Some Farther REMARKS ON THE LATE ACCOUNT Given by Dr. TENISON OF HIS
Conference with Mr. PULTON.

Wherein the Doctor's Three Exceptions against EDWARD MEREDITH are Examined,
Several of his other Misrepresentations laid open, Motives of the said E. M.'s
Conversion showed, and some other Points relating to Controversy occasionally
treated.

TOGETHER WITH An Appendix, in which some Passages of the Doctor's Book
entitled, Mr. Pulton Considered, are Re-considered; and in the Close the best
Means of coming to true Faith proposed.

To all which is added, A Postscript in Answer to the Pamphlet put forth by the
Schoolmaster of Long-Acre.

Ego injuriantem novi, and sustinentem. Published with Allowance.

LONDON: Printed by Henry Hills, Printer to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
for His Household and Chapel; And are to be sold at his Printing House on the
Ditch-side in Blackfriars. 1688.

To the Readers.
YOu are informed at the beginning of the following Discourse what Accident
engaged me in it. And since (as you will perceive) it was not Choice but
Necessity, I have a Title to your favorable perusal. When persons offer
themselves at the Bar for the Defense of Others, it is expected they should be
Eloquent (that is) qualified for such an Undertaking: but when a man is brought
thither to plead for himself, it is enough if he come with Sincerity, and an
intelligible Expression.

Again, if outward Objects have so much influence on the Conceptions of the
Mind, as they are believed to have on those of the Body, you will not look for
great matters in this Pamphlet, when you consider not only my own Inability,
but also what lay before my eyes whilst I composed it: For certainly whatever
Dr. Tenison may have shown himself in other Writings, these which have been the
Subject of my Remarks do not challenge our admiration for their Excellence.

As for Method, I take that which is usual in Remarks, by suffering my Author
to lead me which way he pleases, and therefore whatever leaps I am forced to
make from one Matter to another, must be attributed to those Hedges and Ditches
over which I am conducted by him. But to say the Truth, how unpleasant soever
these Incoherences may appear to the Reader, they were of no small Convenience
to me: For having no time for this Task, but what was greatly interrupted both
by Business and Sickness, my Memory would hardly have served me to have carried
the Matter of any large and connected Discourse through so many Intermissions,
and such variety of other thoughts, whereas this broken and incoherent Theme
was (as it happened) very suitable to my leisure.

However, these Interruptions must apologize for that slowness wherewith this
Pamphlet comes abroad; For though much time be past since Dr. Tenison's Books
called on me (especially the former) yet that which has been at my disposal has
not been much. Nay, on the contrary, it has been so little, that what comes
forth with so much seeming deliberation, was really written in more have than
my Forces (which have not been much exercised this way) could well comply with.
And indeed had I not considered that things of this nature grow out of season
like Gazetts and Almanacs, I should have had so much respect for my Readers, as
to have spent a few more hours in preparing for their Entertainment.

The Doctor, whether it be to manifest the quickness of his Parts, or to show
us that his Parishioners are so Epist. to his Parishioners.
pious, and so * steady, that they need not the looking after, is very fruitful
in such Productions; but Nobis non licet esse tam disertis.

But although in the Method of this Discourse (as I have intimated) I follow my
Author, yet I do it not so closely, but that sometimes I make a stand, and take
a view of such things as lie within prospect. My thoughts have not been so
wholly busied in vindicating my self (as I have had occasion to take notice of
in some places of the following Paper) much less in annoying my Adversary, that
I have not considered which way to benefit my Readers: And herein if I have
treated of some things which may seem beneath the Dignity of the Press, (for I
have attended in my choice more to ordinary Conversations than to Books) I hope
it may pass without Censure. For since all higher Points are already
sufficiently discussed by Learned Pens, I am not to be blamed if I choose some
of those which are not only more proportionable to my strength, but also may be
taken up with less Presumption, for having been rejected by better Writers as
not worth their while.

And yet, had these matters which I here speak of been only the peculiar
Extravagances of some over-strain'd Fancy, they might, and ought perhaps to
have been contemned: But when such trivial things (if you will call them so)
are daily both spoken with Confidence, and heard with Patience; nay, when
oftentimes (at least in outward show) they are the sole hindrances of
Conversion, they cease to be trivial; and we must rectify that Idea, which we
have of them from the bare consideration of their Nature, by weighing their
Effects. A Surgeon is not so much to attend to the prick of a Thorn, as to
the Gangrene which possibly may have been caused by it.

And now I will not deny but it is the greatest of my Desires that all my
Protestant Readers might be Converted. They will not take this in ill part,
when they know I firmly believe there is not other way for their Salvation.
However, what I ask of them at present is much less, and even what themselves
cannot refuse, without pleasing me much better, viz. by changing their
Religion. This will be no longer a Paradox, when I tell them, It is only that
(for some time at least) they would be truly Protestants: My meaning is, That
whereas they affirm, first, that their Faith is not to be pinned on another's
Sleeve; and secondly, that none ought to pretend to Infallibility, they would
now conform themselves to their own Principles, and consequently neither be so
far enchanted by the Name or Reputation of their Teachers on the one side, as
to take things from them without farther Examination, nor so far tied to their
own Opinions on the other, as not to suspect them where they are contradicted
by Men as Wise, as Learned, and (as far as may be guessed by the exterior) as
Good as themselves. This, I say, is all I ask of my Protestant Readers; and
this (as I hinted) is nothing else in effect than that they would be
Protestants. The Reformation it self was grounded on the first of these two
Principles, and the second is a Natural Result from the first: For how could
Christians have separated from their Church-Guides in order to a Reformation,
had they not fancied an Obligation of Distrusting them? And having once (for
the necessary justification of this Proceeding) denied Infallibility to these
Guides, with what shadow of Modesty could they arrogate the same to themselves?

Nothing therefore is so primarily Essential to Protestants, as to conclude
both Themselves and their Leaders Fallible, and in consequence of this to
Distrust both. And from hence it follows (according to what I intimated before)
that when they do otherwise (that is, absolutely confide in either) their
Protestancy is at an end.

This in Truth is consonant to Reason, and therefore one would think that what
I here ask were already granted. But alas! Reason was never more Pretended, nor
less Used; and these Gentlemen are so far from having it in our present Case,
that one Part of them, whilst they decry all dependence on Men for their Faith
with the greatest impatience, repose so entirely on This, or the Other Reverend
Doctor, or on Several of them together, that although these very Doctors By a
necessary Consequence from their Doctrine, viz. That the Church is to be
followed no farther than it agrees with Scripture, and each man is left to
judge how far she so agrees.
teach them the contrary, they are ready to believe them in every thing but
this; and the Rest wondering at General Councils for pretending to
Infallibility, talk in the mean while themselves with so much Authority, and so
little Diffidence, as if they spoke by immediate Inspiration from Heaven.

This is what truly passes in the World; but this is notwithstanding what ought
not to pass: For whatever Allowances may be made to Ignorance where men proceed
according to the best of their Knowledge, there is certainly no excuse for
Protestants, whilst they declare that both their Teachers and their own
Judgments are liable to Error in Doctrins of Faith, if nevertheless they suffer
themselves to be deceived by either.

Wherefore, my dear Friends, I hope you will not say you may be mistaken, and
yet act as if you could not; but that, reflecting on the Uncertainty which even
your own Principles show you to be in, you will do what so much danger
naturally suggests, viz. have recourse to Almighty God, who is our only Refuge
in all Distresses, earnestly and constantly beseeching him, that since you
cannot please him without Faith, nor have Faith whilst you have Doubt, he
would bring you to such a Faith as may rationally exclude all Doubting, and so
yield you a solid Foundation for both your Hope and Charity.

This Resolution of addressing your selves to God by humble Prayer is of so
great moment, that though I could heartily wish that this were now your
Preparation of mind for the reading of this Pamphlet, yet I should be very well
contented if it should prove the fruit of your Perusal, and that when you made
an end of Reading, you would be thoroughly convinced of the necessity of
Praying. And it is for this reason that I make the same Request to you once
more in my Close. And certainly I may well despair of obtaining any other favor
from you, if after all my Entreaties you deny me What your own Teachers, your
own Principles, and your own greatest Interest asks of you as well as my self.

E. M.

ADVERTISEMENT.
The Citations in the Margin refer to Dr. T.'s Account of the Conference,
excepting where it is otherwise expressed.

Page 15. line 22. for Doctor himself, read Doctor and himself. What other
faults have escaped the Press are easily corrected.

Some Farther REMARKS ON THE Late Account, given by Dr. Tenison of his
Conference with Mr. Pulton.
THERE are few persons (I suppose) but such as have a great conceit of
themselves, who are willing, that all the words which drop from them in the
heat of a tumultuous and unprepared Discourse, should be Published through the
present Age, or recommended to Posterity; at least, in no better dress, than
the have they were spoken in would allow. But when such casual expressions, are
not only divested of their Antecedent and Consequent Circumstances, but must
bear the Additions and Defalcations of Craft and Malice over and above; nay,
when a Disputing Adversary, not only takes care to Interrupt his Opponents
Discourse, and by that means renders his Propositions maimed and imperfect; but
also, when he has them at home, mangles them yet farther, and in this plight
(like a deformed Sampson) exposes them to mockery; the injury is too great to
need any other aggravation, than barely the being told. However, this Injustice
is heightened, when to make these misshapen Sentences of his Antagonist appear
yet more ugly, his own are trimmed up and placed by them with a far better Air
in Print, than that which they had at the Conference.

And yet how provoking soever this injury may be, I call God to witness, that
my own Reputation (though it suffer as far as either Dr. Tenisons Tongue, or Pen
is a Slander) should never have prevailed with me to have appeared in its
Defense: Since (over and above the Repugnance I still have to this kind of
coming upon the Stage) it ought to be a greater comfort to a Christian to bear
an Affront with patience, than to ensure the Praise of the whole World. And
those who have been the most acquainted with the exercises of a virtuous life,
have always asserted, that Applause in this warfare is much an harder Enemy to
deal with, than Calumny. It is not my Reputation then (any farther than the
preservation of it is a Duty) which calls upon me at this time to take the Pen
into my hand: But it is that which seems to be so united to it, as to suffer
with it, I mean my Religion. For although personal defects (unless they come to
be general) ought to cast no blemish on any Profession, yet how far shall we
think that such things will influence weak persons, when a Gubbard whom D. T.
(in his Ep. to his Parishioners) mentions to have succeeded his Father in his
Benefice of Mondesly, and afterward to have Preached Purgatory, etc: might
(for ought the Doctor pretends to know) during his stay in that place come
first to be convinced of the truth of such points as he Preached, so that what
the Doctor takes for Dissimulation (which probably would not have discovered it
self where there was a good Benefice to be lost by it) might be Change. It
being great pity, that every one should be as Immutable in Evil as D. T. This
might be the case, or else this G -- might be a Church of England-man as others
have observed.
supposed Crime of a supposed Jesuit made so violent an Impression on Dr.
Tenison, whilst he was Young, against their whole Order, that (maugre his
entire Doctorship of Divinity) he is like to carry it with him to his Grave:
And consequently to the Tribunal of that Judge, who, when he was our Master,
taught us more Charitable Lessons? And to such a strange degree of partiality
does this rash Judgment arrive, that with many Protestants one good Man is
sufficient to bring their Religion into Repute, and one evil Christian enough
to Discredit ours. Which, though unreasonable in them, is yet a good Argument to
us; in the first place, that we should take the utmost care, not to afford any
just ground for Aspersions; and in the next, that we should endeavor (as far as
modesty gives leave) to rescue our selves from those, which are unjustly thrown
upon us. Wherefore, though I am not ignorant how hard a thing it is for the
plainest reason to break through the prejudices of prepossessed and embittered
minds; yet because I hope there are still some impartial (at least not
extravagantly partial) Men in the World, I will not decline this task, which I
shall look on as sufficiently recompensed, if it shall help to bring any one
Soul from under those mistakes which Dr. Tenisons less sincere and less
Generous Ep. to his Parishoners.
Artifices may have involved it in.

Dr. T. is not so ill a Painter, as not to know, that a few strokes of the
Pencil, will quite change the Countenance of the Picture, nor (as we perceive
by his Narrative) so disinterested, as not to make use of this knowledge, when
it is for his advantage.

However, that we may not make our Composition with him more difficult than is
needful, there is one part of that Misrepresentation which I noted above, viz.
the supposititious Ornaments of his own sayings, for which we shall not lay
much to his charge; for, although his part of the Conference has been licked
since it is Birth into as much shape as it was capable of, yet after all this
paternal industry it is but an homely Creature still, and neither does us much
harm, nor (I am verily persuaded) would it have appeared to the Doctor himself
worthy of Publication, had it not been in virtue of that Instinct, whereby The
Crow thinks her own Young ones the whitest.

Mr. P. was the chief (and indeed, the only person Originally concerned) in
this Conference, and, as such, he has given the World a just account of it.
What relates to my self, is much shorter and of less moment, for though a vein of
my Name runs through the Doctors whole Narrative, which makes people think,
that I was a principal Combatant in this occasion; yet in truth, coming only as
a witness, and under an obligation of silence, I Religiously observed it,
unless it were, when the Doctor applied his Discourse to me: And then too I
spoke no longer than the Doctor pleased, which was not half so long, as was
necessary for the making out, or even proposing any one Argument. Which I could
not take ill for two Reasons; First, because I was not his proper Antagonist;
And Secondly, because he used him that was so, after the same fashion. I say, I
never meddled in the Controversy, but when the Doctor spoke to me, and it
would have been ill breeding not to have answered him: Excepting only, at the
latter end of the day, when the Disputants rose up, and there seemed to be a
Liberty of Conscience for speaking; especially when the Doctor blurted out a
Proposition, which all good Men, who should have reflected on it is
consequences, ought to have taken notice of.

Besides, I was separated from them for a very considerable time: viz. (as I
believe) during the greatest part of the Conference. For Mr. P. having
entreated me not to meddle with the Disputation, and a Catholic Gentlewoman, or
two observing, that Dr. Tenison when he had no desire to answer Mr. P's.
Questions, would turn abruptly toward me, and as soon as he had a mind to
break off with me (which as I have said already, was very soon) he turned as
abruptly back again to Mr. P. They advised me to withdraw; one of them telling
me; that the Doctor by the opportunity he had of turning to and fro in that
manner, not only evaded the prosecution of the Arguments, but had also a
plausible pretense of boasting (as he did) that he had two to deal with.
Whereupon I thanked them for their advice, and not greatly apprehending the
loss, I was like to sustain by being absent from the Discourse, I retired into
another corner of the Room; where (according to what I have said) I continued a
great while, talking with several persons (all Strangers to me) and not knowing
what passed between the Disputants; for though soon after my going off, Dr.
Tenison (having some occasion, as I suppose, for diverting the Discourse)
called for me back; yet I excused my self, telling him, that he had excepted
against my Company at first, and that therefore I might venture on so much ill
breeding, as to refuse it to him now, or to that purpose: Neither did I return
to him, till his clamor and his parties importunity even forced me to it, which
(as I take it) was not very long before the Conference broke up. And then too
as soon as the Doctor shook me off by turning again to Mr. P. I retired as
before.

I mention this, that my Readers may have a true notion of that part which I
bore in this Conference, and not be misguided by the Doctors Relation, which
scarce allows me any interval of absence, and seems to make me privy to
Discourses, which I knew nothing of, and therefore can say nothing to. And
whosoever considers what I have here related of my own concern in this Dispute,
and how little even Dr. T. himself says of any body else, excepting only Mr. P,
will not judge that the Doctor, though he speaks of nine Priests or Priests
fellows, was overmatch'd by number.

Moreover had Mr. P. stood in need of the Doctors Craft, and applied himself to
the standers by, the might have had the Credit and Convenience of (at least)
Twenty Antagonists. And even without his seeking he had two or three besides
the Minister: Particularly the Schoolmaster, whom I look upon as next to a
Minister, with as much Reason (I presume) as the Doctor looked on me as next to
a Priest. Besides, for the Doctors farther encouragement, the Cry was on his
side: To hear him speak, not to interrupt him (that is, to suffer him to
interrupt you) and the like, which are of no small advantage in such
engagements, where to speak most, is to argue best.

But not to detain my Readers any longer from a more particular and methodical
account (as far as so much confusion will allow of method) of what concerned me
in this wonderful business, I must acquaint them, that on Michaelmass day last,
having been at the Savoy Chapel, to comply with the Obligations of that
Festival; at my going thence, I met with Mr. P. who told me, That at three of
the Clock in the Afternoon he was to have a Conference with Dr. Tenison; That
it had been occasioned by an Apprentice, who had come to him, to be instructed
in the Catholic Religion, and thereby greatly displeased his Friends, and
particularly his Master. That it was thought convenient, he should not go
alone, but take some person with him who might observe what passed, and hinder,
as much as might be, the bad effects of such Misrepresentations, as experience
shows us, are hardly avoidable on these occasions. That he desired, that I
would be the person, who accompanied him. Lastly, That it would not be my
Province to speak any thing, but only (as he had said) to take notice of what
passed.

I must confess, my willingness to be engaged in this affair was not
extraordinary. It had not been very long, since I had drawn a sufficient
trouble on my self by hearkening to such another Invitation, and had learnt at
the expense of losing that Privacy which I would have preserved, how unsafe it
is to share (though never so inconsiderably,) in a Difference with Men, who
possibly may have better Wits than Consciences, and care not how they wound the
latter, so they may secure the Reputation of the former. However, considering
that we were not born for our selves, and that our reward hereafter, will be
proportionable to our labors here; I resolved to comply with Mr. P's. desire,
and leave the event to Providence, which disposes all things for the best, and
will not suffer us to be 1 Cor^c. 10. v. 13.^
tried beyond that which we are able to bear-Wherefore I told Mr. P. that I was
to Dine at an House in Spring-Garden, near Charing Cross, and that if he
pleased to call on me there, at two of the Clock, I would wait on him to the
place appointed for the Conference, which (as he had told me) was in Long-Acre.

Mr. P. came to me at the prefixed hour, having no body in his Company, as
several worthy persons can witness, and I (likewise alone) immediately departed
with him.

Whilst we were on our way, Mr. P. told me, that he intended to propose a Rule
of Faith for the Subject of the Conference: Which I very much approved, as
being that, whereon (according to my judgment) the whole business of
Controversy depends; for, since all sides agree, that there are some things
necessary to be Believed in order to Salvation, and hence it is rationally
inferred, that Almighty God must have left some means of coming to the
knowledge of such necessary things: Which means we call the Rule of Faith; It
follows, that when we have the Rule of Faith, we have the means of knowing what
we are bound to believe, and what not; which is the end of all Controversy.

And therefore I wonder, that Dr. T. should so often say, Page 13. 17, 21. etc.
that he desired to fix Mr. P. to something in his Disputation, that he could
keep him to nothing, and the like. As if he had proposed nothing for the matter
of their Debate, when he proposed a Rule of Faith; whereas it is the main, or
indeed the only thing which ought to be well settled. For particular Articles
of Faith may be True according to one Rule, and False according to another, and
therefore unless we know what Rule is true, we shall not be able to distinguish
what Articles are true. As for instance, the Quakers Article of the
unlawfulness of all manner of Swearing is true according to the Rule of Swear
not, neither by Heaven, neither by Earth, neither by any other Oath, etc. St.
James c. 5. v. 12.
Scripture interpreted by themselves, but false according to the Rule of
Scripture interpreted by the Tradition of the Church, and there will be no
means of telling the Quakers, which Doctrine they ought to believe, unless you
can tell them, which of the two Rules they ought to follow.

I hope, the Reader will pardon this Digression, for the great importance of
the matter, and when he has well considered it, will not be of Dr. T's. mind,
and think the adjusting, or ascertaining a Rule of Faith, to be so trivial a
thing, nay, to be nothing, as the Doctor makes it. But because I believe, that
I shall have occasion of saying more on this subject hereafter, I will say no
more at present.

Mr. P. having (as I said) acquainted me with the Question he had chosen out
for the subject of the Conference, I told him, That having had some experience
of such meetings, I foresaw that all would end in confusion, unless what was
spoken on both sides by way of Argument, were immediately Written down. And
therefore I advised him to propose as soon as we met, that it might be so.

Being come to Long-Acre, we went into an House, which was not far from that
where the Conference was to be, and stayed there till news was brought us, that
Dr. T. was come.

During our stay in this House, there came in a Gentleman to us, whom I had
never seen before: Nor (as I understood afterward) was he so much as known by
name to Mr. P. He looked, as if his Curiosity, or some better Motive led him,
to know what should happen at the Conference. We were told also, that it had
been noised abroad, and that there would be many Protestants at it. For my part
I thought, that the more persons were present, the more good would probably be
done, in case the Conference were fairly carried on, and especially by Writing.
I had never heard that it was agreed on, that the Meeting should be private,
nor cared that it should be so. For, Veritas non quaerit Angulos, and the
Catholic Faith was never yet afraid of Appearing, but always of being Hidden,
that is, by Lies, Slanders and other Misrepresentations kept from the Peoples
knowledge.

Word being brought, that the Doctor was come, we (viz. Mr. P. and my self)
went immediately to him. Who followed us, I neither knew, nor troubled my self
to observe; having always understood, that there were but two concerned, Mr.
Pulton as the Controvertist, and my self only as a witness: And that the rest
(whether Protestants or Catholics) came only as Hearers.

As soon as we entered into the Room, where Dr. T. was, the Doctor Greeted us
with a Cavil, saying somewhat to this purpose: Look you here, I am come without
so much as a Friend or Servant: This (viz. The coming in of so much Company) is
not according to our agreement. M. P. replied to this effect, That he had only
brought one Gentleman with him, viz. Me: That I was not to speak at all in the
Controversy, but only came as a witness of what passed: That he thought this
caution reasonable in regard of the many Misrepresentations, which had been but
too frequent of late in things of this Nature. Hereupon the Doctor addressed
himself to me, and asked me (in a Tone more imperious than I have usually met
with) whether I was a Priest or not: Saying, that now (to his grief, I suppose)
I need not be afraid to own it. I answered him, (though I Page 15.
thought it a condescension to an impertinence) that I was not. He continued,
that he would know who I was: And I was so much in the Condescending humor,
that I told him my Name was Meredith. At which words the Doctor seemed to
start, crying out immediately, that he excepted against me: Dr. T's. 1st.
Objection against me.
That I had given out a Had Dr. T. heard both sides? No, but if Dr. St -- s.
Authority be not sufficient to make a thing be credited without farther
Examination, what will become of Dr. T's.
false Copy of the Conference between Dr. St --. and Mr. G --. and that he had
received this Copy from his friend Captain O. It was not without some surprise,
(as those who are better acquainted with me will imagine) that I heard these
things. However (as the Doctor is pleased to say) I calmly replied. That I had
been present at the Conference, he spoke of. That one had Written there for Dr.
St --. and another for Mr. G --. That Mr. G --. had caused some Copies to be
made of that which his Writer took. That he had delivered one of those Copies
to me. And that it was this Copy which I lent to Captain O. That I did not
apprehend there was any difference between this Copy and Dr. St -- s. That
therefore had there been any fault in the case, it had not been mine. For
further particulars I referred the Company (as I do now my Readers) to what I
had A Letter to Dr. E. S, etc.
Published in this matter. In which the whole matter of Fact is represented
with so much fairness, that notwithstanding what a subtle and concerned
Adversary has been able to allege against it, I question not, but it still
remains most satisfactory with all those, whose prejudices stand not more in
need of Grace for their removal, than Arguments. And for this reason, being
informed, that the Controversial part of this affair was undertaken by better
hands (a task in which, there is nothing laborious save only the great
copiousness of that which easily offers it self to be spoken against Dr. St --
s Argumentations) I could not but think, that to meddle any farther with the
bare matter of fact, would savor more of a fond, or ambitious desire of having
the last word, than of any thing else: Especially when other more useful and
necessary employments required as much attendance from me at that time as my
health could spare. And therefore to those Protestants, who have spoken to me
of this business, I have scarce said any thing more, than that I desired them
to compare both Accounts, viz. Dr. St -- s and mine, and then judge.

I think there was one thing new, whereof Mr. G --. was accused, in Dr. St -- s
second Letter, viz. That over the second Disputation in some of Mr. G -- s
Copies, was written this inscription, Stillingfleets First Question. Whereas
(says the Doctor) the first Question of that Disputation was put by Mr. T --.
He looks on this as a wilful mistake, and that it was designed to make the
World believe, that the Doctor broke How accessory the Dr. was to the breaking
off of the first Disputation is shown in the Letter to Dr. E. S. etc.
off the first Disputation. Now, I dare say, that this never came into Mr. G --
s head, nor would come into any ones else, who was not at a very great loss for
Objections, and had not Authority enough to make a trifle pass for one.

The meaning of that Inscription was, that as in the first Disputation, Mr. G
-- was the Proponent and Dr. St --. the Respondent, so in this last Dr. St --.
was the Proponent: For though Mr. T. put this first Question, yet Dr. St --.
abetted it, and was still looked on as the only person engaged in the Dispute,
and as such he put all the rest of the Questions. And this is the Explanation
of this Mysterious Inscription. In which, I think, there was nothing to be
blamed, save only the omission of the Doctors Title.

It does not occur to me at present whether, or no, there were any other new
accusation in the forementioned Letter. But whatever there was, I am sure, it
was of no other complexion than this.

I have ventured on this Digression, not only to save my self the trouble of a
Book, but also that my Readers may know, what petty and wretched debates a Man
must be engaged in, who is to give an account of Modern Conferences, and
consequently how much Compassion the employment deserves. But as miserable as
it is, I must now return to it.

During my abovementioned Reply to Dr. Tenisons Objection, and after it, the
Doctor still grumbled; but to give him his due, his interruptions were always
so thick whilst I spoke, that I was not then assured, whether he attended to
what I said, or not.

Mr. P. seeing Dr. T. dissatisfied with my Company, was unwilling, that the
time should be consumed in wrangling, which was designed for Disputation, and
therefore offered the Doctor, that I should withdraw and another Gentleman, who
accidentally came in after us remain as a witness. Which, for my own part, I
should have agreed to without any great resentment; for (I must confess) the
small taste I had of the Doctors Conversation, made me not over fond of his
farther acquaintance. But I did not find that the Doctor was mightily satisfied
with this proposal, who seemed to look after Exceptions more than
Accommodations, and was in no great have to begin the dispute; and therefore I
made another to him, which yet had the ill fortune to please him less. I told
the Doctor, That he need not trouble himself, what witnesses were present, That
he should appoint his own Writer, who should Pen down what was said by way of
Argument on both sides, and that this should be looked on as the only Authentic
account of what passed. This, I said, would free the Doctor from all danger of
being Misrepresented: And in this proposal Mr. P. joined with me and was very
earnest for it. The Doctor answered, that he had no Pen and Ink nor Writer
[things hard to be come by in London] And then, all his Objections against me
vanishing on the sudden, and insisting no longer on the clearing of the Room,
he desired Mr. P. and my self to sit down by him, saying, that he would
Discourse on some Preliminaries, which I could make no other construction of,
than that Dr. Tenison had much rather have to do with a witness, whose Credit
he had taken care to lessen, than with a Record, the Testimony whereof had been
undoubted.

It will be proper here to make some short remarks on the Doctors Relation. He
says, page 4. that he espied Mr. Meredith in the Room, whom he looked upon as
next to a Priest. One would conclude by this expression, that Dr. T. had known
me, whereas by his questioning who I was, etc. he seemed not to know me: But
whether he dissembled or not, I will not determine. He says, p. 4. that Mr. P.
was content to dismiss all besides a witness for himself, and Mr. Meredith was
proposed. This again looks, as if Mr. P. had brought several in his Company,
and that having chosen me out of them for a witness, he was persuaded to dimiss
the rest; whereas on Dr. T -- s first complaint, Mr. P. declared, that he had
only brought me with him; That I came merely to observe what passed in the
Conference, and was not to dispute in it. That if the Doctor did not approve of
me, he would take another: Or, if the Doctor so pleased, he was content, that
all should retire, excepting only the Doctor himself, together with the Boy,
for whose sake (as Mr. P. had always understood) the Conference was held. How
much of this is in the Doctors True Account? And yet the Doctor (if you will
believe him pa. 43.) is too blunt a Man, to be a Man of Artifice.

After this he says: Against Mr. Meredith, Dr. T. made three Objections: And
again, pa. 5. After these exceptions taken at Mr. M. as a witness, Dr. T.
perceiving it next to impossible to clear the Room, etc. called Mr. Meredith to
him. Whereas he called me to him on mine and Mr. P -- s proposing to have the
Controversy taken in writing, and he had then made but one of his Objections
against me. And then for the Impossibility of clearing the Room, the Doctor
never put it to the Trial; nor came to any agreement with Mr. P. about it: I am
sure, that the Room might very easily have been cleared of my Company, and
therefore I wonder, how the Doctor after such solid exceptions taken at Mr. M.
as a witness, came to call Mr. Meredith to him, and place himself between Mr.
P. and Mr. Meredith.

One would think, that Dr. Tenison were framing a piece of Dramatic Poetry, and
that he thought it allowable for him to vary from the true History, as often as
it was for the advantage of his work, which (as the Reader will perceive by
what he finds here) is very often. Indeed the Doctors Narrative is like the
wrong side of the Hangings, where there is nothing right, or in its due
proportion, but a confused Resemblance of what it should be. And this is
sufficient to deceive those, who are (either by interest or humor) very willing
to be deceived.

The Doctor then sitting down, and causing us (Mr. P. and my self) to place our
selves by him, said (as I have already told you) that he would treat of some
Preliminaries. But the Coast being now clear, and in appearance the danger of
having the Arguments Penned down, quite over, Dr. Tenison (perhaps for my
having been so unfortunate as to propose Writing) was resolved to have another
bout with me. He told me, that he had other Objections against me, and Dr. T's
2d. Objection against me.
one was, that I had been already Disposing of his Parish, and had cantoned it
out for Friars. This Objection I must confess was a most sensible one; but it
was not more touching to the Doctor, than it was astonishing to me, since I
could not remember, that I had ever had the least thought of any such thing.
But the Dr. adding, That I had said, his Benefice would maintain Thirty Friars,
and that his friend Captain O. had given him the Information; I discovered
whence this grand Objection had it is rise, or rather it is pretense. I called to
mind, that in some discourses concerning the great want of Charity and
Religious Zeal, which had come into the World together with the Reformation, or
(if you please) ushered it in; amongst other things I said, that this appeared
not only in the discontinuance of Missions abroad for the Conversion of
Infidels, but likewise in the scarcity of Pious and Charitable works at home. I
instanced particularly, that whilst Men were busy in Building private Houses,
they took no care for Churches: And that hence it came to pass, that the
Parishes in the Suburbs were unreasonably large; and that it must needs be
impossible for the Curates and those few Readers their Assistants to comply
with the Duties belonging to their Employments, in such manner as they ought. I
observed, that in the Parishes within the Walls (which were Established before
the Reformation) there seldom died above one or two a week in each Parish, and
in some of the out-Parishes there died (for the most part) forty or fifty: So
that, according to the Proportion appointed by our Ancestors, we ought to have
thirty, or forty Parishes and Parish-Churches instead of one. I said farther,
that where forty or fifty died in a week, there were probably ten, or twenty
times as many sick, and in danger of death: Who would all stand in need of
their Pastors help: And how could it be possible for one Man (or indeed any ten
Men) to visit a thousand persons every week, (which amounted to more than a
hundred and forty a day, one day with another) staying with them so much time,
as was necessary for the giving them the Communion and doing all those other
things which are appointed to be done by the Common Prayer Book in the
Visitation of the Sick, as also for the Instructing, Exhorting, and Comforting
them, as occasion shall be seen? I said, how could it be possible for so small
a number of Men to do all this, and yet at the same time comply with all their
other Parochial Functions; such as were, Reading Common Prayer Daily, Preaching
once or twice a Week, Marrying, Burying, Christening, Catechizing, Reconciling
Enmities, Resolving Doubts, with many other things of this kind, which are
incumbent on Curates, and whereof there is scarce any one Branch, which in
these large Parishes is not enough, if not too much, for one Man.

[Wherefore for the future, Dr. T. needs not take so much pains to convince the
World, that he is able to Dispute against Nine Jesuits at once, since those who
can believe that he performs what of necessity must be incumbent on him in two
such populous Parishes, as he possesses, will easily be persuaded, that he is
able to make his party good against forty of those Fathers. Nay, he may well be
equal to Nine Priests, who has the Employment of above an Hundred.]

I said likewise, That I had heard, there were Thirty Thousand Communicants
belonging to St. Martins Parish, if not more; that if these should have a mind
to Assemble together for the receiving the Sacrament, or hearing a Sermon, it
would not be possible for them to do it, The Church (as I supposed) not being
able to contain one quarter of that number; and that the English Clergy ought
not to wonder, that there were so many Dissenters, since their Parishioners
were forced to go to Meeting Houses for Elbow-room, or even for any opportunity
of doing something like the serving of God. And for this reason They ought not
to have manifested so much Zeal for the Suppression of Conventicles, till the
fervor of their exhortations had inspired More into their hearers for the
Building of Churches.

To this I added, That over and above, that in Catholic Countries the Parish
Priests were more numerous, and held a better proportion with their Flocks,
than amongst us, there were great numbers of Regulars, or Religious Men, who
were no small assistance to the Secular Clergy in saying Mass, Preaching,
Catechizing, Hearing Confessions and the like. But, that this (I meant, such a
plentiful provision of Spiritual Guides) was not so practisable in England, in
regard that most of the English Curates had Families to provide for, and
consequently stood in need of greater Benefices, than those who had obliged
themselves to a single Life: And for the same reason, what was sufficient for
many Pastors beyond Seas, would scarce be enough for one here. Especially, I
said, the Regulars were maintained for very little, and that 600 l. per annum
(which I heard the Parsonage of St. Martins was worth, though perhaps it may be
more) would keep Thirty of them, at least with the conve^^ence of an House to
dwell in. Hinc illae Laohrymae! Now, such Discourses as these, I do confess,
that I have made more than once; and particularly I remember, that I spoke
somewhat of this kind to C. O. and I am so far from being ashamed of it, that I
cannot but think that the cause of shame lies at their door, who are more
concerned for the extent of their Jurisdiction or Profit, than for the benefit
of the Souls committed to their care: And when I understand that Dr. Tenison is
one of those, it is then, that I shall begin to do, what he said I had done,
viz. pity the State of St. Martins.

It was according to what I have said here, that I answered the Doctor telling
him withal, that I had spoken of the largeness of the Out-Parishes in general,
and not of his in particular: And this (as one would have thought) would have
satisfied any reasonable Man. But the French say, A scalded Cat dreads cold
Water, and it seems the Doctor (which I then knew nothing of) had so deep an
See the Drs. Epistle to his Parishioners.
Impression made on him in his Youth by the loss of his Fathers Benefice, that
now the least hint, which so much as brings it to his mind, raises his
Suspicion and Indignation to an high degree.

Moreover, the Doctor seemed to take it ill, that I undervalued the Reformed
Charity, and said, that there were too many Churches within the Walls, and that
in some places there were two in one Churchyard. He talked somewhat likewise,
of an Act of Parliament for Building of Twelve new Churches for the Suburbs,
which was no small confirmation of what I had said of the want of them. I
looked on that compulsive way of doing good Works as not so Certainly the
Statute of Mortmain was a better sign of the Charity of former Ages, than this
Act for building Churches is of that of the present.
clear a Dem^^stration of Charity, as when they are done voluntarily and
without constraint, and therefore I told the Doctor, that it argued some defect
in theirs, that it stood in need of Acts of Parliament, for doing things, which
were, in a manner, absolutely necessary.

The Doctor answered, that he wished, he could see some of our Charity, or some
such like words. What he meant by this wish, I could not well tell, viz.
whether he would have us employ our present Liberty in Building Churches, that,
when time served, they might dispossess us of them, as they did of our Ancient
ones, and so be Provided without burthening the People by Act of Parliament, or
something else? In this doubt I asked him only, whether he would have us Build
Churches now in England? To which he made me no answer, but seemed to attempt
something for the proof of Protestant Charity. But all, that I can remember he
said, was, that he would not brag of himself: Which I esteemed a Rhetorical way
of doing it. And certainly he must needs be put hard to it for an instance of
Charity, who is forced so far to entrench upon Humility for it, as to begin
with himself.

I am not ignorant, (all this while) that some Hospitals, Almshouses and
Churches have been Built by Protestants: But there is more proportion between
Dr. Tenisons two Parishes and a couple of the poorest Vicaridges in Wales, than
there is between the Monuments of Catholic Zeal, For some proof of what is here
said, see a Book lately Primed at Oxford, called Pietas Romana and Parisiensis.
By which in some measure the rest may be guessed.
and whatever of that kind has been done by Protestants. It will be a great
while before the Reformation builds the fortieth part of what it has pulled
down. Nay, (supposing that this poor Nation is not to return to it is Ancient
Religion) there is more likelihood, that Reformations following one another,
like Egyptian Plagues, the succeeding ones should still devour what the
preceding leave, than that Men who have taken Sacrilege for the Service of God,
should endeavor to repair any part of that which is already Destroyed.

The Doctor having finished his Second Objection, put an end to my defense, by
bringing on his Third, without telling me, whether he thought, that what I said
was true, or if it were, whether he judged it satisfactory, or not. But every
Man minds his own business: And it was not the Doctor's to Absolve, but to
Accuse. There is yet (said the Doctor) another Dr. T 's. 3d. Objection against
me.
Objection against you, which is, that you are One, who have forsaken our
Church.

That which then immediately occurred to me for an Answer, was the parallel of
what I had often heard from Protestants, concerning such as turn to them, viz.
That I was then the better judge, having known the Doctrins of both Churches.
But I had forgotten, that what is When Church of England-men dispute with
Dissenters, Church Authority is of great force, and no Scripture is of private
Interpretation: -- But When Catholics argue with them, the case is altered, and
every Man is to be his own Judge.
reason in a Protestants mouth, is stark naught in a Catholics. The Doctor
replied, That I went away Young from their Church, and that if I had understood
it better, I should not have left it.

I know not what the Doctor accounts Young: But it was not, till I had gone
through one of the best and most careful Westminster-School.
Schools in England, and spent above three years at the University, and as many
in Spain. And I question not, but the Doctors of the Church of England will
allow, that after all this I must needs have been come to the Age of judging
for my self, since I find that for this Liberty in others they do not require
so much Education, as mine amounted to. And had it been so, that I had embraced
the Roman Catholic Religion without sufficient consideration, the last fifteen,
or sixteen years, which I have lived in it, had been time enough for the
Correction of an Error, which my Interest, and Necessities would have prompted
me to have laid aside. But (I thank God) I have not been the least shaken in my
Faith ever since my Conversion, either by what I have seen written, or heard
spoken by the most Learned Protestants. But on the contrary I have been so far
from repenting, that I turned so Young, that the more I read or discoursed of
these matters, the more I discerned the Excellence of the Catholic Religion on
the one hand, and the blindness of so many of my fellow Creatures on the other,
and consequently I had no other causes for grief, than first, that my
Conversion was no sooner, and next, that I had not yet been grateful enough,
that it was so soon.

The Doctor says, that Page 5.
no Man, who well understands their Church, departs from it, upon true
Principles. And I am much mistaken, if there be not very many, who know well
enough what the Church of England Teaches, and yet depart from her, on no other
principles than those which they learnt from her self, viz. That the Church is
to be followed no farther than she agrees with Scripture, and every particular
Man is left to judge how far she agrees with it.

It would be tedious and unnecessary to set down here all those Principles or
Motives, upon which I departed from the Church of England, since I cannot so
much pretend to extraordinary things as to deny, but that they are the same,
which have led others from her both before and since, and may be seen at large
in many Books. However, (if my Readers will give me leave) I will lay before
them some of those Points which began my doubts, and prevailed more
particularly with me.

Some Motives of my Conversion to the Catholic Faith.
First, I had been taught, that the Church of Christ continued pure for the
first Five Hundred Years after it is Institution, and that from thence downwards
several gross Errors and Corruptions had crept into it, and that it had been
infected with these Plagues for about a Thousand Years: And that then Almighty
^od out of his Infinite Commiseration enlightened Martin Luther, Zuinglius, and
other (as I thought) Pious Men so far, as that they clearly discerned these
Corruptions, Preached against them, and by that means rescued a great number of
Christians from that darkness, which the Gates of Hell (contrary to our Lords
promise) or some unaccountable Fatality had engaged them in. And Lastly, that I
my self had been so happy as to be one of this number.

This was that Idea of Christianity, which I then had: For as to what they
talked of a constant Succession of Protestants from the fifth Age down to our
times, I had never heard it from any Wise Man, nor indeed can such an Imposture
find place with any one, who is so much an Historian, as the common Discourse
will make him. Every body knows, that the first Reformers, when they left the
Roman Church, joined with no other Society or Sect of Christians then in the
World either in Communion or Doctrine, which must have been done, had this
pretended Succession continued. Their pretense was at that time to Reform the
whole Church, and not to seek out any True one, which then had a Being, and
stood in no need of Reformation. Nay, they were so far from thinking it
necessary to join with any former Church in order to the preserving a
Succession, that they did not unite with one another: But parted their stock,
and each Adventurer set up for himself.

This then was the most Rational Account, that I could give of my Faith, viz.
That our Church finding, that all Christian Churches had been in Error for a
Thousand Years, forsook that Error, and reformed it self according to the
pattern of the first Five Hundred Years after Christ. For to be of a Christian
Church, which never had any being from Christ's time till this present, I
thought a most unreasonable thing.

Now, none can write after a Copy without having that Copy which they pretend
to Write by. I mean, it was impossible for the Church of England to Reform it
self according to the first Five Hundred Years of Christianity, without knowing
what those Christians Taught and Practiced. And how could this possibly be
done, but by the Holy Fathers and other Writers of those times? Wherefore I
firmly believed (as I am persuaded many Thousands do) that these Writers were
mere strangers to all those Doctrins which we had forsaken, and consequently,
that no mention was made amongst them of Purgatory, Prayer for the Dead,
Invocation of Saints, Veneration of Holy Images and Relics, the Sacrifice of
the Mass, the Reality of Christ's Flesh in the Eucharist, the Decisive Authority
of the Church in Controversial matters, the Spiritual Supremacy of St. Peter
and his Successors, with some other things of this nature; I say, I took it for
granted, that nothing of all this was to be found in those Primitive Records of
the Christian Religion. But when I looked into them I found it quite otherwise,
and that those things, which hitherto I had accounted Novelties, were as
clearly set down in these Writings as any other Points of Christian Doctrine.
For instances, to avoid length, I will refer my Readers to a Book not long
since Published, Entitled, Nubes Testium, which has Collections out of some
of those Books which then fell into my hands, and must weigh with Men of any
tolerable moderation, notwithstanding that which is, or can be said against it.

Now, what was there for me to be done in this condition? I had taken it on
trust, that I was a Member of a Church which had Copied out the first Five
Hundred Years, but found my Error.

It was not unknown to me, that several Quotations out of the Fathers were
produced in the behalf of Protestant Opinions: But-to me they all seemed
wrested, or, at least, capable of interpretations, which were not repugnant to
what the same Fathers more plainly and fully speak in other places for a
contrary Doctrine. In a word, what appeared to me in favor of the Catholic Cause
was clear, full, and incapable of any other meaning, But that which offered it
self in opposition to it was obscure, short and interpretable in another sense;
and indeed, for the most part, evidently requiring another, when joined to it is
antecedents and consequents.

Others said, That the Fathers were Men and had Errors, and that they
contradicted one another, and themselves to boot. But this Plea was as little
to my satisfaction as the former: For this serves only to weaken the Authority
of the Fathers, and if good, evinces nothing, but that They are not to be
relied on. And then, how can the Church of England make out, that she follows
the first Five Hundred Years, when she has no other means of knowing what was
believed in those times, but by such Authors as are not to be trusted?

For what some People say, of our being able to know by Scripture what was the
Belief and Practice of these Primitive Christians, is wholly absurd: For we
know not from Scripture (at least, according to the Principles of the Church of
England) whether the Christians of the first Five Hundred Years, lived
according to the Scripture, or not. The Scripture does not tell us of a Church,
which is to continue only to the end of the Fifth Age. It tells us, indeed, of
one which is to continue to the End of the World: And this Church (I hope) may
be found as well in the Fourteenth Age, as in the Fifth. For if all the
Christians of the Fourteenth were Erroneous and Corrupted, and stood in need of
Reformation, those of the Fifth might have been so too, for any thing which the
Scriptures can assure us to the contrary.

This Rock then of my Protestant Faith being shaken, I mean, a Belief, that the
Church of England had Modeled it self according to the Doctrins of the first
Five Hundred Years, it will not be wondered at, if (at least) I gave way to
some doubts.

I found no better footing in that way, which was taken by those Church of
England-men, who conversed more with Roman Catholics than with Protestant
Dissenters, viz. Scripture, as it is understood by every private Man.

First, Because those who took that way differed from one another in most
material things, and also, Such as were esteemed Heretics by the Church of
England, followed the same Rule.

Secondly, Because according to my own Judgment (who were by this Rule to judge
for my self) the Church of England was beholding to Tradition for some Parts of
her Doctrine and Practice, as Infant Baptism, the Observation of the first Day
of the Week, and the like, having no clear Scripture for them, and therefore
could not hold them, and require them to be held, by the Rule of Scripture
Interpreted without the help of Tradition.

Thirdly, Because it was sincerely my own Judgment, that the Scripture was much
clearer for the Catholics than for the Protestants, particularly in
Transubstantiation, Sacramental Confession, Extreme Unction, Purgatory, St.
Peter's Supremacy, and lastly and chiefly (being that which includes all other
Points) the Decisive Authority of the Church; wherefore if I must follow
Scripture Interpreted by my self, I must at the same time necessarily cease to
follow the Church of England.

These certainly were Motives, if not for an absolute departure from the Church
of England, yet still, at least (as I have already hinted) for the doubting of
her Truth.

About this time I remember, that I had two notions concerning Faith.

First, That Faith was not that which must necessarily suit with the Fancies of
particular Men (since then it ought to be as various as those Fancies were) but
it was that, which God would have us believe, whether we fancied it or not,
viz. That, which he would have us Bringing into Captivity all understanding
into the Obedience of Christ, 2 Cor. c. 10. v. 5.
submit our Fancies and Judgments to, merely because it was revealed by him.
And in this submission (as I thought) consisted both the Difficulty and Merit
of Faith. And consequently, that I ought not so much to consider the nature of
the things proposed to be believed, as the Authority by which they were
proposed.

Secondly, That this Faith was the Ephesians. c. 2. v. 8.
Gift of God, and for that reason, that more confidence was to be put in humbe
Prayer for the obtaining it, than in any Human Skill or Industry. Wherefore (as
far as God Almighties Grace assisted my weakness) I endeavored to obtain this
Gift by that means, making it my earnest Prayer to his Divine Goodness, that I
might know the Truth, and firmly purposing to embrace that which I should be
convinced of, though it should be ever so contrary to my Worldly Interest, as the
Roman Catholic Religion at that time most apparently was.

To Prayer I judged it necessary to add a serious endeavor of amending my Life,
lest otherwise I should be found to sue Hypocritically for more light from
Almighty God, whilst I made no use of that which I had received from him by
complying with what I already knew to be his Will. This is a Point, which all
those, who are in search of the True Faith, ought to examine their Consciences
upon, and therefore I would not omit the mention of it in this place.

Amidst these doubts I confess ingenuously, that what our English Doctors have
made so light of, was of great moment with me, viz. That the Church of
England-men affirmed, that Salvation might be had amongst the Roman Catholics;
but the Roman Catholics absolutely denied, that the like was to be had amongst
them. For Salvation in the Roman Communion both Churches concurred; whereas for
the latter, we had only the bare word of Protestants in their own behalf; Who
likewise at the same time told us, they were fallible, and consequently, for
ought they knew, might be mistaken. And if they were actually mistaken, I
should be undone by rarrying with them; whereas on the other side, if they were
not mistaken, I could receive no damage by being amongst the Roman Catholics.
In a word, I considered, that if the Protestants were true, I should be safe
with the Roman Catholics; but, if the Roman Catholics were right, I could not
be so with the Protestants.

This Motive is so strong in it is own Nature, that many Protestants confess,
that it must needs have great Power with those, who (as they say) cannot
thoroughly examine the differences betwixt us; and these I take to be the
greatest part of Mankind. And if so, I will venture to add, that GOD Almighty
having taken as much care of the Ignorant, as of the Learned, would never
permit Falsehood to be supported by such Arguments, as must in common Prudence
oblige all unlearned persons to be engaged in it.

But above all methinks, this Argument should be of force with those Universal
Gentlemen, who pretend, that their Religion is the Catholic, because they
believe nothing, but that wherein all agree, forgetting, that such a Restraint
of their Belief is peculiar to themselves, and not common; whereas here is an
Agreement of all Parties (at least, such as have any Esteem with them) on which
they may safely rely, viz. That Salvation may be had in the Roman Catholic
Church, which is all, we do, or at least ought to aim at by our Religion. As
for those other Points, which perhaps they hold, viz. A Deity, a Savior, and
the like, though they have the universal consent of all Christians for their
Truth; yet they have it not for their sufficiency to Salvation (especially so
as to exclude the Necessity of believing other Articles, when they are duly
proposed) and it will be of small Consequence to them, that what they hold
common with others, proves True, if their additional Article, which holds this
Truth to be sufficient, should prove False.

What was urged in derogation of this Argument, as if the Protestants showed a
greater Charity by thinking well of Catholics, than Catholics did by thinking
ill of them, was nothing to my purpose: For I was then in search of True Faith,
and not of Charity, and knew withal, that how great appearance soever there
might be of Charity, it could not be Real, unless it were grounded on Without
Faith it is impossible to please God, Heb. c. 11. v. 6.
Orthodox Faith.

It seemed to me to be a surer mark of Charity for Men to adventure both Estate
and Life, for the Conversion of others, as formerly the Apostles and now the
Catholic Missioners did, than to keep at home, and in our warm Beds, and cry,
We hope (or we declare) they may be saved, though they are in an Error. Which, if
it were a Charity, was in my opinion a very Lazy one:

Moreover, if the Protestant Religion were false, it was more Charitable in the
Catholics to tell them so, than by soothing them in their Error, to engage them
faster to it. Wherefore the Protestants ought not to fetch an Argument (as some
most unreasonably do) for the Truth of their Religion from their having (as
they imagine) a greater Charity than Catholics, since it must first be proved,
that their Religion is true, before it will appear, that the Catholics want
Charity in condemning it.

Lastly, If it must pass for a Sign of Charity to think well of more Religions
than one, the Turkish Tenets will have the advantage of the Nine and Thirty
Articles, forasmuch as the Mahometans declare, that every one will be saved in
his own Religion, and the Articles on the other side confine Salvation to the Sea 18th. Article.
Christians only. But both these Charitable Religions must give way to the
Origenists, who will have neither Men nor Devils to be Eternally Damned.

Wherefore it is apparent, that this plausible pretense of Greater Charity
weakens not the force of the forementioned Argument, but leaves it Such, as
that the most cautious Christian may safely repose on it; Nay, the more
cautious a Man is in his everlasting concerns, the better and safer this
Argument will appear to him. For, those who have a quicker Sense of their
Temporal Interests, than their Spiritual, will not so much consult, what is
safe for their Souls as what is secure for their Estates. And if both cannot be
made sure alike they will trust a scanty probability (or rather an
Improbability) with the former, so that they may have Demonstration (which yet,
Gods knows, can be but Imaginary) for the latter.

Now, what would Dr. Tenison have me do in these circumstances? Would he have
me Read the Scriptures? Iread them: Would he have me peruse the Fathers? I did
it without his advice. Would he have me make use of (what he calls) Page 18.
Ministerial Guides? I heard the Instructions of the English Clergy for many
Years. Would he have me pray? I looked on Prayer as the chief means of
obtaining true Faith, and therefore omitted it not. Would he have me be humble?
In this Point I can only say, that during this search I had so mean an Opinion
of my own understanding, that I could not but conclude, that Almighty God,
whose Providential care appeared in all other things, had likewise provided
some Such a guide must be one who could not Err himself (i. e.) Infallible.
Guide for me, that I might not Err in so important a concern, as that must
needs be, without which it was impossible to please him, viz. Ut supra Hebr.
11. 6.
Faith.

Wherefore having thus far observed (as I suppose) the Doctors directions, what
would he have me do after all? Does he require the interior Sense, he speaks
of, pa. 10? That also pleaded for the Roman Catholics. And now, if this be all
he looks after, would he have me (according to what he says, p. 15.) at last
Judge for my self? Why then, I do Judge, and Pronounce too, (I mean for my
self) that Holy Scriptures, Ancient Fathers and Common Reason are all for the
Roman Catholics, and against the Protestants.

And what shall interpose between this Sentence and it is Execution, I mean,
between Concluding, that the Roman Catholic Religion is the best, and Embracing
it as such? Does the Church of England pretend, that I ought to submit my
private Judgment to her Public Decisions? She does not: Nor, if she did, would
Dr. Tenison be her Advocate.

And therefore to conclude, if Dr. T --. (being as I conceive, no great friend
to Retractations of this kind) will still affirm, that I departed from the
Church of England on false Principles, he must at least acknowledge, that those
principles were such as I had received from her. So that in effect I am
censured by my Teachers for doing that very thing, which they Taught me to do.
An hard case and that which certainly must prevail with us to observe our
Saviors Command in being Matthew. c. 7. v. 15.
aware of such Teachers for the future!

I have said nothing here (at least, directly) of the marks of the True Church,
viz. Unity, Holiness, Universality, Perpetuity, Conversion of Infidels and the
like, nor of many other things, which concurred at that time to convince me of
the truth of of the Religion I embraced: But thus much I have said, that, since
Dr. Tenison has been pleased to make the World acquainted with my Conversion,
it may not be wholly ignorant of those Motives which occasioned it. And since
we are Commanded Ready always to satisfy every one that asks you a Reason of
that Hope which is in you, 1 Pet. c. 3. v. 15.
to give a Reason of the hope, which is in us, to every one that asks, when we
are upbraided with our change in this public manner, the public seems to demand
this Reason, and consequently we seem to lie under an obligation of rendering
it. Which, I hope will excuse me with my Readers, for so long a Comment on the
Doctors Text.

And now (to return to my Remarks) methinks Dr. Tenison conceiving, that I had
left his Church for want of due Information, ought not to have pressed so much
for my being excluded from that Conference, but rather to have been glad of
this opportunity, wherein by his great Learning he might have rectified my
understanding and been a means of reducing me to one of his two fair Flocks,
viz. to St. Martins in the Fields, or St. James Westminster: For though those
Flocks are so numerous, that one stray Sheep can hardly be found missing, yet
(we know) it was the property heretofore of a good Shepherd to leave the Ninty
Nine, that he might seek after the Hundredth [this being, perhaps, in former
days a competent number for one Shepherd] I say, it had been a clearer sign not
only of the Doctors Charity, but also of his confidence in the goodness of his
cause, to have admitted me to his Conference, than to pretend my turning Roman
Catholic through Ignorance, as an Argument, for the sending me away, and
consequently, depriving me of (what he ought to think) an opportunity of being
better informed.

But perhaps, the Doctor who thought this Conference Pa. 3. And yet D. T. was
displeased with Mr. P for proposing a Rule of Faith for the Subject of that
Conference, because it was not that point which the Boy had mentioned to him,
viz. of Luther, whereas had be designed a more public Good (as be seems to
pretend, Mr. P's Question was the more proper.
to no purpose as to the Boy, for his having been at Mass two Months before,
concluded that it would be less available with me, who had been many years
since, not only at Mass (as many who else are those who carry intelligence from
the Mass-house, to Dr. Horneck? p. 79.
Protestants daily are) but also actually reconciled to the Church of Rome. And
indeed, for as much as concerns this Point, I am persuaded that the Doctor is
not out in his Observations: For let but a Man be truly Converted to the Roman
Catholic Faith (I do not say for two Months, but) for one single moment, and it
will be impossible for all the Doctors in England to remove him from it, till
such time as his own negligence and ingratitude shall oblige Almighty God to
withdraw this Mavelous Light from him. And it is on this account, that I have
often said amongst my Protestant acquaintance, that I wished they were but
Catholics for one half hour.

Dr. Tenison says, that those who forsake the Church of England for the Church
of Rome, are Page 5.
more partial, and possessed with a Spirit of fiercer Bigottry than those who
are Romanists from the beginning.

It is indeed usual for Converts to show somewhat more of warmth in Religion,
than they had before their Conversion, [or perhaps, than some who owing their
Faith to their Birth and Education, have not yet sufficiently considered the
value of it.] One of the most essential proprieties of Goodness is to be
Communicative, and therefore as soon as Men are brought to the true Faith, one
of the first desires which they perceive in themselves, is that of the
Conversion of others. When thou art once Converted, confirm thy Brethren, Luke
c. 22. v. 32.
Tu aliquando Conversus (said our Blessed Savior to St. Peter) confirma
fratres tuos. The Samaritan Woman as soon as she was Converted, left her
Employment, The Woman therefore left her Water-pot, etc. John c. 4. v. 28.
and ran to call her Neighbors. And it is not without Mystery, that the Holy
Ghost is careful to Record of several Converts in the Gospel, that when they
believed, See ibid. v. 53.
their whole Household believed with them.

This indeed is a zeal so proper to Converts, that where nothing of it appears,
the Conversion is shrewdly to be suspected: Especially, when it shall so
happen, that the causes of Pretense, are more apparent, than the Symptoms of
Reality.

And it is this zeal (as I conjecture) which the Doctor calls Bigottry. Wherein
he imitates the rest of the World, who think it sufficient, for the discredit
of a Virtue, to mis-name it. Such, I mean, as give the Title of Niggardliness
to Temperance, of Sheepishness to Modesty, of Folly to Conscientiousness, and
lastly, (where the Doctor falls in with them) of Bigottry to Christian Zeal,

And probably it was this Zeal, which rendered the Boy so Page 2.
uneasy to his fellow Servants, [those who are looser in their manners being
seldom complained of for this kind of troublesomeness] For, Men are generally
so much in love with the enjoyments of this life, that whosoever talks to them
of the last Reckoning Day, and that care wherewith they ought to provide for
it, is but very ill Company. And so, oftentimes, we forfeit the love of our
friends, by showing them ours. And (believe me) there can never be a greater
De^^nstration of our Affection for them, than when we hazard the loss of their
kindness to us, which is our Good, for the sake of their Salvation, which
(setting aside the Merit of a Good Work) is purely their own.

But whereas the Doctor fancies, that original Romanists would be more
propitious to his Party than Converts: If I may guess by my own experience, he
is much mistaken. It has been my observation, that some who have been bred
Catholics from the beginning, having never been without that clearness
wherewith the Truth of our Holy Faith is represented to them, are very hardly
to be persuaded, but that such Protestants as Dr. Tenison, viz. Men of some
Learning, must needs know that they are in the wrong, and consequently,
persisting in it, be Hypocrites. And indeed, the Motives for the Catholic Faith
are so palpably evident throughout all the Writings of the Ancient Fathers and
Ecclesiastical Historians, (which ought to come into the hands of those who
pretend to the Study of Divinity) that I believe I should have been very apt to
have Joined with them in this censure, had I been unacquainted with the
prejudices of Inclination, Education and Interest, or with those obscurities
which they never fail of bringing upon the mind: Whereunto may be added, that
blindness, which God Almighty often Spargit Deus paenales caecitates super
illicitas cupiditates. Aug, Confess.
inflicts on us for the punishment of our other Sins. But as it is, and in
regard that I have been under the same circumstances, though not with so much
Learning, haud ignarus mali, miseris succurrere disco [I have spoiled the
Verse, that I might not Err in the Page 10.
Gender, the Doctor being, as I see, curious in th^se matters] I have now
learnt to have compassion for Those as persons deceived, whom otherwise I might
have abhorred as Dissemblers.

And when the Doctor shall have considered these things well, I believe that if
the Sincerity of his Profession should come to be tried by a Jury of Catholics,
he would not prefer Original ones before Converts*

No Gentlemen, Converts are not fiercer toward you, than other Catholics, but
you deal less fiercely with others than with them; the Yellowness which appears
to a Jaundic'd person is not in the Object but in his Eye. The fierceness is in
your breast toward the Converts, and not in theirs toward you. And this the
Doctor knows well enough, and therefore has recommended me under so
advantageous a Character to the acquaintance of his Parishioners. Which (as he
thinks) will stand me in some stead another day.

Now it is not hard to guess at the Reason, why Converts are more severely
handled by their Protestant Neighbors than other Catholics: [and the nearer,
for the most part, the Neighbr-hood, or Relation is, the rougher the usage.] It
is because, when a Protestant is Converted, we are more sensibly put in mind of
what we ought to do, than by those who have never been otherwise than
Catholics. [And by a Neighbor, or Kins-man, still more sensibly than by a
stranger, or one at a distance] We are disturbed by such an Example in that
drousie Principle, that every one ought to continue in that Church wherein he
was Some go farther, and say, that Men ought to continue in that Religion
wherein they were Educated, whether it be Christian, or not.
Baptized. And we are such stupid Lovers of ease, that we are angry at such as
endeavor to awaken us out of our Sleep, at least till we come to be thoroughly
awake, and so understand, that had it not been for this Charitable
Troublesomeness, we should have been burnt in our Beds. I say, this Principle,
of abiding in that Communion where we once are, is more immediately attacked by
Converts than by others, and therefore of consequence the Converts are more
displeasing to those, who have made a shift to lay their Consciences a-sleep
upon it. And yet how much soever this Principle is beloved at present, it is
that which the Protestants (if they have any kindness for their Religion) have
no reason to be fond of, since, if this Rule had been always observed, their
Reformation had not been, and consequently, the World had still continued
without any Protestants at all.

There is yet one remark which offers it self to me concerning this Aspersion
which the Doctor is pleased to cast on all Converts, viz. That it reflects on
me in very good Company: But I will not insist on this, least the Doctor who
confesses, he is apt to be Ep. to his Parishioners.
Suspicious, should have a fresh occasion of suspecting (as he did at the
Conference) that I intend to inform against him: However for the future (as I
told him then) I would have him take a little more time to consider, before he
speaks.

When the Doctor told me, that I had been turned in Spain, where the People had
no Bibles, what I replied was very true, viz. that going over in the Company of
a public Minister, we had the liberty of using what Books we pleased, and
consequently, we carried with us not only Bibles, but a great number of other
English Books and amongst them many of our best Protestant Controvertists. And
I farther inform the Doctor, that during my forementioned doubts, I frequently
perused the Writings of those Men, and particularly of Chillingworth whom I
looked on as the subtilest of them all, and the Fountainhead from whence Dr.
St. and most others of our Modern Controversie-writers had derived their
Notions. And before my Conversion, to the best of my remembrance, I never Read
one line in any Roman Catholic Controvertist (having always an inbred aversion
to, and a fear of being deceived by them) unless the Doctor will take the
Ancient Fathers to be such, as indeed, he very well may.

But after all, why should the Doctor say, that I have forsaken his Church?
Does a Man leave the House, who goes out of one Room into another? The Learned
Dr. Jackson (as he is Page 58.
Quoted by the Learned Dr. Tenison) says, that the Church of England was in the
Romish Church before Luthers time, and is yet in it. Now, how have I left the
Church of England, when both the Church of England and my self are in the same
Church? London is no farther from Paris, than Paris is from London. If the
Church of England could come so far from the Church of Rome, as she has done
by her Reformation, without Separating from her (as the Doctor seems to Ibid.
affirm;) may not a Church of England-man go all that way back again without
separating from the Church of England? If the Denying of Transubstantiation,
break no Union with those who Hold it; how comes, the Holding it to dis-unite
us from those who Deny it? Wherefore the Doctor might have spared his Third
Exception against me at this time, and first considered whether the matter on
which it was grounded were true, or not.

But the Churches of Rome and England must be two distinct Churches, when it is
for the Doctors turn: And One and the same when a contrary purpose requires it.
That is, when my Apostasy is to be proved, they are two; and when the Doctor's
Succession is to be made out, they are but One. It was not without cause, that
the Ancients said, Oportet mendacem esse Memorem, since it is so very hard, for
much to be spoken in the Defense of Falsehood without the stumbling upon some
Contradiction or other.

It is not impossible, but Dr. T. may Answer what is added by his abovesaid
Learned Brother, viz. that the English Church is in the Church of Rome, neither
as a Visible Church altogether distinct from it, nor any Native Member of it.
But this, (to say nothing of the fancifulness of the Notion) will not serve for
the Doctors excuse. For he charges me roundly to have forsaken the Church of
England, whereas (according to this Learned Man) he ought to have said, that I
had not altogether left it, but had still, at least one foot in it is Communion,
or some such like Church of England-Oracle, which, like their Real Presence,
might have been interpreted either way. This is not trifling (though it may seem
so at first sight) but a clear Manifestation of what most naturally proceeds
from the admirable Harmony of Protestant Doctrins.

I have now done with the Doctors Preliminary Exceptions: But before I pass to
any other part of his Account, I will do him so much right as to acknowledge,
that I am verily persuaded, that he made these Exceptions not out of much
malice toward me, or for any great weight he imagined to be in them, but
merely to spend the time, and amuse the Auditors, or, it may be, to discompose
his Antagonists, and render them less present to themselves: Such Salutations
(ordinarily speaking) being but an ill tuning of the mind for calm and serious
Discourses. For (as I have already hinted) if Dr. Tenison had thought it both
unreasonable and inconvenient, that I should be present at the Conference, why
had he not accepted of that person, whom Mr. P. proposed in my stead, or
otherwise insisted on it, that I should have withdrawn; which I assure him, had
been no less a favor to me, than he could think it a convenience to himself?

Dr. T. says in the beginning of his 6th. page, Page 6.
that Mr. P. [after his sitting down] spoke first about Pen and Ink, and an
Amanuensis, but Dr. T. having brought no person with him, and the Crowd
pressing, Mr. P. began a Verbal Conference, by saying the Protestants had no
Bible, desiring Dr. T. to prove they had one, and asking him how, and whence
they had one, and what was their Rule of Faith.

This looks, as if there had been but a slight mention made of having the
Arguments taken in Writing, and that it was after our sitting down, and only by
Mr. P. and that Mr. P. without insisting much for it had begun a Verbal
Conference: Whereas both Mr. P. and my self were very earnest for it, and
proposed it before our sitting down; Nay, it was on this proposal of ours, that
the Doctor invited us to sit down, after having first told us, that he had no
Pen and Ink, nor Writer, etc. According to what I have said above p. 14.
Possibly Mr. P. might mention this again after he sat down, though I do not
remember it.

Moreover, after this first sitting down, the Doctor added two of his
Objections against me, and offered at some Preliminary things as he called
them. And it was after these Discourses (though they are omitted as trivial in
Mr. P -- s account) that Mr. P. began his Argumentation, and not immediately
after the proposal of having it Written (as Dr. T. says) for Mr. P. perceiving,
that the Doctor had a mind to consume the time in unprofitable Cavils,
endeavored to cut him short, by putting him in remembrance of the business, for
which they had met.

I mention these particulars, that the not admitting of this Proposal of
Writing, may appear (what truly it was) the Doctors Tergiversation. Had Mr. P.
been then as well acquainted with Dr. T. as he is now, he would absolutely have
refused the Conference, had not his desire of Writing been yielded to. And this
is the resolution, which he has taken for the future: Which, in my judgment, is
but shutting the Stable-door, after the Steed is Stolen: For (I believe) he is
never like to have the Doctors Company on such hard terms, notwithstanding that
he seems to offer p. 70. what he refused at the Conference.

Whereas he says, Mr. P. began a Verbal Conference, by saying the Protestants
had no Bible. It was not so: For, he began the Conference, by desiring the
Doctor to Assign his Rule of Faith: Having first given us some account, how the
Youth (for whose sake the Conference was) came to entertain thoughts of making
himself a Member of the Roman Catholic Church. And to that Proposition (after
much debate concerning these Desires in the Youth) the Doctor replied (being
again and again pressed to it by Mr. P.) that his Rule of Faith was the Holy
Scripture. And it was on this Answer, that Mr. P. asked the Doctor, how he
could prove, that the Book which he called Holy Scripture, was truly such, and
not before, as it is made by the Doctors Account; which (as I have complained
before) is one of the most intricate things I ever met with, and no more like
the Conference, than it is usual for the new hands at Cards (after the Pack is
well shuffled) to be like the former ones. The Cards, it is true, are all the
same, but their places being changed, the Games are different. I do not say,
that this Account is more confused than the Conference, but the confusion has
quite another shape, or figure than it had.

But the matter of Fact being cleared, as above, it becomes more evident, how
much Dr. Tenison dissembled, when instead of proving his Bible to be true
Scripture, as was desired, he offered to dispute Page 6.
out of that Book which Mr. P. should own to be Scripture, since it could not
but be manifest to him, that Mr. P. did not only ask him for the proof of those
places, wherein his Bible differs from ours, but for the proof of the whole, or
if he had demanded a proof of such places only, it was not for the sake of any
Arguments which the Protestants take thence for the defense of their Religion,
but that it might appear on what Testimony they had received the Scripture, and
consequently on what grounds their Reformation had proceeded. And therefore
when to avoid this proof he offered to dispute out of Mr. P's Bible (which he
might easily have done by the help of his own Interpretation) it was a plain
(though, with the Rabble, a very plausible) evasion.

This Ibid.
Method [viz. of Disputing out of Mr. P's Bible] says the Doctor, Mr. P. would
not allow, but repeated his Discourse about our not having a Bible, and our not
being able if we had one, to prove we had one; and asked again about the Rule
of our Faith. Dr. T. before he answered to this, applied himself to Mr. M. (who
seemed to be the calmer person, etc.

Here the Doctor discovers his way of Disputing. How comes the Doctor to apply
himself to Mr. M. whereas Mr. P. had begun his Conference with him, and
proposed the main Question of it? How come we not to receive an Answer to this
Question till two or three Pages full of wrangling after it was proposed, nor
then neither (as he confesses, p. 9.) till Mr. P. and Mr. M. not suffering him
to tell a Story, pressed him to it, nor even then (as he farther Page 9.
owns) till he had chid Mr. P. for asking him Questions, and seeming to
Catechize him. Surely after so long an Expectation the Answer must needs be
extraordinary.

In the next place, how comes Mr. M. though a Convert, and Page 5.
possessed with a Spirit of fiercer Bigottry than other Romanists, to be the
calmer person? But Dr. T. wants an excuse for turning away from his Antagonist,
and speaking to one who (as he was told at the beginning) was to have no part
in the Dispute. And as for the Complement, he is resolved, that I shall pay
dear for it, before he parts with me. Besides, some such appearance of Candor
(the common Artifice of Detractors) is necessary for the obtaining a belief to
the basest of Calumnies which is to Page 23.
follow.

Dr. T. Page 6.
put Mr. M. in mind, that such Discourses as these [concerning the proof of
Holy Scripture] and some others lately used by the Romanists about the Trinity
and Transubstantiation, would rather make the People Atheists or Unbelievers,
than Converts. And that the Indifferent were ready to say, Content: We cannot
believe Transubstantiation, and we will have no Trinity; We cannot have the
Bible unless we take it upon Roman Authority, and none we will have. Mr. M.
said, That would not be the consequence; but gave no reason why he said so.

But Mr. M. can give a very good reason, why he then gave none. It is, because
before he could pronounce Six words, Dr. T. turned back again to Mr. P. And it
was not for one (as I have intimated already) who looked on himself as wholly
unconcerned in the Controversy, to interrupt it so far, as to press the Doctor
to hearken to him.

What I would have then said (had the Doctor been pleased to stay for it) was,
That those who would give themselves leave to consider, would find so good
Authority in the Roman Church, for the belief of the Trinity, and the Holy
Scripture, that though there were no other Authority for them (as indeed there is
none) yet this alone would be sufficient. And consequently, that there would be
no danger of Atheism, but where Obstinacy and Perverseness should interpose,
which would never leave Men destitute of a Pretense for Incredulity, though they
should want a just reason for it ever so much. I should have added, that it was
an excellent Argument of the Truth of a Religion, when it could be shown, that
either such a Religion was True, or else that none was so. Wherefore if it
could be proved, that on the denial of this Roman Authority (as the Doctor
calls it) Men would have no reason to believe a God, it must needs have
followed, that the Roman Authority was not to be denied.

Besides: An Arian might have upbraided the Ancient Catholics after the same
manner and said, that so much insisting on the necessity of believing a
Trinity, would rather make the People Atheists or Unbelievers, than Converts.
And that the Indifferent would be ready to say, content: We cannot believe the
Trinity, and we will have no Deity. For Athanasius tells us, that it will stand
us in little stead to believe a God, unless we also believe (what is plainly
repugnant to our Reason) a Trinity of persons in an Unity of Substance. And
this Discourse would not have been less conclusive in the Arians Mouth, than it
was in the Doctors.

This was the Answer, which the Doctor by the Spirit of Prophecy thought not
worth the tarrying for, and therefore faced about to Mr. P. Which I should not
have complained of, had it been to have Answered Mr. P's. Question. But instead
of this, to show how sollicitous he was for the Discovery of Truth in so
important a Point as a Rule of Faith he Page 6. near the end.
falls into an insignificant cavil. Where I leave him, it being too troublesome
for me to trace him through all his turnings and windings. However, what is
here said, may serve to give the Reader some kind of Notion of them.

He says, p. 14. Mr. M. had some while before asked Page 14.
Dr. T. (who had said, that we find the Bible, which we now have, Quoted by the
Ancient Fathers) how he came to know they were Fathers? To which Question he
thought an Answer in that place a condescension to an Impertinence.

The Doctor had been asked, upon what Authority or Testimony [for the Doctor
distinguishes between them] he had received his Bible. He answered (amongst
other things) that he found his Bible Quoted by the Ancient Fathers. Now, I
considered that the Fathers, and their works stood in need of some Testimony
themselves for their being relied on. And therefore I asked the Doctor, how he
knew they were Fathers? By Fathers, I suppose he meant Orthodox Bishops or
Doctors of the Church. Wherefore the meaning of my Question was, how he could
prove those whom he accounted Fathers to be Orthodox? If he should have said,
that they had been allowed to be such by all Christians; It would have been
denied him, there having been, and still being several Societies of such as
Profess Christianity who assert the contrary. And therefore unless the Doctor
could give us a mark whereby we might know which sort of Christians are in the
right, and which in the wrong, it would be impossible for us to understand from
their Testimony whether the Fathers were Orthodox or not.

If he should have replied, that these Fathers were approved by our selves;
That also would have been as little to his purpose. For, if he looks on our
Authority as Good, he ought to receive several other things upon it, which he
does not. And if he takes it not to be such, he cannot confide in it either for
Scripture or Fathers. Since here, they are not Arguments ad hominem (or
concerning only the Private difference between us and them) but general
Arguments which we require of them. I mean such, as may serve to evidence the
certainty of Holy Writ to the whole World. And if the Doctor would have
granted, that this could have been done by our Authority, it may easily be
believed, that we should have asked no more.

Lastly, If he should have said, that he knew those Ancient Fathers to be
Orthodox no otherwise, than by the Conformity which he observed in their Tenets
to the Doctrine of the Scriptures (which is the Protestant way of proving the
Orthodoxness of either particular Men or Churches) he would have involved
himself in a Circle, by proving the Fathers to be true from their agreement
with the Scriptures, and the Scriptures to be so from the approbation of the
Fathers.

By this time, I suppose, it sufficiently appears to unbiased Readers, that
Doctor Tenison would have showed his Learning more by Answering this Question,
than he has done his Manners, by calling it Impertinent.

Here I cannot but take notice, that this Question of mine is inserted in a
wrong place, to make People believe, that I was present to so much of the
Conference: Whereas I am as certain, as my memory can make me, that I heard
none of those Discourses from the middle of the Doctors 10th. Page, till
toward the latter end of his 17th. When the Doctors loud Clamors about the
Quotation out of St. Ambrose brought me back from the Window, whither I had
retired long before, viz. before the abovesaid Discourses which begin at the
middle of the Tenth Page. I say, I was present to none of those Discourses
between the middle of the Tenth, and the latter end of the 17th. Page,
excepting somewhat which is mis-placed, viz. Mr, P's Reprehension of the
Schoolmaster for his Wry Mouths, etc. which was soon after the beginning of
the Conference, and a little while before I withdrew: But the Doctor sets it
down in this Page 15.
place, that the People may not imagine, that the Schoolmaster came so soon to
his Assistance, as in Truth he did. Neither was this Reprehension occasioned
(as the Doctor would have it) by any Discourse concerning the Lateran Council
which was not then spoken to, but on the Schoolmasters producing a Picture in
a Breviary, and (to show his Wit) laughing at it. Which was an action no way
pertinent to the matter then in debate. And therefore the Doctor, to disguise
the Schoolmasters intrusion, says nothing of the Discourse, which happened
about the Picture. It is unhappy (says the Doctor p. 65.) that amidst so many
things we can have nothing sincere, and in it is Naturals. The reason of it is,
because in such occasions the Truth is seldom honorable for both sides. And I
question not, but the Doctor is convinced by this time, that he was much in the
right, when he chose rather to trust his own Memory, than his own Amanuensis.

Concerning what he says, p. 14. viz. Mr. M. asked what Writers? I do not
remember that Question, neither did I hear the Discourse of that Paragraph.
What he said also to me in Derogation of Mr. P. though he has it, p. 15. was a
long time after. But the Doctor is resolved to spread my Controversy through
his whole Narrative, though by this means it be very thin, and neither much for
my credit, nor his: It is possible, that the Doctor thinks to help it out, by
putting my Name at length, so Six times in two Pages.
often as he does, throughout this famous Story, whereas the rest of the
persons of his Drama (excepting only one, as I take it) have only the first
Letter of Theirs. However lest the Doctor should design a Favor by it (though his
not dealing so by his most worthy Friends might make one think otherwise) and
since (whilst I am contented to yield to him in Contumely and Abuse) I am
resolved not to come one jot behind him in Point of Courtesy, I have desired
the Printer to pay him the same Respect, as often as he can do it conveniently:
That his NAME may rumble as much in my Pamphlet, as mine does in his. And
although this should prove to be a sign of ill Will (for I know not what to make
of it) our Spleen would not be mis-placed upon the Doctors Name, since it is
That which has done us Ten times more harm than his Arguments, though indeed ever
since his late Book, we have some reason to hope, that it is Authority is much
lessened with all Those, whose minds are at liberty to Consider.

There is one thing which, with my Readers License, I desire to take notice of,
before I pass on to the remainder of the Doctors Relation, which is the gross
fallacy wherewith some Protestant Divines are wont to delude the Common People,
whenever they are called upon by Catholics to show, on what Authority they
receive the Holy Scripture. The Papists (say they) question the Authority of
Scripture. Again, when it is alleged, that the Scripture left to the
Interpretation of each private person can decide no Point of Controversy,
since doubtlesly every one will declare, that the Scripture is for him; and in
effect he does declare it by holding his particular Tenet (whatsoever it be) as
grounded on Scripture. I say, when this is urged; They cry, The Scripture is
undervalued by the Papists. And this makes such deep Impression on the
unthinking Multitude (or, shall I say, strikes such a damp on their Spirits)
that many times it surpasses the skill of the ablest and plainest Logician to
undeceive them. And yet it is not because they cannot think Rationally enough
to discern the Fallacy, but because they will not; since there is no
understanding amongst them so dull or short-sighted, but if it be made use of,
must see through it.

None can have a greater respect for the Holy Scripture, than Catholics have. I
my self have known several of them Beyond Sea, who amongst their other
Devotions Reading some part of the Holy Scripture every day, to show their
profound Veneration for it, were always wont to Read it on their Knees; which
whosoever observes, and compares with that very indifferent behavior,
wherewith it is ordinarily handled here in England, will not say that Catholics
have a less regard for the Holy Scripture, than Protestants. And consequently,
they do as little question it is Authority.

Why then do the Catholics urge the Protestants to show on what Authority or
Testimony they receive the Bible, since it is Authority is undoubted on both
sides? It is, because the Catholics would take this occasion of showing their
Adversaries, that of necessity a True and Uncorrupted Church must be allowed to
have been in the World, when they began their pretended Reformation, viz. about
a hundred and fifty years ago: For, since they received their Bible from some
Church then in the World; in case there were at that time no true nor
uncorrupted Church, it must follow, that they had no good Authority for their
Bible. And on the contrary, if the Protestants will own that they received
their Bible from good hands, they must acknowledge, that they had it from a
True Church, and consequently, that there was such a one in the World when they
began to Reform. And from hence it will immediately follow, that the first
Reformers separating from the whole World, (as has been said) did also
separate from the True Church which (as we here suppose them to confess) was
then in it: And therefore must be accounted Schismatics, unless they can give
us some better Definition of Schism, than that which hitherto we have had, viz.
of it is being a Separation from the Obedience and Communion of the True Church.

There is yet another Reason, why we ask the Protestants, on what Authority
they receive the Scriptures. And it is, because we would likewise put them in
mind of what I hinted above, viz. that they ought to admit other things, and
indeed, the meaning of the Scripture, upon the same Authority, on which they
admit the letter. And therefore when they say, that they had the Scripture from
the Roman Catholics, we tell them, that if the Roman Catholics may be relied on
for the reception of the Scripture, they may be credited for other Doctrins. If
they are bad Witnesses, no part of their Testimony can be valid. Wherefore if
any part of it be so, they must be looked on as Good Witnesses, and
consequently their whole Testimony ought to be embraced. And this is another
cause of this Question.

But why do the Catholics derogate so much from the most abundant Perfection of
Holy Scripture, as to affirm that it is insufficient of it self to decide our
Controversies in Faith? It is, because the daily and palpable experience of
Mankind Teaches it to be so. Neither is it any derogation to a Law, to say,
that it stands in need of what never yet any Law was without, viz. A Judge, or
Interpreter of it.

And I wonder, that the Protestants, who confess that every Man is fallible,
and as such may be mistaken in the Sense of Scripture, and that, to his
Damnation, should look on it as a Derogation to the same Scripture, to think
that God (whose Mercy is over all his Works) has appointed some means to keep
us from being so mistaken. Especially when this help is not so much for the
Scripture, as for our understandings. It arguing no more a defect in those
sacred Volums, that our narrow Intellects are not able to comprehend their
meaning without an Interpreter (as it fared with the And Philip ran thither to
him [the Eunuch] and heard him Read the Prophet Esaias, and said, understandest
thou what thou Read? And he said, how can I, except some Man should guide
me? etc. Act. c. 8. v. 30.31.
Eunuch spoken of in the Acts of the Apostles) than it does a fault in a good
Print, that it cannot be Read by weak Eyes without the assistance of a Glass.

To conclude, if it be a Derogation to the Scripture to say, that it stands in
need of somewhat besides it self for it is being understood by us; How will
those Protestants defend themselves, who affirm that Prayer, Humility and See
Pa. 18.
Ministerial Guides are necessary for this purpose? What greater affront is it
to the Scripture to declare, that it cannot be understood without the Authority
of the Church, than it is to say, that it cannot be understood without
Ministerial Guides? Nor even with them (according to Protestants) any more than
fallibly; which is, in truth, not to be understood at all; for, how can a Man
be said to know the meaning of a thing, whilst he doubts whether he know it, or
not; as all those must do, who consider that they are Fallible, and therefore
may be Mistaken in their Interpretations?

There is also another supposed Irreverence toward the Holy Scripture, that
the Catholics are accused of, which consists in this, that they make the
Tradition of the Church to be of equal credit with it. On this Point I shall
only ask this short Question, viz. Whether it be not as much to be believed,
that St. Matthews Gospel is the word of God, which is the Tradition of the
Church; as it is, that our Savior Fasted Forty Days and Forty Nights, which is
part of that Gospel? If it be (as I presume none will deny) then it must
follow, that Tradition, which is the unwritten Word of God, must oblige us to
believe, as much, as Scripture which is his written Word. And, indeed who is
there that can doubt but that heretofore, the Apostles Sermons and Verbal
directions (and that which the Faithful remembered of them) were of equal
Authority with their Epistles and other Writings? Shall we not think, that what
was laid up in their Memories was as Obligatory, as that which was committed to
Paper, Especially whilst we hear St. Paul Commanding the 2 These. c. 2. v. 15.
Thessalonians to hold fast those Traditions, which they had learnt, whether it
had been by word of Mouth, or by Epistle?

On the whole matter I dare boldly affirm, that there is none, who shall
impartially consider what has been said here, but will perceive, that the
Catholics have a greater respect for the Holy Scripture than the Protestants,
and this, with relation both to it is Authority and Usefulness.

First, As to it is Authority [I mean, it is Authentickness] the Catholics
Declare, that it has been handed from the time of the Apostles down to ours by
a True and Uncorrupted Church. Whereas the Protestants do not allow that they
received it from any Society of Christians but such as (according to their own
sentiments) were Corrupted. The Inference of this, and of what follows, is too
plain, to need the making.

Secondly, As to it is Usefulness. The Catholics affirm, that God has left us
some sure means of understanding it a-right, so far forth as it shall be
necessary for our Salvation, whereas the Protestants assign no other way of
understanding the Scripture, but what they acknowledge to be Uncertain.

And here I cannot but take notice, that a Bible in an unknown Tongue, which is
capable of being rightly Interpreted, and is daily so Interpreted to the Common
People, is incomparably of more use to them than one in the Vulgar Tongue,
which can be understood no otherwise than fallibly, That is (as I have said See
above Page 56.
above) cannot be And consequently, indeed can be of no use, but rather hurtful.
understood. An unknown Tongue which may be Interpreted being certainly less
inconvenient, than an unknown Sense which may not be Found out.

Wherefore, if Scripture appear both more Authentic and more Useful by Catholic
Tenets, than it does by Protestant, can it be thought to have less Respect
amongst us, than it has amongst them?

There is yet another plausible Pretense which serves rather to Amuse, than
Argumentatively to deceive the Common People whenever this Point viz. the
Testimony, on which Holy Scripture is to be received, comes into Debate. They
say, that the Holy Scripture has a sufficient Authority from it self, that it
is discerned by it is own Light, and that it is Style, Contexture and Precepts
are such, as necessarily speak it to be Divine, insomuch that it stands not in
any need of being recommended to us by any Extrinsic Testimony whatsoever.

Certainly if this were so, the Apostles would have had an easier task in the
Conversion of the World, than it proved to them. They needed only to have
Translated their Gospels into the Languages of all Nations, and so by Ordinary
Messengers to have dispersed them from one end of the World to the other. And
by this means, they might have been in those days as sparing of their Journeys,
as their pretended Successors of the Church of England are in these. And
forasmuch as concerns those Miraculous Gifts, which were Communicated to them,
for the propagation of the Faith, all of them had been Superfluous, excepting
only that of Tongues. Their Scripture would have discovered it self by it is own
Light to be the word of God, and what was Plain in it (according to our Modern
Doctrine) would be sufficient for Salvation. But since this was quite otherwise,
and that the Word of God was heretofore recommended to Mankind by the great
Labors, Holy Lives, and frequent Miracles of those who Preached it, and even
with all these helps found not that Credit with the greatest part which it
ought, we must conclude that this Holy word stands in need of some Extrinsic
Testimony, since at the beginning it pleased God (who does no unnecessary
thing) to accompany it with But they [the Apostles] going forth Preached every
where, our Lord working withal, and Confirming the Word with Signs that
followed, Mark c. 16. v. 20.
such, and that even when it came from the Blessed Mouth of his own The Works
that I do in the name of my Father, they give Testimony of me, John c. 10. v.
25. And again, ver. 38. Believe the Works, that you may know and believe that
the Father is in me, etc.
Son.

And yet, though we should grant that there is somewhat so admirable in these
Writings, that forasmuch as concerns the whole frame of them, it must
necessarily appear (at least, to a well-disposed mind) that they can have no
other Author than God himself: Will it therefore follow, that every Verse is
such, every Historical passage, or that some Syllable or Word may not be added,
or taken away in some Mystery of Faith, without breaking in upon the Majesty of
the Style, or whatever else bespeaks our veneration for this Book? May not (I
say) somewhat of this Nature be done, which may change the Meaning of a
Sentence, and yet thence no evidence arise that this Sentence so changed is not
from God?

For further Illustration and Proof of what I say, let us suppose that there
were two Editions of the Bible, delivered to us by an Extrinsick Testimony or
Authority so equal, that we could not discern which Testimony were best, and
that in one of these Editions our Savior's words in the Institution of the
Blessed Sacrament should be, THIS is a Sign of my Body, and in the other (what
they now are) THIS is my Body. Would it appear from the sound, or any thing
else, which of these two Sentences was spoken by Christ? I presume that
(considering the various opinions which are now in the World concerning this
Mystery) you are ready to say, that it would not. Suppose then, that I, or any
other private person should put forth an Edition of the Bible, which should
have the former Sentence, This is a Sign of my Body, instead of the latter,
This is my Body. It is evident, indeed, that such an Edition, would be of no
Credit. But why? Not for any defect in the sound, or other intrinsic fault (as
has been shown) but because the Authority of one single person, which
recommends the first Sentence, cannot weigh with that of the whole World, which
delivers the last. For could these two Sentences change their Extrinsic
Testimonies, they would change their Credit also.

Much more of this Nature might be added: But we need not have Recourse to
Suppositions for an Evidence of this Truth, which is sufficiently confirmed by
that Difference in the Translations of the Scripture, which is already in the
World.

By Difference in Translations, I mean, a Difference in Viz. when one
Translation has Words expressing a different Sense from those which are in
another.
Sense, and not in Language, as Dr. St -- was pleased to Mistake my meaning, in
his second Letter to Mr. G --. In which piece for the most part he Answers my
Objections by mistaking them. And certainly Books may be Answered with ease,
when Ignorance it self (as Mistaking is) either Real or Pretended, is able to
do the work. The prevention of such mistakes was one of the Reasons, why I
preferred Personal Conferences before the Writing (...) ^ooks, tho, indeed, for
the securing such Conferences from such after mis-representations, as we have
here, I thought it convenient, that what was said in them should be committed
to Writing immediately upon the place.

I say then, that this Difference of Sense in the several Translations of the
Bible which are now in Being, is an undeniable proof, that the Scripture does
not manifest it self to us by it is own Luster (as is pretended) at least in all
it is parts: For since all these Differences of Sense, expressed by Different
words, are held for Authentic, by Different Bodies of Christians, whereas at
most, there can be but one of these Different Expressions, Genuine, or True; it
must follow, that the Truth of every parcel of Scripture is not evident to All
alike, and consequently not Evident from it self. And indeed, to say the truth,
I never knew that any sort of Christians endeavored to justify the preference
of their own Version before that of others from the Sound or Texture of the
Expressions, but always from it is Conformity to the Original Languages, Ancient
Copies, or the like, which they would not have done, could the bare Sound, or
Frame have sufficiently pleaded for it.

What is here proved from the Difference in the Translations of the Bible, may
be yet farther evinced by that which there is in the number of the Canonical
Books; since if the Scripture were evident of it self, how come whole Books to
be received by some, and rejected by others? [And here a new Reason offers it
self to me, why Protestants should be asked more particularly, what Testimony
they have for their Bible, since they lay aside so much of that Canon which was
confirmed by the Council of Carthage, in the year 397. (subscribed to by St.
Augustine) as also by the sixth General Council, A. D. 680. and has been so
generally in use ever since, for want (as they pretend) of that Testimony which
is sufficient.

I should design an endless piece of work, should I purpose to set down all the
absurdities which necessarily are derived from this Assertion viz. that the
Scripture is Proved by it self. Dato uno absurdo, mill sequuntur. I hope, what
I have said, is enough for the rejecting a Position, which ought rather to be
esteemed it is own dis-proof, than the Scripture can be looked on as it is own
Proof: For since it is most apparent, that the Sense of all the parts of Holy
Scripture is not Plain to us by it is own Light; how comes it to pass, that
without further help we may know the Words which we Read, to be the Words of
the Holy Ghost, and not know the Sense, which we have of them, to be the Sense
intended by the same Holy Ghost: The Sense being that which immediately is from
God, whereas the words are from Men; At least, in such Translations as are not
made by Divine Revelation or Inspiration; Which, as I take it, the Reformed
Church of England does not pretend to? Wherefore I cannot think, that any one
will say, that the Phrase, or Form of Words in any place of Scripture is such,
as manifestly shows it self to be from God, and yet that at the same time he is
ignorant whether the Sense, which he conceives of those Words, be from God, or
from himself.

It follows from these Considerations, That Scripture how Sacred and Divine
soever it be, is not manifested to us by it is own light, and, consequently, it
is neither impertinent in it self, nor derogatory to the Scripture, to ask,
upon what Extrinsic Testimony it is received and acknowledged for Such.

Give me leave to add one word by way of Corollary to what has been said,
which is, that seeing the Holy Scriptures are not made Evident by themselves,
and that no Prudent Man can receive any thing upon the credit of False and
Corrupted Witnesses, it must be inferred, that the Protestant Reformers ought
to quit their pretense of being Guided by Scripture, since they have no other
Rule of knowing what is such, and what not, but the bare Letter of that which
is called so, and the Testimony of those, whom they accounted to have so much
Corruption and Falsness, that they separated from them, without the least
apprehension of the Guilt of Schism. For, separating from the whole World (as
has been said) they must needs separate from those, upon whose Authority or
Testimony they received their Bible. And this in effect was the sum of Mr. P's
Argument against Dr. T.

I should not have insisted so tediously on the foregoing points, had I not
known that how frivolous soever those pretenses (of our vilifying Scripture,
looking on it as Insufficient, and the like) may seem to any thinking Man, yet
the common People are most grossly, and almost incurably deluded by them. And we
are Romans 1. v. 14.
Debtors both to the Wise and to the Unwise. And forasmuch as concerns this
last Point, which I have spoken to, viz. the pretended self-evidence of the
Scripture, it has dropped in my hearing not only from the Mouths of the middle
sort, but even from those of the Learned World. And even Dr. T. himself glances
at it in his Tenth Page: Nothing being more Necessitous, or putting a Man upon
worse shifts, than an ill Cause.

But, though I have been very long on this subject, yet I cannot but make one
Observation more, before I proceed to another, which is, that the Protestants,
when they find themselves destitute of solid Proof (as in truth, they always
do) for the Support of their peculiar Tenets, are wont to heap a great many
Unconcluding things together, that so (if possible) what is wanting in Strength
may be made out by Number: Which however like Ciphers, though making as great or
greater show than Figures, amount to no sum. For example (to instance in the
matter of our present Consideration) when we ask them, how they prove their
Bible, They tell us, by it is own light, See Page 9. and 10.
Their interior Sense, and by the Testimony of Jews, Turks, Infidels, and
lastly of whole Bodies of Erroneous and Corrupted Viz. Such Christians as are
accounted Erroneous and Corrupted by them.
Christians; whereas the Catholics have but one poor Testimony to oppose to all
these, viz. That of a true, uncorrupted and uninterrupted Church.

Now, it is not every ordinary Head which (at least without settling) will
serve for a just Balance to these two Proofs, and not be weighed down by that
which is most Bulky, though least Weighty. And yet one would think, that it were
impossible, but that rational Creatures should see the plain Nullity of the
former, and the most abundant Sufficiency of the latter.

But to return to my business: Dr. T. says in the latter end of his 17th. Page,
That Mr. M. took Pen, and Dr. T. delivering him the Paper he had signed in
order to a regular proceeding, he began to Write the first words of these
Questions; Whether God Almighty has left us any Guide, etc.

The truth of the matter of Fact is this, Dr. Tenison having after much time
spent in vain (if that may be said to be so which was spent as was most for the
Doctors purpose) drawn Mr. P. from that point which he had designed for the
subject of the whole Conference, viz. The Rule of Faith, and fallen into
particular matters, where there is much more Sea-room for Controversy, and
consequently less danger of being run a-ground, whilst these things were under
debate, Mr. P. happening to produce some proofs out of the Fathers in favor of
Transubstantiation, and particularly quoting a passage out of St. Ambrose de
Sacramentis for one, The Doctor (to use his own words) caught at it, crying
out, that the Book was Spurious, and none of St. Ambrose's. And in this
transport called for Pen, Ink and Paper. And (to show what a willing Mind may
do) that, which was so hard to come by, when the Writing of the Conference was
proposed, was brought him in a trice. He writes down his Doughty Challenge:
Which was to this purpose, That the Book cited by Mr. P. was Spurious and a
late Book, and none of St. Ambrose's, and that he [Dr. Thomas Tenison] would
show it to be such. This he valiantly subscribed. Now, indeed, according to due
Form Mr. P. should have underwritten, That he would not fail to meet this bold
Challenger, desiring only a fair Stage, and of him no favor. But this, it
seems, he refused for those reasons which he has already See Mr. P 's Account,
p. 10. and sequ.
Published.

Now all this was done with so much noise and Triumph on the Doctors part, and
with such Tumultuous applause of his Adherents, that (being over and above
called upon by them with great importunity) I thought it convenient to put my
self into the midst of the Bustle, that I might come to know the matter, and
keep the Peace if it should lie in my Power.

As soon as I understood what had been the cause of so much Tumult, I
immediately applied my self to the Doctor (who had made some kind of Appeal to
me) and told him, That indeed I could not but look on it as a very disingenuous
proceeding, that he should importune Mr. P. to Subscribe to One single
Quotation, as if that had been the Only thing that in so many hours he had been
able to produce for the defense of his Religion: Which would have appeared very
Ridiculous (whether the Book could be proved Authentic, or not) to any Wise Man
of either Church. I added, That the Doctor should permit Mr. P. to do what he
had desired, viz. Write down all his Quotations and Arguments and Sign to them
(which would look like something) and that then the Doctor should do his Best.
And, lastly, that this was no more, than what was Fair and Reasonable. The
Doctor having little regard to what was said either by Mr. P. or my self, still
pressed Mr. P. to subscribe.

But Mr. P. not being drawn by the Doctors repeated instances, nor by the
Importunity of his Page 70. and in Mr. P's Acc. pa. 11.
Ingenious Women, to what he judged neither Prudent nor Equitable, I took the
Pen into my hand, and taking the Paper from Dr. Tenison's, I told him, that I
would Write something, which should look more like the substance of the
Conference, than what he had Written, and in it self be more Efficacious
toward the ending of the Controversy. What I would have set down, was as
follows.

Whether God Almighty has left us any Guide or Guides to direct us in the
Interpretation of Scripture in things necessary to Salvation? [Or]

Whether he has left every one to his own Understanding in such
Interpretation, without obliging him to submit his Judgment to any other?

But I had scarce Written the three first Words of these Questions, before the
Doctor snatches away the Paper, and blots out my Writing (as much as he could)
with his Fingers. Which was, as I suppose, lest Page 70.
some weight might be laid upon Ones Writing and Signing, and the others
Refusing. For this Viz. Dr. T's Writing and Signing, and Mr. P's Refusing to
Sign.
was to be the Sign of Dr. Tenisons carrying the day. And if I had Written, and
the Doctor had refused to Sign (as it was Ten to one but he would) all had been
spoiled, and the business had been but a drawn Battle at best.

Now I must confess, that there was no great weight, to be laid upon my three
Words, especially after the Doctor had blotted them. But certainly the Doctors
not giving leave to Write will bear as much Weight, as Mr. P's refusing to Sign.

But Dr. T. said, that I was drawing them away from their Point. I know not how
far it drew them from their Point: But I am sure it drew them back to that
Point which was proposed for the Subject of their Conference, and which they
ought to have been upon, viz. The Rule of Faith: And which, had it been once
fixed, would have settled even that Point which they had then rambled to.
Wherefore (as I have said already) I told the Doctor that I would propose
somewhat, that might be looked on as the substance of the Conference with more
justice, than what he had Written. And as he had taken the liberty to pick out
of this Conference what pleased him best for Writing, so he ought to have
permitted us to make choice of that which we had a mind to, for the like
purpose. Especially when in Truth the Question which Mr. P. had proposed and
Mine were of the same nature, and the Doctor by Answering* One would have
Answered Both; Or, indeed when my Question was but the second Branch of Mr.
P's. Mr. P. asked from whom we were to receive the Scriptures. My Question was
from whom we were to have the Meaning of them. Now St. Augustine will tell you,
that you ought to receive the Sense or meaning of the Scripture from those, on
whose Testimony you admit the Letter [according to a Aug. contra* Epist. Fundam.
passage which I formerly Quoted to Dr. St --. And which he (not liking, as I
suppose, St. Augustins Judgment) took no notice of.] Wherefore, (according to
the Sense of this Father) if Dr. Tenison had found out those Christians, on
whom he might have relied for the receiving of the Scriptures, which was Mr.
P's. Question; he would have known whom to have trusted for the understanding
them, which was Mine.

Which being so, I leave my Readers to Judge, whether either of these Questions
were not much more to the purpose, than that which the Dr. set up.

Indeed, it was so little to our Controversy, whether that Book were truly St.
Ambrose's or not, that I wonder, that a grave Man should forget himself so
much, as to lay any stress on it, when other Proofs were offered full as plain,
and out of Writers of as great Authority as St. Ambrose, and even, when there
is a passage to the same purpose, and (to a great degree) in the same words, in
an undoubted Work of St. Ambrose. Nay, one of the Arguments which is brought
against the Authority of this Book De Sacramentis, is that the words of this
Quotation are in another Work of the same St. Ambrose, and that it is
improbable, this Author would use the same Words and Phrases in two distinct
Books. Which, if a good Argument against the Authority of that Book, is
likewise a very good one for the Authority of the Passage. Wherefore if that
passage which was alleged, or one Equivalent to it were undoubtedly St.
Ambrose's, of what moment could it be, whether that particular Book which was
first named, were St. Ambrose's or not? If the passage prove what it was
produced for, it is (at least Equivalently) in an undoubted work of St.
Ambrose: And if it prove nothing, why so much clutter, whether the Book be
Authentic or not?

Here the Reader may be put in mind of another Method, which the Protestants
use in their Disputations. When the Work of any Father is Quoted by Catholics,
if it were ever doubted of, there is no remedy but it must pass for Spurious.
And when it shall happen to be Undoubted, they will do as much as in them lies
to render it Dubious, at least in those places which are Quoted. But when
nothing of this will do, their last shift is Interpretation, which, indeed,
does their business effectually.

This Interpretation is laid up like a Treasure, which is never to be brought
forth but in cases of urgent necessity. Otherwise they would need no other Fond
for the carrying on of almost all their Controversial Expeditions. For, what
need is there, that they should spoil their Eyes with poring on old Worm-eaten
Manuscripts, for the disproof of an Author, when perhaps the passage which they
would evade, is not half so plain against them, as that of some unquestioned
Book, which already they have set aside by their Interpretation? What
Obligation is there, that Words in a Spurious Work should have quite another
Sense, than the self-same words in one which is Legitimate? No, but this knack
of Interpreting is too great a cheat to be often Practiced, and therefore, when
any thing else will serve the turn, this must not appear.

I said, that Interpretation was their last shift. But (unless this be
understood with some restriction) I think, I was too hasty in my Reckoning.
Their shifts are like the Privileges of some Parliaments not so. easy to be
numbered. For sometimes when the Author is unquestioned, the passage too
palpably plain to be wrested, and the Party somewhat more indifferent, and not
so greedy of being imposed on, and when, for these reasons, the Gordian-knot
cannot be untyed, what should they do but follow Alexanders example? They lop
off a Century or two out of the Five Hundred Years which their Brethren are
wont to Appeal to; and it is great odds, but the Father, that is Quoted (most
of them, and those the most Celebrated being in the fourth and fifth Centuries)
drops with them, and loses his Authority, not out of any particular picque that
they have against this Father whoever he be, but because he lived in ill times,
and when Popish Errors began to be predominant. But if it shall so happen, that
they do not see him lying on the ground, together with these Two Hundred Years,
the third Century is sure to follow, and then it is a Thousand to one but they
have him down. However, if after all this he shall yet remain untoucht: Perhaps
another Branch may fall (for these Errors were very early in the Church) or
else the Fathers are sicut caeteri Homines, and (as Dr. T. intimates, p. 16.)
there is no Decisive Determination to be built on what they say. This you will
say, as I have said See above pa. 27.
before, agrees not well with an Appeal to the first Five Hundred Years.
However, this gradual Proceeding argues great Moderation (a thing that is
sometimes bragged of) and shows, that the Members of this Church are not for
carrying matters to Extremities, but where Necessity (which has no Law)
obliges them.

I intimated above, that it was ten to one, but Dr. Tenison would have refused
to Write or Sign any Answer to my Questions. Which was no groundless Conjecture
of my own. For, had he not differed from himself he would most certainly have
done so. A Gentleman of my acquaintance (then a Protestant) had formerly
carried him these Questions, and desired his Answer to them in Writing. In the
first place the Doctor took a very sufficient time for consideration. And in
the second, he absolutely refused to give any thing under his hand, saying in
excuse, that he knew not what Inference might be made. Whereupon (I remember) I
advised the Gentleman to put him in mind at their next meeting of the Logical
Maxim, A veris possunt nil nisi vera sequi, telling him (consequently) that if
his Answer were true, he need not fear, that any thing should follow from it
but Truth.

In the mean time I am not ignorant, that there is something in the Doctors
Narrative, which is a kind of Page 18.
Answer to my Questions. But (as the Reader will perceive) it is not offered by
the Doctor as his Answer to them, neither is there any thing else set forth as
such throughout his whole Pamplet, save only the mention of two Books, page 56.
and a little one (which perhaps might be one of them) that Mrs. V. had from
him, page 24. I say, there is nothing else but these Books which is proposed by
Dr. T. as an Answer to those Questions.

Now, for my own part, I must confess, that oftentimes, I think it much easier
to return a Book to a Question, than an Answer. My meaning is, that when a
Difficulty pinches, it is much easier by long and Crafty Circumlocutions to
Deceive, than by a short and plain Answer to Satisfy. The first may be done by
Books; but it is only Brevity and Plainness which can appear well in a Personal
Conference. Wherefore, to appeal from such a Conference to Books is most
commonly to love Darkness rather than Light, and by entering into a Labyrinth of
Words, rather to lose an Objection, than to solve it.

It has happened to me several times, that when I have offered any Difficult
Point to some Disputants, they have told me for Answer, That the matter was
handled in such a Book, and that there I should find my satisfaction. I have
replied, that the Difficulty lay within a narrow Compass, that the Solution
needed not to be very long, that therefore I desired, they would tell me, what
the Book said of it. All the Answer I could have, was That they had forgotten
the Particulars; that the Book satisfied them, when they Read; and they
supposed that it would have the same effect on me. Which I have taken for an
evident Sign, that they had been Deluded, and not Instructed by their Author.
Since had they met with a concise and solid proof, instead of a protracted and
noisie Fallacy, it would have been hardly possible for them not to have born it
away, especially when they had neither ill Wits, nor ill Memories.

Wherefore, I take leave to dissent from the Doctor, where he looks on it, as a
piece of Page 56.
ill breeding, to ask Questions in a Conference, which [as he thinks] are
already Answered in Books. Since, there being scarce any Point which is not
spoken to in Books, a Conference for the most part is nothing else, but a trial
(as far as it may be) whether the Books have said right or not: Wherefore to
refer us to them for Certainly that Cause which the Dr. referred to 10000
pounds worth of Books was as safe, as the Felon would have been, had his
request been granted of being tried by the 12 Apostles.
Answers, is to send us thither, from whence we have Appealed. And could the
Titles of Books pass for Arguments in these Conferences, a Booksellers
Apprentice would out-argue Dr. Tenison, unless it be, that the late care he
has had of a Library may have greatly qualified him for this kind of
Disputation.

On the other side, it is a shrewd Argument with me, that this Doctor was
somewhat Conscious of the Truth, of what I have said here, touching that room
which there is for Fallacies in Books of Controversy, since notwithstanding he
was so well prepared for the Answering my Questions, that he had Page 56.
Written on the same Subject, and since he caught at all occasions of showing
his Superiority over us, he yet boggled so much to give us his Answer upon the
place; and in conclusion chose rather to turn us over to a Book. Which in the
Doctors Judgment must stop every ones mouth who does not think it worth his
while to Answer it in Print. And yet the Doctor ought to be mindful of his own
proceeding, so far as to give us leave to be silent, where we think an Answer a
Pa. 14. and 15.
Condescension to an Impertinence. But, it is not the Doctors way, to reflect,
so much as this comes to, on what he does himself. For had it been so, it is
probable, he would not have laid any Weight on Mr. P's. Refusing to Sign his
Paper (a thing unreasonable it self) when he considered, not only, that at this
very time he hindered us from Writing, as has been shown, but also that at the
beginning of the Conference he made a most frivolous excuse from Having the
whole Written. Which Refusal, if compared with Mr. P's. was at least a
Millstone to a Feather. Were it easy for us to see our own faults, one would
think, that here were a Speculum that would help the Doctor to such a sight.
However, in our present case, I am afraid, he is not so defective in his own
sight, as he is careful to provide dust for the Eyes of others.

This Storm about the Quotation out of St. Ambrose lasted a great while, and
with so much Commotion, that I will not undertake to describe it. Amongst the
rest of the noise, the Doctor cried often, that Mr. P. had Falsisied and was a
Falsisier. Whereupon I ventured to tell him, that really, he was too severe in
his Censures: For though it should happen, that the Book Cited by Mr. P. could
not be proved to be St. Ambrose's, yet he knew well enough, that it had been
always Published under his Name, and ranked among his Works. Which
circumstances might lead a Man into this Error without the Guilt of being a
Falsifier. Dr. Tenison seemed to yield to this, and to be willing to compound
the business, and rest satisfied, so that, at least Mr. P. might pass for an
Ignorant Person. The Cause now being quite out of Doors, and the Dispute (as
the Doctor had managed the matter) growing merely personal, and, consequently,
nothing to our purpose.

The Doctors new terms of Reconciliation seemed yet too hard: For why should
Mr. P. be reputed Ignorant for Quoting an Author, which had been doubted of,
unless he were convinced of the reasonableness of that doubt by those Arguments
which were offered for it; which he was not, nor (possibly) ought to be? Though
on the other side (as has been intimated) it would have been an imprudence in
him to have Signed this single Quotation, as if he had nothing else to produce
on the behalf of his Cause, especially when we have to deal with Men whose
Interest, Prejudice or Passion strongly inclines them to Believe against us.
And facile credunt, quod volunt. But I was so far from having an opportunity of
urging this latter part of my Mediation, that I ought to be very thankful for
the room, I had, of rescuing Mr. P. from the Doctors first Imputation of a
Falsifier. Such a Permission of speech being (as I must assure you) a very
great favor at our Conference.

Dr. Tenison in his 18th. Page says, Mr. M. and Dr. T. talked a little while
about a Guide in Controversy. It was, indeed, a little while. For,
notwithstanding toward the latter end of the Conference I attempted three or
four times to have spoken something on that subject (which I looked upon as the
most important one, or rather, as I have said, the only one of all
Controversy:) all my endeavors were defeated, the Doctor still, by turning off
the Discourse, either not Answering to my Questions, as not suffering me to
Reply to his Answer, Excepting only some few Words, which for haste, I was
forced (as the Doctor well expresses it) to mutter out when I took my leave.

Now since, Dr. T. sets down, what he told me in short, concerning a Guide in
Controversy, viz. That a Man after using all Christian means, and Page 18.
the help of all Ministerial Guides possible, must at last judge for himself,
and that this was not to run on his own head: As also, that their People, could
know the Voice of their Church, it being in their own Language, but not so
readily the Voice of the Church of Rome, it being in an unknown Tongue; for the
true Interpretation of which, the unlearned depend upon the particular Priest,
that instructed them. I say, since the Doctor Publishes what he said to me on
this subject he ought to have added what I replied to him, though likewise it
were but very short for the Reasons already given. My Talk was to this purpose,
viz. That if Men, after the use of those Christian means, and Ministerial
Guides he spoke of, were by Gods appointment to follow their own
Understandings, Those Laws must needs be unjust, which punished them for doing
so. And consequently what could the English Penal Laws have to say for
themselves, which did not enquire whether Men had used Christian Means, and
Ministerial Guides, or not, but punished them for following their own
Understandings, although they should have used ever so many Christian means, etc.
beforehand? Neither do Men suffer by these Laws, only for Doctrins relating to
the Civil Government (as perhaps the Doctor would insinuate by what Page 24.
follows) but for Points merely Religious, such as are Transubstantiation,
Purgatory, Invocation of Saints, not going to a Protestant Church, etc. For all
which Points they are punished; and this (to make the case yet harder) by such
Men, as owning themselves Fallible, must likewise own, that those Opinions for
which they punish, may be Truths, and Those, which they would compel us to
embrace, Errors, for ought they know.

This Subject is so plain and obvious in it is own Nature, and there has been
so much said on it already, that I shall only add one word by way of of a
Recapitulation, which is, That on the one side we have the Church of England.
Teaching us to Judge for our selves in Religious Matters, and on the other
Hanging us for following her Doctrine. If we are to be our own Judges, why are
we Condemned for it? And if not, why are we Taught to be so? Most Religions
have their Mysteries, and therefore this may be allowed to the Protestants. But
for my part, I can sooner admit, that God is able to do more than I am able to
understand, in the Belief of Transubstantiation, than that Men can at once have
a just ground for the Approbation and Condemnation of the self-same Proceeding.
It being easier to dis-believe our Senses when our Creator Commands, than to
forego our Reason, when we have no higher Motive for it, than the Will of our
Fellow Creatures.

I must confess, that my Discourse on this Subject at the Conference, was not
so large, as it is here, by reason of the shortness of those Interlocutory
spaces that were allowed us by the Doctor, which seemed to be designed by him,
not so much for our Speaking, as for his own Breathing, so that I was forced to
cramp what I had to say into a few concise and general Propositions, and to
throw them out, before the Doctor was aware of them. Viz. That in case we were
not bound by Almighty God to submit our Judgment to any others, but
(presupposing the use of the Doctors Christian means) were left to the Guidance
of our own Understanding, in matters of Faith; we ought not to be hindered from,
or (which is the same thing) punished for Taking it for our Guide in such
matters. That the Penal Laws Punished us for so doing, and therefore were
unjust: And the like. Which Propositions, though too brief perhaps for their
being thoroughly Comprehended by the Rabble of our Hearers, were yet sufficient
to let the Doctor know what I meant, and consequently for a larger Account of
them, than what we have from him, pa. 24. Viz. Mr. M. took leave, and just at
the Door Muttered something about Penal Laws. In which (as the Reader will have
found) there is no Information either of the nature, or of the occasion of that
Discourse: The matter being so obscurely expressed, that a Protestant Gentleman
of my acquaintance was so far deceived by the Doctors Terms, that he imagined,
that I had risen up in a heat, and threatened something as I went away. And
therefore for the future, when Dr. Tenison shall tell us, That he thinks it
will give the greater satisfaction to tell the whole Truth, -- That Truth is
best Painted at full length, -- and that he will let the World know, the whole
Truth, so far as his Memory with all due helps will serve him, as he does, page
45. 46, and 50. We will be so civil to him, as not to understand him in a
Literal Sense.

Dr. T. says in the place above cited, that we are to have the help of all
Ministerial Guides possible, before we must Judge for our selves. Now, I
suppose, that by all Ministerial Guides possible, the Doctor does not mean, all
sorts of Guides True or False. First, Because the Penal Laws hinder us from
conversing with those of other Communions. And, Secondly, Because our Savior
himself Commands us to Matthew. c. 7. v. 15.
beware of false Prophets. Wherefore I would fain know, what mark the Doctor
has to distinguish such Ministerial Guides as may be Addressed to, from such
as may not. If he say, that we shall know these Guides by the purity of their
Doctrine, [the only Mark commonly assigned by Protestants, as was intimated
above, for That of the True Church.] Then it must follow, that I must first
Judge what Doctrine is Pure, before I can know what Guides to have recourse to,
and consequently I must Judge for my self [in the particular Viz. In the
Interpretation of the Scripture.
Doctrins of Christianity] before I use the help of these Ministerial Guides.
Which according to the Doctor is not to be done. The Circle in other Terms, and
more concisely is thus. We cannot know what Doctrine is Pure without Guides: And
we cannot know what Guides to consult without first knowing what Doctrine is
Pure. If he shall Name Succession, Universality, or any thing else for the mark
of these Guides, then we will consider, whether That which is assigned, belong
to the Church of England, or not.

The Doctor seems to say in the close of his Page 18.
Answer (which as the Reader will perceive was nothing less than one of his
usual Digressions from the Point in hand) That their People knew the Voice of
their Church, and needed not to depend upon the Learning of any Particular
Priest for it. If so: How could the Doctor blame this Apprentice (as he does in
his 55th. Page,) for not coming to him with his doubts? Would he have him
repair to a particular Priest for Instruction, whilst he Heard and Knew the
voice of their Church, and therefore (according to the Doctors own assertion)
needed it not?

But, perhaps, the Doctor will say, that for the Verbal Translation of the
Scripture the Protestants are not necessitated to have recourse to particular
Men, the Bible being Translated to their hands, and warranted by public
Authority (though here too they will be at a loss, unless it appear to them, that
they may confide in this Authority) but for the Sense in all dubious places
they ought to Address themselves to their Ministers. They may do it if they
please: And if not (I suppose) they may let it alone; and this last, with most
safety: For, according to our late Divines, all things necessary to Salvation
are plain in Scripture, and therefore to look after the meaning of dubious
places is to do more, than of bounden Duty is required, and has the appearance
of a Work of Supererogation, which is such an abominable thing with the Church
of England, that they have a whole See 14th. Article.
Article against it, and declare that it cannot be taught without arrogance and
impiety, much less (as I suppose) PRACTICED. Wherefore as yet, there appears no
cause, why the Apprentice should be chidden for not having waited on Dr. T. in
this occasion. And indeed, if that be the case, viz. That the Members of the
Church of England are to go to their Ministers for the Construction of these
dubious places, I do not perceive, that they have any great advantage over
those of the Church of Rome, though what the Doctor says were true, viz. That
Roman Catholics were to apply themselves to particular Priests for the
Translation of the Scriptures, since the Protestants themselves must make the
same application for the Sense and Meaning of these Scriptures. And this Sense
is that which is of the greatest importance, or rather That which is of any
Importance at all.

But in Truth they are not particular Priests which Catholics depend on for
either the Translation or Sense of the Scripture in any necessary Point of
Faith, but it is on their Church, whose Voice is as Intelligible at least, and
(with the Doctors leave) much farther Heard than that of the Church of England.
For is it not full as evident in England, and much more evident in other Parts
of the World, that the Church of Rome Teaches a Purgatory, than it is, that the
Church of England Teaches the contrary? And so of other Doctrins.

This is an Age, wherein Men, whilst they Scepticize on evident Truths, are
Positive in Absurdities, and therefore there want not Those, who ask, how the
Members of the Church of Rome can know what their Church holds. But when they
shall have considered, how they themselves come to know what That Church holds,
whilst they Condemn it is Doctrins, as also how a Man may come to understand
what is held by the Church of England, they will not (I suppose) expect any
farther Answer. This were it not so Common (and even with Men of no Common
Wit,) would have been too frivolous, to have been taken notice of.

One endeavor which I used for the speaking somewhat of a Guide in
Controversy, was on the following occasion. Dr. T. having called me to him,
and desiring (as he said) that Page 21.
Mr. P. would stick to something, took upon him to explain a Text of Scripture,
which had been long before Cited by Mr. P. for the Authority of the Church,
viz. That of St. Matthew, c. 18. v. 17. If he will not hear the Church let him
be to thee as an Heathen and a Publican. The Doctor said, that considering the
Antecedent Verses, this ought to be understood of ordinary Trespasses, such as
the not paying of a just debt, etc. And not of Articles of Faith, making use of
a tedious Instance to that purpose, the sum whereof was Ibid.
that in case a Man should refuse to pay his debts after one or two demands, he
is put into the Ecclesiastical Courts (supposing it proper for their
cognizance:) And if he will not stand to their Sentence, then he is
Excommunicated, and Treated as such a One. Whereupon I told the Doctor, that
for my own part, I understood that Text of Scripture quite otherwise than he
did, being persuaded that we were obliged by it to Hear the Church in all those
things, wherein the same Church does declare, that she has Power to Judge. And
most especially in matters of Faith: Which in their own Nature seem more proper
for the Cognizance of Ecclesiastical Courts than a Question of Debt. That it
was not unusual for our Blessed Savior on a particular occasion to deliver a
general Precept; as for instance, when the Jews asked him whether or no it were
lawful to pay Tribute to Caesar, he Mat. c. 22. v. 19, etc.
called for the Tribute-mony, and asked whose Image it bore; and being Answered
that it was Caesar's; he gave this Rule, Render therefore unto Caesar the things
which are Caesar's. Which Rule, I suppose, is general, and has regard not only
to Tribute, but also to whatever else is due from Subjects to Sovereign
Princes, as Respect, Obedience, and the like; though the occasion on which the
Rule was made, and that which immediately preceded it, seem to be Particular,
and to look no farther than his Pecuniary Rights. That in like manner, though
this Text, viz. If he will not hear the Church, etc. might be spoken in a
Particular occasion, it could not be thence inferred, that it was not of a more
large Extension, especially if we should compare it with other Texts, such as
are, Joh. c. 20. v. 21.
As my Father sent me, so I send you. Matthew. c. 28. v. 19, 20.
Go and Teach all Nations -- and lo I am with you always even unto the end of
the World. Luke c. 10. v. 16.
He that Hears You, Hears ME, etc. Ephesians. c. 4. v. 11, etc.
And he gave some Apostles: and some Prophets: and some Evangelists: and some
Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the Work of the
Ministry, etc. That we henceforth be no more Children, If Pastors are left to
keep us from being tossed to and fro, it follows that we must hearken to them,
as also that they must be kept from being tossed to and fro themselves.
Otherwise they will not be able to effect that for which they were left.
tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine, etc. Hebr. c.
13. v. 17.
Obey those that are set over you, -- for they watch as being to render account
for your Souls. All which places (at least, according to my own Judgment) are
clear for that Perpetuity, and that Authority of the Church, which are believed
by Roman Catholics.

But above all, this Truth seems to be most apparent to me, when I consider
what immediately follows in this place of Scripture, viz. When our Savior had
said, If he will not hear the Church, let him be to thee as an Heathen, and a
Publican, which is the subject of our present Controversy, He adds in the very
next Verse [speaking to his Church] Verily, I say unto you, whatsoever you
shall Bind on Earth, shall be Bound in Heaven, etc. The Doctor ought to have
considered what came after his Text, as well as what went before, the one
having as manifest a regard to it as the other.
This Term WHATSOEVER, whether it regard the Persons, or the Things which fall
under the Ecclesiastical Censure, or else Both, is of a most general
Signification: So that it is evident, that the Power given in this place has
no other Restriction, or Limit, but the Will and Determination of those to whom
it is given, there being nothing more required for the Binding, or Loosing a
Thing in Heaven, than that the Church should determine to Bind, or Loose it on
Earth. Which proves what I asserted above, viz. That the Church has Power to
Judge in all those things, wherein she Declares Her self to have it. [It is
true however, that being always Guided by the same Holy Spirit, which invests
her with this Authority, she can never Declare Her self to be our Judge, but
where she ought, and where it is highly for our Advantage, that she should be
so.]

My Discourse on this occasion was to this effect, but (as I have said of those
on other subjects) much shorter, though this was the fairest opportunity of
speaking that Dr. Tenison allowed me, during the whole Conference. In
Conclusion, I assured the Doctor, that I was wholly convinced that the
abovementioned Text (as I declared before) had quite another meaning, than what
he gave of it. And therefore I asked him, whether, being so convinced as I was,
I ought to follow his Interpretation or my own. He Answered, that he would
appeal to the Company, whether the Sense, which he gave of the place, were not
Had it been plain it would not have stood in need of his explanation.
plainly so. I told him that this would not serve my turn, for though that
Company should happen to be all of his Mind (as they were not, there being some
amongst them of my own Judgment) yet so long as my opinion continued as it was,
I should be still at the same loss, unless the Doctor could inform me, whose
Judgment I was to trust, my Own, or Theirs. The Doctor said, that for the right
Interpretation of Scripture, I ought to examine the Originals, consult Learned
Men Why so much ado for what be said was plain? Had the Company, he appealed
to, done all this?
etc. Whereas, said he, this Boy did none of these things: he came not to Me,
nor to his Master, etc. and so striking out of the Road, with a Cavil about the
Boy, I could never get him into it again.

Had I been able to have held him to the Point a little longer, he must have
granted me according to his own principle of Every ones Power of Judging for
himself, That seeing I Judged the Sense of Holy Scripture to be Different from
what he thought, I was as much bound to dis-believe his Doctrine, as he was to
believe it. Which would have been an excellent instance, how much Dr. Tenison's
Rule of Faith tended to the Unity of it; And undoubtedly must have sounded very
strangely in the Ears of his Parishioners, notwithstanding their great esteem
and affection for him. Which I question not, but the Doctor was well aware of,
and therefore thought it more to his purpose, to chide the Boy for not having
washed his Face (as the Story goes of such another Answerer) than to suffer the
Disputation to proceed. And yet this is the Doctor, who in this very place
desires, that his Adversary would Page 21.
stick to something. But non videmus id Manticae, quod a tergo est.

I have already taken notice of a Sentence or two, which the Doctor sets to my
account, more than I can remember my self to have been guilty of: There is
another of them pa. 21. viz. Mr. M. asked Dr. T. if he could tell Chapter and
Verse throughout the Bible. And I think there are one or two more of the like
nature: But they are of so little importance one way or other, that (though I
believe they were never spoken by me, yet) they shall be said, or not said, as
the Doctor pleases. But touching what he says, pa. 18. Of something spoken to
me about the Conference betwixt some Gentlemen of the Church of Rome, and Dr.
Stillingfleet and Dr. Burnet, I remember nothing of it. Neither had I any
concern in that Conference, or in any thing relating to it.

In the Doctors 22d. and 23d. Pages, the Reader will find the following Lines.
-- After this Dr. T. said to Mr. P. there was one thing remaining and fit to be
said to him: He had in a Printed Paper promised not to tamper about Religion
with the Protestant Boys who should come to the Savoy-School; it had appeared,
that he tampered with Boys out of his care, and would do so much more with
those under it: he said it did not follow, because of his word which he would
not break, and that for this Boy he had done it in order to his everlasting
Salvation. Dr. T. answered, that being your Principle, that all out of your
Communion are Damned, you being a Jesuit and a Papist, must break your word in
that Paper for the necessary good (as you think) of the Souls of the Boys,
especially you having hope of turning Boys under your care. Mr. M. said to Dr.
T. This reflects upon the King. Another more loud, this reflects upon the King,
and suggests, that he will break his word: And Mr. P. joined in the Accusation,
but many of the Hearers cried out against them, and said it was a Knavish
trick. Mr. M. was going away, Dr. T. called to him, and desired him not to run
away with a false Tale. Mr. M. denied he said such words, Dr. T. told him he
did, and that for his part he thought his Loyalty at this time to be more
valuable than Mr. M's. Because he as a Son of the Church of England, professed
he would not Rebel against the King, notwithstanding he might be of another
Religion, whereas Mr. M. being of the same Religion, could not so well separate
Loyalty from Interest. Dr. T. being concerned at this false and unworthy way of
catching Men, did say, to Mr. M. at the Door of the first Room, that if he had
persisted in this Trick, he could not have forborne to have given him the Name
of Evidence Meredith.

Here it is, that the Doctor Storms indeed! Here it is, that his Rage breaks
forth! -- Hunc tu, Roman, Caveto! Here it is, that he manifests the Truth of
what he tells us in his Epistle to his Parishioners, and convinces us at
length, that amidst so many things there is somewhat sincere! Here it is, that
the loss of his Fathers Benefice begins to work, and raises his Suspicion and
Indignation to so high a pitch, that, as he says, it is a difficulty to him to
Temper himself!

Out comes -- A Knavish trick -- A False tale -- A False and unworthy way --
Evidence Meredith!

What a deal of Billings-gate Rhetoric have we here, and all crammed into half
a Page? Is this Dr. Tenison that speaks, -- Tantaene animis Caelestibus Irae!
Is it possible for the Anger of a Reverend Divine to boil up to so much scum?
Does he who was so ready at the Conference with St. Jude's Reproof against
Railing, so soon forget his own Instructions? When we see Practices so
different from Words, can we think, that his former Reprehension, was any
other, than the doing that very thing which he seemed to Reprehend?

Out of the abundance of the Heart the Luke c. 6. v. 45.
Mouth speaks. And where the Streams are so bitter, it is not hard to guess,
how much Gall there is at the Fountain. Certainly had I been as well acquainted
with this Gentleman's Temper before our Conference, as I am by it, I should have
had one single Exception against Dr. T. which would have put his three
Exceptions against Mr. M. out of Countenance: I say, his Exceptions, not
Himself.

But, forasmuch as Dr. Tenison seems to lay the blame of all his immoderate
Heat on those Impressions that were made on him during his Childhood, I will
not lose so excellent an Opportunity (since I design rather to Benefit others,
than Right my self) of letting my Readers know the strange Force of such
Impressions, and consequently the great Care which the Education of their
Children exacts from them. Which (I believe) I shall do, if I let them see,
that Dr. Tenison had not the least Glympse of Reason for all this Fury, but,
that the whole (as far as we could perceive) was entirely owing to that
pernicious Tincture which most unfortunately he had received, whilst he was
Young, and it is probable, before he came to the Years of discretion. And I
question not, but the matter of fact rightly stated, and freed from the Doctors
disguises will effect This. And it is as follows,

Dr. Tenison spoke to this purpose, that whereas the Jesuits had Published a
Paper, in which they promise not to tamper about Religion with the Boys that
come to their Schools, Mr. P. had meddled with one who was not his Scholar, and
therefore it was probable, he would much more do so with such as were. Mr. P.
replied, It did not follow, he having given his word for the one, but not for
the other; adding, that he neither had, nor would break his word in that
matter: Whereupon the Doctor said the following words, If you are a Papist you
must break your word. On these words, and spoken in these Circumstances, I said
-- This reflects too far -- These things are not fit to be heard -- And then
retiring a step or two, I came back to the Company again, and perceiving that
no notice was taken by the Doctor of what I had said on purpose that he might
forbear such Discourses as, according to my judgment, might draw after them
pernicious consequences, that my Admonition might be yet plainer to him, I said
-- This reflects upon the King -- which was no more than what I meant by my
former words, though then I forbore to name the King, as well out of a respect to
His Majesty, as because I had no desire, that the hint I then gave should be
taken notice of, any farther than by the Doctor himself; So far was I from any
intention of catching him, as he expresses it; and even when I saw it
necessary to speak more plainly, that what I said might have some effect, I did
it in so low a voice, that I am confident the greatest part of the Company did
not hear me, at least I desired they should not.

I beg of my Readers to pause here a little while, and consider, what it is,
that is so heinous in all this proceeding: Let them discuss every part and
parcel of it as rigorously as they please, and then tell me, whether or no they
can discover any other Motive, the Doctor had to his severe Language on this
occasion, save only That, which (as he acquaints us in his forementioned
Epistle) had lain by him for so many Years.

Can any one affirm at this time of day, that such Propositions, [viz. Papists
are Breakers of their word, or If you are a Papist you must break your word]
are fit to be vented, and Instilled into the Common People, and this too (that
they may receive it with less hesitation) from the Mouths of those, from whom
they expect nothing but Gospel? Was not the Jealousy which the Author of the
late Letter to a Dissenter endeavored to raise, as if his Sacred Majesty would
be hindered by his Religion from complying with his Viz. Of Liberty of
Conscience.
promise, the most Seditious part, of that most Seditious Piece, and (as I may
say) the Venom of that Viper? And had not Dr. Tenisons Loyalty been more
valuable by such Expressions of his Abhorrence for that Pamplet, as the World
has received from the Tongues and Pens of many other Worthy Persons, than it
can appear by seeming, at least, to join with the Author of it in that very
Insinuation, which (above all the rest) renders him the most Detestable? And
lastly was it so weighty an Offense in me, to give the Doctor a Friendly hint
of the inconvenience of such Discourses, that he is not contented with those
opprobrious Terms, he bestowed on me at the Conference, and wherewith he has
since aspersed me in this Narrative, but still (as I am told he does in a later
Pamphlet) heaps Abuse upon Abuse, as if I had unpardonably Injured him by
suffering the worst of Injuries from him without Returning them, or (hitherto)
so much as Complaining of them? If this be the Doctors Loyalty, God grant his
Majesty better Subjects. If this be his Justice, God keep me from another
Experiment of it. And lastly, if this be his Morality: Will the Doctor take it
ill, if we should have so good an Opinion of those Parishioners whom he so much
extolls, as to hope that in his two large Parishes there are not Many but what
are better Christians than their Pastor?

It is true, that the Experience of many Years has rendered our Prince's Justice
and Constancy so well known to all sorts of People, that it must needs be hard
for such Insinuations as these to find place amongst them. However, when Men
have been prevailed with to believe, that Christ himself has not made good a
Promise of his, viz. That of being with his Church to the end of the World,
shall we think it impossible, but that they may come to entertain as mean a
thought as this of an Earthly Sovereign, how Great and Good soever he may be,
especially when these Talents which have succeeded so well in the greater
undertaking, are employed for the compassing of the less? The same vicious
Inclination to Disobedience and mistaken Liberty, that rendered them pliable to
the first Imposture, is not lessened but increased by their being deceived, and
therefore of Consequence leaves them still more disposed for the second. And
certainly for these Reasons, a moderate Caution, where any thing of this Danger
appears, ought not to be looked on as either too Officious, or Superfluous.

Had this business been fairly Represented, Dr. Tenison himself had been
ashamed of letting so much Choler break forth, where (even according to Worldly
Maxims) there was so little cause for it: And therefore if you take notice, you
will find, that he has not permitted himself so far to be transported by his
Passion, but that he has taken Wit in his Anger, and notwithstanding his Page
83.
abhorrence of Shifting and Insincerity has (for reasons easily discernible)
related the matter of Fact quite otherwise than in truth it was. And therefore
since this Gentleman in his 46th. Page, promises a just Representation of the
whole, we must from henceforward conclude, that they are not Papists only, who
are breakers of their Word.

Dr. Tenison seems to affirm (as you will have seen) That it was on his saying
to Mr. P. the following words [viz. That being your principle, that all out of
your Communion are damned, you being a Jesuit and a Papist, must break your
word in the Paper for the necessary good (as you think) of the Souls of the
Boys, especially you having hope of turning Boys under your care] I say he
seems to tell us, That on these words, Mr. M. said to Dr. T. This reflects upon
the King. Now for my own part I desire, that my Portion in Gods favor may be no
farther sure, than this is False: Which, were I not very certain of what I here
relate, I would not say for ten thousand Worlds. The words which I took notice
of, and on which I spoke the forementioned Sentences, viz. This reflects too
far, etc. were those which I noted above, viz. If you are a Papist, you must
break your word. For had the Doctor spoken of this matter in the words of his
present Narrative, I am well assured, that I should not have made that
Reflection on it: For although the speech, even as himself puts it, cannot be
looked on as very seasonable in this juncture of Affairs, yet that Restriction
of -- you being a Jesuit, (however forced and improper as may appear by what
See Mr. P's. Account page 14. and sequ.
Mr. P. has said of it) would have hindered me from saying, That it reflected
on the King, since I can assure him (over and above what I have told him
already) that I was so far from seeking an occasion of speaking what I did,
that I was sorry that which he offered for it, was so necessary to be taken: My
nature (if I am not mistaken in it) being too little inclined to Displease, for
the making such unwelcome Addresses, but where as Sense of Duty absolutely
requires them.

The Sentence which I reflected on was so plainly liable to such a Remark, that
(as Dr. Tenison confesses) two or three immediately joined with me in it. Nay,
who can doubt, but that even the Doctor himself was of the same persuasion,
when he thought it for his purpose to Change it, and that, by so considerable
an Alteration, as has been shown, viz. by restraining that to Jesuits only,
which (as it was spoken) extended to all Catholics?

I must confess, that this kind of Retractation (I mean, a Disowning of the
Expression that was complained of) is a better Argument of Dr. Tenisons
Repentance, than it would have been to have offered at it is Justification.
However, the Doctor ought not to appear Virtuous at his Neighbors cost, he
ought not so far to consult his own Good Name, as not to care what becomes of
mine. Especially, when the value of Reputation is so well known to him, that he
thinks it worth his while (as may be perceived by his above cited Dedicatory
Epistle) to raise the whole posse of two large Parishes to But twice as much
would be little enough to preserve it, should it please God, that the Truth of
this very passage alone, were fully known.
preserve it.

Why must I suffer, because the Doctor is a shamed of what he said? He might
learn by that unwillingness which he finds in himself to own his Guilt, how
grievous the Imputation of it must be to another. Certainly, had his Conscience
been awake whilst he Penned this Account, he would have seen that the --
Knavish Trick, the -- False Tale, the -- False and Unworthy way, could not have
been so fitly sent abroad, as kept at home, and because such Accounts [in the
Cant of the Mobile] Denominate, as well as Evidences (if Dr. T's example be as
good a Warrant for Ribaldry, as St. Paul's Mr. P's Account, page 5.
was for a Grave, though sharp Reprehension) give me leave to say, That
Narrative-Tenison would have been as good a Jest, and (I am sure) as the case
stands, a far juster reproach than Evidence-Meredith. But for such merry
conceits as these, I must confess, it is my Opinion, that both our Coats (though
mine be not Canonical) ought to be of another Color.

But that, which renders my Complaint on this occasion yet more reasonable, is,
that Dr. Tenison was under no precise necessity of taking such a course as
this, for the clearing of himself. He might have declared, that this Sentence
dropped from him in the eagerness of Discourse and at unawares. We should not
have been so severe to his lapses, as he is to Viz. Misspellings, and the like.
ours. We do not think, that our Cause is so near Sinking, that we should catch
at such Twigs to keep it above Water. He might have said, that though his
Expression reached to all Roman Catholics, he had no intention of including
more than the Jesuits. This (in some measure at least) would have saved both
his Credit, and mine. Nay, if he had so pleased, he might have blamed the
Inference which I had drawn from his Discourse, since I had much rather, that
his Censure should have fallen on my Judgment than on my Integrity. For I can
assure him, that I esteem it (whatever he may do) a less Inconvenience to be
thought Weak in the former than Defective in the latter. Wherefore to conclude,
there having been other ways of complying with that strong innate principle of
self-preservation, it is somewhat the more afflicting to me, that he should
pitch on no other means of wiping off his own Spots, but by Aspersing me.

Methinks, this hasty and inconsiderate Speech (if it were such) might have
seemed to him as fair an opportunity of asking pardon, as some other of his
sayings have done, such as were, Page 13. and 17.
That he would not come under Mr. P's Ferula, and that Mr. P. might give his
Papers for Kites to his Boys. And the crying Peccavi in those trivial
occasions, and the omitting it where his Princes honor, and his Fellow Subjects
Reputation lay so much at stake, does it not look somewhat like Straining at a
Guat and Swallowing a Camel?

It is true, that immediately after the Doctor had ended his wrangling about
this matter with Mr. P. he called after me, and (as I think) desired me not to
run away with a false Tale, telling me, that his words were -- You being a
Jesuit and a Papist, etc. and that (he hoped) the King was not a Jesuit, and
therefore that his speech could not concern him. I replied, in these express
Terms. Your words [viz. Those which I had taken notice of] were not You being a
Jesuit and a Papist, etc. but If you are a Papist, you must break your word. I
said moreover, that I had no design to Inform against him, as some in the Crowd
had muttered, and that my Intention in taking notice of his words was no other,
than (what I have had occasion to intimate before) that he might learn to be
somewhat more Cautions and Deliberate in his Discourses for the future. Now,
how comes the Doctors True Account to be wholly silent in so material a
passage? But the Causes of Complaint come so thick, that I must beg leave to
forbear the making it now and then: It being hard for me to vary my phrase as
often as a new Injury seems to require it.

Mr. M. says the Doctor, denied he said such words, viz. That the Doctors
Proposition had reflected on the King.

The confusion was so great at this time (there being then three or four
bawling about my Ears at once) that I cannot well call to mind what I said;
only thus much I distinctly remember, viz. That one of the Doctors Friends
affirmed again and again, that I had not spoken those words, whom I did not
contradict, partly because I was not well assured whether or no I had said,
what was then particularly mentioned, in such manner as to be heard by any of
the Company, having (as I said before) spoken very low; and partly because I
desired that the Doctor might receive as little dissatisfaction, as it was
possible, and therefore since I understood, he knew already what fault had been
found with his Proposition (which was all I aimed at) I was loath to disquiet
him farther by repeating That, which, though reasonably enough urged, had yet
been ungrateful to him. But if any word dropped from me through suddenness of
Speech, that employed such a Denial as the Doctor mentions, it was more than I
intended, and must be attributed to that distraction of mind which is hardly
avoidable amidst such Peals of various Discourses, where the Attention being
called upon by many Different matters at once, is sufficiently applied to none.
For as soon as the Doctor (who seemed to suspect, that I meditated on some
Information against him, and therefore, not to be contented with my Silence)
urged me by the continuance of his Expostulations to declare my self in more
express Terms, I was far from Disowning that I had Reflected on his
forementioned Proposition, as the Reader will have perceived by what he met
with in my last Remark, where I repeat some part of our Discourse on this
occasion, in which I acknowledged that I had Reflected on the Doctors Words,
but denied that it was with any other Design, save only, that he himself might
Reflect a little more on such as he should purpose to speak for the future: A
Caution which (God knows) the best of us stand in need of.

But whereas some persons of that Company spoke as if I had declared, that the
Doctor had Reflected on the King, and that on such a supposition I had an
Intention of Informing against him, it is not improbable, but that this (or any
thing else which I should have taken to have had this meaning) might have been
flatly denied by me. For I looked on it as one thing, For the Doctor to have
Reflected on the King, and another for his Proposition to have done so; since
for the Truth of the former, it seemed necessary to me, that the Doctor should
have actually thought on the King (and Reflected on him in his mind) when he
spoke those Words; which possibly he might not do. [Nay, I cannot do him so
much Injury as to imagine, that he understood (I do not say, the whole extent,
but even) the obvious Consequences of many of his Speeches at this Conference;
since, if he had done so, I question not, but he would have omitted them.] But
on the other hand, that a Proposition may be truly said to Reflect on the King,
nothing else is required, than by a Natural and Easy Inference, It should
appear to include him within its Censure. As for Example, when all Papists are
said to be Breakers of their Word (since we cannot have a better instance than
we have in the present Case) the King is manifestly included: Though perhaps the
Speaker may not reflect that he is so. Wherefore I say, I might deny, that I
had accused the Doctor of Reflecting on the King, and yet at the same time
affirm, that his Proposition did.

This consideration leads me to another Remark, which is, that though every
tittle of what the Doctor here relates should be true (as it is not) and though I
should have had a purpose of Informing (as was likewise falsely imagined) yet
the Doctor was too hasty in charging me with running away with a false Tale.
For what Tale had the Doctor heard from me, that was False? The Doctor had
spoken certain words: And I affirmed that such words Reflected on the King.
Where is the Falseness of this Story? Or rather, what Story is there in This? I
said not (as I told you just now) that the Doctor Reflected on the King, but
that his Words Reflected on him; which though it had been false (unless I had
spoken contrary to my own mind) had been the Error of Judgment, or a fault in
my Inferring Faculty, and not a Lie, as the Doctor would have it. I presume,
that those who hold Transubstantiation and Purgatory will not pass for Liars
with the Doctor, according to the propriety of our Common Speech, though at the
same time he may take such Tenets to be Erroneous, and the Arguments that are
brought to prove them, Sophisms. Wherefore in this Particular Case, although my
Inference had been Bad, my Conscience might have been Good, since it must needs
go very hard with the World if every Man were to be as ill a Christian, as he
is a Logician.

All the Information (had I intended any such thing) which I could, or should
have given in this matter, was, that Dr. Tenison, had spoken such Words as I
had heard from him, and that according to my Judgment those Words Reflected on
the King. But whether they did so, or not, or how far the Doctor was culpable
or innocent, must have been left to others to determine. And after this if the
Doctor, and his Words both, should have been Acquitted; it might perhaps have
appeared to him how greatly it was for his advantage, that his Words were not
left to a Private Interpretation (as he leaves God Almighties) but that proper
Judges had been chosen out and Authorized for that purpose. This Reflection, I
say, might Naturally enough have come into the Doctors mind. But I cannot
think, that it would have appeared to those Judges (whosoever they should be)
or to any other sober person, that I had been guilty of any Perjurious
Testimony in this Proceeding, as the Doctors Knavish Trick, False Tale, and the
rest of his Civil Language would imply. And this is another Reason why the
Doctors Civilities ought not to have gone from before his own Door.

The bare matter of Fact in the forementioned business singly related (as I
said at first) would have been sufficient, to have shown the unreasonableness
of Dr. Tenisons Passion; however I have added these few Remarks, that it might
the more fully appear, how lasting and forcible an Influence these Early Quo
semel est imbuta recens, etc.
Tinctures have upon our minds, and consequently what great Reason all Fathers
of Families (as I intimated above) have to take notice of what is said by the
Poet, viz. Maxima Debetur pueris Reverentia.

But if former Impressions may pass as an excuse for present Transports in
Mortals of a lower stamp (for I take it for granted that Wise Men ought to be
Superior to all these Irregular Motions, whether Sapiens Dominabitur Astris.
Natural, or Accidental) there does not want something of this kind, which it
would have been in my Power also to have produced as a Motive to severe
Language, had I been guilty of any, I mean, an Impression made likewise on Me,
not in my Childhood, but in my ripest Age; not by the behavior of one of the
Doctors Brethren, real, or supposed, but by his own; nor Thirty or Forty Years
since, but no more than a few Months ago, and lastly not unreasonably, but with
a great deal of Reason.

To let the Reader know what I mean without farther preamble: During the late
Commission for the Licensing of Pedlars, a Roman-Catholic Addressed himself to
Dr. Tenison for his Certificate, in order to the obtaining of one of those
Licenses. The Doctor having found out, what Religion he was of, told him, that
no Papist could be a good Subject, and thereupon absolutely I am told, the Dr.
says, that for mere Religion no one was ever an hair of his head the worse by
his means. How well these Stories agree?
refused to do what he desired. Now, this Story I received from so good hands,
that I could not question the Truth of it, and therefore I may leave it to my
Reader to consider, what Impression it must needs make on me, to see, not only
my self, but the Christians of so many Ages and Countries traduced and blasted
all at once, and left even without so much Reputation as was necessary for a To
make amends, the Dr. will allow me to be a Salesman at an Auction of Arguments.
Pediar. It is true, I upbraided not the Doctor with this Story, at the opening
of our Conference, though his Stories concerning me might have provoked me to it,
and though this alone had been worth them all: However I believe, that none will
think it strange if it left my mind a little more disposed to take notice of
what the Doctor said, and not to conclude those things, which otherwise I
should have reputed dangerous, to be innocent merely because they were spoken
by him: Neither is it wonderful if the Resentment of an Injury should be
somewhat greater where former wounds (and deep and fresh ones too) render us
more sensible, than it would have been in another circumstance. But enough of
this: I am unwilling to rip up (if that term may be used of such as are not yet
well closed) even new sores. Neither would I open them at present, did I not
think it necessary in order to a Cure.

Could but these Gentlemen Examine themselves a little, and reflect a while upon
their own Proceedings, we should not have such hard measure at their hands.

The Reader has Above pa. 17. and sequ.
seen how innocent my Discourse was touching the largeness of the Parishes in
the Suburbs and the necessity of more Churches, and yet Dr. Tenison looked on
it as so great a Crime, that he thought me not fit to be trusted as one of the
Hearers of his Conference, merely on that account, and the best Name he could
allow me (for the Doctor has an excellent Invention at Calling-Names) was that
of an Intermedler.

In like manner, in my Letter to Dr. St. I had these words -- If all places
were to be avoided, wherein Lies are told I am afraid, that Dr. St --. would
run the hazard of being silenced for want of a Pulpit, which might be ventured
on. This the Doctor stretched to a Complement on the London Clergy in See Dr.
St.'s second Letter to Mr. G. in the end. If he means by London-Clergy in this
place only some of them (for I suspect a Loophole whilst I am dealing with
this Gentleman) what is here said will not belong to him; and then he is only
to be blamed for an obscure and ensnaring Expression.
General; and (to show his good Nature) reserved it for his own Complement to
me at parting; or else (more properly indeed, considering the Genius of this
Writer) for the Point of his Controversial Epigram. The Expression was used by
me on this Occasion: I offered somewhat in defense of such as frequented
Coffee-houses; and intimated, amongst other things of that kind, that it was no
good Reason why those Houses ought necessarily to be forborne, because it often
happened that Seditious or Lying One good end for which I said these places
might be visited, was to take such Opportunities as should happen for the
diverting Discourses from what was Seditious, Idle, or Profane, to that which
was Serious and Useful, either for This Life, or the Next, etc. This, I said,
was a Mission^^y Zeal, and therefore what the Children of the Reformation were
little acquainted with. The Doctor answers, That though he be no Friend to
Seditious, Idle, or Profane Discourses, yet it looks oddly to turn Places of
Diversion into Schools of Disputing. He still puts things upon the stretch, as
if there were no other way of diverting those Discourses, but by Scholastic
Disputations, which were not mentioned by me. However, the Doctor must be too
great a Friend to Seditious Discourses, not to think even such Disputations
much better; and therefore, at least when there is no other way of putting an
end to the former, it cannot be ill done to introduce the latter. But the
Doctor likes not this Missionary Zeal: as if, forsooth, it were the worse
because it wanted his Approbation. I question not but he likes the Reformation
as well for not sending Missions into China, as for not endeavoring to do good
in Coffee-houses. The Doctor may call to mind what Instructions were given by
St. Paul to Timothy, viz. That he should be zealous in his Exhortations, even
to importunity, Preaching as well out of season, as in it; and then perhaps he
will not think it such a mortal Offense to endeavor the reclaiming of a Soul
from Error or Vice, wheresoever a probability of doing it, or even a
possibility, shall appear, especially when he considers that some men are such
studious shunners of Pious Instructions, that unless they meet with them amidst
their Pastimes, and when they least think of them, they will always want them.
Such is the goodness of our Lord, that when the Guests come not where they may
be regularly invited, he sends his Servants into the Highways, etc. to call
them.

But the Keepers of these Houses will be Losers by such Disputes, for men do
not love to lace their Coffee with Controversies. Dr. St. knows how great an
Argument Gain is with most men. The Author of a Seasonable Discourse against
Popery did it before him, when he addressed two of his main Dissuasives to the
Grasiers and the Lawyers, putting them in mind that if Catholic Religion should
be restored in England, the one would be impoverished by Fasting-days, and the
other by Appeals to Rome, and so engaging that Passion [viz. the love of Money]
to be of his side, which as a Divine he ought to have preached against. But no
damage ought to be apprehended from that which is good. And forasmuch as
concerns Coffee-houses, if men love not to lace their Coffee with Controversy,
they may lace it with somewhat else, or else drink it plain; here being variety
of Discourses, as well as Liquors, and a great Liberty of Conscience of calling
for what they please. Neither is Disputation it self such a Nuisance to this
Trade as Dr. St. imagins; for let but the Doctor (since he thinks it no crime
to go to a Coffee-house) honor one of them with his Presence, though with a
Disputing design, and I will undertake it shall have Custom enough, and
particularly Mr. G.'s as often as he is in Town.

This Marginal Note is too long: but the matter lay so near my Road, that I
could not forbear the taking a view of it.


Discourses were vented in them; there being no places so Sacred, which such
things as these had not access to some time or other; no, not the Pulpits
themselves. I considered indeed, that Misrepresentations of late had been more
frequent in Pulpits than formerly; wherefore I hinted, it was to be feared that
ever long none of them would be left, but what would have met with some
Misrepresenter or other. I will not deny (what indeed is evident in it self)
that I reflected on some Preachers; but how this could pass for a Complement on
the whole London-Clergy, I stand in need of Dr. St.'s Subtilty to make out; for
as my saying that some Lies were told in Coffee-houses, did not reflect on all
those who frequented them, (nay, I was then actually endeavoring to excuse the
frequenting them) so neither could my intimating that the Pulpits had been
liable to some part of that Misfortune, concern all those who Preached in them.
Indeed my Complement (as the Doctor calls it) was so far from being designed by
me to all the London-Clergy, that I directed it not to Dr. St. himself, any
farther than his own Conscience should look on it as belonging to him. However,
had he taken it to himself, I should not have contended so much to have rescued
it out of his hands. I question not but there is a great deal of sincerity
amongst the London-Clergy, and even so much as to acknowledge, that every
individual Member of that Body has it not. And, after all, had it been true
(as it was not) that I had reflected on this whole Clergy; what had That been
in comparison of Dr. Tenison's -- If you are a Papist, etc. which takes in so
many Countries and Ages, and even his own Sovereign?

These are two Instances what Use these Gentlemen can make of their Inferring
Faculties, when they see it for their purpose. Is there any thing here half so
plain, or so naturally deduced, as that which I drew from Dr. Tenison's
Proposition? Nay rather, are not the Inferences of these two Doctors evidently
forced, whereas mine is genuine, and obvious even to the meanest Understanding?
And yet base and unworthy ways of catching men, are laid to my charge, and
these Gentlemen pass for Plain-dealers. But this will not always be so. There
is a time to come, in which there will be nothing of what is now hidden, but
what shall be revealed. And then it will appear how ill a choice those have
made, who have preferred Fame before Truth, and the saving of their Credit
before the saving of their Souls.

The Doctor says farther, That for his part he thought his Loyalty at this time
to be more valuable than Mr. M. 's, because he, as a Son of the Church of
England, professed he would not Rebel against the King, notwithstanding he
might be of another Religion: whereas Mr. M. being of the same Religion, could
not so well separate Loyalty from Interest.

Now, for my part, though I hold Works of Supererogation, yet I am far from
thinking Loyalty (at least, as it is here Viz. A not Rebelling against the King.
described) to be one of those: And therefore it is my opinion, that we ought
as little to value our selves on our not being Rebels, as we would do on our
not being Thieves or Murderers; nay, rather less, forasmuch as Theft and
Murder are certainly less Criminal than Rebellion. And therefore a Loyalty to
be boasted of (if there be any such) must be somewhat more than an ordinary
Obedience. However, if the Doctor think his Loyalty at this time more valuable
than mine, because he demeans himself peaceably under a Prince of a different
Religion, he ought to remember, that for three years which he has lived so, it
has fallen to my share to pass over twelve in the same manner, only with this
difference, that He enjoys entire Privileges of a Freeborn Subject, (sitting
under a large Fig Tree, and gathering the Fruit of a well-spread Vine) and is
promised the continuance of them; having no other Unless perhaps a Restraint
from vexing others, and consequently the want of the old and more effectual
method of silencing Jesuits, be an inconvenience to him.
cause of disquiet, save only (what ought to prompt him to nothing but
Gratitude) the bare Contemplation, that were it not for the Goodness of his
Sovereign, it might have been otherwise. These, I say, are his Enjoyments
during this great trial of his Fidelity: whereas I, on the other side, during
my Probation, was not only debarred of those Advantages which my Education
might have pretended to, but for some time even of the Open Air; and even this
kind of Life was so precariously enjoyed by us, and we were so far from being
assured of any Continuance of it, that were it not for our Confidence in God's
Mercy, we could have expected nothing else but immediate Destruction. Now, when
these two things are put into the Balance; I mean the two different Trials of
Dr. Tenison's Loyalty and Mine; I cannot but think that the Advantage will be
on my side: and this even though the Doctor himself (which perhaps is a bold
word) should hold the Scales. Wherefore, if any value accrue to Loyalty from
such kind of Trials, That certainly which has undergon the longest and
severest, ought to be the most prized. Neither is there any reason why my
Loyaly should lose that value in the Calm, which (according to this Rule) it
must have acquired in the Storm. On the contrary, it is then chiefly that the
Labors of a Soldier are considered, when the War is at an end; and even by
Rewards his Merit is not lessened (though his Pretension be) but declared.

For which reasons it is probable that this Comparison of the Doctor^ will
appear to the World to have many more Grai^^ of Self-Love, than of
Consideration: And for m^ (...) part, I cannot but look on it as an ill sign,
(...) Loyalty should sit so heavy on any Man's shoulders at this time of day,
and amidst so much ease and security, as to be thought a thing of any weight.

Besides, had the Doctor been that Loyal Man he pretended, though he had thought
me a little too hasty in this occasion; ought he to have snapt me up so
discourteously, and with so much bitterness of Spirit, for an expression,
which, though taken by him for ill-grounded, could not but be looked on as Loyal?
Methinks (I say) the Loyalty of my Admonition might have made some Atonement
for the supposed Error of it; and the Doctor, who is so good at giving Grains
of Allowance, might (one would think) Page 7.
have extended his Charity to Me also; especially when the Zeal for Loyalty
needed not to have been extraordinary in him, for the overlooking of so small a
Fault.

Similis simili gaudet: Had the Doctor been as much a Loyalist in his Heart, as
(seemingly at least) he was the contrary in his words, he would have cherished
Loyalty, wherever he had found it, even even though mingled with some
Indiscretion. He may remember how cordially the Old and Loyal Churchof
England-men and the Roman Catholics loved one another during the Civil Wars;
when the difference of Persuasion was not more powerful to divide their
Understandings, than a constant Fidelity to their Prince to unite their
Affections. But these days are somewhat changed. The first Reformers (to give
them their due) thought nothing enough for the Declaring him Head of their
Church, and Supreme Governor in all Ecclesiastical and Spiritual Things or
Causes. They cared not what Church Power he took, so that he would exercise it
in giving them Church Livings.
King; but it is to be feared there are some amongst their Successors, who
thin^ ^^ery thing too much. Wherefore the late Representer of Old and New
Popery may (if he pleases, for his diversion) transfer his parallel Columns to
his own Church. I question not but he will be able to fill them: And for some
Materials I would recommend him to a late * Work of one of his own A Discourse
for Abrogating the Taste, etc.
Prelates; Others he may have in the Uarious Translations of the Scripture,
Common-Prayer-Books, Rubricks, Forms of Ordination, and the like.

But after all, I will not much contend with Dr. Tenison in the forementioned
Point. I wish, that he thought his Loyalty ten times more valuable than he
does. The greater Treasure he takes it for, the more careful in all probability
he will be to preserve it. And had the Doctor's esteem for Loyalty been so
extraordinary before our Acquaintance, his Discourse had not drawn such a
fruitless Admonition from me, nor my Admonition so much unjust Anger from him.

There are several other Remarks which would offer themselves to me on this
Subject: But the Filth which is so copiously raked together in this Paragraph,
is no such inviting sight, as that I should continue to pore on it. However,
there is one Observation which prevails with me for a little longer stay. I
cannot but call to mind what Sacred things the King's Witnesses were, during
the late pretended Popish-Plot, notwithstanding that those who presented
themselves for that Employment were known to be the most profligate Wretches
alive: whereas as soon as that Phantom vanished, and a true Plot (bred under
the Shadow of this false One) was happily detected, then nothing was so
scandalous with some Men as one of these Witnesses; such, I mean, as were then
for the King: Such a strange Perverseness is there in some Natures, that what
is for their turn, though ever so Diabolical, shall be Saintly with them; but
what is otherwise, though Truth, Justice, or Piety, shall be looked on as the
most detestable thing in the World. Whilst the Witnesses were False, it was a
sin to asperse them; but as soon as they came to be True, their former Treasons
were held less Crimes, than their present Discovery of them. And it was about
this time, viz. whilst the Real Plot was under Prosecution, that the Doctor's
Nick name of Evidence began to come in use. Indeed the former Witnesses were
every way so abominable, that the very name of a Witness seemed Ignominious;
and therefore it was the easier for the Enemies of the Crown to represent that
as Odious in it self, which was only so when accompanied with Falsehood. And
hence, instead of vilifying Perjured Witnesses in particular, they slily
brought a discredit on all Witnesses in general, at least on Those who (as I
have said) were for the King, and so falsely pretending to remedy one Evil, they
endeavored to introduce a Greater; it being certainly a less Mischief to the
Commonwealth, that some False Witnesses should be believed, than that None
should be looked on as True. Wherefore I hope the Doctor means somewhat worse
by the Nickname he bestows on me, than barely the being a Witness for the
King, since (blessed be God) I am not yet so unmortified, but that I had rather
be reputed a False Evidence, though the worst of Disgraces, than that the being a
True Evidence on the King's behalf should be esteemed a Disgrace: It being
better that His Majesty should want the Testimony of one single Person, though
ever so unjustly, than that he should be deprived of That of all his Subjects.

This Pamphlet grows more bulky than I intended; and therefore, having said as
much as I thought fit on the things contained in Dr. Tenison's Narrative, I
purpose to be much shorter concerning that which remains.

The Doctor in his 57th Page quotes a Viz. His Diff. betwixt Prot. and Socin.
Meth. p. 26.
Work of his own in these Words; Though he [the Right Socinian] thinks a
Doctrine is plain in Scripture, yet if he believes it to be against HIS REASON,
he assents not to it. And p. 27. A Man of this Church [of England] suspects not
Reason it self, but his own present Art of Reasoning, whenever it concludes
against that which he reads, and reads without doubting of the Sense of the
Words. This he lays down for the Difference between the Church of England and
the Socinians.

Hitherto I have taken the Socinians at least for a witty Generation: But
henceforward, if the Doctor's Character of them be true, I must hold them all
for Blockheads, on pain of being held for one my self. For what is it to think
a Doctrine plain in Supposing Scripture to be the Word of God.
Scripture, but to think it to be revealed by God? And consequently, what is it
not to believe a Doctrine which is thought to be plain in Scripture, but not to
believe what is thought to be revealed by God? And is not this in other terms
to suppose that it is possible for God to reveal a Falsehood? Wherefore if this
be the sign of a Right Socinian, as the Doctor would have it, a Bedlam is
fitter for him than an Inquisition. But the truth is, the Socinians are not
such Fools as this Gentleman would make them; They do not think the Doctrine
they reject to be plain in Scripture: Nay, before they reject it, they conclude
it not to be The Arians and Socinians are so far from thinking the Catholic
Doctrine touching the Divinity of our Savior to be plain in Scripture, that they
think the contrary to be plainly there; bringing for in many Texts; as, My
Father is greater than I, Joh. 14. 28. and the like; which the Doctor knows
well enough.
plain. Wherefore in those points wherein they differ from the Catholics, what
the One understands Literally in the Word of God, the Other interprets
Mystically or Figuratively. And in reference to these Texts they behave
themselves no otherwise than the Protestants do toward those Words of our
Savior in the Institution of the Blessed Sacrament, viz. This is my Body; which
they will not understand in a Literal Sense.

Again, the Doctor says, That a Church-of-England-man suspects not Reason it
self, but his own present Art of Reasoning. I have not time to speculate on the
nicety of this Distinction, and so I let it pass; although I believe that a
Socinian would be extreme glad to know how he might come to be guided by Reason
it self, when he suspects his present Art of Reasoning What causes a
Church-of-England-man to suspect his present Art of Reasoning? Is it not his
present Art of Reasoning? Can Reason guide him without any Reasoning? The
Doctor seems to be very subtle here.
. Is not the Faculty to be suspected, when its Operation is faulty? Can the
Reason be Perfect, and yet the Reasoning which flows from it Defective? But
whereas the Doctor's Church-of-England-man suspects his own present Art of
Reasoning, whenever it concludes against that which he reads, and reads
without doubting of the Sense of the Words: I dare likewise engage, that
whatsoever the Right Socinian reads in Scripture without doubting of the Sense
of the Words, he shall believe as firmly as any Church-of-England-man in the
World. This is proved already; and if the Doctor think otherwise, I shall have
cause to suspect (if not his Reason, yet at least) his present Art of Reasoning.

The Reason why I have examined this Quotation is, because it is taken out of a
Book, which I am recommended to by the Doctor for an Answer to those Questions
I would have proposed to him at the Conference. The Readers have my sense Above
p. 73. and sequ.
already concerning the Answering of short Questions [and proposed in a
Personal Conference] by a Reference to long Books: which seems to be but the
putting off the Trial at best. What Encouragement I have from this Quotation to
have recourse to that Book in particular, out of which it was But if this he
the choice, what is the refuse?
chosen by the Author himself, let them Judge. For, if we may guess at the
Stuff by the Pattern, they will be able to do it.

A. P. pressed Writing (says the Doctor, page 60.) yet when Dr. T. began to do
so, he declined it. The Reader will have Above, p. 67. and seq. See also Mr. P.
's Acc. p. 10. and seq.
seen, that A. P. had a great deal of reason to decline the signing an
insignificant Wrangle about the Authority of one single Book, which was all the
Writing Dr. T. proposed; and that the Doctor had no Reason at all to decline
what was proposed to him, viz. the writing of the whole Conference, unless it
be such as he will be loath to own.

Whereabouts (proceeds Dr. T.) would these Disputers Page 60.
be? A while ago they were all for Verbal Conferences, when Written ones were
offered, as more safe and useful; Now when Verbal Conferences are agreed to,
Writing is pressed. What a pretty Sophism is here? Does not Dr. Tenison know
whereabouts these Disputers would be? Did not those who were all for Verbal (or
rather Personal) Conferences, desire that the Argumentative part of such
Conferences might be taken in Viz. for hindering such after misrepresentations
as we have had from our Dr. as I said before, pa. 61.
Writing; and that nothing else might be published as Authentic, but what was
so written? And were not Conferences so managed, viz. Personally and by
Writing, See the abovementioned Letter to Dr. E. S. p. 26. and seq.
preferred before the carrying on of a Disputation by Books, and not Verbal
Conferences, (as the Doctor insinuates) before Written ones? Was the Doctor
ignorant of this? I do not think he was. But a pretended Mistake is an
excellent Instrument in the hand of a Controvertist. It serves to deceive his
own Party, and, at least, to make Work for his Adversaries.

And now I would not have the Sense of what I have said here, or elsewhere, on
this Subject, so far mistaken, as that I should be thought to look on such
Personal and Written Conferences as infallible means of deciding Controversies;
whereas I only prefer this way of proceeding in them before that of writing
Books. I know there is nothing of this Nature, which some time or other is not
liable to the underminings of Craft; and therefore (as far as I have been able
to observe) when such kind of Conferences are obtained, (which is only where
they cannot be kept off with any credit) the Protestants either refuse to
dispute of the Main Points, such as the Rule of Faith, the Proof of Scripture,
or the like, and fall on some other Branch, where (as I have said before) there
is more room for disputing, unless the matter be soon brought to the Rule of
Faith, as it may, and indeed ought to be: Or else, if they admit of any such
Point, they endeavor to spend the time in Preliminaries, so that they may be
forced to break off before any Argument comes to bear. All the Written
Conferences that I have heard of (which have not been above two or three) have
been of this sort. However the Truth of what passes at a Conference is better
known by this means, and the shuffling (on which side soever it shall happen to
be) more discernible. Besides, I never knew that any of these Conferences were
followed by Noise, though the Copies of them have been distributed through many
hands. All things have been hushed, and no contradictory Narratives have come
abroad to the dividing, rather than satisfying the World: Excepting only Dr.
St.'s Conference with Mr. G. where Mr. G.'s Amanuensis happening to take away
his Copy without comparing it with Dr. St.'s, there chanced to be a small
difference between those Copies which Mr. G. dispersed, and that which the
Doctor retained; and from this trivial Oversight (to say the utmost of it) Dr.
St. took a pretense to accuse Mr. G. of Insincerity, and to refuse the meeting
with him any more. But this (as is evident) may easily be prevented, and Mr. G.
himself did it afterward, viz. by trusting the Protestants themselves to write
both his part and their own, (...) then taking his Copies from them: So far was
he from desiring that any Forgery (...) the least Falsification, should be in
such Copies. And after these Conferences (as I have said) we have been very
quiet. And certainly, if there were no other convenience in Writing, This alone
were enough to render it desirable. And as for the Conferences themselves, though
(as I have said) there is care taken to spend the time (which the Writing also
helps to do) in useless Discourses, yet after the first or second Meeting, when
all the loose Earth shall be dug away in order to a Foundation, it is
probable that somewhat may be built. -- But the worst of the matter is, that
for the most part we are careful to take such Exceptions at the First Meeting,
as may justify our refusal of a Second.

He says (page 64.) Mr. M. stayed much longer, (viz. than what Mr. P. mentions)
for he began to write on the back of Dr. T. 's Paper. This writing was not till
after I had retired from Dr. T. and Mr. P. and came back again to them,
according to what I have related above. And this may be farther proved from
what the Schoolmaster says in his 9th page, viz. When the Question of [How the
Protestants could tell that the Bible they used was really what they (the
Protestants) thought it to be, the Word of God?] had been canvass'd some while,
Mr. M. arising, went to the other end of the Room, etc. Now this Question was
at the beginning of the Conference, as appears by Dr. Tenison's own Narrative;
whereas the writing was not till after the Question of Transubstantiation had
been started.

He goes on; And he [Mr. M.] removed, upon a Gentlewomans coming to him with a
Masque in her hand; which gave occasion to another of that (...) to say to Mr.
M. He chose to dispute rather with Ladies than Doctors. I acquainted my Readers
in my 5th page, That not long after the beginning of our Disputation, a
Catholic Gentlewoman advised me to withdraw from it. But really whether she had
a Masque in her hand, or not, I cannot tell; and therefore herein I must yield
to the Doctor, and confess that He is the more curious Observer of Ladies of
the two. Neither did she come then into the Conference, as the Doctor seems to
express it, but had been there for some time; for she had observed that Dr.
Tenison took the advantage of my being near him, to turn frequently from Mr. P.
to me, and Above pa. 5.
so vice versa from Me to Him, by which means the Prosecution of the Arguments
was hindered. And it was for this reason (as she told me) and also that the
Doctor might not have a false pretense of his contending with two at once, that
she desired me to retire, according to the account I have given of this matter
in the afore-cited place. It was not therefore to avoid disputing with Dr.
Tenison, as the Doctor's Lady surmized (for it seems there were Ladies on both
sides) that I withdrew, but it was that the Doctor might not avoid disputing
with Mr. P. And if I am not mistaken, I was then talking with the Schoolmaster,
when this Witticism [recorded by the Doctor] was spoken. There was a second
Gentlewoman who joined with this in the same Advice; but neither of them spoke
before Mr. P. had desired me of his own accord to leave the Disputation, though
the Doctor seems here to suppose the contrary.

The Doctor takes occasion in several places of his Book to give us to
understand that the forementioned Apprentice was much changed in Humor and
Countenance after his Conversion, and particularly that he seemed often as if
he were Page 2.
mop'd. And Dr. Hornec seems to concur with him in this account. We know what
kind of Spectacles Love and Hatred are to look through, and how much for the
most part they impose upon our Fancies. Certainly the Boy's * smiling at Dr.
H.'s pretending to Succession was no sign of Stupidity; the wisest man in the
World Page 79. in Dr. H. 's Letter.
might have been guilty of some Laughter on that occasion. But for my own part,
that which I think most worth the smiling at in this passage, is that Dr. H.
makes no bones of proving this Succession; whereas Dr. T. said at the
Conference, that it could not be done under Ten Thousand Pounds worth of Books.
Something (says Dr. H.) I dropped I suppose it was accidentally, Succession being
a Point which of their good will they seldom mention.
accidentally about Succession, which he laid hold of, and with a kind of
scornful smile demanded, What Succession we could show? I told him both for Men
and Doctrine, and Proved it to him. How light does this Doctor make of that
which is such a Bugbear to the other? It is much that Dr. Tenison had not
learnt that Receipt of proving a Succession of Protestants from his Brother
before his Publication of the Conference, that so he might not have put us off
in a Question of so much Importance with Page 13.
Despair instead of Satisfaction. And therefore I am apt to think that Dr. T.
gave not much credit to this part of Dr. H.'s Letter, whatever he did to the
rest.

There is but one way (that I know) of reconciling these two Doctors, and that
is by laying it down as a Principle, That there are Two ways of Manifesting a
Protestant Succession. One is, by showing Societies or Persons in all Ages, who
have openly professed the Doctrine of the Church of England. And this, I
presume, cannot be performed under Ten or Twenty Thousand Pounds worth of
Books. And even after all, it is my opinion that the that makes all Doctrins
plain and clear? About two hundred pounds a year. Hudib.
Money will be able to make it out better without the Books, than with them.
The other is, by saying (according to Dr. Jackson's Notion) See above, page 41.
that the Church of England before the Reformation was in the Church of Rome;
and then the Proof of this Succession will come very cheap, and if you give
Sixpence for it, it will be more than it is worth. Now for such as will not or
cannot go to the price of the former, (which I take to be the Boy's case) it is
but reasonable that they should be contented with the latter. If the Doctors
think that I am somewhat too light on this Occasion, they must pardon me; for I
knew not how to make them agree on better Terms.

THE APPENDIX.
Whilst these latter Sheets were in the Press, Dr. Tenison's new Book
[entituled, Mr. Pulton Considered] came forth. I cast my Eye on it; but having
read the Preface, I found so many things which required the Black Note, that I
was afraid to enter farther into the Book, lest I should be overwhelmed with
matter, and so either tempted to lengthen my own Pamphlet, (which I would not
willingly do) or else remain under a kind of vexation by seeing many Fallacies
without exposing them when they should seem to lie in my way. Wherefore, to
avoid both these Inconveniences, I desired a Friend who had read the Book to
inform me what there was in it that had any relation to my self, that so I
might either note, or neglect it, as I should see cause. And as for the rest of
this Worthy Piece (wherein the Doctor, as far as I observed him, has outdone
himself in many of those laudable Qualities I have spoken of above) I knew that
so far as it should be thought necessary, it would be under the Examination of
a better Artist.

The Doctor says in his forementioned Preface, That he went to this Conference
in the simplicity of a Christian, as to a private Discourse; which (says he)
the Arts of others have improved into a public Brawl. Whom the Doctor means by
others in this place, I cannot well tell: But I am apt to imagine, that They who
were conscious either of the Weakness of their Cause before the Conference, or
of their ill Success in it, would not be over-fond of making the thing public.
For my part, I am so charitable as to think there were no Arts used by either
Side for this purpose; the business was so carried, that it could not well be
otherwise: Nay, there were so many Hearers of both Sexes, (and Five of the
Doctor's Party for One of ours) at this Conference, that it had been the
greatest Art in the World to have kept it secret: But for the admittance of
these People, if there were any fault in it, I know not whom to blame, unless
it be the Master of the House, who doubtlesly might have refused entrance to as
many as he pleased. But perhaps the Good Man reckoned upon nothing less than a
complete Victory, and (in consequence of that) the Recovery of his lost Sheep,
and therefore (according to a Gospel-Example, though somewhat too soon) invited
his Neighbors and Acquaintance to rejoice with him. And if this proved
inconvenient to the Doctor, he may learn by it, that it is not always for his
advantage that his Parishioners should have too great an Opinion of him; but in
the mean time there is no manner of reason why he should be angry at Us,
because his own Admirers were mistaken; unless it be such as men that stumble
have of quarrelling with those who shall happen to be near them, though they
contributed nothing to their Mischance.

He goes on to amuse his Parishioners, by telling them of high Accusations
laid by Catholic Writers on several of his Brethren, of Insincerity,
Disingenuity, Want of Modesty, and the like. And this Charge is set forth by a
pompous Company of Great and Reverend Names, that in view of so much Reverence
and Grandeur, our Disrespect may appear the more Notorious. It is pity that so
much Art should be so ill employed. Are these terms of Insincerity,
Disingenuity, etc. any thing else but the plain and simple (nay, the softest)
Appellations of such things as these Gentlemen are taxed with? Let them forbear
to do, or prove they have not done, what they are unwilling should be named,
and all will be well. If they have any thing to say against those Proofs
wherewith we endeavor to make good our Accusations, it will be to their
purpose; but as long as they shall give us Occasion for Complaints, they must
be contented to receive them in such Language as our Ancestors have left us,
'till they themselves shall teach us one that is more to their satisfaction.

And yet what are these Terms which the Doctor complains of, in comparison of
those which the Ancient Fathers bestowed on the Separatists of their Time, and
that merely for Deserting the Church, and without regard to any sinister way
they might take in particular to support and justify their Schism? To omit a
multitude of Instances to this purpose, be pleased to hearken to St. Augustine
(who was far from wanting Compassion for such as were seduced by Heresy) and
observe how he delivers himself in respect of a Reformer of those days. Sed ill
a Ecclesia, quae fuit omnium Gentium, jam non est, periit. -- Hoc dicunt, qui
in illa non sunt. O impudentem vocem! Illa non est, quia tu in illa non es?
Hanc vocem abominabilem and detestabilem, praesumptionis and falsitatis plenam,
nulla Veritate suffultam, nulla Sapientia illuminatam, nullo Sale conditam,
vanam, temerariam, praecipitem, perniciosam, praevidit Spiritus Dei, etc. D.
Aug. Enarr. 2. in Psalm. 101.
That Church which was composed out of all Nations is no more; she is perished;
[or, in our Modern Reformation-Language, corrupted.] This, says he, is the
saying of those who are not in the Church. O impudent saying! Is she not,
because thou art not in her? -- This most abominable and hateful saying, full
of Presumption and Falsehood, destitute of Truth, void of Wisdom, insipid, vain,
rash, precipitate, pernicious, was foreseen by the Spirit of God, etc. Such,
and much more, was the Language of these Holy men on such occasions. The
Apostles themselves, notwithstanding that Meekness which they learnt from their
Blessed Master, both by Precept and Example, were no less liberal in this kind
than others, as sufficiently appears by all their Writings. St. Jude (to give
you one Instance of these also) in that very Epistle wherein he reprehends
Railing, is so far from thinking severity of Language toward Schismatics to be
so, that his whole Work seems to be nothing else but (if I may so speak) an
Holy Invective against them. He calls them Ungodly Men, and compares them to
Brute Beasts: By and by he styles them, Followers of Cain, Balaam, and Core;
Spots, Clouds without Water, carried about of Wind, Trees without Fruit, twice
dead and plucked up by the Roots; Raging Waves of the Sea, Wandering Stars,
Mockers in the last time, with much more of this nature. And lastly, that we
may know whom he means by all this, he gives us their Mark and their Crime in
one single word: These (says he) be they who SEPARATE themselves. This
therefore being the Phrase of the Apostles and Saints, (viz. so sharp, so
penetrating, so full of perfect abhorrence) toward those who violated, what
they had so tender a concern for, the Unity of the Church; I shall need few
words for the Justification of a sharpness of Language, which comes far short
of theirs. For if bare Separation deserved so much severity, what shall we say
when erroneous Doctrine is added to Separation, and both are maintained by
unjust and fraudulent Proceedings? On the contrary, I am afraid it would be a
harder task to excuse that coldness wherewith we often treat such things as
these. It may very well be apprehended, that whilst we play the Courtiers too
much in Controversy, we may leave the Crimes of Heresy and Schism divested of
that Horror wherewith they ought always to be represented. And therefore, to
say the truth, it was not so much for the defense of the severity of our
Language toward Protestants that I have chosen these two Instances out of
numberless others of the same time, and to the same purpose; but it was chiefly
that I might take this occasion of showing my Readers what great apprehensions
the Primitive Christians had of those things whereof now-adays we make so
little account, that so what the Age will not bear from my Pen, they may
receive from those whom they pretend to follow. There is but little difference
(say some) between Us and the Catholics; as if that were little for which the
Unity of the Church is broken; or, indeed, as if the mere breach of that Unity
were little. Let them who have this thought, consider these two passages which
I have cited, and for farther satisfaction (if they shall yet want it) compare
on the same Subject the rest of the Scriptures with the One, and the rest of
the Fathers with the other, and then it is probable they will be of another
Opinion. I am sure they will have reason to be so.

I intimated, that the principal Design of my alleging the Examples of St.
Jude and St. Augustine, was not to defend the sharp Language of our
Controvertists: This indeed had been superfluous, and my Readers might well
have blamed me for an unnecessary Paragraph. For besides that what I said at
first of the necessity we are in of using such Expressions is abundantly
sufficient for their excuse, we have the Example of our very Accusers for the
same sharpness, should we stand in need of any farther justification: For could
but Dr. Tenison consider Himself and his Friends but half so narrowly as he
does his Adversaries, he would find that those Reverend Gentlemen he mentions
are not behind-hand with us on that score, but rather they give us two for one.
What I have collected out of his own Pamphlet may serve for a small Instance.
There are other Books as well stored: But what need of more? It is well known,
that Superstitious, Idolatrous, Antichristian, Devilish, etc. are Terms of
course, and as ancient as that of Papists. And indeed, as the matter is now
between us, if sharpness were an undoubted sign of an Apostolical Spirit, They
would pass for Apostles, and We for Schismatics. It is true there is a
difference between sharpness and scurrility, and therefore we ought to be
careful that whilst we imitate the Fathers in the One, we may not follow the
Heretics in the Other; the One being the result of Zeal, the Other of Malice.
And this last kind of Eloquence was heard so early amongst our Reformers,
(witness Luther's especial Talent in this way) that it may well be termed the
Vagitus or First-Cries of the Reformation.

But, says the Doctor, They say this ill of us, not because we are such, but
because we are not theirs. This he SAYS, and because Ep. Ded. in his new Book.
Defending and Proving is so disagreeable an Employment to him, he expects that
his Parishioners (who Ep. to his Parishioners in his first Book.
pass as high Obligations on their Pastor as man can have to man) will continue
their high Obligations so far as to believe him without Proof.

He tells them by and by, That J. S. is now under better hands. This looks like
an Insinuation, as if there were some hopes of reclaiming him. I thought the
Boy had been past recovery. He was assured (as he says in the 3d page of his
Narrative) that this Conference would be to no purpose as to the Boy. And since
neither Dr. Hornec's Things of Moment, Page 3.
nor Dr. Tenison's Great Conference, wherein Nine (some say Fifteen) Jesuits
were silenced, could do any good upon this Youth, he had so much perverseness
in his heart, and so Page 2.
strange a figure in his Countenance, it is probable that those Hands from
which the Doctor seems to hope so great success, must go some other way to work
with him, than by (what the Doctor does not care for) Defending and Proving.

In Dr. T.'s former Volume we had some Confessions and Retractations, and might
have imagined that a new St. Augustine had risen up amongst us: But in This he
retracts his Retractations, and so St. Augustine ( Ep. to his Par. in his first
Book
as it were) vanishes away, and Dr. Tenison is left us in his stead. When he
published his first Book, he voluntarily owned what he THEN thought less
decent. But his Friends reproved him, for making Apologies for Warmnesses which
they cannot find: And he will not so much suspect their Sagacity, as to imagine
they are in the wrong; especially where the suspecting it is so little for his
Credit. Wherefore he now changes his Note. In his first Epistle to these
Parishioners, he spoke thus: What I said either with less Strength or more
Warmth than I ought, I have set down, and laid it before your Charity. It may
be I have a motive to severe Language toward that sort of Men, which few have
besides me. Then he tells the Story of Gubbard, and concludes, This Instance of
such gross Hypocrisy and Injustice made Impression upon me when I was young,
and so raised my Suspicion and Indignation, that where I have met with any
thing of a like nature, it has been some difficulty to me to temper my self:
But nothing (I hope) shall ever so transport me, as to prevent the doing of my
Duty among you, etc. Here the Doctor asks pardon for some Warmnesses of his at
the Conference, and endeavors in some measure to excuse them, by letting his
Parishioners know what a peculiar Motive he had to severe Language, from the
Impression that was made on him in his Youth by Gubbard's Behavior. And in the
close he seems to tell them, That although perhaps his Wrath may have been
somewhat excessive toward a certain sort of men whom he points at in the
beginning, yet his Parishioners are so Goo^ and so Generous, that he hopes that
no Transport will ever hinder him from being their humble Servant. This, I say,
one would take to be the plain Construction of the foregoing words: And I doubt
not but the Parishioners understood him just in this manner. But we are all
mistaken: The Doctor says he means no such thing; and surely it belongs to him
to know what he means. See his Epist. Ded. in his new Book.
The Indignation he spoke of, was toward Hypocrisy and Injustice, and not
toward Persons and Orders: His Resentment, such as it was, reasonable; and as
for his Memory, it offered him a wholesome Admonition. What is become of the
Fault, and the Excuse? Here is every thing just as it should be. How comes the
Doctor to have so peculiar a motive to hate Hypocrisy and Injustice? Does he
not think that other people may have as great Motives as He to hate those two
Vices? And is it not Motive enough for their being hated, to consider that they
are highly displeasing to Almighty God? But how comes a Motive to severe
Language against a sort of Men, to be nothing else but a Motive to Indignation
against Vice? The Jesuit (says the Doctor) would fix that Indignation I spoke
of upon Persons and Orders, when in express words I make the Object of it to be
Hypocrisy and Injustice. The Doctor then fixes his Indignation upon
Hypocrisy and Injustice; but on what will he fix his Suspicion which he joins
with his Indignation in the same Sentence? Has that nothing to do with To
suspect Hypocrisy, is to suspect some person or persons guilty of it, or to
suspect that it will make them Instruments of some further Mischief, which is
still to suspect the persons.
Persons neither? Surely they amongst whom such Language passes, ought not to
inveigh against Equivocation. In his first Letter he complained* that the
Impressions of his Youth made it difficult for him to temper himself: But here
he declares, that his Memory offered him a wholesome Admonition. How comes that
which is so wholesome to bring the Doctor so near to a Distemper? Or why should
the Doctor endeavor by te^^ering himself to restrain his hatred against Vice,
viz. against that which deserves an infinite Hatred? And lastly, how happens it
that so just an Indignation, and so reasonable a Resentment, should occasion
such Transports as should make him apprehensive of being hindered from doing his
Duty among his Parishioners? Detestation of Sin is no such improper quality in
a Pastor, unless it be where a Pastor thinks it his Duty to flatter his
Parishioners, which ought to be nowhere.

No, Doctor; your Gloss will not serve the turn. Your first thoughts were too
well worded to be misinterpreted by your second; and therefore we will no more
part with this story, than with that of Luther and the Devil.

But if you please you shall have my Comment on it also; which, if I am not
mistaken, is much more probable than Yours. Briefly thus: You thought this
Story of Gubbard would make the same Impression on your Parishioners, as (you
pretend) the thing it self did on You: And this, you wisely imagined, would be
an excellent preparation of mind toward the reading of your Pamphlet. But it
pleased God in his Justice to permit that whilst you were so very intent on
digging a Pit for others, you should omit that care which was necessary for the
keeping out of it your self: For whilst you endeavored to make the Catholic
Priests or Jesuits pass for Hypocrites and Oppressors, your own Story has
represented you as one of a rash Judgment, and of a Temper hardly to be
appeased, and so whilst you undermined our Credit, you ruined your own; with
such, at least, whose good Opinion is any credit.

Mr. P. had Rem. Epist. Ded.
said, That Gubbard might have preached up Purgatory, and yet be neither Priest
nor Romanist, as well as Mr. Thorndyke desire to have an Ora pro Anima engraven
on his Tomb, and yet die in the Communion of the Church of England.

The Doctor does not deny, but in one sense a man may hold Purgatory without
being a Romanist: For, says he, Bellarmin argues for a Purgatory out of the
Poet Virgil. But (proceeds the Doctor) it was not certainly that Purgatory out
of which men are relieved by Masses. And such a Purgatory (notwithstanding Mr.
P. 's suggestion) Mr. Thorndyke could not hold, having forbidden his Nieces to
Marry with any who should go to Mass.

Mr. P. was no way inquisitive what Purgatory Mr. Thorndyke hold; it might be
the Poet Virgil's for ought he knew, (and so might Gubbards too for any thing
the Doctor has yet discovered) or he might hold none at all. [However it must
be noted, That Mr. Thorndyke might have held a Purgatory, where Souls are
relieved by Prayer, without holding it lawful to go to Mass.] All this was
nothing to Mr. P.'s purpose; what he would evince being only, that the Belief
of Purgatory could be no surer sign in Gubbard of his being a Romanist, than
the Approbation of Prayer for the Dead was in Mr. Thorndyke; either of these
Points (forasmuch at least as concerns outward Profession) being as Popish,
that is, belonging as peculiarly to the Roman Catholic Religion, as the other.
But for the manner of understanding them, Gubbard's Sense might, for ought we
can tell, differ as much from the Roman Church, as Mr. Thorndyke's: as I
intimated before.

For which reason, although (according to the Doctor's Suggestion) Mr.
Thorndyke's Ora pro Anima should not have been in Mr. Pulton's way, it sounded
as if it were; and therefore was as sufficient for this surmise, as what the
Doctor says of Gubbard. And what way soever this [Ora pro Anima] was in, it was
so far out of Dr. Tenison's, that when he has put his best Construction on it,
he judges it a Weakness, and so far again out of the Church of England's, that
though Mr. Thorndyke, as has been said, died in their Communion, yet (it seems)
they permitted not his Executor to comply with the Earnest Charge he lays on
him by his Last See an Extract of the Will set down by Dr. T. after his Ep. in
his new Book.
Will of writing the following words on his Gravestone, viz. Tu, Lector,
Requiem ei and beatam in Christo Resurrectionem precare; which is, as near as I
can render it, Thou, O Reader, Pray for his Rest, and Happy Resurrection in
Christ.

He [Mr. Thorndyke] says the Doctor, imitated some Christians about the Fourth
Age, who wished Rest to none but those who, as they thought, already enjoyed
it. And even this Wish of theirs, if it had Charity, it had also (in my
Opinion) Weakness in it.

And truly it had so in my Opinion too (for I must not always differ with the
Doctor) if they wished Rest to none but those whom they supposed to enjoy it
already. For, would it not be a Weakness in Me, (or in any one else whom the
Doctor should take for a better Friend) to wish that Dr. Tenison were possessed
of the two Parishes of St. Martin's and St. James's. And if a man should wish
(though ever so heartily) that the Doctor had a great deal of Sincerity, I am
afraid that he would take it for somewhat worse than a Weakness, though at the
same time the Party should tell him, that he imitated some Christians about the
Fourth Age in wishing to Folks no more than what they believed they had already.

But why should the Doctor fancy that those Holy and Learned Men, I mean the
Ancient Fathers, those Pillars of Christianity, during the first and purest
Ages of the Church, and those whom not only Mr. Thorndyke, but the whole
English Reformation pretends to imitate; why, I say, should he imagine that
these Great Men were guilty of so much Weakness? Certainly if Christian
Religion be a Romans 12. 1.
Reasonable Service, we cannot think that the Best Christians were the most
Unreasonable Men.

These Fathers prayed for the Dead in most express Terms; they offered
Sacrifices for them; they begged of Almighty God to forgive them their sins;
they exhorted the Faithful to do the like; they declared that such Prayers and
Sacrifices were beneficial to the Souls of the Deceased. St. Augustine has a
whole Viz. De cura pro Mortuis.
Book on this Subject, and there is scarce any one of the Fathers who has not
somewhat to the same purpose. And were all these Doings for nothing? Did they
think that their Prayers would help none but those who stood in no need of
their help, which is as much as to say that they would help none at all?
Certainly the Doctor cannot think this. But all Truths are not to be spoken at
all times. It is better that the Fathers should pass for Weak Men in Would not
such Praying also be a Mocking of God, the Taking his Name in vain, and the
Being guilty of Idle words, even at our Devotions?
Praying where they knew it was to no purpose, than that the Papists should
have so strong a proof of Purgatory from the Consent of the Ancient Church,
that the Dead in some cases might be helped by the Prayers of the Living. And
their praying for none but whom they If by thought he means [absolutely
supposed.]
thought to be already in Happiness, is so far from being true, that they
prayed not for the Ideoque habet Ecclesiastica disciplina quod Fideles
noverunt, cum Martyrs recitantur ad Altar Dei; ubi non pro ipsis oretur, pro
caeteris vero commemoratis Defunctis oratur: Injuria est enim pro Martyr
orare; cujus nos debemus orationibus commendari. St. Aug. Sermon. 17. de verb.
Ap. cap. 1.
Martyrs, merely because they concluded them to be Happy, and consequently not
to stand in need of their Prayers.

It is worth observing after what fashion this matter is spoken of by the
Doctor: He imitated, says he, some Christians about the Fourth Age. By some
Christians, I suppose, he means all the Holy Fathers of that Time; and indeed
he might have taken in the whole Catholic Church, in which, as In Machabaeorum
libris legimus oblatum pro mortuis Sacrificium. Sed etsi musquam in Scriptur is
veteribus omnino legeretur, non parva tamen est Universae Ecclesiae, quae in
hac Consuetudine claret, Authoritas; ubi in precibus Sacerdotis, quae Domino
Deo ad ejus Altar sunduntur, locum suum habet etiam commendatio mortuorum. St.
Aug. lib. de Cura pro mortuis. c. 1.
St. Augustine assures us, this Practice of Praying for the Dead was Universal.
By about the Fourth Age, I suppose he means the said Fourth, and the two next
to it both before and after, viz. the Fifth and the Third; and to these he
might, if he had so pleased, have added the Two First. So that we have the
settled Custom of all Antiquity delivered to us as the peculiar or private
Practice of some Christians about the Fourth Age. Neither is this without
Mystery: For having said in his first Book, p. 16. that he would not part with
the Fathers, and having now an occasion of dismissing them as weak men, he
signs their Discharge in other Names, that he may not seem to be worse than his
word. When he can discover any thing in their Writings which may be wrested for
his purpose, they shall be as much Fathers as you please: but when he catches
them holding a Popish Doctrine, they are out of Favor, and must be turned into
some Christians about the Fourth Age.

But if the Doctor means, by what he says in this place, that there were some
Christians about the time he mentions, who imagined that Souls could not be
helped by Prayers or Wishes, and therefore wished Rest to none but whom they
supposed to enjoy what they wished them, and so dissented from the Universal
Church, which (as has been shown) prayed for the Dead out of another
Principle: There might, for ought I know, have been some such Christians, but
as yet I never heard of them.

Lastly, if by some Christians wishing Rest to such as they thought to have it,
he means that they had so good an Opinion of those they prayed for, as to think
they were already received into Bliss; he need not play the Antiquary so much
as to go to the Fourth Age for such Christians as these: They may be found in
the Seventeenth: We our selves [the Catholics of these times] are not so
uncharitable, but that we think that many of our Deceased Brethren, whom we
recommend to Almighty God in our daily Prayers, are already in the fruition of
that Glory which we so earnestly solicit for them; but because we do but
think so, and are not certain of it, we still continue our usual Intercessions,
left possibly it may not be so well with them as we imagine: And so our Charity
is exercised both ways, as well by offereing this Relief to our Friends, as by
having so good an Opinion of them at the same time as to think they need it
not. And in this manner St. Augustine prayed for his Mother. For though (as he
says himself) she lived so virtuously, that he had reason to hope she
contracted nothing since her Baptism which might retard her admission to
Eternal Happiness; yet because, for ought he knew, it might be otherwise, he
thanks Ego itaque Deus cordis mei, sepositis paulisper bonis ejus actibus, pro
quibus tibi gaudens gratias ago, nunc pro peccatis Matris meae, deprecor te,
etc. St. Aug. lib. 9. Confess. c. 13.
Almighty God for his Mothers Good Deeds on the one hand, and beseeches him to
pardon such Sins as possibly she might have committed on the other. And he is
so Zealous in this Charitable Employment, that he is not contented to offer up
his own Prayers only for this purpose, but begs of such as should read his Book
of Confessions, wherein he gives an Account of these things, that they likewise
would join Their Petitions to His: Ut quod illa a me poposcit extremum, uberius
ei praestetur in multorum orationibus. Ibid.
That so (adds this Holy Bishop) what my Mother made her last Request to me,
may the more plentifully be performed for her by the Prayers of Many.

Other parts of this Dedicatory Address might likewise be dissected and read
upon; but I fear that my Lecture is too tedious already: Neither should it have
been so long, had I not been willing to show my Reader what just cause I have
to decline the perusal of the whole Book, when a few Lines of Preface afford so
much (and so trivial) work. Wherefore I shall not stay to examine with what
probability of Truth he asserts, That the Souls of his Sheep are much dearer to
him than their Fleeces, when he seems to be so See above, p. 17. and sequ.
loath that any farther Division should be made in the Fleeces, though for a
better Attendance on the Souls. Neither will I ask him how he comes in the
close of his Letter to call the English Protestant Church I suppose not from
Missions.
Apostolical, as if it came down by perpetual Succession from the Apostles,
when every body knows (that has not read his Ten thousand pounds worth of
Books) that it began in the last Age, and brags of no other Succession than
what it pretends to have received from that Church, to which in Truth, and even
according to its own Profession, it neither succeeds in Doctrine nor Discipline.
And lastly, whereas the Doctor says, That the Established Church, so far as he
can understand the Temper of it [which is somewhat difficult for him to do] had
rather suffer Injuries, than do them: I shall only say, That if this be so, I
presume he will give us leave to hope that this Established Church will not
look on the power of doing those Injuries as part of Her Establishment.

And so much for the Preface: I come now to what concerns me in the Book.

I am told that Dr. Tenison in the 58th page of his new Book calls me a Manager
in Conference. And again, page 96. he says, That I am the very Sales-man at
every Auction of Arguments. What the Doctor means by this, I cannot well tell,
nor I suppose He himself. Possibly it was somewhat that came into his Head,
whilst the Pen was in his Hand, and down it went at all Adventures. For this
was the second Conference I was ever at in my Life, (excepting casual and
unsought Rencounters) and how unwillingly I came to this, I have already given
my Readers an Account. It is true that I had like to have been at one or two
more in Mr. G. 's Company, had not the Ministers who were to be his Antagonists
disappointed him twice or thrice. But this was before Dr. St. had published his
first Letter to Mr. G. and so given me to understand how great an Advantage
Latitudinarian Wits have over one (not only much less, but also) tied within
the straight Rules of Sincerity. It is true, the Goodness of a Cause is of
great Weight, but the Disingenuity of an Adversary is a shrewd Counterpoise.

Now, I say, how my Being at these two Conferences (and that accidentally too,
and forasmuch as concerns the latter, very unwillingly) could render me that
Manager, and Sales-man at Auctions of Arguments, which the Doctor's Nick-naming
Faculty would make me, I do not perceive. But the Doctor has a Rule for this,
as well as for the rest which he has been pleased to bestow on me, viz.
Calumniare fortiter, aliquid adhaerebit, and therefore I shall say no more of
it. [And yet it is hard to find out why the Doctor turns that into a Calumny,
which fairly represented would be a Commendation. For what could any man do
better, who had a Talent proper for it, than employ his time in freeing Souls
from Error; an Employment for which our Blessed Lord came into the World, and
for which his Holy Apostles traveled through it? But I forget that the
Retrenchment of Missions was one of the most considerable parts of the
Reformation.]

However, though I have not been at many of these Conferences, yet I will not
deny but that I imagine my self to have arrived to some competency of skill in
them; and for some proof of this, and because I desire to be communicative in
so precious a Talent, I purpose to make my Readers partakers of it, as a Reward
of that Patience wherewith they have hitherto endured such tedious and
immethodical Discourses, promising my self, that for the sake of this one
Treasure only, they will think the rest of their time well bestowed.

Now, forasmuch as the worse the Cause is, the greater skill is required in the
Management of it, I will lay down some brief Rules, whereby, as I conceive, an
ill Cause may be managed in Conference to the best advantage; and so as that
the Defender of it (especially if the Hearers be no wiser than some of Dr.
Tenison's Parishioners) may come off with great Applause.

First then, let the Scene of your Conference be Brief Rules how an ill Cause
may be managed to the best advantage.
laid amongst your own Friends, and therefore, if the Disputer be a Protestant
(and such he must be to stand in any need of these Instructions) let it be in a
Protestant Family. Before the Conference, and the arrival of your Antagonist,
endeavor to possess your Favorers with a prejudice against him; prophecy
something which you are sure will come to pass, that when it does so, they may
have the better Opinion of you. For Example: Tell them that you are come alone,
without so much as either Friend or Servant, [when you know that the whole
House are your Friends, and that none can be readier to serve you than they
are.] And then lay a wager that your Antagonist brings some one with him,
[because you think it imprudent, and therefore unlikely, that he should trust
himself to the Reports of your Party, without some Witness of his own.] But
this, as you shall word it, must argue Confidence in You, and Diffidence in
Him. And when you shall see that he complies with what you thought Reasonable,
turn to your Company, and say, Did I not tell you that he would not come alone?
Be sure to begin the Conference with that which has nothing to do with it.
Make many Exceptions [at the Company, the Persons, or somewhat else] without
hearkening to any Accomodations. Let the first hours of your Conference be
spent in such things as these, which your Adversary never thought of, and
consequently is not provided for. This possibly may disturb him so as that he
will forget his Arguments, at least it will deprive him of that time which
would be necessary for the carrying them on. [If Writing be proposed, let it be
waved as earnestly (but as plausibly too) as may be: but when it cannot be
otherwise, let the whole Conference be taken up in preliminary and frivolous
matters, or at least artificially broken off before any material point be
concluded. But in these Written Conferences there is little room for
after-Misrepresentations, and consequently little Credit to be obtained, and
therefore what follows, for the most part, has relation only to such as are
purely Verbal.]

But now, your first Cavils being once weathered, (which by the by, must not
be, so long as you can hinder it) and your Adversary finding room to propose a
Question, have a care of returning any Answer to it immediately. No, such
precipitation would argue a great want of skill; and therefore be sure to start
some new thing, offer some Objection to your Adversary, and urge him to solve
it. And let all this be done as prolixly, and in as many words as your
Invention can furnish: And he is a poor Artist that is not able to keep his
Adversaries Question out of sight for one half hour at least. By this means you
may promise your self one of these two Advantages, viz. That either your
Adversary, by answering your impertinent Objection, will be diverted from his
Point, (and when he is once capable of being so, you may deal with him as you
please) or else by not answering it he will give occasion to the Parishioners
to think that you have puzzled him.

When the Diversion will hold no longer, and your Adversary becomes so
obstinate and importune, that, maugre all the fine things you say to hinder it,
he throws out his first Question once more, and the Hearers at length seem to
expect your Answer: Here it is that you must show your Art. Let your Answer be
tedious and intricate, seeming much, but being little to the purpose. But when
your Answer is once given, stay for no Reply: Suppose that none can be given;
and therefore, as if this Question were already become your prize, begin a new
Matter; Raise some notable Objection (as you did before) and ask him what he
says to it; Make use of some opprobrious Term; Out with some reflecting Tale:
Perhaps his Passion will be moved, and he will think himself obliged in Honor
to defend himself against these New Attacks, and so quit his former hold, and
then the Day is your own. But if, contrary to your Opinion, his tenaciousness
should still continue, yet still you have this advantage: He answers not your
Objections, and this disgraces him with the Parishioners; and it is so long
since you returned an Answer to his Question, that he knows not what it was,
and therefore is forced to propose his Question anew. The people are nauseated
with this Crambe: You tell him that you have answered this long ago, and for
proof you repeat your Answer, with some variety of Phrase; and to avoid Reply,
run aside again, and lead him such another Dance through Cavils, Similitudes,
and Tales, as you did before. You have here the whole Method of Disputation,
and you have nothing else to do, save only to repeat these Rounds so often
'till the day be gone, the Hearers grow weary, or your Antagonist lose all hope
of advancing one step farther.

There are some particular strokes of Art which your own Mother-wit will be
likely to suggest as occasion shall be offered. When your Adversary will not go
from his first point, be sure to complain that he will stick to nothing. Lay a
great stress on trivial things, and make no account of such as are most
material. Let the Rule of Faith be not worth the naming, and let the Cause of
both Churches depend upon a single Quotation. Turn frequently from your
Adversary with an Appeal to the Hearers. This wins their Affection, disturbs
your Antagonist, and (what ought to be your principal care) is of singular Use
toward the consumption of time. Place your self between your Adversary and his
Friend, whom you must represent as his Second; and when the Argument presses
too much on one side, turn to the other, and so vice versa: By which means you
shift the Disputation to and fro, as Boys do a live coal from one hand to the
other, with such quickness that neither is burnt. You may also brag, that you
have Two Adversaries, when in Truth you have not so much as One; for instead of
adding them together to make Two, you substract them one from the other; and
what remains?

To these things may be added the Merriments of some Droll, the Applause of the
Company on the one side, and their Rudeness on the other, and the like.

When the Conference is ended, call a Council of War; take a View of the Field
of Battle; reckon what See D. T. 's Narr. p. 4.
Yellow Perukes, Plain Bands, and other Ensigns of the Enemy lie there, that so
you may compute the Number of the Slain, and understand the Greatness of your
Victory: Indict a Triumph; and remember that a False Story differs not in
Language from a True one, and for the most part men believe as they are
affected: And then it is your own fault if the Common Fame be not on your side.

You have here my whole skill in the Art of Wrangling; and it is so much, that
I question not but when I tell you that I learnt it all (in a manner) at one
Lesson, you will conclude either that I am a very apt Scholar, or else that I
had an excellent Master: And for my own part, if this will not support an ill
Cause, I know not what will.

In the last of the above cited places the Doctor represents me as one who love
to be engaged; and tells me, that possibly some or other may oblige me in the
Art of Wrangling; but, as for him, he has Employment more worthy his time.

It is strange that the Doctor having publicly aspersed me at the Conference,
and since more publicly posted me up in Print under several Ignominious
Characters, besides what (I hear) he has been pleased to bestow on me in his
private Conversations, should after all look on it as an Irregular Appetite to
Wrangling in me, that I should publish any thing in my own Vindication. He
might have remembered how his Friend Dr. St. made the Nation ring with
Complaints, because Mr. G.'s Amanuensis had casually left out a few words in
his Copy, which (for any thing they added to the Sense) might have been as well
See the Letter to Dr. E. S. page 18.
out, as in. Dr. St. may do this; but as for me, I must be contented to sit
down under the heaviest Reproaches, on pain of being thought a Wrangler. And
even in our present Case Dr. Tenison is the Aggressor, and yet Mr. M. loves to
be engaged. How high are some men carried in their own Conceits! They imagine
that the whole World was made for them, that as for the rest they may tread
upon them at pleasure, and if These turn again, (as they say a Worm will do)
the Others are hugely affronted! God deliver us all from this Spirit, which is
so diametrically opposite to that of a Christian!

And here (besides what I have already said to this purpose) I will assure the
Doctor, That I am far from being a Lover of Controversy. Had I Time, Health,
and other Talents necessary for Writing, I should much more willingly employ
them on Books of Devotion; and this because I am persuaded that with most men
the Will stands in more need of being moved, than the Understanding of being
convinced, at least I believe that when the First is done, the Last will soon
follow. Such Conversions, as I have been more intimately acquainted with, have
ever (as far as I could perceive) begun this way. And agreeably hereunto, our
Savior generally lays the blame of Unbelief not on any Defect of the
Understanding, but on the Vices of the Will: John 3. 19.
Light, says he, is come into the World, and men loved Darkness rather than
Light, because their Deeds were evil. And again, John 5. 44. (where
particularly he notes Pride as a principal hindrance of Faith) How can you
believe, who receive Honor one of another, and the Honor which is from God only
you seek not? And forasmuch as concerns even our present Hesitations in point
of Faith, I question not but they all proceed from the same Root. The Hardness
of Transubstantiation, or some other Mystery may be pretended, but the Real
Hindrance is somewhat else; some foreseen Persecution, or other Temporal
Inconvenience; the Displeasure of Friends, the Censure of the World; (if not
these, yet) the disagreeableness of Confession and doing Penance, the
difficulty of some Restitution, or of breaking with some beloved Vice, the
enjoined Celibacy of a leading sort of Men: These things, I say, and some
others of the like quality are (in their turns) the ordinary source of all our
Repugnances against Religion. I do not mean that men are generally hindered by
such irregular Passions from professing what they believe, (though it may be
feared that this also too often happens) but that they are hindered by them from
believing what they ought, and what (were it not for such Byasses) they would.

Wherefore, if the main (I might say only) Obstacle of true Faith be a
perverseness of Will, it follows that such Books as tend to the warming of the
Affection are more probable means of Conversion, than such as are directed for
the enlightening of the Understanding: Not but that Books of Controversy are
useful too in their season, and those who are qualified for this way of Writing
do well in making us Partakers of their Labor, and indeed the Proceedings of
our Adversaries in a manner exact it; but as for me, I am led by Judgment and
Inclination to give the preference to Treatises of another kind. And therefore
those who have taken in that Character which the Doctor is pleased to give of
me in this place, as if I loved Controversy, are (if it imports them to know
it) much deceived; this being an Art no less contrary to my Liking, than it is
above my Capacity. But forasmuch as concerns my present Task, I cannot but
promise my self that the Necessity that was put upon me will excuse the
Undertaking, and the Goodness of the Cause bring me through it.

The Doctor (if I mistake him not) threatens to leave me engaged with a new
Antagonist. But why should he, who thinks I do too much in taking notice of
what himself writes, imagine that another Pen is able to engage me? He seems to
think that I might have let Him alone without Disgrace; and what then should
oblige me to Combat his Second? On the contrary, it is my opinion, that when
such Calumnies are first vented, somewhat is to be done to satisfy the
Judicious: but afterward, when Old Calumnies are defended by New, the best
Refutation of them is Contempt. And therefore, unless the Doctor's Second come
into the Field with better Weapons than his Principal has done, I shall leave
him an Enemy worthy such a Champion, viz. his own Shadow.

And here, though I cannot but think it a little hard that the Doctor should
begin the War, and then leave me engaged with fresh Adversaries, unless my
Revenues were as well able to hire Auxiliaries as his own; yet I must
acknowledge, that his excuse for not Writing is so just, that I wonder how he
could find any for Writing. One would think that two such Above p. 17. and sequ.
Parishes should find him work enough. And certainly, were it not for a
singular Art of converting Cures into Sine-cures, I should have heard as little
from Dr. Tenison, as he would have done from me without a Provocation.

Dr. Tenison (as I am farther informed) having said that Mr. P. accuses him of
answering nothing to a certain Query that had been put to him, viz. How the
Church of England, granting her self to be Fallible (and for ought she knew in
actual Error) could be the Church built upon a Matt. 16. 18.
Rock, etc? has the following words: It is much that I had nothing to say upon
this Argument, when Mr. Meredith may remember, that upon the Objection as made
by him, I gave him this Answer, to which he has not yet replied; That our
Church was no more Fallible than any other in the World; That God's Providence
would not suffer all to fail together; That we had a certain Rule, and
sufficient means; That we were as infallibly sure of the Necessaries of Faith,
as a man is of casting up a Sum right, though, by Misattention, 'twas possible to
commit a mistake; And that our Church could prove, it had rightly computed.
This was said to him at the side of the Bed in the second Room, about the close
of our Talk.

Now it is very possible that Dr. Tenison might be readier with an Answer to a
Query at one time than at another. No man (generally speaking) is always
equally present to himself; a Passion may sometimes interpose, and darken the
Understanding; and this especially is not to be wondered at in One who has
peculiar Motives to Indignation. Besides, he might live and learn, and finding
himself puzzled to day, he might study the point better against to morrow; for
which reasons it is not impossible but the Doctor might have said nothing to
his former Quaerist, and yet afterward say something to Me on the same
Subject. There is no great Miracle in all this. But that which is truly to be
admired is, that he should take that which he said to me for something. For my
part I do not remember what passed herein at the Conference with distinction
enough to be able to relate it, wherefore I shall take it for granted that the
Doctor gives us a faithful Account of the whole Affair; neither indeed is it so
much for his advantage, that I should suspect a Fraud. What the Doctor says of
my not replying, is likewise extremely probable: I told him at the beginning of
the Conference, that I came not as a Disputant, but an Hearer, and he treated
me ever after (and even when he disputed with me) accordingly, viz. as one who
was to hear, and not to speak. And in the present Case, whether it be probable
that my silence proceeded from the want of a Reply, or of the Liberty of giving
it, I shall freely leave my Readers to judge, after a short Reflection on the
Doctor's words.

The Doctor (it seems) had been asked how the Church of England, granting her
self to be Fallible, could be the Church built upon a Rock, etc. viz. one that
could not fail? To this he says, (and calls it an Answer) that their Church is
no more Fallible than any other in the World. What trifling is here! The
Quaerist supposes, that according to Scripture there must be an Infallible
Church, (viz. as I have said, one that cannot fail) and that the Church of
England acknowledges her self to be Fallible; and then concludes, by asking,
How that, which by its own Confession is Fallible, can pretend to be what is
truly Infallible? The Answerer neither tells him (at least plainly) whether
there be any Infallible Church, or whether the Church of England deny, or own
her self to be Fallible, but answers like one who knew not what to say. The
Church of England, says he, is no more Fallible than any other; which is as
much as to say, She is no more Fallible than those whom she takes to be in
Error. An excellent Security! For whilst he pretends that his Church is no
more Fallible than others, he does not deny it to be as Fallible as others.
Wherefore the whole Discourse amounts to this: Gentlemen, here are many
Churches that have fallen into Error, and we have been so wise as to separate
from them on this account; and now (for our comfort) we are as Fallible as
they, and for ought we know may be as much mistaken. But (proceeds the Doctor)
the Providence of Godwill not suffer One would think however, that the
Providence of God had suffered all Churches to sail together, who should
consider that the Reformers could find none amongst them with which (if you
will believe them) they could join with safe Consciences, and so were forced to
separate from ALL. The common Answer is, That before the Reformation there were
some Churches sound in Necessaries of Faith; which, say they, is a sufficient
fulfilling of our Lord's Promise of being always with his Church. So then, it
seems, we are assured by a Divine Promise, that at least some Church or
Churches were sound in Necessaries before the Reformation: But that a Church
separating from all others, shall be so, they do not, they cannot pretend that
they have any Promise from God, nor other security than what they receive from
a Banquerupt Ensurer, viz. their own Presumption. And this certainly deserves
their most serious Consideration. Members may fail without the Destruction of
the Body.
all to fail together. The place of Scripture alluded to by the Quaerist speaks
of one Church, whereas the Doctor talks of several. It is true, that this one
Church to which this Promise of Infallibility is made, consists of diverse
particular Churches as its Members, and that it is possible for any of these
Members to So far as such
fail in Particular, but not for all of them together, and therefore if the
Doctor had proved either that his Congregation was this whole Infallible Church
here spoken of, or else shown some such whole Church whereof the Church of
England was a Member, he had done his business. But whereas he does neither of
these things, the Query continues still without an Answer.

But because what is defective in Strength may be supplied by Number,
(according to what I have said Page 64.
above) out comes another Cipher. We have (says the Doctor) a certain Rule, and
sufficient Means. I suppose the meaning of this is, That the Scripture is
certain, and I will add in the Name of the Church of England, That if we could
hit on the right Sense of it, we should be so too: But because we are uncertain
whether we have this Right Sense or not, notwithstanding our certain Rule, we
must continue uncertain; And then because we have no means of knowing when we
have this Right Sense, and when we have it not, whatever our means are
sufficient for, they do not suffice for Certainty. Hitherto we have made but
little progress; let us therefore make room for what comes next.

We are (adds the Doctor) as infallibly sure of the Necessaries of Faith, as a
man is of casting up a Sumright; though, by Misattention, 'twas possible to
commit a mistake. Not to ask the Doctor at present, By what Scales he weights
the I thought the Infallibility of a Church had been from God's Promise, and
consequently somewhat more than what is merely natural.
Infallibility of the Church of England, and finds it neither more nor less
than a man has in casting up a Sum: Is not what he says here also as much as to
say, that they are as Infallible as a man that may be mistaken, which was never
(that I know of) denied to the Church of England? But here I take it for
granted (though the expression, as well as that which follows, seems to be
somewhat doubtful) that the Dr. does not intend to say thus much, viz. That
though indeed His Church might be mistaken in casting up its Sum, were it guilty
of Misattention, yet now being assured that it is guilty of none, it is
impossible for it to mistake. I suppose, I say, he does not mean this: For if
there be no possibility of mistaking in this Computation but by Misattention,
and the Church of England is sure that it has no Misattention when it computes,
it is sure likewise that it is Infallible, because it is sure by being without
Misattention that it is without a possibility of mistaking, which is contrary
to the supposition of the Query, (which was not denied by the Doctor) and to
the Fallibility which this Church owns of her self. The like must be said of
that which follows, viz. That the Church of England can prove it has rightly
computed. For if a right Computation be liable to no mistake, and the Church of
England can prove that it has this right Computation, it proves at the same
time that it is liable to no mistake, and therefore Infallible. In a word, if
what the Doctor says imports that his Church is Infallible, I say, it is
contrary to our supposition (not denied by him) and to her own Profession; and
if he understands less than that, the Query remains, viz. How that which is
less than Infallible, can be that which cannot fail?

And yet how frivolous and unsatisfactory soever these last Positions are, I
cannot but applaud the Contrivance of them: For could any thing be better
calculated for a Vulgar Capacity? How! says a Long-Acre-Artisan, am I as sure
that the Protestant Religion is true, as I am that I have cast up a Sum right?
Why then I am safe enough: I have cast up many a Bill, and have never been
mistaken yet, especially when I have taken care. And (it seems) this is done
without that supernatural Infallibility which the Papists talk of: And
therefore what need is there of it? This is a very pleasing Delusion with
People who care for no more Security in Religion than what will barely suffice
for the keeping their Consciences in some tolerable Quiet; and the more it
pleases them, the greater hazard I shall run of their ill will by endeavoring
to lay it open. However, because I am more intent on doing Benefits to them,
than desirous of receiving any from them, I will state the matter aright, and
by that means show them truly how the Case stands. They suppose already with
the Doctor, that the finding out of true Religion is like the casting up of a
Sum, and that Seekers in Faith are of the same quality with Accomptants in
Arithmetic. And now let them suppose with me, that twenty several Accomptants
were employed about casting up of the same Sum, and that the Life of each of
these in particular depended on his right Computation; that these Accomptants
were of equal capacity, and that in outward appearance they all used the same
diligence and application; and lastly, when their respective Computations were
finished, that their Totals were wholly different one from the other. We will
now suppose that the honest Artisan, whom I mention above, is one of these
Accomptants: What do you think? would he hold his Life secure, whilst he
differed in his Computation from Nineteen others, who had every way as
sufficient means of being in the right as himself? The Application is easy:
There are Twenty several Computers in Religion (I might say many Twenties) of
equal Skill and I say of equal Industry, that I may suppose most advantageously
for the Protestants. For in truth it cannot be allowed that their Industry in
Religion is equal to ours: Witness our Laborious and Dangerous Missions,
Penitential Retirements, the general obligation of Confession and doing
Penance, with much more which the Protestants have discarded.
Industry; Salvation depends on their being in the right; They all differ in
their Computations; The Church of England is one of these Computers, and it is
Nineteen to One that she is in the wrong; and this is all her Security. Let the
L. A. Tradesmen consider whether they would trust Five Pounds on the like. And
yet what is That (or indeed their whole Worldly Interest) compared to HEAVEN!

And now what is become of this Famous Answer, which wanted a Reply? Was it not
truly Froth, which looks like something, but vanishes whilst it is looked on?
These Gentlemen deal with their Clients, as Nurses do with little Children; bid
them hold fast, when they put nothing into their hands; and the poor Infants
are so long deceived, 'till their Curiosity, (or some other Appetite) prevails
with them to pry into their Treasure.

This was just such another Dr. St. 's second Letter to Mr. G., p. 17.
Purse as Dr. St. put into Mr. T.'s hand. Mr. T. desired to know, Whether the
Protestants were absolutely certain that they held all the same Doctrine that
was taught by Christ and his Apostles? Dr. St. undertook to show that they
were; and for proof says, that there was an absolute Certainty for the New
Testament from the concurrent Testimony of all Christian Churches, as well
Heretical as Orthodox; which is all he either said at the Conference, or
published since in his Letters to Mr. G. to prove that Protestants held all the
same Doctrine that was taught by Christ and his Apostles; and consequently the
Absolute Certainty which he delivered to Mr. T. was no more than what at the
same time he bestowed on the Note that the Arians and other Heretics take the
Scripture for their Rule of Faith, as well as Protestants.
Arians (who deny the Godhead of our Savior) and all other Heretics both
Ancient and Modern. Of the Arians you may say, That they are Absolutely Certain
they hold the same Doctrine that was taught by Christ and his Apostles, because
there is an Absolute Certainty for the New Testament; and so of the rest.
Wherefore, had Dr. St. when he made a Present of this Absolute Certainty to Mr.
T. been so ingenuous as to confess that what he then gave him was no more than
what Heretics possessed as well as he, viz. a Certainty of the New Testament, I
suppose he would not have been so well pleased with it as he seemed to be. And
therefore I would advise him to open his Mr. T. has the Paper he took at the
Conference, and may peruse it at leisure.
Purse once more, and try what he can discern in it. And if upon a second
Computation he finds himself no richer than an Arian, or any other Heretic, I
suppose he will return back to the Doctor for a better Legacy. For if we are
not as careful in laying up Spiritual Treasures; as we are in gathering
Temporal Ones, we may be Rich for a Moment, but we shall be Poor for a whole
Eternity. And here, though Mr. T. has great Reason to look about him, from what
has been said, (viz. that for any thing he learnt at the forementioned
Conference he is no surer that he is in the right than an Arian) yet I must
tell him, That this is not the worst of his Case, because whilst Dr. St. gives
him an Absolute Certainty for a part of Scripture from the Universal Testimony
or Tradition of Christians with one Hand, he takes it away with the Other, by
telling him that Tradition is no Infallible Conveyance of Matters of Faith. For
though the Doctor endeavors to reconcile this Contradiction in his Second Letter
to Page 33. Where the Dr. raises a Mist by telling us what his Adversaries
hold, that he may keep his own Contradiction out of sight. In his next let him
speak plainly, and tell us how he himself comes to hold, That Tradition is a
Ground of Absolute Ce^^ainty for the Scripture, and yet no Infallible
Conveyance in Matters of Faith; or let him deny that he holds these two
Propositions, or either of them.
Mr. G. yet I will leave it to Mr. T. to consider (provided he promise me to
take time for it) how well he has succeeded in his Undertaking.

THE CLOSE.
I Have now run through all those parts of both Dr. Tenison's Pamphlets which I
have thought fitting. I am not conscious to my self of any thing wherein I have
dealt unjustly by him, save only (it may be) in the want of that Negligence
wherewith he See his Epist* Ded. to his new Book.
threatens to do Justice upon Mr. P. Which piece of Justice if I have been
defective in hitherto, I shall be a more careful Observer of it for the future.
Only thus much I judged convenient to be said, that when I shall think it
reasonable to say less, the World may not be mistaken in the Cause of my
Silence. A moderate Defense (according to what I have said above) is due to
Truth; but when Calumnies grow excessive, they answer themselves by appearing
what they are.

It may be objected, That in some places of this rambling Discourse, I deliver
my sense somewhat more largely than I did at the Conference it self, whereas at
first I seemed to blame such proceeding. What I blamed was, that those who have
full Liberty in any Conference of speaking what, and as much as they please,
(especially by way of Argument) should afterward, when they pretend to give
Account of it, render their own Speeches more full and plausible than they
were, and yet represent them as truly spoken. This, I say, is what I blamed:
But on the other side, when either a man is wholly hindered from Answering, or
else cut short in his Answers by the Authority or Rudeness of his Adversary,
and when by that means most of what he has to say remains in petto; it is but
just he should have that freedom in the Press, which was denied him at the
Conference, provided that whatever is added on any Subject be related not as
what was, but as what would have been said, had an Opportunity been given. And
this I have taken care of.

I have already told my Readers after what manner Dr. Tenison dealt with me at
the Conference. He made his Applications to me as often and as fully as he
thought fit, excepting only when I withdrew to avoid them: But as for me, I was
to speak no longer than he pleased, (I must confess a most effectual way of
silencing) sometimes not a word, sometimes a few, but never so many as were
needful. Neither is this the first time that I have made this Complaint: I did
it at the Conference; and particularly, the Doctor may remember, I told him
there was no possibility of prosecuting any Argument, so long as he spoke all,
and heard nothing. I added, that this indeed became a Doctor, but not a
Disputant: My meaning was, That it was proper for one who was Teaching, but not
for one who was in the disagreeable Employment of Defending and Proving.

But though the Doctor's Interruptions were remarkable enough in all his
Discourses with me, yet they seemed to be more than ordinary a little before
the conclusion of our Conference: For when I perceived that our Disputations
had no other visible effect than the embittering of minds, and a farther
alienating of affections, I thought it not amiss, before we took our leaves, to
offer something that might tend to the calming and re-settling of our Spirits,
that so, though we came to no Agreement in our Religion, we might yet at least
part Friends and Well-wishers to one another. As soon as I opened my Mouth for
this purpose, the Doctor immediately stopped it: Not a word must pass. Sir, said
I, I am not going to Dispute, but only to take my leave, and would offer a word
that it may be amicably. No, it must not be; the Doctor is inexorable; and though
I attempted it three or four times, it was impossible for me to get above three
words over without an Interruption. Whether it were that the Doctor (out of his
great propensity to Ep. to his Parish. in his first Book.
suspicion) suspected that I would put an Argument upon him in disguise, or for
some other reason, I cannot yet tell: But I despaired of prevailing with him,
and so gave over my importunity.

What I should have said (had it been allowed me) was to this effect, That I
could not perceive our Meeting had been to any great purpose; That I would not
then dispute on whose side the fault lay, much less who were in the right, and
who in the wrong, as to Religion; That I desired we might, notwithstanding the
difference of our Opinions, live peaceably together; only at present I would
entreat them to consider, that whilst they imagined the Catholics to be
Mistaken, they themselves were but Men, and consequently as liable to Error as
their Neighbors; and therefore I would advise them in so important a Point as
That whereon their Eternal Salvation depended, that they would have recourse to
Almighty God, and earnestly beseech him, That if they were in the right, he
would confirm them in it; but if in the wrong, that he would bring them to the
right. This is all I would have said, and this (upon the word of a Christian) I
was not permitted to say; which I think is sufficient to show of what nature
the Doctor's Interruptions were.

But what I had no leave to say at the Conference, I speak here; and the
liberty of doing it makes some amends for all that trouble I have had, and all
those pains I have taken on this occasion: And could I be sure that my Counsel
would be followed, I should desire no farther Reward. Wherefore I earnestly
exhort my Protestant Readers, That for an Establishment in the true Faith they
would make their chief Applications to Almighty God, whose Ephesians. 2. 8.
Gift it is. Should I send them to Catholic Priests, their Prejudices might
perhaps make them think it unreasonable; should I send them to their own
Ministers, they might suspect a Gubbard, [or Papist in Masquerade] and at best
could hope but for a Fallible Director; should I send them to the Scripture,
what would it Unless by some plain Texts they are directed to an Infallible
Interpreter, as indeed they might be.
profit them, so long as they carry with them their own Fallible
Interpretation? Lastly, should I send them to Controversial Treatises, they
might complain of their tediousness and intricacy: I say, should I send them to
any of these things, they might find somewhat to be afraid of. But what
Apprehensions can they have, when I send them to Almighty God? This is an
Advice wherein there can be no danger but in not following it.

Wherefore (my dear Countrymen) I hope that you will neither hearken to the
Suggestions of Pride on the one hand, as if you needed not God's Assistance;
nor to those of Sloth on the other, as if earnest and persevering Prayer were
too dear a Purchase of it; but that fixing your Eye on that ETERNITY which lies
at stake, you will despise whatsoever either by Flatteries or Threatenings shall
strive to divert you from so necessary an Undertaking. I do not say that other
means are to be neglected, but I affirm that our chiefest Confidence is to be
placed in This: And this is always to be put in practice, that our other
Industries (whatsoever they be) may not prove ineffectual.

And lastly, when by following this Counsel you shall arrive at a solid and
immovable Faith, as I question not but you will, if you persevere in your Pious
Negotiation with such Sincerity and Diligence as are requisite to so Important
a Business; I beg of you that you would employ some of those Prayers on My
Behalf, which you have found so Beneficial to your selves, That as God has led
me ever since my Conversion through many other kinds of Adversities with
Safety, so now he would vouchsafe to assist me under this new Load of Calumny,
which his Providence (always-Good) has permitted to be laid upon me; giving me
Grace to bear it as I ought, and to Those who impose it, as much Felicity as I
wish to my self; and both to Them and Me (if it shall so please his Divine
Goodness) a joyful Reconciliation on Earth, and an Eternal Union in Heaven.

Edward Meredith.

THE POSTSCRIPT, In Answer to the Pamphlet put forth by the Schoolmaster of
Long-Acre.
AS for the Schoolmaster, (who has made my Name his Captive, and carried it, as
I suppose, in Triumph to the Pastry-men long before now) I shall say as little
to his Insincerities in Print, as, he says, I did to his Arguments at the
Conference: For though he has grossly Misrepresented me, yet at the same time he
has given the World so just a Representation of himself, that his
Misrepresentation is like to do me little harm.

He seems to be a man (as far as may be guessed by his Work) so equally
composed of Insincerity and Ignorance, that it is hard to tell which Ingredient
has the advantage; though for his sake I am willing to give it to the latter.

He represents me as one who several times interrupted Dr. T. in his
Disputation with Mr. P. A thing utterly false, and what Dr. T. himself (whose
Charity has not greatly appeared in covering our Faults) never complained of.
Nay, on the contrary, he confesses in his 6th page, That when Mr. T. had asked
him a Question, he turned from him before he would answer it, and expressly
applied himself to me.

He uses the same Ingenuity in the Account he gives of his two Discourses with
me conerning Images and Confession; which I shall endeavor to set right as
briefly as I can.

The first of Images passed in this manner: He had brought several of the
common Sophistries against the Use and Veneration of Holy Images, and received
Answers to them all. At length he urges, That it would be a Dishonor to God,
who is Infinite, to be represented by an Image, which is Finite. I replied,
That his Argument was stark naught; for by the same Reason we ought not so much
as to think of Almighty God, for we being Finite our selves, and all our
Faculties, we could make no other Representation of him in our Thoughts but
what was Finite. Ay but, says he, the nearer we come to the Nature of God, the
better. That, I told him, brought on a new Question, [viz. Whether the
Representing of God by an Image were remoter from his Nature than such other
Representations as are used?] but as for what he then affirmed (viz. That God
being Infinite, ought not to be represented by any thing that was Finite) he
might perceive that it was altogether false. My intention was to let him see
the Error of one Notion, before I proceeded to undeceive him in another; since
otherwise our Disputation would serve for no other purpose than making a noise.
I cannot tell whether the Schoolmaster understood what I meant by this Answer,
or not; but he replied nothing.

He seemed to me by his Behavior to be very self-conceited, and therefore I
took it for granted that it would be in vain to endeavor the convincing him by
Argument, unless I could first persuade him that it was possible for those
lofty Imaginations of his to be deceived. But because I concluded he had too
good an Opinion of his own abilities to humble himself before Men, I counseled
him to do it in the Presence of God, considering that (whatever he might fancy)
he was really no better than his Fellow Creatures; and if he thought others
Mistaken, he might, for ought he knew, be so himself. I added somewhat more of
the same nature, much according to that which (as I say above) I had designed
to have spoken at my parting with Dr. Tenison. He seemed to be well pleased
with what I said, and thanking me for it (as he says himself) went his way.

Whereas had he returned with his last Argument against Images, (viz. That we
ought to come as near as may be to the Nature of God in our Representations of
him) That also might have been answered as easily as any of the rest: For though
it may be granted that our Thoughts are immaterial, and therefore more
proportionable Representations of an immaterial Being, yet when we communicate
our Thoughts, (viz. these Mental Representations) to Others, we are forced to
make use of Material things: Of Air, when we speak; of Ink, or the like Matter,
when we write; of Wood, Stone, etc. when Letters are carved or engraven;
Lastly, of the same Materials, when we signify these Thoughts by Holy Signs or
Images. Now, since all these ways of Representing consist of material things,
it cannot be said that one of them comes nearer to the Divine Nature than
another. Neither indeed is it of any importance which way the Representation be
made, provided that which way soever it be made, the Viz. That which is
communicated to the Mind.
Representation be still the same; and therefore when an Holy Sign or Image
brings into my mind the same Thoughts concerning God which are brought by Words
spoken or Written, that Representation by an Image cannot be said to be farther
from his Nature, than this by Words; the Representation (or that which is
conveyed to the Mind) from both being perfectly the same. And therefore, when
that Symbolical Figure (used by Protestants as well as Catholics) of a Triangle
awakens in me the same Notion which the word Trinity would do, how comes there
to be a greater distance between the Figure and the Notion to which it
corresponds, than there is between the same Notion and the Word; the one doing
the same thing by the Eye, which the other does by the Ear?

And if (as has been said) the Representation by Images is the same with that
by words, there is no more reason why the Church should deprive her self of the
Former, than of the Latter, especially when she may speak to her Children by
Images in those places, (viz. in Highways, Markets, private Houses, and the
like) where she has no opportunity of doing it by Words, at least to such as
cannot or have not the time or will to read Inscriptions. And even in those
places which are set apart for Sermons or other Verbal Instructions or
Exhortations, the Church has no other way of perpetuating these Instructions
and Exhortations, but by Images, which are her constant The Doctrins of the
Blessed Trinity, of the Incarnation, Life, and Passion of our Lord; as also the
Consideration of Death, Judgment, Hell, Heaven, etc. being oftentimes brought
to our minds as movingly by Images, as by the most Eloquent Preachers.
Preachers and Catechists, and speak as often as they are looked upon.
Wherefore, to conclude, since Thought is the root of Action, the removal of
things so proper for the inspiring us with good Thoughts can be esteemed no
other than a Stratagem of the Devil, who is sure of keeping Goodness from our
Works, so long as he can keep it from our Minds. And if we consider what kind
of Pictures have succeeded to these Pious Ones in many Cabinets, we shall have
little cause to doubt on whose instigation the first Possessors were displaced.

It may be objected, That forasmuch as concerns Symbolical Figures, or any
Representation of God by an Image, it is probable they will misguide the
less-knowing, by making them think that God is such in Shape, or some other
Finite Quality as they find in the Picture. To which I answer, That there is no
more danger of this, than there is that the same Persons should be misguided by
reading those places of Holy Writ where God is represented as having Eyes,
Hands, Feet, and the like. The Schoolmaster perhaps will tell me, That such
Expressions as these are Metaphorical, and not Literal; and that the common
People are taught to understand them so: And he must give me leave to tell him
in return, That they have a like Lesson with us in respect of the forementioned
Images, and the same care that prevents their mistaking in one Case, will do it
in the other.

So much for the Schoolmaster's first Discourse. His second was concerning the
Secrecy of Confession, and much of the same strain with the former.

He asked me, Whether if Treason should be discovered to a Priest in
Confession, he were bound to reveal it? I told him, No; but on the contrary not
to reveal it. I added, That though the secrecy of this Sacrament might seem at
first sight (and particularly in this Case) to be prejudicial to the
Commonwealth, yet in Truth it was not so at all, but rather very profitable.
The first, because the Commonwealth loses no Discoveries by it; for were it not
for this obligation of Secrecy, Traitors would own their Crimes no more to
Priests, then they would do to other Men, that is, not at all, unless they
intended to make a Discovery, or hoped to find a Fellow-Conspirator. The
second, because where there is such Security of Confession, it is probable that
some of these Criminals, either through some remorse of Conscience, or some
imperfect desire of difengaging themselves, may disclose their Conspiracies to
Priests, and thereby give them opportunities of dehorting them from such
Villainous Undertakings, of encouraging them to such Discovery as shall be
necessary for the prevention of the Mischief, by showing them how they may do
it with safety, and helping them in it, and lastly, (when no such Discovery can
be obtained from their false Penitents) of doing all those things toward the
hindering of these evil Designs, which may be done without the violation of this
Trust. These certainly are great Advantages, and such as the Commonwealth would
be deprived of, were it not for the secrecy of Confession.

The Schoolmaster said, That Traitors must needs receive great encouragement
from such Confessions toward the Proceeding in their Treason; which was so
absurd a Notion, that, I must confess, I took my Antagonist to be somewhat
unsound in his Intellectuals, and therefore thought it would be but loss of
time to have any farther discourse with him. For what encouragement could he
think it to be, for the going on in one Crime to commit another, unless this
second should some way conduce toward the carrying on of the first? What
comfort can a Traitor have by adding Sacrilege (as his approach to this
Sacrament without Repentance would be) to his Treason? What new Incentives to
Villainy can such a Miscreant receive from those Dehortations and Menaces which
a good Priest ought to denounce against him on the part of Almighty God, if he
persist in his Wicked Undertaking? Lastly, What an odd encouragement must it be
in a Conspiracy to disclose it to one who (as the Conspirators ought to think)
will be sure to hinder the Design, as far he shall be able to do it without
discovering the Persons? I do not say but this Sacrament may be abused as well
as others; but I think that the Schoolmaster has hit on one of the most
fantastical ways of abusing it that ever could come into any man's Imagination.
And yet, if any one should have his Brain so strangely turned as to receive an
encouragement in his Treason by Confessing it, as the Schoolmaster supposes; a
good Institution is not to be laid aside, because there is a Madman in the
World.

You have here a true state of both my Discourses with this famous Gentleman.
How he has Misrepresented me in both. you may see, if you think it worth the
while, by comparing my Relation with his: But for my part, I do not owe you so
ill a turn, as that I should transcribe so much of him as is necessary for it;
especially since it will be needful for me to trouble you with some fragments
of his Discourse by and by.

So much for the Insincere part of this Paper, viz. its Mispresentations. I
come now to the Ignorance of it, which is in so great a proportion, that, I
confess, I have some scruple for laying any part of the blame on Want of
Sincerity, when the Ignorance, as it appears to me on second thoughts, would
have been sufficient to have born the Whole.

And in this point (according to what I intimated just now) I shall leave the
Schoolmaster to speak for himself, since none can do it more to purpose. The
good qualities of his Paper are conspicuous enough without a Commentator, and
he that runs may read them. Only I shall add a few Notes, for the sake of such
as (my Acquaintance with this Author convinces me) there are amongst us. And we
are Debtors (as I observed See above, P. 64. and sequ.
formerly) both to the Wise, and to the Unwise: And this being a Debt of
Charity, we owe the most where most is needed.

The Schoolmaster speaking, How Mr. P. had told him, That seeing God had
appeared to Daniel in the shape of an Old Man, he might be pictured, so that we
meant not to delineate him sub Specie propria, has these following words: To
this A. C. answered, (which our Adversary has concealed) That as for the Text
before us, what this Prophet saw, was only in a Vision, which was a
Representation of God's coming to Judgment, and fitted only to that particular
Occasion, and therefore ought not to be prostituted to all Intents and Purposes
whatsoever. Who says (I pray) that such Representations of Almighty God ought
to be prostituted to all Intents and Purposes whatsoever? Let the Schoolmaster
consider for what Intents and Purposes this Vision is recorded by the Holy
Ghost, and why the History of it is so often The History of this Vision is
permitted to be read by private persons, as often, and for such Intents and
Purposes as they please. Will the Schoolmaster say that it is prostituted?
read in our Churches, and then perhaps he will discern for what Intents and
Purposes such Representations are used by Catholics. But, says our subtle
Disputant, That was a Representation of God's coming to Judgment, and fitted
only to that particular Occasion. As if God might be represented as coming to
Judgment, but not as governing the World, pardoning Sinners, or in any other
Divine Action, and as if the Shape of an Old Man, wherein he was represented by
that Vision, has by Nature a greater relation to his coming to Judgment, than
to any other of those Works which I have mentioned. And this is the TREASURE
which the Schoolmaster complained that Mr. P. had concealed from the World.

He goes on; And then for the Lawfulness of Representing God, provided it was
not meant to do it sub Specie propria, A. C. answers now, (he confesses he did
not answer to this last part of the Objection at the Conference) Any one may
see (if he will but take a little pains) the vanity of this distinction; for if
God's Image be not given us sub Specie propria, with relation to his own
Essence, it is no more the Image of God, but the Sign of his Power which is
represented in the abovementioned Chapter of Daniel; His Throne was like the
fiery flame, etc. But suppose all our Disputant says were true, what comfort
could it be to a poor Soul, who is charged with dishonoring God, who is
Infinite, by representing him by an Image that is Finite, and terminated by
Visible Dimensions, to be told by Mr. P. That he does not dishonor God, because
he has no intention to represent him, sub Specie propria? What think you, does
this famous piece of Logic need a Comment? If God's Image, says he, be not
given us sub Specie propria, with relation to his own Essence, it is no more the
Image of God, but the Sign of his Power, which is represented in the
abovementioned Chapter of Daniel. Mighty subtle! If that which is exhibited by
Catholics, as God's Image not sub Specie propria, be not God's Image, as the
Gentleman says, why are we accused for making God's Image? But if it be, then
the Gentleman is in the wrong. However it is to be understood that such a
Representation is not God's Image properly, (for so much is meant by our saying
that it is not sub Specie propria) but Symbolically, or in the Nature of a
Sign, as he himself speaks, without understanding what he says.

But the Representation in Daniel 's Vision was a Sign of God's Power, and not
of his Essence. A little above it was a Representation of God's coming to
Judgment; now, it seems, it is not of God's coming, but of his Power's coming.
This will be sine sense by and by.

Besides, how comes God's Power to be more capable of being represented than
his Essence? Are not both Infinite alike; and therefore what dishonors the One,
will it not be an equal disrespect to the Other? Wherefore if the Schoolmaster
allow that God's Power may be signified by an Image, he must not deny but that
his Essence may. But indeed there is nothing in God but what is God, and
therefore his Power and his Essence are the self-same thing. Had our
Disputant's Divinity reached so far, it might easily be imagined that he would
not have endeavored to evade this Instance of Daniel's Vision by telling us
that God's Power was represented there, but not his Essence.

But suppose, quoth he, all our Disputant says were true, what comfort could it
be to a poor Soul who is charged with dishonoring God, who is Infinite, by
representing him by an Image that is Finite, and terminated by Visible
Dimensions, to be told by Mr. P. that he does not dishonor God, because he has
no intention to represent him sub Specie propria? Mr. P. says, It is lawful to
represent God by an Image, provided it be not meant sub Specie propria:
Wherefore if all the Schoolmaster 's Disputant says be true, what discomfort
could it be to a poor Soul to do so? And why does the Schoolmaster beg the
Question, by supposing (without proof) that a poor Soul will be charged with
dishonoring God, for representing him by an Image? As for his Infinite and his
Finite I have spoken to them already.

A word or two more, and the Schoolmaster shall hold his peace: For because A.
C. said not this [viz. what is here repeated] at the Conference, he does intend
to add but one word or two more. And first, That he might here observe, that if
it were granted that we might picture each of the Three Persons of the B.
Trinity apart; That this could be no Argument at all for its resembling it (the
Trinity) because such resemblances do not only make Three Persons, but Three
Gods; such Images as these represent not only a Distinction of Persons, but a
Diversity of Substance. I leave our Jesuit to think of this. I believe this
Philosopher is shrewdly puzzled when he looks on some of our Sheet-Almanacs: On
his right hand he sees an Old man with Wings, and on his left a Serpent biting
his Tail. He is told that the first is a Symbol of Time, the second of a Year.
Now by deep Speculation he discerns that Time is a mere Accident, and that a
Year is nothing else but such a parcel of Time, and consequently as much an
Accident as the former, or rather the self-same with it. Next he ponders how
these two things (viz. the Old man and the Serpent) which are brought to
signify Time and a Year, do represent two living Creatures, and consequently
do not exhibit Accidents only (which is what they ought to do) but even
Substances also, and this is to outrun the Constable. To conclude, he either
blames the Painters, (as I suppose) or knows not what to make of the business.
I leave him to think of this; and I promise my self that when he has sound out
the Mystery, as also how the Appearances of Bodies represent Angels who have
none, and how the Virtues, Vices, Death, Eternity, (where by the way he may
note that an Infinite is represented by a Finite) and suchlike things are
painted: when, I say, he has discovered all this, I question not but he will
begin to understand how a Trinity of Persons may be signified by a Figure
without any necessity that such Figure should also signify a Trinity of
Substances. Such Signs as these, (though they have some Foundation in Nature) are
of the quality of Words, and signify just as men agree they shall.

And now having dissipated the Schoolmaster's Sophistry, it will be an harder
Task to defend my self for having taken any notice of him. Indeed I had fully
purposed to have left him in the quiet possession of all that Glory he had
obtained (at least in fancy) by his Pamphlet; but espying the Name of my Lord
Archbishop's Chaplain in his Title Page, I thought I could do no less than
accept of him for an Enemy whom so great a Person had thought worthy of being a
Champion. But what respect I have now paid to this Gentleman's Name, I hope he
will have for it himself for the future, and not prefix it where it is so
little for his Credit; otherwise I shall think my Complement very ill bestowed,
and have just occasion of forbearing it another time.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
NOt having Dr. Jackson's Works by me whilst I penned what the Reader finds in
my 41th. page, I am afraid on second thoughts, that the obscurity wherewith Dr.
T. quoted a passage out of that Author may have misled me; so that whereas I
imagined his meaning to be, That the Church of England was in the Church of
Rome before Luther, and still continues in it; I begin to think be only means,
That it was in the Church of Rome before Luther, and nothing more. It matters
not much which way soever he means. However even this latter meaning is
sufficient for my purpose in that place: For if this Church of England, whose
Being we enquire after, were in the Church of Rome before Luther, it must be in
it still; because a Church holding Communion with Rome cannot be the same with
one separating from it; and therefore if the Church of England acknowledge her
self to be separated from the Church of Rome, she cannot be the same with that
which held Communion with it, and consequently it must not be said, That she
was in the Church of Rome before Luther, since she is not the same with that
which was so; for, at least, this present Church of England differs from that
former one by her Separation, whatever she does otherwise.


