A MESSAGE FROM The King of Scots, TO HIS SISTER The Princess of Orange.

Printed at the Hague. And A Letter to the Lord General Cromwell, concerning the
Earl of Cleveland, Col Blague, and diverse other Officers. The raising of a new
Army in Scotland, for their King, by the Marquess of Argyle; With a Lettter
from the Earl of Newcastle; Ordered to be burned.

ALSO, A true Relation of the sad and wonderful inundation of waters that
befell the famous Town of Bilbo in Spain; showing the manner how it rained for
24 hours together, the water pouring down the Mountains with such a strong
torrent, that it broke down the houses, drowned all their Mules, Sheep, and
Cattle, filled their Iron-Mines, over-turn'd their Mills, brake down the Wharf,
and carried all their Ships into the Sea, dismanted whole Woods, leaving not a
Tree standing, beat down the Fowl in the Air, and destroyed many Families.

Sent to Mr. Jacob a Merchant, living in Fleet Street.

Imprinted at London for Geo: Horton* 1651.

THE KING OF SCOTS MESSAGE TO THE Northern Counties, and his Sister the
Princess of Orange.
Right Honorable,
WHereas it has pleased God to honor the Parliaments Forces with
extraordinary success in England, as the effect of Gods mercy, and the
consequent of good Order and Discipline; so likewise His Divine Majesty has
been pleased to add a further Trophie of Conquest to his Servants in Scotland;
and to make them instrumental of breaking the host and power of his Enemies.
For on the 17 of this instant, we fell upon the Scots now Levies in the West,
and after a sharp dispute, gave them a great Defeat, killed about 300 on the
place, and took diverse prisoners. Yet notwithstanding, we hear that the
Marquess of Argyle is raising Forces, and so are diverse Shires in the West, and
in the North. A good Force, and a good Council might do well to reduce and
settle this Land. As for their King, No man can tell what is become of him: so
that its probable, his former demonstrations will now produce a Verification;
for upon his advance for England, He sent a Letter to the Gentry of Cumberland,
and Westmerland; intimating, That he had left Scotland, with a Resolution never
to return thither any more; and had cast himself upon his good Subjects of
England; leaving the event and success thereof to God.

This week we received an Express from the Low Countries, containing
Occurrences of very great consequence, printed at the Hague in Holland; a Copy
whereof follows:

THe King of Scots grows every day more formidable th^n other, and marched
without opposition, in great have toward his chief City of London, being within
a days march of it with four score thousand Horse and Foot. This great news
has since been confirmed from Ter-Veer in Zealand, brought thither by an
Expres^ sent by the said King to his Sister the Princess of Orange: with this
addition, That on Thursday the 28 of August, at ten of the clock in the
forenoon, the said King had made his Triumphant Intrado into London, whose he
was received with the greatest acclamation that possibly could be expressed: As
also that two ships were arrived at Roterdam with Parliament Men flying to save
their lives. The English at the Spa, and other places in Holland, have lately
had a day of Jubilee; and to ratify the truth of their frantique-joy, gave
out, that the king of Scots had a more formidable power in England then ever
his Father had; that he increased like a snow ball in his march ( but I am
certain he dissolved as fast in his Retreat) and that the Citizens in most
places set open their Gates. From Ireland, We he^r that Limerick is even upon
their knees: gladly would they accept of the first Offers of my Lord Deputy;
for they have many division among themselves which will necessitate them to a
surrender: On the 25 of August they made a sally upon our Guards with 1000
foot, and 300 horse: We had a dispute with them for an hour, killed of them
above 80, and wounded many: we have 9 slain, and 35 wounded: Clare Castle is
blockt up, and Galloway much straightned.

The Lord still direct and protect the Parliament and council of State; and
give the godly in the Land eyes to see, and hearts seriously to consider what
dreadful dangers, and grievous inconveniences they have run themselves into,
by refusing to own, and be faithful unto those whom God in much mercy has set
in authority over us, and under whose authority we may (if we will) lead a
godly and peaceable life.

From Holland it is certified as follows,

SIR,
WHen Captain Beck was at Rotterdam with his Ship, the Vice Admiral of Holland
was ready to come to sea, but where it could not be told, nor at that present
understood. There were two French Ships that did come in thither for convoy for
France, and they had two convoyes granted them: And some of our friends there
heard some discourse between the French and Hollanders, to this p^rpose: The
French men did say, That there was a Parliament Dog in the Harbor meaning Cap:
Becks ship): The Dutch men answered, that they would hoyst him in if they
should meet him at Sea: Cap: Beck was forc^d to come with his Convoy hither,
and left them at the Brill.

From the West Indies we hear that the Lord Willoug^by seems to have an
inclination for the surrender of that place.

Yarmouth 19 September. 165^

By Letters from Portsmouth we have received an account of the prosperous
success of the good ship called the Tiger: a Copy whereof follows:

SIR,
THese are to acquaint you, That God by his good grace and hand of Providence,
has brought us out of the Straights in safety, unto the Port of Portsmouth,
with the Angel Captain Rand, and the Bonadventure Captain Hoxton, and one
Merchants ship in Convoy, laden with Currants and Silk: And likewise at the Bay
of Bulls at my going into Cales, I had intelligence of a Frigot there riding,
which came from France laden with linen cloth, the which I did surprise: All
her cloth being delivered, I found in her about 20000 Dollars of pieces of
Eight, Spanish Moneys: besides a good quantity of Bars of Silver, and some
Barrels of Cochenel; and Bills of Lading assigned for St. Mallows and Ross in
France: Which moneys, and the Silver, I have on board the Tiger, and as for
the Frigot, she has ten pieces of Ordnance in her.

A Letter from the Governor of Stafford to the Lord General Cromwell, came as
follows:


May it please your Excellency,
WE have purposely sent up the bearer hereof to give you an account of the
persons both English and Scots with us here in the Garrison, with the names and
conditions of them, amongst whom is Colonel Blague, formerly Governor of
Wallingford, whom amongst others, as they passed through this Country, was
taken by this bearer and brought hither: also the Lord of Cleveland, Maj.
Galbreth, with many other Officers, Gentlemen, and common soldiers, above
three hundred.

Your Excellencies most humble servant, H. DANVERS.


My Lord,
YOur Lordships Letter by Creswel is so nobly kind, friendly, and so wise
council, as it is too big for my pen, ink, and paper, only it has made me all
over thankfulness, and that is as much as I can either say or do. For my estate
they are now selling of it, it is against all the old tenants that I should be
a traitor and rebel, and all my estate confiscate, and I to be hanged without
mercy. My Lady Oneal and my self sitting in council, like provident parents,
agreed upon a match between my son Harry and her daughter, and gravely
articled, bought 18 penny worth of Ribond for the wooing the old Lady a lean
Chickin in a pipkin for the dinner, with three preserved Cheries, and 5 drops
of Syrup by them for the banquet, etc. With other particulars of a very strange
nature,

Dated from Antwerp. And subscribed, W. Newcastle.


From the ancient and famous town of Bilbo, by letters to several London
Merchants, it is certified, that there has happened a great inundation of
waters; an exact Copy follows:

Sir, On the 8 of this instant Aug. here happened an accidence of very amazing
consequence, and as sad an inundation as has befell in any part of Europe these
many years; the manner thus: It rained by fits almost 24 hours together, and
very great were the showers; so that at the last, there came pouring down the
Mountains such a torrent of waters, that in 4 hours time the water was 16 foot
high in our houses: insomuch that most of the goods in Cellars and Warehouses
were utterly spoiled: the stream was of such a force, that it bare down many
strong houses, and levelled them with the ground; and had it not bin for the
great Church at the end of the bridge which did break the impetuosity of the
fall, it had undoubtedly swept away the whole town. It has drowned all our
Mules, Hogs, sheep, and other cattle, filled our Iron Mines, over-turned our
Mills, carried away all our stores of Charcoal, broke down our Wharf, that
there is no sign of it left, carried away all our ships, Barks, and Ligh^ers
into the sea, dismantled whole Woods, that there is not so much as a shrub
left, undermined the very graves, so as to give forth their dead, beat down the
fowls in the air, yet has not destroyed many persons that we can hear of. This
place is totally undone, and of the sweetest place in Spain, is now become the
noysomst in the world: we all gave our selves up for dead men, for we had no
visible refuge: the Lord give us hearts to be living Monuments of his praise.
It is to be observed, that this happened on a day dedicated to a great
Romish-supersticious Procession; but now the Images and Altars in the Churches
are all demolished by the waters.

FINIS.

