DIRECTIONS FOR THE Latin Tongue.

BY The Translator of Religio Medici.

LONDON, Printed for Benj. Took, at the Ship in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1681.

THE PREFACE.
LIttle or nothing needs more be said to recommend these ensuing Sheets to the
Judicious or the Curious, besides acquainting thee that the Author of these
Directions was the Translator of Religio Medici into Latin; and by being so,
has given an undeniable evidence of his skill and mastery in both Languages:
It was not thought decent to the memory of that Great Man, especially some time
since dead, to place his Name without either his leave or knowledge, before so
small a tract; which was designed by him for nothing but private directions to
his own Pupils above twenty years ago; but as transcribed by as many as had
heard of it, or could procure it: And had it not fallen into the hands of an
Ingenious and Learned Person, who had more Charity for the Public, than to
suffer such judicious and accurate Directions to remain concealed in a few
private hands, it had been in a short time lost for ever. This manner of
writing is plain and familiar, condescending to the meanest capacity, but the
subject matter of it weighty and judicious, and some of the Observations are
unusual and peculiar. After the first difficulties of Grammar are conquered,
you will not easily meet with a better Guide through the best Authors of the
purer Latin Age; nor a better Director to imitate as well as unstand them. The
public and famous Schools amongst us, where the Learned Languages are most
exactly taught, and without all Pedantry, will find the design of this to be
manly, and so most agreeable with their own: Nor will it be below the careful
perusal of the younger Students in the Universities. If it may be of use to any
in public or private, it has obtained its end; if not, there will be but
little money misspent in the purchase, and less time in the perusal.

SOME DIRECTIONS FOR THE BETTER LEARNING OF THE Latin Tongue,
Praeceptor. Discipulus.

Dis. SIR, you have often exhorted me, and urged me to take pains to make my
self a good Latinist, I desire that you would set me in a way for the
attainment thereof, and I my self (God willing) shall employ my best endeavors
therein.


P. I am very glad to hear you say so* and on my part nothing shall be wanting,
which may further your desire. But first tell me what you mean by good Latin,
for there are not a few which spend much time in pursuit of it, and yet never
know what it is; like him that went into the Garden to look Celandine, and knew
it not when he saw it.


D. Sir, I must needs acknowledge my self to be one of that number, for one
while I thought I made good Latin, when I could patch together a great many
hard uncouth words, or unusual Phrases, out of the most crabbed Authors into
Theams and Orations: another while having heard one that was esteemed a very
good Scholar say that such Latin was pedantick, conceited and ridiculous, and
that that was the best Latin that was composed of such Words and Phrases as
were found in the most approved Latin Authors, whereupon I set my self to read
Tully, Virgil, Seneca, etc. gathering out all the best Phrases as I went along,
yet I have since heard you say that one may do all this, and be far from a good
Latinist.


P. I can easily excuse your ignorance in that particular, having known many,
and they not highly graduated in the University, as far to seek in this
particular, as you are, if not farther. I shall by and by inform you what you
are to understand by good Latin, in the mean time though you do not know what
good Latin is, yet I suppose you know what Latin is.


D. Sir, I think there are few Scholars but they know that.


P. Not so few Scholars as you imagine, I do not doubt but that you are better
instructed, and more ingenious than to be ignorant, that it is a Language, and
that Language which was used in Italy some Ages ago, as Italian is now used
there, or as Spanish is now used in Spain, French in France, English in England.


D. Sir, so I conceive it to be, though indeed I can yet remember the time when
I looked upon Latin as nothing else but a Book full of hard words, to be
construed, declined and conjugated, with Rules given for them out of the
Grammar, not knowing any other end or use in them.


P. Answer your self that there are not a few in the world which never raise
their Learning or Understanding so high as to cast off that Notion which you
had then of it, I could name one to you who is Master of Arts, and beneficed in
the Country, who (I having occasionally said, that Tully was happy that learned
Latin at his Mothers breast, not needing to spend eight or nine years at the
Grammar School for it, as we ordinarily do) replied seriously that he conceived
Tully learned as we do, and that it was never vulgarly spoken as we speak
English. I could name you another who was of far greater standing, and a far
greater Divine, one that leads whole Towns after him by the ears, as Orpheus
did Trees and Stocks: who when I told him upon his demanding of it, that they
had not the same Grammar in the Low Country Schools which we have in England,
said surely then they did not use such kind of Latin as we did. I could relate
several passages of many others, to show you what strange fancies some have of
Latin, but I hasten to what I propounded, this is enough to let you see that I
had some reason for it, when I asked you what you understood by Latin, which
you rightly conceive to be a Language as English is, in times past, though not
at the present, used in Italy, as English is in England.


D. And that Latin is now changed into Italian, now used in Italy instead of
it, as the old Saxon Language once used in England, is changed by degrees into
this present Language we now have, so that Saxon is as it were old English, and
Latin old Italian.


P. Right, well then, if Latin be a Language, then have you no better way to
judge of the nature of it, and the manner how to learn it, than by some other
Language which you know already.


D. Sir, I know no other but English, and a little Greek.


P. You desire to know what good Latin is.


D. Yes, Sir.


P. First then, do you know what good English is? for if you know the one, you
may (as I said) judge of the other by it.


D. I suppose a man is said to speak good English when he can express himself
in significant words, good Language and expression.


P. What do you call good Language?


D. When a man uses elegant words, and queint expressions, and writes good
lines.


P. If your Friend come to your Chamber and say, Sir, I would desire you to
lend me your Virgil for an hour or two, and I shall send it safe back, whether
does he speak good English or no?


D. Yes, Sir, it were English good enough, but it is not such as we usually
call good English, when we say a man speaks good English or so.


P. You perhaps would count it better English, if he come unto you, and say
unto you, Most esteemed and worthy Sir, I come here an humble Suitor to your
courteous ingenuity, that you would be pleased to accommodate me with the
ingenious Works of incomparable Virgil, but only so long as till Phoebus have
traveled two hours forward to his evening repose, after which period of time
it shall have a speedy and a safe return to your self again.


D. Sir, this is such as I mean, but if my friend should use such language to
me upon this occasion, I should rather laugh at his simplicity than commend his
good English.


P. What, because he uses it upon this occasion.


D. I, Sir, I suppose the former would be a great deal better English upon this
or the like occasion.


P. So then, you grant the other to be good English in this place, though it be
but plain and homely.


D. The better because it is plain.


P. Plain English is good English then in its due place.


D. I see it is, but what do they mean when they say such a man or such a man
speaks good English: or why should one man be said to speak better English than
another, seeing there is no body but can speak as good as this?


P. If you take good English in your sense that speak so, you should rather
call it good Language than good English, for the one is as good English as the
other, but the one is not so good Language as the other, i. e. not so queint
and elevated a style, which queintness and loftiness of style is not proper in
all places, as you have partly understood already, but either in a set Speech
or written Book, seldom in a Letter, and seldomer in common discourse: but of
this more hereafter, for the present it is enough, that you grant that the
first plain English as you call it, is good English, and better than the other
in its place, though not so elevated a style.


D. It is clear that it is so.


P. So then, he that writes or speaks as good Latin as this is English, writes
and speaks good Latin, though never so plain if in its due place.


D. I am forced to grant it.


P. Is this the good Latin then which you desire to learn.?


D. That, Sir, I suppose I can do already indifferent well with such plain and
easy Latin as that, my desire is, how I may write queint, elegant Latin in
lofty style.


P. Before you come to that I see I must rectify your judgment concerning this
plain easy Latin, as you term it, which, howsoever it be plain, yet it is not
so easy as you and many beside you think it is, there are a great many who can
make a shift to make a Theme or Oration, or a Paper of Verses in this kind of
elegant Latin, who if they should be put to tell a Story, or make a Dialogue,
or hold a Discourse, or any such like matter, which requires a plain familiar
style, would be at a loss in every clause.


D. Sir, I cannot conceive how they that can write and speak elegant and queint
Latin, and Phrase, should be unable to speak plain ordinary Latin.


P. I shall endeavor as well as I can to make you conceive it, and convince
you that it is so. You must know that in an elegant style there is a great
latitude and variety of expression, so as when you have a word or Phrase which
you think is mean and bald, you can change it for another, and that for
another, and vary the same conception if need be a hundred several ways, till
you light upon an expression which pleases you, because this kind of Latin
chiefly depends upon the fancy and tropical expressions, which are infinite. In
plain and familiar Latin it is not so, for in that there is but one, or at
least not many, and the certain and definite Phrases, and forms of Speech for
such and such occasions, which if you do not use, you speak improperly, and
consequently bad Language: as for example. If upon the former occasion of
borrowing your Virgil, one should say thus to you, my Friend, I do desire you
that you shall lend to me the Works of Virgil, to one or two hours, and I will
give it unhurt to you again. Were this good English, or not?


D. Certainly it is not.


P. Why, what is the reason? The words are all good English words, they are
joined together grammatically, and in their right signification; what is the
reason that they are not good English?


D. Sir, I can give no other reason, but that it is not proper and usual to
speak so.


P. But suppose a Forreigner as a Frenchman, or Italian were learning English,
how shall he know that it is not proper, nor usual to speak so? or if that it
be not proper, how shall he know what is proper? Not by his Grammar, for they
are all grammatically set together, nor by his Dictionary, for that is the
proper and usual signification of the words. How shall he know how to speak
properly?


D. Methinks he should not ever happen upon such an uncouth expression, but
having consulted his Grammar and Dictionary, should without any more to do say,
Sir, I would desire you to end, and c.


P. You think so, because it is your own Mother Tongue, and you by long use and
custom have been so used to this, and no other Phrase upon this subject, that
all other seem uncouth to you, but to convince you that it is far otherwise
than you imagine, you must know that Language in it self (as I told you even
now when I spoke of a queint and elegant style) is in some manner infinite,
there being almost no sentence or form of Speech which may not be changed an
hundred several ways, all which ways in a queint and elegant style are
indifferent to be made use of, because there none of them is used more than
another, and the less they are used the better: but in a plain familiar style
which we are now speaking of, is one, or some few of this large variety in use
and propriety, and the rest are never meddled with, seeming as uncouth and
strange, as our proposed examples, which you say you suppose no man could
happen upon. Tell me this, seeing every thing may be expressed so many ways,
and seeing some few of the ways are only proper, because they only are in use,
the rest remain uncouth and strange, Do you think that all Nations have made
choice of the same sorms, and expressions to be in common use, and agreed
together which should be rejected?


D. It were impossible that they should, for how should we that speak English
know what Phrases they have made choice of to be in common use in France, Italy
or Spain? or what are the common Phrases in German, Turkish, or Persian
Language, and as impossible would it be for them to know what ours are.


P. So that now you must confess that if one of any of these Nations should
come to learn our Language, and know the signification of all English words,
yet he might fall upon as uncouth a Phrase as that which I propounded.


D. I am now convinced that he may, for how shall he know that these are in use
more than any other in our Language? having one perhaps clear differing from
ours in his own Language, and probably ours will seem as strange to him as his
does to us.


P. No question but it will. But this which you rightly apprehend, will be more
clear by an instance or two. Suppose Latin were spoke in Italy, as once it
was; here comes one of that Country into England, and Latin is the Language.
He has desire upon occasion to speak the same in effect, which we have already
propounded for an example. The manner of speech in use in his Language for the
purpose is this. Rogo te, Amice, mihi Virgilium tuum ad horam unam aut alteram
utendum des and eum tibi reddam integrum. Which he will probably translate into
our Language, knowing no other way to utter his mind in particular, so that he
willcome to you and say. I entreat thee, my Friend, that thou may give to me
to be used thy Virgil, to one hour or another, and I shall render him to you
entire.


D. I cannot indeed well conceive how he should speak any otherwise, being
ignorant of our usual manner of speech in this particular; but surely we should
count it very strange English.


P. If a Frenchman should come he would have some other kind, which yet would
differ as much from our English, and seem as strange, the same you may
understand of an Italian, of a Spaniard, of a Dutchman, or any other
whatsoever, all would be different, and all uncouth. A Frenchman would say, My
Master, I pray you of lending me your Virgil for an hour or two, and c. A
Dutchman would say, Do me though ( amabo) your Virgil an hour, two, three, and
I will give you it back again unhurt. Then see how these differ both from one
another, and you need not think there is less variety in the rest. The same
variety will appear in any other phrase. If a Latinist should ask you how you
do, i. e. salute you at the first meeting, he would say, according to his own
Dialect, Salve Amice, Be safe Friend. A Frenchman would say, Good day, my
Master, how do you bear your self? An Italian, How stands your Lordship? or how
stand you? A Dutchman, Good day my Master, how goes it with your health?
whereas they must say, if they would speak good English, How do you do Sir, I
am glad to see you well; for the other are their familiar expressions, and this
is ours. By what I have said you see that the same thing may be expressed with
infinite variety, and that some few of those ways are used in a Language, and
all the rest are obsolete and uncouth. So that to the perfect knowledge of a
Language is required (besides the signification of the words, and the
grammatical joining them together) that you acquaint your self with the use and
custom of a Language, by observing what manner of Phrases and Forms of Speech
are used in it, upon such occasions and in such subjects, which is the
business, the greatest labor that belongs to a Language. This propriety and
use of such and such Phrases, is called the Idiom or Propriety of a Tongue, and
such manner of usual Phrases and Expressions are called Idiotisms, and he that
has attained to that perfection in any Tongue, that he can use these in their
due places, without uncouth and unusual Phrases, is said to speak pure, i. e.
properly, or as we say, for example, good English, good Latin, good French, or
the like. And now having told you what good Latin is, it remains that
according to your desire I give you some directions for the attaining of it.


D. I perceive that I have a greater business in hand than I dreamed of, for
the attainment of Latin. I thought that now being an indifferent Grammarian,
and able (as I supposed hitherto) to make a piece of ordinary Latin
indifferent well, I had not wanted much of a perfect Latinist, but now I see
plainly that there is yet such a task for me behind, before I can arrive ever
to write good plain ordinary Latin, that I am ready to despair of attaining to
it.


P. Why should you say so?


D. Why Sir? Because I see as you have convinced me that every Language, and
particularly Latin, has for every particular occasion and conception, a
peculiar phrase, and idiom different to all ours; all which to observe and be
acquainted with, considering the multitude and multiplicity of occasions,
subjects, and conceptions that will occur, must needs be too long a task to be
performed in any reasonable time, or pains.


P. If that be all, take a good heart; do but take along with you a
consideration or two, which I shall give you, and you will confess the
difficulty is not so great as you imagine it to be at the first sight. First
then, you must know that a great part of this long task which you so fear, is
over already: you have with your first Rudiments, taken in a great many of
these Idiotisms, in learning your Grammar and other School Authors; and for
what is still behind, assure your self, that one quarter of a year well
employed in the way which I shall set you, will dispatch so much of it, that
the remainder will be delightsome, and such as may be pursued with pleasure.
Again, you must know that very few do ever attain to such an exactness, no not
in their own Mother Tongue, as to be acquainted with the several Idiotisms
thereof; but as he is best which knows most, so he may be accounted a Master
for perfection in a Language, who knows so much as he can express himself in
proper phrase, at least in some measure, upon any subject whatsoever: not (I
say) as though any one could know them all, for there are many times several
expressions, not a few* and all proper and usual for the same thing; all which
you will not stand in need of, but only one or two of the choicest and most
received.


D. What Books will you have me to read, to observe those Idiotisms out of?


P. That was the next thing which I intended to instruct you in; you have
already seen that good Language and good Latin are several things.


D. I have so, and conceive that I must first learn to make good Latin, and
then good Language, or elegant Latin.


P. That must undoubtedly be the way, and here it is clear, that in common
Schools they go preposterously to work, that make Latin first, or at least
their chiefest exercises; for their Scholars Theams and Verses, which require
elegancy as well as propriety; whereas they should at first exercise them well
in a plain and proper style, by making Epistles or Dialogues, or telling of
Stories and making Relations, by which they might learn to speak purely and
properly upon every subject; for when they can do that, elegancy of speech will
come of it self, being a thing that depends upon fancy and invention; for by
this preposterous course of theirs, it comes to pass, that if you put one of
those who have been taught after this method, to make a Theme or a Speech, they
will bring you a piece of stuff, patcht up of several expressions, scraped
together out of Poets and Orators, which, if every Bird had its own feather,
would have nothing left, but here and there a bald Anglicism; and if you put
them to write an Epistle of any familiar matter, or make a relation of some
occasional subject, you will quickly see how far they are from good Latinists;
for there you shall have nothing of them but English phrases in Latin words,
unless they can bring in ever and anon one of their Oratorical or Poetical
expressions, which is very incongruous to the matter.


D. I must needs confess that it is as you say, but would you not have Scholars
taught to write elegant Latin as well as proper.


P. Remember to ask me of that again by and by, I will first dispatch what I am
in hand withal, about plain and proper Latin, which I say must first be
learned, before you learn elegancy of speech. If you were to teach one of these
Strangers (which I mentioned) English, would you first teach him to write
strong lines, as we call them, before he could use proper expressions?


D. Methinks that is as if one should go about to teach a Child to dance before
you teach it to go.


P. A Musician must first learn Plain song before he come to Division and
Discant. A Limner must first learn to draw before he learn to paint: and a
Linguist must first learn to speak in usual and proper phrase, before he come
to a queint style, and strong lines; but I promised to tell you what Authors
must be read for gaining this propriety of phrase which must first be aimed at.


D. I Sir, I pray do so.


P. They first then in this kind are all Tullys works, except his Orations.


D. May I read any of the other works indifferently?


P. No, there must be choice used in them too; his Epistles are the plainest,
and are most fit for this purpose, containing in them all manner of subjects
incident, and consisting of a plain and familiar style, such as we use in
common discourse. The other, as his Offices, De senectute, de amicitia, de
natura Deorum, de finibus, de oratore, Tuscul. Questions, do now and then rise
above a quotidian style, which is easily discernable: Among these you may choose
out such subjects as you desire most to benefit your self in; as for example,
If you desire to be well furnished with expressions for Disputations, which is
a thing very necessary and commendable, take his Tusculan Questions, where he
brings in mere disputing Dialoguewise, and so in other subjects.


D. Pray Sir, why do you except his Orations? for none are more usually read in
Schools than they.


P. The Orations are of a quaint and lofty style, and yet not to be meddled
with, till you have made good progress in the first kind of Latin; and
whosoever would have their Scholars learn Latin out of them sooner, and indeed
before they be better grounded than they usually are in common Grammar Schools,
will never make good Latinists.


D. You have already given me convincing reasons for that: What other Books do
you commend besides Tully?


P. Tully alone were almost sufficient, being so large and full of variety for
all manner of subjects: But yet for diversity, and to supply what is wanting in
him for common ordinary talk, Terence, or Erasmus his Colloquies, the first
especially for all manner of familiar discourse; the latter both for telling of
Stories and Relations; and for discourse, which to do well, is one of the most
difficult things in a Language. To these, it would not be amiss to add a Book
or two of Caesar's Commentaries, which will fit you with all propriety of speech
concerning Soldiery, Wars, descriptions of Countries, and other terms of
History, which you will scarce find so conveniently in any other: For as he
calls his Book a Commentary, that is, a Journal or short relation of passages;
so he is content to make a bare relation of the carriage and managery of his
own War, with several other Occurrences, without any quaintness of Phrase, or
flourishes of Rhetoric, the only impediment of learning a Language.


D. You have told me what Books I must read, I would now desire you to give me
some rules for the profitable reading of them.


P. That I shall scarce need to do, if you have well observed what I have
already told you concerning the nature and propriety of a Language; it will be
necessary in this reading of Authors, for the better observing the Idiom of
every sentence and form of speech, to turn it into English as you go along,
comparing it with the idiom of your own Language, and noting their difference
down in a Paper-book for that purpose, as often as you meet with any thing
observable, that is, with any thing you did not know before, or which you might
have failed in, had you been to make that into Latin, without the knowledge of
that Latin Idiotisme; as for example, read me any Sentence out of your Terence.


D. Where shall I read?


P. Any where; read the beginning of the second Act, and the third Scene of
Andria.


D. Quid igitur sibi vult pater? cur simulat? ego dicam tibi.


P. Quid igitur sibi vult pater? How will you English that?


D. what is my Father's meaning? or what does my Father intend?


P. Suppose you had had this English to have put into Latin? how would you
have done it?


D. I believe scarce as it is here; if I had not known otherwise the Latin
phrase before, I should have said perhaps, Quaenam est intentio patris? or so.


P. It is not improbable you would; take then your Paper-book and write down,
Quid igitur: What means he then? adding to it such a caution as this when it is
needful, not tum, not quaenam est intentio ejus? But of this kind of exercise I
shall give you a large example apart hereafter, out of which you will better
understand the nature of it than by any precepts.


D. But methinks Sir, that it should be an infinite and endless task, to go
through a Book on this fashion; for I shall probably find some difference in
the Idiom, and consequently something to observe, and to set down almost in
every clause; nay, when I find no difference, as in this which follows here,
Ego dicam tibi, I suppose it would not be amiss to set that down, that I might
know in this, or such an Idiotisme, there is no difference between us and
Latin.


P. It were good to do indeed as you say; but for the endlesness of the task,
it is no Tie, so as you imagine at the first apprehension. Remember what I have
already told you, that you know many of those Idiotismes already, that no man
knows them all, neither are they all necessary to be known; and assure your
self, had you but gone through one Comedy in Terence thus, with a Colloquie or
two in Erasmus, and half a dozen of Tullys, you were in a manner already a
Latinist.


D. If that were so, it would be a great encouragement to me.


P. Though as a Learner you are bound to believe your Teacher, in what faculty
soever it be, and therefore it should be enough to you that I say so: Yet the
better to convince you of it, know, First, that by that time you have done so
much, you will have got most of the most usual Phrases, and common Idiotisms,
so that the remainder will lie thin, here and there scattered, which to glean
up, will be no toil, but a delight. Again, know that before you have done thus
much, you shall begin to meet with the same Idiotisme again, and again, as also
with variety of them for the same thing, which to observe and compare together,
you will find delight some. And lastly, in the Idiom of the Language, which
when you once come to, you will find such a delight in, that it will draw you
on with the greatest pleasure imaginable, and never let you rest till you have
fully attained it. Take this from me as a secret which I have proved by
experience, in the learning of five several Languages: It is no greater delight
to read the most delightful Story, or the most pleasant Romance, than to read
any thing in a Language, which you once got the Idiom of; without which, as you
shall never fully and perfectly understand the matter of which the Book treats,
so shall you never have any relish, or take any delight in the reading of it;
and if in this particular you should not believe me, or think it my peculiar
Genious to take such delight in it, hear what Vigerius that exact Grecian
says, to the same purpose in his Epistle to his Greek Idiotismes. Ita enim se
res habet (says he) ut nonnullo quoque dicendi usa dicimus, linguae omni
Graecaeque praesertim suus quidam est ac singularis genius, and certis quasi
formulis alligens, quam simul ac deprehendere coeperis ames continuo, ne ante
persequi desinas quam assequaris idem, nisi te afflaverit frustra suades, nec
minus inani quam molesto labor jactoris necesse est. For thus it is (says he)
as by some experience in teaching I have found; every Language, but especially
the Greek, has a certain peculiar stream or genius restrained within certain
Phrases or forms of speech, which as soon as you get hold of, you presently
fall in love with, and never give over till you have attained it; and if you do
not come to get a taste of this, you will assuredly lose your labor, and your
pains will be as fruitless and toylsome. So he; whose testimony (as I say) I
can approve by experience. But add further; though reason should not enforce
you to believe this, yet, that I as your instructor, have authority to enjoin
you to believe that it is not so difficult and so tedious a thing (if you set
your self about it in a right way) as you perhaps think it is to learn a
Language, and as indeed we usually make it here in England to learn Latin; you
shall have one that is any thing Studious, learn both to speak and write
perfect French or Italian, and the pronounciation in two years time, or less,
which Languages do, notwithstanding, require little less pains, either Grammar
or Idiom than Latin, besides the difficulty in pronounciation, which in Latin
you are not much troubled with. In the Low Countries, you shall have a Lad
ordinarily of 15. or 16. years old, speak Latin and French both, and both very
well, and in propriety. Nay, I met with one not much above the same Age, who
spoke both Latin, Spanish, Italian, and High Dutch, besides Flemish and
French, which were both in a manner his Native tongues, being Born in the
Borders of France and Flanders; and in any of those he would maintain any
ordinary discourse, without any remarkable impropriety of Speech: And what
should be the reason then that Latin amongst us at seven, eight, nay ten or
twelve years should be so difficultly attained to, and that without any great
perfection too, but that we are out of the way and the method?


D. It is very probable.


P. The consideration of this did at first clearly convince me, though I knew
it in a confused manner before, that we ought to go the same way to work in
learning of Latin, which they do both in learning that and other Languages.


D. Pray Sir what way do ye go?


P. Why after some few Grammar grounds, which are as short, and yet as exact
too as may be, they come to this observation of the propriety and Idiom, and
never meddle with any quaintness of style, till that be in some measure
attained; and to this purpose, both their ordinary exercise, both there and in
France, are only such as require a plain and familiar style; to wit, writing of
Letters, and making of Dialogues, and Relations of ordinary passages, as Going
abroad, Buying and Selling, and the like; Verses and Orations being only proper
to the two last years in the Grammar School, and that in several Forms, and
with several Masters; for there every Form has a several Master belonging to
it, and they are commonly seven in number, in every of which, Boys make their
stay according to their proficiency: The first four years they commonly employ
to make them Latinists, the next in Humanity (as they call it) that is History,
Mythology, and the like; the sixth in Oratory and Poetry, and in the two next
after, which they continue also in the same School, they go through all
Philosophy as far as our Batchelors of Art in the University, for this is also
taught in their public Schools; and then after that, such as have a mind to
Study Law, Divinity, Physic, or the like faculty, go to the University for it.


D. So that it seems in eight years space, after they can well Write and Read,
they are made in their ordinary Schools as good Scholars as our Batchelors of
Arts.


P. They are so, and many often in less time, if they be capacious and diligent.


D. Capacity and diligence must needs be things of no small importance, and
therefore I suppose, if Boys, who are generally averse from Learning, and will
commonly learn no more than they needs must, are yet ordinarily brought to be
good Latinists in four years space; one that would set himself about it with
study and earnestness, would do as much in one year or two at the most.


P. No question but he might: I knew a Boy once, and one not of the largest
capacity neither, that having been taught to Write and Read, and having learned
his Accidence, with some part of Propria quae maribus, gave over School at ten
years of Age for the space of five years; his Parents being but of mean estate,
and intending nothing less than to make him a Scholar; to which
notwithstanding he having a desire, got his Friends o let him go to School
again, when he was about 15 years of age; after which, in a year and a halfs
time, he learnt both Greek and Latin, and went to the University, though
perhaps not so well grounded as he ought to have been, but I am sure as well as
most go out of Country-Schools, and had he been set in a right way, might
probably with the same pains have attained to greater perfection in the same
time, though I say, his Masters care was as commendable as his own diligence.


D. Sir, I have heard that you got your Learning in as short a space.


P. It matters not much who it was: Thus much take from me, that it is very
true, and my end in relating of it, is to let you see that learning of a
Language, however it may seem at first, as it does, I perceive, to you a thing
very laborious and difficult, yet with a little pains and time, rightly
employed, will be found otherwise. And if from the first Rudiments such a time
will serve sor some proportionable attainment of it how much less will serve
such an one as you, that have already thus far proceeded in it?


D. Sir, your discourse has now delivered me from that discouraging
apprehension, which I had of the difficulty and tediousness of the business: So
that now I can resolve to settle to it as a thing facile; only I shall desire
you to give me leave to ask you another question or two, which I suppose will
not be altogether impertinent.


P. You cannot please me better, than to ask me questions in whatsoever may
concern your own improvement, and therefore ask freely, both now and at other
times, whatsoever you desire satisfaction in.


D. Sir, I suppose this Note-book which you would have me make for my
Idiotismes, will be but a kind of Phrase-book; now seeing there is great
variety of these Printed, and to my hand, whether would not one of them serve
me as well?


P. By no means, and that for many Reasons.

First, Because though there be many kinds of them, yet none are made in that
manner which I ascribe most advantageous, because they do not give the
particular signification of every Phrase by it self, nor set down the
difference of Idiotisms, which is chiefly to be observed, but only put down own
Sentence or Conception in general, and reduce many Phrases to it, as to an head
or common place which have any affinity with it.

Secondly, Because many times they confound Idiotismes with Elegancies, or
expressions of fancies, which if they be not distinguished, you shall never
find any end of your labor: For Idiotismes, though they be not few in number
which belong to a Language, yet is the number of them certain and definite. But
expressions of fancy (as I have told you already) are infinite, and every where
various and different, according to the genius and fancy of the Author.


D. How may I know an Idiotisme from an expression of fancy?


P. Ask me by and by and I shall tell you.

Thirdly, My third Reason against your common Phrase-book, is, because they
only gather such Idiotismes as consist in whole clauses or sentences,
neglecting those which consist in single words, and small particulars, as
Adverbs, Conjunctions, Praepositions, and c. which are not less if not more to
be regarded, as you will find by diligent observation, as I shall show in those
large examples which I promised you.

Fourthly, My last Reason is, because they are gathered to your hand already;
for the main advantage which you reap by this exercise, consists more in the
gathering of them, than in having them already gathered; because this by little
and little imprints them in your mind, and the frequent meeting with the same
Phrase or Idiotisme in your reading, and comparing it with others which are
allied to it, fixes them so in your memory, as to have them ready at hand upon
occasion, which you shall never have by a Printed Phrase-book, though you
should get it without book. These are my Reasons why I account them
insufficient. Before I go any further, I shall satisfy your demands concerning
the difference betwixt an Idiotisme and an expression of fancy.


D. That indeed I would willingly know.


P. The difference in short is no more but this, as I have in a manner told you
before. An Idiotisme is generally used of every one in plain and familiar
speech: An expression (for so I shall henceforth call it, to distinguish it
from an Idiotisme) every man has, or may have peculiar to himself. As for
example: In English, if I should say thus, I have not received a Letter from
you this twelve month; this were an Idiotisme, because a common and usual
Phrase which every man in familiar speech uses upon the same occasion: But if
I should say, The Sun has once completed his yearly Circuit since you graced
me with a Letter from you; this were an expression; because any man may form
the like according to his own fancy: As another might have said in the same
sense, The Sun has made his annual progress through all his Caelestial Houses,
since I broke up the Seal of one of your Letters. Another thus: (...) run
through all the lines in the Zo^^^^ (...) saw one from you. Another thus, (...)
now the second August since I saw your hand at a Letter. Another thus: You
write Letters to me as men do Almanacks, once a year; and so a thousand ways,
according as every man's fancy leads him. I suppose I need not show you the same
over again in Latin: you will easily understand from what I have already said,
that whether in English or Latin; or what Language soever, the true and only
difference betwixt an Idiotisme and expression is; that the one is common and
familiar in all men's mouths upon such a subject, and the other used but of one,
or at least borrowed of him by some few others; as we see men will many times
make use again and again, of an expression which they like, having had it from
the mouth of another, or met with it in some Book. And so essential is the
difference which I have already laid down, that if any expression of fancy come
to be vulgarly used, it cease to be an expression, and becomes an Idiotisme,
as were easy to show by examples in our own Language. Our common form of
speech used to be: Sir, I shall make bold to come and see you by and by. After,
some made use of this, as a more elegant and civil expression: Sir, I shall
take the boldness to wait upon you; which is now grown as common as the other,
and therefore is no longer an Expression, but an Idiotism. We used to say, I do
verily believe such a thing; then came in these and the like expressions; I
verily persuade my self; I am very confident; or, I do assume my self of such
and such a thing, and the like; which, however at first when they were new,
they were Expressions, yet being now grown common and familiar, they pass for
Idiotisms. Nay, it is very probable that most of our common Expressions and
Phrases, which are now most common and vulgar, were quaint and new Expressions,
and made Idiotisms by common use, in which conditions they shall continue, till
other new ones come in their places, and usurp their rooms, which I conceive to
be the chief, if not the only cause of that vicisitude and change which
Languages are obnoxious unto* as well as other things: For whilst we naturally
grow weary of old things, and delight in novelties, it comes to pass that old
words and Phrases give place to new ones; and perhaps old Antiquated ones,
after some Ages, like old fashions, come into request again, as Horace tells us;

Multa renascentur, quae jam cecidere, cadent que
Quae nunc sunt in honor vocabula si volet usus,
Quem penes arbitrium est and jus and norma loquendi.

D. This being then the difference (as you have shown me) betwixt an Expression
and an Idiotism, I suppose that it will be consequent to say, that whenever a
man will speak or write a familiar ordinary style, he must use Idiotisms, which
are common Expressions; and when he would speak or write a style more raised or
quaint, he must use Expressions, i. e. such forms of speech that are not made
vile and cheap, as it were, by commun Use.


P. Very right; and as we laugh at him, who in any thing that requires
Elegancy, as (in set speech, or the like) uses common homely expressions,
letting his style (as we say) creep upon the ground. So on the contrary, he is
as ridiculous that in common and ordinary talk affects strong lines and bombast
phrases (as we call them) which perhaps would fit well in another place.


D. To return again to my question concerning Phrase-books, it seems Sir, that
you do not allow any one of those Printed ones, but only such as are of my
gathering.


P. There is one notwithstanding which may be made some Use of, and that is
Erasmus de copia verborum, who according to his extraordinary perfection in
that Language, has briefly gathered together in that little Book, under a
certain number of pertinent heads, most of the considerable Idiotisms of that
Language; and the way to benefit by that Book, would be now and then to spend
an hour or two in turning them into English, and transcribing them into the
Note-book, after the same manner which I prescribed you for the reading of your
Authors.


D. Is there no other Book of that nature, that can be made use of?


P. There is one more, but not altogether of that nature, which I must needs
commend to you.


D. What is that I pray Sir?


P. Laurentius Valla de elegantiis, which I would advise you by all means to
join with the reading of the prescribed Authors, for he has in a great part
done to your hand what you read these Authors for, gaving gathered a great part
of these Idiotisms and proprieties together.


D. How Sir? has he gathered them better than Erasmus?


P. He goes in a way plain different from him; Erasmus only, or chiefly gathers
Phrases and Sentences, but Valla has taken the most pains in showing the true
and proper signification of particular words, and the right Use of those
particulars which I spoke of before; and indeed, in these things as much as
any, consists the Idiom of a Language.


D. Pray Sir, what will be the best way to read his Book with advantage?


P. Why having read over a Chapter, which commonly is very short, and treats
but of one word or Idiotism, contract the substance of it as briefly as you
can, and so write it down in your Paper-book.


D. Must I write it down in Latin or in English?


P. Only the Phrase or Word it self in Latin, but all the Explication of it,
as much as needs, in English. Take for an example if you will, the particular
Idiom of the Verb Committo, which besides its ordinary signification, it often
has, and is then followed with ( ut), and sometimes with Quamobrem: When it
has ut after it, I perceive by his example, it signifies the same in this
Idiotism that we express by this English Phrase. Be sure you do not such or
such a thing; and when it has Quamobrem, the same that this, I will be sure
never to give any occasion why I should not do so, or so; which you may set
down in short in your Paper-book thus,

Lib. 3. Cap. 56. Committo with ut, or Quamobrem. Non committam ut mihi
dicendum sit, non putaram, I will be sure never to be put to say, Non putaram.
Nihil committam quamobrem non eo veniam; I will be sure never to give any
occasion why I should not come there, or which may hinder me from coming there:
And thus have you a brief sum of the Chapter, and may in the same manner
contract the rest according to your own fancy, some one way, and some another,
but of this I shall also give a larger example apart; for I would have you read
these Books of Valla very diligently, because they will save you a great deal
of labor in collecting at random; and indeed Books of that nature are the
chief helps for getting of Languages. And I shall advise you, that what
Language soever you learn, and desire to be exact in, that you will get such a
one of that Language, if it be to be had. In Latin you have this; In Greek you
have Vigerus, his Idiotisms: In Italian, French, and Spanish, you have them
more plentifully. But so much for this; I have now, I suppose, satisfied you
concerning Phrasebooks; what other question would you ask me?


D. When you first mentioned Valla de elegantiis, I was in hope you were going
to speak something concerning the manner of attaining elegant Latin, which
before I desired to know of you; but seeing his Book gives you not occasion to
speak of it, I make bold to put you in mind of it again, as you then willed me.


P. You desire to know how one may write or speak quaint elegant Latin.


D. IS r, first whether it may be learned or no? and then how? for you seemed
before to intimate that it cannot, or ought not to be learned.


P. There is a great deal of difference betwixt learning this and the other
plain familiar Latin, which is as it were the groundwork in a Language, and
must only be learned out of Books, because there only you can have those
Idiotisms which are proper to every subject and occasion, and without which you
cannot deliver your mind in a familiar discourse without the censure of
affectation.


D. I have observed already that it is so; but pray Sir, what may be the reason
of it?


P. Because expressions of fancy, being not in ordinary way of delivery, but
such as scorn the common road, and beaten path of Language, raising themselves
aloft as it were, and soring above the pitch of ordinary parts and wits, he
that uses them, will always make show of ostentation of Parts, Wit, or
Language above other men; which kind of ostentation in words; is called
affectation. Now on the other side, in a set Speech or Verses, or Books, it is
both supposed and expected that a man should take pains to express himself
above the ordinary rate of vulgar words and phrases; and therefore in such
cases there is no fear to be censured for affectation, if it be done with
discretion, and the style suited to the matter in hand: You see then the
necessity of knowing all these vulgar forms of speech, which I call Idiotisms:
In this regard amongst the rest, that you may speak without affectation, which
(as I told you before) you have no other way to judge of so well, as by your
own Language, wherein you are best acquainted, and therefore when a man speaks
with affectation and when not; because you do know when he uses Idiotisms, and
when not, which in Latin, or any other Language which you are not yet very
well ex^re^s'd and familiar in, you cannot be so sensible of, not* knowing so
exactly, for want of use, what Phrases are Idiotisms, and what are expressions:
But when by diligent and frequent observation of your Authors you can
distinguish them, you will be as sensible of the affectation in Latin, as you
are of it in English; which you may also apply to the distinguishing of
propriety of speech in a Language, which many are not sensible of in Latin, or
any other foreign Language for want of use and familiarity of it, to know what
is proper, and what improper: But to one that is exercised in a Language as he
ought to be, such impropriety of speech is as sensible, as it is to you in your
own Language. As for example, Look how strange and uncouth it is in English, to
say Be safe friend, instead of saying How do you Sir; or to say You come most
wished for, instead of saying. You are very welcome; or to say, I do not hear
it being merry, instead of saying, I am sorry to hear it: so uncoath it is in
any other Language, to those that are well exercised in it, to use any phrase
or manner of speech which is not usually received. Now to return from the
digression to our purpose, that Idiotisms are only to be learned out of books
in Latin, because it being not now vulgarly spoken, as most other Languages
are; you have none other way to know what an Idiotism is, and what not. But for
a quaint style, and elegant Latin, the learning whereof you desire to be
informed in, though it may be, and always is much helped by books, yet does it
more depend on a man's peculiar fancy and genius.


D. Sir, I would desire you, if you please, first to show me how it depends
upon a man's fancy and genius; and then how it may be helped by reading.


P. I shall for the first then: You must know that all elegancy of speech, and
quaintness of phrase, especially in respect of the signification of words,
howsoever it is very large, and in some manner infinite, as we may perceive by
that infinite variety of expression of the same thing which we find in Orators
and Poets; none of them ever using (or at least frequently) the same expression
which either themselves or others have had before; yet is there not one
expression in all this large variety of Language and elegancy which is not
deduced to one of the four Tropes usually taught in Rhetoric, Metonymia,
Ironia, Metaphora, Synecdoche, as you will easily perceive by a little
observation. Now you know that these Tropes, howsoever they be taught by Art,
which in this as in other things, may be helpful to nature: Yet we do find by
common experience, that he that is not naturally inclined by his own genius to
make use of those Tropes in his expression, will never be brought by Art to any
considerable perfection in it: We see in common English some naturally express
themselves by Similitudes and Metaphors, which they never studied for; others
likewise by contraries or Ironies, and so of the rest as their peculiar fancy
leads them. And he that can properly once express himself in plain Phrase, will
easily as he has a mind, raise himself to a figurative expression. As for
example: He that can say such an one has a great opinion of himself, can (if
he have a mind to express himself better) say one is swollen or puffed up with
self-conceit. He that can say such an one desires and seeks after honor, can
say (if he have a mind) such an one hunts or pants after honor; or by an
Ironie, such an one cares not at all for honor; or by a Metonymy, such an one
desires to be cring'd to, or stood bare to by others; and so in any other. For
any one that once knows the true and proper signification of words, can easily
make use of them for any tropical and figurative expression.


D. This, Sir, I now fully conceive, viz. how this elegancy of speech depends
upon the fancy: I desire now that you will show me what use may be made of
books to this purpose, which was the second thing.


P. In attaining to elegancy of speech, you are not to make the same, nor so
much use of books to this purpose as some ignorantly do, who will not use any
form of speech or expression but what they find in some Latin Authors; so that
their Latin is nothing else but a cento, or a patcht composition, piec'd
together out of several books: But such as those know not the difference
between an Idiotism and an expression. The first whereof are indeed to be had
out of books, the other from the fancy: There are again others, who though they
do not tie themselves so strictly to the expression of their books, yet are
they so desirous to bring out of themselves what they can, that many times they
bring in things very incongruously and improperly, which either express more or
less than the matter requires; or at least break that integrity and evenness
which ought to be in a style. A third and last sort there are of others, who
because they have some confused notion that elegancy of speech consists, as
indeed it does, in having something extraordinary, or above the vulgar phrase,
and know not in the mean time how to come by it; seek out all the uncouth words
that they can find in Plautus, or Apulens, or the like books, and think
themselves more elegant than Tully, if they can but besprinkle their speech
thick enough with such as these; but these are rather to be accounted
Antiquaries than Linguists; and for the love of old things (as Erasmus says)
deserve to live upon nothing but rotten Eggs and stinking Beef, and wear old
Shoes and torn Breeches. Hitherto I have told you the abuses that are commonly
made of Books and Authors in gaining of Eloquence; I shall now show you the
true use that is to be made of them, and that is double.


D. What is the first?


P. The first use that may be made of Orators and Poets for this purpose, is
this: That the reading of them raises a man's fancy, and has a peculiar force
to put it in a frame of expressing things out of the vulgar road. A man's brain
is of a ducible pliable nature, easily molded and conformed to what it is most
conversant about: you shall frequently observe, that one man by keeping company
with another, will get the same garb and carriage, will talk like him,
discourse like him, express himself after the same manner; all which he has
not got with industry, and set purpose of learning them, but even insensibly
and before he was aware, only by conversing with him. It is just so in reading
of Authors, which if a man be conversant in, though without any intention of
learning their expression and style, yet he shall find himself insensibly at
last wrought to it, and if immediately after the reading of them he come to
write or speak any thing; he shall find he will write and speak like them,
which is not unknown to those that will undertake in a paper of Verses to
imitate any of the old Poets, as Virgil, Ovid, Claudian, etc. as we see Strada
has done most successively in his Academical Prolusions.


D. Would you have me to read them only, without any endeavor to imitate their
phrase, or observe their style, leaving that to come insensibly of it self, as
you say.


P. It would not be amiss now and then to observe a good expression, which
pleases you more than the rest, that you may remember it, though you do not
make any use of it in your own expression, but only lay it up in your fancy as
the seed of other expressions to be molded from it: And to this purpose it
would not be amiss now and then to get such expressions and passages without
book, or at least frequently to read them over, because this kind of exercise
does by little and little work your brains to this kind of expression; so that
upon the like occasion it will naturally run of it self into the like. Now as
once or twice doing a thing is not sufficient to produce an habit of such
actions, so does not once or twice reading of an expression leave a sufficient
touch upon the fancy, to wind it up to the like expression upon the like
occasions: But there must be a frequency and iteration sufficient to work and
mould the brain to such a kind of habit. So that when you light upon any
Author, whose phrase and manner of expression pleases you, and that you desire
to imitate him, I shall advise you to use none other means for the attainment
of this imitation, but only frequently in reading of him, and here and there
getting something which you like best, without-book; of which getting
without-book I shall tell you more by and by.


D. Would you not advise me rather to take a book upon the recommendation of
some good Scholar, than of mine own choice?


P. To take one upon another man's commendation perhaps would not be amiss; but
yet there is such variety in men's fancies in this particular, that a book may
be commended to you, and by a judicious Scholar too, which will never suit with
your genius, and consequently your fancy will never be molded to the genius of
it; or at least, not with that success which it would have been, had it been
more suitable to your nature: And therefore I say, I should rather of the two
advise you to take one of your own choice.


D. Is there none that take any other course in reading of Authors, for gaining
their styles?


P. I would not have you to suspect this way, for I can approve it by mine own
experience to be very successful. There are indeed some who would have you to
gather out the chief expressions; first turning the matter into a plain style,
and then observe how they have raised themselves above the vulgar. But I
conceive this way both more toilsome and tedious, and less effectual, as not
conducing so much to the producing of that habit, and readiness in the fancy,
which is so necessary to a Language.


D. What is the second use that may be made of reading of Authors, for the
attainment of elegancy in expression?


P. The second is more large, extending to what book soever you read, whereas
the first is only of some one, at least of few particularly, to which you tie
your self for imitation: And this it is, Though I would have you principally to
depend upon your own fancy for expression, and only be beholden to your Authors
for the habit and readiness in exercising them. Yet because in all Authors of
any worth, you ever and anon shall find some expressions and sayings remarkable
for wit and elegancy above the rest, and such as ordinarily a man's own fancy
will not furnish him withal; such as these I would have you write out, and
commit to memory, not only for the use aforesaid, but also that you may have
ready to insert, either in speech or writing upon occasion; for such it is
lawful and warrantable to make use of, though they be not our own. And if the
Author be one in esteem and Classical, it is better to name him than not, with
this or the like form: As such an one says, or As such an one expresses it.
But yet that with this proviso, that such raisings and expressions be not
already grown too common and familiar in every man's mouth: for if they be, it
is not good to use them, unless you invert and vary them by some Paronomacy,
Amphiboly, or the like; as if instead of O bone vir curasti probe, you should
say, O bone vir jurasti probe; instead of vir sapit qui pauca loquitur, you
should say, vir loquitur qui pauca sapit: Instead of ne quid nimis, ne quid
minus. Or as if in an abusive way you should say, you knew such a one to be
such a man's Son, because he is like him; making use of that in Virgil, Sic
canibus* catulos similes, sic matribus haedos noram. Or lastly, as if in
reproof of a deboist and idle Philosopher, you should apply that Greek
Proverbial sentence, (...). And this is the second use you are to make of
reading of Authors; and all I shall say for the present of them, unless there
be any thing else which you desire to be satisfied in.


D. Sir, if you conceive these rules and directions sufficient for the
attainment of good Latin, I desire no more.


P. Only one thing or two I must put you in mind of, for a right use of the
Collections, and so I shall leave you for the present. First then, you must not
think that the bare gathering of the Idiotisms is sufficient, but you must have
some set times to look over them so often, and so frequently, that in a manner
you have them without book. For take this for a certain and necessary rule,
that though a man know never so many Phrases and Idiotisms, and have them in
some measure without book, yet he shall never be able to make use of them or
any thing else in discourse, till by use he render them so familiar not only to
his memory, but fancy also, that they come in of themselves, without thinking
of them, or studying for them, which use and frequent repetition of them will
easily and insensibly bring you to. But on the contrary, without this readiness
and habit thus gotten, whole Volums of Phrases and Collections lying by you,
not only in your books, as all acknowledge, but even in your memory also, which
few consider, will be as useless to you as Lessons and Instruments of Music
are to one that has not the habit to play or sing; and howsoever the frequent
meeting with the same Phrases in the collecting of them, did bring this
readiness in some, which indeed for the present are only useful for you, yet
there still remains much behind among them to be completed by frequent reviews
and relations.

In the second place I must put you in mind of frequent Exercises, and making
and writing of Latin, which indeed is the very life of all your labors, viz.
whilst you are learning the Idiom. Epistles, Dialogues, Relations, Stories, and
the like, into which style to bring as many as you can of your collected
Idiotisms; for that will make you both perfect in the use of such as you have,
and let you see where you are defective, which will make you more careful in
the observing of those which you want, and the finding of them more delightful.

Lastly, know that besides your collections, it will much conduce to the
attainment of the Idiom of Latin, or any other Language, to make choice of
some convenient Author to get without book, as I prescribed you before for
expression, where I left you to your own choice, for the reasons there
alleged. But here I shall tie you to some part of some of your Authors,
prescribed for the Idiom: as for example, one of Terence his Comedies; two or
three of Erasmus his Colloquies, or a proportionable number of Tully's
Epistles; and that which you so get without-book, need not have collections
made out of it; only it will be expedient, that at the first reading it over,
as you go along, you turn it into as proper English as you can: This committing
it to memory, or rather frequent reading it over, to commit it to memory, does
as it were naturalize the Idiom to you, and so work and mould your fancy to it,
and it will bring it to that familiarity and readiness, which is very necessary
for Language, as I have told you already: And because I would not have you
discouraged with the pains of getting without book, I do not require that you
should take that tedious and wearisome way of committing it to memory, that
Schoolboys do; but only tie your self to read it over once or twice a day,
till you find that you can readily, without help of memory, as it were only by
a kind of natural rume of the fancy, repeat a clause or sentence to the end of
it, which will be enough for your purpose. Neither is it at all necessary, but
rather prejudicial to repeat a whole page, or three or four, or a whole
treatise from end to end by a continued recitation, which only rather burdens
and dulls the memory, than helps the fancy to any readiness of expression. That
you may more fully conceive my meaning herein, you must know the habit of a
Language, or readiness of man's expressing himself, is like that habit which a
Musician gets in his fingers, being such as depend very little upon the memory,
but rather upon the fancy, or indeed the nerves or motive faculty of the soul,
wherein the habit resides. For there are many which can remember a whole lesson
perhaps upon the Lute, knowing both what notes and strokes succeed one another,
and how every one of them is to be stopped and stricken, and yet for want of
practice, or rather that habit and ready faculty which is got by practice
cannot play that tune very well, perhaps not at all; whereas another which has
the exercise and habit, who perhaps if you put him to his memory before hand,
cannot tell two notes together how they are struck, will notwithstanding play
the whole tune so readily and exactly, that he can scarce play otherwise if he
would; only because he has got the habit or readiness in his joints and
nerves, which by that alone run (as it were of themselves) without any
direction from the memory; so it is, I say, in learning a Language. Many will
speak very eloquently and properly upon such a subject, who perhaps cannot
repeat you two Phrases out of any book and Author. The reason is, by use and
exercise they have got that habit, which where it is, will bring in these
Phrases of themselves, as it were when we think not of them; as it is easy to
observe in the speaking of our own Language, where we use a thousand several
expressions, readily without any stay; which if we consult our memory for, we
are to seek, as you will find sufficiently by experience, when you come in the
Collections to English your Latin Idiotisms, as I directed you, where you
shall find your self at a loss many times for an English Phrase; which if you
had been in discourse upon that subject, you would never have stuck at. The sum
of all is the seeing, it is not the memory, though never so good, which is
sufficient for the perfection of a Language, though that be very necessary too
at the first beginning, but there must be this habit or readiness also in the
faculty of Language; it is so clear, that the attainment hereof, as all other
habits, must depend much upon frequent exercise, which is the reason that I
commend to you above all things, this way for getting without book, which is
more easy, and more effectual.


D. Methinks Sir, this way alone might be sufficient without all collections.


P. No by no means, because it is not so exact for the gaining of the Idiotism.
You will leave many things unobserved in reading, and getting without book,
which you will not in collecting; and besides, it will be necessary to collect
out of more books than you can possibly get without book, though after this
easy manner; yet it is also true, the more you get without book, the less you
need collect.

And now I suppose I have satisfied your desires, and furnished you with all
necessary rules for making you a good Latinist: And not only so, but further
also these same rules will direct you in some sufficient manner how to set your
self about learning any other Language. I was desirous to take some opportunity
for this very purpose, which now in some measure I have fulfilled, and am glad
this has been offered, hoping you will make good use of it, for the attainment
of this accomplishment so necessary for a Scholar without it; though it cannot
be deemed but our English are very defective in this particular, witness the
few books written in Latin, in comparison of what other Nations have; witness
the general defect of our Nation in speaking of Latin, where not one among
forty, even in our Universities, is able to entertain a Foreigner in that
Language, which is so known a thing, that it is taken notice of in all our
neighbor Nations; whereas in other Countries, but especially in Holland, you
shall not meet a Scholar, nor indeed a Gentleman, but will be able to hold you
very good discourse in Latin, upon any subject. It is usual indeed with our
Nation, that they may undervalue them, and excuse themselves, to say, That they
can indeed speak it very fluently; but that they speak, is very plain and bald;
where if they take plain and bald for one and the same thing, they betray their
want of skill, both in that and all other Languages, supposing none to be good
Latin but that which is made up of Poetical and Oratorical Phrases. That their
Latin is plain I grant; which kind of Latin is only proper for discourse, as
I have already shown, and indeed is most difficult to speak; but that it is
bald and impure I utterly deny: and indeed, though we should grant it were so,
which it is not, our Contrymen might very well bear with them, who if put to
discourse, can seldom maintain it Grammatically true; which general defect
amongst us, I am verily persuaded, and I think I have very good ground for it,
is one of the chief, if not the only cause, which keeps Learning at so low an
ebb in the generality of our English Clergy. For though our Commonwealth have
some men always eminent for Learning, which may enter comparison with the best
of Nations, yet it cannot be denied but those are thin sown, and that our
Nation in the generality comes short of others; but this is easier to bewail,
than to know how to remedy, unless every one will undertake to mend one, which
I hope you for your part will do.


D. It is a thing Sir, which by Gods blessing, and the hope of your directions,
I do fully intend.


P. I hope you will, and doubt not but the way which I have set you in, will in
short time, and with easy pains make you Master of your desires; and this I
will assure you of for your better encouragement* that the content and benefit
which you shall receive by it, will make a large recompense for your pains.


FINIS.

