THE SPEECH OF Sir Audley Mervyn Knight; His Majesty's Prime Sergeant at Law,
And Speaker of the House of Commons in Ireland.

Delivered to His Grace JAMES Duke of Ormond,Lord Lieutenant of Ireland,the 13
day of February, 1662. in the Presence Chamber in the Castle of Dublin.

Containing the Sum of Affairs in Ireland; But more especially, the Interest of
ADVENTURERS and SOLDIERS.

royal blazon or coat of arms C R
HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

Printed at DUBLIN; And Reprinted at LONDON by J. Streater, by Special Order,
1662.

The SPEECH of Sir AUDLEY MERVYN Knight, His Majesty's Prime Sergeant at Law,
and Speaker of the House of COMMONS in Ireland: Delivered to JAMES Duke of
ORMOND, Lord Lieutenant of Ireland, the 13 day of February, 1662. in the
Presence Chamber in the Castle of Dublin.
May it please your Grace;
ACcording to the ancient Privileges of our House, We have been humble Suitors
for this Access into the Royal Presence: and your private Spirit which knows
not how to deny, prevails so in your public Capacity, that even for this your
Graces particular condiscention, I am commanded by the Knights, Citizens, and
Burgesses in Parliament assembled, to present you their most Submissive
acknowledgment.

And surely this present Solemnity of the House attending your Grace, may carry
the signification of a Hand in the Margent, to point out something more then of
ordinary observation.

This, with us, is as a sheet-Anchor, which is never made ready but when we
discern a cloud; perchance it is yet no bigger than a man's Hand, but by the
best Judgment we can make of it, it is like to over-cast the Horizon of this
Kingdom; This makes this Address of that Importance, that the House thought not
fit to entrust it to the bare expressions of a Speaker, (had he been of the
greatest abilities,) therefore have they committed it to this Instrument, that
it might remain as a Record of their Endeavors, that the hard Fate and Ruin
of an English Interest in this Kingdom might not bear date under the best of
Kings, under so vigilant a Lord Lieutenant, under the first (and if not
prevented, like to be the last) Protestant Parliament that ever sat in ^his
Kingdom.

It would confound Astrologers to observe such Planets, such masculine Planets,
ascending, in Conjunction, in the Houses of their Exaltation, and yet this
Kingdom not to be Planet-struck.

There is a time to speak, and a time to hold our peace; This, this, is the
Critical time, God calls us to it, when Religion, the established Religion is in
danger to be undermined, by casting the predominancy of temper upon a Popish
Interest: And believe it Sir, whatsoever delusive Tenants have been broached a
late, the contrary has been written in Letters of blood, not in his Majesty's
Kingdoms only, but wheresoever the Papal power was exalted; That persons
professing the Reformed Religion, are but Tenants at Will for their Lives and
For unes, and through Centuries of Ages it appears, That as their Fleeces grow
they are shorn, till a time of slaughter be appointed.

His Majesty, He has called us by his Writ to no other end, but to offer up
our humble Advice, Ne quid detrimenti respublica capiat; And if ever the advice
of Subjects may be serviceable to their Prince, this is the time, when this
poor, miserable, and unfortunate Kingdom, fruitful by the blood of English, and
placed as a greedy grave to bury their treasure in from age to age, is upon its
new module: It is now in its Mintage, and our care must be, that the Miter be
not stamped instead of the Crown; It is not long since the sale of this Kingdom
was offered to the Miter, as his Majesty's Interest was prostituted to every
Roman Catholic power, so that it may be said of Ireland, as Jugurtha said of
Rome, O venalem Hiberniam, ^^ox perituram si modo emptorem invenerit: Did I say
his Majesty called Us? May his Majesty's days be long, and prosperous; Were we
weltring in our blood, We must hold water whilst he washes his Hands in
Innocence.

The Country calls Us, and were they not assured We would speak for them,
doubtless but your Grace had heard them speak for themselves by their humble
Petitions, for the Alarm, that Hannibal is at the Gates, is hot throughout the
Protestant Plantations; We are his Majesty's Great Council, the grand Inquest
of the Kingdom, and We dare appeal to your Grace, how We have spent our time:
We understand the usual proceedings in Parliaments, to begin at Grievances, and
conclude with Supplies; We have inverted the Order, and applied our selves
hitherto in settling a constant Revenue for his Majesty, and granting other
Temporary ayds far above our abilities, yet far less then what his Majesty's
goodness may challenge from us: There has been an imitable contention, as I
may say, between the King and his Parliament here, if it were possible for a
Subjects to outdo such a King, We would; but it is possible for a King, and he
has outdone us, and therefore vaeh illis, Woe be to them, that in this
Conjunction would undo us both.

It must be therefore a forced Put, that presses us on to this address and our
moderation even in it will appear; Cuncta prius tentanda.

It is in the body Politic as it is in the natural; he brawny and fleshy
members can admit a discontinuity of parts, though not without pain, yet
without danger; But the apple of the eye is so tender, that the least dust is
offensive to it: We enjoy the benefit of many good and wholesome Laws, But the
Act of Settlement is the Law of Laws, it is the Magra Charta Hiberniae, this is
the apple of the eye, and must be Printed with this Motto: Nemo me impune
lacessit: Our strength lies in this, as Sampsons in his locks; if those be cut,
we are as weak as others, when the Philistines, shall fall upon us, in the
execution of other Laws, whether Mint and Cummin, in this we fulfill the
weightyer things of the Law.

Your Grace well remembers that struggling twins in the Womb of this Act, never
Prince that sat upon the Throne, endured so many pongs and throws, to give his
Protestant Subjects a Birth and Life, as CHARLES the Second did: And We shall
never forget the fainting expectations of the People for this Bill of
Settlement, when every ones Soul looked out at the Casements of his eyes, as
Sicera's mother, with a Why are the wheels of his Charirt so long a coming? But
now Sir, with as great a sorrow We behold the driving of the Chariot to belike
the driving of Joh^ the Son of Nemish that drove furiously.

We come not this day to reflect upon the Commissionrs for executing the said
Act: This House has a great respect for that Court, it had part of our, breath
to give it life, and we are under the greatest obligations to admire his
Majesty's goodness and favor to his Protestants, (I shall neverforget the
expression of his Majesty at a full Council,) my Justice I must afford to you
all, but my favor must be placed upon my Protestant Subjects, in sending over
those Gentlemen, that were of our own Country and Religion: His Majesty
warrantably judged, that if difference were betwixt an Israelite and Egyptian,
Moses, would lean to the Isr^elite: His Majesty knew men of resolition might
alter the Climate without changing sound Principles, though even those may be
endangered by a constant and familiar conversation, with persons of different
judgments: and so we may in time forget to attest the fear of Abraham, and
learn to swear by the life of Pharaoh; We consider the comprehensiveness of the
Act, their new beaten path of proceedings, saepe viatoremnova: nonvetus orbita
fallit; The mixture in Hotch pot of Law and equity, so that they are both
Jurors and Judges, and the rsummainess of the proceedings they design, so that
the Text many times may happen not to be the Rule, but the Hower-Glass; His
Majesty's other Courts shoot from a rest to a dead mark, and sildom or never
miss: This Court runs and shoots at a flying mark, and therefore it is
admirable if it ever hit aright. I say Sir, We come not to criminate, or to
force a ball into the Dedan, but if any brick-wall expressions happen, that
cannot be designed otherwise, it is rather a force upon us.

Upon the whole, the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, upon the serious
observations they have made of the proceedings of that Court, have made this
judgment, That without some speedy Rules and Instructions be given to those
Gentlemen, as the line and plumm to direct the executive part of that great Act
of Settlement, that the Lands justly forfeited to His Majesty, upon the
account of that late horrid and unnatural Rebellion in this Kingdom, and by
His Majesty freely granted to the English (to improve and enrich, which they
have beggard themselves) will be taken out of their possession, and themselves,
wives and children exposed to mockery and misery; and actual Rebels that yet
survive, or the Heirs and Blood of those that died actve in that Rebellion, be
restored to the same; and this being all done under pretense of severe justice,
the Roman Catholics of this Kingdom, may get a reputation and credit to those
pamphlets they have dispersed through Europe, That His Masties Protestant
Subjects first fell upon and murdered them. Sir, the Commons cannot but be
apprehensive of these coniequenses, and therefore in this Instrument, have
drawn certain proposals by way of humble advice tendered to your Grace, in the
name of the Commons of this Kingdom: They are not of the nature to impose any
foreign sense upon the Act, they arise out of the bowels of it; they seek not
to lay out a new way, but only where some corners and destowers are, to hang
out lights; and the greatest Courts of Judicature will put out snuffs, when to
read the Statute, they may have a Parliament-light, especially a light held by
that Parliament that past the Act: They have likewise their convoy to your
Grace, by a particular clause in the act requiring the Commissioners to give an
account to your Grace and the Council, of their proceedings, to and follow such
further directions as they shall from time to time receive from your Grace and
Council persuant to the Act.

I shall crave your Grace's leave and patience to read it in distinct
Paragraphs, and according to the commands of the House, to hint some parts of
their sense, for the reasonableness of them.

Forasmuch as by the Act of Settlement, there is a power vestd in His Grace the
Lord Lieutenann and Council, to give further Directions and Rules from time to
time, to the Commissioners for executing the said Act; and forasmuch as it
evidently appears to the House of Commons, That there is a necessity of several
Rules and Directions to be given the said Commissioners, therefore the
following particulars are to be offered to the consideration of his Grace the
Lord Lieutenant and Council, as the humble advice of the said House in order
thereunto.

This, though it sounds as a preamble or introduction, and so may be looked on
as a Frontice-piece or Title Page by some; yet by us is understood as an
essential part of the structure: If our distractions were doubled, they could
not divide us in our duty. Nec natura aut Lex operantur per saltum; you were
not only the nearest port, but Statio been fida carmis: And though the night
should grow dark, and tempestuous upon us, your care has hitherto been as a
Beacon upon a nigh Promontory, not only burning upon the arrival of a Fleet
(such as this Address is) but even to secure the least Fisher-boat, the
smallest and individual interest, when it lays its course to you: Suyreme
Councils, and General Assemblies, have, upon created or imaginary necessities,
gone to the Witch of Endor and having taken their observations from their own
Ignes fatui, instead of the Guards of Charles his Wain, have arrived at Tyber
instead of Thames: Now, Sir, being in our right Port, we shall break Bulk; and
the first Proposal is this:

1. That the King be by the Court of Claims allowed to be Party, as by Law he
ought to be; and that no cause be brought to Adjudication, till the Attorney
Gene rall have a fair Summons, and be fully heard.

Your Grace might think us under some distemper to offer this; for utrum nix
sit alb a, non est disputandum: But if the Commissioners have declared in
Court, That His Majesty is not concerned, and have, before judgment given,
refused to admit evidence upon record, offered by Mr. Attorny-General in His
Majesty's behalf, pregnant with evidence to have proved the Nocency of the
person, and thereupon have declared the Nocent, Innocent, and in a breath blown
down the Title of several Protestants, and their respective Heirs, their
improvements, and the like, it is the Duty of Us sitting in Parliament,
judiciously having taken cognizance thereof, to offer some Expedient against
it. Sir, Innocent, or Nocent, is the Question, which without any help of a
Septuagint, is translated at the Bart of the King's Bench, Are you guilty of the
general Rebellion of Ireland, or not? Stamf. pl. Cor. 1. I wonder if they will
not infer this, inter placita Coronae: Then under what Title would they refer
it? If the Commissioners be pleased to consult their Oath prescribed by the
Act, it is thus: Act. p. 59.

YOu shall swear, That you shall to the best of your skill, truly and
impartially administer Justice between his Majesty and the Subject, and between
party and parties, in the place of a Commissioner, for putting in execution His
Majesty's gracious Declaration and Instructions for the Settlement of Ireland,
according to an Act entitled, An Act, etc.

This Oath is framed in terminis, according to the exigency of the subject
matter cognizable in every Claim by the Commissioners; for every Claim, Guilty,
or Not guilty of the Rebellion, is one part, and has hitherto been first tried
by them; and to this part, the Oath provides in these words, You shall truly
administer Justice between his Majesty and the Subject: Then admit the person
be adjudged Innocent, yet the English-Adventurer or Soldier, in case such
Innocent's Title to the Land be not good, is in by the Act; and then in the
second place, the Title comes in question, and for this the Oath is suited,
viz. And betwixt party and party.

Regularly, either by Office or Attainder, forfeited-Lands are vested in the
King, and his Majesty being graciously pleased not to proceed by the severity
of Attainder, which reaches life and corruption of blood on the one hand, nor
the expense and delatoriness of Offices to be found, (not consisting with a
Kingdom gasping for a Settlement.) was pleased to rest his Title upon a Trial
of Innocence: So that, exclude his Majesty to be party, the Commissioners
Judgments cuts both ways: The Irish are turned out of their Inheritances upon
the account of Treason, and the King not party, the English shall have their
Lands, and yet they were never legally settled in the King; so that Treason
will seem to be a crime not so much against the King, as against the Subject;
Lands by the Act, are vested in his Majesty, so they be not the Lands of
Innocent persons, (and Qualifications for the trial of their Innocence are
positive.) Lands are given to the Adventurers and Soldiers, if they belong not
to Innocents, where rests the Freehold, in the Innocent persons? That is but
conditional and contingent; Is it in the Adventurer or Souldie? that is but
conditional and contingent; Is it in the King? it is there but conditional and
contingent: Why then it is in custodia legis, to judge between these three
persons; the Innocent can never have it if it be judged for the King, the
English can never have it, except it be judged for the King: then to exclude
the King is in construction of Law, to exclude the English; for the
Commissioners Decree cannot give the Land to the English, except the Act and
Law warrant it, but nothing by Law can pass from the King, till it be first in
him, and there is no way by the Act to place it in the King, but by the
judgment of the Court, betwixt the King and the pretending Innocent.

Courts of Justice, ex Officio, if a title upon the pleadings arise for the
King, are to take notice of it and improve it, though the King be not party to
the Action. Hob. 126.127.

The Court will award a Writ for the King where the Title appears for Him on
the Verdict, though the Issue find it not for him. Hob. 118, 119.

And where Statutes are made to put things in an Ordinary form, and authorize
inferior persons for the execution of it for the ease of Sovereign power, or
the ease of the Subject, yet they shall never restrain the Sovereign power or
Interest. Dyer, 225. part 35. Hob. 146.

Besides, this Act is a general Act as to this; nay, it is rather Statutum
generalissimum. It concerns the King in giving and taking, which are relatives,
and the Honor and Justice of the King in performing really the intents of his
Grants does as truth concern Him and His People, as does His profit in enjoying
and receiving Grants from them, (they are the words of a reverend Judge, the
Lord Hobbart, whose spirit in the behalf and interest of the King; I would
propose as imitable and exemplary to the Commissioners, I shall not ^e^ a
syllable of his own expression, (the Case is Sheffield versus Ratcliffe. Hob,
335.) (viz.) I must profess, that whenever I have thought of this Case, and
advised upon it my self, I have met with two strong affections, Zeal and
Indignation, Zeal in behalf of the King, to preserve the ancient right of the
Crown, against the invasions of Rebels and Traitors; Indignation when I find
Francis Bigod, that sometimes brought a puissant Army into the Field, to depose
the King; failing in that enterprise, now to rise up in judgment against him:
that whom he could not by the Sword destroy, he might supplant by the Law: For
though Ratcliff bear the name of this Case, yet I see nothing, but the Land of
Francis Bigod, his State, his Right, and Title, his blood, his descent that
maintain and defends it: Therefore let it not seem strange, that I am warm in
this Case, for Zeal and Indignation are fervent Passions: And I do profess, to
give Prerogative to the right of the Crown in my care and vigilance; and it is
nobile officium Judiciis and debitum, due by Oath and Office to watch for him,
who wakes for us, Ne quid detrimenti Respublica capiat: And if Charity begin at
it self, so ought Justice to do, that the King, who grants Justice to all,
should not be wanting to himself, etc.

Sir, This needs not by an Application to be shaken together, it mingles with
the present purpose, as water does with water; I shall only observe, that the
breath of this Reverend Judge perfumes the presence Chamber: whatsoever is
contrary in the like Case, is like the stench of Mare mortuum, that stifles
whatsoever approaches it. This Francis Bigod was attainted and executed, 28 H.
8. And this zealous expression was 13 Jacobi, by computation something longer
then from the 23 October. 41, to 1662. Bigod is resolved into his first dust, and
those dormitories have some privilege, De mortuis nil nisi bonum, when the
persons with whom the present Issue is to be joined, are living, vivit, imo
vivit, etiam in senatum venit; The Queen 24. of her Reign, granted the same
Lands to Edmond Lord Sheffield, and the Reverend Judge, and the Court retreated
not to the Objection made by our Commissioners, That the King had parted with
the Lands from himself, and so in a manner qui potest capere capiat, thereby to
render that great Act of Settlement, the Emanation of his Majesty's Royal
Bounty, to be dispenc't by a Rule of Justice, to seem rather like a muss of
Apples or Nuts thrown in the Streets, to invite Boys to scramble.

Before I leave this Point, I shall crave leave to intimate to your Grace's
remembrance, (for truly if I should seek in this Point to inform your judgment,
I were under an unpardonable guilt,) the opinion of his late Majesty of ever
blessed memory, how far he concerned himself, and the dispensation of his
Justice, Exact Collection.
in order to the Settlement of this Kingdom interested: In his Majesty's Speech
delivered to both Houses 14 Dec. 41. there is this expression; But still seeing
the slow proceedings therein, and the daily disparities I have out of Ireland,
of the lamentable estate of my Protestant Subjects there, I cannot but again
earnestly recommend the dispatch of that expedition unto you; for it is the
chiefest business that at this time I take to heart, and there cannot (almost)
be any business, that I can have more care of: I might now take up some of your
time in expressing my detestation of Rebellions, in general, and of this in
particular; To conclude, I conjure you by all that is, or can be dear to you
and me, that laying away all Disputes, you go on cheerfully, and speedily, for
the reducing of Ireland.

In his Majestiees answer to a Petition of the Parliament, his Majesty
delivers himself thus: exact. collect. p. 34.
We cannot but thank you for this care, and your cheerful engagement for the
suppression of that Rebellion, upon the speedy effecting whereof, The Glory of
God in the Protestant Profession, the safety of the British there, our Honor,
and that of this Nation, so much depends; all the Interests of this Kingdom,
being so involved in that business, etc.

In his Majesty's Declaration to all his loving Subjects, published with the
advice of his privy Council, it is thus declared: viz. And our hope is, that
not only the Loyalty and good affections of all our loving Subjects will
concur with us in the constant preserving a good understanding betwixt Us and
our People; but at this time, their own and our Interest, and lamentable
condition of our poor Protestant Subjects in Ireland, will invite them to a
fair intelligence and unity amongst themselves, that so we may with one heart
intend the relieving and recovering that unhappy Kingdem, where those barbarous
Rebels practice such inhumanities, and unheard of outrages, upon our miserable
People, that no Christian ear can hear without horror, nor Story parallel; And
a few lines after follows these words, (viz.) Whereas We acknowledge it a high
Crime against Almighty God, and inexcusable to our good Subjects of our three
Kingdoms, if we did not to the utmost employ all our powers and faculties to
the speediest and most effectual assistance and protection of that distressed
People: And we shall now conjure all our good Subjects, (of what degree soever)
by all the bonds of love, duty, and obedience, that are precious to good men,
to join with us for the recovery of the Peace of that Kingdom, etc.

In His Majesty's Message, sent by the Lord Chamberlain to the House of Peers,
it is thus said: His Majesty being very sensible of the great miseries and
distresses of His Subjects in the Kingdom of Ireland, which do daily increase
so fast, and the blood which has been alreddy spilt by the barbarousness and
cruelty of those Rebels crying out so loud, etc. And in his Proclamation of the
1. exact collect. 34.
of Jan. 41. inter caetera; We have authorized our Justices of Ireland, and
other our chief Governor or Governors and General, or Lieutenant General of
our Army there, and do hereby accordingly, require and authorize them, and
every of them, to prosecute the said Rebels and Traitors with Fire and Sword,
as persons who by their high Disloyalty against Us their lawful and undoubted
King and Sovereign, have made themselves unworthy of any Mercy or Favor, etc.

In an answer of his Majesty's, are these words, viz. His Majesty being more
tender in that particular which has reference to Ireland, as being most
assured, that he has been, and is from his Soul resolved, to discharge his
duty (which God will require at his hands) for the relief of his poor
Protestant Subjects there, and the utter rooting out of that Rebellion. Exact
Collect. 72. Thus far this glorious Martyr; and these are but few of many.

But Sir, If any shall object, To what purpose serves this? A Rebellion is not
disputed, neither is there any that ever questioned His Majesty's abhorrence of
it. I answer, Though several Pamphlets swarm, to fasten the rice of the
Rebellion upon the Protestants, and that we drew the first blood, and much of
the like stuff: yet these places are not quoted to that purpose, it is but to
show how unreasonably His Majesty is denied to be a party in discovering who
were guilty of that Rebellion, so horrid and odious to all Christians, to use
His Majesty's words in another place, Exact Collect. 71. when especially this
very trial of Innocence and Nocency, is the only way prescribed by the Act to
vest the Lands in the King, and is to supply the defect of Attainder and
Offices to be found, which must be in the Kings name; or that any Commissioners
can strain the Act and Qualifications, to let Nocency be shrouded under
Innocence, and Treason to become merit. Besides, it is to be observed, the
Actors, Abettors, etc. of the Rebellion in Ireland, notwithstanding this
jubilee of Indulgences under our gracious Sovereign, stands yet unpardoned, the
punishment being left to the execution of this Act; and shall the King be
excluded in the trial, and not made party? I shall say no more, but certainly
those that are of that opinion, differ much in judgment from his late Majesty,
and his Majesty that now is, who inherits his Fathers Virtues with his Throne:
Besides, I shall put your Grace in mind, that the Agents of the Roman
confederate Catholics of Ireland, amongst other their desires in writing,
desired that his Majesty's Council at Law, might be at large, and indifferent;
but it would not be granted.

I shall further offer the judgment of the Parliament in England, December. 41.
in their third Proposal to his Majesty, viz. That you would be pleased to
forbear to alienate any of the forfeitod and escheatod Lands in Ireland which
shall accrue to your Crown, Exact Collect. 2.
by reason of this Rebellion, that out of them the Crown may be better
supported, and some satisfaction made to your Subjects of this Kingdom, for the
great expenses they are like to undergo in that War.

I do not infer, that his Majesty's necessities or Revenues must be supplied or
settled by the confiscation of innocent persons Estates; God forbid we should
put that leavon into the Kings Treasury, or such Mandrakes into the pot: But
Sir, God sorbid on the other side, that Nocents, Nocents in so high a degree,
should for want of evidence, that the Law allows in the Kings behalf, should be
made Innocents, whereby his Majesty's Revenue so considerately settled in this
Kingdom, should be reduced to nothing; and so the Protection we enjoy by his
Majesty's Army (for so is our condition in this Kingdom) be dissolved, and to
complete the misery, the Protestant Families turned out to the open Sky, to
entertain him, whom upon the account of Rebellion, his Sword had conquered. It
is further worthy of consideration, that his Majesty is not only concerned in
his Revenue, but by a strict decreeing of just forfeitures, answers a debt his
Majesty has been pleased to take upon himself, by his Letters from Breda, to
the Army here under the Command of the Duke of Albermarl: The payment of that
part of the Army in England, drew vast Treasures, whilst the forfeited Lands
here, by a due execution of the Act, will discharge that debt: Be pleased to
consider the worthy Adventurers of England (of which interest, says his late
Majesty, I am resolved to be very tender) and I am fure, Sir, it concerns a
Protestant Parliament to be tender of them: Should our sins provoke God to
visit us with so sharp a correction again, as he did in 1641. with what
considence could we expect supplies from England, if former Adventurers,
bottomed upon so strong a security, should after such so long, so expensive
solicitations, be disappointed. And Sir, we are upon the precipices of this
ruin, when amongst all the persons that have been restored as Innocents, we
cannot understand of one, neither can We say upon our own knowledge (and we
come from all parts of the Kingdom) that any one of them, from 1641. to Sep.
165 -- ever drew a Sword against the Irish in Rebellion, or ever assisted the
English forces in the prosecution of them: And much of this arises, the King
being not made party, by the vilifying of the Witnesses produced by the
English, the checking of the English Council at the Bar, whilst the
insolences of the Irish Counsel are past over in silence, the disrespect unto
Depositions, Evidences, and the absolute rejecting of other matters of Record,
His Majesty we hope by your Grace and Council, being thus stated in his right:
we come to the second Proposal his Evidence.

2. That all Examinations and Depositions whatsoever, taken for discovery of
the Rebellion, as proceedings of the Rebels and their Adherents, as well during
his late Majesty's reign, or in the time of the usurped Authority. All Books,
Rolls and Writings, remaining in any Offices belonging to the Court of Claims,
or in any of his Majesty's Courts of Record, as also the Books of Kilkenny, be
taken for good evidence, in behalf of his Majesty, to bar such person or
persons of their Ianocency.

Sir, We promise the King to be party, and then this Proposal reaches but to
evidence concerning Guilty or not Guilty of the Rebellion in Ireland; But in
the general, as to evidences and proofs. We must take notice that the Law
distinguishes times, and according to Emergencies, suits and applies its
remedies; This is the great design of the Statute Law, to alter and change the
garments of the Law, according as the dimensions of the Body Politic alter
and change; The Notoriety of this Rebellion no History can parallel, (to use his
late Majesty's words) and yet to come to the proof of individual persons acting
in it, is no easy matter. In the late Wars between France and Spain, puissant
and numerous Armies have been drawn into the field, and yet how few individual
persons by exact proof of the adverse party, could be concluded to have ever
been present at any of those battles? Our Case differs not; We were as distinct
enemies as French and Spaniard, the English under his Majesty's Government, the
Irish under a Supreme Council, and general Assembly. How can we witness without
seeing? how could we see without fighting? during which Act, Our spirits on
both sides exercised not so much the reflect Act what We should do hereafter
before the Judge, as the direct Act, What we were to do upon the place before
our General.

Silent leges inter arma, was never more truly applicable, did our present
condition bear analogy with Nets and Routs in time of peace, the Law enabled us
by means to maintain a distinct proof: But Sir, It is a true Maxim, Quod
remedio destituitur, ipsa re valet si culpa absit. and the Law where the
subject matter in demand will not admit of proof, 2 Bulstr. 310.
will supply it, denying to deliver the money, the Law will conster it a
sufficient proof to maintain a conversion of it; And the great Act of
Settlement had in its prospect these difficulties, the Act words ( p. 4.) are
viz. And for as much as the Rapines Depraedations and Massacres, committed by
the said Irish and Popish Rebels and Enemies, are not only well known to this
present Parliament, but are notorious to the whole World, Notwithstanding the
many Means and Artiffices, which for many years together have been used, to
murder such Witnesses, suppress such Evidences, and also to Vitiate and
Imbesil such Records and Testimonies as might prove the same against particular
persons, etc. Thus your Grace observes the Judgment of King and Parliament,
that this is an extraordinary Case, and it is not disagreeable to Law, Novis
injuriis emersis nova apponere remedia, and We ought not to allow that
imperfection in our Law (living in the most glorious Constitution in the known
World,) that Treason and Rebellion should pass with impunity; because though
the Law meets with these Enemies, per se, yet that it should suffer them to
escape, nay, to triumph, per accidens; No Sir, the Law will do much, ne curia
Domini Regis deficiat in justitia.

But Sir, more particularly; The Law betwixt party and party, allows in many
cases, Examination to be taken, in perpetuam rei memoriam; If so, it would be a
hard consequence of his Majesty's and Council, foreseeing the difficulty of
proofs, flagrante bello, should authorize persons to receive Examinations that
then might be had, if afterward no use should be made of them; It is as true;
tha^ Rex non praecipit inutilia, as that Lex non praecipit inutilia; Cro. Car.
69, 70.
It is a remarkable Case of Sir Randolph Crew (ver. George Vernon:) That
Examinations of Witnesses taken by Commission, after the death of K. James,
(which Commission legally was determined,) yet should be allowed to be goods
especially (as the words of the Judges are) in a Court of Equity, where the
proceedings are jure naturali, and not according to the strict course of the
Law; And be pleased to observe their further Reason certified to his Majesty,
(viz.) Otherwise it would draw into question many trials by verdicts of Nisi
prius, and Trials and Attainders upon Goal-deliveries, whereupon diverse have
been arraigned and executed since the Kings death: so that your Grace may
observe the prudence of the Law, to obviate inconveniences, and therefore
multa conceduntur per obliquum quae non conceduntur in directo.

Besides, the Law requires not the attending of circumstances so praecise from
matters given in evidence, Kelway 166.
as it does from the same matters by way of pleading; Br. Records 65. style 34.
A man shall not plead a Record except it be in the same Court where it
remains, unless it be exemplified under the great Seal, Heatiey 138.
but otherwise, it may be given in evidence; A canceld Deed, (after testimony
given of the matter of fact how it came to be c^nceld,) was read in evidence:
Proofs by deposition taken in the Exchequer in a former suit, Lane 110.
shall be allowed, notwithstanding the parties are alive: a fortiori,
depositions taken in the Kings case, and between the same parties as in our
case it is: Hob. 109.110.
But true it is, where the Kings Plaintiff, and the Defendant claims by
Feoffment, and to prove it duly executed, desire some depositions taken at York
might be allowed, the Court refused it, because the original of the depositions
were gone so, as the King must fight with weapons assigned him by his
adversary; Godbolt 439.
so if the Plaintiff cannot find his witnesses to give testimony viva voce,
then he is, as it were, dead unto him and his depositions in an English Court
betwixt the same parties, may be read to the Jury.

It is further observable, that in Trials the Law allows evidence, according to
the necessity of the subject matter: If the Lord distrain for Escuage, and the
Tenant pleads, that he was with the King in Scotland, it shall be tried by the
Certificate of the Marshal of the Kings Host: Littelt. sect. 102.
If in avoydance of an Outlawry, it is alleged he was at prison in Bordeaux,
it shall be tried by the Certificate of the Major of Burdeux: 1 Institut. 74,
Moor 451.
The issue was upon full age, and two Church Books were given in evidence.

But it may be objected, That it would seem hard that Depositions taken by
usurp^d Authority should be good. I answer, The same reason that warranted
judicial proceedings in those times to be confirmed, may allow these, only the
reason is stronger in our case, because the matter of fact has been so
shifted, that the truth can appear no way: To this I add, That by the Act of
Settlement they are allowed; the words are these, And whereas several of your
Majesty's Subjects, by whom as Instruments, the said rebels were totally
subdued, dyed in the time of your Majesty's absence beyond Seas, Act Settl. p.
2.
(be pleased to observe, this was in the time of the usurped Power) for supply
of the then pressing necessities, and to prevent the further desolation of your
Majesty's Kingdom (here necessitas vincit legem;) Enquire into the Authors,
Actors, and Abettors of the said Rebellion and War, (and this was by Offices,
Examinations, etc.) And after much deliberation amongst themselves, and advice
from others had thereupon, did dispossess such of the said Irish Popish Rebels
of their said Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, as they found guilty of, and
to be engaged in the said Rebeltion or War, and did withal distribute and set
out the said Lands, etc. Your Grace may observe in this Clause, here is the
Guilt, the Proof, the Judgment, and Execution, concerning the Rebels Lands,
and the date of those proceedings, is, during his Majesty's absence; and yet
this is laid as the Groundwork of that Clause, which vests the Lands in the
King: for all the Characteristical Letters of forfeited Lands, in the fourth
and fifth pages ofthe Act of Settlement, are, the manner and ways of seizing,
sequestrating, distributing, allotting, etc. of those Lands under that power:
for either that way must have been observed, or otherwise, the Irish being a
consederated Body associated by Oaths, established under a Democraty. And
lastly, conquered by Arms, must, and of right might have been, according to the
Law of Nations, condemned in gross; It is to be feared, the King will encounter
many Deeds and Settlements, and lewd Witnesses, it is but reason he should
defend himself by his own that are just: And if out of Acts of Usurped Powers,
his Majesty set^les the peace of his Kingdoms, it is but a part of Royal
Chemistry; out of poisonous Minerals, to extract a Cordial.

Propos. 3. That such Proclamations, or any Act of State as have declared any
person or persons, and their Adherents, Rebels, before the Cessation in this
Kingdom, 1643. by his Majesty's Authority, shall be good Evidence in the Kings
behalf, against such person ^r persons, to the Impeachment of their Innocence,
before his Majesty's Commissioners, for Execution of the Act of Settlement.

A Proclamation is part of the Kings Prerogative, and obtains in cases of
necessity, the force of a Law, and is therefore sometimes termed Lex temporis;
11 H. 7.33. a
If the King proclaim a Tilting to be held, and one kills another in that
Exercise, this Proclamation shall be good by Pleading, or Evidence, to excuse
the Felony: The King, by Proclamation, may inhibit the Subject to go out of the
Realm; f. n. b. c. 85. c.
and if the Subject does against it, it is a contempt, and he shall be fined;
and since it is a Law to fine, it will be good Evidence to justify it: It was
no time for Sheriffs, in the ordinary course or Law, to make Proclamations, in
order to Outlaries, when without an Army it was hazardous to march two miles
from Dublin; His Majesty's Proclamation of the 1. Jan. 1641. invites them, to
lay down their Arms, and forbear all further Acts of Hostility; Col. 34 Page
If this Proclamation from Mount-Geball will not take place, that from
Mount-Gerezzin must. And we never yet received an instance, that any embraced
those offer, of mercy; but though his Majesty hung out a white Flag, they
advanced one of red. I shall only add this, that it seems reasonable, that if
his Majesty by name declares J. S. to be a Traitor, and to be prosecuted with
Fire and Sword; in such case, if any good Subject should destroy the said J. S.
he shall be indempnified by the Proclamation, why then admit J.S. have escaped
to this day, I say if no intervenient Act of Grace from his Majesty obviate it,
this Proclamation may sorely impeach his innocence, that might have warranted
me to take away his life.

Propos. 4. That where by any Order or Orders of the House of Commons, since
1641. and before the first Sessions of this present Parliament, any of their
Members, upon the account of the Rebellion, have been adjudged to be rotten
Members, and fit to be cut off, and have Ordered the Speaker of the said House
to direct his Letter for the issuing out of Writs to supply their places: That
such Orders shall be allowed as good Evidence, to bar such person or persons of
their innocence.

It is first to be observed, this extends no further then to the Members of
their own House: And your Grace may remember, the Parliament fitting several
Sessions after the Rebellion, ahd reason to enquire what became of the far
greater part of the House; they found many English murdered, the ways for
traveling obstructed, for such as survived; or otherwise they were engaged in
his Majesty's service, for defense of this Kingdom; the Irish they expected
after Order upon Order, with their names publicly affixt, whereupon they did
conceive one or more Orders, expressing the names of such persons, who upon
their own knowledge, were engaged in the Rebellion. The House of Commons is a
considerable Grand Jury, its a good Billa vera they return: Their Orders are
Records; 4 Institut. 23.
and that appears also by 6 H. 8. c. 16. where the words are, viz. And the same
License be entered on Record, in the Book of the Clerk of the Parliament
appointed, or to be appointed for the Commons House, etc. And more directly,
Account of the Trial, p. 46.
in the point upon the Trial of Harrison the Regicide, Mr. Jessop was produced
to attest several Orders of the Commons House, Mr. Jessop being Clerk of the
House.

Propos. 5. That the English Quarters be ascertained from time to time, until
his Graces recess in 1647. and that all Quarters not so ascortained, be
adjudged the Rebels Quarters.

Sir, The Qualifications are the Soul and Spirit of the Act, and amongst the
Qualifications, that of living and enjoying their Estates, real and personal,
in the Enemies Quarters, is velut inter ignes Luna minores, it is the Elixir of
them; and therefore till those be ascertained, from time to time, we are as in
a Labyrinth, without a Clue: It is offered to be ascertained from time to time,
for the motion of War is Planetary; and there were Ebb and Spring-Tides,
according to the success of the Armies. This will much expedite time, and abate
the Alamode sin of Perjury: it will answer much the Proceedings of the
Common Law, where a Prohibition lies, when the Bounds of Parishes are in
question, when a question is, Whether Lands be in ancient Demeasn, it is tried
by the Books of Domesday: 3 Cro. 228. 5 H. 5, 10. Heb. 188.
This is the Shibboleth to distinguish an Ephraimite from a Gileadite; and the
Bounds of the Brook Kidron, warranted the Judgment against Shimei.

Propos. 6. That where two or more persons have claimed one and the same
L^ands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, by several Titles, that such Persons
Titles be tried and ascertained before the said Commissioners proceed upon the
trial of innocence of any or eith^r of them.

Without this, it will resemble some Games at Cards, where the Protestant
Defendant will assuredly have his Cards rust upon one hand or another; for
example, three, or four, or more, (for that is usual) claim the same Lands; now
their respective innocencies come first in trial; if three of four be judged
nocent, and one innocent, by agreement (to give it no other name) amongst
themselves, the other Titles shall vest in him, who obtaining his decree of
innocence, shall carry the Lands, whereas re vera; the Title was not in him,
and yet the Court (according to this unreasonable Rule) excusable, as to the
Judgment, and the Protestants to the defense, who cannot have cognizance of
such privy and dormant Titles: This Proposal answers but the Rule of
enter-pleading in the Law, wherein to give one instance of many: Two several
persons being found Heirs to Land, by two several Offices in one County; it is
doubtful to the King, 8 E. 4.6.
to which of them he shall give Livery; and therefore before Livery shall be
made to either, they shall interplead, that is, formerly tried between
themselves who is right heir.

Propos. 7. That in all Claims, the Titles to the Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, be first tried; and that the Deeds of all Nocents be left in the
hands of the Court, there to remain.

What has been offered to the last Proposal, may (in part) serve to evince the
convenience, if not necessity of this: it has its rise from a Maxim in our
Law, Frustra fit per plura, quod sieri potest per pauciora; for if it appear,
that the party has no Title, the labor of Trial of innocence is saved, 8 Co.
167.
where it is probable, Witnesses may strain the Point so far, as to make
themselves nocent before God, to make another innocent before man; and it is
but consonant to the usual proceedings in Law, that where it appears to the
Court, Cro, Et 230.
upon the Plaintiffs own showing, that he has no Title, though the Defendants
Plea may be vicious, yet he shall never have judgment. Besides, Sir, it is to
be observed, That the Trial of innocence is by the Act of Settlement adopted
into the place of an Office sound, Stamfor. 63, 64.38 E. 3. 18.
and so is in nature of traversing an Office, in which case the Law is clear,
that none shall be received to traverse the title of the King, without making a
title to himself.

As to that part that desires the Writings of Nocent persons to be lest in the
Court, it cannot work a prejudice to them; for the Lands being adjudged against
them, to what purpose will the Writings operate in their hands: But Sir, I
correct my self, they will have an operation; and this puts me in mind of a
plain, but apposite similitude: Sir, in the North of Ireland, the Irish have a
custom in the Winter, when milk is scarce, to kill the Calf, and reserve the
Skin; and stuffing it with straw, they set it upon four wooden feet, which they
call a Puck^an, and the Cow will be as fond of this, as she was of the living
C^l^, she will low after it, and lick it, and give her milk down, so it stand
but by her: Sir, these Writings will have the operation of this Puckcan; for,
wanting the Lands to which they relate, they are but Skins stuffed with straw;
yet Sir, they will low after them, lick them over and over in their thoughts,
and teach their Children to read by them, instead of Horn-books, and if any
venom be left, they will give it down upon the sight of these Pitckan Writings,
and entail a memory of revenge, though the Estate-tail be cut off: Sir, how
little soever this may weigh, yet in the Government of Rome, when the Tarquins
were put down, not only all moneys and Sculptures that might retain their
memory, were by public sanctions decried, but such Innocents as retained the
name, were forced to assume new ones: The Israelites remembered the fleshpots
of Egypt, when Manna was before them; but when they wanted water, they
murmured.

Propos. 8. That where the Claimant claiming an Estate of Inheritance, has not
set down his title certain, in such case, the Claimant shall be adjudged to
claim in Fee-simple, and not otherwise.

Sir, To open this proposal; matter of fact must be thus stated, The Irish put
in their claims generally under such expression;, That he is seized as of a
Demeasn in Fee, or Fee-tail, or some other Estate of inheritance in use,
possession, or remainder: This has been excepted against, but it has been
overruled to be a very good form of pleading: indeed it is Sir, for one cause,
to take away all probable means where by the Protestant Defendant, may maintain
his Cause, it indangers him not only to loose his Land, but first to loose his
sense; Those Presidents will enrich our Books of Entries, as the German word
Plunder, did out English Dictionaries, whilst it beggard our Nation. Besides
Sir, to demand Oyer of any Deeds, has been overruled by the Court, so that
when according to the present proceedings, We come to know the Title of the
Irish Clymate: We have no more time of defense, then the Fowl has, that no
sooner sees the Fire in the pan, but dies of the shot in the Body.

And since the Law praesupposeth every man of full age, to know his title, what
shall this be accounted but a stratagem? and those fortifications are hardly
tenable, when one standing upon the lines of defense, may be short per
derriere, is certainly the Center of the Law; and therefore it says, Oportet
ut res certa ducatur in judicium: Bra. b. 2. 5 Co. 3.21.
certa esse debet intentio and narratio: Unhappy was that Declaration in
trespass, quare clausum suum fregit and pisces suos cepit, which was judged
vicious for not showing the number or nature of the Fishes, when Lands,
Tenements, and Hereditaments that in the providence of the Law, are more worthy
then two Fishes that are sold for a farthing, may be demanded and recovered
under all the incertainties and disguises that may be; But the readiest way to
make Sampson to grind, is first to put out his eyes.

Propos. 9. That where any person or persons, have put in his or their Claim,
before the former or present Commissioners, and after put in another Claim of a
different Title, the best Title for the King shall be taken.

Sir, It is usual for Merchants to put off an old stuff under a new name and
here is new stuff put off under an old name; This by the Commissioners is
called a Retraxit, and if they please to make good the word as the Law
understands it, no exception will be taken; for a Retraxit is, 21 c. 4.38. 8 H.
6.8.
when the Plaintiff or Demandant comes in proper person into the Court, where
the Plea is, and says, that he will not proceed any further in the same: now
this will be a bar to the Action for ever, Qui semel actionem renunciaverit,
amplius repetere non potest; but this Retraxit is much like the Retraxit of a
Ram or Goat, that retires to make his assault with a doubled strength; Truly
Sir, We know not upon what clause in the Act this proceeding is warranted; The
proceedings before the former Commissioners are allowed, true it is, that some
Commissions that issued from them for valuation of Lands, in order to reprisal,
are suspended until a new valuation issue by the present Commissioners, and
then the best return for the Kings Service is to be made use of; if it be
objected, those Cl^ims were put in upon the Declaration and Instructions, which
by the Act possibly may be altered; It is easily answered, either the Act has
given them a new title, or it has not: if it ha^h given them a new title, then
they are in by the Act, and not by any former title; if it has given them
none, then their old title is that they must rely on; But admit an election be,
the Law is clear, Noy. 29.
and so resolved, that there is no election against the King.

Propos. 10. That no Claimant claiming by Innocence, shall be allowed to make
any other Claim, in case he shall be adjudged Nocent.

Sir, We must crave your patience to consider this Case; And first, the Act of
Settlement (omitting other divisions,) divides the Irish into Innocents and
Nocents, and there is but one subject matter, upon which, both these
distinctions have their prospects, scilicet, the recovery of their Estates; I
shall grant, that election of Actions belongs to every Subject as his
Birthright; Dep. 20.21, 57.
but likewise it must be granted, that where he has made his election,
prosecuted it, and determined it, he cannot have recourse to renew his
election, being not suspected, but extinguished; I speak this with this salvo
that a person that by particular clause in an Act, has an Estate granted unto
him, he must take finally and sub modo, as the Act appoints, Br remitter. 49.
and has no election to claim upon any former or other right; The body of the
Act is but consonant herein to the body of the Law that delights finem imponere
litibus, and hate^h all circuit of action: If a man by his Deed grants a
Rentcharge, and the Rent is arrear, it is in the Grantees election to bring a
Writ of Annuity or distrein; Littl. Sect. 219.
but he cannot make his election but once; for if he recover in a Writ of
Annuity he shall never after distrein, or if he does distrein, and avow in a
Court of R^cord, he shall never after bring a Writ of Annuity, because an
Avowry in a Court of Record, being in the nature of an Action, is a
determination of his election, before a Judgment given; a fortiori, after
Judgment given.

If a Wife be endowed ex assensu patris, and the Husband dies, the Wife has
election either to have her Dower at Common Law, Dower 158.
or ex assensu patris; but if she bring a Writ of Dower at Common Law, and
Count, albeit she recover not, yet shall she claim her Dower, ex assensu patris.

So if the Grantee bring an Assize or the Rent, and makes his Plaint, he shall
never after bring a Writ of Annuity: Nay, when an Election is given to several
persons, 10 E. 4.17. 1 Institut. 145.
there the first Election made by any of the parties shall stand.

A man by his own wrong may lose his Election, as if a Feoffment be made of two
Acres, the one for Life, and the other in Fee; if the Feoffee makes a
Feoffment of both, the Feoffor may enter into which of then he pleases,
because the Feoffee has lost his Election, 2 Co. 36.37.

It is well known, that where many times in one case., the Law does give a man
several remedies, that by the folly of his Election, he may bar himself for
ever, 1 I^stit. 27. a. b. 279. a. Its at the Election of the Issue in tail, to
enter, or to allow himself out of possession, and bring his Formedon: its at my
election, if one receives my Rent, if I will charge him with a Disseizin, and
allow my self out of possession, and bring an Assize, or have an Action against
him. 1 Cro. 220. but I shall be bound up by that election, to the advantages,
or disadvantages that accordingly attend it. So it is in the Claimants
election, to claim by Innocence, or Nocency; but after Judgment given, he shall
be concluded.

Propos. 11. That any person claiming as an innocent, shall after proof of the
title, proceed to prove himself to have been faithful, and loyal unto, and
never to have actod against his Royal Majesty, or his Father, before the
Defendant shall urge any Crimination, and that for defect of such proof of
innocence, the Claimant shall be adjudged Nocent.

The very letter of the Act rules this point (page 17. of the Act.) viz. That
all innocent Papists, being such as shall prove themselves to have been
faithful and loyal unto, and never acted against our Royal Father, or Our
self, etc. The Evasion, that this relates only to innocent Papists of
Convaught, will not hold, except by some Philosophical Rule, we may ascribe a
particular malignity to the Climat of that Province: it is also agreeable to
the rule of Law, Actori iucumbit onus Probandi, they are the Plaintiffs, and
have Estates granted to them, upon condition that they prove themselves
innocent: There is an Objection, the Solution whereof will aboudantly clear
this point: The Objection, is, Stabilitur praesumptio, donec probatur in
contrarium, and therefore every of them shall by Judgment of Law be presumed
innocent. I will grant this to be regularly true, but Distinguenda sunttempora:
when the whole Kingdom is under the serenity and calm of peace, and his
Majesty's Writs have their free course, every man shall be presumed to be a
loyal Subject: for what appearance is there to the contrary? But, if a part of
the Kingdom shall rise up in arms against their Sovereign, and assume a
contradistinct Government, and in defense thereof maintain a War, and, which is
worse, a cessation, with detention of his Majesty's Forts, and the inheritance
of his Subjects, Nisi -- this latter being an act of Judgment and
deliberation, and this by Oath of Association, and by the strictest rules of
confederacy, Who is it, that without the violation of charity and reason, can
Judge all or any of them innocent, till by distinct and authentic proof, they
have separated that guilt from themselves, which for so many years unto blood
they espoused? Upon this construction, be pleased to hear the words of the
Act, for that is the Touchstone of pure or adulterate Expositions; viz.

Whereas an unnatural Infurraction did break forth against your Majesty's
Royal Father of over Blessed numory, his Crown and Dignity, in this your
Majestics Kingdom of Ireland, upon the 23 of October, in the year of our Lord
God, 1641. and manifest it self by the murders and destruction of many
Thousands of your said Majestics good and Loyal Subjects; which afterward
umversally spreading and diffusing it self over the whole Kingdom, feetled
into, and became a formed, and almost National Rebellion, etc.

The case being thus truly stated, it is easy to discern both from the nature
of proof, being in the affirmative; and the advantage that they are to receive
by it; That they must putify themselves according to the purification of the
Law, before they can be admitted to offer in the Temples of Justice: And
therefore the case will be much like, as where a bargainer shall endeavor to
avoid the bargain, by reason of the non-enrollment within six months: he must
make manifest proof thereof, or else it will be presumed that it was enrolled
within the six months. 4. Co, 20. Sir if an innocent person will endeavor to
avoid my present Estate, upon surmise that he was not guilty of the Rebellion
(being a Roman confoederate Catholic, under which Title the War was
maintained,) he must prove his Innocence, or else it shall be presumed he was
one of them.

A. and B. Tenants in common of a Manor; A. purchases a Franktenement mixed
with the demesne Lands which were not certainly known: B. brings a Writ de
Partitione facienda, of the Manor only: It was held by the Justices, That A.
must prove the bounds of the Frank-tenement putchased: For the Jury shall be
discharged if in conscience they make Partition, de tanto quanto praesumitur
and dignoscitur per praesumptiones and verisim lia, Dyer, 266. So, Sir, the
Irish Claimant coming under that violent Presumption of Nocency, if he will not
prove the bounds of his actings and conversation during that War, the Jury (if
there were one) or the Court as it is at present, are discharged, if they judge
him nocent, if upon proof allowed unto him he cannot clear himself of that
presumption: I say [that violent presumption] because the Act casts it upon
him, and Fortior est dispositio legis quam hominis: Nay, that Act to which he
himself is a party: so that every Irish Claimant that appears in the Court, the
Law supposes him to plead thus; I confess the Rebellion in Ireland was
universally spread, and became almost National, yet whosoever is innocent
amongst us, and so can prove himself to be, must have his Estate without a
previous reprisal, and not otherwise; I am an innocent. Pray Sir, admitting,
that the King by no grant or engagement had disposed of this persons Estate,
would you not judge that Court very complemental, that upon such allegation
would judge him his Estate without any proof; There is little of my Lord
Hobart's zeal and indignation in that Court.

Besides Sir, if this were an Imposition, it is no other then what the natural
Olive is subjected unto; Those Officers that ever faithfully served his
Majesty, called the 49 men, and then why should the wild Olive repine? Before
they can be admitted to state their Arrears, they must prove in what Regiment,
Company, Troop they served, with a continuando during their service; And
nothing is more practicable. In the Barony of Evishoan, there are above two
thousand Irish can bring hundreds of Protestants to witness their civil
demeanor, through the whole course of the distemper in this Kingdom.

Propos. 12. That every Claimant does summon the Owner or Defendant of the
Land, or upon Affidavit made that he or his dwelling cannot be found, the
Tenant and Attorney of the Defendant, and after such summons, notice be given
of the day of hearing the said Cause, by posting the name of the Claimant, and
List of Lands in the Court 30 days before the hearing in Leinster, and 40 days
in any of the other Provinces, and that the Commissioners be desired to publish
the Lists promised.

A true Regulation in this particular of Summons and Process of the Court, is
of great importance; errors in this, are like faults in our first, decoction
not to be remedied: Notwithstanding the long experience, and curious
observations of the settled Courts of Justice, in 21 Eliz. c. 3. which with us
was Enacted 10 Car. c. 12. we were forced to have recourse to a Statute for the
avoiding of secret Summons in real Actions: Courts of Equity adhere close to
their Process; in Courts of Law they are fitted, according to the Nature of the
Actions to which they relate: And it is apparent, if this Point be not
ascertained in a different way then, as now it is used, many persons will be,
as some already have been, decreed out of their Estates unheard,
notwithstanding their greatest vigilance to defend them.

Propos. 13. That the Commissioners observe to proceed in the trial of Claims
of Innocents, only in the respective Counties, according to the Priority
heretofore published by themselves: And where any such person claims in
several Counties, that such person be not heard, till the last County come to
be adjudged, according to the forementioned order of Priority wherein he is
concerned.

That there be a Priority of Counties, and that Priority positively to be
observed, is of absolute necessity: It were very hard (dividing this Kingdom
into thirty three Counties) to give them all the alarm at once, and to continue
them on that duty, when but one quarter is attaqued; we shall out-bid the Winds
uncertainty by a point, that ever wandering within 32 points. Every man comes
with the Spirit of a Gamester, fairly confident to win, that is, to have his
business speedily heard; the English are served with Process, who must appear,
both Plaintiff and Defendant are drawn up, with their troops of Witnesses (a
sort of Militia that must not run in arrears) always ready to fight, but
uncertain when the Court will give the signal: it will be charge and expense
enough to both parties, when it is confined to a particular County, but without
Priority the charge will increase in proportion, as 1. is to 33.

As to the second part, to post-pone, the trial of the claim out in several
Counties, to the time of the trial designed for the last County: This will be a
sole expedient to prevent surprises in hearing (no small fate to the English
Defendant) and of no prejudice to the Irish Claimant; or if so, it were de
minimis, which, in so comprehensive a Settlement is not regarded: For example,
If a man have but three Acres in the County of Dublin, and a thousand pound per
annum in the County of B. as much more in the County of C. which is set forth
to several Adventurers and Soldiers, when this priority of Counties, and
post-poning of trial to the last County is established and published, all the
Defendants are secure, until the trial of the last County comes, and then the
several three Counties make an united defense; whereas otherwise, if he slip
into his trial for his three Acres in the County of Dublin, and by a faint
defense or otherwise, he be adjudged innocent, it is likely that Decree of once
innocent, shall be always innocent as to recover the remainder of his Estate in
the other Counties, that never had notice of his Trial.

Next, it were manifest injury to the King, where the trial may be, when the
first County, or last County, comes upon the Stage, to take away the right of
Election from his Majesty, specially accompanied with a palpable loss and
disadvantage: It is yet the character of two great Generals, That one cunct
ando, by delaying, recovered the lost estate of the people; The other
Celerando, by precipitation, lost what was in possession.

Propos. 14. That matter of fact cognizable by the Court of Claims, be tried by
Jurors.

We do not well understand, how by the Act any other way of trial is allowed;
for in some cases, lest there might be a mistake of what proof is intended, it
is particularly set down by Juries: Next, this Trial by Juries, is the ancient
way and birthright of the people, State ^uper vias antiquas: And though this
Act had Enacted a trial otherwise, and only in the affirmative, it would not
have excluded or barred this ancient way of trial by the Common Law, and which
was before the Conquest (Lamb, verbo. Centur.) Besides, it is the clear
uncontroverted construction of the Law, that, Wheresoever a Statute mentions
the word Proof, the Law intends it of no other manor of proof whatsoever, then
that by Juty. The Court of Chancery, how often does it reconmend issues to the
trial of the Common Law Courts by Jury. Matter of Law, and matter of fact are
divided: to the first, the Judges answer; to the last the Jurors. Upon any
wrong done by the Court, there lies remedy by Error for the Subject; if by the
Jurors, then by attaint; but as now the execution of this great Act stands,
admit the Court being Judges both of the Law and Fact, will decree away my
Estate, Where is my remedy? The highest Court of equity allows a Review: Hob.
202, 203. resolved by the Judges, That to try causes that were naturally
triable by the Common Law, and by the Jury, by a Chancery way, would suddealy
confound all Jurisdictions, make all the Common Law, and all the course of it,
needless, and a handmaid to the Chancery. It is further considerable, that this
will certainly bring great prejudice to his Majesty's interest; for Jurors may
find many things, that the Court will not, or is not bound to take notice of,
the finding whereof may vest the Estate in the King: A verdict may find matter
of Record, which was never given in evidence; and so likewise matters of
writings, and other things, not within the pleadings, or ever given in
evidence; and nothing, can more contribu^e to the just discovery of men, and
their demeanors in these troublesome times, than by the knowledge of their
neighbors, Vicini vicinorum facta praesumutnur sctre: And there is no reason
that the English Interest having but one eye left them, as to this point of
discovery, and that not yet recovered from the bloodshed, should have that put
out: Sir, if no other reason moved, this would induce us, Lest we cast a
disrepute upon our ancint and known Laws, that make this Island a Terra firma,
as if these ancient Courts were only Pleasure-boats in fair weather, and could
not ride it out in a storm: Sir, if we settle the Kingdom by any other means,
than by the experienced rules of those Laws, we may hastily bring our wounds
to healing and skinning, whilst a sanies, and corruption lies at the bottom,
which will break forth more incurable than at first.

Propos. 15. That no person shall be admitted to prove his Innocence by any
other Witnesses, then such as have constantly lived in the English Quarters.

We must with your Grace's favor consider the issue again, (viz.) Guilty or
not Guilty of the Rebellion in Ireland; if so, no person that is Particeps
criminis, that is under the same guilt, ought to be admitted a witness against
the King to prove the person upon his Trial innocent, Facinus quos inquinat,
aequat: If a person be infamous, if he be attainted of a false verdict, or
conspiracy at the suit of the King, or convicted of perjury or of felony,
whereby they became infamous, or regularly he that loses Liberam legem, cannot
be a witness; now if your Grace consider what has been hinted formerly, how
the Rebellion in Ireland was maintained and owned by confoederacy, association,
by their representatives in the General Assembly; that were Homines generici,
as Divines term Adam, when by his fall his posterity fell: If your Grace
reflect upon the spreading consequences of it, that as it was voted by power,
and trust sent from all the Counties, Cities, and Buroughs, within their
power, so it was tragically acted in every part of this Kingdom; And lastly, if
your Grace cast your eye upon the mark, and level in this case, the Act of
Settlement, which upon these and other considerations, have called it
universal, and almost National: i^ would seem but very just that such crimes
should not be purged by persons guilty of the same, which all under that
confoederacy by the Judgment of Law and that Act, are; These persoes have by
their own industry lost Liberam legem, their Estates are forfeited as well as
if it were by Office or at tainder. For What? It is answered Upon the account
of the Rebellion: then certainly the witness must be Rectus in curia, before he
can make anothe so; for Quicquid efficit tale, est magis tale: in a modus
decimandi, against one, the rest of the Parishioners shall not be witnesses; in
defense of Common against a Commoner, the rest shall not be witnesses, Hob. 92.
And yet the union and tie in these cases, are not under such strict interest of
association, as amongst the confoederate Catholics of Ireland.

It may be objected, We make use of them against themselves: It is easily
answered, It is but just and reasonale: A Tarryer is the only creature to
unkennel a Fox, because he is got by a Fox and a Brache hound; How is it
possible for us to prove such a person to have been at such a battle, to have
contributed to their assistance, to have sat in their General Assemblies, but
by persons frequent amongst them, and of their own confoederacy, and such a
Witness is in Law a double Witness, and the same reason urges the necessity of
their proof by such as lived in our Quarters: Besides, it is known how the Law
is, in case of an Approver, who though he confess the same Felony, Stamf. pl.
Cor. fol. 142. Who either by direction of the Court, or at the prayer of the
Felon himself, is examined by the Coroner, and his examinations taken upon
Record for the good of the King and Commonwealth. And Sir, I suppose the
Opinion is maintainable, (especially as the proceedings are,) if he or they
that were in arms in Munster, are not equally guilty of the blood shed by the
Army in Ulster: they move by joint Counsels, from one public stock of
maintenance, the victory of one is the victory of the other, and consequently
the blood shed by one, is the blood shed by the other: It is good Law, that if
a man received a man that is attainted of Felony by Outlary in the same County,
though he be ignorant of it, yet he is accessory to the Felony, because the
Outlawry is matter of Record, of whsch every one ought to take notice; This
were durus sermo, a hard Law, if when an open and universal Rebellion is
maintained, and the Kings Colors slying in the field, and the Sword, and other
Ensigns of Royalty at home, (as notable matters of Record, as an Outlawry upon
Proclamations in the County Court,) that persons should not take notice of it,
and then taking notice of it, should relieve and abet the actors therein, and
instead of being punished as accessaries, they shall triumph, as witnesses to
clear the principals, (if any accessaries, were in Treason,) The reason of the
Law why if 3. or 4. be in a room, and but one gives the deadly stroke, yet the
other shall be accessaries, is, because the presence of the rest abated the
courage of him that was killsd to make his own defense: upon the same reason,
all the confoederate Catholics are accessaries or principals.

If it had been understood by the Protestants in Ulster, that this Rebellion
had been only the attempt of Sir Philome, or a Rabble, as in public papers the
Irish have termed it, so much blood had not been so cheaply spilt: but hearing
it was universal, and countenanc't by confoederacie of all; that his Majesty's
Proclamations to lay down arms were contemned, this abated their spirits, and
made way for despair to dethrone resolution.

Propos. 16. That when the Court does give Judgment upon any cause, that every
respective Commissioner seriatim, deliver his particular Judgment in open
Court, with the reasons thereof.

Sir, It is among the ornaments of our Law, that matters are very learnedly
debated at the Bar, and in Causes of difficulty, solemnly argued by the Judges
on the Bench; In every leaf of our Year-Books and Modern Reports, we may
discern the Judges Opinions and their Reasons. No doubt but Judicatures are
under great temptations, and a greater check cannot be upon the frailty of our
Natures, that they lie not under the protection of a concurrency: As true it
is, that virtue has been scandalized by an affi^^^y with vice, so likewise it
is true, that vice gets a reputation by a commerce with virtue: That Cato did
look on, was held to be a restraint to some spirits; and no doubt but when so
great an audience as attends that Court, shall hear every particular
Commissioners Judgment, and the reasons of it, whether it may prove as a means
of caution to themselves, yet surely it will give a great satisfaction to the
persons concerned, upon whose uninterested Judgment they may repose as well, as
upon their Councels argument: Thus it was in the case of Ship Money. And such
is the solemnity of Judgments, that they are en^red Consideratum est per
Curiam; if it be entered Videtur Curiae, for the levity of it, error will
reverse it.

Propos. 17. That where affidavit shall be made, that one or more materia
Witnesses being summoned before the Court, refuse or neglect to come in, that
such cause be suspended.

This Proposal is the issue of Experience: for we are certainly informed, that
diverse persons who have formerly offered themselves as witnesses, and that have
declared their knowledge in order to prove the nocency of several persons,
withdraw themselves some allege they are under the censures of
Excommunic^tions, and Fulminations, (they are hard words, but happily your
Grace remembers them, when not only your Grace, but such as should give your
Grace any relief, or those that served under your Command, have been involved
in the same, and perchance your Grace has not forgot the operation of them).
It is said in Philosophy, Actus activorum non sunt nisi in patiente been
praedisposito. How receptive the complexion of the people has been of such
influences, I shall pass by; only thus much I must observe, if they were so
powerful as to violate the Bonds of Allegiance, to their lawful and merciful
Sovereign, they may without straining, dissolve the Reciprocations of Common
Equity amongst Subjects: Estates rest upon Proofs, and if Witnesses neither
flectuntur prece aut pretio, I mean their necessary and convenient expenses
tendered: we must resort to the Law for its process; If they will not manage
with a Snaffle, perchance their Heads may be brought into a Rane with a
Port-pit: And, upon Affedavit made, it is but reasonable to suspend the Cause:
There is no privilege in this case by Law, to exempt them for giving Evidence
in his Majesty's behalf, and for settlement of this Kingdom, which is the
adaequate Object of the Act: There are no stronger or nearer Relations then Man
and Wife, that the Law (in many respects) esteems them as an Individuum: Yet a
Wife, for the King, may be brought to give Evidence against her own Husband:
Privilegium non valet contrarempublicam: A Master of a Ship, laden with
Merchants Goods, may cast them over-boord; but if he be laden with Ammunition,
Ordinance, etc. of the Kings, to relieve his Army or Gartison, he cannot
justify to fling them overboard, though the Vestel and Mariners lives are at
the stake, ( Bacons ma. page 17.) But is not the set^lement of the Kingdom of
more worth, (and that depends upon the faithful discharge of Evidence) then a
particular Garrison.

Propos. 18. That where any person or persons provided for, to be restored by
particular name to any Estate, that such person or persons shall not be
admitted to claim the same, under, or by any other way or means, then is laid
down in such Clause in the said Act, wherein he or they are so particularly
named.

May it please your Grace, this humble Proposal is one of the Poles, upon which
the Act of Settlement moves; and it has its particular aspect upon the Clause,
in page 21. of the Act, in which several persons are particularly named; and
afterward it is said thus, viz.

We do hereby declare, That they and every of them, without being put to any
further Proof, shall be restored to their former Estates according to the Rules
and Directions, in the last foregoing Clause of this Our Declaration,
concerning such as continued with Us, or served faithfully under Our Ensigns
beyond the Seas. Now Sir, we have considered that foregoing Clause, VIZ. That
such persons shall be restored to their former estate, a Reprize being first
assigned, and legally set out of the remaining forfeited Lands undisposed of,
to such Adventurer or Soldier, or other person before named, of equal value,
worth, and purchase to the Estate, out of which such Adventurer or Soldier, or
other person aforesaid, shall be soremoved. So that it appears clearly, none of
these persons are intended by the Act to be restored without a praevius
Reprisal first set out: And they are, as to the manner of their Restitution,
placed in the Catalogue of those that served beyond Seas under his Majesty's
Ensigns.

Though nothing can be clearer, yet Sir, be pleased to observe, how in order to
the Design of this Clause, several other Clauses in the Act are particularly
framed for the execution of it. In page 26 of the Declaration, where the Rules
of Precedencies in restitution were set down, they are included in the
provision made for such as served abroad, etc. or otherwise they were totally
left out: But it was but reasonable, since their manner of Restitution was
limited, according to the resti^ution of those that served abroad, that they
should be included with them, and it had been mere surplusage to have men^ioned
them.

Now Sir, to proceed, in page 37. of the Act, there is a particular Clause for
the further making the former Clause practicable, viz. In the next place, you
are to take care, that the Adventurers, Soldiers, or other persons, possessed
of any of the Estate or Estates of such persons, to whom We have by our said
Declaration assigned a particular favor, and are in a distinct branch thereof
by Name expressed, be Reprised, as in our said Declaration is expressed, and
the said persons restored to their former Estates, from the time that such
Adventurers or Soldiers shall be so Reprised.

And be pleased Sir to observe, least this intimation might not be directory
enough, it concludes, observing always the former cautions and provisions in
our said Declaration expressed, referring to the said persons restoration: that
is, ( page 20.) A praevious Reprisal being first set out. One might think here
were a particular Act of Parliament from themselves, assertaining under what
terms they were to enjoy their Estates. But in the perclose of the whole Act,
page 118, 119. Provided also and be it further Enacted by the Authority
aforesaid, That in case Reprtsals shall fall short, whereby persons mentioned
and appointed in the said Declaration and this Act, to be restored without
being put to any further proof. This is the Character (that denotes the same
persons, cannot or shall not obtain or receive the full benefit intended them)
Sir, be pleased to observe, there was no other benefit intended them, then it
shall and may be lawful for the Lord Lieutenant, or other chief Governor or
Governors, and Council, for the time being, and they are hereby authorized to
order, appoint, and make distribution amongst them, of the same satisfaction or
restitution allotted them, in such proportion and method as they shall judge
most equal and just consideration being had, of the conditions and pretenses of
the several persons concerned: Nevertheless, according to the Rules and
Directions of the Declaration concerning them in all other Points, and
particularly of that of Praevius Reprise or Reprisals, which Order and
appointment of theirs shall be final, and observed by the Commissioners
appointed, or to be appointed for the execution of this Act; any thing therein
contained to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. Thus Sir, your Grace
sees how the Interest of these persons so named, is fenced and bounded
throughout the Act; so that indeed, the final determination of their Interest
cannot be adjudged; no, nor the Interest of any one of them assertained, till
the value of Reprisals appear before your Grace and Council, and then your
Order shall be sinal, and directive to the Commissioners: And it closes home
with Any thing contained to the contrary notwithstanding.

Now though this be so, they are beginning to leap over the hedge, and putting
in the strongest foremast, and wave all these Clauses, and put in their Claims
upon the account of Innocence, upon which, they had once an election to have
relied upon, but now it is determined by this Clause: The reason that induces
them is plain; for if they should be judged Innocents, then they are restored
without any consideration of Reprisal: If they be judged nocent, then they will
keep this Clause for a Retreat.

But Sir, I am commanded by the House of Commons, humbly to offer your Grace
their Opinion, that this is contrary to the whole course and reason of Law in
the general, and very illusory to the main Design of the Act; and in the
opening this Point, I have command to be an humble Suitor to your Grace for
your patience, his Majesty's In^erest as to his Revenue, and the Protestants
Interest, being so highly concerned.

1. Sir, We presume it will be allowed, That an Act of Parliament binds all
persons, for all persons are parties to it, 21 H. 7.4. nay, my Lord Cook,
Institut. 4. p. 4. tells us, that multitudes are bound by an Act of Parliament,
which are not party to the Elections of the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses,
as all that have no Freehold.

2. Freeholders in ancient Demeasn.

3. All Women, having Freehold, or no Freehold.

4. Men within age, etc. A fortiori, then those are bound by this Act, to which
they themselves in person have given their assent. Now Sir, as to the point in
hand, ( viz. That the persons that are by peculiar name restored to their
Estates, under a praevious Reprisal, can claim them no other way then the Act
prescribes.) I shall humbly offer you the Judgment of the Sages of the Law in
an instance or two: Where a man has Title to Land by an Estate-tail; and
afterward the same Land is given to him by Parliament, his Heir shall not be
remitted, for by the Act of Parliament all other Titles are for ever excluded;
for this is a Judgment of Parliament, that the Estate shall only remain in
the same very way that it is given: The same Law is, where the King has a
Title in Tail, and the Land is given to him by Parliament in Fee; the
Estate-tail is determined, so that the Heir shall not avoid the Leases made by
his Father; for the Statute binds all for Titles and Estates, B. Parliam. 73.
The Reason given here, is, for that it is a Judgment in Parliament; and of what
extensive power that is, even to take the right hand of an Act, 2 Institut.
497. will instance.

Nay Sir, the operation of a Statute casts it with that violence upon the party
taking it, that if it had given me the Estate of any p^rticular person by name,
saving the right of that party, the saving had been flattering (as we call it)
1 Co. 47. a. b. It is said, Though the Act be in nature of a Conveyance or
Judgment, the saving is repugnant, as to him that makes the Conveyance, or
against whom the Judgment is given, or from whom the Estate of the Land is to
pass; for though they be parties to the Act, yet, in Judgment of Law, the Land
shall move from him that is seized, ( Plowden 49.) it is there held, where
Lands are given by Statute, it shall be interpreted the gift of the Ter-Tenant,
and the confirmation of all others that assent to the Act; for if it should be
adjudged the gift of another person, the Parliament should do wrong to the
Ter-Tenant, to take away the Land, and make another to give it.

Sir, The application is easy and familiar to your Grace, who well remembers
the great Solicitations that was made to get into this Clause; it was looked on
as the Ark, for those who could not endure the Examen of Innocence; and being
nocent, found themselves bound by the Act, to be concluded, by taking out of
Lands in CONNAUGHT, in compensation of their former Estates; they very well
understood, that the Gate of Innocence had no flaming Sword over it, to keep
any from entering. As great and powerful Provisions are made for such persons,
as Wisdom could contrive; but the Law presupposes, every man knowing own
Estate and condition best, will not make an election to his prejudice; but if
he do, and that election is executed by an Act of Parliament, he is bound for
ever, Hob. 256. it is thus.

Note, an Act of Parliament has every man's consent, as well present as to
come, and he may be an Author of his own hurt; also he must hold as the Act
gives it, having power to bind every man's right, finally or Sub modo; and
therefore if any person by his application to the King, when out of his
Princely favor, has granted his Request, though thereby he has re-intrencht
himself of a provision otherwise held out unto him, he must lay his hand upon
his mouth, and own the inconvenience to arise from himself; It has been
judged, that License for alienation by Parliament, takes away the Fine,
otherwise by Law due to the King: The like in case of partition by Parliament
between the Coheirs of the Lord Latimer, 1 Le. pl. 113. the reason is given
there, for that the Queen her self is party and principal Agent, and therefore
against her own Act, she shall not claim the Fine; And shall an Act attatch the
Revenues of the Crown, that are firmamentum belli, and ornamentum pacis, and
yet a private person avoid, and make illusions a Statute, for which himself
has been a suitor; and to which, upon the passing of it, he has personally
given his vote: Ecce mode mirum --

Sir, Nothing is more favored by our Law then a Remitter, and even that upon
construction of the Stat. 27 H. 8. that ancient privilege of the Common Law is
so overruled, that the person taking by the Statute, in most cases, shall not
be remitted: and if a Statute by construction, lays aside the indulgence of
the Common Law in public settlements a fortiori, it will bind private
Interests particularly expressed.

In the next place, I must observe, That all the clauses relating to these
particular persons, though they are in the affirmative, yet being directory, as
to the form and manner of their restoration, viz. That they shall be restored
from the time that such Adventurers or Soldiers shall be reprized, etc. and
viz. observing always the further cautions and provisions in our said
Declaration expressed, reserving to the said persons restoration ( page
38.12.19. Act) they carry in them a negative; for it is a Rule, That all
Statutes that limit a manner and form in execution of matters that were not so
by the Rules of the Common Law, though they be in the affirmative, they are in
substance the negative, as if it had been expressed, That it shall be done in the
manner and form, and no otherwise; so it has been adjudged upon West. 2. c. 4.
that gives, Quod ei deferunt, and that the Demandants may Vocare ad warrantum
as si essent tenentes, that is as much as if it had said, Et nullo alio modo;
and so 11 H. 7. c. 20. where it is said, he shall enter, enjoy and possess the
Land, according to his title in them, it shall be understood, according to his
title, and in no other manner, Plowd. 113. Now to restore an Nocent, that is,
one guilty of Rebellion, to his former estate, certainly will be granted, it is
not agreeable to Common Law, why then when this Act particularly names some of
them, and that under the character of Nocent persons, and presents the way,
order and means of their restoration, not once, but through the texture of the
whole Act, it must needs rationally follow, that it is intended, and no other
way. The Act says, You shall observe the Rules for their restoration: what is
the Rule? it is this, after a previous reprisal; but if you take him out of
this clause, and put him upon Innocence, then he is to be restored before a
reprisal: I humbly ask, How is the Act answered, that says, Thus it shall be:
No, says the Court, it shall be thus: And by saying so, a great part of the
Act is made to signify nothing (nay, tha^ part of the Act upon which the
Protestant Interest wholly depends, for that being observed, they are sure to
have their penny, or pennyworth, the Estates they now enjoy, or reprisal which
by the plain and genuine construction, preserves all the part of the Act in
summetry and proportion; and I am sure this was the Judgment of the House,
upon passing the Act: I shall shut up this point, with that which should have
had the preference, even the consideration of his Majesty's Revenue; if the
persons be held to the clause of their own Election, they are to pay the same
Rents the Adventurers and Soldiers pay by the Acre; if otherwise, their former
Rents, which are not considerable: We know upon whose account it is, that his
Majesty is at that great charge to maintain an Army here, it is but reasonable
a round share of the charge should lie on them; whilst the greatest Estates of
the Irish in this Kingdom, that are rationally qualified by this Act, if they
escape it, the Protestants do beat the burden, and they scarce touch it with
their little singer.

Propos. 19. That the Officers before 49 and their Tenants, shall be admitted
Witnesses to give evidence for his Majesty in any causes whatsoever, depending
before the Court of Claims.

Sir, We must remember again the Trial, (viz.) Guilty or not Guilty, between
the King and the party, and that in matter of Treason, which premised, I might
say no more to evince the lawfulness of any of his Majesty's Subjects, to give
Evidence upon such a Trial: I shall admit, that regularly no than shall be
Witness in his own cause: but this is to be understood cum grand salis; It is
said in our Law, Judicis officium est ut res, i^n tempor a rem quaerere,
quaesito tempore, tu^us eris; I have hinted before how difficult it is for
proof to be made, after so long a tract of time spent in War, and in confusion,
since 41. till his Majesty's happy Restoration^ The Act, says the Witnesses,
have been slain, and those few, the Officiers serving before 49. whom
Providence reserved, when God impanne^s a Jury to enquire after blood, must be
challenged: The ways by which Evidence might have been had, has been by the
power of the Sword drawn against, the Law been obstructed; and therefore it may
bef^ll to such guilty persons Exceptions. Frustra qui in legim peccat a lege
petit auxillum: Were an unlawful Assembly, at this day, in a riotous Posture,
the Justices and Sheriffs, with the power of the County, might resort to the
place, and view the force, and record it; but this was too dangerous an
employment for them, when an Army of Horse and Foot could not undertake it
without hazard: and if few or no other Witnesses are left, it were to impose
too much irrationality on our Law, that by the Rules of it Treason might pass
with impunity: to prevent which, the Law has recourse, in extraordinary cases,
to extraordinary means: It is a Maxim, Quod remedio destituitur ipsa re valet
si culpa absit: and therefore the Law will allow an Avowry without Atturmnent,
where he has no means to compel the Test to atturn, 6 Co. 68. a. so where
Impediments happen by the Act of God, the Law judges according to the
necessity. If one be bound to repair a Bank of the Sea, if he (by negligence)
suffer the Waters to surround his Neighbors ground, he is liable to wast; but
if by violence of Tempest, an Innundation happen, he is excusable. If the Heir
at full age tender Livery, and dies before he has made homage, the Law gives
him the advantage of his Tender in the same way, as if it had been accompanied
with all the solemn Circumstancies attending it: If a Disseisor die seized, the
Disseisee being in Prison, or beyond the Seas, it is no descent, Finch Nom. 17.
Necessitas vincit communem legem: and therefore, if two Joynt-Tenants be of
Land, and to the Heirs of one of them, they shall not join in a Writ of Right
and yet they shall join in a Writ of Right of an Advowson: For if they shall
not join, neither the one nor the other has any remedy, 5 Cr. 40. b. Illud
quod alias licitum non est necessit as facit licitum and necessit as inducit
privilegium quod jure privatur: And upon this ground was the Bishop of
Salisburies Case judged of the grant of an Office, with an Annuity contrary to
the Statute, 1 Eliz.

But Sir, was there ever greater necessity, is not the settlement of the
Kingdom in its critical hour, is not the Banes published, Now to give evidence,
or for ever after hold our peace? Do not nocent persons pass in triumphant
innocence, whilst those stand by, whose evidence, if admitted, would write the
Letter of Condemnation on their foreheads? These were the men that broke
through the Host to draw water, to get evidence, by marching into the enemies
quarters daily encountering them, and now the water must be spilt on the ground,
and they denied to say, they ever did see them: This is worse then to muzzel
the mouth of the Ox, whilst he treads out the straw; Persons in many cases
may be examined, where the consequence may be to obviate a p^nalty, they may be
subjected unto; A Sheriff may be examined upon his own return. A foreign Plea
may be sworn; An Infant levies a Fine, and brings a Writ of Error to reverse
it, yet he may be examined; Debt upon arrerages of account, the Plaintiff may
be sworn if there be any such account, and by this he takes away the benefit of
the Defendant to wage the Law: The party robbed upon the Statute of Hue and Cry
shall be examined, and so upon a forcible entry, though the party may have
restitution, yet he may be examined; In a Writ of Entry brought, an Essoin was
cast for the Defendant in the Kings Service, in partibus transmarinus, and the
Essoiner was examined and sworn de veritate essoinae, Dyer 154.

I might proceed, that licet iniquum est aliquem suae rei esse judicem, yet in
some cases one may be judge, Master and Carver: Lessor Covenants to repair the
House, if he do not, and the Lessee does it, he may pay himself out of the
Rent, 12 H. 8.11. Tailors and Hostlers may detain the Garment and Horse, till
reasonable satisfaction be made.

It may be added, how little those Officers serving his Majesty before 49. are
subjected to those temptations, upon which the Law in its rigor grounds it
self, to exclude interested persons from being Witnesses; The bulk of that
remote possibility of satisfaction, is but gleanings and fragments, (their
reward is, that they know his Majesty has an esteem of their services and
sufferings,) join that with the worth of the persons, being all Commissioned
Officers, and then who could without injury to the Law of charity judge them,
that to preserve those Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy they have sworn,
inviol^bly have put no rate upon their lives and fortunes, and have not
worshipped the Idols of the times, though the Oven was seven times heated, I say,
Who can judge, nay think, that for an acre of Land to be divided among them,
they would stoop to so sordid a crime as Perjury: The Peers of the Realm, upon
this account, pass upon trials of blood, only declaring their Judgments upon
their Honor: But surely cur case is plain, and that they are not only lawful
Witnesses, but under strong Obligations, if any person be indicted of Treason,
to give in evidence, their knowledge in matter of fact, Tenant for life, and the
Remainder over: If Tenant for life be indicted for Treason, he in the Remainder
may be a witness, though in that case, when one goes to the bough, the other
goes to the plough.

Propos. 20. Upon motion to the Court, that any aged or impotent Person that
can give evidence for his Majesty, That their depositions be taken by
Commission, and lodged in the Court, to be produced in his Majesty's behalf, at
the same shall require.

This is not denied in the case of the Subject; Commissioners to examine, in
perpetuam rei memoriam, are frequent; It is but reason to use all good
Husbandry for the King, and to pickle up such proofs, as through age cannot
keep long.

Thus may it please your Grace, I have past by those several heads given me in
charge by the House, humbly to present to your Grace, with the instance of some
of those many reasons they had under their consideration; The conclusion of the
Instrument is this, viz. These are the particulars which are presented to his
Grace and Council, as the result of the observations which have been hitherto
made upon the late proceedings; And that this House humbly desires his Grace,
that when time and experience shall suggest any thing of like moment with the
above particulars, his Grace and Council will be pleased to receive them: And
if any thing herein offered, through the strai^ness of time, be not
sufficiently cleared, his Grace and Council would be pleased to admit a
Committee of the House of Commons, to confer with a Committee of the Board upon
the same; and that, in the interim, if any cause to be heard by the
Commissioners, may receive prejudice under any of these Proposals, being
undetermined, that the Commissioners being ascertained of the same, may suspend
the hearing of it, till his Grace and Councils pleasure be further known.

It rests only to beg your Graces pardon, if in discharging the trust reposed
in me, I have been enforced to use some words of Discrimination, It is against
the Inclination, nay, the Prayers of the House (if the Subject matter could
dispense with it) to avoid them: They know, the complete peace of the Kingdom,
rests not in cessation of Arms, but in union of Hearts; and they doubt not, but
under the prudent Administration of his Majesty's Authority vested in your
Grace, we shall arrive to that happiness, that it may be said, Jam cuncti gens
una sumus; ah Sir, and Sic simus in aevum: We complain not of the want of a
good Law, for the settlement of this Nation upon sure and lasting foundations,
such that nothing but our sins can subvert: If the spirits of all Kings living
had been textacted, they could not have contributed more to revive a gasping
Kingdom, than the wisdom of our Royal Sovereign, blessed with a Divine
assistance, has in this Act of Settlement recorded, to perfume and embalm his
memory to all ages: But Sir, Corruption optimi est pessima: It is not the Sword,
but the hand that gives Protection, or a Wound, with respect to the efficient
cause: The Law says, All-hail-Protestants of Ireland; but if the execution be
dissonant, we are crucified under a glorious Inscription of Mockery.

The execution of the Law, is the soul of the Law; the want of this has
transmitted this never-dying Truth to Posterity, That Nulla est ta^ misera
servitus, quam ubi jus est incertum and vagum.

FINIS.
February 13. 1662.

ORdered by the House nemine contradicente, That Mr. Speaker having this day so
faithfully delivered the sense of this House, unto his Grace the Lord
Lieutenant: Do cause his Speech to be Printed and Published, and that it be
entered into the Journal of this House.

Philip Fernely, Cler. Parl.

I Do appoint Alderman William Bladen to Print my Speech: And that none else
presume to Print it without my Order.

AUDLEY MERVYN.


