A DISCOURSE OF Licenses to Preach.

OCCASIONED By a Question Propounded, viz.

Why many Officers of the Church of England, in the Episcopal Visitations, urge
the Incumbents, to take LICENSES to Preach.

Replied to by Ja. Metford Rector of Basingham, in the County of Lincoln: In a
Letter to the Proposer.

Published for the Consideration of the CLERGY, to whom it is of no small
Importance.

LONDON: Printed for H. Hindmarsh, at the Golden-Ball over against the Royal
Exchange in Cornhil. School.

TO THE Righ Reverend Father in God, JAMES by Divine Providence Lord Bishop of
Lincoln.
My Lord,
WE can never be enough Thankful to his Sacred Majesty, the great Patron of
this Church; that He was pleased to honor Us, with a Bishop, taken from among
our Selves, to fill the Chair of this Ancient See of Lincoln: who is neither
Ignorant of our Persons, nor our Needs, nor unwilling to Hear and Resolve our
Doubts. This small Dissertation therefore, comes in all Humility, and with most
profound Respect, to show your Lordship, the Sense of most of your Clergy,
about an odd Custom, introduced in these later Ages, of Obliging Incumbents to
take Licenses to Preach. And that, even after they have received Ordination,
and Institution.

We believe that your Lordship intends not to elumbate the Dignity of
Preisthood: nor to divulse its Essential, (or at least Integral) Parts, from
each other. And accordingly that you will never permit, any Consideration, to
gain that Ascendency in your Thoughts, as to continue a Custom, utterly unknown
to the Primitive, and middle times; and unuseful in these. And can furnish Us
with nothing but Scruples in our Selves, and Objections against us in our
Adversaries.

We know that you have Kindness enough, to forgive the Weakness of Management;
and Wisdom enough to strengthen its defects, where it needs; and therefore do
humbly submit the whole matter to your sound Judgment: in full assurance, that
you will add to the Blessing of our public Peace, by giving us private
satisfaction, in withdrawing this Custom, or at least to Instruct us in the
necessity of its Continuance, who have no other Design, but to be Dutiful,
whatever is determined: and to be taught what we do not understand; which will
be abundantly obliging to All, but more especially to

My LORD, Your Devoted Subject and most Humble Servant, J. M.

A Discourse of Licenses to Preach.
SIR,
THE Quaere last Night Propounded: why Licenses to Preach, are so frequently,
and vehemently urged to to be taken, and Exhibited, by Incumbents; in our
Episcopal Visitations: being then Answered with some haesitation, the help of a
few hours Thoughts, gives me the advantage of setting this matter in a clearer
Light before you. Which I think (for want of a better Method) may be done by
elucidating these Seven ensuing Propositions.

First, That Ordination to Priesthood, gives Authority to the Ordained to
Preach.

Secondly, That the Church for 1400 years, never required Incumbents of
Benefices, to take Licenses to Preach.

Thirdly, That the Church Canons enjoined all Incumbents to Preach, under great
Penalties.

Fourthly, When Licenses were first Introduced, they did not oblige Incumbents
to take them.

Fifthly, If the Canons did ever oblige Incumbents to take Licenses: It was
upon an accidental Consideration.

Sixthly, That Licenses add, nor, diminish any thing, to or from the Title to
any Benefice.

Seventhly, That the forcing Incumbents to take Licenses (since the first
Accidental Occasion) was of no Benefit to the Church, but to gain Fees.

These Propositions made good, will infer the Truth of my Sudden Answer. That
these Licenses are pressed upon Incumbents upon very mean Considerations. I
shall therefore apply my self to clear them in Order.

I. First, That Ordination to Priesthood, gives Authority to the Ordained to
Preach. A Truth so well known, and believed, that few will List themselves in
the Army of Opponents, but such as Gain by it. Most will wonder what Ordination
means, if it gives not Authority to Preach. For it was used to fit the
Presbyter for his whole Function, of which Preaching was a very Considerable
Part.

When our Savior ordained his Ministry, He bid them go teach all Nations,
Math. 28.19.
and Baptize them. And in Conformity to Christ's Institution, the whole
Catholic Church thus prepared Preachers by Ordination. And so does the Church
of England in her Office of Ordination, Require those that are to be ordained
to Promise, That they will give faithful Diligence always to minister the
Doctrine and Sacraments -- And to teach the People committed to their Charge --
And to drive away all Erroneous and strange Doctrines. Without any previous
Condition, If they should be thereunto Licensed. And farther the Ordainer
says, at Imposition, of hands: Be thou a faithful Dispenser of the Word of
God, and of his holy Sacraments. So that he is as much Authorized to Preaching,
as to Adminster Sacraments. And therefore may be as well forced to a new
License for Administering Sacraments, as for the Preaching. But in truth, both
these Functions are sealed to him, under the most venerable Seal In the Name of
the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

If all this be thought, too little, to Authorize him to Preach, yet sure when
the Ordaining Bishop delivers Him the Bible with these Words; Take thou
Authority to Preach the Word of God, and to Minister the holy Sacraments, in
the Congregation, where Thou shall be lawfully appointed thereunto. Who can
doubt but that He is as much Authorized to Preach in that Place, as to
Administer holy Sacrament. 'That is, as much as all the Licenses in the World
can give Him. For here the Ordaining Bishop, gives Him Authority to Preach and
Administer, under the most sacred Circumstances imaginable: being in Cathedra:
in the presence of God: and before the Assembly of Saints: at the Holy Altar:
and Seals this Character, with the most tremendous Body and Blood of Christ.
And what can a Scrole called a License do more than This? Is a Bishop greater
in his Study?. or Dining Room? than at the Church? or is his Table greater than
the Altar? or Himself and Secretary, more venerable than the Congregation? what
pity is it that Avarice or other unknown cause, should run men into such
Absurdities?

But They may say, though this be true, yet the Presbyter has no Seal to
Evidence this; so that He cannot make it appear to all People where He comes.
This we must Justly deny, for He receives Letters of Orders under the Bishops
hand and Seal; by which this Authority is manifested, as much as by the
License. So then, we do with good Conscience, and upon plain Evidence affirm,
the Presbyter has License to Preach by his Letters of Orders, and needs no
more, if Officers need no Money.

This Authority satisfied the holy Catholic Church for Fourteen Centuries:
amongst whose Records we find no Licenses to Preach besides their Letters of
Orders.

We, hear of St. Cyprian's Presbyter Didiensis, but read no other Title to
Preach besides his Letters of Orders. And when the Laurae were, settled in
Egypt, we yet find nothing but Ordination and the Priests Mission to dwell in
a house placed very near the Church: which answers well enough to our
Institution.

II. Secondly, That the Church for 1400 years, never required Incumbents on
Benifices, to take Licenses to Preach.

This Proposition being negative, admits of no other Proof, than that no notice
of any Licenses to Preach, has come to our hands, after the best Search we
could make about them. We see Ordination did Qualify for Preaching in the
Church. And find that Bishops did send their Presbyters abroad to administer
Religion where they thought convenient. We find also a great many Requisite
Forms, or Letters used in many Cases: as the (...) (which also were sometimes
called (...) because they did not only commend the Party that had Them, but
also contained his dismission in Peace.) There were also Literae Formatae
(called so I think from the Form of the Bishops Seal put to them) as also
Communicatoriae given to Christians Traveling, that they might be received
into the Catholic Communion, where they came. These and a few others, we meet
with in the Primitive times, as the Tractoriae which directed the Messengers of
Churches, and gave them ready Acceptance where they were sent. And so ancient,
that we find the (...) or Commendatory Letters mentioned by S. Paul himself as
of common use in his time. 2 Cor. 3.1. Can. Antioch. 7, 8.
Witness those words of his (...) And in the Synod of Antioch we see some
others; but no where these Letters of License for Preaching. And if there were
any such, it is to be wondered at, that neither Bernardinus Ferarius that
treated so minutely of the ancient Rights of Bishops: nor Alcuinus, Amalarius,
or any other of those Antiquaries, that Charles the Great set on work, to
search the ancient customs of the Church: nor any other, of those collected by
Melchior Hittorpius, should hit on them. We cannot suspect those Authors of
Ignorance, in the Church Canons and customs seeing it was a known Rule: Nulli
Sacerdotum liceat suos Canones ignorare. Great. nulli did. 38.


We may add the Probability, that this Church of England, knew nothing of this
License to Preach, in the time of Archbishop. Stratford An. Dom. 1342, Lyndw.
l. 3 tit 22 cap. Saeva and etc.
nor at any time before. For his Synod endeavored to stop the Oppressions of
the Clergy; and to Restrain the greedy appetites of the Officers; seeing the
inferior Clergy groaning under their burdens, ready to join with the Wiclefists
in their complaints. And therefore enumerated all the Seals and Writings then
in use: and ascertained the Fees, for them: but makes no mention of any
Licenses to Preach as distinct from Letters of Orders. They are thus reckoned.
Pro Scriptura Literarum, Inquisitionum, Institutionum, vel Collationum, and
Commissionum ad inducendum, vel Certificatorijs ipsarum in Beneficijs, ultra
xij Denarios. Pro Literis vero cujuslibet Sacri Ordinis, ultra vj Denarios
dicti Clerici per se vel per alios, non recipiant quovis modo. And farther to
Evidence that the Synod intended to omit nothing then in use, they add that the
Sewers, Porters, Grooms, nor Barbers should require nothing, giving this Reason
for it, That the Ordinary ought to maintain his own Servants with fitting
Wages. Now can any man (not quite deserted of Reason) imagine this intent Synod
forgot these Licenses to Preach? Or may we not more reasonably conclude, there
was no Footstep of any such Practice then in use? And yet we shall soon hear of
it, even in his time, though not required to be taken by any Incumbents.

III. Thirdly, That the Church Canons enjoined all Incumbents to Preach under
great Penalties; which surely they would not do if they were not qualified for
it, without Licenses. But the Canons proceed on a Supposition, that Ordination
and Institution gave Title enough to furnish out a Preacher for his Cure. It
will not be necessary to show the many Canons of Codex Ecclesiae universatis,
seeing our own Church has plenty enough. But if any desire it, he may consult
Photius his Nomo canon. tit. 8. c. 2. where He may be satisfied.

For the Church of Englands zeal that way, we may consult Stephen Langtons
Decree, in the Council holden at Oxford Anno 1222, how earnestly Preaching is
urged on all Incumbents Praesentis Concilij definitione districte duximus
injung endum, ut Rectores and vicarij, Plebes sibi commissas pabulo verbi Dei,
secundum quod fuit ijs inspiratum, informare procurent, ne canes muti merito
judicentur: cum latratu salubri a Caulis Dominicis Luporum spiritualium morsus
non expellunt etc.

So likewise John Peccham in a Constitution made at Lambeth An. Dom. 1281 Cap.
Ignorantia Sacerdotum etc. Imposes this care on the Archdeacon to watch the
Clergy concerning Preaching. Quoties Archidiaconi invenerint Presbyteros,
Institutionem moralem populo minime praedicasse, sen publicasse, toties eos
arguant and poena Canonica castigando supplere compellant, quod temere
omiserunt.

The same Council also lays this charge on the Clergy. Praecipimus, ut quilibet
Sacerdos Plebi praesidens, quater in Anno -- per. vel per alium exponat populo
vulgariter, quatuor december Fidei Articulos: December mandata Decalogi: Duo
Praecepta Evangelij: Septem opera misericordiae: Septem mortalia peccata etc.
and gives, them a Method how to do it. By which we may conclude, they were so
far from Restraining their Clergy from Preaching; that they urged it by all
good means they could. While we strive to embarass that work, till so much
money is paid for our leave to do it.

It Is true indeed, that if a Priest were a Stranger; that came out of Ireland,
Wales, or Scotland, and for the same Reason, from any other Foreign Church,
such a one was forbidden to celebrate any Divine Offices in this Church: If he
came without Commendatory or Dimissory Letters of his Ordinary (And especially
if there were any doubt of his Lawful Ordination) Unless He came with a License
from the Diocesan. This Constitution was made under Walter Reynolds, in the
Second Council at Oxford Anno 1322, in these words Item praecipimus ne
Sacerdotes ignoti, de quorum Ordinatione non constat ad Divinorum celebrationem
diserviendo Ecclesijs admittantur, nisi de Licentia Episcopi Dioecesani. Nor
was it Lawful for the Diocesan to give him that License, without Letters
Testimonial and good. Evidence that He was lawfully ordained.

Here we see a License mentioned to be given by the Diocesan, but it was to a
Foreigner. 2 To one that was no Incumbent. 3. To one whose Ordination was
doubted. 4. It Was a License ad celebrationem Divinorum, Lynd. de ^ler.
peregrinat. c. 8
which the Gloss interprets, to celebrate Mass; the Canonical hours: and to
administer Sacraments: so that it was not a bare License to Preach. 5. The
Reason of it was, That none below the Dignity of a Bishop, might be trusted
with the Judgment of Foreigners Pretenses to holy Orders. Which therefore can
make nothing to our Licenses to Preach. There is another Provision concerning
Chaplains celebration in any of our Churches, after Lollardisme began to spread
it self; made in a Council at Oxford under Thomas Arondel Anno 1408. in these
words: Nullus Cappellanus admittatur ad celebrandum, in aliqua Diaecesi nostrae
Cantuariensis Provinciae, in qua Oriundus sive Ordinatus fuerit; nisi deferat
secum Literas Ordinum suorum, atque Literas Commendatitias Dioecesani sui etc.
without which Orders and Commendatory Letters of the Bishop, if any Rector,
Vicar, or Curate, did permit him to celebrate, Permittens acriter puniatur. On
which we may observe, It Is a Rule for Chaplains not Incumbents. 2. It enables
them to celebrate Divine Service, as well as to Preach, and so accords not with
our Licenses.

IIII. Fourthly, When Licenses were first introduced, the Church obliged no
Incumbents to take these Licenses to Preach. If they did Require it, we might
expect to hear of them, either at Institution, or Induction: but we hear of
none in company with either of them.

First we hear of none at Institution. There is a Constitution made at Lambeth
under Archbishop Peccham, concerning the Institution of an Incumbent, directing
the Form of it, in these words: Statuimus u^ unusquisque Episcopus, Clerico
quem ad Ecclesiam admittat, Literas Patentes super sua Admissione concedat.
Inter alia continentes, in quo consistat Ordine: etiam quo Titulo, ad hujusmodi
Beneficium admittatur etc. Had that Council then thought Licenses to Preach
necessary, no doubt they had ordered them too. Seeing now the Incumbent was
going to his Cure, under the obligation of the Canons to Preach, and Instruct
his People.

It seems the Glossator thought the Letters of Institution thus drawn, were
Title good enough, without any farther License to Preach: for He tells us Hae
enim Literae in Beneficialibus habentur loco Tituli. That this Institution was
his Title.

Secondly, nor does any thing concerning these Licenses appear, when Mandats
for Induction were enjoined In the Council held at Oxford under the before named
John Stratford in the year 1343 (as many reckon) or 1342 (as the Manuscript
Copy in the Bedleian Library has it) Mandats for Induction are mentioned; and
the Rates of them set, to bound the Gripes of Avarice. But no mention is yet
made of these Licenses to Preach. The Constitution is Sacro approbante Concilio
statuimus, ut hi qui admissos ad Beneficia Ecclesiastica, ad Mandatum
Superioris tenentur inducere; pro indunctione hujusmodi facienda Sumptibus
contententur moderatis. Videlicet si Archi Diaconus Inducat xl Denarijs. Si
suus Officialis duorum solidorum perceptione. Providing, that if either take
more than is there allowed, for the Induction, Constable. Provin. ^3. tit. 6.
or propter Literas Certificatorias (meaning the indorsed Certificates of
Execution) They are to be suspended ab Officio, et ingressu Ecclesiae Till they
Refund the Extorted money, to the Party wronged.

We may (without doing violence to our Reason) believe, That bounds had been
set, to the Rates of Licenses also, had there, been any such things then in
use. And the rather because the same Council, under the same Prelate,
complained heavily of the great Exactions then on the Clergy. And therefore
sixth the charge of every Seal then in use, for Incumbents to take, Constable. 1.3.
tit. 22.
as appears by their Constitution Saeva et miserabilis Cupiditas etc. which
has been already touched. In which they Decree against both Bishops,
Archdeacons, and their Clerks; That they shall not take for any Writings above
twelve pence. Nor for any Letters of Orders above six pence. And for Sealing
nothing at all. If any Clerk took more, he was to refund double. If he were a
Beneficed man, he was suspended ab officio and Beneficio. If a Lay man he was
to be suspended ab ingressu Ecclesiae, till satisfaction made.

It Is very probable, That such Constitutions of our own, and the Catholic
Church, caused that Learned and tender Prelate Bishop Bedell, v. Burnets life
of Bedel.
to write the Letters of Orders and Institutions himself as the worthy Dr.
Burnet, the present Bishop of Sarum testifies of him.

The same Council condescended to take notice, That Archdeacons would not
suffer Incumbents, to administer Divine service, in the Cures they were
admitted to, till they had paid them six pence, for matriculation, in their
Rolls of Call. Which payment that Council reduced to one penny as formerly it
was. And is it probable they should omit a License (if any) that remembered such
a Trifle?

And farther to show the diligence of the Gloss on that Decree, that nothing be
forgotten; It blames those Ordinaries, that will Revise their Clergies Orders,
Institutions etc. for benefit: though they have perused and satisfied
themselves about them before.

Thirdly, In the first appearances of any Licenses to Preach, we find the
Incumbents of Churches, not charged to take them. But their Right to Preach, by
virtue of their Institution; and their Obligation thereto, is acknowledged.

The first Occasion of forbidding Preaching, without License, that we meet
withal, was in regard to Wickliffes Doctrins, then much spread in England:
under the name of Lollards. Not so called e Lolio from Durnell, as Godolphin
and Lyndwood, and other Civilians fancy. As if they were the plague of the
Church, as Darnell is of Wheat. But from one Walter Lollard a German, the first
noted to profess those Doctrins, about the year 1315. This Sect spread much in
the Reign of Edw. III. and increased to the times of Hen. V. whereof John
Wickliffe Rector of Lutterworth was the greatest Promotor, in England. Of whose
Doctrine Forty Five Articles stand condemned in the Eighth Session of the
Council of Constance. Pacher. de Council l. 2. c. 3.
As likewise at London Anno 1382. And at length, the Professors of it were
condemned to punishment, by Act of Parliament, made 2 Henry V. cap. 7. And
Thomas Arondell Arch Bishop of Canterbury, decreed many things against them,
Constable. l. 5. tit. 5. de haeret.
in a Council held at Oxford, Anno Dom. 1408. And Pope Martin the Fifth Anno
1429 raised a Crusado against Them, under the Conduct of Henry Cardinal of S.
Eusebius and (if my memory fail not) then Bishop of Winchester.

Now seeing that many Foreigners, and Laymen, Catechizers, and Lecturers, took
upon them to Preach these Doctrines; a Constitution was made, in the said
Council at Oxford 1408, That none should Preach without License.

The words of the Decree are; Ordinamus quod nullus Soecularis aut Regularis,
ad praedicandum verbum Dei, a jure Scripto minime authorisatus: privilegiove
speciali munitus, Officium ceu exercitium proedicationis ejusdem verbi Dei, in
se assumat. Populove aut Clero, quovismodo praedicet, in Latino Sermon seu
vulgari, in Ecchsia aut Extra etc. Unless He present himself to the Diocesan,
and undergo his Examination: and being found fit, he be sent to Preach, to one
or more certain Parishes, as the Ordinary shall think fit. And it is ordered
that no Rector or Vicar is to permit any to Preach, unless he show his Mission,
or special Privilege; How he appears qualified for the service of Preaching.
Or if he come from the Diocesan, He is to show his Letters under Seal. But this
concerned those that were not authorized Jure Scripto, as all Incumbents were;
And Friars Praedicants, and Minors were authorized to Preach by special
Privilege, and the Gloss thinks Augustinians and Carmelites were so too. So
that it did not reach them. But it did reach all other Friars, Strangers,
Lecturers, Catechisers, and the like.

That Incumbents were not intended, is plain from the Exception, Jure Scripto
minime authorisati, for they had their Authority under Seal, and by the Canons
were bound to Preach. And the following Clause cleers it: Curatum vero
perpetuum, missum intelligimus a Jure, ad Locum et populum Curae suae. And it
farther adds concerning Curates that might be changed; Sacerdotes vero
Parochiales seu Vicarii temporales, et non perpetui, in forma supradicta non
missi, in Ecclesijs illis, in quibus hujusmodi officia gerunt Illa sola
simpliciter praedicent, quae in Constitutione Provinciali, a bonae memoriae
Johanne Praedecessore nostro, in Capite Ignorantia Sacerdotum continentur
express.

Now because men might imagine, this new License to Preach was ordered to be
taken, on purpose to get more Fees; It Is wisely provided by the Council, that
it should be granted, Sine aliquali Exactione pecuniae without any manner of
Fee. Celeriter expediunter, et gratis, says the Constitution.

And then the Council provides, If any such Preach, without these Letters: or
if any say, the Church has not power to lay on this Restraint, he incurs the
Sentence of the greater Excommunication: and is to be treated as a Heretic, or
Shismatick having all his goods confiscated. Yea the place where such Preaching
is held (if not stopped by the People) is put under Interdict.

From this Constitution we may draw these Conclusions, 1 That this was a new
Law, not imposed before, to take Licenses to Preach. 2 That Incumbents are
declared to have power to Preach Jure Scripto by Law, in their Cures. 3 That
some others had Right to Preach, without taking these Licenses Privilegio
Speciali: as Friars Praedicants, Minors, Augustinians and Carmelites. 4 That
these Licenses were to be granted by the Diocesian Bishop, and not per
inferiorem Episcopo, namely not by any Archdeacon, Chancellor, Commissary,
Official or the like. 5 That. these, Licenses were to be taken by Strangers
Lecturers etc. but not by Incumbents, nor their temporary Curates. 6 That these
Incumbents or temporary Curates were to Admit, or Refuse such Preachers, in
their Cures as they should find their Licenses to be. 7 That those who were
bound to take Licenses to Preach, were not to pay one Farthing for them. This
part of the Constitution well observed* would end all Disputes, about Parochial
Diocesan, and Provincial Licenses. 8 It shows where this wise Council Judged
Licenses to Preach necessary: Namely for all that had not perpetual, or
temporary Cure of Souls. For to them that had such Cures, Ordination gave them
Jus ad Rem. Authority to Preach, in any part of the holy Catholic Church: But
Institution gave them Jus in Re, a Right to Preach actually to the People of
their Cures: And to the temporary Curates by virtue of the Incumbents
Deputation. As also to necessary Assistants in case of Sickness, or necessary
Absence.

The Friars Titles are not necessary here to be spoken to, because this Church
of England is troubled with none of them, that come to challenge any Right.

V. Fifthly, If the Canons of this Church did ever oblige Incumbents to take
Licenses to Preach. It was upon very extraordinary, and Accidental
Considerations. Such as also forced the Church to compose books of Homilies,
for the use of Incumbents that could not Preach.

Upon the Reformation, there were great Numbers of Incumbents, brought into the
Church in the time of Popery that were not able to Preach: who yet turned
Protestants and conformed to the Doctrine, and Discipline of this Church as far
as they were able; whom the Piety and Charity of those times thought not fit to
cast out of their Livings; because they thought fit to give them some Respect
for their Conformity: and to save the Parishes from the burden of their
maintenance: and those poor Priests from perishing through wants: and because
they had not Learned men enough to put into their places: and because they
would not wilfully force, by their violent treatment, so many men, to act
against the Safety of Church and State; which had Enemies enough, both at home
and abroad, wherefore they were permitted to continue in their Living, and to
celebrate Divine Service: but were never forbid to Preach: yet when the Church
found them able (by their Study and Industry, and often hearing Sermons) to
Preach; They wisely took that opportunity, to try their Parts, and to bring
them under Subscriptions, to use the Protestants method, by requiring them to
take Licenses to Preach, when they thought themselves able.

One may justly wonder how such ignorant Men came into the Church: Con. Carth.
6. c. 19.
considering how importunate the Primitive Canons are for Priests Preaching:
insomuch that the last Council of Carthage enjoins it every day, or at least
every Lords day. And if the Presbyter were sick, the Deacon is ordered to read
a Homily to the People. And that S. Ambrose, Chrysostom, and Augustines Works
show that they Preached all Fasts and Feasts, as well as Sundays; and often
every day, and many times twice a day. But this change must be Attributed to
the guidance of the Roman Church, in which Preaching fell early into contempt:
for Sozomen observes the difference of that Church from all others, Soz. l. 7.
c. 19.
in this matter. (...) which was in the Reign of Valentinian and Theodosius.
And least any should think Sozomen mistaken in the Practice of Rome, he may
find the same Affirmed by Cassiodore in his Tripartite History, who lived in
Rome, and could not be Ignorant of their services. It Is true Valesius thinks
this custom altered in Pope Leo, who did Preach to the People; but one Swallow
makes no Summer: He himself looks Irregular for his pains. You may know that
that Church holds Preaching to be no part of the Essence of Priesthood: for
they account, Potestatem offerendi verum corpus Christi and remittendi peccata,
the power of offering the very body of Christ in the Eucharist, and of
Remission of Sins, to make up the formality of Priesthood. And accordingly
Anathematize such as say, Qui non Praedicant, Cone. Trid. Sess 23. de Sacr.
ordin. c. 1.
prorsus non esse Sacerdotes: one may be apt to suspect those to be of the same
mind, that judge a Priest in his place may not Preach without taking out a New
License so to do. We deny not but a Man may be a Priest that cannot Preach in
respect of Age, Sickness, or the like: but deny him to be a Priest of Christ's
Institution, that has not power to Preach, if he be able: because Christ
ordered all that he sent to Preach and Baptize. And if you read on, the next
Session of that Council of Trent, Ib. sess 24. de Refor. cap. 4.
they seem more for Preaching than our Protestant Visitors; for they say
Praedicationis munus Episcoporum praecipuum est: and command all to Preach
saltem omnibus dominicis and sollennibus festis diebus. Et tempore
Quadragesimali, et Adventus, quotidie vel saltem tribus in hebdomade diebus.

But the History of the Council of Trent will tell you, whence this new Flame,
of Preaching was raised; intimating that Preaching was lost in Cathedrals, etc.
nor did any but Regulars keep it up, Hist. Con. Trent. l. 2. p. 173.
till Anno 1546, when it was raised again, by certain Rules of Reformation,
passed in the Trent Council, on June 17th. the same Year; upon the loud
Accusations and Complaints of all People, both Popish and Protestant for a
Reformation.

Yet that Church seems to have an aching Tooth against it to this day, which may
be guessed, from the Scornful reproaches cast on the Preachers, by some of
them, of whom we shall only instance in Becanus a Jesuit, Bec. c. Guard. page
794.
seeing his immodesty knows no Bounds in his Dispute with Gardius, he tells
him. Quamvis modestiae Pallio se obtegat Gardius, Praedicanticam naturam exuere
non posse. Again, Hanc Praerogativam (scilicet ineptiendi) Praedicantibus
relinquo. So he charges him imperitia novi Praedicantis. Id. 1. c.. 16. p. 17.
Id. 73. Id. 170. Id. c. 3. 117.
And farther, Ita antiqui Patres id statuunt: si tu cum vulgo Praedicantium
aliter sentis per me licet. Again notae sunt Praedicantium Imposturae, ut
facile caveri et contemni queant. So again novellus aliquis Praedicans
sussuratur argumenta ex Bellarmino. By which and many other such like passages;
one may discern their bitterness against Preaching, as a most ridiculous
Employment; yet S. Paul Magnifies, or rather Glorifies this Office. And tells
us by this follishness of Preaching, Romans 11.13. 1 Cor. 1.21. 1. Cor. 1.17.
God intends to save some. And 'twas the Apostles main business, as that great
Apostle notes, For Christ sent me not to Baptize, but to Preach the Gospel. By
which it appears that Preaching was not only an essential part of a Priest, but
is preferred to Sacraments themselves. So that a Jesuit follows Jesus in his
Name, but his Sentiments are vastly different, and often contrary; for Christ
sent the Preachers, and the Jesuit derides them.

If any doubt of the Ignorance of the Roman Clergy, Id. Con. Hard. Apol. p. 622.
at the Reformation, they may see it proved beyond Exception, in the learned
Jewel against Harding; in truth Learning made so great a fall in the sixth
Century, that the prime Men of the World, had very little of it. Even
Theodorick King of Italy, and Justin in Constantinople, Amarcel in Addit. p.
669. Greg. op. I. 9. ep. ^9. id. 16. ep. 29.
could not write their own Names: as Veles in Ammianus Marcellinus, shows the
greatest of Popes Gregory the great, candedly confesses to Eusebius Bishop of
Thessaly, that he understood not a word of Greek, nos nec Graecum novimus; so
also in another Epistle he says, Graeca Linguae nescius. And some great Men in
the Church knew not Latin neither, as Paulus Jovins notes of Riarius the
Praesident of the Conclave of Cardinals, Jov. vit. Lev. x. l. 3. p. 127. Long.
ad an 1389.
that Aetatis honor, Sacerdotijs atque opibus, caeteros omnes anteibat,
quanquam Ei deerant Literae atque eae Virtutes quae Sacerdotem exornant.
Boniface the IX. Pope, fuit pane illiteratus says Langius. That Julius 3
understood no more Latin than a Soldier. There fore the Canon calls the Popes
Doctores Authoritate non Scientia. Doctors by their place not by their
Learning, which gives some color for the English Proverb; that he can write no
more than the Pope of Rome. Poor Heriman Bishop of Babenberg was, says Langius,
expers Literarum, and unfortunatly charged by one of his Canons, Lamb. senet
Chro. ad an. 1075.
that he could not Construe one verse in the Psalmody, was (says Lambertus
Schafnaburgensis) deposed by the Pope from his Bishopric, but continued a
Priest. Yet Gregory the great was more indulging, for he confirmed Rusticus
Elect Bishop of Ancona, et si Psalmos ignoraret. It seems Popes looked asquint
on Learning as dangerous to their spiritual-worldly Dominion; for Paul II.
called all that studied Philosophy Heretics. And forbad the Citizens of Rome
to keep their Children to School longer than to write and read, Satis esse
dicens si legire et scribere didicissent; which Platina notes in his life; the
Chronologer remarks, Lang. ad an 1389.
That when Chrysolaras Bizantinus came to teach Greek in Rome (which was about
1389) the Greek tongue had been disused there for 700 years last past. St.
Francis also (it seems) was a great stickler against Learning for he cursed
Friar John, for going to Bononia for Learning; Lang. ad an. 1254.
saying Se malle Fratres suos, magis orare quam Legere; as Langius reports it
of him. One may see to what Barbarity the World was come, by the Canons that
were made in favor of Ignorance: as that Sancti loquentes per Barbarimos non
sunt irridendi. V. de Consecrat: Did. 4. c. retulerunt and again Episcopi
errantes in Grammatica, non sunt a Sapientibus deridendi. 38 Did. c. quamvis
etc In pursuance of the design, of these and such like Canons, zealous Langius
falls fowl on Erasmus, for deriding the well meaning Cardinal Hugo's strange
mistakes, about the meaning and derivation of Greek Words: but thereby proves
the Barbarity of the times, Lang. ad an. 1250.
saying of S. Hugo; In ea tempora incidisset, quae politiores Literas,
praecipue Graecas, totam et per Galliam, et per Germaniam, prorsus incompertas
and inauditas habuerant. You may guess by this little, how dimm the Light was
that guided the World, till the Reformation, and what wooden Tools those Sr.
John's were that then supplied the place of Burning and shining Lamps.

We will propound but one grave dispute, upon this Subject, and so leave it;
that we nauseat not the Reader. The famous Aventine in his Annals of Bavaria,
tells us of a Priest of that Country who being wholly ignorant of the Latin
Tongue, Avent. Annal. l. 3. p. mihi 172.
did yet baptize In nomine Patria Filia et Spirita Sancta. A Question grew upon
it whether it was good Baptism or not? Vargilius the Bishop Justified it: but
Boniface of Mentz utterly condemned it. The whole matter referred to Pope
Zachary who (always pitiful to the Blind) approved it, as done with a good
Intention to Baptize.

But here the Reader must beware, That he conclude not that a gross thick
darkness covered all the Earth; for there were still some stars in every
Horizon, though very few. Some sparks of Learning survived the deluge, which have
been blown up to the Bonfires we see in all places: but the Professors were
Rari nantes in Gurgite vasto. Rare as Phaenixes, one in an Age. The Church
required little more than mumming and Massing, and Received less than Required.

Now as there were many illiterate men brought into the Church that Conformed,
and were Continued: so the Reformers, had not able men enough, to supply the
Places of those Few that laid down their Calling. Can. of 1603 can. 45, 46.
They were therefore forced to make plain honest, but Ignorant men Incumbents,
who were not then able to Preach, but were admonished to attend their Studies:
to Celebrate Divine service; once a month to get an able Preacher into their
Parishes: and at other times to read a Homily. For their sakes in the present
defect, the new Canons were made: That before they ventured to Preach, they
should come to their Bishops: undergo an Examination of their Ability: and make
their due Subscriptions, and so Receive their Licenses from the Bishops.

This method of dealing with weak Incumbents,'it is probable the Reformers took
from the Council of Trent, Sess. 23.24 Hist. trent. l. 2. p. 174.
who Decreed much the same Things: as may be seen by comparing the 23 and 24
Sessions of that Council with the History of the Council Anno 1546. where they
Require Licenses to be taken for the present Exigent of Affairs. Judging
Twilight better then quite Dark, and a Rush Candle to be preferred before none:
That the Prodigal were better Eat Husks, than die for hunger. And the Children
of the household of Faith to feed on Coarse Fare, than have no Food at all.

Here we ought to Consider, That the Church at Institution gave Incumbents
Authority to Preach in their Cures; and never prohibited them. But long
inveterate Custom of Massing, had taught the Institutor not to regard the
Incumbents ability. And the Instituted, not to fit himself for a Duty that none
practiced. Yet would it appear strange, to bid the Ordained Priest, not to
Preach in his Cures seeing he was ordained to that very End, if Christ's
Minister. But they were satisfied of the Incumbents inability for the present,
and so Required it not of him, till better able. 2. That the non Preaching
Incumbents, were bound by Canon, to procure Sermons to be Preached in their Cure
once every Month at least. Can. 46.
Concionem per Concionatorem legitime approbatum haberi procurabit etc. But can
any man believe, the Church would grant men leave, to procure Sermons, or
Preachers, yet would not trust them to preach themselves, had they been able?
It Is an allowed Rule Qui facit per Alium, facit per se. So that we may
conclude; It was not their not taking Licenses made them incapable of
Preaching; but their inability to perform it. Insomuch that the Church thought
good, to wait their Progress Studies, till they could perform it. 3. It is also
plain, that Incumbents were not bound to take Licenses to Preach before these
Canons made, because then (some of them at least) had had them before hand; and
so need not come before the Bishop for them; which had spoiled the whole
Project. 4. we may perceive too, that the Trent Canons, ordered these Licenses;
to be given gratis: as we noted before, of our former Canons, that related not
to Incumbents. Had the Canons of 1603 made the same Provision; It Is odds that
we had heard nothing of them to this Day: Hist. Trent. l. 2.164.
Bishops Chancellors and Comissaries would not have quarrelled who should have
granted Them: since men are seldom keen, to cut out themselves work, without
wages.

It appears therefore upon the whole matter, That if there be any Canons,
Requiring Incumbents to take Licenses to Preach, They are grounded upon special
Reasons, and particular Occasions that are extraordinary, and so cannot found an
Ordinary Rule. If the Ground fail the Superstructure must also fail. We
administer not the same Remedy but where is the same disease. Thanks be to God,
the Bishop has choice of able Preachers as well as able Priests: and can at
Institution provide for one as well as the other. Why should that be done at
twice that can and ought to be done at once? Frustra fit per plura etc. A
Priest implies a man that can Pray and Preach. Why should any put asunder what
Christ joined together. By the Canon of Canons a Priest must be apt to teach:
1. Tim. 32.
as to pray, and administer Divine Service. Men expect not fresh Grace to every
distinct Dish, that comes to Table; it suffices to consecrate the whole Dinner
at once. If we will take the Services apart, where will Covetousness end? Why
may not Clergy be forced to take one License to Preach? another to Pray?
another to Marry? another to Bury? etc.

VI. But to Proceed Sixthly, That Licenses to Preach, add not, nor diminish, to
or from the Title to any Benefice. This License is a thing so extrinsick, and
useless to a Divine, that he knows not what use to make of it. His Ordination
gave him Authority to Preach, and his Institution appointed out the Place: what
then does this License serve for? Is He more an Incumbent when he has it, than
he was without it? Both Common Lawyers, and Civilians agree, that the Incumbents
Tide is as good without it as with it. So that It gives them License only to
pay for it.

It would be tedious without profit, to transcribe, what Common Lawyers say,
makes a good Title to a Benifice. We may positively say that they do not so
much as name these Licenses in stating the Title: nor do we hear the Civilians
introducing them, as necessary to make a Title. To cut this matter short, we
will vouch one, with his Nomo Canon, to speak for all; having joined the Common
Law and Civil together: namely Dr. Godolphin, Reper. Law. cap. 17.. 4.
who in his Repertorium Canonicum twice states the Incumbents Titles 1 under
the Title Parson. He says no man can be a Parson unless 1 He be in holy Orders.
2 four and twenty years, of age. 3 unless he be admitted by Institution. 4 and
Inducted. 5 unless he subscribe the use of the book of Common Prayer, and take
the Bishops Certificate of it. 6 unless he within two months after Institution
and Induction, read the 39 Articles in his Church, on some Sunday tempore
Divinorum, and declare before the Congregation, his unfeigned Assent, and
consent, to every thing contained and required in them. And on the same Sunday
read the service of the day. In all which we hear nothing of this License to
Preach. And his 5th refers only to Incumbents Aug. 24. 1662.

Again the same Author, Id. c. 28.. 1.
in his Title Incumbent, shows four things Preparatory to the being a Complete
Incumbent. 1 The Patrons Praesentation. 2 The Bishops Admission after
Examination, making a Record of his name. 3 The Clerks Institution. 4 The
Clerks Induction. These things, and peacable possession for six Months, is a
Plenarty pro hac vice, and bars any in a Quare Impedit. So that then Licenses
are neither antecedently necessary, to the settlement of an Incumbent: nor
consequently necessary to continue him in his Cure. What then should move some
men to urge these Licenses; but what makes the Mare to go?

Seventhly, That the forcing Incumbents to take Licenses, was of no benefit to
the Church: nor to the Officers, but the Fees. This will appear,

1. By considering that Licenses to Preach cannot bind from Preaching false
Doctrine, more than Subscription to the 39 Articles will do: for what virtue is
there in the Bishops, or Chancellors hand and wax, more than in our own
Subscription and Promise, to keep us Orthodox? Is that an Amulet against
Heresy? nor can we see any virtue in it, to restrain Preaching against
Conformity or Ceremonies, more than in our Subscription to the three Articles
in the 36 Canon, of the Canons made 1603. Besides, the Laws of this Realm back,
and enforce the observation of our Subscriptions; but take no notice of these
intruded Licenses as arbitrarily imposed on a tame and couching Clergy.

2. The Clergy may as effectually be corrected, and Reformed from ill,
Heretical, or Shismatical Preaching, without Licenses as with them. For the
Incumbent may be convened, admonished, Reproved; and upon non Amendment, may be
suspended; and if contumatious Excommunicated: and standing so for Forty days,
may be deprived. And if he still persist in Heresy or Schism, be diliver'd over
to the Secular Arm. If they will give him Liberty of Preaching, they are
answerable to God for all the Mischeifs he does, but the Church is clear.

This way must be taken with Licenses too, as well as without. For though men
dote on them, they can no more strangle wicked Preaching than other Seals and
Subscriptions: nor so much, being not warranted by Law. And in truth this was
the only Remedy the Primitive Church had, to suppress all their Heresies and
Schisms: convening the Offender before the Diocesan: if that cured not the
malady, then before the Synod; where the Heresy or Schism was declared, and the
Party reformed or Excommunicated: and the People admonished to withdraw from
Him.

This Course may be taken still against all sorts of Sectaries, that by Baptism
were once made members of our Church. Who either will not take Licenses, or
cannot be reformed by them.

If it be said that, however Licenses are a more expedite way, because it is but
taking them away from such as Preach Heresy, or Schism. We may answer. 1 They
must first be convicted by due process, before they are punished; for Hallafax
Law is not well relished in England. So that the other method will be as nimble
as this. 2 If Licenses are durante beneplacito, they are too haughty for any
thing less than the Papal Dignity to give, and too slavish for a Minister of
Christ to receive. 3 If teaching be an essential part of Priesthood, it is
impossible to take it away, but by deposing the Priest: and that is the
punishment directed in the 38 Canon. 4 It Is probable such ill men would not
deliver up their Licenses, nor if they did, would hold themselves thereby
disabled to Preach: seeing (generally speaking) all Clergy believe themselves
authorized to Preach by Ordination: and the place assigned out by Institution:
and think Licenses as useless Tools imposed upon Incumbents of Livings: so that
the Cure would not be so quick as imagined. 5 Add to this that it would look
ill, to see an unpreaching Ministry; neither suspended ab Officio, nor
Beneficio, but a part Officij; a term as uncouth among Civilians, as Chagrine
amongst the English.

3. The dreadful Rebellion of 1640 did give us a sad Experience of the little
service these Licenses did the Church. for the Lecturers (to whom they were
necessary) were so far from being confined by them, That they were the loudest
and shrillest Trumpets of the War. The Lecturers Holy water swelled the Floods
of the Church and States calamity. Their Pulpits were the bellowing Drums, on
which they beat the Allarms of War. Burnet Ref. p. 2. lib. 1. page 160.
They were set up, says the History of the Reformation in 1550: and Barrow
against Gifford tells you why. The Lecturer was brought in to answer the Geneva
Platform, that we may have a Doctor besides a Pastor. He calls him a Sectary
Teacher: V. Barrow against Giff. page 136.
a Roving Stipendiary Predicant -- brought in by such of a Parish as have
Itching Ears -- From these arise the Schisms and Sects in the Church of England
-- They are Sighers for Reformation, and Conscience Botchers -- They seduce and
distract the People, some to this Preacher some to that, from their own
Parishes and Churches: calls them bats being neither Laiety, because Ordained;
nor Clergy because they had no Benefices. Of whom He gives a large (and no
doubt a true) Account, having been bred under them, till he turned Brownist,
and fell into the Rigid Separation.

It Is probable, that Holy Bishop and Martyr Ridley, foresaw the danger that
would arise, from such Licentiates, that He set himself so heartily against
them, as the Historian notes, as also did King Edwards wise Privy Council,
forbidding the People, Burnet ibid.
to have any thing but Prayers on the Week days.

It were not difficult to show, that the Smectymnuan Party, and many other of
those Firebrands of that Rebellion, were men tied by Subscriptions, and yoaked
with these Licenses: yet being men of no Consciences, these nor any other Ties
could hold them, but like masterless Swine, broke through the Quickest hedges
of Laws, and Canons, with these Yoaks about their Necks. Which also proves
Barrows Character true of the Lecturers, That they had Counterfeit shows of
Holiness, Barrow ib.
gravity, austereness of manners, preciseness in trifles: but large Consciences
in matters of greatest weight. And withal shows, that the very Reason urged
for the necessity of Licenses, viz. to stop the Preaching of Sedition; does
rather prove the uselesness of them to that End; by the very Instance given.

Having cleared the Truth of these Seven Particulars, and thereby proved the
unreasonableness of urging Incumbents to take Licenses to Preach; There are two
Things farther to be spoken to. First, To inquire in what Cases Licenses to
Preach may be necessary. Secondly, To Answer the Arguments brought for the
taking of Licenses by Incumbents.

First, In what Cases Licenses to Preach may be necessary. Seeing the true End
of Licenses, is to bring men, admitted to any teaching Office in the Church, to
engage and Subscribe to Conformity in Doctrine, Worship, and Discipline,
practiced in the Church of England: we judge it Reasonable, that those only be
required to take such Licenses, as are not known to have made such Promises,
Subscriptions and Engagements to the Church, at Institution or any other way.
Such are

1 Lecturers, that are not Incumbents in the Diocese, where they Preach such
Lectures: because the Bishop may not be assured of such Subscriptions,
Promises, and Engagements. Can. 1603 can. 36.
This we believe to be the meaning of the 36 Canon, in which the three Articles
for Subscription are contained. The words of which are, No Person shall
hereafter be received into the Ministry: nor either by Institution, or
Collation admitted to any Ecclesiastical Living; nor suffered to Preach, to
Catechize, or to be a Lecturer, or Reader of Divinity -- except he be Licensed,
either by the Archbishop or Bishop of the Diocese (where he is to be placed)
under their Hands and Seals: or by one of the two Universities, under their
Seal etc. Except he shall First Subscribe to these three Articles following, in
such manner and sort as we haw here appointed. From whence we gather, 1 That
all Officers in the Church ought to have a License to their Office. 2 That this
License ought to be under the Hand and Seal, of some Archbishop or Bishop of
the place, or of the University. 3. That this License is in order to enforce
their Subscription to the three Articles. 4 That the word License is not
determined in its signification, for it may be a License to enter the Ministry,
or a License for Institution, or Collation: or a License to Preach: or to
Catechize: or to be a Lecturer or Reader in Divinity. The First we call Letters
of Ordination: the Second Letters of Institution. The Third, Fourth, Fifth, and
Sixth, are properly Licenses of Preaching which we inquire after. 5 The License
of either University can assign no place for any man to Preach, except amongst
themselves: as to the Kings and Margaret Professors; and the Proceeding
Graduates in Divinity: with the settling and disposing them (it seems) the
Universities are entrusted. Any other License they can give, is but a
Commendation of a Professor, for his ability in his Profession: which is to be
Reckoned amongst the best sort of Testimonials, in all parts of the Christian
World: but can give no Authority to preach any where, but amongst themselves.

The Lecturer therefore, by this Canon, is oblidged to take a License to
Preach: and he should be the more carefully looked after, that the Church run
not twice aground on the same Quicksands. Nor should the Bishops be over
forward to grant such Licenses, without the Consent of the Incumbent; seeing he
has an Intrest in the Cure. Barrow Ib.
And (as Barrow observes) their main business was to alienate the Hearts of the
People from the Parochial Minister.

We the rather expound the said Canon, for a License of Preaching to Lecturers,
Can. 37.
because the very next Canon singles out, those that are Licensed to Preach in
the former Canon by the restrained fence, of Licensed to Preach, Read Lecture,
or Catechize. So that we Judge the License to Preach, only referrs to them, and
not to any Incumbent.

2. Public stipendiary Catechizers, ought also to take these Licenses to
Preach; as being mentioned in both the Canons, and indeed, Catechizing is one
way of Teaching, as Preaching is another. And it is meet those men should be
Orthodox, and conformable to the Church, least they should infect young vessels
with ill Sents in Religion. The Jews called the Catechized Hanish from (...)
Imbuere, because he receives a Tincture by it, which may be false unless well
looked after.

It Is too true we have but few such now, Mart. Tr. 2 p. 86.
distinct from Parochial Ministers; but Martinius has proved Catechistarum
praeter Episcopos and Pastores fuit peculiaris Ordo; and instances in
Pantaenus, Clemens, Origin, etc. in the Church of Alexandria. Justin Martyr was
Converted by Catechizing; Just. Martyr Apol. Cypr. l. 3. ep. 22.
which he commends much to the Senate of Rome. And Luther calls himself
Discipulum Catechismi. Optatus was a Catechist in Carthage in S. Cyprians time.
S. Mark is said to turn the great School of Ptolomey Philadelphus in
Alexandria, to a School of Catechizing. And Pamphilus a Christian Philosopher
ordained a famous School in Caesarea for this purpose: which had eminent
Teachers in them; we have by S. Paul's a School Catechizationis in London, and
in the late Learned Doctor Busby, is said to have set up such an Officer in S.
Margarets Westminster: it is pity there were not many more, yet without
oblidging themselves, by Subscriptions to teach Orthodoxly, and conformably to
the Faith, and Discipline, professed in the Church, they would only serve to
increase Heresy and Schism.

3. We must add to these the Curates, employed under Parsons, and Vicars, to
supply their Cures, who, should they take no License to Preach or serve the
Cure, would give no Caution to the Church for their good behavior in it. They
would be the only Freemen in it to Preach and practice as they List, being
obliged to nothing. The Canon reaches them too, in that it orders none shall be
suffered to Preach without being Licensed. The Church has as much Reason to
fear them as any other, because They are commonly young men, hot, and rash, and
may hope by overturning the present Establishment to be the true Owners, of
what they are now but Trustees. And are apt to Court the People for advantage.
And gave some instances, of their helping hand, in the overthrow of the Church,
in the fatal Revolution of the great Rebellion. And if there be any others in
the like state, they ought to be obliged, by the same methods: for where there
is Eadem Ratio, there is to be Idem Jus. As those that have Donative, etc.

We are now to proceed, to Answer the Arguments brought for Incumbents taking
of Licenses to Preach.



To the Congregation, V. Office of Ordin. of Priests.
where Thou shall be Lawfully appointed thereunto. Which place the Bishop knows
before hand, for He is not to Ordain without a Title. It being an ancient Rule
in the Common Law of this Realm, That no Bishop may ordain Laymen, to the Order
of Clerks, above the number suffizing to serve the Churches, as that old Author
has it, in the mirror of Justice. And the Canons of 1603 showing that It has
long since been provided, Mir. Just. c. 1.. 3. p. 14.
by many Decrees of ancient Fathers, That none should be admitted either
Deacon, or Priest, who had not first some certain place, where he might use his
Function -- They therefore Decree, Canon 33.
That henceforth, no Person shall be admitted into sacred Orders, except he
shall at that time, exhibit to the Bishop, of whom he desires Imposition of
hands, a Presentation of himself, to some Ecclesiastical Preferment then void
in that Diocese. etc. Providing that if any Bishop admit any that has no Title
there enumerated He shall keep, and maintain him with all things necessary,
till he do prefer him to some Ecclesiastical Living.

2. Institution is the Instrument, by which the place of Preaching, and
performing all other Functions of an Incumbent, is Lawfully appointed. For
Licenses to Preach are unknown to the Law. Institution avoids all Confusion.
And without Institution assign the place of Exercise, of the Ministerial
Calling, it is altogether useless.

3. Licenses to Preach, may name a Place, but can assign none: because it is
not the legal Instrument to give the Title, nor can we take any Induction upon
such License should it be granted, (...) ^ice (...) ^er^ (...) (...) ^y: (...)
^on (...) gave us power to do these, but assigned no place, and without a
certain place, we should run into Confusion; one may with as much Reason urge a
new Grace to every Dish of Meat, that comes up at a Dinner. The Argument is
fallacia Consequentis; It being a plain non sequitur, That Ordination assigns
no place, therefore we must take Licenses. The true Consequence is, therefore
we ought to have Institution. In a word he that holds this Argument good, is at
home in no Principles but in Popery. For he must believe Preaching to be no
essential part of a Priests office; but that the formal Reason of a Priest is,
to offer Sacrifice, and to Remit Sins, according to the true notion of the
Council of Trent. But to as many as believe the Ratio Formalis of a Priest, is
Preaching the Gospel, and celebrating Divine service, and Sacraments: The
Argument is a plain Absurdity. Yet God forbid we should think, those that use
it, took it out of the Trent Cloak-bag.

Beneficiati ad Concionandum admissi. And the 46 Benefeciatus ad Concionandum
non admissus.

England: and such Incumbents having no Institution, will need Licenses both to
Preach and do all other duties of a Minister in their Benefices. 5. Nor is it
likely, any thing hindered those Beneficed Men from Preaching, but their own
inability, seeing the 46 Canon requires and instructs, them, to procure others
to Preach for them. Concionem per Corcionatorem legitime approbatum haberi
procurabit, once every Month at least. For he that appoints whom he pleases,
may do it himself if he could. 6. We doubt not but a Church ought to Examine
who is fit to Preach, before he be allowed; but this the Roman Church did not
require, in their Massing Priests: therefore they examined them not. And 'twas
in vain for the Reformers to examine theirs, whom they know to be insufficient
for it: But the Bishop ever since, is bound to examine this Ability before the
Ordination, and so there is no Room nor Occasion for Licenses to Preach, as
distinct from Ordination and Institution, in this present State of the Church.
A Helmet may be useful in a Battle, but it showed Mark Coleman mad, to wear one
every night in his Bed. 7. In short the design of the 45 Canon was to command
all men that were able, to Preach one Sermon, in their Cures every Sunday: but
because some could do it, and some not, the Canon distinguishes and Requires
only them that were admitted to Preach: and the 46 requires those that could
not, to procure one that could: and this is the Sum of the matter.



Annual: So great a Benefit were a cheap Purchase at 10 s. per Annum a man. But
alas! men fancy what brings them profit, is profitable also for every Thing.
The Mountebanks Pill cures all Diseases. England has labored under more
Heresies Schisms and Seditions, since this Antidote was Invented, than ever It
did before; as is too evidently Demonstrated in the 7th Proposition. If those
Christian Ties, of Subscription to the 39 Articles, with a solemn Promise, in
the presence of God, and in the Face of his Congregation, to Preach no contrary
Doctrine, will not restrain men from Preaching Errors, how should a mere
License to Preach effect it?

And he that can Preach against or disuse the Common Prayer, or inveigh against
the Discipline of the Church, after Subscription to the 3 Articles contained in
the 36 Canon, in these words I N. N. do willingly, and ex animo, Subscribe to
these 3 Articles above mentioned, and to all things that are contained in them.
There is no hope that any chains but those that are Everlasting will hold that
man. Much less can this dull Tool do it, that implies no Tie but Authority to
Preach. In truth the Church could find no better Links than what men make with
Their own Pen: unless they should advance an Inquisition.

But we may well wonder, why those Licenses are no N more earnestly urged than
before. Considering 1. The General Liberty granted by the State to Preach any
thing, so they impugn not the Doctrine of the Trinity. 2. And the Practice of
the several Sects that Preach what they please: and will endure no Obligations
to Restrain them, from God nor Man. 3. And the Practice of Latitudinarans in
the Church, that can explain the Mystery of the Trinity into Tritheism. And
show us that we may worship Gods in a greater, and Gods in a lesser Sense,
without believing themselves oblidged to the Contrary, by these Licenses. 4.
And that the proper Legal Subjects of Ecclesiastical Power are swept away,
namely the High Commission for punishing Heresy, and the Star Chamber for
punishing Seditious Preaching, and Conventicling to disturb the State. Would
they shackle the Clergy, while the Sects cuff out their Eyes. 5. After such
Recorded Subscriptions, and solemn Promises, as Incumbents have made, what need
they fear their Preaching Heresies and Schisms; unless they believe them
Knaves! especially seeing they are the only Banks left to stop the Inundation
of Errors that threaten to drowned all before it. 6. Were Men sincere in their
Zeal against Errors, one would think the most probable way to stop them, were,
to Intercede with the Government to shut the Floud-Gates, which they have
opened to Libertines. It Is no small ground of Suspicion, that the stopping
Errors is not the Thing designed: while men pretend to stop Errors that are
possible only, when they attacque not them that are flaming amongst us. It Is
certain the Clergy at present have no Liberty to dote upon Questions; having
work enough to secure their Parishioners Consciences; from the Infection of
such Errors as the Sects broach among them; and to confute their pernicious
Pamphlets.

If the matter aimed at, be a Power to out any Incumbent of his Cure, under
Pretense of Preaching Error or Sedition. We may say the Bishops of the Church,
have power enough to deprive, for Heresy and Schism, for Disobedience and
Incorrigibleness, as Mr. Nash can tell you in his Case. And for contumelious
words of the Book of Common Prayer, as Mr. Robert Cawdry can show in his Case.
Mr. Parkers Case also can show that a man may be deprived for Drunkenness, v.
Repert. Can. c. 27. Pars. Law. c. 17, 18. Pars. Counsel. lib. 1. c. 9.
if he refuse to Reform after Admonition. And in truth (if our Authors deceive
us not) any Crime may deprive a Man, if the Criminal stand Forty days
Contumacious after Excommunication; so it be a Crime of Ecclesiastical
Cognizance: and deprivation be its Punishment Canonical: and that the Canon be
not contrary to the known Law of England. And the Fact be not discharged bv
some general Act of Pardon. But still if the Party so deprived will bring his
Action for Tithes against his Parishioner: the Validity of the Bishops Sentence
will come into Question, and must take its Fortune. As it was said in Burtons
Case, where the Parson was deprived for Adultery, but a general pardon
intervening, He was Restored, without the Ecclesiastical Court, Hab. searle and
Williams case. f. 293.
because the Judgment of Pardons, belong to the Common Law. And so it will be,
if the Bishop deprive any, after Revolt from Subscription and License according
to the direction of the 38 Canon. However if an Occasion of deprivation be the
design, the Clergy ought to be the more wary, of admitting such an Innovation,
seeing it has so sharp Teeth.

As to that Part of the Objection that referrs to Preaching Sedition, we may
say 1 Subscription to the three Articles Secures that too. Seeing the First of
the three vindicates the Royal Rights. 2 Oaths of Allegiance are much stronger
than these imagined Ties 3. There are Laws enough to suppress such Preaching
and Punish them. 4. Licenses to Preach, are not proper Instruments to hinder
Preaching in any kind. 5 Many in 1640. did under these Licenses, Preach
Sedition: We find therefore upon the whole matter, these Licenses to Preach,
are expedient for nothing, more than to bring in Fees, which yet, if they must
be continued, ought to be given Gratis.



London; or before the King; Or any Minister to have power to call any to help
him in his own Cure. 'Twas never yet denied but an Incumbent's Authority is
sufficient, to enable him to perform by another; what Sickness, Necessary
Absence, or any other Lawful Impediment, makes him unable to do in his own
Person. 2. Does not the 46 Canon Authorize, and command him to call in a
Preaching Minister once a Month at least; If he cannot do it himself, Men use
not to Preach in any Neighbors Church, but at their Request: or in case of
vacancy, by a License to serve the Cure. 3. If it be necessary to take a
License to Preach in another Parish, is it not necessary, also, to take another
Institution, or License to celebrate Divine Service, or Sacraments there? Or if
not, may not the Incumbents Entreaty, be as sufficient for Preaching as for
Celebration of the Service and Sacraments? Any thing but Avarice would blush at
such trifling Objections. In truth he that Preaches, and he that Officiates, in
any other place but his own Cure, does it not by his own immediate Authority,
but by the Right of Him that calls him to his assistance. But 4 Let it be
supposed that Titius has no Right to Preach any where, but in his own Cure,
will the Bishop grant him a License to Preach in Sempronius's Cure? will not
Sempronius think that injury to himself? and Usurpation in the Bishop? will not
such a License introduce all the Confusion complained of? For in many so
Licensed, which of them can command the Pulpit? which ought the People to hear,
seeing all are alike Licensed to Preach? Otho. constable. t. 12. cum sit Ars, and
Constable. 13. ut. 5,
would not the Patron also think himself wronged, by such an Intrusion? yea the
Constitutions Provincial forbid it, Exigit namque Ars nostra Catholica, ut
unicus in una Ecclesia sit Sacerdos, such also is that of Stephen Langton in
the Council at Oxford, Anno. 1222. Nec de caetero plures vicarij in eadem
Ecclesia constituantur.

The Canonists indeed say The Pope may Preach in all the world: The Bishop in
any place of his Diocese, and the Incumbent in his own Cure: But none say, the
Bishop may Authorize two, or more, in the same Cure: which yet must be, upon
this supposition. And it is very improbable, any man would take a License to
Preach; where he has no particular Intention to Preach; no more than he would
take out a Matrimonial License to Marry, where he has no thoughts to Marry.



cannot be imposed on the Subjects, by probable Implications, without express
words, as the best Lawyers generally affirm. The Canons cited to prove the duty
of taking such Licenses, are the 45 and 46. The 45 says all beneficed men
allowed to Preach, shall Preach one Sermon every Sunday. Where allowed to
Preach Is put in, to Excuse those that were not able to Preach, Constable. Prove. de
off Archipresb.
from this Command. For all were allowed to Preach, that were Instituted, if
they were able, by the Constitutions of the Church, That all Rectors and Vicars
shall instruct the People committed to their Charge Pabulo verbi Dei. Nor can
it be supposed, That any Instituted to a Cure of Souls, was forbidden to
Preach, seeing that would be malum in se, and contrary to the Canons, and,
destructive to the People: but his inability might be wink't at, till able: and
then might be allowed Ore tenus, by kind incouragment: without wax and
Parchment. Or suppose the Beneficed man were upon a Donative, then he ought to
take a License, or would be a Preacher without Subscriptions. But the First
seems most agreeable, because the 46 Canon requires That a Beneficed man not
allowed to Preach, should procure a Sermon once a Month: which is best
explained by being wink't at or excused from Preaching as unable; for else he
was not only allowed, bit Required to Preach Jure Scripto by Virtue of his
Institution, if Orthodox and Able.

The 36th Canon bids fairest for a License to Preach, but cannot be so
understood generally. The Words are recited before. No Person shall be received
into the Ministry except he be Licensed; this must referr to a License of
Ordination, called Letters of Orders. Not admitted by Institution to any Living
-- except he be Licensed; this we call Letters of Institution. Nor Suffered to
Preach, to Catechize, or to be a Lecturer or Reader of Divinity. This we call
properly a License to Preach; and so that Canon is accounted for Conformable to
the Canons and Practice of the Church. But the other way supposes we must have
a License to Preach, before we can be ordained, or be brought into the
Ministry.

It Is probable these Considerations swayed that wise and Learned Man, the
present Bishop of Worcester, the true Ornament, and Defender of this Church, to
wave pressing of these Licenses, in his Primary Visitation. And to tell us: All
Persons who had Cures of Souls and Legal Titles, Bish. Of Worcester. charg. p.
10.
were said to be Missi a jure, ad locum and Populum Curae suae; and therefore
might Preach to their own People without a special License.

Upon the whole matter, arises this Question: whether those Officers that have
Received Money for these Licenses, ought not to Refund it.

To which it may be answered, that they ought to make Restitution: because they
can have no Conscionable Right to it. For the Fruits of Imposture, Extortion,
and Cosenage, are accursed Things. And those that take more than they ought,
stand suspended, Constable. prove. l. 3. c. 6. de Instit.
ab ingressu Ecclesiae, donec haec contra recepta, Solventibus Restituantur;
and laeso sua culpa satisfaciant in praemissis, as John Stratfords Council
determins, in 1342. And in another place, the Council determins, if any Require
more than is allowed, Ingressum Ecclesiae sibi noverint interdictum, quousque
de duplo Satisfactionem, impenderint solventibus competentem; Id. Conc. l. 3.
tit. 22. de censib. v. cap. sevas.
Double Satisfaction the Constitutions in most places impose, upon Extortion of
Officers. And so it is decreed in Extortions, at Visitations, and Corrections of
Incumbents. The Gloss adds, if the Archdeacon receive Procurations when he does
not visit, forsan quia Episcopus eodem anno visitavit, and suspendebat
Iurisdictionem Archi Diaconi. Id. ib. cap. Quama is. lex nature.


Now we have showed before, that though Arondell in his Council at Oxford, Anno,
1408. had Decreed, that Licenses to Preach should be granted, by the Diocesan,
Ib. in cap. ut singula.
sine aliquali Exactione pecuniae, And again celeriter expediantur and gratis,
difficultate quacunque semota, without any exaction of Fee, Delay, or
Dificulty; with what Conscience then can Men retain, what they extort from a
poor, but humble Clergy, Constable. l. 5. tit 5. c. Reverendissimae, etc.
almost reduced to Extremety, by other insupportable Burdens. Yea John Anton a
Canon of Lincoln, in his notes says: He that grants these Licenses, may take
nothing, Etiam si sic Licentiandus gratis voluerit aliquid solvere: Though Men
pay it willingly, Gloss. 16.
they cannot hold it honestly. We will add no more, being persuaded, that if
Men's own Rules, will not convince their Consciences; no Reasons will prevail.
For we have made it plain from their own Laws, that whether Men ought to take
these Licenses, or ought not; yet no Money is to be paid for them: Or if any be
paid, that it ought to be Restored again.

If it be urged, that the Officers cannot subsist, by doing the work Gratis, it
is already answered by the Constitutions themselves. Constable. Prove. l. 3. c. 22.
c. saeva. etc.
That the Ordinary is bound to provide maintenance for them, if the allowed
Fees will not do it: thus Stratfords Constitution, that assigned the Fees,
declared, In caeteris vero Ordinarij suis: teneantur Ministris stipendia
constituers, quibus debeant merito contentari: Stephen Langton in his Council
at Oxford forbids any thing to be taken for the Paper, or rather Character of
Collations, Can. Prove. l. 3. t. 6. c. quia juxta.
Institutions or Induction; but as the Title has it, Collator Gratis conferat,
and se per se, and per suos. The Bishop is to settle any Incumbent or Praebend
Gratis, farther than what the Canons allowed. And the Question is there put by
Lindwood, whether the Notary, or Secretary may receive nothing, seeing no man
is bound to serve in War without Pay, and brings in many saying, quod Episcopus
debet talibus scribentibus, de suo providere. And produces another Rule out of
the Law. Quod sicut Episcopus Gratis Episcopatum suscepit, it a membra ejusdem
Episcopatus Gratis distribuat, which answers that of our Savior; Freely you
have Received, Freely Give, and at length Resolves, that if any thing be taken
for the Substance of any thing to be done, in Ordination, Collation,
Institution, or Induction; It will be Simony: but if it be not of the Substance
of the thing to be done, but mere Writing or the like, they may Recive as much
as that labor deserves, and no more.

Thus the Case stood in the Reign of Hen. 5. An. 1422. when the famous Canonist
Linwood Dr. in Laws, returned from his Embassy to Spain, and composed the
Provincial Constitutions which have ever since been held in great esteem, by
Reason of his skill in the Common, and Canon Law of this Kingdom, and
accordingly made Dean of the Arches; and after Bishop of St. David's; And these
Canons and Constitutions, as far as they are not contrariant to the Laws of the
Kingdom, nor repugnant to the Royal Prerogative, are established to be used and
executed, by an Act made in the 25 Hen. 8. chap. 19. Which Act though it were
Repealed by Queen Mary; yet was Revived again, 1 Eliz. 1. and so they continue
to this day.

To Conclude therefore, it is advisable, before Men grow so eager to vend
Licenses to Preach, to consider, what our Lord Christ will think of such
Priests, as may Baptize but not Preach: as may Communicate, but not instruct
their Charge; seeing a Priest is properly a Minister of Christ, one of the
sacred Orders: He instituted: (...), the Elders that Priest it well, 1 Timothy, 5,
17.
are supposed to labor in word and Doctrine: Else should they not be called
Priests, but Sacrificers; as the French Translation of the Bible, allways
renders the Jewish Ministers, Sacrificicatours and Sleidan, and many others,
call the Popish Ministers Sacrifici. And that such as Christ sent, were to
Teach all Nations, as well as to Baptize them. What God has joined together,
it is great Confidence in Men to keep asunder, unless there were more to be got
by it, than a perishable Fee. Can these two Priests, be both of one Order;
Christ's, that could Teach and Baptize? ours that could Baptize, but not Teach,
seeing they differ in an Essential part of their Calling.

Secondly, They should consider too, what the Primitive Church would think of
such Proceedings: seeing they never heard of any License besides Ordination and
Mission: nor of any Priest but what could and ought to Preach as well as
Baptize.

Thirdly, They ought also to consider, what Neighbor Churches and Nations,
will Judge of our Ministry; when they shall hear that we Ordain, and Institute
Priests, that have not Power to instruct their People.

Fourthly, They might do well also to consider, what the several Parishes of
England, may deem, the Church Rulers are about to do, in sending them
Ministers, that have no Power to Preach among them. Will not they be apt to
suspect, such Rulers have little care of the Peoples Souls. And that they are
about to settle Sir John's among them.

Fifthly, Nor is it wholly to be slighted, what the several Sects of this
Kingdom, may judge of the National Ministry; may they not take occasion from
hence to affirm, our Priests to be no Ministers of Christ, seeing they have not
Power to Preach the Gospel, by their Ordination, and Institution; without some
farther Authority. We know their Readiness, to Catch at the shadow of an
Argument against our Ministry, to give some alleviation to their Schismatical
Guilt, and to support their sinking cause. But hereby we seem to thrust a
Cudgel into their hands to drub us and our Ministry withal. It had been far
better our own Mouths had been shut in this Point, than to Open so many Mouths
against us.

Lastly, It may not altogether be unworthy our Consideration, what our
Reformers would think of these Licenses to Preach, now urged; seeing they
changed the very Simbols of Ordination; laying aside the Chalice and Patin, and
instead thereof, putting the Testament, or Bible, into the hand of the Priest,
in his Ordination: Requiring, and enabling him to take Authority, to Preach the
word of God. Thereby evincing that in their Judgment, Preaching was an
Essential part of the Priests Office; and that it was a fault in the Roman
Church needing Reformation: That they made only Massing Priests, and took too
little Care of the Preaching part. They might suspect by such Licenses, we
would deform the Reformation: and Relapse into an Opinion, that Hoc facite
makes a Priest: or at least that a License had been a better Simbol, than their
Bible, to be delivered in Ordination.

You see (dear Sir) my Thoughts in this Affair, and some of the Reasons of
them. And may peradventure guess from hence, that Profit, and; importunity of
Officers may blind wel-meaning Men. I believe you know my Resolution, to comply
with this our common Mother, in every Indifferent thing. But I fear, if this
were well sifted, it would appear more Dangerous, than the Sticklers for ^t are
aware of: But I leave the whole to your clear and candid Judgment, to Act
according to those Dictates it shall perscribe, Remaining

Yours, in our common Savior. J. M.

FINIS.

