A



OBSERVATIONS Upon the 28. Act, 23. Parl.

K. JAMES VI.

AGAINST Dispositions made in defraud of Creditors, etc.

By Sir George Mckenzie of Rosehaugh.



EDINBURGH, Printed by His MAJESTY'S Printers: Anno DOM* 1675.

THE PREFACE.
THe easiest and plainest part of our Law, are our Statutes: for these are by
Printing exposed to all men's view, and are drawn to instruct the vulgar in what
they must obey. And this Statute against Bankrupts, must be presumed to be
amongst the easiest and most intelligible; because it is founded upon the
evident principles of equity, and reason, and was first drawn by the Lords of
Session, and after some years trial, was renewed by the Parliament, who would
have plained what was obscure, and supplied what was defective: And yet I am
afraid that albeit the Statute be very full, and my Observations upon it be
very clear, that yet it will appear convincingly that the knowledge of the Law
is not easy, and that none should pretend to it, but such as have illuminated
their excellent natural parts with laborious Learning, and have polished that
Learning by a long Experience.

I have not debated fully the cases here related, that being fitter for
Pleading then Treatises; nor have I set down all the cases that occurred, lest
the Reader should think I industriously designed to confound him, the more to
magnify the necessity of Lawyers. It cannot be denied but many now in my
condition could have treated this Subject, both more profoundly, and delicatly,
but yet I may say that nothing here is against Law, since all these Sheets have
had the approbation of one of the ablest Lawyers in our Nation, who can neither
deceive, nor be deceived in his own profession.

These Sheets are but a part of a greater work, wherein I resolve to clear, 1.
What Acts are in desuetude, or abrogated. 2. How each Act is interpreted by the
Lords decisions. 3. What new doubts may arise from each Act, though not yet
decided. 4. Wherein our Statutes agree with the Civil Law, or Laws of other
Nations. And thus I hope to make all our Acts of Parliament intelligible and
plain.

AN EXPLICATION OF THE Act of PARLIAMENT, 1621. AGAINST BANKRUPTS.
The words of the Rubric, or Inscription of this Act, are,

A Ratification of the Act of the Lords of Council and Session, made in July,
1620. against unlawful Dispositions and Alienations, made by Dyvours and
Bankrupts. FOr the better understanding of the Inscripon or Rubric, it is fit
to know, that the word Bankrupt, which is the translation of the Latin
Banciruptor, is in the Original but a barbarous word, either derived from the
French word Banque, or the Italian Banco, and the word rumpere: because when
Merchands became Bankrupts, they broke, either the seat upon which they did
sit; or the bank or table, at which they did sit, as Salmas. observes, in Pref.
de usur. page 511. But now the word Banciruptor, is taken not only, pro
mensulario; foro cedente, but for any Merchand, or any other person, who has
contracted more debt, then he is able to pay, as Vegnern observes. page 8. They
are called likewise decoctores, quia rem suam coquendo diminuunt, decoquere
signifying diminuere, Bud. ad l. si hominem. quoties ff. deposit. In Italy they
are called falliti, and cessantes, Boer. decis. 215. but in the Civil Law the
true Latin word is fraudatores; l. 4. ff. de curat. bon. dand.

They are likewise by this Rubric called Dyvour, or Dyour; from the Irish word
Dyer, as I conceive, which signifies a knave; and they are likewise called
bairman in our Law, l. burg. cap. bairman. 144. and de jud. cap. bairman 46.
Though our learned Skeen does in de verb signif. verb. Dyvour, make Bankrupt to
be the same with him who has obtained a cessio bonorum, and qui bonis cessit:
yet these differ very much, for a Bankrupt is he only, qui foro cessit, sed qui
bonis cessit, forum retinet, and bona creditoribus in solutum dedit, Hottoman.
de verb. sig. verb. credere, caedere for^ est facti, caedere bonis est juris,
and he only who has lost his estate by accident, without his own ^ault, was
allowed bonis caedere, bancciruptor dicitur, qui dolo casuve non solvendo
factus est. Venger. ibid. How the word Banckrupt is taken in this Act, may be
justly doubted, for by the Rubric of the Act, it would appear, that this Act
strickes only against dispositions which are made by persons insolvent, and
whose estate is not able to pay the debt due to the reducer; for the Rubric of
the Act bears, to be against dispositions made by Bankrupts or Dyvours* so
that these two, are made pares termini; and therefore, since a Dyvour is a
person who is insolvent; it seems that this Act must only strike against
Dispositions made by persons that are insolvent, per argumentum a rubro ad
nigrum: for Lawyers are very clear, that where either the Rubric is an entire
sentence, or where any term used in the Rubric, is explained by any
equipolent, or exegetick word, that there the general term which is dubious, is
to be interpret according to the import of both these terms; and therefore,
since the word Dyvour is only applicable to persons insolvent, the word
Bankrupt must be likewise interpret only of these; and so the Rubric running
only against Dispositions made by persons that are insolvent, it must follow,
that only such deeds are reduceable, as are done to the prejudice of Creditors
by a person that is insolvent. 2. This seems likewise consonant to reason; for
if the Creditor can recover his debt, he is not prejudged, and so the design of
the Act fails; and it were most unreasonable to trouble a person who has got a
Disposition, except there be an absolute necessity. 3. This is most suitable to
the common principles of Law, whereby nunquam recurrendum ad remedium
extraordinarium, quamdiu locus est ordinario, no more then in Physic, a member
should be cut off where it can be cured; and therefore, a Creditor who may
recover payment by ordinary diligences, such as by the comprysing, or arresting
his Debitors Estate, ought not to be allowed to reduce all Dispositions made by
his Debtor, since omnes actiones rescissoriae, and particularly actio Pauliana,
sunt remedia extraordinariae, whereby the Magistrate has been by cheats of
Debtors, and the fraudulent Dispositions of such as contract with them, forced
to rescind and annull the private pactions of parties, contrary to the ordinar
and general principles. 4. This seems to be further clear, by the narrative of
the Act, which runs only against dispositions which elude all execution of
justice, whereby Creditors are defrauded of all payment, and many honest
families come to utter ruin; neither of which expressions are applicable to
the case of Creditors, who may recover payment otherwise. Conform to which
arguments, I find, that the Lords, upon the. 6. of March. 1632. in an Action at
the Lord of Garthlands instance, contra Sir James Ker, upon this Act of
Parliament did refuse to reduce an Infeftment; albeit a mere Donation, and made
likewise by the Grandfather to his own Grandchild, and that because the
granter of the Infeftment was neither at the time of the granting thereof
Bankrupt, and non solvendo, nor was he become such since; neither had the
Creditor done diligence for his debt; and yet it might have seemed in reason,
that though dispositions, where there was an onerous cause, might have been
sustained, there was no reason to allow the same privilege in favors of
confident persons, for mere Donations. And upon the 10. February, 1665. the
Lord Loure, having quarreled the Lady Craigs Infeftment, as being an additional
Joynter, granted betwixt Husband and Wife, to his prejudice who was a Creditor,
and had comprised the Estate; It was answered, that the disponer was neither
bankrupt, nor insolvendo, nor did the Compriser sustain any prejudice, seeing
the Lady was content, that the Lord Loure should be preferred to his
Annual-rents by virtue of his Comprysing, providing he would assign the Lady to
his Comprising pro tanto, that she might recover as much for satisfaction of
her additional Joynter; which answer the Lords found relevant, the Apprisers
prejudice being purged, as said is: but they ordained the Compriser, not only
to be admitted to have access to the comprised Lands, by assignation in manner
forsaid, during the Legal, but they likewise declared, that if the Lady
redeemed not within the Legal, the Lands should be irredeemable, and the Lady
should be totally excluded; which though it was but a trysting Interloquetor,
does confirm the former opinion. And though it may be alleged, that a
Disposition being once valid, when it was first granted, cannot become
thereafter null by the disponers becoming thereafter insolvent, yet this holds
not in many cases in our Law; for we find, that Dispositions of less then the
half of Ward-Lands, without consent of the Superior, become thereafter null,
if as much of that Barrony be thereafter disponed, as will amout to more than
the half; But in my opinion, though the rubric of our Statutes may found a
presumptive argument for explicating the Text; yet it is not authoritative, for
the Rubric is not read in Parliament, and it is added to the Law, after it is
past, carelessly without debate.

Our Sovereign Lord, with advice and consent of the Estates: The legislative
power of Scotland consists in the Parliament, that is to say, the King and
three Estates of Parliament; and though some think it more proper in our Law to
say, Our Sovereign Lord, and Estates of Parliament, as in all the Statutes, or
Acts of the 18. Par. Ja: 6: then to say, Our Sovereign Lord, with advice and
consent, etc. yet I conceive, the King Statutes, and they but consent, (though
their consent be necessary) for his touching them with the Scepter, and not the
being voted, makes them Laws; and in England, the King statutes with consent of
Parliament, and upon their supplication, and therefore I understand not Craig.
who Diag. 8. affirms Statutes to be constitutiones trium Regni ordinum, cum
consensu Principis: for that is just to invert the statutory words of this, and
many other Acts. Our old Acts being all past the last day of the Parliament,
did not express the statuting power in every Act; for in effect they were all
but branches of one Act, and run, Item that, etc. and many of these Acts bear,
It is statute by the Parliament, and the King forbids, as Acts. 13. 14. 1 Par.
Ja. 1. which Intimats, that though the Parliament statutes suffragando and
consentiendo, yet the King only does statute sanciendo, and prohibendo.
Sometimes our Acts bear, It is statute by the hail Parliament; and sometimes,
It is statute and ordained, without mentioning either King or Parliament;
sometimes also they bear the determination of Parliament, without speaking of
the King, which was either where the King was to perform what was statuted, as
23. Act, Par. 1. Ja. 1. It is statute and ordained, that our Sovereign Lord
shall gar mend his money. And by the 6 Act, 3 Par. Ja. 2. The Estates has
concluded, that the King shall ride through the Realm; or else when the Estates
are only to grant what is statuted, as in Commissions granted for uniting the
two Kingdoms. But I find one Statute bear, the King statuting without
mentioning the Estates of Parliament* viz. Act 19. Sess. 1. Par. 1. Chapter 2. but
this is but mere inadvertance.

Ratifies and confirms an Act of the Lords of Session, etc. This was originally
an Act past by the Lords of Session, when they do sit judicially, at which time
it is marked in their books of sederunt, such and such men did sit. Thus the
Hebrews disigned the books of the Old Testament, by the first words; and thus
we still mark the Laws from the first words; and thus the old books of our Law
are called Regiam Majestatem, because they begin so.

His Majesty, at the first institution of the College of Justice, did allow
the Lords of Session to conclude upon sick Rules, Statutes and Ordinances, as
shall be thought by them expedient to be observed and kept in their manner
and order of proceeding, at all times, as they devise, conform to reason,
equity and justice, his Grace shall ratify and approve the same. These are the
words of the 43. Act, 5. Par. Ja. 5. to the which Act, I think this act
relates: but it would appear, both by that Act, and by the power as here
repeated, that the Lords of Session have only power to make orders relating to
the regulation of their own house, and to the forms of Process. For this was
indeed necessary for explication of their Jurisdiction, and possibly was
employed in their very constitution, without any express warrant: arg. l 2. ff.
de jurisdict. but it seems that this general power cannot authorize them to
make Statutes, and Acts relating to the material distribution of Justice; such
as, that all Writs should be null, except subscribed before witnesses, though
they might have ordained, that Papers under the hands of their own Clerks,
should be so subscribed: for if they could make Statutes, as to any thing else
besides the forms of their own house, there needed no Parliament; for their
Statutes might bind all the people in all things; and yet it may be objected,
that by this argument the Lords of Session could not have made this Law,
declaring Contracts amongst the Leidges, to be null; that touching upon one of
the fundamentals of humane society, albeit they might have declared such a
nullity, receiveable by way of exception, for that concerned only form of
Process. But the Answer to this is, that the Lords, in making this Act, did not
introduce jus novum, a new Law; but only adapted to our practice, the old Roman
or Civil Law, which they might have followed in their decisions, without making
any new Act of sederunt, as they do in most cases where the Civil Law is
founded upon equity; as here; and where they are not determined by either our
former practice, or constitutions. And by the same principle, both the Lords of
Session, and the Parliament did in this Statute declare, that their said Act
should extend to causes depending, or to be intented: whereas Statues regularly
are extended only to future cases; except where the Act declares what was Law
formerly, as in this case.

We may then conclude these differences betwixt these Acts of sederunt, and
Acts of Parliament, that Acts of sederunt can only be made concerning the
forms of procedure, or to fix a constant decision for the future, in cases
which they might have so decided, before their own Act: and it is their
prudence, and our happiness, that they should rather decide in hypothesi, then
in thesi. But Acts of Parliament should mainly be made to regulat new
substantial grounds of justice and commerce. But though this power of making
orders for administration of justice, be properly, and principally their
province, yet they have in this but a cumulative jurisdiction with the
Parliament, who may and do likewise make such orders, but the Parliament ought
to do so sparingly, since forms are better known to the Lords of Session, then
to them: and therefore, it seems that the power of making Acts, relating to
forms, or of regulating forms already made, belongs particularly to the Lords
of Session, both because of there constitution, and experience. The Lords have
been in use, not only to regulat their own Court by Acts of sederunt; but they
have by the same power prescribed regulations to other Courts, and thus as to
the Justice Court in anno, 1591. years, they made an Act, that women, and socii
criminis, might be received witnesses, in cases of Treason: and we find, that
they have likewise regulated inferior Courts, without any previous warrant, as
is clear by the 19. Act, 23. Par. Ja. 6. where the Parliament ratifies an Act
of Secret Council and Session, which did ordain and command, that no Process
should be granted before inferior Judges, on the first Summonds, but upon
lybelled Precepts, and citations of fifteen days warning. And in anno, 1636.
they made an Act of sederunt, appointing, that no consent of any inferior
Court should bind the consenter, except it were subscribed by himself, and that
the assertion of the Clerk of that Court was not sufficient. Nor should this
extention of their power seem unwarrantable; for, since they may reduce the
Decreets of inferior Courts, it seems most consequential, that they may
regulat their procedure: but though the Lords of the Session pass the Bills
before the Justices, and advocat Causes from before that Court, it may seem
strange, that they should have power to make Acts of sederunt, for regulating
that Court, the jurisdictions Civil and Criminal, being most distinct and
different.

It may likewayes seem, both by the former Act allowing the Lords of the
Session this power, and the Ratification of their Statute specified in this
Act, that it is necessar, that all the Acts of sederunt, which relate not
merely to the regulating their own forms, should be ratified by the Parliament,
though in the interim of Parliaments, these Acts should bind. And yet, de
facto, we see very many Acts of sederunt to have full vigor, and force,
without any such confirmation.

Before I begin to explain the words of the Act of Parliament, I shall offer
this Analysis of it.

Either the Creditors who are defrauded, are such Creditors as have done no
diligence, or such as have done diligence: if they be such as have not done
diligence, then either the Dispositions quarrelled are made to conjunct
persons, or not; if they be made to conjunct, or confident persons, either they
are made for necessary and onerous causes, or not; if they be made for an
necessary and onerous cause, they are valid, though made to conjunct or
confident persons. 2. If these Dispositions be made without an onerous cause,
then either they remain with the conjunct confident to whom they were made, or
not; if they remain with him, they are reduceable, either by way of exception,
or reply. But if any third party, no way partaker of the fraud, has lawfully
purchased any of the Bankrupts Lands, for a just and true cause, then the Right
is not quarrelable, but the Receiver is only liable to make the same
forthcoming to the Bankrupts true Creditors. 3. The fraud is probable by writ,
or oath of the party receiver. 4. If the Creditors have done diligence by
Inhibition, Horning, etc. Then the Bankrupt cannot in prejudice of these
Creditors who have done diligence, dispone voluntarily any part of his Estate
to defraud that diligence, in favors of another concreditor, who has done no
diligence, or posterior diligence, or in favors of any interposed person to
their behoof. And in this part of the Act, it is not considered, whether the
interposed person be a person conjunct, or not. 5. The Bankrupts, the
interposed persons, and all such as have assisted them, in advising, or
practicing these frauds, are declared infamous.

Conform to the Civil and Canon Law, etc.
BEcause the Act of Parliament and Act of sederunt bear, that they have in this
Act followed the Civil and Canon Law; We may justly assert that it were ^^t the
Lords of Session understood exactly the Civil Law, and that it is the great
foundation of our Laws and Forms. Thus we see, that Robert Leslies Heirs, are
by the 69. Act, Parl. 6. K. Ja. 5. ordained to be forefaulted for the crime of
treason committed by their Father, according to the Civil Law; and forfaultor
in absence, was allowed by the Lords of Session, in Anno 1669. because it was
conform to the Civil Law: and falsehood is ordained to be punished, according to
the Civil and Canon Law, Act 22. Par. 5. Q. M. And that the Civil Law is our
rule, where our own Statutes and Customs are silent, or deficient, is clear
from our own Lawyers, as Skeen, Annot. ad l. 1. R. M. c. 7. ver. 2. and by
Craig, l. 1. Diag. 2. As also from our own Historians, Leslie, l. 1. cap. Leg.
Scotor. Boet. l. 9. Hist. Camer. de Scot. Doctr. l. 2. cap. 4. And the same is
recorded of us by the Historians and Lawyers of other Nations; as For^a^. lib.
7. de gal. imper. Polid. lib. 1. Hist. Angl. Petr. d^ amitis Geograph. Europ.
tit. di Escosse: and Duck, de auth. jur. civ. lib. 2. cap. 10. And though the
Romans had some customs or forms peculiar to the genious of their own Nation:
yet their Laws, in undecided cases, are of universal use. And as Boet. well
observes, Leges Romanas a Justiniano collect as, tanta ratione and sermonis
venustate esse, ut nulla sit natio tam fera vel ab humanitate abhor^ens quae
eas non fuerit admirata. And K. Ja. 5. was so much in love with the Civil Law,
as Boet. observes, lib. 17. that he made an Act, that no man should succeed to
a great Estate in Scotland, who did not understand the Civil Law, and erected
two professions of it, one at St. Andrews, and another ar Aberdene; and when K.
James the second did, by the 48. Act, 3. Parliament, ordain, that his Subjects
should be governed by no foraign Laws, he designed not to deny the respect due
to the Roman Laws, but to obviat the vain pretenses of the Pope, whose Canons
and Concessions were obtruded upon the people, as Law, by the Churchmen of
these times.

It is also fit to know, that by the Civil Law many remedies were provided to
secure Crditors against the cheats of their Debitors: As first, Actio Pauliana,
so called either from Paulus the Praetor, who did introduce it, or from Paulus
the Lawyer, who did first advise it: by which Action Creditors might recall
either the Estate moveable, or immovable, dispon'd by their Debtor to their
prejudice. 2. Actio in sactum, by which bona incorporalia, such as jura, and
servitutes were recalled, when alienated, l. 14. ss. quae in fraudem
creditorum. 3. Actio faviana, whereby Patrons might revoke that which was done
by their freed men, to the prejudice of that fourth part or legittim which was
due to them by the Law. 4. Actio faviana utilis, by which Minors who were
adopted or arrogated, might revoke what was done in prejudice of their fourth
part due to them. But though Snedwine calls this utilis faviana, yet it is a
mistake; for Hottoman, Gomezius, and others, do much more properly make this a
species actionis Calvisia^ae 5. Actio Calvisiana, which was granted
indifferently to Patrons and others. 6. Edictum fraudatorium, which was
competent, when the Creditor was to revoke what the Debtor had alienated, and
which belonged to another, and not to himself: as if a Tutor had alienated the
goods belonging to his Pupil, which Pupil, and not himself, was Debtor.

The Action competent by the Civil Law* was called Actio revocatoria, so
called, because the Judge revoked what was done; and with us it is called an
Action of Reduction, because the deeds so done are reduced or rescinded: And I
find the word Reduction used by Civilians even in this sense, as by Panormitan,
Concilio secundo, and others. And reducere does properly signify informam
pristinam instaurare, as is clear by Ulp. l. 3. ss. de Itin. act privato. 15
And therefore we have elegantly called this an Action of Reduction, because the
Judge was to restore the thing alienated in prejudice of the Creditor to its
former condition, whereas the Reduction of Decreets was a term unknown to the
Civil Law, they using only Appeals, and Revisions; but Reductions of Sentences
is used amongst the Doctors, even in the same term and sense that we use it, as
is clear by Gail. lib. 1. observe. 141. and 150. And the reason why it was
necessar for Lawyers to introduce the necessity of such Reductions or
Revocations, was, because in the subtility of Law, the alienation did ipso jure
transfer Dominum, l. si sciens ss. de contra empt. And therefore it is that
if such Reductions be not raised before the years of prescription, the
alienation it self is valid, though within that time it might have been
rescinded by this Action of Reduction.

Though this Statute only declares all Alienations, Dispositions, Assignations
and Translations whatsoever made by the Debtor, of any of his Lands, Teinds,
Reversions, Actions, Debts, or Goods whatsumever, to be null; yet this is
extended to Bonds granted, and to Tacks set by the Debtor, to the prejudice of
his Creditor, for though neither Tacks, nor Bands, be comprehended under the
Letter of the Law, yet the same parity of reason extends the Act to them; and
in Laws which are founded upon the principles of reason, extensions from the
same principles are very natural, and in Laws which are introduced for
obviating of cheats, extensions are most necessary, because the same subtle
and fraudulent inclination which tempted the Debtor to cheat his Creditors,
will easily tempt him likewise to cheat the Law, if the wisdom and prudence of
the Judge did not meet him where ever he turned. But yet Bands, in so far as
they are personal, do not prejudge the Creditor, nor fall they under this
Statute: but only in so far as they tend to, and may be the ground of legal
Alienation, by Comprizing, Poynding, or other diligence to the prejudice of the
Creditors, and by affecting the Debitors Estate. By the word Alienation, is
meant not only an express transferring of the right, but any act whereby the
dominium or property is loosed to the Debtor, as if the Debtor should in
prejudice of his Creditor, habere rem pro de relicto ut alius ^um occupet, if
he should relinquish any thing, upon design, that a conjunct or confident
person might possess it. Discharges likewise by the Debtor, of a right
competent to him, are reduceable upon this Act of Parliament, though the word
Discharges be not expressed in the Act, for by the common Law, Competebat
Pauliana, quando Creditor liberabat Debitorem suum acceptilatione vel per
pactum de non petendo. Wherein l. 1.. 2. ff. h. t. agrees with l. 5. Basil.
(...).

I doubt not but upon the same parity of reason, if a Debtor suffered a
Decree to go against him, dolose, and connived so far in prejudice of his
Creditor, as to omit a competent defense; but the Creditor might reduce that
Decree upon this Act of Parliament, if he could instruct the connivance and
collusion, and verify the defenses that were omitted, but without this
collusion were clearly instructed, it were very hard to reduce a Decree at the
instance of a party, who needed not to have been called,

I likewise think, that if the Debtor should in prejudice of his Creditor
suffer the term to be circumduced against him for not compearing to depon, that
Decree were likewise reduceable: And this was so found at the instance of
Marjory Halyburton contra Morison, where though Morison was a singular
Successor, and had got an Assignation to the Decree obtained by collusion
against Watte, by his Brother, yet the Lords ordained Witnesses before answer
to be led for proving the collusion, and repon'd Watte to his oath, and
ordained him to depon. But the difficulty there would be, how a Debtor could
be compelled to swear* and I doubt not but in this case if the collusion were
offered to be proven by the oath of him who obtained the Decree, that the
Decree would be reduced, though the Debtor compeared not to depon: or if the
Creditor pursued him, that ^o casu he would be forced to depon, and that if he
refused, personal Action would be obtained against him, l. 3.. 1. h. t. which
allows Action to the Creditors, Si data opera ad judicium non venerit. (...).

Upon the same reason also, if my Debtor should by collusion prejudge his
marches by a transaction, merely to prejudge me who was to secure his Estate to
my self by a diligence for my debt; this transaction might be quarreled, as
done in defraud of me his Creditor, which agrees with l. 13. Basil. h. t.

It is much debated amongst the Civilians, whether he is said to alienat in
prejudice of his Creditors who refuses to acquire an Estate that he might
acquire, to the advantage of his Creditors: As for instance, if he refused to
accept of a Legacy, or to enter Heir, it would appear to me, that by the common
Law, Actio Pauliana extends not to these cases, as is clear per l. quod autem
ff. quae in fraud* qui autem cum possit aliquid qu^rere, non id agit, ut
acquirat ad hoc edictum non pertinet and. 2. p^oinde and qui repud^avit
Haereditatem vel Legi^timam vel Testamentariam non est in eo casu ut huic
^dicto locum faciat. And the ordinary distinction allowed by the Doctors in
this case is, that aut agitur de jure de lato and quaesito, and hoc debitum
quaesitum Creditor repudiare non potest, aut agitur de jure non del^to, aut
saltem nondum quaesito licet de lato, and non prohibetur illud repudiare. But
yet this decision of the Civil Law seems unreasonable, for since the Law was to
secure Creditors, it was just that it should have secured them against all
frauds, and what fraud is more malicious, then to ly out of an Estate by which
the Creditor might be paid: or not to fulfill a condition, by the fulfilling
whereof, they might be put in a capacity to pay their Debt. And therefore our
Law has much more justly by the 106. Act, 7 Par. Ja. 5. allowed, that the
Creditor may charge his Debtor to enter Heir, whereupon the Estate may be
apprised from the appearand Heir, in the same way, and manner, as if he had
entered Heir.

As also, by our Law, if a Legacy were left to my Debtor, if he designed to ly
out of it merely to prejudge me, who am his Creditor; yet the Law would secure
me against this malice, either by allowing me to arrest the Legacy left in the
hands of the Executor, if the Executor did confirm that Testament wherein my
Legacy was left, and so I might establish a right to the said Legacy in my own
Person, by a Decree to make forthcoming; or if the Executor should refuse or
decline to confirm the Testament. I the Legators Creditor might confirm my self
Executor, dative; and so in omnem eventum, secure my self against the fraud
designed by my Debtor; but they are in a mistake who think, that I could have
confirmed my self Executor to the Defunct, for the Defunct was not my Debtor,
though he left a Legacy to my Debtor. The question is yet harder with us, in
conditional obligations, whereof I shall give two instances; one is, if by
contract betwixt my Debtor and Titius, Titius were obliged to pay my Creditor
5000 merks; and upon the payment thereof, my Creditor were obliged to confirm
Titius as his Vassel, but my Debtor finding that the said 5000 merks would
accress to me, should upon that head decline to fulfill. The question is, how
could I settle in my own Person a right to the said 5000 merks? And it is
thought that the proper way were to comprise from my Debtor, that right by
which he could have confirmed Titius; and having thus put my self in a
condition to fulfill the condition upon which the 5000 merks was payable, I
could either arrest the money in Titius hand, and force him to make it
forthcoming, or else pursue an ordinary action against him, wherein I would
conclude that he being obliged to pay 5000 merks to my Debtor, upon obtaining
a confirmation from him, should be now descerned to pay me the said 5000 merks,
as having come in place of his said Creditor, by having comprised his right,
and so being capable to pursue, and fulfill the condition whereupon the said
5000 merks was payable. But it is thought that the last part of the Alternative
will not hold, viz. that there may be a personal Action for payment; and that
because, albeit the Creditor having comprised the right whereupon he may
confirm, may fulfill the condition, yet he cannot have right to the conditional
obligation, so that he may pursue for payment, unless it be settled in his
Person by comprising, arrestment, or some other legal diligence.

The second case is, if Titius be obliged to pay my Debtor 5000 merks, upon
condition that my Debtor should build him a House: The question is, how I, if
my Debtor be unwilling to fulfill, can establish a right to the said sum in my
own Person. To which it may be answered, that either my Debtor was obliged
expressly by way of mutual Contract, to build the said House to Titius: And then
some think, that I may force Titius to asigne me to the Contract, and thereby I
will force my Debtor to fulfill his part; but yet I see not how he may be
forced to asigne me, or from what that obligation can be inferred. Others think,
that I may arrest, and if when I pursue to make forthcoming, Titius shall
allege that he cannot pay until the condition be fulfilled. I may eleid that
allegiance by this reply, viz. sibi imputet, that he did not obtain the
implement of that condition by registrating the Contract, and forcing my
Debtor to fulfill. But I think the foresaid reply, sibi imputet, would not be
relevant, seeing the Debtor is secure; and it cannot be imputed to him that he
did not pursue for implement, and as the Creditor of the conditional Debtor
would not be heard to say sibi imputet, so this Creditor who can be in no
better case; cannot reply upon sibi imputet.

But if my Debtor was not expressly obliged to build the said House, and that
Titius was only bound to pay 5000 merks, when my Debtor should build him such
a House. I conceive that eo casu, if my said Debtor designed to defraud me by
not fulfilling the condition* our Law would allow me no remedy.

To be intented by any true Creditor.
A Creditor is he to whom we owe any thing; against which we cannot defend our
selves by a perpetual exception. (...) Basil* de verb signif. l. 10.

By these words it clearly appears, that this Action is competent to all
Creditors, whether they were Creditors for an onerous cause, or not. For though
it would appear by the narrative, that this Law was only designed to secure
such as were Creditors for an onerous cause; and albeit it would seem that the
only reason why that this Law was introduced, was wanting here; since the
Creditor did not lend out his money in this case, in contemplation his his
Debitors Estate: Yet since in the construction of Law, even donations are good
Rights, and the person to whom they are made becomes thereby Creditor; etiam
donatarius est Creditor, post quam donatio est completa (except in the case
where the donation is revockable) therefore this Action is likewise competent
to them; and so it has been often decided in our Law.

Though Creditors whose term of payment is not come, differ from such whose
Debt is suspended by some condition, the one being called Creditor
conditionalis, and the other Creditor in diem; which two differ both by the
Civil Law, and ours; yet whether either of them be comprehended under the
general word Creditor, where that word is used in Statutes, is much debated.
Cagn. adl. 1. ff. Si certum petetur is of opinion, that these are not true
Creditors, because a Debtor is he who may be forced to pay, l. Debtor: ff. de
verb. sign. with which Law the Basilicks do agree, for l. 66. tit. Basil. de
Reg. jur. (...), but so it is that he who owes to a day, or under a condition*
cannot be forced to pay. 2. The Law called a conditional debt, the hoop only of
a debt. Ex conditionali just. de verb. obl. 3. These are called Creditors in
this title quibus ex quacunque causa cum debitore est actio, but so it is that
before the condition be purified, or the term of payment, there can be no
Action, l. caedere diem, and l. Creditores: ff. de verb. signif. But yet on the
other hand, these are both Creditors, because the Law makes Creditor to be
genus, the species whereof is Creditor purus, Creditor in diem, and Creditor
sub condition, l. Creditores ss: de verb. signif. 2. It is clear per l. Aquil.
ss. ad l. Aquil. that a conditional Creditor may purlue to have his Debt paid,
or secured, when the Term comes, though it be not yet come. 3. Ille vere est
Creditor, qui perpetua exceptione non potest removeri, l. creditores, ss. de
verb. sig. But so it is, that neither Creditor in diem, nor Creditor sub
condition, potest perpetua exceptione removeri. 4* In Reason it appears, that
since when the condition is purified, the condition is drawn back to the date
of the Contract; that therefore the conditional Creditor has this remedy
competent to him, glos in d.. si quis in fraudem.

This Action then, is competent to Creditors, to whom a Debt is conditionally
owing; but is not to take effect until the condition be purified. As for
instance, if Titius sell me his Lands with absolute warrandice, and thereafter
dispone any part of his Estate, to a conjunct, or confident person, without an
onerous cause, I might reduce that alienation as done in defraud of me, though
the Lands sold to me were not evicted, and so the warrandice did not actually
take place. Which case though it be not expressly decided in our Law, yet I find
a reduction ex capite inhibitionis sustained in their very terms, but with this
just caution, viz. that the reduction should take no place till distress should
follow, which is likewise decided by the Civil Law, l. Potior ss. qui potiores
in pig.. 1 where also the former caution is used, and ubi conditio purificata
est, ibi conditio retrotrahitur. 30. This Action is even competent to these
Creditors whose term of payment is not come, though it may seem, that till then
they are not true Creditors, The reason why both the Civil Law, and ours allow
reductions in these cases, is commonly thought to be, least the Creditor to whom
the alienation is made, become insol. vendo, and so the action of reduction, if
delayed till then, would then become useless. But if the Lands or others
disponed, be still in their hands, it does not import whether they be insolvent
or not, seeing reductions are in rem, and do affect the right disponed,
whatever be the condition of the person who receives the right; and if they be
dispon'd to a third person for an onerous cause, the reduction cannot be
effectual; and for obviating that prejudice, the Creditor may inhibite. The
true reason then for sustaining Reductions at the instance of Creditors in
diem, or sub condition, is, that though personal actions for payment, are not
competent to such Creditors before the day, or the condition exist, yet they
may obtain Declarator, that notwithstanding of such fraudulent rights, their
Bonds shall be effectual to them, and their Debitors Estates liable to them,
and to execution at their instance, as if those Rights were not granted, and
upon the matter, Reductions are nothing else but Declarators to the effect
foresaid. 4. By the common Law, such as were Creditors ex delicto, had this
remedy, which though some Lawyers have contradicted, yet it is most clear in my
opinion; l. 12. ff. de verb. sig. sed et si ex delicto debeatur, mihi videtur
posse creditor is loco accipi: for though he only is a Creditor, whose faith we
have followed, l. 1. ff. si certum petat: and that the party injured cannot be
said to have followed the faith of the injurer, yet that Law expresses only one
quality of a Creditor; and there are many Creditors whose faith we have not
followed. And yet I have seen this debated in our Law, February 1674. Lindsay
contra Gray of Haystoun* in which persuit a Reduction was raised by Lindsay
against Haystoun, of a Disposition made to Haystoun by him who had murdered her
Husband, after the murder committed, to the prejudice of the assythment due to
her, and thereafter decerned to her by the Exchequer: from which Reduction the
Lords assoilzied, because Haystoun was not obliged in Law to know of the
murder, nor did any Register put him in mala side, and singular Successors are
only obliged to seek the Registers; and she having only the gift of the
murderers escheet (he being denounced in absence) for satisfaction of the
assythment due to her; the Lords found she might pursue Declaratours of
Escheet, but could not pursue real Actions.

And generally with us in Scotland, he who commits a crime, is either only
denounced fugitive, and in that case, his Escheet only falls, or he gets a
remission, and then there is an assythment due, but in neither of these cases
Reductions upon this Statute are sustained, or else the murderer dies, and then
nothing is due even by way of assythment with us. But this first seems
unreasonable, or at least severe, for if a person should commit a crime against
me, and should thereafter to defraud me of that assythment, and just reparation
that were due to me, dispon his estate to a conjunct or confident person; It
seems very unjust that I should be disapointed of my just satisfaction by this
voluntar deed of his. And as this is not suitable to the principles of equity,
and justice; so neither seems it suitable to the Principles of Law, for tantum
facit quis delinquendo, quantum facit se obligando, and therefore as I could
have reduced any such voluntar Alienation, if another had expressly oblidged
himself to me, so ought I to have the same benefit when another l^^s committed
a crime against me: And ^^ we consider seriously the principles of either the
Civil, or our Municipal Law; we will find; that not only are Creditors ex
dilicto looked upon as Creditors, but that they have (...). or jus prelationis
to all other Creditors, in swa far as concerns the necessary reparations. And
thus it is with us expressly declared by the 25. Act 14. Par. K. Ja. 2. and the
174. act 13. Par. Ja. 6. that all remissions, or respits granted to any person
till the party skaithed be first satisfied, shall be null. And by the 26. Act.
1 Par. Chapter 2. the party from whom goods are stolen, are to have reparation out
of the first, and readiest of the thiefs goods And the last part, viz. that
nothing is due by way of assythment where the guilty person suffers, seems
unreasonable for the Heirs of the person injured being put to great expenses in
the persuite often times, and the wife, and children, being often times beggared by
the death of the person killed, it is unjust they should have no reparation;
and the offenders death satisfies public justice, but not them. And I love
bette^ the Law's of Spain and France, which allow's reparation even where the
offender dies.

For the better understanding of the general point, how far the Fisk becomes a
Creditor, by the common Law, upon the Commission of a crime, and so may reduce
posterior dispositions; It will be fit to destinguish these cases, first,
before the crime be committed, the Fisk has no interest to reduce any
Disposition made by any person whatsoever, except the Commmitter had disponed
his Estate, upon disigne to disapoint the Fisk when the crime should be
Committed; As for instrance, if a person who disigned to run in to the enemy,
or to Kill the King, should immediately before dispon his Estate; I conceive
that disposition would be quarrelable, as done in fraudem fisci. If this animus
comm^ttendi crimen, and fraudandi siscum, could be made appear, by these, or
such like presumptions, viz. If the disponer did immediately before the
committing of the crime, and without any Onerous cause, grant the said
Disposition, and made an Disposition omnium bonorum, for a particular
Disposition of any small part, though made immediately before. and though
gratuitous, could hardly be quarrelable ex hoc capite. 2. If the receiver of
the Disposition was conscious to the disponers design of committing the crime,
then if the crime was treason, the receiver is guilty of the crime; and so the
Disposition, and all the receivers own Estate falls to the Fisk. And in these
crimes a Disposition made to one who was conscious to the design, makes the
disposition quarrelable whether it be made for an onerous cause, or not, or
whether it be omnium bonorum, or not. 3. As to Dispositions made after the
crime is committed, we must distinguish thus, viz. either the crime committed
is treason, and all dispositions made after the perpetuating of this crime are
null, though before citation, or condemnation, but there must still ensue a
sentence, which sentence is drawn back to the committing of the crime. 4. In
other crimes, Dispositions are either of Heretage, or Movables; As to
Heretage, no disposition is quarrelable, because no crime confiscats Heritage,
except treason. And yet quoad assythments to the party wronged, I think there
is in reason (though our Law allows it not) so far jus quasitum, to them, that
they may quarrel all gratuitous Dispositions, though made before citation, as
made to their prejudice* who became lawful Creditors by the injury suffered in
the same crime: but if the Disposition was for an onerous cause, I conceive it
cannot be reduced ex hoc capite, or affected with the subsequent assythment
because the buyer was in bonafide to buy, finding nothing against him in the
Register of Hornings, or Inhibitions. And that though he knew the Disponer had
committed the crime, because he was not oblidged thereby to know that he was
incapacitated in Law to dispon. 5. In other crimes, besides treason,
Dispositions of Movables are quarrelable by the Fisk, if if made after
sentence, and it may be, if after the party was cited for the crime, if the
crime was such as did consiscate Movables. For though regulariter post
commissum crimen, valet alienatio ante sententiam facta titulo oneroso neque
revocatur nisi appareat contrahentium fraus. Angel. Ad. l. 1. Siquis C. de bon*
proscript, yet there lies still a presumption, that all Dispositions made after
an accusation are made me tu justae penae. Picus ad l. post contract. ibid. And
all Lawyers are of opinion, that in neither of these cases, a delinquent may
pay his former Creditors: And it is a received opinion amongst us, that all
crimes which are capital do confiscate the commiters Movables, though there be
no Act appointing that confiscation, as a part of the punishment, because
Movables, sequuntur personam* And thus in the case of Waugh in Selkirk; The
Lords found his Movables to fall under Escheet for theft, though there be no
express Statute confiscating the Movables* for theft But though this be
followed in some particular Nations, as France Ultrad. Council. 17. yet Clarus
tells us, in Quest. 78. that de consuetudine totus mundus servat quod bona
mobilia non confiscantur nisi exdispositione statuti, vel consuetudinis,
excepto crimine Heresis, and lose Majestatis. And particularly in theft,
Bossius is clear, that the Movables are not Escheet nisi vigore statuti. And
why with us should it be declared by some Acts, that the committers life or
goods shall be in the Kings will, and in others, that the committers Movables
shall be Escheet to the King, if this hold in all cases? 6. Where the committer
is declared punishable by confiscation of his goods, and his goods are
confiscated ipso jure, there even after the committing of the crime some think,
that the committer can dispon no part of his Movables, even before
denounciation or citation. That being the effect of confiscation ipso jure, as
is clear by the above cited Doctors. And it would appear, that confiscation
ipso jure, must import somewhat more then the confiscation that results only
consequentially from the nature of the deed it self. For else why needed the
Law express this; and if the Law has confiscated them at the time when the
crime was committed, it would appear that the dominium is thereby transferred
to the Fisk, and that consequently the committer is divested of them nam duo
non possunt esse domini in solidum. And if the committer be thereby divested of
the property, he cannot dispon, for none can dispon but he who is proprietor.
And yet even in that case the person injured, should have still action for his
damage, and interest, for he is mor prejudged by the crime, then the Fisk; and
consequently it is not just that he should be excluded by the Fisk, since the
Fisk has only intrest by him, and by the wrong which he has suffered. But I
refer the reader to Peregrinus de jure fisci, who has treated this question
most lernedly.

5. This action is not only competent to the Creditor himself, but to the
Creditors Heir, for here is and defunctus sunt in jure una and eadem persona, and
not only is it competent to the Creditors Heir, but in many cases, it is
competent to his singular successor, to whom either the right is asigned, or
who becomes singular Successor, ratione rei, as Donators to Escheets, and
forefaulters etc. as was found, March 1636. 6. The Defuncts Creditors are
allowed to reduce Alienations made to the prejudice of appearand Heirs, upon
deathbed, when these Heirs were their Debitors, for though this privilege
seems only introduced in favors of appearand Heirs, yet their Creditors may
comprise from them omne jus quod in iis est, and so reduce, as having
comprised, as was found at the instance of Balmerinochs Creditors contra the
Lady Coupar, and the 4th. January, 1672. Roxburgh contra Beatty. And in this
case it was found that even Creditors might pursue Declaratours and Reductions,
upon this Act, though they had not yet Appris'd, albeit it was then alleged,
that none has interest by our Law to pursue Reduction of a real right, except
such as have a real right standing in their Person to the Lands, whereof they
crave the right to be reduced. It is in some cases, not only competent to such
as were Creditores before the alienation quarrelled was made, but even to such
as were Creditores futuri, and became Creditors only after the alienation
quarrelled was made. And the Civilians mention two cases wherein this action is
competent even to such as were not Creditors the time of the Disposition
quarrelled: The first is, if the Disponer designed to borrow money before he
made the fraudulent alienation, and did borrow the money upon design to break
with it, for there though the Reducer was not a true Creditor, the time of the
alienation, yet the fraudulent inclination respecting expressly this Creditor,
or the borrowing of the money; made the disposition revocable and reduceable.
Jason ad jnst. hoc tit. number. 6. but here the design must be expressly proven, or
at least must be necessarily inferred from convincing circumstances, and
presumptions. The second case mentioned by them, is, if the Creditor did lend
the money for paying prior Creditors; In which case, as they might have reduced
the deed done in their prejudice, so may the posterior Creditors, since they
come in place of the Creditors whom they paid; and surrogatum sapit naturam
surrogati. But this last case does not (for ought I remember) take place in our
Law, and seems not at all suitable to the Annalogy of our Law in other cases;
for else he who had lent money to pay sums due upon an Inhibition, would have
right to the Inhibition, or he who lent money to pay off Comprysings, or
Arestments, without being expressly asigned to either. And therefore I conceive,
that either the Creditor who pays the Creditors who were prior to the
alienation, takes assignations to these prior debts which these pays, and then
they may reduce deeds done to the prejudice of that first debt, or else he pays
only the money to the Debtor, and the Debtor pays the prior Creditors, which
is the case meaned by the Doctors here, and in this case I conceive, the
Creditor who so pays, would not have the privilege, and that because the debt
which only had the privilege is extinguished, and non entis nullae sunt
qualitates, nor can the maxim surrogatum sapit naturam surrogati, take place
here, seeing that the debt in whose place it is surrogat, became extinct before
the surrogation: and none of the parties could design to transmit this
privilege, else the payer had taken Assignation; nor can he complain since
sibi imputet, who did not that which he might have done for securing himself.
As to the first of these cases, there was a famous decision extending their
Reductions even to posterior Creditors, 2. July, 1673. at the instance of
Street, and Jackson, Englishmen, against James Mason. The case whereof was
this, James Mason having dispon'd his Lands to James Mason his son, the said
Street, and Jackson raised a Reduction of the sons right, as granted in
prejudice of them, who were lawful Creditors to him, by virtue of a Trade and
correspondence which was begun long before the alienation; though the Bands
wherein he became Debtor to them were of a date posterior to the alienation.
To which it was answered, that the ground of the debt, being a bond, and the
Bond being posteriour to the alienation, they were not Creditors the time of
the alienation; and consequently the alienation was not reduceable upon this
Act of Parliament 1621. To which it was replied, that this pursuit was not
founded upon this Act 1621. only but upon the sure principles of the common
Law, according to which the Lords useed to decide before this Statute was made,
and according to which, they are warranted to proceed by this Statute in cases
that are new. Though the Debt was not constitute till after the Infeftment was
granted, yet the pursuers having long before that time entered in a Trade with
Mason, they did bona fide continue that Trade without any interruption, and
under the color of that Trade he had most fraudently bought with their moneys
this Land, and did most fraudulently convey the same to his Son to their
prejudice: which did clearly infer a designed fraud in the Father, and tended
inevitably to ruin all Trade and Commerce which might be very easily
disappointed by such fraudulent conveyances as this* Upon which debate the
Lords ordained James Mason, the Fathers count-books to be produced, that it
might appear in what condition he was at the time when he made that Disposition
to his Son; And whether the same was granted upon design to frustrate his
Creditors, or not, like as they allowed witnesses to be adduced for either
party, for clearing the Lords how far the Trade was continued betwixt the
Father and their pursuers, before, and after the Sons right; After making of
which report, the cause being again called, it was urged for the pursuer, that
by the report it was clear, that there was a former Trade, and correspondence
betwixt them, prior to the Sons Infeftment, dureing all which time he oftimes
sold cheaper then he bought; and that when he went to take the Infeftment for
his Son, he disguised himself, and rode from, and to the Land, in a by-way, and
caused so mark the Seasing in the Minutbook, that no man could know but that
the Seasing was taken for the Father, and after the Seasing was taken, the
Father still remained in actual possession. From all which it was argued, 1.
That Mason elder having entered into a public and unterrupted Trade, and
correspondence with the pursuers, the said Trade is to be considered with
respect to its first beginning, and the Bonds, though posteriour to the
Infeftment, yet are to be drawn back ad suam causam, viz. the Trade and
Commerce from which they did result. 2. It was clear from the nature of
Commerce in general, and from this report in particular, that former payments
were still made the foundation of new credit: And if the making of such Rights
during the dependence of such a continued Trade were allowed in favors of
Children; no Merchand would give trust, or if they gave, they might be ruined
by it, both which would be equally destructive to Trade. 3. If we consider the
Analogy of our Law, we will find, that the Lords have still considered a
continued, and uninterrupted Trade as very privileged in many cases; And
therefore though other compts prescrive in three years, yet that Statute uses
not to be extended to a continued Trade, and correspondance, and so far have
privilegia mercatorum, and commercii, been allowed in our Law, that Bills of
Exchange are allowed, though wanting the ordinary, and Statutary solemnities of
witnesses and warrands; for payment of Bills of Exchange are sustained without
the solemnity of intimation, against posterior Assignayes, and Arresters: and
Annualrent is sustained betwixt Merchants, sine pacto, vel lege, and a Bill
subscribed only by a mark, without either the subscryvers entire name, or the
initial letters of it, was sustained, it being proven that the drawer of the
Bill was in use so to subscribe. 4. By the common Law, Actio Pauliana was
extended even to posterior Creditors, where animus fraudandi, prior to the
alienation did appear, either by writ or presumptions, which are enumerate by
Jason, ad inst. hic and are very far short of the presumptions formerly
condescended on: and if the common Law, and natural reason allowed this remedy
in the case of debts absolutely posterior; how much more ought it to be allowed
in this case, where the debt, which is the ground of this pursuit, depended on
a prior cause, and was the result and product of a correspondence entered into,
before granting of the Sons Infeftment. 5. The Father had no Estate before this
correspondance, and having drawn fraudently into his hands the persuers goods,
about the same time that he bought the Land, Law and Reason presumes that the
price of their goods, did pay the price of their Lands: And that therefore this
Land ought to be affected and burdened with their debts. To which it was
duplyed, 1. That though the common Law did allow Actio Pauliana to posterior
Creditors, yet that was only in the case where the receivers of such Rights
were participes fraudis which cannot be alleged here, since the Son was minor
nec doli capax, and that especially being introduced in odium of the collusion,
it cannot be extended to cases, where no collusion can be alleged upon the
receivers part. 2. Commerce and Trade is founded upon personal trust, and
Merchants follow the faith of those with whom they trade, without ever
considering what real estate they have; so that their pursuers cannot be said to
have been cheated in their expectation, since they cannot be said to have
furnished their goods, in contemplation of the real Estate now controverted. 3.
Either their pursuers did search the Registers, or not; if they did not, sibi
imputent, qui sibi non vigilarunt; and if they did, they would have found that
the Son was Infeft, his Infeftment being Registrate, and though the Minut-book
did not specify, whether the Seasing was granted to Mason elder, or younger,
yet they ought to have searched the Minut-book it self, whereof this is
appointed to be but an Index, and the Son not having been particeps fraudis,
could not have been prejudged by any cheat or contrivance of his Father: for
the jus quesitum to him by the Infeftment, sine facto suo ab eo auferri nequit.
4. The pursuers did innovat their accounts by taking Bond for the product, and
Mason had a discharge of all former accounts, and trade: so that at the time of
the Disposition, he was not their Debtor upon the account of any prior Trade;
and the pursuers were no more to be considered as Merchants, but as common
Creditors: And it were a very dangerous consequence, to make debts that are
innovated, retain all the privileges that they had ante jnnovationem and
pernovationem prior obligatio perimitur. ^. 1. ff. de Novationibus. 5. It can
be made appear, that Mason had other Trade, which would have furnished him the
price of the Land, and that he was loser by the pursuers Trade. To which it was
replied, that the common Law did only consider participes fraudis, in order to
another effect, viz. If the Alienation was ex causa onerosa, then the
Alienation could not have been reduced; unless the receiver had been particeps
fraudis; but where it is ex causa mere lucrativa, as in this case fraus in
eventu was sufficient. And even here the Disposition being made by the Father
to his own Son who was in familia, the Son, was in as ill condition, as if he
had been particeps fraudis: nor could he plead the same benefit as a stranger,
contracting bonafide. Upon which debate, the Lords did reduce the Disposition,
as being made to the Son, by the Father, who was a Merchant, during his public
Trade and correspondance. Which Disposition could have no other rational
design, but to cheat Creditors, the Father not having so much as reserved
himself a liferent, or power to redeem. But since the Lords declared that this
decision proceeded upon all these grounds jointly, it can hardly be extended to
other cases. And I find that this public interest, and advantage of Trade and
Commerce, has been sustained to reduce deeds done to the prejudice thereof: but
yet not upon this Act, and Statute, but upon the general ground of fraud,
inferred by most pregnant qualifications, as is clear by the decision betwixt
Pot and Pollock. 12. Feb. 1669. The case whereof was this* John Pollock being
Creditor to his Wife of a second marriage, for her life-rent provision, and to
others to whom he owed money, they apprised his Estate, and assigned their
rights to Pot, who thereupon intents Reduction of a Band granted by the defunct
to James Pollock, his Son of the first marriage, for 5000. merks. The reasons
of Reduction were, first, that this Band was granted by a Father to his own
Son, without an onerous cause. To which it was answered, that they not being
Creditors when this Band was granted, this Act of Parliament allowed them no
Reduction of it, for this Act is only conceived in favors of prior Creditors,
and since his Father might have gifted away his Estate to a stranger, and even
that gift could not be quarreled by posterior Creditors, because they had not
then interest, and so their interest could not be said to be prejudged, there
was no speciality as to him, why he might not be capable of the same donation;
And whereas it was alleged, that this would ruin Commerce, because a Father
might grant such a right, and thereafter keep it latent, and cheat his
Creditors with whom he Traded, who could not know the condition of the Defunct.
To this it was answered, that the Act 1621. introduced no such speciality in
favors of Trade, but upon the contrair, such Dispositions, when made by
Merchants, were less presumeable to be done in defraud of Creditors, then when
made by such as had no Trade, nor Commerce, because Traders might grant Bands
to their Children, in expectation of what they might gain, and when they ^ell
thereafter insolvendo, that might be imputed to their loss by Sea, or Trade,
and not to the donation in favors of children. Upon which debate, the Lords
repelled the reason founded upon the Act 1621. The 2. reason was, that this
Band was reduceable ex capite doli, as granted by collusion betwixt Father, and
Son, in necem Creditorum, and to defraud their just interest: which dole, and
fraud, was inferred from these circumstances, 1. That the Son being
forisfamiliat, and provided, it could not be granted for any onerus cause. 2.
The Band was kept latent till the Father died. 3. It did bear no annualrent,
and the term of payment was delayed till after the Fathers death. 4. Their
debts were all contracted immediately after the granting of this Band; so that
it appeared clearly, that he had designed to exhaust his Estate by this Band in
favors of his Son, and then to contract debt freely, and to apply their money
to the payment of this Band. Upon which qualifications of fraud, the Lords
reduced the Band. The third reason was, that this Band granted by a Father to a
Son, was but a legittim or portion natural, in the construction of Law, and
therefore was revockable by the Father, and consequently by his Creditors; and
legittims did only affect the the Defuncts free Gear; which reason was also
justly repelled, for this being a Band granted to a son, who was foris
familiat, and being delivered to himself, was found not to be of the nature of
a Legittim. First, because it did not bear to be in satisfaction of his portion
natural. And secondly, because it was an ordinary Band, and delivered in the
ordinary way.

There was another case decided 4th December. 1673, Wherein the Lords reduced a
Disposition granted by Reid of Daldilling to his Son, even at the instance of
posterior Creditors, in respect that the Right was base, and that the Father
continued still in possession, and acted still as absolute Fiar, and that the
Registers of that Shire were carried out of the country, so that they neither
could, nor were obliedged to know the Sons Infeftment. And that, albeit it was
alleged for the Son, that as fraud never ought to be presumed, so there is no
ground for presuming it here, since this infeftment ought to be imputed to
another cause, then a design to defraud Creditors, viz. to a prior Contract of
Marriage; wherein his Father having gotten a great portion with his Mother, was
thereafter obliedged to Infeft him in his Lands, and this being the ordinary
way taken to secure ancient Families against prodigal Sons: And it being the
ordinary remedy taken by provident men, when they give great portions with
their Daughters* It were very dangerous to reduce such Dispositions at the
instance of posterior Creditors* in whose favors nothing was provided, by the
Act of Parliament, and the Sons Infeftment being registrat, did likewise take
off all presumption of fraud. And though the Registers were taken away, that
could not prejudge the Defender, or be a ground of Reduction here, no more,
then it could defend him against a Reduction ex capite inhibitionis, or
interdictionis, for the user doing omne quod in se est, and following the faith
of public Registers, cannot be prejudged by an accident, to which he had no
accession. And there was as good reason for reducing interdictions at the
instance of posterior Creditors, as for reducing such base Infeftments: the not
allowing of which would still force Sons thereafter to be at the great expense
and trouble of public Infeftments, and even these public Infeftments, were
liable to the same reason of Reduction, since lawful Creditors were in both
cases prejudged; and a Son preferred to them. And though equity should be
considered, where there is no Law; yet where there is an express statute, in
which many cases are considered, casus omissus, habetur pro omisso. It was here
observeable, that the Contract of Marriage did not bind the Father to Infeft
the Son in these Lands, but that hereby the Estate was only provided to the
Heirs of Marriage, so that the Son behoved to have been served Heir, and so
would have been liable to the Fathers debt, if this new Infeftment which was
here quarrelled, had not interveened.

Not only deeds done to the prejudice of prior Creditors are reduceable, but
even deeds done dolose to the prejudice of such as became Creditors, at the
same time with the deed done, are reduceable. As for instance, one brother
grants a Band to another, upon design to let the friends of her whom he is
suiting in Marriage, see that he has an Estate, and immediately after the
Contract, or about that same time, grants a Discharge to his brother, having
engaged the woman's friends to give him a gerat Tocher in contemplation of that
fallacious Band: this Discharge is reduceable, as given fraudulently to the
prejudice of the woman who gave the Tocher. And who is Creditrix by that
Contract, without respect to priority or posteriority of the debt. As was found
in the case Henderson against Henderson; and Donald Foller being provided by
his Father, in his Contract of Marriage; to the Conjunct^ee with his Wife, of a
Tenement of Land, the Fee whereof was provided to the children of the Marriage,
and the Father having fraudulently taken a tack from the Son at the same time;
the Lords reduced the said tack, as done in defraud of the said Contract, and
contra fidem tabularum nuptialium. And if this had been otherwise decided, all
poor women might easily be cheated, and Contracts of Marriage, which are the
obligations most privileged by Law, would become ineffectual and might easily
be evacuated: And so favorable are such obligations in Contracts of Marriage,
that Glencorsse having provided his Sons by several Bands of Provision, and
having thereafter dispon'd his Estate to his Son in his Contract of Marriage,
the Son having got a good Tocher in contemplation of this Estate; the Lords did
find, that the Sons Fee could not be reduceable by, not affected with those
Provisions, since they were but latent Rights, which neither the Son, nor they
who contracted with him were obliged to know.

The presumptions from which Lawyers conclude a design of cheating future
Creditors, are those. 1. If the Debtor dispone all his Estate, assignatio
omnium bonorum, especially if he reserve not his own Liferent, as in Masons
case, for it is presumed, that no man would denude himself of all means of
subssistance without some malicious design, and if the Disposition be made
without an onerous cause, l. omnes. Lucius ss. de his quae in fraud: or for a
less price, then the thing dispon'd was truly worth, Strach. tract. de decoct.
part. 3. number. 2. but since licet contrahentibus in emptione vel venditione
seinvicem decipere. It seems that this extention should not hold, except where
the thing dispon'd is much under-rated. 2. If the Disponer be Bankrupt, or a
Cheat. or deploratae vitae. Strach. number. 23. 3. If he borrowed immediately
after the Disposition. 4. If he borrowed secretly, and desired to conceal his
condition, as in Masons case. And 14. December. 1671. Duff contra Culloddin this
qualification of fraud, was sustained to reduce an Assignation made by one
brother to another, viz. That the resigner desired the Resignation should be
kept secret, and thereafter suffered his brother to continue in possession. 5
If he borrowed sums far above his fortune: and upon this last presumption, a
Merchant in Paris was executed, having borrowed vast sums, with which he broke
next morning after they were borrowed.

To any conjunct or confident Person.
THe reason why the Act suspects such, and is more unfavourable in the case of
Dispositions, and Rights made to conjunct or confident persons; is, because
these have easier occasions of making, and are more pron to make such Rights
then any else. For what strangers would cheat Creditors for one another; and
though a Debtor will be desirous to prefer his Creditors to Strangers; yet he
will be ready to prefer his Friends to his Creditors. Which reason seems to be
insinuate by that excellent Law, l. 27. C. de donat. Data jam pridem lege
constituimus, ut donationes interveniente actorum testificatione conficiantur,
quod vel maxim inter necessarias, conjunct asque personas convenit custodiri.
Si quidem clandestinis ac domesticis fraudibus, facile quidvis pro negotii
opportunitate confingi potest, vel id quod vere gestum est aboleri. And the
Doctors have received as a brocard, that conjunctus presumitur scire facta
conjuncti, l. octavi: ff. unde cognati: and therefore presumitur alienatio in
fraudem facta, quando facta est donatio omnium bonorum vel conjuncta personae,
Bart. ad l. post contractum, h. t. number. 30. Our Law has not fully determined
who are repute conjunct persons, since this opens a door to arbitraryness in
Judges, it had been fit the Law had obviated by a special definition, quo ad
this Point the power of Judges, as well as the fraudulent conveyances of
Creditors. But certainly Father and Son, and all degrees ascendant and
descendant, are repute conjunct. And because these are the most near relations,
therefore Dispositions made to them, are not only reduceable by this Statute;
but such Dispositions, when made to such as might have been Heirs, make the
receiver successor titulo luc rativo post contractum debitum. Which passive
title was not extended against a Brother, though the Disponer was so old that
he could not expect Succession whereby his Brother might be excluded, nor was
the presumtion of fraud so strong amongst collaterals, as to infer so odius a
passive Title, but reserved Action upon this Act, 1621. in so far as the cause
was not onerous, 7. December. 1672. Spencer-field contra Kilbrakmont. 2. Brother
and Brother are repute conjunct Persons. But whither this should be extended to
the same degrees in affinity, as in consanguinity, has often been contraverted;
and it is certain, that in other Statutes, non idem est jus affinitatis, ac
consanguinitatis; And thus the Statute forbidding Father, Son, or Brother, to
judge in Actions of their correlati, is not extended so as to prohibit
Fathers, Brothers, or Sons in Law, to judge in such cases; as was found in
Mores case against Gruibbit. But yet a Sister in Law was found to be a conjunct
person, 5. July 1673. Hoom contra Smith. And a Brother in Law was repute a
conjunct Person in the Reduction against Major Biggar, at Waughaps instance.
And S^eidivin hoc tit, page 1209. tells us, that inter affines and conjunctas
personas frauds presumuntur. And since men will do as much for their Allies,
as for their blood Friends, especially for Sisters, or Brothers in Law; and
that the Law upon that same reason repells them from being witnesses: It seems
most reasonable that they should be repute conjunct Persons. And it is not
imaginable why the Law, which is jealous that an allye or affinis may perjure
themselves for another, should not be much rather unwilling to assist them in
such conveyances as their, to the prejudice of their Creditors, where the cheat
is easier, and less dangerous.

But whether a Bastard be such a conjunct Person, as that a Disposition made to
him by his Father is Reduceable; may be doubted: for upon the one part, a
Bastard patrem demonstrare nequit, and he who is of no blood, cannot be
conjunct upon the account of Blood: And yet upon the other part, a Bastard is
known to have much natural affection, and so may be presumed a person-willing
to conveigh such frauds: and upon this account, the Law rejects him from being
witness in favors of his natural Father, Marsil. singul. 273. And a Bastard
with us is only received cum nota. And the Law has allowed him action against
his Father for aliment. And though the Law will allow him no advantage by his
birth; yet it should not capacitate him to cheat others: and I think this
distinction more reasonable then to say with Paleot: that Bastards are not
conjunct upon the Father side, but on the Mother side. cap. 60. de not his, or
to say with Alex. consil. 60. that these are to be accounted conjunct, in so
far as concerns marriage only, so that a Bastard Brother cannot marry his
Bastard Sister; for certainly, though these be not conjunct in strict Law, sunt
conjunctis similes felin. ad cap. per tuas de probat.

Who is understood to be a confident, seems more difficult, and it would seem
that an ordinary Factor, or a domestic Servant must be said to be confident
Persons, and an ordinary Agent was found to be such a confident Person, 26.
June 1672. Moubra against Spence, and Immola ad h. t. leg. post contractum
affirms that Amicus, magna amicitia conjunctus, is liable to this presumption,
and the Law judges still of him as of conjunctus sanguine, and friendship is
oftimes warmer then blood.

Dispositions likewise omnium bonorum, are reduceable, though not made to
confident Persons, but to a mere stranger: except the Disposition be made for
an onerous cause, for the Law presumes as I observed formerly, that it is made
to prejudge Creditors; and it were unreasonable that a mere gift should be
preferred to poor Creditors, this was found the 18. November 1669. Henderson
contra Henderson. Albeit it was there alleged, that this Act declares such
deeds only reduceable, as are made in favors of conjunct or confident Persons,
for though this Statute make that a presumption of fraud, yet it excludes not
other presumptions, such as were in this c(...), viz. that it was assignatio
omnium bonorum, and that it bears to be granted for a cause falsely narrated,
viz. for the sum of two thousand merks, due by Howat the common Debtor to
Anderson; whereas it was offered to be proven by Discharges under Howats own
hand, that the far greatest part of this sum was paid before the Disposition.

Since this clause of the Statute annuls deeds only done to the prejudice of
confident or conjunct persons, it would seem, that such Rights when made to
others who are not conjunct, nor confident, are not reduceable. And yet de
praxi, all Rights made to any persons whatsoever, without an onerous or
necessary cause, are reduceable by this Statute, and our Law considers the
difference betwixt conjunct, or confident persons, and others; only in
reference to the way of Probation, so that these must prove an onerous cause
whereas others need not; this shows how misteriously our Statutes are conceived.

Without true just and necessary causes, etc.
TItulus onerosus, is when any thing is dispon'd with the burden of doing or
paying somewhat, titulus lucrativus, is when the deed is merely gratuitus, and
proceeds from mere favor.

The Civil Law observed two Rules, in the difference betwixt an onerous, and
lucrative cause, quoad this Action. The first was, that this Action was
competent, even against these who had received such Rights for onerous causes,
when both the giver and receiver were guilty of fraud, if they were partakers
of the fraud, l. ait. praetor ff. h. t. And in that case the thing alienated
was recalled without restoring the price. The second Rule was, that he who had
received such a Right, ex causa lucrativa, was liable to restore* though he was
not accessory to the fraudulent conveyance. nec particeps l. quod autem. ij.
ff. eod.

Our Law likewise considers two cases, one is, if the Creditor had done no
diligence; and then Rights made to their prejudice are only reduceable, if they
be made to confident persons without an onerous cause: The other if the Reducer
has as a Creditor done diligence, and ^hen the Rights done to his prejudice are
reduceable, whether they be made ex titulo oneroso, or lucrativo. For by the
last part of the Act, it is declared that the Debtor cannot prefer one
Creditor to another, to the prejudice of any such diligences.

How far children are Creditors to their Father, and may upon this Statute
reduce deeds done by their Father in favors of other children after their
Provisions, may be dubious in many cases* of which I shall only name a very
few. The first is, a Father by his Contract of Marriage with the first Wife,
provides the children of the first Marriage to ten thousand Pounds, and by the
Contract with a second Wife, provides them to twenty thousand Merks, and by a
Contract with a third Wife provides the children of that Marriage to ten
thousand Merks. The question rises, whether the children of the first Marriage
can reduce the Contract of the second Marriage, quoad the Provisions therein
made: as made in prejudice of them who became lawful Credtors by the first
Contract; or if the children of the second Marriage, may not do the same to the
children of the third Marriage: and I conceive that if the Provisions be made
to the Heirs of the Marriage, and if they enter Heirs, they cannot reduce,
because tenentur prestare. But if the Contract bear children of the Marriage,
some think that they may assign their Portions, and the assignay may reduce
these Provisions made in the second Marriage. And just so the children of the
second Marriage, may reduce the Provisions made to the children of the third
Marriage: But I think, that either the children of the first Marriage are
Infeft, and then certainly, the Father cannot prejudge them by posterior
personal Provisions, or else where neither are Infeft, I conceive, that if
there be an onerous cause, such as a Tocher paid by the Contracts of the
second, or third Marriages, and then also the Contracts cannot be reduced upon
this Statute: For these Contracts are not made to defraud Creditors, since they
are made for an onerous cause. Yea though there be no Tocher, yet even the
Marriage is an onerous cause; for who would marry if there were no Provision,
and the design here, was not to prejudge true Creditors.

The other case is, a man in his first Contract provides his Land, and ten
thousand Merks to the Heir of the first Marriage, and in the Contract with his
second Wife, he provides the children of that Marriage, to the conquest that
shall be made during that Marriage. The question is, whether the Son of the
first Marriage will be Creditor to the Father for ten thousand Merks, even
though he be served Heir to his Father: For though here it seems, that
confusione tollitur obligatio, the son of the first Marriage being both Debtor
and Creditor. Yet conquest is still understood to be, illud quod super est
deducto are alieno: and therefore the children of the second Marriage, can have
no Right but with the burden of these ten thousand Merks. And in the case of
Scot of Bavila contra Binning. The Lords found that the Heir might reduce the
Provisions made to the Wife, and Bairns, of the second Marriage, in so far as
concerned, the ten thousand Merks provided to the Heir of the first Marriage:
but this may be doubted; for first it may be alleged that there was no debt,
since the Pursuer was the Debtor himself. But secondly if the money with which
the Land was bought, was conquest also in the second Wifes time, it seems
against Law and Reason, that this should not be called conquest quoad an Heir
of another Marriage, cui nihil deest, though if the money had been conquest in
the first Marriage, it might be more properly called Aes alienum.

A third case is this, a Father obliedged himself in his Contract of Marriage,
with his first Wife, to provide the Bairns of the Marriage, to eight thousand
Pounds: but before his death he provides one of the three Bairns to the whole
eighth. The The question propon'd was, whether the other two Daughters might
raise a Reduction of the Disposition made to their sister upon this Act, and
for these sisters it might be urged, that the brother became Debtor to them
prorata, even as if he had granted Band to six men for a sum, each of them
would had Right to a proportional part of it; at least, that each Child became
Creditor to him, and so something was due to each of them. And consequently he
defrauded them by his disponing all to to any one: but for the other sister, to
whom the Disposition was made, it might be alleged; that the Father was
Debtor only to the Bairns of that Marriage, tanquam stirpi, and so he
satisfied his obligation by disponing his Lands worth that sum to any one of
them, but was not Debtor to them in capita. 2. The design of the parties
Contracters, in such cases, is only to secure the sum to the Issue of that
Marriage, without consideration of any division; for this Provision is made to
secure against Children of other Marriages; but not to secure one Child against
another, and there may be some reason to be jealous of the Father in the one
case, but not in the other. 3. This restriction were contrair to the Fathers
patria potestas, and the Law is never jealous of the Fathers affection, but
presumes that his division will be just, and what Judge should be juster to
Children then a Father. 4. It were against the interest of the Commonwealth to
restrain, or take away the Fathers power, of Distribution in such cases, which
is the great curb, that the Father has upon his Children, for making them good
Children, or good Citizens, and were it not against reason, that if the two
sisters had been very Vicious, and the third most Virtuous, that the Father
should have been so bound up, that he could not gratify the one, or that he
behoved to provide the other with Money to serve their lusts. 5. It is ordinar
to provide expressly, that the Money so provided to the Children should be
divided as the Father pleased, and the Law uses to decide general cases
according to what is ordinarily pactioned, presuming that to be the tacit will
of the parties, which is ordinarily the express will of other parties. Likeas
if it had been contraverted amongst the parties at the time when the Contract
was to be subscribed, who should have had the Power of division? certainly, it
had been allowed to the Father. To which last I incline, except it could be
alleged that all were equally deserving, and that the Father, or Children
preferred, had used indirect means in preferring one to the rest. For though
there be no Testament quarela testamenti in officio si -- with us, yet there
may be some place perhaps, for the Judge to interpose in such cases. I find by
the opinion of the Doctors, a Father Disponing to one Child a necessary
Portion, is not said to defraud the rest of the Children, to whom he Disponed
formerly, nam hoc potius tribuendum pietati quam fraudi. And it is clear, that
for this reason, Libertus in fraudem patroni, filie dotem constituere poterat
l. 1.. sed si ff. si quid in fraud. patro, but it is not so with us in all
cases, as has been formerly observed.

It has been likewise debated, whether provisions by Parents to their Children,
in their Contract of Marriage, be such onerous causes as may defend the
Children against Reductions upon this Act, at the instance of Creditors, who
crave Dispositions made to them in satisfaction of these obligations to be
reduced. For upon the one part, it seems, that since they are Creditors who may
pursue, and distress their Father, therefore their Father may dispone his
Estate, and this is both a necessar and a prior Debt, and so falls not under
the Act; which declares only such Rights reduceable, as are granted without
true, just, and necessary causes. And Provisions of Children by Contracts of
Marriage are the ordinary allowable remedies granted to such as paying Tochers
with their Daughters, or providing their Sons, desire to see their Grand
Children thus secured. But upon the other hand, it seems very hard, that such
latent deeds as Contracts of Marriage, which Creditors cannot know, should be
sustained as onerous Causes to seclude them; and that the Debitors own Children
should be preferred to Creditors. And as there can be no debate as to this
point, where the Provisions are made in favors of the Heirs of the Marriage,
because there the Heirs must represent the granter, and so cannot reduce his
deed, so where the Provision is made to Bairns of the Marriage, yet Creditors
were preferred to them in the case of Bannerman of Elsick contra Haystoun. But
upon the 3. July 1673. in an Action, Gordon contra Fraser: The Lords found,
that a right to Movables made by the Father to his Children, was reduceable at
the instance of Posterior Creditors; though it was made in satisfaction of the
Mothers Contract of Marriage, except the Children would allege that the Father
was not Bankrupt, but had an sufficient Estate to pay the pursuers; for they
thought it much more reasonable, that the Children should loose by their
Father, then the Creditors.

It has been contraverted, whether a Right made by a Father to his Son in law
for a Tocher, be reduceable by an anterior Creditor, and if this be allowed in
all cases, men may easily prefer their Children to their Creditors; and it
would appear, that at least the Right so made, should only be esteemed onerous
in quantum, it extends to such a value, as may be a suitable Tocher, for such a
man's Daughter, or else it should be repute onerous, in so far as may answer to
the Joyntur given by the Husband, or to the aliment that he is obliged to
bestow upon her stante matrimonio, though he be by Contract obliged to no
Joyntur, nor has any Joyntur to give her, et it a dos, est titulus onerosus,
ex part mariti, qui^ datur pro oneribus matrimonii, sustinendis l. pro.
oneribus C. de jur. dot. sed ex part uxoris dos, est titulus lucrativus. l.
qu^ liberos ff. de ritu nuptiar. l. sin. C. de doti^* (...). Basilic. l. 25. S.
1. hoc tit. And upon the other hand, a Joyntur to the Wife is titulus onerosus,
in swa far as it is suitable to the Husbands Estate, as was found November. 1665.
contra Russel. But if the Husband should Dispone all his opulent Estate to his
Wife, as a Joyntur, I think it might be reduced to a third, at the instance of
prior Creditors, both because a Tierce is the Provision, that the Law allows a
Wife if there be no provision; and so is the legal quota. And because Rights
made by a man upon Death bed, to the prejudice of his Heir, is restricted to a
Tierce; but if the Contract bear^, the Land to be Disponed to the Son in Law
for love and favor, that narative proves titulum lucra tivum, though really no
other Tocher was bestowed; and though a Joynter was given, as was found betwixt
Graham and Stewart.

How far a Wife is Creditrix by her Contract of Marriage, and may reduce
Posterior deeds as done in defraud of it, is debateable in many cases, as to
Heretage* but these fall not properly under this Act, but under the Act 105.
Par. 7. Ja. 5. And as to the Husbands Movables, I shall only mention one case,
viz. Campbel contra Campbel, December. 1674* which was this; Campbel by his
Contract of Marriage, provided his Wife to the half of the Movables, that
should pertain to him at his Death, and a little before his Death, he Disponed
many of his Movables to his Brother; whereupon the Relict raises a Reduction
of that Disposition upon this Statute. To which reason of Reduction, it wa^
answered, that the reason was not relevant for the Relict was only Creditrix by
this Contract, as to what Movables should belong to the Husband at his Death,
which was but (...), and spes successionis, but did not hinder the Brother to
Dispon at any time, in his liege poustie, upon any part of his Movables. And
as such Clauses providing a Wife to the third of the Movables, were most
ordinar, so if this were sustained, the Husband could not gift to his Brother,
or Relations, any Horse, or any thing else. To which it was replied, that if
such Dispositions were sustained, the former, or the like Clauses would be
Elusory, and might easily be Evacuated; for a Husband might Dispon a little
before his Death all his Movables: this was not decyded. But the Lords
inclined only to sustain this Disposition, if made for some probable Cause: but
if it had been made upon Deathbed, it was Reduceable, or if there had been
great presumptions of fraud adduced to clear, that it was contrived as a mere
cheat against the Relict. But were clear, that if the Donation, was only of one
particular thing made in leidge poustie, it could not be quarrelled upon this
Act. It may be doubted, if when the onerous Cause expressed, is not true, or if
there be no onerous Cause, but that the Right granted, bear expressly, to be for
love and favor. If in either of these cases, it be not lawful to the granter
to astruct his Disposition, when quarrelled upon this Statute, by offering to
prove, true and real onerous Causes, prior to the Debts whereupon the Reduction
is founded. And first, it is without all doubt, that if the Right bear no
Cause, the user may condescend upon, and offer to prove the true and onerous
Cause. 2. I find it decided, that where the writ did bear only love, and
favor, though granted by a Man to his own Wife; she was allowed to astruct it,
by founding it upon her Contract of Marriage, and ascribing it to make up the
defects of the Lands, provided to her by her said Contract. January 1669. La.
Brae, contra Chisholm. 3. Where the Disposition did bear love and favor, and
other onerous Causes: Either the receiver of the Disposition was admitted to
astruct the Disposition, by proving an onerous Cause adequat to the worth of
the Land. In the case Naper contra Ardmore; which Decision may be debated, for
why was love and favor insert, if the Cause was adequat, and this was a great
presumption of the fraud, especially in a Disposition by the Father to the Son,
for though, utile per inutile non vitiatur. And that this might have proceeded
ex stilo, yet in suspect cases, where it is known that narratives are much
considered, these Arguments are but weak.

4. Where the writ bears an onerous Cause, and that the Cause can only not be
proven. Then it seems reasonable that the person to whom it was granted, may
astruct his right, by offering to prove that there were othere sums justly
resting to him. 5. If the Disposition bear an onerous Cause; but if it be
proven expressly, that the Cause expressed is not true, but is caluminously, and
fictitiously expressed: I would conclude, that the user should not be allowed to
astruct another true Cause, and that in odium falsi, and calumniae: even as if
the date of an execution, or other diligence, be found to be false; the user is
not allowed to astruct the same, by condescending upon another true date, and
abiding at it.

Without true and Competent.
THe Doctors also condescendes upon a third kind of Title, different from both
a lucrative, and an one rous Title; and this they call a mixed Title, titulum
mixtum, l. apud Celsumus. authoris ff. de except doli. vid. Jason ad l. nemo
potest ff. legate: and an instance of this is given in an Alienation made in
defraud of Creditors, for less then the true price. And even in this case,
Reduction is competent for the Creditor, prejudged, in so far as the price
received is below the true value; and thus, l. 7. Basil. h. t. (...), si in
fraudem Creditorum meorum, minore praetio fundum vendidero, revocatur quod
gestum est, etiam non reddito praetio, but since, licet contrahentibus in
emptione and venditione se invicem decipere, and that we see prices of Land
very different, every man taking his advantage. It may seem strange, why the
Law should prejudge so far the Buyer in this: and I conceive, that except the
price be palpably made so low, upon design to cheat Creditors, (any of the
Creditors having offered more) or that it is extraordinary low in it self; such
prices cannot be challenged. As if a chalder of Victual, worth truly 3000.
Merks, were sold for 2000. Merks: But yet I think not that it behoved to be
ultra dimidium, below the just half; for then it might have been reduced by the
Civil Law upon another head, and so this Action had been unnecessar.

Whether if any Debtor buy a hazard ( jactum retis, as Lawyers call it) v. g.
if he buy a woman's Liferent at seven years purchass, and dispone his Land for
the price: if he die the next year, may not I reduce that Disposition, as done
to the prejudice of me a lawful Creditor; even as a Minor might reduce such a
bargain, if made by his Tutors. To which I conceive it may be answered, that it
cannot be quarrelled, if it was made in the ordinary way, and for the ordinary
advantage, for which a man would have transacted it, if he had no Creditors,
and if no design to defraud, can be shown: and here that maxim holds, fraus
and eventum, and consilium requirit: nor are the Leidges put in mala fide to
Contract with Debitors in such cases.

Without just.
IT is not sufficient, that the price or cause be onerous, but it must be just;
that is to say, a price which the Law allows; as for instance, if a man should
loose a great sum at Game, and for payment of it, should dispone his Lands,
that Disposition might be quarrelled as made without a just price, because the
Law allows not the payment of what is gained at Game, if it exceed 100. Pounds
Scots. And since the Law would not sustain Action for it, at the gainers
instance against the Debtor who loosed it, much less should it sustain a
Disposition for payment of it against the Creditors, and yet this may be said
to be an onerous cause; for the looser hazarded as much of his own, against
what he gained, and so this Game was but the return of his Money: and like to
emptio jactus retis. And though it may be alleged, that by the 13. Act, 23.
Pa. Ja. 6. The superplus of what is gained at Game above 100. Pound, be
ordained to be consigned for the poor of the Parish. And so the Disposition
made for payment of it, must accresse to them; and is still an onerous and
necessar debt, quoad the looser, and consequently is not reduceable at the
instance of his Creditors; yet I conceive that such a Disposition would be
reduceable at their instance, as not made for a just cause, since it is made
for a cause, upon which the Law would not allow Action. And the Civilians
number, what is gained at Game, amongst lucrative causes, Bald. adl. i. C. si
quid in fraud Patron. And generally what is acquired unlawfully, is by them
said to be acquired, titulo lucrativo, Jason hic number. 8. and thus Dispositions
granted ob turpem causam, etc. may be said to be reduceable also upon this
Statute, as granted without an just and onerous cause: according to them; as it
is granted without a just cause, to speak in the terms of this Act. And I
think, we speak more properly then the Civilians here, for what is gained at
Game, rather wants a just cause, then an onerous cause.

And necessary causes.
DIspositions made to conjunct or confident persons may be quarrelled, though
they be made for an just and onerous cause; if they be not made for an necessar
cause. For it may be fraudulent, and be designed to prejudice Creditors, except
the cause be necessary, though it be onerous. As for instance, if a conjnuct,
or confident person, knowing that his Debtor intends to frustrat his
Creditors, and to go out of the Country, and yet presuming that a Right
granted for an onerous cause cannot be quarrelled, should so far comply with
his fraudulent design, as to buy Land from him, and to pay him the price upon
that design, such a transaction may appear to be fraudulent, and liable to be
questioned upon thus Act; and these words of it, without true just and
necessary causes.

To have been from the beginning; and to be in all time coming, null, and of
none avail, force, strength, or effect; by way of action, exception, or or
reply, without any further Declarator.
BY this Paragraph of the Statute, the nullity arising from this Statute, is
reduceable by way of exception, as well as action, open exceptionis, as our
Practick terms it: and this was introduced in favors of the Pursuer, who is
leised by the fraud^, whose advantage it is to have his interest sustained to
him any way, and so to have his diligence thus shortened.

For the clearer understanding of these words, we must consider, that by the
common Law, nullities are either such as are received ipso jure, or open
exceptionis. That is said to be null, ipso jure, where the thing is declared
null by any express Law, as this is by this Statute, quod contra legem fit,
pro infecto habetur, and ipso jure nullum est. l. non dubium C. de legib: that
was nullum open exceptionis, which was not receiveable, except the nullity had
been proponed, by him to whom it was competent. But in our Law nullum ipso
jure, and nullum open exceptionis, are the same, and termini convertibiles: and
with us the opposition is betwixt nullum open exceptionis, and actionis; the
reason of which difference proceeds from the favor designed by the Law, quoad
the form of procedure. For if any thing be null by way of exception, it is
received summarly against the pursuit, without raising an Action of Reduction,
or Declarator: but what is only null by way of Action, needs Process of
Reduction, or Declarator. By the common Law, either a Penalty was not adjected
to the prohibitory Law, but the thing was simpliciter prohibited, and these
things were ipso jure null. But if the Law proceeded further, and adjected a
Penalty; then either the Penalty was adjected to the annulling of the deed: and
then the deed whereby the Law was contraveened, and the Penalty, was both due,
or else the deed was declared null, but so that it was some way allowed to
subsist, but a remedy was appointed, and then it was not null ipso jure, but
was reduceable by the way appointed; according to the principles of the common
Law, this nullity was receiveable ipso jure, for quod contra legem fit, id ipso
jure nullum est. But so it is that this alienation in defraud of Credirors, was
declared null by the Law, and by this Statute being declared null, that nullity
should be receivable open exceptionis. and yet by our practice the nullity
arising from this Act, is oft-times received only by way of Reduction, whereby
the Lords have receded from the express words of the Law; and the only reason
I can give for for it, is, that the Author or Disponer must be called to
maintain his Right; which could not be if the nullity were receiveable open
exceptionis: and if the Disponer were called, he might eleid the the pursuit,
by alleging that the Debt, to the prejudice of which his Right was said to be
granted, was paid, or discharged, or became extinct by compensation; neither
of which could be known to the receiver. And yet I find in some cases, this
nullity receivable, open exceptiouis, v. g. If the right bear, to be for love
and favor; for here there needs no Probation that it is fraudulent, and it is
a principle, that where the nullity is founded upon Law, and the subsumption is
instantly verified, that ^o casu the nullity is receiveable open exceptionis.
And in my humble opinion, where ever the fraud can be instantly verified, it
ought to be received, open exceptionis, and the former and ordinary reason, viz.
That the Disponer should be called, because he may allege the debt to be
paid, seems not to be good, because that nullity is not competent to be
propon'd by way of exception, but where there is a competition betwixt the
Creditor, and confident Persons, both pretending right to the Lands and others
Dispon'd, which cannot be but where the Creditor has comprised; and though
before comprysing, the Creditor ought to cite the Disponer in his Reduction,
which is processus executivus, and previous to, and in order to execution by
comprysing: yet after ultimat exeecution by comprysing, it is not necessar the
Debtor should be cited upon that pretense, that he may question the Debt as
satisfied. 2. I find that Dispositions of Movables, have been found null by
way exception, though nullities of Heretable Rights are not found null, without
Reduction or Declarator, and thus it was decyded, 16. June, 1671. Bower contra
the Lady Coupar: The reason of which distinction must proceed from this, viz.
that mobilium vilis est possessio, (...) as the Greek calls it, and therefore
the Law requires not so much solemnity to their constitution, nor destitution,
or revocation. 3. I find, that where the Right quarreled, is parvi momenti, the
Lords admit the nullity to be receiveable, open exceptionis, 5 January, 1669.
But here the parties were poor, which I find they do also in nullities ex
capite inhibitionis etc. in small matters, and betwixt poor parties, nam de
minimis non curat lex, and deminimis summarie jus dicit pr^tor. Since there the
subject matter is not able to bear large expenses. 4. I have observed, that
where the nullities did arise incidenter from another pursuit, depending, that
there it was received, open exceptionis, least the other Process should sist, as
was found in the case Haliburton contra Morison. Where a Reduction being
intented at Haliburtons instance of Morisons Right, ex capite inhibitionis, it
was alleged that Morisons Disposition depended upon a Right prior to the
Inhibition. To which it was replied, that that Right was null by the Act 1621.
Upon which debate the Lords sustained the quarrelling of this Right, by way of
reply. But I should rather think, that where the Right is betwixt most
confident persons, such as Father and Son, that eo casu the nullity should be
receivable by way of exception, both because the cheat is easiest, and most
unfavourable: and because the Father, or very near Friend, might have made all
concur willingly to defend the Right, without the necessity of being called,
which is the reason why Reductions are so necessary in other cases.

And in case any of His Majesty's good Subjects (no ways partakers of the
Fraud) have lawfully purchased any of the Bankrupts Lands, for a just and
competent Price, etc.
IT is much debated amongst the Doctors, if Actio pauliana be Actio realis, or
not. The Gloss and some Interpreters assert it to be only a personal Action:
and they conclude so, because the Possessor of what is alienated in defraud of
Creditors, is not liable to this Action, except he be particeps fraudis, or
else have acquired the thing so alienated without any onerous Cause, that it is
not the possession, but the deed of the possessor that is considered. Our Law
agrees in this with the Civil Law, for by this Paragraph it is Statute, that
all who have acquired the thing alienated in defraud of Creditors, shall not be
liable to this Reduction, but such only as are partakers of the fraud, and have
not paid a just price to the interposed Person. As for instance, one dispons
his Estate to his other Brother, without any onerous Cause, which Brother
Dispons it again to a Stranger who knew nothing of the Fraud; and who pays a
just and adaequat price for it. In which case, a priorlawful Creditor, may
reduce the first alienation made to the Brother, but he cannot reduce that alie
nation that is made by the Brother to the Stranger: And yet if that Stranger
did either know that the first conveiance was fraudulent (which the Act calls
the being partaker of the fraud) or if he paid not an adequat price, then and
in either of these cases, the Creditor may reduce even the Disposition made to
the Stranger; he is said to be partaker of the Fraud, to whom it was intimate
by the Creditor, that he should not buy, l. ait praetor ff. hoc tit, which is
founded upon excellent reasons, and would certainly hold in our Law; though I
remember not that it is already so decyded. For this intimation would take away
the bona sides, upon which the privilege granted by this Act to singular
Successors is founded.

But the third parties knowledge, that it was to the behoove of the Bankrupt,
or of the confident, is still sufficient to take from him the benefit of his
Clause; which being granted, because of the third parties bonafides, cannot
reach to such, whose knowledge put them in mala side, as was found 22 January,
1669. Hamiltoun contra Hamiltoun, and the Viscount of Frendricht.

As also, if the Disposition made to the first receiver, whom this Act calls
the interposed Person, did bear love and favor, and was made to a confident
Person; in that case, the Right is reduceable. For in that case, the third
Person buying ought, to have known the nullity, and scire, and scire debere
equiparantur; and this was found in the Reduction of a Tack, 1672. Hay contra
Jamison. Though that Tack had past through many hands, and to singular
successors, who had acquired their Rights for onerous Causes.

I have heard it debated, that though a third Person, who acquires a Right from
the Person interposed, for an onerous Cause, be not liable to this Action; yet
a compryser, comprysing this Right from the interposed Person, had no such
privilege. As for instance, a Right made by one Brother to another without an
onerous Cause, is reduceable; and therefore if one of the Creditors of that
Brother, to whom the Right was made, should compryse the Right so made to him:
It was alleged, that as this Right would have been reduceable in the Person of
the first acquirer, if it had continued with him; so it would have been
reduceable from the Compryser; and that for these reasons, 1. A Compryser
compryses only, omne jus quod in debitore erat, tantum, and tale: and therefore
since it was reduceable in his Debitors Person, it ought to be so in his, even
as it had been reduceable from his Creditor, ex capite inhibitionis, aut
interdictionis, etc. 2. The express words of the privilege, given by this
Paragraph, does not meet this case, for the words run thus; if any of His
Majesty's good Subjects, shall by lawful bargains purchase. But so it is, that
he who compryses, cannot be said to purchase by way of bargain; but though a
comprysing be a legal Disposition, and Assignation, yet it is a sale by the
Judge, and not a purchase, or Contract amongst the parties. 3. This case seems
not to fall under the reason of the Act; for the Act privileges such, as
having a good security, do in contemplation of that Right (which for ought they
can know, is sufficient) lay out their money; and so follow the faith of that
Right in the first constitution of their Debt. But the Compryser lent his money
to his Debtor, without showing that he relied upon the Right now quarreled,
but finding thereafter that he could not recover his Debt, he comprysed any
thing he could find. 4. If this were allowed, it would open a wide door to
fraud; for Rights might be made to confident persons, and then might be
comprysed; which any Creditor might be induced to, whereas few would adventure
to buy originally these Rights, as said is. This case was debated in July,
1666. betwixt Jack and Jack, but was not decyded: and it did divide the
opinions of very able Lawyers.

It may be doubted also, whether the receiver of the Right from the interposed
Person, knew not that the Right was fraudulent the time of the alienation, but
knew before he received the thing sold, that the first alienation was
fraudulent, whether this Right be reduceable or not. And it seems that if he
knew either the time of the Vendition, or Tradition, that the Right was
fraudulent, that he is particeps fraudis, and ought not to have the benefit of
this exception; for traditionibus, and non venditionibus, transferuntur rerum
dominia, and so he cannot be said to purchase a Right, bona side, who knew
before Tradition, the fault of the Right Disponed, and he might have kept the
price in his own hand till* Tradition, and so needed not have been prejudged.
Likeas, it is a principle in Law, that bona sides requiritur in emptionibus;
and tempore contractus, and tempore factae traditionis, l. 2. ff. pro empt. and
l. Fin. ff. pro solut.

Though the Doctors give as a rule that such alienations are reduceable, as are
made without an onerous cause, and where the receiver is particeps fraudis: Yet
they except two cases from this Rule, First, deeds done in favors of the Fisk,
or of a City, or Incorporation, which they declare reduceable, though the
receiver was not particeps fraudis, l. 2. C. de debitore Civitatis. But I think
this most unreasonable; nor would it hold in our Law: for as the Act makes no
exception in favors of the ^isk, so in dubio, semper contra siscum
respondendum. And since this third party is only privileged, because of his
bona sides, I see not why he should be prejudged by the Mala sides of his
Author: or why he should loose his privilege where he can allege his bona
fides. The second exception is in favors of a Patron, who might revock the
Goods sold, though the Buyer was not particeps fraudis. l. 1. ff. si quis in
fraudem patro: But in that case he was liable to pay the price, ibid. we have
no use for this in our Law. And yet by our Law, Masters have no such a tacita
hypotheca, in the Farms that grew upon their own Ground, that they may reduce
any Disposition made thereof, even to a Buyer who was not particeps fraudis.

So favorable likewise are singular successors, who are not particepes
fraudis; that a Tack being craved, to be reduced ex capite fraudis, as granted
and delivered Blank quoad the issue or* endurance, and in the Blank, eighth
years being filled in: Whereas ninteen years were only communed upon; this was
found relevant to reduce the Tack quoad the Tacks-man, who had acquired Right
to the Tack for but not quoad a singular Successor, for an onerous cause,
without being particeps fraudis. First December. 1671. Crichtoun contra Crichtoun
and Hannans: and a Disposition being craved to be reduced, as granted by a
person who was only a trusty, having given a Back-band; the Disposition, though
made as said is, to a singular Successor, was found to be reduceable, if the
Right was made without an onerous cause; or that the singular Successor knew of
the Disponers Back-band; though it was but a personal obliegement, and not in
gremio juris; and consequently could not in Law have otherwise affected a
singular Successor. 20 Novem* 1672. George Workman contra John Crafurd. And it
has been often found in our Law, that though gifts of Escheat, taken to defraud
Creditors* be reduceable in the persons of such as took them; yet they are
sustained, when established by assignations in singular Successors, no ways
partakers of the fraud: And an Assignay is not in Law obliedged to suffer his
Cedent to swear in his prejudice, if his Assignation be made for an onerous
cause; but if either the Assignation be granted without an onerous cause or be
made upon design to preclude the Debitors from these just remedies: then
whatever is competent against the Cedent, is competent against the Assignay; so
that we may establish this general rule, viz. particepes fraudis, have never
the privileges competent to singular Successors.

If the Disposition has been made by the interposed person, for payment of a
price, but the price is not equivalent to the thing sold, then in so far as the
thing exceeds the price, the Disposition will be reduced, but it will stand in
quantum; it exceeds even as a Disposition made to a conjunct person, will be
valid in so far as it is onerous, for in either of these cases is the
Disposition absolutely revockable. But either the conjunct person in the one
case, or the singular Successor in the other, will be obliedged to make up the
true and just price, as was found in the former case, Henderson contra
Henderson, and the 12. Janu. 1632. Skeen contra Betson, which is likewise more
fully clear by these words of the Act, viz. providing always, that so much of
the said Lands, Goods or Prices thereof, so trusted by Bankrupts to interposed
persons, as has been really paid, shall be allowed unto them, they making the
rest forthcoming to the remnant Creditors: and the reason of this is, because
the Law did not absolutely oppose the alienation; but only did reprobate it, in
so far as it was done to the prejudice of Creditors. And therefore, the Law
resolving not to pursue its revenge, further then its design, did reasonably
ordain, that these Dispositions made in defraud of Creditors, should only be
quarrelable, in so far as the price was not equivalent. This is likewise fit
for Commerce; which is never restrained in so far as is absolutely necessary:
and this is very suitable to the Analogy of Law in other cases; for thus,
according to the common Law, he who had taken an obligation for more
Annual-rents then the Law allowed, did not thereby loose all his own
Annual-rents, but only loosed them in so far as they exceeded the quota
prescrived by Law, l. Placuit ff. de usuris. And a Donation bearing a greater
sum then the Law allowed, when the Donation was not insinuated or Registrated,
did not lose the whole, but only quatenus superat definitionem legis l.
sancimus, C. de donat. And in our Law, though it be by express statute
appointed, that Tacks set by inferior beneficed persons, without the consent of
the Patron, for longer then three years, shall be null; yet quoad these three
years they are still sustained, and are not annuled in totum. And albeit by
another Statute, all Bands and other Writs not subscribed by the party, or two
Nottars for him, be declared null, if exceeding one hundred Pounds. Yet though
granted for a greater sum, it will be valid, if he to whom it was granted
restrict it to an hundred Pounds: And though Witnesses can prove nothing above
an hundred Pounds; yet though the sum craved be greater, the pursuit will be
sustained to be proven pro ut de jure, if restricted to an hundred Pounds. And
yet I confess; that these Arguments from Analogy, do not in this absolutely
hold, for in several of these instances, the deeds specified habent individuam,
formam, prescribed to them by the Law, and ubi actus est individuus, ratione
formae, ea non servata, actus omnino corruit, and utile per inutile vitiatur.
But the Arguments taken from Donations, and ab usuris quadrat with this case or
at least the Argument ab usuris does.

But the receiver of the Price shall be holden to make the same forthcoming to
the Bankrupts true Creditors, for payment of their lawful Debts.
THough the interposed Person be particeps fraudis, yet he is not by the Act,
liable to restore the Land, or others disponed to him simply, or the price
thereof, if he has dispon'd, the same to a third Person: But there will be
deduced, or allowed to him, so much either of the Land, or price, as he has
given, or paid to lawful Creditors: and the superplus is to be forthcoming to
the other Creditors, who wants their due payment; and that not without new
diligence, by these who have reduced the Right granted to the interposed
Person, by Arrestment, or otherwise. But if the Creditor who has prevailed in
the Reduction, had not done diligence to affect the Land, or price, in the
hands of the interposed Person, either by Comprysing, or Arrestment, he must
notwithstanding the Decret of Reduction, affect the same: Otherwise, other
Creditors doing diligence, will be preferable, seeing Reductions do not settle
a Right upon the Creditors to their Debitors Estate, but they only sweep away
such fraudulent Rights, as may stand in the way of their diligence, and
execution; and hinder them thereby to get a Right to the Debitors Estate.

And it shall be sufficient probation of the Fraud intended against the
Creditors, if they, or either of them, shall be able to verify by Writ, or
Oath of the party receiver, that the same was made without any true Cause, etc.
FOr clearing of these words, it is fit to know, that the word Fraud, is
variously used by Lawyers; it is taken pro poena capitali, l. eum autem ff. de
Aedilit edict. pro periculo alicujus in commodi, l. 1. ff. ad l. falcid pro
impostura, l. aliud est fraus ff. de reg. jur. pro privatione juris l. 2. ff.
de his quae intest delen: But here, Fraud signifies the prejudice arising to
the Creditors by unlawful alienations. And even in the Civil Law, it was taken
sometimes pro damno pecuniario. l. is ff quae in fraud credit. And he is said
to de fraud his Creditor, who prejudges him by that Alienation, without
necessity of proving any previous design of cheating; for that design being a
secret and latent Act of the mind, the Law which designed mainly the indemnity
of the Creditor, would not burden him with so narrow, and difficult a
Probation. But presumptione juris, and de jure, concluded that Alienation to be
made in defraud of Creditors, which wanted an onerous Cause: and this is fraus
in re, though not in consilio. And Lawyers have well distinguished, fraudem in
re, a fraud in consilio, Accurs. ad. in fraud just. quib. ex cause. manum.
which is suitable to the distinction used by the Law it self, in the Title, de
dolo. inter dolum ex proposito, and dolum ex re ipsa: for fraus, and dolus,
differ only, as genus, and species. ^raus being more general then dolus, as is
fully proved by Bargalius, de dolo lib. 5. c. 4. But albeit the Civil Law makes
Alienations in conjunctam personam, to be only sufficient probation, si aleae
presumptiones concurrant, l. si quis C. de bon. damnat. Burgal, de dol. c. 8.
l. 5. number. 43. Yet our Law makes the want of an onerous Cause, per se, though
nothing concur, to be a sufficient probation of the Fraud, against a conjunct,
or confident Person. And albeit by the Civil Law, fraus, and eventum, and
consilium desidera^. (...). Basil. l. 15. h. t. Yet our Law requires only
fraudem ex eventu, without considering whether there was fraus in consilio; for
albeit he who received the Disposition, knew not that the Disponer had Debt, or
Creditors: Yet if the Estate of the Disponer was not able to pay his Debt, our
Law will reduce that Disposition, if made without an onerous Cause; which is
also expressly contrair to l. 6.. 4. basil. h. tit. quae in fraud. cred. (...).
What probation shall be sufficient in Reductions, upon this Statute, is
determined by this Paragraph; and though the Statute appoint the probation to
be by the oath of the party receiver, or by writ, bearing no onerous Cause, or
bearing to be for love and favor; yet the practies has in this point so
varied, that it will be fit to reduce our present decisions into these
conclusions. 1. Narratives, bearing the Disposition to be for true and onerous
Causes, being but the assertion of the party granter, does not prove the Cause
to be onerous; else it would be very easy to elude the Act. 2. Though the
Narrative does not prove for the granter, yet it proves against him, nam verba
narrativa, as Craig observes, page 145. licet sepe falsis sima probant tamen
contra proferentem. And therefore, if the Disposition quarrelled, be made to a
conjunct Person, and bear to be made for love and favor, it will be reduced,
that though the Person to whom it is granted, should offer to prove the onerous
Cause, as was found in the case Stewart contra Graham, nothing can prove better
the design of the parties, then a writ under their own hands; for as this
cannot fail, so if the receiver should be allowed to lead a subsequent
Probation, for proving the onerous Cause, contrair to the writ produced, it is
very probable, that he might use indirect means for proving the said onerous
Cause, and this might both disappoint the Creditors, and open a door to
Perjury; and sibi imputet, the pursuer who accepted of a writ, bearing such an
Narrative. 3. A Right made by very conjunct Persons, such as Father and Son,
are made to Persons against whom there lies a presumption of Fraud, either
because of the relation, or because the receiver had no visible Estate,
wherewith to acquire ex titulo oneroso, the Right disponed in that case, though
the Right bear an onerous Cause: Yet the receiver must prove the onerous Cause,
otherwise then by the Narrative. 4. If the Disposition bear, that the same was
made for satisfying of Debts, owing by the Disponer, or for satisfying a Debt
owing to the Receiver: he must prove the onerous Cause; as was found 23. March
1624. Duff contra Cullodin, though the Disposition there, was made only to a
Brother in law, and the reason of this seems to be, because if there was any
antecedent Debt, that Debt may be easily proven; and the Lords have proceeded,
so far according to the presumptions of Fraud, which have appeared, that where
Bonds have been produced, proving the Disponer to be Debtor, prior to the
Disposition; they have yet ordained the onerous Causes of these Bonds to be
proven. Because if confident persons design to cheat their Creditors, they may
as easily grant Bonds bearing borrowed Money: and then Dispositions for payment
of these Bonds; as they may simply grant Dispositions bearing onerous Causes.
And as a Minors Disposition would not be found proven to be for an onerous
Cause, though granted for payment of a preceding Bond, so neither should a
Disposition granted by a Bankrupt; for a Bankrupt is as prone to cheat, as a
Minor is to be cheated. And therefore, if the presumptions of fraud be very
strong, they will ordain the party receiver to instruct the onerous cause, even
of the preceding Bond, by the parties who received, and the Witnesses who were
present; or else will ordain the concealed Bands to be produced, or at least
the party receiver to depon thereupon, as was found, December 1671, Duff contra
Brown, and December 1773. Campbell against Campbell. In which last case, a
woman being Creditrix by her Contract of Marriage, as being provided to the
half of the Movables which should pertain to her Husband, the time of his
Death, and to 200. Merks out of the other half, pursued Reduction of a
Disposition made to her Husbands Brother of his Movables, who defending
himself by a Disposition, made for an onerous cause, viz. A Bond granted by his
Brother to him, it was urged, that the Brother to whom the Disposition was
made, should prove the onerous cause of that Bond, for though the Bond bare
onerous causes, yet it is easy by such Bonds to cheat Creditors. And it was
presumeable in this case, that the Bond was not granted for an onerous cause,
since payment of Annual-rent and Execution was deferred till the granters
death. Notwithstanding of which presumption, the Lords allowed the receiver to
give his Oath upon the onerous cause* especially seeing it was ordinar for
Brothers to spare their Brothers, both as to Annual-rent, and as to Execution:
And much more when the Brother who granted the Bond was sick, and would die
shortly in all humane probability. Nor did they think fit to burden the
receiver with other Probation of the onerous cause, since the Disposition bare
to be for onerous causes, and the Bond was produced, bearing to be for onerous
causes also. So that to require a higher Probation backward, was dare
progressum in infinitum. And it was well known that Brothers have such private
Transactions, Trusts, and Lendings, that they pay and receive Money, to, and
from one another, without Witnesses. 5. When Bands are granted to Trafficqueing
Merchants, who are Brothers in Law, or such Relations as are known to be men of
integrity; it is hard to put them to prove the onerous cause, otherwise then by
their Oath, for Merchants and others use to adhibite Witnesses to all their
Bargains, and in many cases they cannot have Witnesses to their Bargains, being
made abroad, and in Remote Countries; and to tie them not to make Bargains with
their near Relations (with whom ordinarily they enter into Societies) were to
ruin all Commerce. And though Movables use to be Dispon'd without Writ, nor
does the Law require any Writ to their transmission; yet in the former case of
Anderson, the Lords forced him to prove the onerous cause of his Disposition to
Howats Movables, though he alleged that he could be in a worse condition by
his having a Disposition, then he would have been without it: but so it is,
that his Right to Movables would have been sufficient without Writ; but here
there was a Disposition, but where there is no Disposition, it were hard to
reduce a Right made to Movables, because I could not prove the onerous cause.
As for instance, if I bought a horse, and paid the Money, no Creditor of the
Sellers could force me to prove the price to be paid. 6. Sometimes the Lords
use to suffer the receiver, to astruct the onerousnesse of the causes, by one
or more Witnesses, and to give their Oaths in Supplement, and according as the
relation is remote, or the presumption of the receivers honesty strong, they
lessen the necessity of the strong adminicles. And thus the 5. July 1673. In
the case of Margaret Home contra Smith, they sustained one Witness, deponing
that he was Witness to such a Bond, and that he heard the granter of the Bond
acknowledge that he was Debtor, to be sufficient adminicles, being joined to
the Defenders Oath of Supplement. And in the case above cited, 18. November
1669. Andersons Disposition being quarrelled, as being omnium bonorum, and for
a false cause, a great part of the sum for which it was granted, being paid
before the Disposition; yet the Lords sustained the Disposition in swae far, as
it was granted for Sums owing before the Disposition, to be proven by the
Oath of Anderson himself, and of the persons to whom the Money was paid, and
for what Sums were paid before dililigence at the pursuers instance, though
after the Disposition, to be also proven by the Oath of the common Debitors,
and of these to whom the Debts were paid: And yet where the Disposition did
bear, to be not in general for payment of the granters Debts, but particularly
for payment of the Debts after specified, and some of the Debts being filled up
with new and different Ink, the Lords would not allow these Debts, except the
Defender would offer to prove, that these Debts were filled up before the
pursuer did diligence as a Creditor, after which time, there being jus quesitum
to him by his diligence, as no Disposition could have been made to his
prejudice, so neither could he be prejudged by filling up other Creditors
names, then these contained in the first Disposition; for else it were easy to
cheat all Creditors by such Blanks. And yet here it was offered to be proven,
that it was communed expressly, at the very time of the granting of the
Disposition, that these Debts should be paid which was alleged to be
sufficient, being propon'd in fortification of the Disposition, which was prior
to the Creditors diligence, 15. January, 1670. Lady Lucie Hamilton, against the
Lord of Dunlap, and others.

These remarks may reconcile the contrair Decisions that are to be found upon
this head, such as the 22. January, 1630. Pringle contra Mr. Mark Ker. Wherein
the Lords found no necessiry to burden the Pursuer, that he should prove a true
and onerous cause, otherwise then by his own Oath, because as is there
observed, when parties borrow Money or Contract mutually, there is no other way
to prove the borrowing or Contracting, but by the Writ then made and found
expressly, that this was not a Negative which proves it self. And yet upon the
12. February, 1622. It was found that this part of the Act of Parliament: was a
Negative, and proved it self.

It seems likewise, that if the party who made the Right, was not able to pay
the Debt otherwise, that then the Probation should be so much the stricter: And
though the Oath of the receiver should not be taken as a full Probation; yet if
the receiver of the Disposition have in any former pursuit, been forced to
depon upon the onerousness of the Cause, that Oath ought to purge any
presumption of fraud; for though that pursuit should not bind any other then
the persons who were Pursuer or Defender there, as what was inter alios acta,
quae aliis non nocet, yet the receiver having been put to swear, ought to have
this advantage also, as he had that trouble. And that Oath being upon the same
subject matter, it ought to be still much respected; especially since this Oath
is only required to clear the Judge, as to the truth of the Debt, and as to the
onerousness of the Cause.

Whether a Disposition procured by a Tutor to his Pupil may be quarrelled, as
granted in defraud of lawful Creditors, and how the fraud may be proved, in
that case may be doubted, for it may seem, that no man's Right can be taken
away, without some Act of his own, and the Tutors Oath cannot prejudge his
Pupil, for a Tutor may make his Pupils condition better, but cannot make it
worse. And yet there may be two distinct cases considered here, one is, if the
Disposition be granted without an onerous Cause; and there is no doubt but such
Dispositions may be quarrelled, for if the Minor cannot instruct an onerous
Cause, his Disposition is null; and there should be no difference as to this,
betwixt Majors and Minors: And in this sense is to be understood, l. 6.. 10. h.
t. Si quod cum pupillo gestem est, in fraudem creditorum, Labe^ art, omnino
revocandum esse quia pupilli ignorantia non debet esse captiosa creditoribus,
and ipsi lucrosa, which agrees with l. 6.. 6. Basil. h. t. though it be the
more general (...). The second case is, when the Tutor paid a Price in the
Pupils name, but knew it was granted to defraud the Disponners Creditors, it
seems that though a Tutor cannot depone upon Rights not acquired by the Tutor
himself, yet in Rights acquired by himself he may depone, and his Oath
acknowledging the the fraud should annul the Pupils Right acquired by his
Tutor, for quem sequitur commodum, eum sequi debit incommodum: and that there
is no reason the poor Creditors should be prejudged by inserting the Pupils
name, but he ought to pursue his Tutor. But yet I incline rather to think, that
if any Tutor knowing that such a Debtor was to defraud his Creditors, did lend
out my Money to buy Land in my name; that though his being partaker of the
fraud might have annulled this Right, if it remained in his own person, yet his
fraud being merely personal, cannot prejudge me who was innocent, no more, then
if my Factor should collude with such a Debtor, would his collusion prejudge
me. And so neither of their Oaths can prove against me, for their fraud is not
relevant against me, except in so far as I have received advantage by the fraud
of my Tutor, or Factor: In which case, deeds either done by the Minors self, or
by his Tutor, are reduceable at the instance of lawful Creditors. l. 10. S. 3.
Basil. h. t. (...)* But if Minors sell any Lands in defraud of their Creditors,
then if they sell without the consent of their Tutors or Curators, the
alienation will be ipso jure null, and so needs not be reduced: But if the
Disposition was made with the consent of Tutors and Curators, though it be
reduceable upon minority and Laesion, yet the Minors Creditors cannot raise a
Reduction, ex hoc* captic, for that reason is personal, nec egreditur personam
minoris; but the Creditor in this case must comprise the Right or action
competent to the Minor, and as having Right to the Action in manner forsaid, he
may reduce the deeds done by the Minor.

Whether a Defender in their Reductions ex capite fraudis, may be forced to
depone whether he was particeps fraudis; my be doubted, and it appears that he
cannot, for he being partaker of the fraud, by this Statute diffames all such
as are guilty of it. And by our Law, no man is obliged jurare in suam
turpitudinem. But yet I find, that the Lords have, ex nobili officio,
obliegeded parties to be examined upon their accession to such contrivances, 7
Febr. 1673. Dame Elisabeth Burnet contra Sir Alexander Fraser. And even in
Improbations, they examine, ex officio, the parties who are alleged to be
Authors; though the hazard be greater there, then in their Reductions. And
seeing reasons of circumvention are referred to Oath, why may not the being
partaker of the Fraud, be referred to Oath? if the Lords, and His Majesty's
Advocat, declare, that the deponers Oath shall not infer, infamiam juris,
against him, which is a Criminal punishment; without which be secured to him, I
conceive he is not obliged to depone.

It may seem, that the Action of Reduction, founded upon this Act, against such
as are partakers of the Fraud, should not prescrive, because this is a cheat
which the Law ought not to maintain, nor assist, and this should no more
prescrive, then actio falsi dos; whereof this cheat seems but a branch, or
which at least, it does much resemble. And by the Cannon Law (which as Craig
observes, we prefer to the Civil Law in Scotland, where matters of Conscience
are considered) he who is in mala fide, cannot prescrive, 6. sin. de prescript.
And to allow the partaker of the Fraud a security of prescription, were to
tempt him to cheat. Notwithstanding* of all which, certainly all actions upon
this Act would prescrive: for neither our Act 28. Par. 5. I. 3. Which appoints
the prescription of moveable Rights, nor the Act 1617. Which introduced
prescription in Heretable Rights, makes any exception in favors of this
Action. And our Law being desireous to secure all Persons in general, has drawn
these Acts very comprehensively, and sibi imputent, such as are prejudged, who
suffered so much time to elapse without diligence. Likeas the Civil Law, which
considered malae fidei possessores, with a very unfavourable eye, does allow
the benefit of even 30 years prescription, mal^ fidei possessori, for the same
reason, as is clear, C. de. prescript. 30. and 40. annor. And the same is
observed in France, Guide. Pap. quest. 199. And though we observe the Cannon
Law, in case of Marriage, Teinds and such like, which are somewhat
Ecclesiastical by their own nature; yet in prescriptions which had their
original from the Civil Law, we follow the dictats of that excellent Law.

Or the most part of the Price thereof was converted, or to be converted, to
the Bankrupts profit and use.
ANother presumption of the fraudulent Disposition of the Bankrupts Estate, is,
if the price of the Debitors Estate was converted, or to be converted to the
Debitors own use, and profit. And this proceeds upon the same reason, whereby
the Rebels Escheat is declared null, if he be suffered to remain in Possession,
Act 145. Par. 12. Ja. 6. And as by that Act, the suffering the Rebels Wife or
Bairns to remain in Possession, is equivalent, as if the Rebel himself remained
in Possession; so if it can be proven, that the price of the Debitors Land was
applied to the behove of his Wife, and Children; I conceive it is equivalent,
as if it were converted to his own behove, though this Act do not expressly beat
it.

Upon this part of this Act, arose lately the ensuing debate; Hermistoun being
obliged to pay the Lord Sinclar 8000 merks as an Annuity, and for his Aliment:
This oblidgement was assigned to John Watt, and was by him transferred to
George Cockburn, who did pay several Debts for my Lord, but finding that his
payment, might thereafter be challenged by my Lords Creditors, as made in
prejudice of them who were prior Creditors, he did take the gift of my Lords
Escheat, and gave a backbond to the Exchequer, wherein he obliged him to count
at the sight of the Exchequer, for the superplus that exceeded the payment of
the Debt truly paid, or to be paid by him, for my Lord. The Creditors having
quarrelled those payments upon this act, 1621. as made to their prejudice,
because though it was free to the Exchequer, to gift my Lords Escheat, and to
burden it with any back-bond, yet this gift was granted truly to George, in
contemplation of his former Right; which former Right was null, as made to
defraud them, and for the use of their Debtor; and the Right made to him was
null by this clause, of this Statute, by which all Rights made to any Person,
are presumed fraudulent, if the price be converted to the behove of the
Debtor: and if this were allowed, poor Creditors might soon be cheated by so
easy contriveances. And though His Majesty may prefer a Donator to the true
Creditor, where that is chiefly designed by His Majesty, yet where the gift is
taken only by a Person who had formerly defrauded Creditors, merely to pallia^
the fraud, in that case, the gift laborat eodam vitio, being also taken for the
behove of the Debitors, and so is null by the former Act 145. Par. 12. Ja. 6.
But this was repelled, because the Lords found, that whatever might be said
against the former Right, upon this Statute, yet the gift of Escheat did
sufficiently defend him, for since any Superior might allow an aliment to his
Vassal, being Rebel, and might grant his liferent Escheat for that effect, why
should not this liberty be allowed to the King, 3. December, 1674. But if this
gift had not interveen'd, it seems uncontraverted, that the obliegment to pay
Sinclars Debts, though undertaken prior to any Action at the Creditors
instance, was not sufficient to defend the undertaker against prior Creditors,
for the Right being at first quarrelable at their instance, as done in defraud
of them; it being a Right made for the behove of the Debtor: it could not
thereafter convalesce, by* undertaking the Debitors debts. For it was all one
to pay the Money to Sinclars Debitors, as it would have been to have paid it
to himself. And if the Money had been paid to my Lord, to the end he might
have paid them, the payment might without doubt have been quarrelable. And yet
a deed once quarrelable may thereafter convalesce, if their was no Fraud in the
first contriveance, v. g. If an Uncle should Dispone his Estate to his Nephew,
who knew not of his being insolvent, this Right might be Reduced upon this
Statute. And yet if thereafter, the Nephew should bonafide undertake the Uncles
debts, before any diligences done by the Creditors, his Disposition would be
sustained in so far as true Payment was made.

They making the rest forthcoming to the remnant Creditors who want their due
payment.
SInce by this Act, the Disposition made by a Bankrupt to one who was partaker
of the Fraud, is reduceable* so that the buyer will be forced to quite the
Land, or thing bought fraudulently to the Bankrupts true Creditor: It may be
doubted, whether the buyer, though partaker of the fraud, will get repetition
of the price truly paid by him, from the Bankrupt to whom he paid it. And it
may be argued, that he would not, because first, the Law never authorizes, nor
lends its assistance, to recover what is due by fraudulent, and unworthy
obligations, for there is behoved to be the Minister of Iniquity, and to serve
Vice in a mean, and sordid way, and ubi dantis, and accipientis turpitudo
versatur, cessat repititio. l. 2. ff. de condict. ob. turp. cause. 20. The buyer
in this case cannot complain of the Law, since he knew the hazard, and yet run
upon it. 3. This were to invite men to commit cheats; whereas to deny them
action of repitition upon the eveiction, were a ready mean to deter them, since
the hazard would be so great. 4. This may be further clear, l. 1. C. de prescr.
30. annor. and l. hi qui C. de rescind. vend. and l. fin. C. de litig. and l.
si fundum sciens. C, de evict. and l. 25. Basil. de reb. auth. jud. possidend.
(...). But yet the contrair, viz that the fraudulent buyer ought not to have
repitition from the Bankrupt Seller; may be urged by these reasons, First,
Crimes and Frauds are extinguished by mutual compensation, and therefore, since
as the Buyer would have had an action of eviction, if no fraud had interveened,
so ought he to have the same action where the fraud is mutual, for there it is
in the same condition, as if had never been; for it is extinguished, l. viro.
ff. solut. matr. 2. If the Seller should not be obliged to restore the price,
he should gain by his own cheat, for his Creditors would be paid, by
prevailing against the buyer, and he would retain the price. 3. Where the buyer
and seller are in the same condition, his condition is most favored by the
Law, who seeks only to secure himself against loss; in pari casu melior est
conditio ejus qui certat de damno vitando, l. non debet ff. de reg. jur. And
this is also clear, per l. 3. C. de his qui vi metusve cause. and l. sin. C.
Common: de legate. I would rather perhaps incline to think, that because both
have offended, therefore both should be punished; the one by being obliged to
refound the price received, and the other by not get in git, though refounded:
But that he should see it confiscated by public authority, like the Legacies
left to unworthy Persons, who are incapable of them; for these remain not with
the Testator, nor yet go to the Legator, but fiunt caduca, and belong to the
Fisk.

It may be here doubted, if in these Reductions, the defender who is to restore
what is disponed to him, will be obliged to restore the fruits of the thing
sold, and whether he will be obliged to restore them from the date of the
sentence, or from the time of Litiscontestation, or from the Citation. The
Civil Law l. 25.. 4. F. h. t. ordains not only the thing it self to be
restored, but the fruits which were upon the ground at the time of the
alienation, and these which were reaped after the action was intented, non
solum autem rem ipsam restitui oportet, verum and fructus qui alienationis
tempore terrae eohaerent, quia sunt in bonis fraudatoris. Item eos, qui post
judicium inchoatum recepti sunt medio autem tempore preceptos in restitutionem
non venire. But the Basilicks differ somewhat, for they say, qui post litem
contestatem percepti sunt. As Fabrot translates them, (...). But these may be
reconciled, because though in our Law, Litiscontestation is only made by the
decision of the points in jure, and the assigning a day to either party to
prove, whereupon an Act is extracted: yet by the Civil Law, Litiscontestation
was made how soon the Defender denied the thing craved, and so judicium
inchoatum differed little with them, from Litiscontestation.

Our Senate observe as a general rule in all Reductions, to decern fruits to be
restored from the time that the possessor knew that his Right was not valid:
and therefore when it was palpably unjust, they use to decern from the date of
the citation, but not from the citation upon the first Summonds, because these
are but indorsations, where Copies are seldom truly given, and so the Defender
could not thereby be put in mala fide. This was so decided, Howison contra
Gray, February 1672. And yet this seems to authorize the belief that citations
upon first Summonds may be false, whereas since the Law commands them, it ought
to believe them, and so punish the forgers, rather then discredit the form. If
the nullity depend upon a debateable point, they decern from the
Litiscontestation, because that nullity was not clear till then, v. g. if a
Disposition were quarrelled as made to a Brother in Law, and he alleged that
the Act extends not to Brothers in Law, if the Lords found the Statute to
extend to Brothers in Law, eo casu, if it were referred to the Defenders Oath;
the Lords use to decern from the Litiscontestation; because after that the
Defender could not doubt of the nullity of his own Right, though before he
might have doubted. But if the nullity depend upon extrinsick probation, which
the Defender could not know before sentence; as for instance, if it should be
denied by Act of Litiscontestation, that the Debtor became, and was insolvent;
the Defender could not be in malafide till this were found proven, and so ought
not to be liable in fructus, till sentence.

I conceive that these generals may be likewise particularly applied to this
Statute, by considering three different cases, relative to the three different
parts of this Statute.

The first is, that of the first part of the Act, by which all Dispositions
made to confident, or conjunct persons, in defraud of lawful Creditors, without
an onerous Cause, are so reduceable, that the alienation being reduced, the
fruits extant are to be restored from the time of the intention of the cause,
and not only from the time of Litiscontestation. And yet it would appear, that
all the bygone proffits, or fruits, ought to be restored; not only from the
time of the citation, but from the date of his possession: Because, 1. By the
express words of the Statute, all such alienations are declared to have been
null from the beginning, and so are in the same case, as if they had never been
made. But so it is, if they had never been made, the Possessor behoved to have
restored all the fruits, whether extent, or not, and even from the time of his
possession. 2. This seems most reasonable, for the Law having dicharged such
alienations, he who Contracts in spite of, or to cheat the Law, ought not to
be protected by it; and if the Debtor might thus prejudge his Creditors, for
it is a prejudice to them to want the fruits and profits of their Debitors
Estate, from the alienation, till the time of intenting an Action, which
poverty, or absence, ignorance, or latency of the deed, may keep them from
intenting: and which may be very considerable and were it not absurd, that a
gratuitous Disposition of an Estate, often thousand Merks by year, should carry
the receiver to five or six years rent, extending to 50000. Merks, because
these Rents were intrometted with prior, to the intenting of any Action of
Reduction, and yet the Estate should not be able to pay all the Debts due to
the many poor Creditors, who are Pursuers of the Reduction.

The second case is, where the Disposition was made to one who was Particeps
fraudis, and he is to restore even all the profits from the date of the
alienation, whether they be fruits occasioned by his own industry, or brought
forth by the nature of the thing possessed. For he who was partaker of the fraud,
is malae fidei Possessor, and such are still discerned to restore all, fructus
extantes rei vindicatione; and consumptos condition sine causa, l. 3. C. de
condict. ex leg. nor ought he in reason to reap advantage by his own cheat: and
as he cannot blame the Law for severity to him, since he occasioned his own
loss; so the Creditor might complain that such as cheated the Law, and him,
were enriched by his loss. And the reason why bonae fidei possessor facit
fructus consumptos suos, is, because he not knowing but these profits were his
own, thought he might live accordingly, this reason is wanting in him who is
partaker of the fraud, for he knew that these profits belonged to others, and
so should not have spent them. And though it may be alleged, that all
Dispositions made to confident, or conjunct persons, are reduceable by this
Act, as fraudulent, and therefore the receiver cannot be called bonae fidei
Possessor in no case for nothing is so contrair to bona fides, as Fraus. It is
answered, that a Disposition may be made to a conjunct person, who knew neither
that the Disponer had Creditors, or that his Estate was not able to pay them,
and Fraus ex eventu, as I observed formerly, is not Mala fides.

The third case, is of Creditors who got a Disposition from the common Debtor
for payment of their Debt, but it is reduceable at the instance of other
Creditors, who have done diligences; and these, I think, should according to
the rules of Justice, and Reason, be only obliedged to restore the profits of
the thing so dispon'd from the date of the sentence: for since they are more
favorable then a conjunct perrson, who gets a Disposition without an onerous
cause, and that he luoratur fructus ante citationem perceptos, they ought to
have more favor. But I have not heard this debated, nor decided, and it is
generarly believed that they would be liable after citation, but if he has
dolose received payment, and was particeps fraudis, even he, though a Creditor
ought to restore all the profits received by him from the time of his
possession. In all which restitutions the restorer will have detention of the
profitable expenses bestowed by him, whether he be bonae fidei, or malae
Possessor l. 5. de rei vindicat. (...). Basil. l. 10.. 14. h. t. To which there
is also added, (...). Et si quae aliae ex creditorum volunt ate factae sunt.

The Civil Law ordained the fruits that were upon the ground, the time of the
Disposition, to be restored, though these were consumed before citation, l.
25.. 4. h. t. Because fructus pendentes, were pars* soli, and so were to be
restored; but this has not been craved with us: and since they use to be bona
fide spent, there is no reason to restore them more then other fruits. I have
heard it contraverted, whether a person to whom a Disposition is made in
defraud of Creditors, may when that Disposition is reduced, pursue by way of
Action, for the expenses he bestowed necessarily in reparing the Lands, or
houses disponed; and it may seem that this being once a Debt due to him, it
cannot be taken away but by a Discharge^ and yet Lawyers are clear, that though
such expenses may be retained, or that the Defender in such Reductions may
allege that his Right cannot be reduced, till all his expenses be repayed. Yet
if he suffer his Right to be reduced without proponing upon his expenses, and
meliorations, then he seems to have past from them. For the Law presumes, that
if he had any thing due to him, he would have craved it before he was
dispossessed: And albeit the scolion ad l. 28. tit. Basil. de sumptibus in re
aliena factis, asserts this only de malae fidei possessore, (...)* and l. 46.
ibid.! this is also asserted de bonae fidei possessore, (...) which agrees with
l. sumptus de rei vind. and l. si in area de condict. indebit. But yet it is
the opinion of some eminent Lawyers with us, that evenafter the Right is
reduced, the person to whom the Right is made, may recover payment of what he
necessarily bestowed even by way of Action: and Molineus ad consuetud.
parisiens. t. i. gloss. 5. Is of their opinion, and asserts that the present
customs of all Courts have receded as to this from the Civil Law, and yet it
may seem in our Law, that this is competent and omitted, and so should rather
be allowed in our Law, then in the Civil Law, especially seeing this is of the
nature of compensation. For when the Pursuer craves the thing disponed to be
restored, with the fruits and interests: it seems to be a sufficient ground of
compensation, or at least an exception quae sapit naturam compensationis, that
the Defender bestowed as much upon the thing craved to be reduced, as may
compense the fruits, or a part of the Stock, and by express Act of Parliament,
compensations are not receiveable after sentence, and therefore neither should
it be lawful after sentence of Reduction, wherein this allowance might have
been craved, to seek allowance by way of Action, for what was bestowed in
Mellorations, or necessary expenses.

And if in time coming, any of the said Dyvours, or their interposed partakers
of their Fraud, shall make any voluntar payment, or Right to any Person, in
defraud of the lawful, and more timely diligence of another Creditor, having
served Inhibition, or used Horning, Arrestment, Comprysing, or other lawful
means duly to affect the Dyvours Lands, or Goods, or Price thereof to his
behove: In that case, the said Dyvour, or interposed Person, shall be holden to
make the same forthcoming to the Creditor, having used his first lawful
diligence, who shall likewise be preferred to the Creditor, who being Posterior
to him in diligence, has obtained payment by particular favor of the Debtor,
or of his interposed confident, and shall have good action to recover from the
said Creditor, that which was voluntarly paid, in defraud of the Pursuers
diligence.
ALbeit by the first part of the Act, all Dispositions be allowed, if made for
onerous Causes, to conjunct or confident Persons, yet that only holds where
Creditors have done no lawful diligence: But where Creditors have done lawful
diligence against the Bankrupt, by Inhibition, Arrestment, Horning, Comprysing,
or otherwise in that case, the Bankrupt against whom the diligence is used,
cannot make any voluntar Right of his Estate, to prefer thereby any Creditor he
pleases, to the Creditor who has used diligence, and that though the Creditor
who has got the Disposition, was likewise a lawful Creditor: but in that case
the Creditor who is preferred, is declared by the Act to be liable to make
forthcoming the price of what was disponed to him.

By the principles of reason, he seems not to act fraudulently, who gets
payment of what is due to him. But yet by the Civil Law, postquam Creditores a
Magistratu in possessionem bonorum missi erant, their Debitors could not even
pay any true Con-creditor, and so prefer one Crditor to another, suitaly to
which, our Law has not allowed here the prefering one Creditor to another,
after diligence done by Horning, Inhibition, etc. Which diligence we have
equalled to the missio in possessionem by the Roman Magistrate: And in effect
there can be no diligence done in Scotland, without the authority of the
Magistrate; for no Inhibition, Horning, etc. can be raised without a warrant
from the Magistrate. And as it was reasonable that a Creditor qui sibi
vigilavit, by getting payment, should not be prejudged; so it was as
reasonable, that payment made to him in prejudice of another Creditor, qui sibi
vigilavit, by doing diligence should not be sustained. And thus we may
reconcile this part of the Statute with l. 6.. 6. h. t. which says that qui
suum recipit nullam videtur fraudem facere, with which agrees l. 5.. 2. Basil.
h. t. (...).

From this part of the Act, it is first observeable, that though voluntarly
Rights are reduceable, at the instance of prior Creditors, who have done
diligence; yet necessary Rights are not, and therefore, if the Bankrupt was
obliged by a Minute to sell his Land, before he was put to the Horn, if for
implement of that Minute, he should thereafter dispone his Lands, that
Disposition may seem not Reduceable, at the instance of a Creditor who had used
diligence, by Horning, or otherwise after the Minute, though before the
Disposition: because it may be alleged, that in this case, the Creditor cannot
be said to have been voluntarly preferred by partial favor, as the Act bears,
For that cannot be called voluntar, to which the Disponer might have been
compelled. And in this case, as well as in Reductions, ex capite Inhibitionis,
these Dispositions which depend upon necessary Causes, are drawn back, ad suam
causam. But the doubt may be greater, if the cause upon which the Disposition
depended, had no specific obligation in it, to grant the deed quarrelled, but
only a general obligation, v. g. If Titius should only be obliged by a Minute,
to Dispone Lands to Mevius; if Titius thereafter being put to the Horn, at the
instance of Sempronius, should after he was put to the Horn Dispone Lands to
Mevius; it may be doubted whether that Disposition would be Reduceable, since
the Minute did not bear an express obligation to Dispone the specific Lands
afterward Disponed, but only to Dispone Lands in general: for it may be
alleged, that quo ad these Lands, the Right was voluntar, seeing there was no
specific obligation, quo ad these. And if such a Disposition as this might be
sustained, all Dispositions, though made for onerous causes, might be sustained,

Notwithstanding of all which, I conceive, that by voluntar Rights and payments
in this Paragraph, are understood all such Rights and Payments, as are made
without any previous diligence, though the Debtor could have been compelled to
make them; and though there be a preceding cause, whereupon the Debtor might
have been forced, to make the said Rights and Payments, and so are necessar,
quo ad the Debtor, if other Creditors had not been concerned; yet they are
accounted voluntar, as to this Act and Statute, because the Debtor having
other Creditors, who might have compelled him as much as the Creditor whom he
has satisfied: Yet he voluntarly prefers and gratifies him in prejudice of
their diligence. And even in the case here instanced, of a Minute bearing an
obligation to dispone Land, if the Dyvour should after the diligence of other
Creditors Dispone, that Disposition would be construed a voluntar Right, which
the Bankrupt ought not to have granted in prejudice of his other Creditors, who
had done diligence, and who might have affected the same Land, if the
Disposition had not been made; notwithstanding of the personal obligation
contained in the Minute. And it cannot be denied, that there is a great
difference betwixt a Debtor inhibited only, and a Debtor Bankrupt: for a
Debtor who is inhibited, Disponing what he was bound to, by an obligation
prior to the Inhibition, does not contraveen the command of the Inhibition,
which only forbids him to do any new deed, to the prejudice of the Inhibitor.
But a Bankrupt not being able to satifie all his Creditors, does contraveen
this Law, in gratifying one, to the prejudice of others, and to the prejudice
of diligences done by them. Especially since he could not have been compelled
in Law, to prefer the Creditor who had done no diligence.

It may be observed, that though voluntar Dispositions be only quarrelable by
this part of the Act, at the instance of Creditors who have done diligence;
yet, Dispositions made by notorious Bankrupts, are even quarrelable at the
instance of Creditors who have done no dilligences. But in this case, the
Disposition so made, is not absolutely reduceable, but is only reduceable to
the effect the Creditors may have access to the Estate, not to affect it
simply, for the whole sum, but to put them in the same case, as if the
Disposition had been granted to them all, for payment of their sums, conform
to their dilligences: and the ordinary qualifications quo ad this part of the
Act, are, either that he was in meditatione fugae, or that he was in the Abbay,
or in Prison, or that there were very many Hornings, and dilligences against
him: And therefore on the 18. December 1672. The Lords sustained Action upon
this Act against the Lord of Kinfawns, at the instance of Tarsappies
Creditors, though the Disposition made to Kinfawns, was made for the payment of
the lawful Creditors; and that because Tarsappy the time of the Disposition,
was fugitive in the Abbay, and that his Debt did exceed his Estate, and that it
was a Disposition omnium bonorum, made to an Uncle, though the Creditor here
had done no diligence.

Though this Clause bear generally, that Dispositions made in prejudice of such
as have done lawful diligences, by Inhibition, Horning, Arrestment, or
Comprising, shall be quarrelable: Yet it may be justly doubted, whether these
words must be so interpret, as that any of these dilligences shall be a
sufficient ground, promiscuously to quarrel any Disposition: So that the Law
considers not so much the nature of the diligence done, as the Partial favor,
and gratification of the Dyvour, or confident who has done no diligence, and
the prefering him to one who has done diligence, though that diligence was not
perse* proper to affect. For if it had affected properly, there had been no
necessity for this Act, or Statute, v. g. If the Creditor had inhibited, the
Debtor could not have thereafter disponed in prejudice of that Disposition,
but the Disposition would have been reduceable ex capite Inhibitionis. But if
the Creditor not knowing that the common Debtor had Money lying by him, that
could be affected with Arrestment, did ommit to Arrest, but did inhibite, it
appears, that if the Debtor should, to gratify and prefer a Creditor, who has
no diligence, give him that Money, this Law and Statute intended, that the
Creditor who has done diligence by Inhibition, should not only have liberty to
reduce all Dispositions ex capite Inhibitionis: For that was competent before
this Law, but that he should have condictionem ex hac lege, to recover that
Money; though the Inhibition be no proper way to affect it. And yet upon the
other hand, it would seem absurd, that the using of an Arrestment should be a
sufficient ground for the user to quarrel a Right made of Lands, for that were
vitiosa transitio, de genere, in genus. But as in all general Clauses, so in
this, the application must be, singula singulis: and therefore if after a
Creditor has used any real diligence that may affect Land, such as Inhibition,
or Comprising, his Bankrupt Debtor, shall to disappoint that diligence,
dispone his Lands to a Concreditor, who has done no diligence; then the
Inhibiter or Appryser, may quarrel that Disposition; or if a Creditor has
affected any of his Debitors sums, by Horning, or Arrestment, and if to
disappoint that diligence, the Bankrupt Debtor should dispone upon his
Movables in favors of a Con-creditor, eo casu, that Disposition to the
Movables might be quarrelled by him who has used Horning, or Arestment: which
are diligences proper to affect Movables in our Law. Which may be further
urged, by these reasons, 1. Because Inhibitions and Comprisings are not proper
diligences to affect Movables, no more then Arestment or Horning can affect
heretage: and the Law never privileges a diligence, except where the diligence
could affect. 2. The reason why the Law Privileges such Creditors as have used
these diligences, is, because the Law presumes they might have affected the
Bankrupts Estate by these diligences, and because it presumes that the Debtor
dispon'd his Estate, to disappoint that diligence. But so it is, that neither
could Inhibitions affect Movables, nor can Arrestments affect heretage; nor
were these Dispositions made to disappoint such diligences, and therefore, etc.
3. When men are to buy Land, thy look only the Registers for Inhibitions, or
Comprisings, but they never consider whether there be any Arestments used
against the Seller. 4. Though this part of the Act be conceived in favors of
Creditors, who have used Inhibition, Horning, Arrestment, Comprising, or other
lawful diligence; yet this Clause must be so interpret, that the mere raising
of an Inhibition or Horning is not sufficient except the Inhibition or Horning
be execute, as was found February, 1671. in the Case betwixt Tynet, and Grahame
of Creigie. For the Act of Parliament mentions serving an Inhibition, and using
a Horning, and not the raising of either* But yet if the Bankrupt to disappoint
his true Creditors, who have raised Letters of Inhibition, Horning, or
Arrestment, should collude with his other Creditors who know the raising of
these Letters, and they by express collusion, should make and receive such
Dispositions, I conceive these Dispositions may be quarrelled upon this part of
the Act, though the Letters were only raised; for else the Act might be
absolutely disappointed, and immediately upon the raising of the Letters, such
Dispositions might be made, and the Creditor who did exact diligence, and omne
quod in se erat, should be prejudged by fraudulent conveyances, and by the
nimious diligence of his cheating Debtor. Nor should the fraud of a Creditor,
receiving such Dispositions, be of advantage to the Receiver, nam nemo debet
lucrari ex suo dolo.

But it is more difficult to resolve, whether a mere charge of Horning, without
denounciation, be a sufficient diligence to make all deeds after the charge to
be quarrelable upon this Act. And it may be alleged, that to charge upon the
Horning, is to use a Horning, which is all that this Act requires. 2 The charge
is properly the diligence, for thereby the Debtor is commanded under
certification, that he will be denounced; whereas the denounciation is but the
effect of the diligence: and the Debtor is denounced, because he did not
obey. Which reasons incline me to believe, that the charge without
denounciation, is a sufficient diligence in this case, and for the same
reason, I believe that a personal charge upon an Inhibition, would operate the
same effect, though the execution were not used at the Market Cross; because
that is only necessar to put the Liedges in mala fide, in order to a Reduction
ex capite Inhibitionis.

And I conceive likewise, that the Inhibition being lawfully served, though not
registrat, would be sufficient quoad the effect designed by this part of the
Act, for the Registrating an Inhibition is different from the serving of it;
and the serving of the Inhibition is all that this Act requires: And if the
Creditor may reduce ex capite inhibitionis, before it be Registrat, if it be
once served, that is to say, lawfully execute, much more should the execution
of it, without Registration, be sufficient as to this Act.

It may be likewise observed, that though this part of the Act, must be so
interpret, as that proper and peculiar dilligences may only affect; that is to
say. Arrestment Movables, and Comprysing Heritage: yet even in that case,
Horning may be accounted a sufficient diligence, after the using whereof, the
Debtor being a Dyvour, can neither Dispone Heritage, nor Movables, to the
prejudice of the Creditor, who used the Horning* for a Horning is not only a
diligence that may affect Movables, but it is likewise a step in diligence,
necessary, previous in many cases to Comprysings, which are real dilligences.

By these words any other mean, is to be understood other Lawful dilligences,
beside Inhibitions, Hornings, Arrestments, Comprisings, here expressed. As for
instance, if a Creditor should raise a Precept of Poynding, and should charge
his Debtor thereupon, to disappoint which, the Debtor should Dispon his
movables to another Creditor, the raiser of the Precept might quarrel that
Disposition upon this clause of the Act. 5. It is observable, that though in
the first part of the Act, after the Law has declared all deeds done by
Bankrupts, in favors of their Creditors, without an onerous cause, to be null,
yet it subjoyns immediately in another clause, that if a third party shall bona
fide acquire a right to these fraudulent rights, these rights shall not be
quarrellable in their person, except they were likewise partakers of the fraud.
But here where the Law, in this clause, declares, that where diligence is done
by a Creditor, the Debtor cannot thereafter in his prejudice; prefer another
who is a Con-creditor, and Dispone the Land to him, though even for an onerous
Cause. Yet the Law has not determined, whether if this Disposition made to a
Con-creditor, shall be quarrellable in the Person of one, who bona fide has
acquired that Disposition from the Con-creditor, in the same manner as if it
would have been quarrelable in the Person of the Con-creditor himself. And
though it may be alleged, that the clause subjoyned to the first part of the
Act, in favors of third parties, ought to be repeated here, for singular
Successors in this case, not being partakers of the Fraud, ought not to be
prejudged: yet if we consider the case somewhat inwardly, we will find that a
Disposition made by the Bankrupt to a Con-creditor, and by the Concreditor to a
third Party, is quarrellable in the third Parties Person. For the Concreditor
could make no better Right nor he had himself; and there being jus quaesitum to
the Creditor by the diligence, so that he might have quarrelled the Right made
to one of the Con-creditors, by the common Debtor. This Right could not be
evacuated by any Disposition, that the Con-creditor could make, and if it were
otherwise, the Creditors diligence might be easily eluded, and disappointed:
for the Con-creditor finding that the Right made to him was quarrelable, he
might still transfer his Right to a third party, and there was great reason why
the Clause conceived in favors of third parties in the first part of the Act,
annulls only deeds, because made fraudulently; and therefore this nullity ought
not to have been extended against third parties, who were not participes
fraudis, for there deficiebat ratio legis: But this Clause of the Act annuls
not these deeds upon any personal account, but because these deeds are contrary
to diligences done by a lawful Creditor. And therefore the nullity here ought
to be extended quo-ad all* because to whomsoever such Dispositions were
transfered, they remain still to be deeds done in prejudice of diligences done
by a lawful Creditor. And so the ground of the nullity here being real, it
ought to be extended to all. But if after the Right is settled in the person of
the confident, diligence be done against the Dyvour, which the purchaser from
the confident, neither does, nor is obliedged to know: he is in bona side to
acquire, and his Right cannot be questioned upon pretense of diligences, as
being real, and quae afficiunt fundum, in respect the diligence is not against
the person, who stands in the Right, but against the Author who was denuded.

Though the former conclusion holds in Disposions of Lands, yet it may be
doubted, whether it should likewise ^hold in Movables, and it seems very
prejudicial to, and destructive of all Commerce, that a third party buying bona
fide Movables, should be quarrelled for them: because though they past throw
many hands, and were bought (it may be) in a public Market; yet they were
originally Dispon'd by a Bankrupt, to a Con-creditor, in prejudice of another
Creditors lawful diligence; and if this were allowed, no Person could be in
bona fide, or in tuto, to Buy or to Trade.

Upon this part of the Statute, may be raised this other doubt, viz. a Creditor
comprises, and thereafter another Creditor gets a Disposition for payment of
his Debt, and is Infeft. And last of all a third Creditor Comprises, and is
Infest. The first Creditor who had Comprised, intents Reduction of the
Disposition made to the second Creditor, as made after he had done diligence:
in which Reduction the second Compriser compears, and desires to be preferred,
because he is Infeft before the pursuer, though the first Compryser: and so
would be preferred to him. And since qui vincit vincentem ^ me, vincit and me;
it follows clearly, that since the second Compryser would be preferred to the
first, that thereafter he ought also to be preferred to the Creditor, who had
got the Disposition, because the first Compryser would be preferred to him who
had got that Disposition. It is answered, for the pursuer who is the first
Compriser, that he must be preferred, and the Disposition made to the second
Creditor must accress to him, because he had done diligence before his
Disposition; and by this Statute, a Creditor to whom a Disposition is made in
defraud of a true Creditors diligence, is obliged to make his Right
forthcoming to the Creditor who has done diligence; whereas that Disposition
would be preferred to the second Comprising, though Infeftment had not followed
upon that Comprysing; because no diligence was done by that Compryser, when the
Disposition was made, nor could the second Compryser be preferred; because he
Comprysed only all Right that was in the Person of the Debtor: but so it is,
that the Debtor was denuded, by the Disposition made to the Creditor or
Trusty. And I think the first Compryser would be preferred; for this part of
the Statute, ordains not the Disposition to be null, and not to prejudge the
Creditors doing diligence, which if it had only done, the second Compryser
would have been preferred; but it ordains the Right made to the other Creditor,
in prejudice of the diligence, to be forthcoming to them who did diligence, as
said is. It is here also observable, that if the Creditor who got the
Disposition, had not been Infeft, the second Compryser had certainly been
preferred, for he had the first real Right: nor had the Debtor been denuded by
the Disposition.

As to the argument, qui vincit vincentem me, vincit me. It may be answered,
that this Brocard receives many restrictions; amongst which one is, that if he
qui vincit me, use a privileged way for prevailing against me, which is not
competent against another, then potest vincere me, and tamen non vincere
vincentem me. And in this case we know, that there is a special privilege
given by this Statute, to the Creditor who does diligence: and by virtue of
this privilege, the first Compryser prevails here. And this leads me to
another doubt in our Law, which is very considerable.

There are three Creditors, whereof one has raised, and served an Inhibition:
The second Compryses for debts, and upon Bonds posterior to the Inhibition, and
is Infeft. The third Compryses also for debts prior to the Inhibition, and is
also Infeft. The Inhibiter intents a Reduction, ex capite inhibitionis, against
the first Compryser, and reduces his Right; and thereafter the Inhibiter
Compryses also, and being Infeft, he compets for the Mails and Duties with the
second Compryser, and craves to be preferred to him, because he has prevailed
against the first Compryser who would have been preferred to him, he being but
a second Compriser, and qui vincet vincentem, etc. 2. The second Compriser
comprised from a person who was denuded, in swa far as the first Compriser
denuded the Debtor by his comprising, whereupon In^e^tment followed. But on
the other hand, it may be urged for the second Compriser, that the Inhibiter
prevai^ed only against the first Compriser by virtue of his Inhibition, which
did sweep away the posterior Debts, whereupon that first comprising was
founded. But as to his Debts, whereupon he led the second comprising, they were
Debts contracted prior to the Inhibition, and so were not liable to a Reduction
ex eo capite. And as his Debts could not be quarrelled by this Compriser* so
his real Right was also preferable to his, he having a prior Comprising,
whereupon In^eftment followed.

As no Bankrupt can prejudge his Creditors, who have done diligence, by
prefering one of them to another: so neither can he make a Disposition to any
confident person, with power to him to pay the Debt due to himself in the first
place, and his Creditors in the next place, two instances whereof I remember
lately decided. The first was, the 8. of January 1669. the case whereof was
this, The Lord of Craigmiller being Debtor to Mr. John Prestoun his Brother,
did dispon him his Estate for payment of his Debts particularly therein
related; with power to the said Mr. John to pay any of the Creditors he
pleased. And Mr. John being Infeft upon that Disposition, there was a
competition for the Mails and Duties, betwixt Mr. John, and Captain Newman,
who was one of the Creditors contained in the Disposition: In which
Competition, Captain Newman craved to he preferred, notwithstanding of that
Disposition granted to Mr. John, because the Disposition granted to Mr. John,
was granted to the behove of the said Captain his Debt, being one of the
onerous Causes therein expressed. To which Mr. John answered, that he had power
by the same Disposition to prefer any of the Creditors he pleased, and that the
value of the Land was now exhausted by payment made to other Creditors: To
which it was duplyed by Newman, that this Disposition was fraudulent, and
reduceable upon the Act of Parliament 1621, for as Craigmiller himself could
not prefer any to the prejudice of him who had done diligence, so neither could
he bestow that faculty upon any other. To which it was answered, that
Craigmiller might have disponed his Estate to any person he pleased, for an
onerous Cause, before Captain Newman did diligence. But so it is, that at the
time of this Disposition, Newman had done no diligence. 2. This Disposition at
least ought to be sustained, in so far as Craigmiller was Debtor to Mr. John,
either for Debt due to himself, or for relief of Cautionry. To which answers,
it was replied, that quo ad the first, it was not relevant, because though the
Disposition was prior to the diligence done by Newman: yet the said Newman had
done diligence, before payment made to any others of the Creditors; and
consequently before the preferrence. Whereas by the forsaid Act, no Creditor
could be preferred after diligence. And to the second Branch of the answer, it
was replied, that though Craigmiller could have disponed his Estate to Mr.
John, for his payment, or relief, expressly before Newmans diligence; yet that
was not done in this case: for this Disposition was only made in general
terms, for payment of Craigmillers Debts generally, and Mr. John had no
advantage over others thereby, but in swa far as he had by preferring himself
by virtue of the forsaid Clause, which was unwarrantable. And so the Disponers
deed quo ad him, was null; Because quod sacere potuit non fecit, and quod
fecit, sacere non potuit. Upon which debate the Lords preferred Mr. John only
in swa far as concerned his own Debt, or Cautionry: but sustained not the
preferrance, in swa far as concerned other Creditors.

The other Decision was the 24. July, 1669. in which Young craved a Disposition
made to Anderson, by Fleming, to be reduced, as done in his prejudice, he being
a Creditor who had inhibit, and Comprised. It was answered by Anderson, that he
had granted a Back-band, declaring that the Disposition was in Trust, for
payment of the Debt due to Anderson himself. And in the next place, for payment
of Flemings Creditors: and subsumed, that he had paid as many Creditors as
would exhaust the price, which he was in bona fide to do, there being no
diligence against him; nor could he be prejudged by any diligence against
Fleming, Fleming being denuded, as said is.

To which answer it was replied, that Anderson being but a Trustee, was
fictione juris, in the same condition with Fleming; And as Flemnig could not
disappoint him, as a lawful* Creditor; so neither could Anderson his Trustee:
And if it were otherwise, the diligences of lawful Creditors might be rendered
elusory, for the Debtor who resolved to disappoint the diligences of his
Creditors, might still dispon his Estate to a Trustee; which Trustee, and
Trust, the Debitors not knowing, they could not know against whom diligence was
to be done. Likeas, in Law, this power to prefer Creditors, behoved to be
interpret legittimo modo, and interminis habilibus: so that the Creditors could
not be disappointed, but that they should be preferred according to their
diligences, as they behoved to have been by the Debtor himself. In respect of
which reply; the Lords preferred the Creditors, and found that voluntar payment
made by the Trustee, could not prejudge the Creditors who had done lawful
diligences, by voluntar payment. But the question here remains; whether if any
of the Creditors had Arrested in Andersons hand, as Trustee, and had pursued an
Action to make forth-comming against him: If in that case, Anderson was
obliged to give in a qualified Oath, bearing that he was Trustee, but that
there was other Creditors who had done more timeous diligence; or if he ought
to have called the Creditors, who had done more timeous diligence, as said is.

This Act is only conceived in favors of such as were Creditors, to those who
granted such Dispositions, prior to the deeds contraverted. But argumento hujus
legis, and upon the same reason of equity, the Lords constantly sustain
Declarators at the instance of Creditors of the Father concluding any Right,
made even by strangers, to Children in familia, to be null, as being granted to
their prejudice, without an onerous Cause, or as being acquired by the parents
means. Which presumptions are never otherwise elyded, then by alleging, that
the procurer had an Estate aliunde, whereby he might have procured the Right
contraverted. As for instance, Sempronius being Debtor to Mevius, dispones not
his Estate to his Son, but acquires an Estate in his Sons name from a stranger,
this Disposition so acquired, can never be quarrelled by Mevius, the Fathers
Creditor, by way of Reduction, For the effect of a Reduction is nothing else
but the annulling of the deed, and the taking it out of the way, or the
bringing back of the Estate dispon'd, to the same condition it was in before;
which would not be sufficient in this case, because the Estate which the
Creditor desires to affect, was never in the Debitors person. And therefore it
is necessary for the Creditor to raise a Declarator, wherein he must narate,
that Sempronius being Debtor to him, did fraudulently acquire the Right of
such and such Lands, in his sons name; and which must be presumed to be
acquired by the Fathers Estate: because they were acquired by a Son in familia,
who is presumed to have no Estate, but what he derives from his Father, or else
he must Lybel, that though the Disposition be procured by a Major, who is
foris-familiat, and Trafficking upon his own account, the same was truly
acquired by the Debitors means, and the Disposition only acquired to be a
colorable Title to disappoint his Debt. Therefore concludes, that the said
Estate so bought, may be declared liable to his Debt, in the same manner, as if
the Disposition had been taken in his Debitors name.

The Common Law, and ours, does not only reprobate Dispositions, made by
Debitors: in meditatione fugae, but both the one, and the other of these Laws,
do likewise allow the summar apprehending of Creditors, who are suspected to be
Bankrupts. And by our Law, though a man cannot be regularly Imprisoned for
Debt, without Letters of Caption be formerly raised; Yet in Masons case, the 5.
November 1665. The Lords summarly, upon a Bill, issued out a warrant to
apprehend him, tanquam Debitorem suspectum, and fugitivum. And though at first
they doubted, whether their own power could extend this far, yet thereafter
they found that it might: since even the Admiral grants such warrants, and yet
there may be some speciality quoad the Admiral since the nature of his
Jurisdiction allows a very sumar procedor: and since this his Jurisdiction is
ordinarily exercised over Persons, who have an easy way to convey themselves
out of the Country, and are ordinarily very little fixed to one place.

But because this may open a door to great Arbitrariness, and may afford great
occasion of prejudging the Leidges, since upon this pretext, Merchants may,
whilst they are going about great bargains, and others about urgent, and
necessary affairs, be laid up in Prison upon this account. It will be fit to
consider, what the common Law, and Lawyers have delivered as their opinion in
this Point.

Lawyers distinguish inter fugitivum, and suspectum de fuga, the one is guilty
only of an Intention, but the other has actually fled. And I conceive, that
meditatio fugae, so much considered by our Law, is a midst betwixt those two,
for he who is in meditatione fugae, has cum suspecto designed a flight, and has
cum fugitivo, done some extrinsick deed in order to his flight.

He who is suspect, or fugitive, may be apprehended by the common Law, summarly
by any Judge, who can cite that Person before him, qui potest recitare, id est
personali coercitione coercere Debitores, they may be also apprehended by a
Judge otherways incompetent: and he that is taken by an incompetent Judge,
cannot object the incompetency. For as Lawyers observe, these Debitors who are
Fugitive, or suspect of flying, may be apprehended by warrands, direct either
by incompetent Judges, or by warrands direct in incompetent times, such as are
vacand times, or holy days, gloss in l. si super C. de feriis. verb.
^ideijussionis* But with us, no Inferior, much less can incompetent Judges;
can give such warrands. And it has been expressly decided, that an Arrestment
laid on, even upon a Bankrupts Goods, by an incompetent Judge, was not valid, 5
December 1671. where the Arrestment was laid on in Pasley, by virtue of an
Decree obtained before the Bailie of Cunninghame, and so was found null, as
extra districtum. Albeit the Bailie of Cunninghame, was also Sheriff of
Renfrew, within which Sheriffdome Pasley lies. -- Lawyers are likewise of
opinion, that the Creditor may apprehend one who is Debtor, if he find him
actually fleeing: for fleeing in this case, is a kind of crime. But if the
flyer be not a Debtor by express Contract, he cannot be apprehended by the
Creditor without a warrant, except either a Judge cannot be had, or that he be
fleeing with the Debitors Money, Ang. in l. extat. ff. quod met. cause.

He who craves a warrant, to take a Debtor who is suspect, or fugitive, must
lybel to the Judge, reasons why he suspects his fleeing, as that he was packing
up his Goods, or was lurking, or denied himself when his Creditors were seeking
him. And though by opinion of the Doctors, none who has an immovable, or Land
Estate, can be thus proceeded against, because it is presumed, he will have so
great care for his Estate, as not to leave it: and because his Land Estate is
always a biding cautioner: yet if either the Land Estate be very small, or if
it be affected with diligences that may exhaust it. I think that in these
cases, such Heretors can have no privilege, nor are their summar warrands ever
allowed to such as become voluntarly Creditors, after the Debtor was
suspected; for these ought to blame themselves, who trusted a Person in that
condition: but it is otherwise if they became Creditors ex delicto, vel quasi
delicto: as for instance, if after he was suspected; he Robe, or Wound, or
commit any Riot. For in that case, he who becomes so, his Creditor may have
such a warrant for apprehending him; and these warrands are granted, not only
for pure and liquid Debts: but even for conditional Debts, and for Debts
whereof the terms of payment are not yet come; and though the Debts be small,
except they be very inconsiderable, Cacia-lup. tract. de debit. susp. quest. 3.

Finally, the Lords declares, all such Bankrupts, and Dyvours, and all
Interposed Persons, for covering, or executing their brauds; and all others,
who shall give Council, and wilful assistance unto the said Bankrupts, in the
devising, and practicing of their said Frauds, and godless deceits, to the
prejudice of their true Creditors, shall be reputed, and holden dishonest,
false, and infamous Persons, incapable of all Honors, Dignities, Benefices,
and Offices; or to pass upon Inquests, or Assizes, or to bear witness in
Judgment, or out-with in any time coming.
FOr the better understanding of this part of the Act, concerning the
punishment of Bankrupts, and of such as advise, or assist them. It is fit to
observe with the Civilians, that Bankrupts, and Dyvours, are either such as are
become insolvendo by their Misfortune, rather then Fault. And quo ad these,
because they were guilty of no Crime, therefore no Corporal Punishment was
appointed for them by the Law, omni corporali cruc^atu remoto says l fin. Cod.
qui. bon. ced. poss. Nor does Infamy follow them, Novella; and therefore this
clause of the Act, cannot be interpret of such Bankrupts: and though the clause
be general, without distinguishing Bankrupts: and that it might be therefore
alleged, that ubi lex non distinguit, nec nos. Yet general Laws must receive
their restrictive Interpretations from the Common Law. And since the design of
this Act, was (as is very clear by the Narrative) to prevent, and punish Frauds
and Cheats; it is just, that these general clauses should not be extended
beyond the express scope, and design of the Act.

The second kind of Bankrupts mentioned in the Law, are these; who only by
their own fault become Bankrupts: qui suo vitio fortunas conturbarunt. And the
third kind of Bankrupts, were such, as became Bankrupts, partly by their own,
and partly by the fault of fortune. And both these last kinds of Bankrupts were
denied the benefit of a cessio bonorum, nam hoc est miserorum subsidium, sed
non presidiu^, dolosoruml. sin. h. t. and l. pen. ff. de jur. Dot. And with us,
the Bankrups of both these Classes are denied the benefit of a cessio bonorum,
except they wear the Habit: though such are spared from it; whom fortune
without their own fault, has thrown into the necessity of seeking that
miserable remeed. Nor does the granting of Dispositions that are reduceable
upon this Act still infer infamy, for if a man grant a Disposition, whereby one
Creditor is preferred to another who has done diligence, that Disposition would
be reduceable, and yet if there remained as much as might have paid all the
Creditors, that Disposition could not infer infamy. And by this Act, such only
are declared infamous, as are guilty of fraud, and Godless devices.

Such as give council are liable to the pains of this Act, which is likewise
conform to the opinion of the Civilians, vid, Strach. de decotor: But they
distinguish betwixt such as gave council, or advice to those who were resolved
before to cheat their Creditors; and some Doctors do conclude, that such
advisers, are not punishable, because the Bankrupt followed not here the advice
of another, but his own inclination. And this opinion was first sounded upon
the Gl^ss. inst. de oblig. que ex de lict.. open, but others do more reasonably
conclude, with Dynus ad reg. nullus de reg. jur. l. 166. That the advice is
equally punishable, whether the Bankrupt was resolved to follow that advice, or
his own inclination: Because the adviser did here all that in him was, to
transgress the Law, others distinguish thus, either (say they) the principal
offender designed only to have cheated a Bankrupt, but delayed till he got
advice, and then the adviser is equally punishable with the principal, because
there, the transgression was imputeable chiefly to the Adviser: Or else the
principal Adviser had begun to defraud and cheat his Creditors; and the advice
did but interveen, and was but supervenient: And then the Adviser is not
equally punishable, especially where the contrivance is not otherwise probable,
then by mere presumptions.

Wilful assistance also in devising or practicing these frauds, is also
punishable by this Act, under which Lawyers comprehend such as transact betwixt
the Bankrupts and interposed persons, such as lend him Horses to flee, if they
knew his design, and such as carry the Goods of the Bankrupt, or such as rescue
him when he is apprehended, or stop his being apprehended, Strach. de decoct.
part. 2.

The punishment appointed by this Act, is, that they shall be repute false
persons: By which is not meant, that they shall be punished tanquam falsarii,
but as cheats for cheating is a species of falsehood. And yet if a Bankrupt did
call himself by the name of a Rich Merchant, thereby to get Credit: or if any
treated for him under that name, I conceive they might be pursued tanqnam
falsarii, and and might be punished accordingly.

They are also declared incapable of all Honors, or Dignities, and Offices,
which are not distinct punishments from infamy, but are the natural
consequences of it. For whosoever is declared infamous, is eo ipso incapable of
all Honors, Dignities, and Offices.

They are also declared incapable to pass upon Inquests, or Assyses. But this
was also unnecessary, for Assysers have a mixed employment, and without being
either Judges, or Witnesses, are both, and as to their capacity of Judges, they
fell under the foregoing Clause, whereby all Bankrupts and their assistants are
declared incapable to be Judges. And as to their capacity of being Witnesses,
they fell under the subsequent Clause, whereby such are likewise debared from
being Witnesses. And I believe the reason why they were specially debared by
this Act, was because our Law looks upon Assysers, as having an employment
distinct, and differing from either a Judge, or a Witness, and medium
participationis, betwixt the two. Though regulariter, in our Law, whatever
debars on from being a Witness, debars him likewise from being an Assyser. And
there is no surer legal topic with us, then an Argument drawn from a Witness,
to an Assyser: And yet argumento hujus legis, an Assyser may be concluded
different from both Judge, and Witness, and medium participationis, betwixt
them.

Bankrupts, and their assisters are likewise by this Act, declared incapable to
be Witnesses, and the reason of this exclusion certainly is, because the Law
considers such as have cheated Creditors, as persons who would be ready to
cheat Judges; that such as have been dishonest in their own Affairs, will never
be honest in the Affairs of other men.

And whereas this Clause, debars them from being Witnesses, in-with, or
out-with Judgment, by Witnesses out-with Judgment, are meant Witnesses in
Writs, as Bonds, Seasings, etc. But yet it may be doubted, whether in Bonds, or
such like Writs, this can take place: For there, the Witnesses are presumed of
Law to be admitted of consent, which excludes all objections against Witnesses;
and therefore a man's servant, or brother, cannot be received judicially as
Witnesses for him; yet they may be, and are sustained as Witnesses in Bonds
granted to him. Nor did I ever hear, a Bond, Seasing, or any other Writ,
reduced upon this head, viz. That it had only two Witnesses; one whereof was
incapable to be a Witness, because he was found by the Lords Decree to have
either granted fraudulent Dispositions, or to have been in accession thereto,
except he was declared expressly infamous by the Lords sentence, as Mason was.
Though such an objection seems well founded upon this Clause of the Act.

Not only such as defraud Creditors, are declared infamous by this Act, but
even in Declarators founded upon the Common Law, the persons guilty will be
declared infamous; as was found in Masons case: And though it was aledged, that
infamy could not be inferred without an express Law; yet it was found that
this Act empowered the Lords, to decide conform to the Conmon Law in like
cases, and a paritate rationis, and he was thereupon declared infamous.

I have reserved to be debated in this last place, whether by virtue of the
last Clause of this Act, whereby the advysers of frauds are to be punished: An
Advocat may be examined upon his having given advice to his Client, to defraud
his Creditors: or whether he may be examined against his Client, who in
consulting with him, and taking his advice, has made him as his Advocat, privy
to the fraud he has committed. And because these questions are of universal
consequence, I am resolved to consider them in general terms, both with, and
without relation to this Act. For if Advocats may be forced to depon against
themselves, or their Clients in this point, or as to any other thing which is
the subject matter of their consultations, they may be as well forced in all
things; for the parity of reason, and the public interest being the same. I
see not why if the Judge may lawfully force them in the one, he may not as well
obliedge them in all other cases.

As to the first question, it would appear, that an Advocat cannot be obliedged
to depon upon any thing which may bind a guilt upon himself, or which may
defame him.

As to the next question, it would appear, that it is the interest of the
Commonwealth, to have the truth of all frauds and contrivances detected; and
that he who conceals the truth, is as guilty as he who commits a falsehood: But
to such as attentively and judiciously consider, they may probably find
themselves inclined to the contrary opinion, by these considerations, 1. An
Advocat, is by the nature of his employment tied to the same faithfulness that
any Depositor is: For his Client has depositat in his breast, his greatest
secrets; and it is the interest of the Commonwealth, to have that freedom
allowed, and secured, without which, men cannot manage their affairs, and
private business: and who would use that freedom, if they might be ensnared by
it? This were to beget a diffidence betwixt such, who should of all others,
have the greatest mutual confidence in one another; and this will make ignorant
men so jealous of their Advocats, that they will lose their private business, or
succumb in their just defense, rather then hazard the opening of their secrets
to those who can give them no advice, when the case is half concealed, or may
be forced to discover them, when revealed. As for instance, a Client not
knowing that he can be defended against an pursuit for murder, by proving it
was committed in self-defence, will conceal from his Advocat, that he killed at
all, least his confession, and his Advocats testimony, might be made use of
against him. 2. This might afford to Advocats great matter of prevarication,
and might occasion much prejudice to the Clients, for an Advocat having
discovered the weakness of his Clients Cause, might discover it likewise to his
adversary: and to cover his prevarication, he might suggest to his said
adversary, that he might be examined, and so impute the discovering of these
secrets, to the cogency of the Law, and not to his own private inclinations,
which made Rob. Annaeus say, that si tamen de inceps, Advocato liceat,
Clientium secreta pandere, and causarum arcana fidei suae commissa, palam and
public proferre eaque parum fido pectore effutire. In foro deinceps, non
equitatis cognitio, sed latrocinium exercebitur: tribunalia murices erunt,
quibus litigantium simplicitatem undique circumvenire, and imputare licebit.
and in judicio, non templum ^hemidis, sed spoliarium erit, si clientes tacita
confessionis side captare, and irretire permittetur. Whereas now, if a Clients
secret be discovered, he can blame no man but his own Advocats, who are by
their honor and interest, obliged to keep up a secret, whose discovery can be
ascribed to none, but them. The design of all Probation is to convince the
Judge, whereas because of the great Relation that is betwixt an Advocat, and
his Client, Law and Experience cannot but presume, that hardly Truth can be
discovered this way. And this way rather opens a door to lying, or gives
occasion to fallacious, and ambiguous concealing of Truth, then helps the
discovery of it. Upon which account, the Law has shunned to force men to depon
against themselves, or Husbands against their Wives, or Children against their
Parents in Criminal cases. And therefore Virgil equals those two, pulsatusve
parens, and fraus innexaclienti. Upon which place, Servius observes that
Clientes, quasi colentes, Patroni, quasi patres, tantundem ergo est Clientem,
quantum filium fallere: and such was the respect due to Clients, that the Law
allowed less liberty in deponing against them, then against Blood Relations:
and thus M. Cato is brought in, by A. Gell. saying, adversus cognatos pro
cliente testatur, testimonium adversus clientem nemo dicit. And the Law has
still been rather inclined to evite the hazard of Perjury, then to follow too
far the Interest of the Commonwealth; or of private Parties, since God
Almighty suffers by the one, and men only suffer by the other. 5. The Law L.
nimis grave C. de testibus, tells us, that Mandatis cavetur, ut presides
attendant, ne Patroni iu causa cui Patrocinium prestiterunt, testimonium
dicant. And though Bartolus, and some others do expon this Law, so, as if a
Judge were thereby only discharged to admit an Advocat to depon for his Client.
This Gloss seems to be most absurd, both because the words of the Law are
general, and since they extend to both cases, and that no Posterior Law has
restricted them, there is no reason why both should not be equally
comprehended: As also, Laws are presumed to be made still against the more
doubtful case; but that Advocats could have been received to depon in favors
of their Client, was so clearly against the whole Analogy of Law, that there
needed no special Law to have been made against that case: but there was
necessity to inform Judges, whether Advocats could be forced to depon against
their Clients: which gloss is approved by the learned Heraldus de Rer.
judicatar auctor. lib. 2. cap. 4 And conform thereto, the Parliament of Paris
did find in December 1619. that an Advocat could not be obliged to depon
against his Client, for clearing of a Fraud, for which his Client was pursued.

By Justinians 80. Novel, cap. 8. It is appointed, that though witnesses may be
forced to depone, both in Civil, and Criminal matters: yet those who had been
employed as Mediators, who are called there, (...), should not be forced to
depone as witnesses, except both parties consent; for which no other reason can
be given: but because the parties had entrusted their secrets to them. And
accordingly the Senate of Savoy, decided the 23. November, 1596. as Faber
observes, lib. 4. tit. 15. def. 56. and the reason there given, is, solent enim
qui litigant, agere liberius cum istis mediatoribus, quasi cum confessore; and
causae patrono. Then which nothing can be more convincing, Idem etiam in
proxeneta observavit papiensis in form. jur. test. number. 15. And in this the
Cannon Law agrees with the Civil: for by Can. statut. Cause. 2. quest. 6. It is
ordained, that no Clergymen shall be obliedged, or can be compelled to bear
witness in a case which has been referred to him, by two Laics. And therefore
since that trust is held so Sacred, that the secrets even revealed to Arbiters,
are not to be extorted from them, much less ought an Advocat, to whose
patrocinie, his Clients slay, and from whose faithfulness they seek protection,
to violat that trust, and disappoint that confidence, sane id a Romana virtute,
and animi magnitudine erat plane alienum. And how much secrecy they allowed to
witnesses, who had got any thing entrusted to them, is clear, l. 1.. 38. ff.
deposit. si quis tabulas testamenti apud se depositas, pluribus presentibus
legit, ait Labeo, depositi action recte de tabulis agi posse, ego arbitror,
and injuriarum agi posse, si hoc animo recitatum testamentum est, quibusdam
presentibus, ut judicio secreta ejus qui testatus est divulgarentur. Nor can
there be a solid reason given, why Confessors cannot be forced to discover the
secrets revealed to them, sub sigillo confessionis, And yet Advocats shall be
obliged to reveal what is consigned to them, under the sacred assurance of
Trust, and Secrecy.: Especially seeing that Law which is alleged against them,
does acknowlepge them to be juris and justittae Sacerdotes l. 1. ff. de just.
and jur. Since the Common wealth is more concerned in the secrets of Affairs,
then in secrets of Devotion; and there are greater temptations to provoke the
Trustee to discover the one, then the other: for few can have advantage by what
a Confessor can reveal, but many could gain by that an Advocat can discover.

I must here beg leave to represent, that the rise of this great trust betwixt
Clients, and Patrons, was, that first when Rome was founded, Romulus finding
the error the Grecians had committed, in tyranizing over their Clients, (whom
the Athenians called (...), and the Thessalians (...), he did introduce a
mutual Friendship and tie betwixt them. And as Aulus Gellius observes lib. 5.
cap. 13. in officiis apud majores, ita observatum est, primum tutela, deinde
hospiti, deinde clienti, tum cognato, postea affini. And as Dionis. halic. lib.
2. Ant Romans observes, the Patron was obliedged, clienti jura interpretari, and
lites pro eo suscipere. And this was common to both, that they could never
accuse nor bear Witness against one another (...). And on the Laws of the
twelve Tables was, patronus si clienti fraudem fecerit, sacer esto. So
sacrilegious a thing was it then held, to reveal the Clients secrets: But
thereafter this mutual dependence, and friendship, became so suspect to the
Roman Emperors, that none were allowed to be Patrons, but Lawyers, whose power
the Magistrates needed not suspect; and who were presumed to be men, so legal,
and of such integrity, that they would advice nothing, but what was just. And
therefore, betwixt these continued the Trust, and mutual assurance that was
required betwixt the old Patrons, and their Clients. Though Advocats be now
known to antequaries, for distinction, under the term of patroni secundarii.

Whereas it is urged, that it is the interest of the Commonwealth, that truth
be discovered: To this it is answered, that it is indeed the interest of the
Commonwealth to discover the truth, as far as that can be done, in a
convenient and lawful way; for it is likewise the interest of the
Commonwealth, not to unseal the secrets of private persons, and thereby to
render all Trust, and Commerce suspect. And notwithstanding of this Argument,
the Law has exempted men from deponing against themselves, and against many
others, who are enumerat, l. 4. ff. de testibus and of which we have very many
instances in our Law. Rei publicae quidem interest, crimina impunita non esse,
sed rei publica quoque interest, pietatis and necessitudinis officia sarta
tecta conservari, sine quibus nihil sanctum haberi potest, nec inviolatum. And
Cicero lib. 3. de offic. does elegantly affirm, non igitur patria prestabit
omnibus officiis, sed ipsi patriae conducit, pios cives habere. Advocats are
persons whose Breeding obliedges them to admire Justice, as Musicians do
Music, or as a man does that Country in which he lives; and they having given
their Oath de fideli, at their admission, to give their Clients advice
according to the Laws: they cannot be presumed to have advised any thing
against the Law. And it is known, that they offend in this so infrequently, if
at all* that it may seem fiter not to inquire into such cases, that seldom
occure, then by inquiry to introduce a jealousy betwixt parties, who need such
strict intimacy. And as no Gentleman is desired to divulge his friends secrets,
much less should the Law require this from Advocats, since it has obliedged
them to employ Advocats: and to entrust them with their secrets. And though men
may be suspect, when they debate for their own interest, and advantage, yet
what interest can Advocats have here, save that of their Clients, for the
Client and not the Advocat suffers by the discovery, and the Commonwealth being
only a collective body of Clients; in effect the Commonwealth is prejudged,
because Clients are prejudged. And though a Decision in the Parliament of
Paris, be commonly alleged upon this point, 18. June 1580. in the case of one
Barbine, yet all that was there decided, was, que l'advocat, and conseil,
pourroit estre ouy par for me de tesmoinage. So that the Advocats have there
been willing, but were not forced: And the parties objections were there
reserved, for the Decision bears. Sauf a la party, ses reproaches: So that
they were but examined before answer. Nor can an Advocat be thus said to
conceal truth, since he is only said to conceal, who may be forced to depon.
And if Clients know, that their Advocats may be forced to depon against them,
they will keep their secrets, or propose their doubts under borrowed names; and
thus the design of finding out truth will be disappointed. And the Argument
altogether eluded, some urge, that Advocats may be forced to depon upon the
having of their Clients Papers. And that by many Decisions they have been often
forced to give them up, after full debates: wherein a special privilege upon
the account of their employment has been pretended; from which they infer, that
they may be also examined upon what past betwixt their Clients and them. But to
this, the easy, and just answer is, that an Advocat can be no further
obliedged to deliver his Clients Papers, then the Client himself could have
been, but neither the one, nor the other could be forced to deliver up any
Papers, but such as the Pursuer is in Law allowed an interest in, and in so far
as they are the pursuers Papers. Nor are such Papers as ought to be exhibited,
to be accounted secrets, and Advocats are obliedged here, not as Advocats, but
as ordinary Subjects. But I will not decide this weighty point.

ACT XXVIII. A Ratification of an Act of the Lords of Counsel and Session, made
in July 1620. against unlawful Dispositions and Alienations made by Dyvours and
Bankrupts.
OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, with advice and consent of the ESTATES, conveened in this
present Parliament, ratifies, approves, and for his Highness, and His
Successors, perpetually confirms the Act of the Lords of Counsel and Session,
made against Dyvours and Bankrupts, at Edinburg, the 12. day of July, 1620* and
ordaines the same to have, and take full effect, and execution, as a necessary
and profitable Law, for the weal of all his Highness Subjects, Of the which Act
the tenor follows.

THE LORDS Of Counsel and Session understanding by the grievous and just
complaints of many of his majesty's good subjects, that the fraud, malice, and
falsehood of a number of Divours and Bankrupts, is become so frequent, and
avowed, and has already taken such progress, to the overthrow of many honest
men's fortunes, and estates, that it is likely to dissolve, trust, commerce and
faithful dealing amongst Subjects: Whereupon must ensue the ruin of the whole
Estate, if the godless deceites of those be not prevented, and remedied; who
by their apparent Wealth in Lands and Goods, and by their show of Conscience,
Credit, and Honesty; drawing into their hands upon trust the Money,
Merchandise, and Goods, of well-meaning and credulous persons, do no ways
intend to repay the same: but either to live ryotously, by wasting of other
men's substance; or to enrich themselves, by that subtle stealth of true men's
goods, and to withdraw themselves, and their goods, forth of this Realm, to
elude all execution of Justice: And to that effect, and in manifest defraud of
their Creditors, do make simulate and fraudful alienations, dispositions, and
other securities, of their Lands, Reversions, Teyndes, Goods, Actions, Debts,
and others, belonging unto them, to their Wives, Children, Kinsmen, alleyes,
and other confident and interposed persons: without any true, lawful, or
necessary cause: and without any just or true price interveining in their said
bargains: Whereby their just Creditors, and Cautioners, are falsely and
godlesly defrauded of all payment of their just debts: and many honest Families
likely to come to utter ruin.

FOR remedy whereof, the said LORDS, according to the power given unto them by
His Majesty, and His most Noble Progenitors, to set down Orders for
administration of Justice: meaning to follow and practice the good and
commendable Laws, Civil and Cannon, made against fraudful alienations, in
prejudice of Creditors, and against the authors and partakers of such fraud;
Statutes, ordaines, and declares, That in all actions, and causes, depending,
or to be intended by any true Creditor, for recoverie of his just Debt; or
satisfaction of his lawful action and right: They will decree, and decern, all
Alienations, Dispositions, Assignations, and translations whatsoever made by
the Debtor, of any of his Lands, Teyndes, Reversions, Actions, Debts, or goods
whatsoever, to any conjunct or confident person, without true, just, and
necessary causes, and without a just price really paid, the same being done
after the contracting of lawful Debts from true Creditors: To have been from
the beginning, and to be in all times coming, Null, and of none avail, force,
nor effect: at the instance of the true and just Creditor, by way of action,
exception, or reply: without further declarator. And in case any of His
Majesty's good Subjects (no ways partakers of the said frauds) have lawfully
purchased any of the said Bankrupts Lands, or goods, by true bargains, for just
and competent prices, or in satisfaction of their lawful Debts, from the
interposed persons, trusted by the said Divours. In that case, the right
lawfully acquired by him who is no ways partaker of the fraud, shall not be
anulled in manner foresaid. But the receiver of the price of the said Lands,
goods, and others, from the buyer, shall be holden and oblished to make the
same forth-comming to the behove of the Bankrupts, true Creditors, in payment
of their lawful Debts. And it shall be sufficient probation of the fraud
intended against the Creditors, if they, or any of them, shall be able to
verify by write, or by oath, of the party receiver of any security from the
Divour or Bankrupt, that the same was made without any true, just, and
necessary cause, or without any true and competent price: Or that the Lands and
goods of the Divour and Bankrupt being sold by him who bought them from the
said Divour, the whole, or the most part of the price thereof was converted, or
to be converted to the Bankrupts profit and use. Providing always that so much
of the said lands and goods, or prices thereof so trusted by Bankrupts to
interposed persons as has been really paid, or assigned by them to any of the
Bankrupts lawful Creditors, shall be allowed unto them, they making the rest
forth-comming to the remanent Creditors, who want their due payments. And if in
time coming any of the said Divours, or their interposed partakers of their
fraud; shall make any voluntary payment, or right to any person, in defraude
of the Lawful, and more timely diligence of another Creditor, having served
Inhibition, or used Hornining Arrestment, Comprizing, or other lawful mean,
duly to affect the Divours Lands, or price thereof to his behove. In that case
the said Divour or interposed person, shall be holden to make the same
forth-comming to the Creditor, having used his first lawful diligence: who
shall likewise be preferred to the Concreditor, who being posterior unto him in
diligence, has obtained payment by partial favor of the Debtor, or of his
interposed confident: and shall have good action to recover from the said
Creditor that which was voluntarily paid in defraude of the pursuers diligence.

Finally, THE LORDS declares all such Bankrupts and Divours, and all interposed
persons, for covering or executing their frauds, and all others, who shall give
counsel, and wilful assistance unto the said Bankrupts* in the devising and
practicing of their said frauds, and godless deceits, to the prejudice of
their true Creditors, shall be reputed and holden dishonest, false, and
infamous persons, incapable, of all honors, dignities, benefices, and*
offices: Or to pass upon Inquests, or Assyses: Or to bear witness in Judgment,
or out* with in anytimes coming.

FINIS*

