The last FAMOUS SIEGE OF THE CITY OF ROCHEL: TOGETHER WITH THE Edict of Nantes.

WRITTEN In French by Peter Meruault, a Citizen of Rochel, who was in the City
from the beginning of the Siege until the Rendition of it.

LONDON, Printed for John Wickins at the White Heart over against St. Dunstans
Church in Fleet Street. 1680.

THE AUTHORS PREFACE.
WHEN the Siege of Rochel had its first beginning, I was but in the 20th year
of my Age, and having been bred to commerce, wanted the advantage and ornament
of Scholarship; yet nevertheless my curiosity prompting me, I made it my
business to take notice of what then passed, and my Father being a Member of
the Common Council, and as Master of the Artillery exercised the second Charge
or Office in the City, I learned from him diverse Particulars, which I carefully
committed to writing: And though I had at that time nothing less in my thoughts
than to compose a Narrative for the Public, yet being cloistred up until the
Rendition of the City, I find this Journal complete, even until the end of the
Siege, which I kept only for my own particular use, in case the Lord in his
mercy should suffer me to survive; from whence it is that this Collection has
ever since lain dormant in my Cabinet, and nothing but the importunity of
friends could have carried me beyond my own resolution in exposing it to
public view. Neither my Age, my Profession, nor yet the little care I then
took in digesting of things (intending them only for my self) can beget in any
an expectation of exactness in Form or Style worthy perusal, having nothing
more to recommend it than integrity as to matter of Fact, of which those at a
distance, as well as those at home, must bear witness, it being a plain
Narrative of Counsels and Transactions during the Siege, without any Inferences
of my own: In the collecting of which neither Interest, Affection, or Hatred
had any influence upon me.

As this Age is fruitful in great Wits, so these Memoirs may be useful to the
Writers of the History of our Times: However, some may happily be glad to
understand the Particulars which I have here given an Account of.

PETER MERUAULT.

For some Reasons the Author could not publish this Journal sooner, though he
had License for doing it many years since.

A PREFACE TO THE READER.
Reader,
IT is now fifty one years since the Reformed Religion and Liberty received its
great wound in the loss of Rochel, a City in France, once famous for its
constant opposition of Rome, and being a safe refuge for the Protestants of
that Kingdom, in the frequent Massacres practiced by the (more than cruel and
brutish) Papists.

Whoever shall read D' Aubignie's History (not D' Avila's, against which the
Reformed excepts as partial) of the Civil Wars of France, writ in or near the
time of King Henry IV. Grandfather to the present King of England, will find
that this City was of great service to that King in all his troubles, as being
a Sanctuary to him upon several occasions, constantly taking his part against
his Enemies, the Popish and Spanish League and Faction.

This Henry IV. (like a magnanimous and generous Soul) excelling in gratitude
and good Nature (tyranny and oppression being the Badges and effects of
dissoluteness and cowardice) when by the assistance of the Reformed he was
restored to the Crown and Dignity of France, did not unthankfully forget his
friends, and persecute them, but as a heroic Prince made them participate of
the mercies of God toward him, by giving them (as their Magna Charta) the
Edict or Law, Called that of Nantes, with supplementary Articles, by which they
are restored in all cases to equal Privileges with the Romanists; for though
to do the like by Papists in a Protestant Country would be the certain ruin of
that Nation (their faithless bloody Principles, and owning of a Foreign Head
being inconsistent with such liberty) yet he knew that nothing could be of more
security to his Crown than to cherish those that owned no other Sovereign than
their Native Prince, and could have no other Interest than his, as his
Successors have since experienced, both of them being indebted to the Reformed
for keeping their Crowns upon their heads.

After several former Edicts or Laws had been no sooner made for the security
of the Religion than broke, the reformed Party (who had for their Heads the
King of Navarre, and Prince of Condee, besides a multitude of other Grandees)
refusing to rely any longer upon Paper Edicts and the word of a King, demanded
Cautionary Towns, and had amongst others the City of Rochel given them for one.

Whilst this excellent Prince, Henry IV. lived, his Edict and supplementary
Articles hereunto annexed (declarative of many former Edicts) were faithfully
observed; but he was no sooner gone than his Successors, losing all gratitude,
chose rather to follow the vicious examples of his Predecessors than the
virtuous Precedent that he left them, of being true and faithful to Laws and
Engagements, for at the importunity of their Bishops (enemies to true piety)
setting aside all faith and reverence due to Laws, made perpetual and
irrevocable, they took up a severe persecution of the Reformed; from whence
arose several Wars, and as many reconciliations; for the innocent Protestants,
thirsting after nothing but Peace in the enjoyment of their Laws, were always
deluded out of their advantages to rely upon fair promises, and the
insignificant word of their King: Until Lewis XIII. having first prepared all
Matters, took his opportunity to fall upon this City, the chief Bulwark of the
Reformed, which resisted upon the account of their Privileges, as a Cautionary
Town, thinking it as lawful to defend their Rights, as for the King to invade
them; and how the place was lost appears by the ensuing Journal or History;
which shows,

I. A Miracle (and perhaps beyond example) of Unity, Courage, Constancy, and
Resolution, to die rather than outlive their Liberty.

II. In all the Managers of their defense (as well at home as abroad during the
Siege) more of faithfulness, diligence, prudence, readiness of Wit and Parts
than peradventure will be found in any History, especially of its bigness.

The loss of this City was the first decay of the Protestant Cause and Interest
in Christendom, and the Original Rise and Foundation of that Greatness in the
French Monarchy, which threatens at this day the Liberty of Europe; for so long
as Rochel remained in freedom under a Mayor, his Council, and the Common
Council of forty eight, annually chosen by themselves, they were so formidable
under that Government, that the French could never get forward in suppressing
those of the Religion, nor oppressing of their Neighbors, which renders the
Spaniard guilty of a great Solecism in Politics, in being assistant in the
reducing of this City, as well as Spinola, the Great Spanish General (but a
Native of Genoua) was in contriving the Digue (a Bank which blocked up the
Passage by Sea into Rochel) the means of taking it, which he did at his giving
the French King a Visit in his passage to Spain; for though the Author of this
History will not take from his own Country the credit of the Invention, the
honor of it does traly belong to Spinola.

But that you may the better understand how the Reformed in France have been,
and still are, dealt with contrary to Law, I have hereunto annexed the several
Declarations of Henry IV. establishing thereby his Edict and supplementary
Articles for their Liberty, making them perpetual and irrevocable, as also the
several Declarations of this present French King Louis XIV. reciting the
substance of the Declarations of his Father Louis XIII. with several Decrees of
Council, owning the perpetuity of the Edict of Nants, and confirming them all
with this acknowledgment, That he remained fully satisfied with his Subjects of
the Reformed Religion, as having given him certain proofs of their affection
and fidelity, especially in 1652. the year of his Declaration, when they drew
the hatred of the Prince of Conde and his Party upon them for their Loyalty, in
adhering to the King, and opposing of the Prince in his then Rebellion. But the
King by their help had not long got the Ascendant of his enemies, before
holding the Reformed unnecessary, to satisfy the insatiable malice of the
Bishops (as appears by their actings, which will in due time be published) he
left them to the mercy of the Church, whose mercies are cruelties, and even
suffered the Prince of Conde to revenge himself upon them, who, the first year
he was restored into favor, demolished all their Churches in the Pais de Gex,
near Geneve, and under his Government, which County wanted then little of being
entirely of the Reformed Religion.

Yet, that I may do the former times right, I cannot but observe the Candor and
Ingenuity (acknowledged in this History) of the French Ministers of State at
the taking of Rochel, who, when some malicious enough (and most likely the
Bishop of Mande, employed in the Siege, and others of his Order in France, who
never consult truth, but worldly advantage) would have had it assigned in the
Kings Declaration as a reason of his taking up Arms, that the Rochellers did
not only call in the English, but also gave themselves up to them; the then
Chancellor caused the Registers of the Mayor and Council of Rochel, the
Memorials and Instructions given by them to their Deputies sent into England,
and the Treaties made by them with that King, to be all exactly perused and
examined, and finding that the said Instructions and Treaties had been always
made with a reserve of the fidelity due to the Crown, he would not suffer
anything of that nature to be inserted in the Kings Declaration, because it did
not appear to be true; a piece of honest Morality little practiced in these
days in France, some Men there having now no other Politics than little
tricks, besides lying and dissembling (all easily seen through) for which they
would be thought great Statists; but Honesty, as King James (who knew enough)
used to say, is the best Policy. And to give Richelieu (a Person of vast
abilities and clear Parts) his due; His treating with the Rochellers in their
greatest distress, seems to have been with more moderation, sincerity, and
plainness than is in this Age common or usual among them.

And now by comparing the present French Kings Persecution of his Reformed
Subjects, with his former Declarations, confirming and making perpetual and
irrrevocable all Edicts and Lawsmade for their Liberty and Security in the
exercise of their Religion, as a reward for their acknowledged fidelity and
good service, may and ought to be observed by Protestants how little the Faith
and Laws of Popish Princes are to be relied upon, especially in matters of
Religion.

The Contents of this Book.
I. THE Duke of Buckingham's expedition for the Isle of Ree, and his taking of
it.

II. The Dukes inviting the Rochellers by his Agent Mr. Baker to accept of his
assistance, and join Arms with him, and his Manifest delivered to them in the
Name of the King of England.

III. The Dukes being forced to quit the Isle of Ree and return for England.

IV. The Rochellers Negotiations by their Deputies in England with that King,
sometimes alone, and sometime in Council, and their several Conferences with
the King and Duke.

V. The King of England and the Rochellers Letters one to another, and the
Treaty made with the King, with several excellent and pressing Harangues made
by their Deputies to the King.

VI. The Earl of Denby's ineffectual Voyage to Rochel with a Naval Fleet, and
his Return.

VII. The Earl of Lindsey's Voyage with a might Naval Strength to Rochel, and
returning without attempting any thing, as this History says.

VIII. The miraculous patience in the Rochellers, without the least murmuring
under a not to be paralleled Famine.

IX. The Treaty for Rendition of the City made with Cardinal Richelieu.

X. The Edict of Nantes given by Henry IV. of France to those of the Reformed
Religion, together with his supplementary Articles for their security and equal
liberty with the Papists.

XI. The Declarations of Henry IV. and of the present King Louis XIV reciting
those of his Father Louis XIII. making all the Laws in savor of the
Protestants perpetual and irrevocable, with several Orders of Council
confirming the said Edictrand Arcles.

1627. July. A JOURNAL OF THE LAST SIEGE of the CITY OF ROCHEL: Begun the 20.
of July 1627.
THe Naval Army of the King of Great Britain, commanded by the Duke of
Buckingham, High-Admiral of England, appeared first to us upon Tuesday, the
20th of July, 1627. betwixt Eight and Nine in the morning, to the number of
Eighteen, or Twenty Sail: they were then believed to be Dunkirkers, lying in
wait for a Fleet of Hollanders, laden with Salt, which lay in the Road a la
Palisse, and before S. Martins, (the Principal Town of the Isle of Re) and
ready to set sail for Holland: Upon their nearer approach, they were suspected
to be English, and Sixty or Eighty Sail in number; but of this we were out of
doubt, when coming before the Fort La Pree, they saluted it 1627. July.
fiercely with Cannon-shot, which they continued that day, and the next, coming
to Anchor a la Palisse, before the Point of Sablanceau, one of the Extremities
in the Isle of Re, on that side next Rochel.

On Wednesday the 21. the Rochellers kept a Fast; and betwixt Sermons there
arrived in a Shallop (from the Duke of Buckingham) at the Chain, (which is the
entrance by Sea into the City) an English Gentleman, called Baker, desiring to
speak with the Mayor (for so the Chief Magistrate was called) and to his
Council; who having notice thereof, sent the Sieur Prou Sheriff, and Symond
Theuinine Advocate, to acquaint him that they were in their Churches at their
Devotions in the Celebration of a Fast, and could not that day give him
Audience; upon which he returned not a little discontented.

The 22. between Nine and Ten in the morning, the Duke of Soubize (followed by
Mr. Baker, Agent for the Duke of Buckingham) came to the Gate of S. Nicholas,
desiring entrance into the City: The Guard, before the admitting of him,
acquainting the Mayor therewith, he immediately repaired thither; and sinding
him betwixt the two Gates, remonstrated to him the consequence of his coming
into the City; entreating of him, if he desired the good and Conservation of
Rochel, and the Church of France, to return to the Duke of Buckingham; but the
old Duchess of Rohan, his Mother (who was some Months before retired hither)
coming to meet her Son, after Salutations and Embraces, took him by the hand,
saying with a loud voice, (that she might be heard by the Mayor, and the
multitude that were there) My Son, come 1627. July. see your Sister, who is
very sick: At which words, without demanding leave of the Mayor, (who found
himself surprised, and durst not openly and by force oppose him) he went into
the City with her, as did also Mr. Baker, who demanding to be heard in Council,
which was held after Dinner, he made this Speech, as follows:

Gentlemen,
I am sent by my Lord, the Duke of Buckingham, High-Admiral of England, to
declare to you the Reasons for which (by the Command of the King my Master) he
is come to the place where he now is, and in sight of you, accompanied with a
Fleet of Ships laden with Soldiers, Artillery, and Ammunition, ready to make a
descent, if occasion require.

It is sufficiently known to the World, how the King of Great Britain, our
Master, having Personally by an Adventure very rare, and by a Prudence
exceeding much his Age, discovered before, and since his coming to the Crown,
the danger ready to fall upon him, and the rest of Christendom, by the
Ambition, Fraud, and Power of the House of Austria, has used all industry to
prevent this danger; and that not only by his own Forces, but also by those of
his Allies: to which Resolution, as he has been pressed by almost all Princes
and Estates of Christendom; so none has done it with more vehemence and
efficacy than the French King, his Brother-in-law, and his Ministers, not only
by Arguments, but also by Promises of Union and Assistance in that Common Cause.

And to conserve this Mutual Interest against a Common Enemy, or suspected
Friend, was the reason why the King our Master has more desired 1627. July.
the Amity and Alliance of France, than of all the World besides, hoping by this
means to have the Power to divert the thoughts of this Great King from the
ruin of his best Subjects, (those of the Reformed Religion) and humbling the
true Enemies of his Estate, who keeps from him so many brave Provinces and
Kingdoms, possessed by his Predecessors. In the prosecution of which Design, he
was willing to have sacrificed all his Interest for Common Good, and securing
of Christendom.

But his Majesty has found by too dear experience, that being engaged in a War
with Spain, he did not only not receive the favor and assistance of France,
which with reason he might have expected, but by expecting it, received more
prejudice and hindrances than from Spain it self; and the reason hereof is
most apparent, for the grand design of this Estate is to take the advantage of
the Engagement of the King our Master with Spain, to ruin and extirpate at the
same time those of the Reformed Religion in France; not that his Majesty will
believe that this proceeds from the French King his Brother-in-law, or the
Queen his Mother, being so great Princes, and so nearly Allied to him; but you,
Gentlemen, know better than we the Powerful Influences that the Jesuits and
Spanish Faction have upon the Councils of France; which are said to be so
strong, that even with a high-hand Affairs are often carried against the King
himself; and by the force of this Faction proceeded the refusal of a passage to
Mansfields Army (raised and furnished in England, 1624.) at the very instant of
their departure, contrary to a Solemn Article 1627. July. agreed upon with the
French King for their passage; by which refusal, the Liberty of Germany has
been betrayed, and twelve thousand English near totally destroyed.

The King our Master having interposed his Ambassadors for appeasing the last
Wars against those of the Religion, and (with the consent of the French King
himself) becoming Guarrantee for the Peace; and that those of the Religion were
willing to submit to harder terms than at that time (their Condition
considered) they needed to have done, in hopes that the designs of this Estate
would turn against their Common Enemies in Italy; by the Power of this Faction,
it is nevertheless come to pass, that not only the Confederates of the King in
Italy have been abandoned, but the Arms employed there, have since been made
use of to reduce you to the extremity of Poverty and Famine; of which I need
not say more, than that the Complaints of this City, and all the Body of the
Reformed Religion do still continue, the Dukes of Rohan and Soubize having
represented them to the King our Master. Finally, when this Faction perceived
that all was to no purpose, without prohibiting this City all Trade to Sea,
under pretext of an Imaginary Society of Commerce, they have built a number of
Ships of War; but doubting that it would be sufficient to their design to
fortify themselves at Sea, without at the same time weakening there the King
our Master, by an unexampled and unheard of Injustice, in the midst of a full
and perfect Peace, and at a time when the King our Master was deeply engaged in
War, by whch the Assurance and Riches of France increased, they 1627. July.
made seizure of 120 Ships of his Subjects, with Artillery, Merchandise, and
Mariners; and what other design could they have in it, than to assure
themselves of the ruin of this City.

For these Reasons alleged, and many other of the same nature, the King our
Master, the most Religious and Pious Prince in the World, setting aside all
other Respects than that of his Conscience, has a Sympathy of your Sufferings,
and his own Honor; and finding himself obliged by Promise to procure the
accomplishment of the Articles agreed upon, especially being invited thereunto
by my Lords, the Dukes of Rohan and Soubize, in the Name of the whole Body of
the Reformed Religion, he has therefore sent hither my Lord, the Duke of
Buckingham, who has given me in Charge, to make you an Offer in his Name, of a
powerful assistance, as well by Land as Sea (in case you resolve to accept of
it) for redeeming your Liberty, by joining with you in an actual War, which he
will do upon such Conditions, as you your selves, Gentlemen, and all the World
shall acknowledge, that the King our Master has no Eye to his own advantage,
but vour good, the vindication of his Honor, and discharge of his Conscience:
for his Majesty is far from pursuing any Demands or Pretensions of his own, or
to invade the Territories of the French King, his Brother, with whom he desires
to come to a perfect Union, so it may be accompanied with the assurance of
those in France, who make Profession of the same Religion with himself.

If it be demanded, how it comes that the King of Great Britain offers at this
time Succors to 1627. July. those of the Reformed Religion, and this City,
when being formerly earnestly solicited to it, he would not hearken thereunto;
I answer, that the King at that time was not obliged by Promise to take care
that the Articles agreed upon by the last Peace were observed; besides, that
then the Treaties between these two Kingdoms were in their Vigor and
Reputation; and that the King our Master had hopes to be as beneficial to you
by his Intercession, as by his Arms; for he well understands, that the Church
of God is our true Common Country, and therefore has been very careful in all
his Seizures by Sea and Land, to preserve those of the Reformed Religion, and
especially this City, from all damage.

But at present the proceedings of this Estate has put his Majesty out of
doubt, as to their designs, and left him at liberty, by having trodden under
feet the Reverence due to Public Treaties; and therefore, if you refuse this
opportunity, you will hereafter seek it in vain; and in such case, my Lord the
Duke of Buckingham has commanded me to make a Solemn Protestation, before God
and Man, that he holds the King his Master in Honor and Conscience fully
acquitted from all Engagements, and his Excellency will dispose himself to
execute the other Commands which he has in Charge. God has in mercy given you
the opportunity of making choice of Good or Evil, and I have it in Command to
press you to a ready Answer and Declaration, as to which of the two you will
make choice of: You ought to consider, that you may at present resolve clearly
hereof, as well as with suspention; and that, as to us, each hour of delay will
be very prejudicial.

1627. July. After this, he presented the Duke of Buckgham's own Manifest,
Signed by himself, containing a Declaration of the King of Great Britain's
Intentions, as follows.

WHat share the Kings of Great Britain have always taken in the Affairs of the
Reformed Church of this Kingdom, and with how much Zeal and Care they have
labored their good, is most eminently known to all, the Examples thereof
having been as ordinary as the occasions. The present King, my most honored
Lord and Master, had not come therein behind his Predecessors, if his honest
and laudable designs, for their good and advantage, had not been perverted to
their ruin, by those whose interest it was to have accomplished them: What
Advantages has he refused? what Parties has he not pursued, that by his
Alliance with France he might work the more profitably and powerfully for the
restitution of the Churches to their Ancient Liberty and Splendor? And how
could we have expected less from so strict an Alliance, and so many reiterated
Promises from the Mouth of a Great Prince, than Effects truly Royal and
suitable to his Grandeur; but the Issue is so far short of that, that his
Majesty, instead of obtaining freedom and security for the Churches, and a
general Peace to France, by the reconciliation of those who breathe after
nothing but all sort of obedience to their King, under the enjoyment of Edicts,
has met with nothing but the contrary, some having prevailed by the interest
they had in those of the Religion, to the deceiving of them, and that not only
by dividing them from him, but also by rendering him, if not odious, at least
under suspect with them, in perverting the means that he ordained for 1627.
July. their good, to an end wholly contrary. Witness the English Vessels, not
designed for the extirpation of those of the Religion, express promises having
been given not to make use of them to their prejudice, and yet nevertheless
they were carried to Rochel, and employed ^n the last Naval Fight against them.

What can any expect from so puissant a King as the King my Master, for being
publicly illuded, than a Resentment equal and proportionable to the injury
done him: But he has had Patience beyond Patience; and whilst he could hope
to relieve the Churches by other means, he has not had recourse to Arms, until
being made instrumental of the last Peace upon Conditions disadvantagious
enough, which had never been accepted of without the intercession of His
Majesty, who interposed His Credit and Interest with the Churches, even with
Menaces, for procuring their agreeing to them; for salving the honor of the
most Christian King, and giving him assurance, not only of the observance of
them, but also of the melioration of the said Conditions, whilst he should
remain Caution toward the Churches; but what has been the issue of all this,
nothing but the abuse of his Bounty, and that which His Majesty thought would
have been a Remedy to all their Evils, has it not carried the Churches to
almost the last point of ruin? So little it fails, that by the continuation of
the Fort before Rochel, (the demolishing whereof was promised) by the violence
of the Soldiers, and Garrisons in the said Fort and Isles, as well toward the
Inhabitants of the said City, as Strangers, who, instead of being entirely
withdrawn, have been daily augmented, and other Forts built, and, by the
Commissioners remaining in the said City beyond the time agreed, Cabals have
been held; by the means of which Divisions have crept in amongst the
Inhabitants, to 1627. July. the opening the Gates to Neighbor Troops, and
byother breaches of the Peace, the said City, and in it the whole Church, has
wanted little of drawing its last Breath; and nevertheless his Majesty has
contained himself, and not opposed such great Injuries and Violations of Faith,
more than by Complaints and Intercessions, until having had certain advise
(confirmed by intercepted Letters) of the great preparations that the most
Christian King made for falling upon Rochel; and then his Majesty could not do
less than vindicate his honor, by a ready taking Arms against those that had
rendered him as a Confederate in their Frauds and Treachery, and to give
Testimony of the Integrity and Zeal which he has always had to the
establishment of the Churches, which shall ever be most dear and precious to
him above all other things; and that if any shall question whether this is the
only end of his Arms, and not rather some particular interest, let him consider
the Circumstances of time, and dispositions of his Affairs, and they cannot
believe that the King, my Master, has any design upon France, or can have
thoughts of Conquest in a time so disadvantagious. That he has at present for
Enemy one of the most puissant Princes in the World; and that if that had been
his design, the Troops which he has on Foot, upon the same account as these,
ready to cross the Seas, if the Churches have need thereof, are but a handful
of people in comparison of those that are necessary for the Execution of so
high an Enterprise.

Who will not judge rather (as the truth is) that these Troops are but
Auxiliaries, and that the end of them is not other than the sole good of the
Churches, which for many Reasons, and some important Considerations, His
Majesty finds himself obliged before God and Man to protect and succor. And if
it shall be alleged that the King, my Master, takes up Arms upon 1627. July.
any other Consideration, as in revenge for detaining and seizing of the Ships,
Goods, and Effects of his Subjects at Bordeaux, and other places of this
Kingdom, contrary to the manifest Agreement and Treaty between the two Crowns,
(which is express in this point) and to the irreparable prejudice: Nay even to
the total ruin of Commerce, (in the rupture of which the poor people of this
Realm, who cannot retail their Commodities, do not only groan under the Burden
of so many Taxes and Impositions, but also under the necessities of Life it
self) insomuch, that the apprehension that the King, my Master, has of the
most Christian King's growing Greatness at Sea, has moved him to this
preparation, for the preventing his increasing there, especially being
constrained thereunto, as having no hopes of accommodating Affairs. The Answer
unto all is this, That whoever will examine the Arrests, Seizures, and Prizes
taken on one side and the other, will find that my Master, and his Subjects,
have hitherto reaped much more profit by the Rupture, than the French King and
his Subjects have done.

But Secondly, The King, my Master, does so little value the Increase of the
French King's Power at Sea, that when he shall but think fit to give Letters of
Mart to his Subjects, he can, by them alone, dissipate all his vain and feeble
Attempts, without employing to that end a Royal Navy. And Lastly, If it be said
that the King, my Master, has been necessitated to this Arming, as having no
hopes of an Accommodation, the contrary will be sufficiently manifest, to all
that will consider the many Solicitations that have been made, as well by
their own proper Ministers, as by the Mininisters of other Princes, by their
Instigation, to the King, my Master, for an Accommodation; and all this
aforesaid bears Testimony for the King my Master, 1627. July. that he has not
been constrained to take Arms for any particular Interest, but solely for
defense of the Churches, for whose Liberty and Security he remains responsable.
And yet, nevertheless, there are some who are so bold as to insinnate, that his
Majesty has a particular Design, and that he makes use of Religion as a
Pretense for forming a Party, that by the means of their Conjunction with his,
he may carry on his Design as he has projected it: But our Religion teaches
us altogether other things; and the Piety of the King, my Master, in which he
yields to no man living, will never permit it in him. His Design is the
Establishment of the Churches, his Interest is their good, his end their
contentment; and this being so, if the Churches desire not his assistance, the
beating of these Drums, and displaying of these Colors, shall cease, and the
noise of War be buried in silence, for that they appear not otherwise than for
your sake, as they have been advanced for your service.

Given a-Board the Admiral, Wednesday July 21. 1627. Signed. BVCKINGHAM.

JVLY.
This Manifest being read, the Mayor and his Counsel made answer, that they
should advise upon it; and nominate some to confer with him, which they did,
making choice of eight of the body of the City, or Common Council; Eight
Freemen and two Ministers to hear the business more particularly: who having
Consulted the Duke of Soubize, and digested all the affair, made report thereof
to the Council.

1627. July. The same day as these things were transacted at Rochel, being the
22d. the Duke of Buckingham approached with part of his Army to the point of
Sablanceau, and under the favor of his Cann on shooting without ceasing, he
made a descent of his troops. Monsieur Thoiras who expected him there with 200
Horse, and 8 or 900 Foot, used all his endeavors to hinder his descent, and
put the English into such confusion, that a great Number were drowned:
Nevertheless the Duke continuing his descent in such sort, that he landed near
3000 men; Monsieur Thoiras was forced to retreat, and the rather because the
ships shot upon him with advantage, which obliged him to retire to the next
Town called Lafflot, and from thence to the Borough of St. Martins, leaving
upon the place about 300 foot, and of the horse about 80 among which was found;
his Brother Monsieur Restingliers the Baron Navails, Chantail, and Tablier; for
which, as also, for the Officers of the Infantrie, he sent the next morning by
a Trumpiter, desiring them of the Duke of Buckingham, who granted his request:
And as to the English, this action cost them near 500 men; but above all
Monsieur Blancard, a Gentleman of rare merit, who had negotiated all this
affair, and was as the soul that moves all the members, insomuch that the
English losing him, they found themselves Stripped of their Principal
Counselor.

The 23d the Council assembled in the City-Hall to hear the report of their
Commissioners; It being ordered formerly, that nothing of importance should be
resolved upon, which concerned the Church in general, without taking time for
knowing their Advice: For acquainting the Duke of Buckingham 1627. July.
herewith they appointed the Sieurs Isaac Blandin, Sieur of Herbiers for the
Corporation, or Counsel of the City, Gayer Junior for the body of the Citizens,
and conformable to this resolution the next morning being the 24. Herbiers and
Gayer with the Duke of Saubize, and Mr. Baker, waited upon the Duke in the Isle
of Ree.

At this same time it was proposed in Council by some of Rochel, as also of
Maran, to bring upon their own adventure, a great quantity of Corn and Wine
into Rochel conditionally, that in case the City had not need thereof for the
Public, it should be allowed them to sell at reasonable rates to particular
Persons, and in case it should happen that neither the one nor the other, had
by reason of a Peace any need, they should transport them whither they should
think fit. This proposition was very pleasing to the greatest part of the
Council, and judged most profitable for the public good of the City, but some
of the principal, who were more concerned in their particular Interest, than
was the generality of the people; because they had some Wine to sell, and hoped
for a good Vintage, opposed the proposition as to Wines very strongly,
alleging that it would be the breach of the Privileges which their Ancestors
had religiously preserved from Father to Son, and by this means render the
Vines of the Government unprofitable, and so concluded that they should not
admit their offer save only as to Corn; The Merchants proposing, Remonstrated
hereupon that for two reasons they could not make this contract for Corn alone.
The one that they should lose by it without hopes of recompensing their loss,
otherwise than by Wine. Secondly, That if they should carry away their 1627.
July. Corn without buying Wine, the thing would be subject to suspicion, seeing
that in Holland, whither they pretended to send it, had more need of Wine than
Corn. In conclusion to engage the City they offered to pay a Crown Custom for
every Tun, but notwithstanding all that they could say, the interested
prevailed, alleging that the English being powerful at Sea, and near to them,
could every hour send them Corn, Wine, and other Provisions and Commodities,
more then they wanted, but this obstinate Counsel cost them dear in the end.

After the descent and Fight made by the Duke of Buckingham in the Isle of Ree,
three days passed without any attempt made by either party one upon the other,
only Monsieur Thoiras by little Skirmishes kept his enemies in breath, but
expecting another Fight, retired to the Borough of St. Martins, and from
thence into the Citadel with all that he was able to bring thither. The Duke of
Buckingham fortified and entrenched himself in the place where he made his
descent, as well because he had not the knowledge of the Country, as that he
dreaded the Forces of the Isle, which he feared were great, and gathering
together to fall upon his people, who had not well recovered their hardship at
Sea, and misfortunes at Land: Nevertheless in common opinion, if he had briskly
followed Monsieur Thoiras he had carried the Citadel at one of the Gates, which
was not finished, where ten or twelve men on breast might have entered, besides
that it was ill provided with Victuals and other necessaries, which during this
delay they carried day and night thither: and also industriously repaired the
weakest parts of the Fortifications.

1627. July. The 26th the Duke of Buckingham with his Armies of 7 or 8000 Foot,
and 100 Horse marched in Battle to St. Martins; which he possessed himself
off, and approaching with in half Musket shot of the Trenches and ditch of the
Citadel; did with great diligence in six days, finish his Batteries, and one
of them being upon the Haven of the Borough, put the assieged in great fear,
because it lay right upon their Mills, yet nevertheless they found means to
defend them.

Soon after the Duke of Buckingham's descent In the Isle of Re, particular
Citizens of Rochel being allured by gain, and the beauty of Jacobus's gold,
furnished his Army for their refreshment with all sorts of Provisions; which
they continued to do so long, until they left their own City unprovided of
Victuals.

Thursday the 29. it was debated in the Council whether they should send
deputies to complement the Duke of Angoulesme, who lay at Marans, a great
Borough, (about 10 or 12 English Miles from Rochel) many were against it;
least the English should thereby, be discouraged, and there upon leave their
Town as a prey to their enemies: But others on the contrary, said, that since
they had sentto the Duke of Buckingham Lieutenant to the King of England, with
more reason they ought to do the same to the Duke of Angoulesme, Lieutenant to
the King, their Sovereign; and that if it were for no other reason, then to
give him thanks, for that he had not committed any Act of Hostility against
their government: As also to beg leave of him for reaping, and gathering in
their Harvest* besides, that they might possibly gather from him that which
might serve to help forward the peace betwixt 1627. July. the two Kings, which
ought to be desired by them above all things, since, whatever the Event of the
War might be, Rochel would have cause of fear; from their own King, if he drive
out the English, who will consider them as having drawn them thither; and from
the English, should they remain Masters of the Isles, because thereby they
would have a Bit in their Mouths to curb them as they pleased, if peradventure
they did not totally Master them; and therefore it behoved them, whilst in the
beginning of the Difference, to endeavor to pacify it; and, by paying their
Respects to this Prince, they might open a way to it. In the end, after great
Contest, they resolved to send to him, and to that purpose named certain
Commissioners, on the behalf both of the Magistracy and Citizens; and on
Saturday, the last of the Month, they waited upon him at Maran, where he
received them with great Friendship, and sent them back on Monday following,
with Promises to suffer them to reap and gather in their Harvest, so long as
they remained good French, and not otherwise.

The 30th, the Sicur de Loudriere crossed the Sea, which is two or three hours
sail, from Rochel to the Isle of Re, with six or seven hundred men, to
strengthen the Duke of Buckingham; who some days after commanded all the
Papists of the Isle to retire to the Continent, and appointed them Ships to
carry them over; which he did from an Opinion, That they gave Intelligence to
the Citadel of all that passed in the English Army: Nevertheless he did not
oblige the Capuchins that were in St. Martins to leave their Convent, but
provided for their nourishment.

1627. August. AUGUST.
The 6th day of August the Mayor and Council sent Deputies to the Duke of
Buckingham, to desire him not to hinder any more the Vessels and Commodities
which would come from the Isle of Re, or other places, to Rochel; all which he
agreeed unto, and received them very kindly.

Tuesday the 10th, The Duke of Angoulesme came by break of day, with a Party of
Horse and Foot, to the Gates of Rochel, giving a very hot Alarm to the Town,
who immediately sent to him to assure him, That they were the Kings good
Servants, and had no hand in the coming of the English to the Isle of Re: As
also, That they were not in conjunction with them. He answered them amicably,
so that it was permitted to such of his Servants as would, to come into the
City, and buy what Commodities they pleased.

The same day, after Dinner, the said Duke went with the Sieur Marillot, and
Pompee Targon, Engineer, to view the point of Coureil, and all the Coast,
without having any shot made at them from the City, there not being yet any
Declaration of War on either side.

The 13th. The said Duke writ to the Mayor and Corporation of the City, That if
they should continue to assist the English, he would approach with his Army to
the Gates of their City: And as they were in deliberation thereof, he came the
next day to Estrce, la Moulinette, Bongrenne, and Coureille, his Army being
composed of some Regiments of Navarre, Chappes, la Bergerie, and a Moity of the
Regiments of Guards, with ten Cornets of Cavalry, and a good quantity of Cannon.

1627. August. At the same time he prohibited, thorough the whole Government
and Land of Aulnis, (for so the Country about Rochel is called) the carrying
into Rochel any Wares or Commodities, upon pain of Confiscation, and Corporal
Punishment; hindering also the Inhabitants of the City from gathering their
Harvest, which showed the Rochellers what they had to expect. They sent the
Sieurs Papin and de Fosse to the Duke of Buckingham, in the Isle of Re, to
desire him to send back the Sieur Loudriere, with the French he carried
thither, and obtained their Request of him.

The 15th, about two or three hours after Midnight, the English took a Bark
which came from the Citadel; of those that were in it some were made Prisoners,
others leaping into the Water were drowned; as amongst the rest, one Captain
Demoriciere of the Isle of Re.

The same night the Duke of Buckingham, having advice that they had but little
Water in the Citadel, and that they were furnished from a Well that was fifteen
or twenty Paces from one of their Half-Moons, to cut them off their supply from
thence, made an Attempt upon their Half Moon, but those that kept it behaved
themselves with so much resolution as made the English retire with loss; only
during this Attacque they employed some to poison the Well, by which they
incommoded very much the besieged.

The 16th, was carried to Rochel their King's Declaration, against all that
should join with the English. Upon which, the major part of the King's Officers
seeing, that though the Conjunction of the City with them was not yet declared,
it was nevertheless in effect done, they left 1627. August. the City, and
retired to Maran; whither the King soon after transferred the Court of Justice,
and gave his Letters Patents for the same; but those who remained, which were
seven in number, continued to administer Justice as former y.

The same day, with the Evening-tide, came into Rochel eight Barks or
Shalloopes from the Isle of Re, in which were the Sieur Loudriere, with the
Troops that he had carried thither.

The 19th. The Sieur Comminges, Captain of a Company of the Regiment of
Champaigne, and who, in the abscence of the Sieur Thoiras, commanded the Fort
Lewis, met with some Rochellers, when, after much discourse upon the Affairs of
the time, and the descent of the English in the Isle of Re, he remoustrated to
them, That if they would carry themselves as good and faithful Subjects to the
King, and seek his favor, they would have all sort of Contentment, which he
desired them to acquaint the Mayor and his Council with; of which report being
made, they sent Deputies to him at his Fort, and he afterward went to them in
the City, where he was heard by the Mayor and his Council, but not agreeing, he
returned without doing any thing. Being in the City he visited the Duchess of
Rohan, and reasoning with her about the succors of the English, he told her,
That the Wine-Harvest was not yet come, and that he would not wish them worse
Enemies to fight with than Grapes and new Wine, at which they then laughed, and
made slight of it.

The 20th. The Mayor and his Council observing how the Duke of Angoulesme made
the people work at the Moulinette, Bongrenne, and Coureille, for the raising of
Forts there, and according to advice 1627. August. they had received, were upon
the point of seizing of the Barrovere on the side of Tadon, which was the
Suburbs of Rochel, and within Musket Shot of the Port of S. Nicholas, to the
end to raise there also a Fort, and nearer, if they could be suffered. Those of
the City resolved to break his design, and hinder him from approaching nearer
on that side, by making one without the Gate of S. Nicholas, betwixt the two
Mills, which are about the half way between the Port, and the place of the
Barrovere: For this end, at eight of the Clock in the Evening, there went out
betwixt six or seven hundred Soldiers, and some Inhabitants, who wrought there
all night, placing so many Pipes and Barrels there, that by morning they were
in a condition of defense, and continued their working some days following
without his interrupting of them.

The 21. the Duke of Buckingham seeing the resolution of the Sieur Thoiras, and
the little hopes he had of forcing him otherwise than by Famine, made search
thoroughout the Isle for the Papists that were remaining in it, and brought
them before the Citadel, where the Sieur Thoiras received part thereof; but
refusing to receive the rest, they were carried over to the Main Land, and set
on shore to go whither they pleased.

In the same time some Soldiers coming out of the Citadel, reported to the
Duke of Buckingham, that Corn and Meal began to be scarce with the assieged,
that they were reduced to Bisquet and Horseflesh, besides, that the Soldiers
were greatly incommoded from the ill weather, and continual Rains; and that
they were contriving among themselves some Revolt.

1627. August. The 28. the Sieur Thoiras finding from day to day necessity
pressing him, and that he could not receive any news from the Main, sent three
Soldiers, each of them with a Packet of Letters, acquainting the Condition he
found himself in, who undertook to carry them: by Swimming, one of the three
got to Fort Lewis, another was drowned, and the third not being able to hold
out, rendered himself to the English, and gave them advice of all that passed
in the Citadel: The Duke of Buckingham understanding their condition, writ to
the Sieur Thoiras, endeavoring to show him his necessity, and persuade him to
render the Citadel, and all that he held in the Isle, into his hands, with
offers of very advantageous and honorable Conditions; but if he would hold out
until the last Extremity, he could not then hope for the same. To this Letter
the Sieur Thoiras made answer with great civility, yet telling him, that he was
not reduced to such straits as he believed; and some days were spent in
Complements, and friendly Correspondence, by Gentlemen sent with Presents from
one to the other, which made the Rochellers suspect the Duke, and from
thenceforward to despair of taking the Citadel.

Nevertheless, the Duke gave not over, endeavoring by all means possible, to
make himself Master of the place; and to come the sooner to his end, fitted out
upon the Water a floating Machine, which played continually with eight Cannon;
and by the means of Pinnaces and Barks equipped for War, endeavored to prevent
all succors of Men and Victuals; and further, made a Pallasade of Ship-Masts,
and great Cables, kept above water by Vessels, and betwixt the Vessels by Pipes
and 1627. September. Barks, and sunk before them many Ships full of Stones; and
indeed, he omitted nothing that might entirely shut up that side, which
according to the report of several Soldiers, made the Sieur Thoiras and his
people very uneasy.

SEPTEMBER.
Tuesday the 7th of September, twelve or thirteen Pinnaces, laden with all sort
of Provisions, entered the Citadel, having passed the English Army, Pinnaces,
Shalloops, and Pallasades, which by Storms the night before had been half
broken and bruised; which continuing, obliged those in the Ships of the
Pallasade to cut their Cables which tied them together, which happened well to
those in the Citadel, who were not able to do any more, and who were so
pressed, that had this Succor staid three days longer, the Sieur Thoiras must
have been forced to have delivered the place: but as this was matter of great
joy to them, so it was of grief and sorrow to the Duke of Buckingham, who by
break of day discharged his Choler by the Mouth of his Cannon upon the Citadel
and Pinnaces.

Friday the 10th, about four or five in the Evening, the Rochellers observing
the working at a place over against the two Mills, fired their Cannon upon
them, the Fort Lewis answering them in the same kind, which crossed the City,
but without doing any harm; so that by this mutual thundering, they declared
War one against the other.

The same day, about eight in the Evening, the Fort Lewis fired three
Cannon-shot with Fire-Bullets, one of which fell in a House full of Hay and
1627. September. Straw, near a Stack of green Wood, which was entirely burnt: At
first this new Invention astonished them much, and obliged them to seek remedy
against the like.

The 11th, the Council sitting in the Town Hall, and the whole Body assembled,
Commissioners were ordered to consider upon conditions for the Minting of
Money; as also the Mayor and Council were desired to publish a Manifest, and to
see to the Articles of Conjunction with the Duke of Buckingham.

The 12th, the Duke of Buckingham received a Recruit of 2500, by seven Ships
and four Flutes. The same day the English took two Barks laden with Provisions
and Munition of War for the Citadel, and gave Chase to a Ship which followed
the Bark, and pursued her unto the Stuckets or Pallasades.

The 13th, in the Evening, the Rochellers observing some at work near the House
of Coureille, for the raising of a Fort, they played their Cannon upon them.
The same day, in the Evening, came from the Isle of Re to Rochel the Sieurs
Ashburnham for the Duke of Buckingham, and St. Surin for the Sieur Thoiras, in
their way to the King at Paris, from whence Ashburnham (after having conferred
with his Majesty) was to go to England, and began their journey the next day:
And this was the effect of the Communications beforementioned, when all
believed, the Duke being cheated by St. Surin, he would find this Voyage to no
purpose, as it proved.

The 15th, Monsieur the King's only Brother arrived at Estre, and skirmished
his Cavalry with those of Rochel, who after some small loss gave 1627. September.
way to those of Monsieur, who pursued them with Horse and Foot unto the very
Ditch of the Fort Tadon; but being too far advanced, he lost some of his
Cavalry, as well as Infantry; of the first, the Sieur Maricour; of the latter,
one Sariant, and ten or twelve Soldiers, whereas the Rochellers loss was no
more than one Citizen, and three or four Soldiers, besides some wounded. The
same day, about eight in the Evening, they from the Fort Lewis made five shot
with Fire-Bullets upon the City; the Fire took effect in a House near the
Townhouse, where there were Fagots, and the cuttings of Vines, but it was
extinguished without burning more than the Roof, and part of the Wood.

The 16th, the Mayor made Proclamation thorough all the Quarters of the City,
commanding every one to remove out of their high Chambers, and Garrets, Wood,
Hay, Straw, and whatever was subject to fire, and to keep there Oxe-hides,
Pales and Tubs of Water, as well to quench the Fire, as to throw upon the
Bullets.

The 17th, a Party of Cavalry sallying out of Rochel some days before upon
Adventure, brought into the City a Courrier which the King had sent with a
Packet to the Duke of Angoulesme, with many Letters for particular Persons in
the Army, by which was discovered the King's design of shutting in the
Rochellers by Sea with a Bank, and a Naval Army, and enclosing them on the
Land-side with a strong Line of Communication; and so to gain them by hunger,
rather than force, according to the Tenure of that to the Duke of Angoulesme,
which is as follows.

1627. September. The French Kings Letter to the Duke of Angoulesme, in the Camp
before Rochel.
COusin, by your dispatch of the seventh of this Month, you have rendered me a
particular Account of the Employment you have given the Troops of my Army since
your Arrival there, of the Quarters that you have taken about my City of
Rochel, of the Works that you have begun, of those that are made, of the men
necessary for keeping and preserving them, and opposing the Diversions that the
English by Salleys from the Isle of Re may make on the Coast of Poictou and
Xaintongue. I understand your advice and sentement, as well for shutting the
Channel of the Port of Rochel, as relieving of the Isle of Re; of which having
well considered, and of what will be best for my service, after having
testified to you the content I receive in seeing so exact, judicious, and
faithful an information from that side, and the good liking that I have of the
diligence and good Conduct that you have remarkably showed for the advancing my
service, I will tell you, that I approve the Quarters that you have taken for
my Army, and do desire that for the maintaining them with security, that you
order the Captains who command there to retrench, and fortify themselves well,
and to keep good Guards; that you continue the order that you have established
there for preventing the relieving of Rochel by Land with any sort of Victuals,
and do it with extraordinary care and security, without permitting, upon any
cause or pretext whatsoever, any contradiction, nor show 1627. September. any
favor to such as shall be so bold as to do contrary hereunto; for in this
point consists one of the principal Effects of my Army, by which the factious
Rochellers may be chastis'd for their Rebellion, and be constrained to submit
themselves to the obedience that they owe me.

I approve also of the Forts and Retrenchments that you are upon at Bongrenne
and Moulinette. I will believe that they are near (if not before this done to
your hands) in defense; it behooves us to preserve these two Posts, since they
are judged necessary: but except you determine making at present the Fort that
you have proposed betwixt the Port de Coinge and la Fons, for to ^^^ off the
Current of the Water which goes to Rochel, or turn to some other Enterprise, I
judge it more to purpose that you employ all your labor to the building of the
Fort that you have formerly been ordered, over against the Fort Lewis, to the
end that it be with all speed in such defense, that neither the Rochellers, nor
the English, can hinder the maintaining it, with a number of men necessary for
its defense.

I know, That for the accomplishing these Designs, for conserving your Posts,
for hindering on the Land-side the going in and out of Rochel, and provide
against diversions, it is necessary to maintain a good Army, well paid: That
which you propose to me to have about Rochel ought to be 10000 Foot, and 1000
Horse effective, which will be done when the Orders that I have formerly given
for the marching and levying of Soldiers have been executed; as you may see by
the numbers of the Regiments of Foot that I have sent you.

1627. September. As to the diversions the Enemy may make on the Coasts of
Poictou and Zaintongue, I make reckoning that my Naval Army, which shall be
laiden with a good number of Infantry, will serve for succor and security
against all the descents which they can make on the Coasts of my Kingdom. I
cannot believe that the English, with the few men that the Siege of the Citadel
of Re has left them, dare make a descent, having no Cavalry, nor undertake a
new Fortification at this Season; that which is most to be feared, is the
surprising of some place, for which cause I find it necessary speedily to
augment Garrisons, Victuals, and Ammunition, in all those places that you shall
inform me have need, on the Coasts of Poictou and Zaintongue.

I will not now answer the several ways that are propounded for shutting up and
ruining the Port of Rochel, because it is not that which at present is most
pressing. In reference to the relieving of the Citadel of Re, and the Fort of
Pree, as I have cause to promise my self good success there, from the succor
of 13 Pinnaces arrived in the Citadel, the advice whereof is confirmed to me by
your last Letter; so (I presume) to employ the means which have been a long
time in several places preparing for the refreshing of the said Forts, will I
think be sufficient, which I refer to the Bishop of Mande to explain more
particularly in my Name, according to the Charge that I have therein given him.
Considering that so long as the Citadel of S. Martin can hold, there is no fear
of the Fort of Pree; I see no necessity of sending men thither, though there
may be of Victuals and Munition, after that the Citadel shall be sufficiently
provided.

1627. September. You may judge better than any one, how many of the Regiments
designed for the Army are necessary for your guard, and the advancement of your
work, and therefore I desire you to send to them in all places to raise them
with all diligence.

I have well considered the Retinue that you say the Rochellers, (upon the
Declaration of War,) are resolved to keep; and how you acknowledge it to
proceed more from fear than love or respect; and that you will not spare to act
effectually against them, as if they had already declared; all which I approve,
since their actions and deportment do sufficiently show their evil intentions,
and therefore you may permit those of the Fort Lewis to work upon their
Fortifications, since you think fit to make some new ones.

I am pleased that you have sent some Cavalry to my Brother the Duke of
Orleance, and doubt whether he will be with the Army before this Answer; if he
be, fail not to communicate this to him, to the end that he be informed of my
intentions.

Furthermore, I commend the care that you have taken to dissipate that Assembly
of Nobility at du Parcg's House, that you have seized the Houses of de la
Rolandiere and Moric, and that you have secured the other Gentlemen by good
Caution: Continue to make my Letters and Declarations of this kind be well
observed: I hold it fit to give the Fruits which may be gathered in the
neighboring Villages, belonging only to them that have gone contrary to my
Declaration, to my Army (viz.) to the Captains and Officers, which serving in
my Troops shall be judged worthy of such gratifications. Above all I pray God,
1627. September. my Cousin, to take you into his holy protection.

Writ at S. German in Lay, the 13th of September, 1627. Signed Louys,
and underneath, Philipeaux.


There was also in this Packet the Donation of the Office of Seneschal, or
Chief Justice, of the City of Rochel, to the Duke of Angoulesme, with the
confiscation of all the Goods, moveable and immovable, of the Sieurs of Brille
Baudet, and of Angoulins, in form as follows.

THIS day being the 11. of September, 1627. the King being at S. Germain in
Lay, taking into consideration the great and commendable services that the
Duke of Angoulesme, Peer of France, has done him in his Army of Aulins, and
the great Expense that he is obliged to be at there, his Majesty has granted
to him, and does hereby give him the Office of Chief Justice of the City of
Rochel, being vacant by the forfeiture of the Sieur Loudriere, who is in
possession thereof, but is attainted of High Treason, for bearing Arms, and
joining with the English, contrary to the service of his Majesty and this
Estate, and have also given to the said Duke all the Goods, moveable and
immovable, belonging to the Sieurs Brille Baudet and Angoulins, as confiscated
for the same Crime, and being at present in the City of Rochel. In Witness of
which, his Majesty has commanded me to expedite to the said Duke all Letters
and Provisions necessary, and in the mean time to dispatch this present Brief,
which he has signed with 1627. September. his own hard. Contre-signed by me,
Counselor in his Council of State, and Secretary of his Commands.

LEWYS,
beneath Philipeaux.

The 19. the English took a Barque laden with Provisions and Munition for the
Citadel, where was the Son of the Sieur Saugion, as they had some days before
taken, and sunk many others which steered the same course.

The 22. there went from Rochel seven sail to go to Re, upon whom was made from
the Fort Lewis many great shot, but without touching them: In the one was the
Sieurs John Gittou Sheriff, formerly Admiral of Rochel, and David Fosse
Advocate, Deputies from the Mayor and his Counsel to the Duke of Buckingham, to
carry him the Articles drawn for their conjunction with him.

The 22. betwixt two and three, before day, arrived in the Citadel a Barque of
about 30 Tuns, laden with all sorts of Provisions, Munition, and Refreshments,
upon which the English made many unprofitable Cannon-shot.

The 23d. The Sieur Burrowes, Lieutenant General to the Duke of Buckingham, was
killed in the Trenches; which, together with the entry of the said Barque, did
so irritate the said Duke, that he shot all the morning long, as well from Land
as from his Ships, upon the Citadel and Barque: During this Thundering a fatal
shot carried out of this World the Sieur Montferrior, Brother of Monsieur
Thoiras, in such sort, that this day was a day of great loss to each Party; but
above all to 1627. September. the English, in that Monsieur Burrowes was the only
man of experience that they had.

The 27th. The Sieur Ashburneham, who was gone to Paris with the Sieur St.
Surin arrived at Rochel with St. Surin in their way to Re, who immediately
after his arrival there, was by the Duke sent Prisoner to one of his Frigates,
where was already the Son of Sieur Saugeon, because, as he said, of the ill
usage that Mr. Ashburnham had met with, but it was believed in revenge, for
having been baffled by him.

The same day, about three in the Afternoon, they began Prayers in the Temple
of S. John, to continue every day until the Peace was made.

The 30th, being Thursday, the English took in the Evening three Barks laden
with Victuals and Munition for the Citadel, sunk three others, forced ashore
two at Aiguillion, and put the rest to flight, in such sort, that at this time
there got none into the Citadel.

OCTOBER.
October, the Sieur Thoiras finding himself pressed with all Extremity, and
seeing that all his people, as well Soldiers as Volunteers, murmured against
him, and made Cabals for treating with the Duke of Buckingham, and to deliver
the place to him, to the end to content them, and to gain time, and to amuse
the English, he sent the Sieur Montault to the Duke, to know what Conditions he
would offer him. The Duke deferring the Treaty until the next morning, after
many goings and comings, it was in the end agreed, that if the Citadel was not
relieved by the eighth of the Month, (which was High Water) that both it and
the Fort de la Pre should be put into his hands.

1627. October. Thursday night, before Friday the 8th of October, designed for
the Rendition, there went forty Barks and Pinnaces from Ollorne* laden with
Men, and all sorts of Provisions, for the Belly as well as war, whereof 29 got
happily into the Citadel, by the favor of a very great North-East-Wind, which
blew so hard, and mastered the English Army in such sort, that it could not
hinder their passing; save that there were four sunk to the ground by
Cannon-shot. This succor came very seasonably to the Sieur Thoiras; because in
the morning, according to Conditions, he ought to have rendered the Citadel.

The Duke of Buckingham on the contrary was so discontented and discouraged,
that, having discharged his Choler with multitude of Cannon-shot, which broke
in pieces fifteen or twenty of these Pinnaces, (but already un-laden) two or
three days after he took away his Cannon from his Batteries, and Shipped them,
with part of his Men, having taken a resolution to raise the Siege, and to
return for England; but the Duke of Soubize, who was near to him, as also the
Deputies of Rochel, and the Inhabitants of the Isle, entreating him very
earnestly not to abandon them, and offering him whatever was in their Power,
which prevailed with him to suspend this Deliberation until the Arrival of
Sieur Dolbiere, who he had sent into England, and who put him in hopes of a
succor of 6000 Men, which the Earl of Holland would in a few days bring to
him, which in some kind restored his Courage, and made him resolve to continue
the Siege.

The 12th. The King arrived, before Rochel, and took his Quarters at Estre, he
needed not to enquire 1627. October. whether the Cannon and Muskets made not
good Music through all the Quarters of the Army for his welcome.

The 13th. There were read, in the Council assembled in the Town Hall, Letters
from the Duke of Rohan, writ the 9th and 10th of September, from Nisines to
those at Rochel, by which he advised them of the Conjunction, made by those of
Languedoc with them and the English.

The 17th. Seven Barks, laden with Victuals and Munition, with some Companies
of Soldiers, got into the Fort Pree, without any Impediment; but the same day
a Pinace going out from the Citadel, was taken by the English Shalloops, who
slew the Son of Richardiere, who commanded there, and most part of his Men.

The 18th. A Ship laden with dry Fish, and some Barks laden with Wine and other
things from the Isle of Re, came into Rochel; there were fired at them from the
Forts Lewis, Port-Neuf, and Coureille, 35 Cannon-shot, without touching any of
them.

The 19th. One called Franc, one of the Messengers to the King's Council, was
brought into Rochel by John Farene, a stout and bold Soldier, who took him
Prisoner near Lusignan as he rid post with many Letters, and some even from the
King himself, writ to several Governors of Provinces, by which he gave advice
of the besieging of the Citadel; commanding them to send all the Ships they
could, laden with Stones to fill and shut up the Haven of Rochel; as also to
have his Naval Army in readiness, upon the first Command, to come before
Rochel: And this by Letters dated the 14th of October.

The same day, and the day following, came from 1627. October. Re to Rochel
four or five hundred English, who were quartered in Houses.

The 24th. The Duke of Soubize writ to the Rochellers, exhorting them to send
Deputies to the King of Great Britain; upon which were named the Sieur Jaques
David Sheriff, on the behalf of the Common Hall; Sieur John de Hinsse, on
behalf of the Bourgesses; and on behalf of the Church the Sieur Salbert, a
Minister, who was in Re, near the Duke of Buckingham.

The 25th. Before day there came into Rochel, from England, a Ship with 150
Tuns of Corn, as also some Barks laiden with Wine and other Commodities, and
entered without any damage, though with the bright of the Moon, and had been
shot at thirty or forty times with Cannon from the Fort Lewis, and the
Batteries.

The 26th. The Rochellers published their Manifest, by which they gave an
Account of the Causes and Reasons which moved them to join Arms with the King
of Great-Brittain; and put at the foot of the same their Kings Letter to the
Duke of Angoulesme, as also the Oath of Lewis the Eleventh made to Robert
Cadiot, Mayor of Rochel, 1472.

In this Manifest they say, That one of the Conditions of Peace in 1622, which
is recited, was the demolishing of the Fort built near the City during the War,
as also that accordingly the King had given Letters to their Deputies, Dated
the 18th of December, directed to Sieur Arnoult, by which he enjoins him not to
delay doing it, but that under diverse pretexts he did not only elude the
obeying him therein, but on the contrary continued to fortify it; and after
his death the Sieur Thoiras did the same more diligently; 1627. October. so that
neither their Complaints, nor the reiterated Complaints of their Deputies to
his Majesty of the breach of Agreements, could produce any effect. That their
design in preserving this Fort, and furnishing it so much, appeared
sufficiently by the several Enterprises that had been made upon the City. This
was the occasion which moved the Duke of Rohan, with whom the Peace of 1622 had
been Treated, to take Arms, and give cause to the Duke of Soubize to make an
Enterprise upon Blavet, and to assure himself of the Isle of Re and the City,
and to join with them; because that though they had not declared, but sent
Deputies to the King to obtain the justice of having this Fort demolished,
instead of the King's effectual agreeing thereunto, the Marshal Praslin was
come against them in Arms, committing Acts of Hostility. That the following
Peace, having been made by the Intercession of the Ambassadors of the King of
Great Britain, and of the States of Holland, under diverse Articles, and above
all upon the word of a King, even given to the said Ambassadors in writing,
that within six Months the Fort should be demolished, yet nothing of it had
been observed: That instead of suffering them to bring back their Goods, the
Sieur Thoiras had seized them, and carried away all their Salt, and built a
Citadel in the Isle of Re. That instead of reducing the Garrisons to the number
agreed upon, they had been increased in such sort, that there was always near
eight or ten thousand men round the City. That upon the passages to Maran, and
other places, they had built new Forts, which blocked the City, and hindered the
bringing in of Corn and Provisions. That the Sieur Thoiras did 1627. October. the
same by Sea, by the help of Vessels, which he, contrary to the Treaty, had
lying in the Road at the head of the Bay.

That the Sieur Briel, sent as Intendant of the Court of Justice, had committed
unheard of Injustice; as the putting a Soldier to death upon suspicion of
having broken a Crucifix in time of War, which afterward was proved false, the
Crucifix being found. That contrary to the privileges agreed to with the City
by the King, which was not of Grace, but under Covenant given to France; That
they charged the City as belonging to the Domane, establishing Offices for
taxing the Corn and Wine of the Government, sent Commands to Sieur Thoiras,
Governor of the City, to build the said Fort and Citadel. That besides these
Injuries done them in particular, those of the Religion, in general, were ill
used thorough the whole Kingdom, and their Edicts violated in all the heads.
That hereupon the King of England, who on behalf of the King, was to them
Garrantee of the Peace, (which was so little observed) having ineffectually
employed his Intercession, resolved upon taking Arms; and having sent his Army
into these Quarters, they sent Deputies to the Duke of Angoulesm, who was in
Arms so near to them as Maran, to satisfy him by protestation, That they
desired to remain inviolable in their Fidelity and Obedience to the King, and
to beseech him to intercede with the King for their enjoyment of the last
Treaty of Peace. That instead of hearkening thereunto, he declared War against
them, plundering their Houses, building of Forts too near to them, and
committing openly all acts of Hostlity, whilst they yet held themselves 1627.
October. in suspense. In the end there fell into their hands the Kings Letters
to the said Duke, of the 13th of September, where they found the Map of their
ruin, and the Order for besieging them both by Sea and Land: That being
reduced to this point, they saw themselves forced to take Arms, and to join
with the English, praying all their good Countrymen, and all good Kings and
Princes to approve of their Design, and to assist them therein, under
protestation nevertheless to remain always in the duty of Subjection and
Fidelity due to the King; and that they should be ready to submit themselves to
him, when it should please him to receive them into his favor, and cause the
breach which had been made upon the Edicts to be repaired, and to establish
them in their ancient Liberties and Privileges.

To this Manifest was published an ample Answer, the sum of which was, That if
the Treaty a^ Montpelier had not in all points been executed, the Rochellers
were the cause of it, they having first broken it, in that the Exercise of the
Romish Religion ought to have been re-established fully and peaceably in their
City, which they would not suffer when the Commissioners of the King were sent,
nor suffer the public practice of the Popish Ceremonies; besides that, the
King, by the same Treaty, having ordered the dissolving of the new Order of
forty eight Burgesses, they would not do it, adding that, to their other
disobedience, which made his Majesty believe that it behoved him to stop that
demolishment which they pressed so much for, that they might be at the more
liberty for a new Insurrection. That the Armies levied afterward by the Duke
of Rohan, in Languedoc, and the King's Vessels, seized by the Duke of Soubize,
1627. October. at Blavet, were Rebellious Attempts without Example, and that
the whole had been agreed with them, who nevertheless was willing to amuse the
King with feigned pretenses of Loyalty, but he did not think it reasonable to
suffer himself to be so deceived by them.

As to the Treaty of Peace which followed, it was false that Strangers had
acted therein as Mediators, that the King had given his word to them, or
consented to that Injury of their Master's, being Garrantees to his Subjects,
as the Ambassadors of England have since told him. That if after this Treaty
the King thought good to build a Citadel in the Isle of Re, and Forts in the
Passages from the Isle of Maran, it was no more than what was too apparently
necessary for bridling a Rebellious City, who then tampered with the English;
and further, that it was contrary to truth, that on that side they had
committed any act of Hostility, as all France knows, but that the Passages for
going, and coming, and bringing all sorts of Commodities, was free to all. As
to the Offices established contrary to their pretended Privileges, and the
Commands of the Governor, given to the Sieur Thoiras, that as these
Privileges were from the King's Grace, and not as they say, by Covenant, so
when they were fallen from their Duty it was most just to revoke them; as in
the time of Francis the First, who dissolved their Common Hall, and gave them a
Governor, and never received them to Mercy, until upon their Knees, and with
Tears, they all made supplication for Mercy. That the Judgment given against
him who broke a Crucifix was judiciously done, upon sufficient Informations.
That the Complaints of 1627. October. the generality of their Religion, in the
rest of the Kingdom, was without Vouchers, and refuted by the free and entire
Exercise the King granted them, and his protection under which they lived
peaceably. That the Invasions of the English, and their descent in Arms in the
Isle of Re made in full Peace, and without any precedent Denunciation of War,
was contrary to Justice, and the Law of Nations, which the King will make them
repent in the end. That if the Rochellers at first deferred, declaring for
them, and sent Deputies to the Duke of Angoulesme, it was in design to gain
time, and during that delay to make their Harvest, for the King was most
certainly advertised that the coming of the English was agreed upon with them;
and though they had not yet in words declared for them, it was done in effect,
in receiving Deputies from the Duke of Buckingham, and sending theirs to him,
and aiding him every day with Provisions; that so the King had just cause to
declare them Guilty of High Treason, and make them suffer for their Rebellion,
and he hopes in the end to make them Examples for it.

The said day, with the Morning-tide, the Sieurs David and Dehinsse went to the
Isle of Re to join with the Sieur Salbret, who was with the Duke of Buckingham,
and from thence to go into England, to return that Prince thanks for his
Assistance, and to beg the continuance of it, representing to him their State
and Condition; with them went to the said Isle of Re, to reside near the person
of the Duke of Buckingham, the Sieurs Desherbiers, and Bragneau, for the
City-Hall; and Goyer Junier, (a good man and experienced Sea-Captain) for the
1627. October. Burgesses, without being prejudiced by any Cannon-shot, though
many were made at them.

The same day, with the Morning-tide, thirteen Barks, with six or seven hundred
men, got into the Fort la Pree, without any Rencounter or Impediment from the
English.

The 27th, with the morning-tide, there went out from Rochel to Re fifteen
Sail, as well Pinaces as Barks, to the end to hinder the passages of those that
would go to the Citadel and Fort la Pree; the Enemy made many a Cannon-shot at
them from their Batteries, but without doing them any harm: And the same day,
in the morning, two Capuchins were brought in Prisoners, which they sent back
after Dinner without offering them any Injury: And the Curriers did likewise
bring Prisoner a Spanish Jeweller, who had several precious Stones by him,
which caused a Debate in Council whether they should be declared good price;
some contradicted it, and particularly the Sieur Vincent, the Minister, who
having entertained this man, and found him one of Sense, was for gratifying
him, and to manage by him, the beginning of a Treaty with the King of Spain,
which he maintained with many Reasons, and expressed great diffidence of the
Duke of Buckingham and the English, but his motion was not relished.

The 28. those of Rochel sent forth nine other Sail, as well Pinnaces as Barks,
equipped for War, with three Companies of Infantry, and some Voluntier
Gentlemen, which passed in spite of their Batteries, from whence they played
upon them with their Cannon, but without effect.

1627. October. This same day the Sieur Salbert being excused going for
England, the Sieur Philip Vincent, one of the City Ministers, was by the Church
and City-Hall appointed in his place, and went the same day to the Isle of Re,
to join with the other Deputies that were there.

The 30. about four or five a Clock In the Evening, twelve or thirteen hundred
men, commanded by the Sieur Canaples, Master of the Camp to a Regiment of
Guards, were shipped at the Plomp for the Fort la Pre, which passing without
any obstruction, and having a great Party there on Land, endeavored to make a
descent, but were at first by the English and French, who joined to hinder
their Landing (after a long Combat, with the loss of fifty or sixty of those
that were furthest advanced on shore) forced to return to their Barks for
saving of themselves, in which Retreat many were drowned; nevertheless, the
Night coming on, which was so favorable to them, that they found themselves
very obscure, they not only finished their descent to the Fort, but even
constrained the English to retreat, with the loss of ten or twelve men, and
some wounded.

NOVEMBER.
The third of November. there came fifteen Barks from the Isle of Re into Rochel,
some laden with Wines, others with Commodities, at which was shot sixty or more
Cannon-shot from the Forts and Batteries, without touching any of them. The
same day the Sieur Vincent came from the Isle of Re to Rochel, to confer with
the Mayor and Council upon some particulars relating to his Voyage for England,
and desired a commodious and safe 1627. November. Vessel to be ready to sail with
the first.

The Duke of Buckingham considering the supplies which the King sent to the
Fort of la Pre, and foreseeing that the design was to attack him, and that he
found himself weak, he resolved upon a final Attempt; and upon the sixth of
November. between seven and eight in the morning, he assaulted the Citadel in two
places, the French making it on one side, and the English on another. At first
they carried all before them, gaining the Ditch, and planting their Ladders
against the Wall and Terraces, but their Ladders proving too short, and having
to do with people who received them with much resolution, they were in the end,
after two hours contest, constrained to retreat, with the loss of many men,
besides wounded, which were sent the next day to Rochel to be treated and
cured. The same day, about nine and ten a Clock in the Evening, a House in
Rochel was fired, near the Bellfry, to the Church S. Savior, where being
lodged several combustible Commodities, as Hemp, Flax, and Rosin, and c. it
burnt so suddenly, that the people in their Shifts were hard put to it to gain
the top of the House, and so to save themselves by their next Neighbors House.

The seventh Ditto, there went from Rochel to Re nineteen Pinnaces and Barks,
in one of which was the Sieur Vincent, who went to join with the other Deputies
for England.

The eighth, the Duke of Buckingham, after this last attempt upon the Citadel,
despairing of gaining it, and of being able to stay much longer in the Isle,
especially seeing there arrived from day to day considerable succors to come
into the Field with, and that his own Army was diminished more 1627. November.
than one third part, proceeding from the eating too many Grapes, according to
Sieur de Comminges Prophecy, resolved to raise the Siege; and to imbark with
the more security, ordered his Retreat by the Isle of Lois (which a small
Channel of the Sea separates from that of Re) and having made a Bridge for his
passage, in case he should be thereunto forced, he marched his Troops, putting
in the Rear one of his best Regiments, and Colonel Montjoy with his Cavalry to
defend the Infantry, if need were. This Providence was of great use to him, for
the Night before his Retreat, (besides the Troops of the King which were
already in the Isle) Marshal Scomberg arrived there with three or four thousand
Foot, and two or three hundred Horse; and upon the advice of the Dukes retreat,
came in such sort thundering upon him, that had not the Rear guard sustained
the shock, and defended a long time the Bridge, he had, according to
appearance, been totally cut in pieces: But the Army being nimble in imbarking,
the resistance of these kept them from danger, only this Arreer-guard and
Infantry was entirely defeated, and most of the Captains taken Prisoners; as
amongst others, Colonel Montjoy, Lord Gray, and Lord Montague: And in this
manner did the Duke of Buckingham leave the Isle of Re, three Months and
sixteen days after his first entering the same.

This same day was found in many houses in Rochel little Packets of Powder,
with Matches for Tinder-boxes well brimstoned, and some Match which had been
lighted at one end, which were nevertheless put out without doing any harm.
This obliged every one to shut all the Lights to their Cellars, Windows, and
dangerous places for fire, and 1627. November. to watch for the apprehending of
some of these Boutefeus, and the Night following they took three, whereof one
was a Sergeant to a Company, who was as readily hanged in the Castle-yard, as
he was lately come into the City.

The ninth Ditto, betwixt six and seven in the Evening, they made great
Bonfires at Estre, Coureille, Bonnegreen, la Moulinette, Follie-Budel, Rousay,
Fort Lewis, and in all the Quarters of the Army, with Vollies of Cannon and
Musket Shot, crying, Vive le Roy, for the retaking of the Isle of Re from the
English, which gave a great Allarm to the Rochellers, who not knowing the
cause, for fear of surprise, and of Intelligence held in the City, they
remained all night in Arms.

The twelfth, the Sieur David Vincent, and Dehinse, deputed as aforesaid for
England, returned from the English Army to Rochel, about 9 a Clock in the
Evening, as did also the Sieur Desherbiers, and brought a Letter from the Duke
of Buckingham, which they delivered to the Mayor and his Council, which upon
that occasion was extraordinarily assembled in his House; the substance was to
counsel them, that whilst he was in the Road to desire a Peace of the King,
which as he assured them would be granted according to their own desire; but if
otherwise, he offered them the choice of two things ( viz.) either to come into
their City with two thousand men, or to return for England to procure them a
supply of Corn, and all things necessary for a severe Siege, and to return
himself with an Army and Forces sufficient for their deliverance.

The same day they began about ten a Clock in the morning to work at the Mills
on the side of Coureille, 1627. November. and prepare Wood to make there a
Pallisade, which obliged the Rochellers to play with their Cannon upon them
with all the power they could to interrupt the work.

The thirteenth, with the Morning-tide, a Newfound-land Ship, of about fifty or
sixty Tun, laden with Green Fish, came on ground upon the Mud, or Ouze, at half
Musket shot from the Chain, not having water enough to go in, and upon him was
shot from the Fort that day forty Cannon shot, whereof there was but two that
came in the Shrouds; and also without killing or wounding any person, and so
she entered with the Evening-tide.

The seventeenth, the Duke of Buckingham, after having laid eight days at
Anchor before the Isle Lewis, finding the Wind to favor him, set sail, without
expecting an Answer to his Letters from those of Rochel.

The eighteenth, the Sieurs David, Vincent, and Dehinse, imbarking about Noon
in a Fly-boat, set sail for the Isle Lewis, where they hoped to have found the
Duke, and with them went ten Barks with Bread and Water for the English Army,
and in one were the Sieurs Tessereau Counselor, Journault, and Savarit, who
went on the behalf of the Rochellers, to desire the Duke of Buckingham to give
them some of the Corn, and other Provisions, which he had in abundance aboard
his Ships; but being disappointed in not finding of him, they returned to
Rochel, whilst the Deputies for England followed the English Army.

The 21. In the night arrived at Rochel a Pinnace of War with a Prize, laden
with Munition-bread for the Troops in the Isle of Re, and Citadel, to the
number of fifteen thousand Loaves, which 1627. November. were sold to the people;
the white at two Sous, and the rest at one Sous, and six Deniers; and in the
passage, one of the Seamen was flain by a Cannon shot.

The 25. with the Evening-tide arrived at Rochel five Prizes ( viz.) two laden
with Wood, two with Corn, and one with Munition-bread, at which were made many
Cannon shot without touching them.

The 28. came into Rochel from England Captain Bourgis with 80 English, who
made a Company; he reported, that the Earl of Holland was at Sea, upon his
Voyage to the Duke of Buckingham in the Isle of Re; but we heard since, that
this Earl had been embarked three times, and always driven back by contrary
Winds to Plymouth, where the Duke found him, being arrived there the 22. Ditto
with our Deputies, who joined with him the 20. without being saluted by the
Ships, though it was full day.

The same day, in the morning, was seen many Pioneers working at the Haute Fons
in the Garaine de la Ramigere, making of a Fort: The Rochellers played their
Cannon at them, and after dinner sallied out by the Port Coinge with seven or
eight hundred Foot, and thirty or forty Horse, endeavoring to drive them from
thence, but could not, they being defended by many Horse and Foot: The day
passed with small Skirmishes, in which was slain one Inhabitant, besides three
slightly wounded. The same day some were seen at work upon a Fort beyond the
Bridge of Salines, toward Perigny, in a Field called La Folly Baudet, where
formerly there had been one.

1627. December. DECEMBER.
The third of December. were brought into Rochel two Barks which they had taken
as they came out of the River of Maran, and found in them Spanish Wine, many
Barrels of Raisins, and seven or eight Tun of Corn, with some other Provisions.

The 14th, betwixt four and five in the Evening, they began to shoot from a new
Battery, erected upon the edge of a Bank, 200 paces from the House of
Coureille, which came betwixt the two Towers of the Chain: The first Cannon
shot cut the Foremast of Captain Bragneau's Ship which lay cross the Haven,
without killing or hurting any person.

The 16th, the Rochellers desired Pass-ports for sending out of Town many
Women, and unprofitable Mouths, but was refused it.

The 17th, shooting from the said Battery, (which we shall hereafter call
Royal) there was slain a Man, a Woman, and an Infant.

The 18th, at Eleven a Clock in the Morning, some Barks of the Besiegers
arrived at Coureille, Convoyed by the Galleys of Brouage, who about two or
three a Clock after dinner, came very near the Chain, and shot three Cannon
shot cross the City, without doing any harm to any person: But receiving advice
that the Rochellers would go to Coureille, to take it, or burn it, they
returned in the night to Brovage.

The 25th, a part of the Kings Naval Army, to the number of ten or twelve great
Ships, some Pinnaces, and the Gally of Brovage, came to Anchor in the Road at
the Head of the Bay, and at their arrival discharged all their Cannon, as did
1627. December. also the Fort Lewis, and the Royal Battery, to which the
Rochellers answered at the same time from theirs.

The 26th, betwixt three and four in the Evening, a shot coming from the Royal
Battery, killed three Beggars, and hurt two or three more, as they were playing
at Cards in a Shop of Planks upon the Key of the great River, over against the
opening of the Chain. The next day these Shops were pulled down, that they
might not serve any more as a mark, nor cause in the future any more such
murders.

At this time the Bank, which is hereafter called the Digue, advanced much on
both sides of the Head of the Bay, and of Coureille, to the end to shut up the
going in and out of the Rochellers by Sea, at which they at first laughed,
believing that Storms and ill Weather would undo more in one Tide, than they
could do in six Months.

The 28th, men was seen working between Ronsay and Beaulieu (a good Cannon shot
from the City) upon a Fort they were making there.

The 30th, with the Morning-tide came into the City a Bark laden with Bourdeaux
Wine, at which many shot was made from the Fort Lewis, and the Royal Battery,
but without touching her.

JANVARY.
January, 1628. there was seen working at the little Festille, for making
another Fort there, which obliged the City to play upon them with their Cannon,
but without any great success.

The 6th, there was so great a Storm at South-East, that the Bank was almost
overturned, and 1628. January.the Kings Ships which were in the Road at the
Head of the Bay so incommoded, that three of them were cast upon the Coast of
the Head of the Bay, and of Coureille, where one wanted little of being totally
broken in pieces.

The 8th Ditto, forty Cavaliers being gone from Rochel, by the new Gate, to
clear the Street to the new Festille, and thereabouts, met with some Horse of
the Assiegers, and worsted them; but Monsieur de Bassompier, with a great Party
of Cavalry and Infantry, coming in to their assistance, made them retreat,
though without other loss, than of some wounded; in exchange of which, they
brought with them three Prisoners into the City. The same day was discovered
(by a Soldier sent from the Camp into the City) an Enterprise upon the Fort
Tadon, contrived by the Ensign to Captain Salle, who was immediately taken,
racked, and hanged the 10th, and his Head set up at the Head or utmost part of
the Fort, half a Musket shot from Bongrenne, where for the same cause had,
three Weeks or a Month before, been hanged two Soldiers, and one condemned for
the Executioner.

The 12th, some Soldiers brought into Rochel sixty Oxen and Cows, and at the
same time saw men working at Miroeil, making of a Fort there.

The 13th, the Rochellers having in the Morning seen some Barques arrive at
Coureille, under the Convoy of some Galleys, and believing they were with
Cannon and Warlike Ammunition, (having had advice some days before of their
coming) made a Sally by Sea to intercept them; and at the same time another by
Land for diverting 1628. January.of Succors; and to this end they did with all
diligence equip twelve Shalloops, who finding themselves ready by eight of the
Clock in the Evening, furnished with Men, Stones, Granado's, and Fireworks,
went out of the Chain, and went by the Coasts of Port-Neuf to prevent
discovery; and having left two of their Shalloops in the midst of the Channel,
as well to hinder succors as to snap those that would escape, they fell
unexpected upon these Vessels which were at Anchor, under the Fort of Marellac,
and at first made themselves Masters of two Galleys, forced the others, and
also the Barques to run Ashore, and killed many of those that were in them;
and others, to save themselves, leaped into the Water; but seeing Succors
hasting from all parts, and fearing also that if they should stay longer, it
being an Ebbing-tide, they should lie dry upon the Sands, they returned with
two Galleys to Rochel, having lost in all the Action but four men, and eight
wounded. At the same time, whilst this was in execution at Sea, those at Land
assaulted the Redoubt of Beautriel, betwixt Bongrenne and the House of
Coureille, where there was a Squadron of thirty of John Sac's Regiment, who,
after some resistance, were forced and cut in pieces, especially by the
English, in Revenge for their Companions which had been killed in the Isle of
Re, in such sort, that not above two or three of them were saved, and with the
loss of no more than one killed, and three wounded of the Rochellers, and
returned to the City with all their Arms, which were given to them that took
them.

The 14th, very early in the morning there was ^^ot from the Royal Battery
fifteen or twenty 1628. January. Cannon shot cross the City, without killing or
hurting any person, save one rash Soldier, who, mocking those that bowed down,
and put themselves under the Covert of the Parrapet, tog avoid the danger of
the dreadful Thunderings, stood upon the Wall, until his Head was carried away
by a great shot.

The 15th, the Sieur Fequiere was brought Prisoner to Rochel, and put in the
Tower of Monreille, near the old Gate Maubec, having been taken as he was
crossing from Coureille to another Quarter, accompanied by the Sieur Forest,
Lieutenant of Cardinal Richelieu's Guards, who was slain refusing to render
himself Prisoner, or take Quarter.

This night, about two a Clock in the morning, of the 19th Ditto, went out of
Rochel the Sieurs Daniel Bragneau, on behalf of the City-Hall; and John Gobert
for the Burgers, to go for England, to hasten succors, and to buy Corn and
other Provisions for the City, and departed with Ten Sail ( viz.) three Men of
War, five Pinnaces, and two Fireships, and passed all the Forts, without
receiving any damage from the Forts, Batteries, or Men of War, which lay at
Anchor at the Head of the Bay; but going out from the Chain, one of the
Fireships, thorough the carelessness of those in her, was so entangled with one
of the Men of War, that they were forced to cut her Masts and Cordage, and in
that condition turn her a drift, who with the Current was carried to Port-Neuf,
where she gave them a great Alarm, and made them spend many Cannon and Musket
shot upon her, until not being answered, no person being aboard, they boarded
her with their Shalloops, 1628. January. and run her ashore in the Creek of
Port-Neuf: Besides these ten Sail, ten others had gone out, had they not been
hindered by a second intanglement of two Men of War falling foul upon one
another in their going from the Chain, and could not be cleared until the Tide
was lost, both to themselves and the rest that should have followed them; this
fault being imputed to one of the Captains of the Ships, who (as is believed)
not desiring the Voyage, did it designedly.

The 20th, the Rochellers played with their Cannon upon the Digue, of the side
of Fort Lewis, to interrupt if possible their work, which notwithstanding they
continued.

The 21th, betwixt two and three a Clock Afternoon, being High-tide, the
Pallisade of ten or twelve great Ships mured full of Stones, was fixed between
Port-Neuf, and Fort Marilac, on the side of Coureille, half a Cannon shot from
the City, whither they brought them under the favor and protection of the
Galleys, Men of War, and Galliots of Brouage, the Rochellers Cannon not being
able to hinder them; nor by their sallying out with ten Shalloops of War could
they effect any thing, but being advanced, were constrained to retreat, the
Enemy having made ready all the Cannon of their Batteries, which thundered so
furiously upon them, that they could do nothing even against the Men of War;
all that they were able to do, being to return with their wounded men.

The 22th, about nine in the Evening, the Rochellers fell out by the Port of
the two Mills with forty Horse, and two or three hundred Foot, besides with a
great part of Seamen, and Ship-Carpenters, who with Planks and other materials
went 1628. January. to the Pallisade, endeavoring to stop the Portholes of the
Ships mured full of stones, to the end to bring them within the Chain, or else
to a place where they should not offend them; but as they were with Ladders
(the Sea being low water) mounting these Ships, they found themselves
unexpectedly received with a shower of Musket shot from those that guarded
them, which beat down three or four, and made the rest descend faster than they
mounted. This gave such a consternation to those that were below to shut the
Portholes, the defense being seconded by the numbers which came upon the Arms
of the Port-Neuf and Coureille, that they abandoned all to save themselves by
flight; and in such disorder, that they run a great hazard of being all ^ut in
pieces, had not the Cavalry, who from their Post saw their bad condition, run
to their succor, and charged the Pursuants so briskly, that they made them
retreat, even to the Pallisades, killing many upon the place; and amongst the
rest, a Captain, who was come from Courcille to their succor. The same day,
betwixt four and five a Clock in the Evening, was shot from the Fort de la
Fons, upon the City, diverse Cannon shot of 32 and 33 pound Bullets, without
killing or hurting any person, insomuch that the people seeing the little
effect of the Cannon, grew accustomed to them, and did not regard them.

The 27th, the Rochellers having advice that the Kings Naval Fleet, of thirty
Men of War, conducted by the Duke of Guise, was a few days before arrived at
the Head of the Bay, as also Don Frederwick de Tolledo, Admiral of Spain, with
35 or 40 other Men of War, sent out with the 1628. January. Evening-tide three
Pinnaces of War, with each their dispatch, for advertising their Deputies in
England with the arrival of these several Armado's; as also that they had made
a Pallisade cross the Channel with ten or twelve great Ships, to the end that
they should diligently seek succors: They carried also Letters to the Estates
and Prince of Orange; and notwithstanding all the impediment from sunk Ships,
upon which was some Cannon, and all the other Men of War, these Pinnaces passed
without difficulty.

The 28th, arrived at the Camp at Estre Marquess Spinola, whom the King
received with all sort of Caresses, showed him the situation of the Camp, the
Lines, and the Digue; he spoke thoroughout (as is reported) with much esteem,
and said above all, that the Digne was the only means to take the City by.

FEBRVARY.
February, they saw from Rochel a Chain carried cross from Coureille to
Port-neuf, which was supported upon the water by Pipes at a distance one from
another by an uncertain interval, having betwixt every two cross pieces of
Timber tied and mortused one within another, and in the middle of them a
floating Engine, turned by the Britch, or Stern.

The 8th, the Rochellers sent two light Galliots to England, to hasten the
succors, and to represent the condition they were reduced to.

The 10th, the King went for Paris, after he had been before Rochel four
Months, less two days, leaving all the weight of his Affairs, the Principal
Authority and Command of his Army, and Title 1628. February of General, with
Cardinal Richelieu: the Duke o^ Angoulesme, the Marshals of Schomberg and
Bascompiere, remaining there also in quality of Lieutenant Generals to his
Majesty, under Cardinal Richelieu.

The 18th, diverse other Ships were mured for strengthening the Pallisade, so
that there was reckoned forty or fifty, besides a Machine in the middle of the
Digue.

The 19th, some Horse being gone to Ronsay, t^ whet and provoke the Horse that
were there upon the Guard, were repulsed, notwithstanding the succors sent
them from the City, and the Cannon which did their part, and could not do
bette^ than leave three or four dead upon the place; and among the rest, one
called Forest, who was much lamented, because of his valor, and the service
that he had done the City, who was the next day Interred with much honor.

At this same time Cardinal Richelieu sent ^ Trumpeter to Rochel with a Letter,
exhorting them to come to a Treaty for Peace, saying, that he had the Order of
the King for it, who for the facilitating of it, was retired to Paris, leaving
to them the choice of the place for Treaty: It was offered to be at one of
their Gates, promising to send thither Monsieur Hallier, or others. The thing
was brought into deliberation in the Council of War assembled to that end, but
some opposed it with a high hand, carrying it against the Mayor, and the
greatest part of the Council, even by threats, to raise the People against
them, if they should enter into such a Conference, which (as they said) tended
to the ruin of the City: And so this Proposition came to nothing.

1628. February The 25th and 26th, with the Night-tide rose an impetuous Storm,
which broke part of the floating Chain, and some of the mured Ships, sending to
the City a quantity of Wood, and cross Timber, and two Piles of the Fessine, or
Britch of the Machine: The common people running out to carry away what they
could of the Wrack, the Cannon, which played upon them, killed one Maid, hurt
some others, and dismounted a Trooper, without doing him any other harm.

The 29th, in the night, a Galliot was sent from Rochel to England, to hasten
the succors, and passed without any obstruction.

MARCH.
March the Rochellers received a Letter by Land from Sieur David, Vincent, and
Dehinse, dated the 4th of February, writ in Ciphers, which imported, that in
the Month of March, or April at farthest, the Fleet would be ready to carry
them succors of Men, Victuals, and necessary Munitions, which rejoiced much
the City thoroughout; the Letter was as follows.

Gentlemen,
HAving received yours by Sieur de Bausay, we have so pressed the sending
Provisions, that Monsieur D^hinse was gone for Plymouth to have managed them,
but meeting by the way the Sieur Gorribon, who in his passage toward Britain
having met the Kings Navy Royal, they believed that the Convoy being weak, they
would indubitably be all taken; whereupon returning, we have represented to his
Majesty your Condition, and obtained a Promise of a Puissant Naval Army for
your succor, in March or April for certain; 1628. March. and in the interim,
they will run the adventure of some small Vessels with Corn. Have good courage,
for without delay you will be supplied with Men, and all Provisions: Keep in
order, and make provisions of Shalloops.

Messieurs, Your most humble and obedient Servants, David. Vincent.

London, Feb. 4. 1628.

At this same time were fixed many Ships in several places of the Digue,
besides those there before, and were fastened one to another by great Cables,
to hinder the passing of any thing.

The 6th, there was a skirmish between the Besiegants, and those of the Fort
Tadon, without any great loss on one or the other side.

The 11th, Cardinal Richelieu, the Kings Lieutenant General, having (as is
said) secret Intelligence with some of Rochel, environed it with 8000 Horse and
Foot, bringing a great number of Ladders, Bridges, Petars, a quantity of
Cordage and Timber, which were carried in ten Chariots unto Plessis, a ruined
House, five or six hundred paces distant from the City, the Night being
favorable to him for making his approaches, in that it was very dark and
windy; his principal design and Enterprise was to Petar the crasie Port of
Salines, which is Maubec, to scale the Bastions of Gabal, to essay by Petars
Port-Neuf, and that of S. Nicholas, to attempt in good earnest the opening of
the Chain to break in betwixt the two Forts of Tadon, whilst diverse Parties
should give false Allarms in 1628. March. diverse places, for to divert and
divide the Forces of the City; and in this great Expedition, the Marshals
Schomberg and Bassompier assisted him, exhorting the Infantry, and giving them
assurance, that never any Design had less Adventure in it; that his Majesty had
in the City eight or nine hundred Confidents, all good men; and that by the
opening the Draw-bridges, by the Petars, and the help of the Ladders, means all
well ordered, they should with ease render themselves, and almost in
Battaillia, in the middle of the Streets, and places of Arms; that they should
presently embrace an entire Felicity and Fortune with her most precious
movables, and that after such a Glory, there would not be any thing more for
them to wish. But whilst these fine words flowed with facility, and the
Soldiers hearts leapt for joy, all of a sudden they found the Wheel of their
design nailed and pinned, without knowing who to attribute it to, except to the
Night, which the Cardinal with reason had chosen, as most dark, had brought the
Troops and Executors into confusion; or that the variety of so many several
parts of the design, might bring an intanglement, or some ill understanding in
the Army: whatever it was, that night was spent until daylight, without
enterprising any thing, except the viewing the Ports by some bold Soldiers,
who knocked there, and at the first Drawbridge; the Sentinels of the City, who
were watchful enough in their places, not hearing any thing of it.

Cardinal Richelieu seeing his design upon Rochel to fail, the twelfth Ditto in
the night, he undertook another upon the Fort Tadon, to try if he could succeed
better there; and to that end, he 1628. March. chose the Flower of his Army,
which he divide^ into three Battalions: In the first were Gentlemen of
Companies, as the Forelorn-Hope, which were betwixt 150 and 200, commanded by
the Sieurs Marilac and Surdis, Capt. in the Regiment^ of Guards: The second
made the Body of the Battaille, where Marshal Schomberg commanded in his own
Person, and had about eight hundred of the most sprightful, bold, and vigorous
Soldiers in the Army, with the Flower of the Gentry* The third, which was the
greatest, was the Reserve, winged with the Cavalry, without engaging with the
others. Thus ordered, they marched without making any noise unto the Head of
the Fort Tadon, each Musqueteer having a Cover, that they might not be
discovered: but before any thing was enterprised, they sent thirty Soldiers to
pass the Sands of the Channel, to see if the Tide were at the lowest, being
willing to vex the Court of Guard of Tevaille, and Port of two Mills; and by
giving an Allarm on that side, to assure so much the more their Enterprise upon
the Fort Tadon, which are almost opposites; they sent a cunning Soldier to the
Port of S. Nicholas, to hallow to those that were upon the guard of the Gate,
in the name of those of the Fort, that they should not shoot, for some reasons
known to him, and advised the same all along the Curtain of the said Fort, that
they had a contrary design to act upon the Assiegants, who would come to them
all along by the Sea, and that they could not shoot in the confusion of that
mixture, but with more prejudice to those of the Fort, than to the Assailants;
which advice they received, and was the cause that they fired n^^t,
understanding that shooting would 1628. March. give an Allarm to the City. This
Evening commanded in the Fort by lot the Sieur Pontlevain, a Gentleman of
Xaintonge, who besides his Company, had five others with him, four French, and
one English. The Sentinel heard a noise upon the Beech of the Seashore, but
the Wind being North, hindering his hearing, occasioned him to hearken more
attentively on that side, and perceived, as he thought, a great Shadow which
floated the height of a man before him, without being able to discern what it
should be: nevertheless, he shot his Musket, and by the light of it discovered
the Battalions, and saw them already in their approaches. Their Captain seeing
himself discovered, marched two of his first Troops by the Sea, as if he would
go to the Port S. Nicholas, and advanced betwixt the City and the Fort, over
against Gabut, to have the Wind on their backs, (which blew impetuously in the
eyes of those of the said Fort) and afterward having discovered their Match,
commanded them with a loud voice the first Attack, to which they submitted,
without disputing; and above all, the Gentlemen in the Forelorn-Hope: but they
found the Garrison in good condition, and well disposed to receive them, and
the Fort less accessible than they thought of. At first, and almost all the
time, during the Storm, the Captains of the Fort were resolved not to shoot,
because they thought they had no shot to lose, and that they should have
occasion enough of exercise in this business, which they saw begun with good
Conduct, and believed would be pursued with a long obstinacy: but this, as
reasonable as it was, came not to pass; for the first having gone briskly on
unto the brink of the Ditch, and having 1628. March. there encountered an
Intanglement by the Pallisade which was along the Seaside, and were hotly
saluted in the Front and Flank by the Musketeers, and some shot with stones.
Marshal Schomberg came himself to charge; but seeing his Soldiers in disorder,
retired and went a little aside, where he rallied, as if he intended to have
returned, which was that that made those of the Fort spare their shot,
reserving them for a second Charge; but the Marshal contented himself with
retreating with his dead and wounded men, which was not perceived by the Fort,
until he had turned Head for his Retreat, and then they were pinched in the
Britch with Cannon shot of stones, as well from the City, as from the Fort,
besides with some small shot: The Wind was so great, that not one of the first
shot was heard in the City; and it was a surprise upon those of S. Nicholas, to
hear that the Allarm should not be given until day, and that the Assailants had
not altogether dispaired. The day being come, there was but ten found dead, and
some hurt among the Enterprisers, the rest having beegn carried away by their
Comrades, as it was afterward known by some Soldiers who came from the Army
to the City, where they reported, that there were eighty or a hundred men
slain, and a great many wounded; but as to those in the Fort, there were none
either killed or wounded.

The 14th, the Rochellers held an extraordinary Day of Thanksgiving, in all
their Churches, for this Deliverance, with Prayers to God, to continue for the
future, his Protection of them.

The 22th, with the Night-tide, about five a Clock in the Evening, Sieur John
David, Captain 1628. March. of a Pinnace of War, coming from England, passed
thorough the whole Naval Army, and all the Ship-Pallisades, taking the side of
Port-Neuf, and came into Rochel without the loss of a man, notwithstanding that
about two hundred Cannon shot, and an infinite number of Muskets which were
shot at him, as well from the Ships, as all the Batteries; that which put him
in most danger in his passage being the Galliots, which pursued him very near
the Chain, though he played his Cannon and Murderers at them as they came near
to him: However, he arrived safe and sound, only he cast into the water his
Packet of Letters, for fear he should have been taken, having been three times
in danger, which were found afterward by those of the Pallisade.

With the same Tide, about six a Clock in the Evening, Captain John Martin,
called Sacremore, commanding also a Pinnace of War, passed in the same manner
as the other had done, drawing after her a Prize laden with Bourdeaux Wine; but
the Sea ebbing, he found not water enough to enter the City; so that his Prize
run ashore against the Pallisades, and was presently boarded, and taken by the
Galliots; but as to himself, he run in the Owze, or Mud, on the side of the
Fort Tadon, within half a Musket shot off the City, from whence by a Shalloop
he got into the City, and carried his Packet to the Mayor; at midnight (the
Tide being at lowest) those of Coureille came to attacque this Vessel, bringing
many Ladders to mount her with, as also Wood and Fire to burn her, in case they
could not carry her away; but though there were not remaining more than ten
men, they defended themselves with so much vigor and courage, that 1628.
March. they gave time to those of the City to succor them, and with the
Morning-tide to bring her into the Port, having lost in this Combat five men,
and three wounded. There was in these two Pinnaces betwixt 25 and 30 Tun of
Corn, as well Wheat as Rye, and other Provisions and Refreshments, which
belonged to particular persons.

There was great joy for the entry of these Pinnaces; above all, because of the
Packet which the last had preserved, where was the Copies of all the dispatches
that the Deputies had to that time writ; and a History of their Negotiation, as
follows.

Gentlemen,
WE doubt not but you as well as we are troubled and perplexed touching the
English Army, forasmuch as you have neither received the Men, nor the
Provisions promised; and by your Envoy, it seems, that the Duke was obliged to
have stayed our return; and as this has administered to us matter of diversity
of thoughts, it may also have been the occasion of many discourses amongst you,
and possibly of scruples; and therefore we are very glad that this occasion
presents it self so to purpose, which we shall make use of for rendering you a
particular account both of our Voyage, and what we have done since our arrival
in this place. You may without doubt, Gentlemen, remember, that we were all
three happily embarked in a small English Pinnace which we brought to you; the
Master of which not finding the Fleet hesitated at first whether he should
undertake the Voyage, but we encouraged him to it, and he followed our 1628.
March. Course from Thursday to Saturday, without hearing any news of the Army,
but toward Noon we discovered it toward Vschant, and in the Evening we
reached the Reer-guard; and so happily, that we re-encountred the Dukes Ship;
and so soon as he heard that we were there, appeared upon the Hatches to bid us
welcome, without nevertheless obliging us to come aboard. The next day about
Noon, when we were near entering into the Narrow Seas, he caused himself to be
set aboard our Pinnace, and drawing us apart, told us, that the Wind being come
good, his Captains would not lose the opportunity of it; that in the mean time
he had given order, that the Corn, Hay, and the other small Vessels, should go
to you, but he understood that they had followed the Army, for which at their
arrival they should render him an account. And further, that he was come into
our Ship, having given order to all the rest of the Fleet to go to Portsmouth,
whilst he would go with us to Plymouth, where he hoped to find the Earl of
Holland, and the succors designed us, and give such Orders in our affairs, as
we should be well content with. Accordingly, on Monday the 22th, we landed at
Plymouth, where we met a part of the Fleet, and particularly our French, which
were in a most pitiful condition; and the Duke, according to his hopes, met
there also the Earl of Holland, with whom having discourse, and read some
Letters his Majesty writ to him: He immediately sent for us, and in presence of
the said Earl declared, that the Intention of the King his Master was to assist
us with lla his Might: that if the succors were not arrived 1628. March. in
time, the blame ought not to be imputed otherwise than to the Winds which had
failed them three times, (and that the third time was the same day we arrived,
but believed that some Vessels would gain your Port) that for the time to come,
we should resent the effects of his good will; and for the present, wished us
to advise among our selves of the most pressing necessities: Upon which offer,
returning him thanks, we represented Hunger as our most dangerous Enemy at
present; and therefore supplicated the Duke to remember the promise that he had
made us for Corn, to give order for returning our French, and to add to them
two or three hundred English, who suffers in the present necessity. Upon this
we left him, and the same day were visited by Monsieur Dolbier, who entertained
us upon the two Heads of our Demand, and upon the last (to wit) the Soldiers,
asked if we understood that they should be armed: To which we answered, that
nothing was more necessary, the City being very much unprovided of Arms, having
lost a great number in their late Rencounters. Upon the other Head, to wit, of
Corn, we found our selves as Merchants upon Thorns, he representing to us some
Emence expenses that the King had been at in this Affair, and that he must
maintain it in the future: Beside that, he told us, that the Duke had spent
more than one hundred thousand pounds Sterling of his own Estate. In brief, to
bring it to a Head, he desired to know of us, if we could assure the payment of
it. Now though we desired to procure this Easement, and make as if it was sent
you freely, nevertheless, 1628. March. fearing that by being obstinate in it,
we should lose all; or at least, that things would be so delayed, that it would
be very prejudicial to you, we engaged that you should receive, with great
Resentment of Obligation, if it would please the Duke to make only the advance,
and render it to you at the Head of the Bay, whither you would send to meet it,
and give order for payment. We know very well, that this Answer was a trouble
to him; yet the next morning he came to our Lodgings, and told us, that as to
the Soldiers, the thing was agreed according to our desire; and for the Corn,
the Duke had reckoned upon five and twenty thousand pounds, and had established
a certain Fond for other 25000 l. to the end to buy Provisions for us, and that
we should understand it from his own mouth: And indeed, going after Dinner to
try the issue, he confirmed to us the one, and the other; and told us, he would
leave the Execution of all to his Vice Admiral, who was present, and who is his
Creature, and one of his Domestics, who he made expressly to remain there to
that end, demanding further of us, whether we would have the Ships sent away
one after another, as they should be laden, or send away what they could at
present, which would come to ten thousand Francks, and send the rest altogether
with a Powerful Convoy. And having referred this to his Prudence, the Earl of
Holland, who was there, concluded, that the last advice was to be followed: And
so it was agreed, that one Ship of two hundred Tun should be at present sent
away with so much Corn, and in the same all our French, order being given for
the 1628. March. nourishment of them, whilst they waited for a Wind. After
this, the Duke told us, he would take Post for Portsmouth, to give Orders about
the Army, and cause the English, as we desired, to be dispatched with the
first: and in the mean time, that we should go straight to London, where he
should not be wanting in all good Offices possible: Upon which the Earl of
Holland taking the word, represented with great vehemence how much his
Majesty's intentions are for our good, and that we ought not to have any fear
of ever being abandoned, and that this was but a beginning of what should be
well prosecuted; and that besides the Fleet which he now sends us, he would
prepare another, and that we should see the same, if they had any Ships. All
was concluded with our returning thanks, and the Duke taking Post as he had
said, advised us to remain here a little, to see what diligence would be in
performing what they promised us. Yesterday we saw not here any other
advancement, than that they provided for the nourishment of our poor French in
the absence of the Vice Admiral; and having this day met with him, we have
obtained for our said Countrymen 6 d. Sterling. per day, which is the most the
King allows in this place, and which is an honest allowance, sufficient for
them to live on, we having put them under the Conduct of Monsieur Savignac
Ensign, and Monsieur de la Land, that they together may have an eye upon the
Money which shall be distributed to the Soldiers, and see it faithfully done.
We cannot conceal from you, that this Ensign has attacqued us with insolent
and injurious discourse in the presence of the Duke: As for 1628. March. Corn,
we understand, that all possible diligence is used for the lading of it; so
that our sojourning here being no longer requisite, we do intend, God willing,
to depart to morrow for London, but by different ways; ( viz.) two of us by
Bristol, where the Ship is, which from the beginning was designed us by the
Duke, in which are our Men, Goods and Papers; and the third, which will be
Sieur Vincent, by the way of Portsmouth, not to be far from the Duke of
Buckingham, and to discourse the Duke of Soubize. In brief, Gentlemen, have, if
you please, this considence in us, that we shall not spare either pains or care
for the discharging our selves, the best we can, of the business you have been
pleased to trust us with, and commit unto us, and shall advertise you as often as
we can of whatsoever shall pass. We ought not to omit, that besides the Army
embarked with the Earl of Holland, which were three thousand Soldiers, there
are six thousand more, which the King has in pay about this place, not
reckoning the Scots, which are assuredly ready, and yet are levying other
Troops; so that from all sort of appearance we are made believe, that they do
intend to succor us in good earnest, and we hope, that in the mean time, God
will fortify you: Some of those who interest themselves in your Affairs, seem
to be of Opinion, that you will be abandoned, but we hope you will provide
Antidotes against such evil suggestions, for we are confident, that their fears
are vain, and that things are in such a condition, as give us cause of hoping
well; and therefore retreat not to the hearkening to a Peace, which will be
ruinous, as without doubt it will be such, 1628. March. if his Majesty
intercede not in it: whereas if it please God to bless the good intentions from
this side, we shall have wherewith to do well, and such as will not leave more
leaven for a following War: There remains yet one thing more to advise you of,
that when the first Corn is arrived, that you would be pleased to give order
for the ready payment for it, for you cannot but judge of what consequence that
will in the future be; and therefore we cannot cease recommending the advantage
to you: We will not write you any thing of the price, for having spoken to the
Duke about that, he told us, that he intended that your selves should set it;
but possibly these are words of Complements, upon which we ought not to depend:
He reiterated his desire of having you send him Pilots, you may please
therefore to advise thereof, as also to keep your promise of sending frequently
Pinnaces to us, to inform us of your necessities, and thereby render our
Instances the more powerful, by grounding them upon fresh advice, which is so
necessary, that we cannot recommend it pressingly enough. We beg it of you
again, and refer you to Sieur Faux, the Bearer hereof, to communicate to you
what we may have omitted: We will not add more at present, than to address our
prayers to him who has been hitherto your Keeper, that he will still incompass
you with his Protection.

We are,
Gentlemen, Your most humble, and most obedient Servants, David, Vincent,
Dehinse.

Plymouth, November. 25. 1627. 1628. March. When it shall please you to write, be
pleased to direct your Letters to Monsieur Host.




Another Letter of the Deputies of Rochel, to their Superiors.

Gentlemen,
THis is our third since our arrival in this Isle. We writ from Plymouth the
24th past, and from Bristol eight or ten days after, without troubling you with
the repetition of what we have desired for you: We shall now give you an
account of what we have since done here, where we arrived the sixth Current; we
addressed our selves to the Duke, who received us with demonstration of most
particular good will and kindness, and the same hour he was the means of our
Audience by his Majesty, to whom having had the Honor to pay our Respects,
Monsieur David returned him most humble thanks for concerning himself upon the
account of our Oppression, representing to him how much it was aggravated since
he had showed his kindness to us, adding then a most earnest Supplication for a
ready and powerful assistance of you: We read in the Countenance of his Majesty
the gracious Answer which he made us, amounting in sum to assure us, that
though the success had not answered his good Intentions, he would nevertheless
continue to assist us to the making our Cause his own; adding, that he should
make the Errors committed in what had been done, Advertisements to him for the
time to come: The Duke being present, and hearing what the King 1628. March.
said to us, as he had in^^oduced us, so in like manner he brought us back. Some
days following we spent in waiting upon the Privy Council, amongst whom there
were some that received us with great humanity, and assured us, that the
Inclinations of his Majesty were so carried out for us, that we needed no
Intercessors; and amongst the rest, one said, that his Discourses by day, and
Dreams in the Night, were nothing but of our Affairs; and another Principal
Person added, that he would rather lose his Crown, than not to make good his
word to us. These Complemental Visits did not so take up our time, but we
applied our selves to the most Essential of our Affairs, and judging that the
sending of Corn was most to be pressed, we addressed our selves for that to the
Duke, especially for that we understood that the Order given at Plymouth was to
our great grief revoked; but thereunto he answered, that since his arrival in
this place, they had found Corn much cheaper here, and in far greater quantity,
than in other places, which had made him change his Order; saying further, that
from that time they had with diligence industriously applied themselves to the
buying of it; and by our continual solicitation since, it is in such
forwardness, that a great quantity of Corn is ready, wanting nothing but
Vessels, which we must hire, and agree for the Freight, but we know not yet
what Convoy they will give us; the Wind being contrary, has kept some in
Plymouth, which they did design to that purpose: Nevertheless, we are assured
of some, and in all appearance will be ready in a few days to set sail, if God
give an opportunity: With the 1628. March. Corn you will receive, besides
French, four or five hundred English Soldiers which we have procured, with
order for paying of them; as also of those that you have already, both for the
time passed, and to come. So soon as we are over this business, we shall press
the other Heads, contained in the Memorials, which you gave us in Charge; but
the importance of this would not suffer us to traverse any other Proposition.
Moreover, it is the good pleasure of his Majesty, not to limit himself in his
assistance with Provisions, but gives us hope of a plentiful supply which is
preparing, and for which the City of London has lately furnished him with
12000 l. but we cannot think that they will be ready before the Spring. The
Duke of Soubize, who arrived here a day after us, improves all his power, being
exceeding well received by his Majesty, and in singular good intelligence with
the Duke; so that he contributes not a little to our Affairs, in which we also
interest him with us, as in a Cause which is common to us all: That which
confirms us in the hopes that they will in good earnest embrace our defense, is
the Answer that they have given lately to the King of Denmark's Ambassador, who
offers a Mediation for the Accommodation of the two Crowns, and particularly
desires a more puissant assistance at Sea; but without in any kind touching
this Proposition, they gave him only for answer, that his Majesty would
continue to him, as he has hitherto done, all the assistance promised; and
when he has need of Ships* he can be accommodated therewith by the King of
Swede, and the States, who have their Commerce in the Baltic. You see, Sirs,
the present condition of 1628. March. your Affairs, and we shall not be wanting
in advertising you of the Progress, as we also beseech you frequently to impart
to us the particulars of your Condition, even by Express Pinnaces, it being so
absolutely necessary, that we cannot forbear reiterating our Supplications
herein. We have received yours of the 24th passed, and do perceive what order
you say you have given for payment of the English with you, which we have made
use of, according to what you have thereof writ us. The Proceedings of the
Captains are very much disliked, but yours such, as give great satisfaction:
The said Captains will receive the Kings Commands when the Corn shall be
dispatched, which possibly will not be to the contentment of them all; in the
mean time, it will not be displeasing, that you oblige them to keep to their
Duty. We have heretofore writ to you, touching the Ship of Monsieur le Mayor,
taken by the English, and carried to Bristol, and how they would have condemned
her, and were upon the point to have done it, alleging diverse reasons for it;
above a^l, the Deposition made of the Equipage, in which the Mayor has very
little share; but we have so solicited the Duke, that by his Authority, as
High-Admiral, he has suspended Proceedings for this Week, and we shall
endeavor all we can to procure an entire deliverance; but we beseech you, that
for the future, the desire of protecting others, may not endanger the losing of
our own, and not to give any Passport which may render others suspicious, for
here they are very exact. We shall add, for the closing of this, that having
some days passed seen the Ambassador of Holland^ 1028. March. who is a Person
most affectionate for us, we understand from him, that the States had resolved
to send Ambassadors to the two Kings, to endeavor an Agreement; and that they
were to depart the 25th of November. which none can hinder, if they have not
changed their resolution; if they pass this way, they will discover here
whether their Inclinations are disposed for a real accomplishment of those
things you were promised by the Peace: Time will show us the success of this
Enterprise; in the mean time, we pray God that by this, or any other way, we
may arrive at a Peace in effect, as well as in name, and that there may not be
hid under her Ashes matter for a new Quarrel: whatever it be, we are assured,
that if any Propositions thereof be made, you will do us the favor to
advertise us readily of it, and that you will not take any Resolutions without
his Majesty; otherwise, if they hear any thing on this side to the contrary, it
will entirely ruin your Affairs. We will not trouble you further, than to
assure you, that we are both by Duty and Affection,

Messieurs, Your most humble, and most obedient Servants, David, Vincent,
Dehinse.

London, December. 25. 1627. POSTSCRIPT.
Messieurs,
WE advised you by ours from Plymouth, that whether we apprehended the
Intention of the 1628. March. Duke aright or not, it is certainly in show for
the providing of Corn, which shall be sent you; and we (...) reiterate our
advice (if you please) to make good and ready payment for it, lest otherwise
they should sen^ you hereafter no more.




Gentlemen,
WE sent you a Copy of the substance of this by the Sieur Pepin, one of our
Fellow Citizens, who parted this day from this City, taking his way by Dover,
for the lading his Bark with Wheat, and other Commodities for Rochel; and
though he r^^kons to set sail with the first Wind, we judge it necessary to
send you this by Plymouth, yet have nothing to add, save that we are assured,
that the Corn the Duke should send to your City, is lading with all diligence,
together with a great quantity of Bisquet, Beer, Beef, Pork Salted, Cheese,
Butter, and other Commodities; and that all (God willing) will be ready to sail
by the end of this Month, at the furthest, under a puissant Convoy of Ships of
War. These are from, Scile of France.

London, January 7. 1628. Messieurs, Yours, etc.


Gentlemen,
WE have by all our former given you an account of our Negotiations since we
arrived here, and of the diligence we have used to procure the sending of
Provisions to you; if the effects have not appeared to you so soon as we have
desired, and your necessities required, it is not from want of affection on
this side, and much less of our solicitation, but from the difficulty of
getting Ships in those places where the Corn was to be laden, and contrary
Winds for sending them from the 1628. March. places where they were hired, to
the Ports where they were to take in their lading. But the Sieur Bossay, being
arrived from you the sixteenth Current, we have made such pressing Instances,
that a resolution is taken to send away what is ready, that it may be to you an
Earnest and Assurance of the rest. And to confirm you further, his Majesty and
his Council finds it necessary, that one of us should make a journey to you, to
inform you particularly of the good intentions they have here for you, and of
the preparations that they are making for your assistance. Though each of us
desire to take this Voyage, we have agreed upon Monsieur Dehinse, our Colleague,
and yesterday we went with him to take his leave of his Majesty; he will tell
you the good words that we then had, which were such, as we think it our duty
to give you in his own terms: (viz.) Receive not this as a Succor, but as a
small Refreshment, to give Life and Courage to your City, until the season of
the year will permit a more powerful assistance to be sent you: Assure your
selves, that I will assist you in such measure, as I will procure you a good
Peace from the King of France, or oblige those that incompass you to retire:
Nay, assure your City, that I will never abandon you. Whereupon the Duke
undertaking to speak, told us, you see, Messieurs, you have the Word of a King
for this; and all the rest Sieur Dehinse will illustrate to you more
particularly, having with him the Request we presented to the Council the
fourteenth present, as well as the Project betwixt his Majesty and us, which
has been since agreed upon. If at first you apprehend that we superfluously
dilate and discourse, Sieur Dehinse will give you the Reasons and Motives for
it; as also the necessity we have had to make use of the uttermost power you
have given us. In the mean time you may 1628. March. be assured, that so far as
we can judge, they have (...) here other than sincere intentions. We promise
o^^selves, that receiving this beginning of assistance with all sort of
gratitude, you will establish so good an order for the ready sale, and
consequently sure payme^^ of the Provision, which shall be sent you, as will
i^courage all others to supply you hereafter. For ^^ parts, we shall continue
to labor to prevent your being in any want, and to execute, so far as is in o^
power, all that you have by your Instructions given ^^ in Charge. We beseech
you further, that for our necessary assistance you will speedily return to us
Monsie^^ Dehinse, who informing us of your Condition, wi^^ contribute much to
the hastening of the Preparations* and it will be needful, that every three
Weeks, or Mon^^ at least, you send one to us. We refer you to Monsieur Dehinse,
to tell you the advantage that we have made of Monsieur de Bossays arrival, and
to testify his worthy acquitting the hazardous Commission that you have given
him; and now there remains nothing, save our prayers to God, to fortify you,
and to pour out his Blessing upon the Justice of your Arms, until we i^ the end
obtain a good Peace: And this is the Prayers of those that are,

Messieurs, Your most humble, and most obedient Servants, David. Vincent.

London, Jan. 29. 1628.

Gentlemen,
IF the two last we sent by Land, since the arrival of Sieur Gorribon, are come
to your hands, they will acquaint you with the substance of what we shall more
particularly hereby inform you: Our 1628. March. instant solicitations having
in the end obtained a Convoy of Corn, Bisquet, Beer, Flesh, and other
Provisions, and judging it necessary that one of us should accompany it,
Monsieur Dehinse went hence to that end, the thirtieth passed, and is the
Messenger of the good words his Majesty has given us, according as we have
mentioned in those we have sent you by him: But having the same day met Sieur
Gorribon, he informed us of the success of his Voyage, which he had been
constrained to take by Sea, and how he met at the height of Bell-Isle the Naval
Army, who assuredly intended to go to you; but they judging that the Men of War
ordered for the security of this Convoy, could not prevent its falling into the
hands of those who block you up, they returned hither with the Sieur Gorribon,
who gave us yours dated December. 30. We went immediately to the Duke, and by his
means presented a new Request to the Council, representing your extremity; and
that if you were not with all speed relieved, you would be lost without
recovery. This gave a hot Allarm; and the Admiralty sent us word, that
assuredly they should, within six Weeks, set out a Fleet puissant enough to
shock those that are in your Road; and in the mean time, since your necessities
are so great, they were resolved to lade with all diligence the Provisions in
small Ships, for to send them you under the favor of a good Wind, that they
may pass by stealth. This is the advice that we sent you by Land by two several
Messengers, who went hence the fourth Current: Since this, all our employment
has been to solicit the speedy dispatching of the Provisions, for which we
have obtained a promise; and that the 1628. March. Earl of Denby, the Dukes
Brother-in-law, should with all diligence go to Plymouth, to give necessary
orders for the same. Whilst these things were in doing, Monsieur David
delivered us yours of the 24th passed, and informed us of your Condition by
word of mouth, having arrived here the seventh in the Evening. In the Morning
we waited upon the Duke, and delivered him a Letter as from you, which was one
of your signed Blanks, and after Dinner we were conducted by him, and the Duke
of Soubize, to his Majesty, to whom we presented yours, which we seconded with
new and most instant supplications, and in terms which showed a vehement
Emotion: His Answer was, that he had prevented our Demands, for that orders for
all that we desired was given. After which, he having enquired of us the
particular Estate of the City, and being answered by us according as you had
particularly writ, touching the Propositions which had been made you, and your
Answer, he said, it was done like honest men; and he assured, for his part, he
would never forsake you* Much contented with these good words we passed away
the day following, expecting some effects, and the next day we waited upon the
Duke, begging of him, that the departure of his Brother-in-law might not be
longer deferred; but the Duchess, his Lady, being in Labor, we could not come
to speak with him: but understanding, in the Evening, that she was happily
delivered of a Son, we took occasion, in the morning, to go and testify the
share we took, and that which we knew you would take in his Joy; in which
having evidenced a particular satisfaction, 1628. March. he assured us, that
without doubt his Brother-inlaw would depart next morning, which is to day; and
that a Resolution was taken, to Convoy by Men of War, all the small Vessels
laden with Provisions, conducting them to the height of Bayonne, and there wait
a good Wind to make all pass at once: And to that end, they expected that we
should furnish them with good Pilots, they having put them in hopes at
Plymouth, that we should send them some thither. Upon this, we again assured
the same, and that Sieur Dehinse should to that end go to Plymouth, and if need
were, should imbark himself with the Earl of Denby, to assist him with his
advice, as there should be occasion, not judging that at present he would sail
directly to your City. This he seemed to accept of, as very agreeable, and
accordingly Sieur Dehinse has prepared to depart to morrow, and will write you
more particularly of the success of the Voyage. In the mean time, we commit
this to the care of Captain David, to the end, that if he come first to you, as
he hopes by the assistance of God to do, you may be informed of the Progress we
have been able to make hitherto; he will tell you by word of mouth the good
words we have from his Majesty, having carried him with us when we went to
deliver him yours; the thing we have only in doubt is, whether the Fleet can be
ready in the time they put you in hopes of: But we assure our selves, that if
you can be refreshed with Victuals, you may well patient your selves some
Weeks, in expectation from hence: However it is, it seems by all that we can
see, that it is in good earnest that they embrace your Affairs; and 1628.
March. because it requires an Immense Expense, they have resolved of having a
Parliament the seventeenth of March next, from whom they hope for good on your
behalf: In the mean time they assure us, that they have at present a Fond for
the the War; and that it need not be feared, but the Parliament will provide
for us. Yesterday we were with the Duke, ^aving communicated to him yours for
Holland, he was of advice, not only to send them; but further, that one of us
should go thither, and take the occasion of going with Monsieur Dolbier, who
his Majesty sends thither, as well to buy a quantity of Arms, and some Horse,
as to oblige the States to join with him for your defense. Upon this we are
agreed that Sieur Vincent, who has Acquaintance there, shall undertake this
Voyage; and besides the Instructions that you have given us, we have given him
others that are new, whereof we send you a Copy, having conceived them so, as
you will find by the advice of the Duke; and Sieur Vincent has prepared
himself to part hence to morrow. In the mean time, we expect to morrow
Messieurs Bragneau, and Gobert, who we hear is land^d at Falmouth, and comes
hither by Land: We shall consult together what each of us ought to do for the
execution of the Commission you are pleased to give us; and we desire you to
believe, that we shall apply our selves thereunto with the most assiduity and
vigilance that is possible; and that we are most extremely and sensibly
troubled, that we are not able to advance your Affairs more advantagiously. But
we have had a double obstruction, the one natural to those of this Climate, the
other the great difficulty they 1628. March. have had to get Money, not but the
Country abounds in it, but because it is not sought by the ordinary Forms. As
to the good affection of the people in general, it seems hitherto (as we can
certainly assure you) as much as we can desire. We shall not fail to write you
diligently, each of us, from the place where we are going to be scattered; and
in the mean time, we jointly assure you, how much we are,

London, Feb. 11. 1628. Messieurs, Your most humble, and most obedient
Servants, David, Vincent, Dehinse.



Gentlemen,
THe same day we writ to you last, the Sieur Bragneau Another Letter from the
Deputies to the Rochellers.
and Gobert arrived, and brought us all yours, and expressed abundantly your
necessities, which we together represented to the Duke, with supplications to
hasten the effects of his Majesty's promises, and accordingly he dispatched a
Courier to have all things in readiness, and ordered, that Monsieur Bragneau,
and Dehinse, shall be gone to morrow to establish such orders as shall be
judged necessary; it is that which they dispose themselves unto, and will not
fail, when they shall be at Plymouth, to write you largely of all they shall do
there: We refer all to them, and we shall each in his Province labor to do
what shall be for your Affairs, and pray to God that the success may be as we
desire. We shall reiterate here what we have many times said in our former (to
wit) that the Duke not finding at Plymouth the Corn, as he hoped, and not
finding him in condition to execute that which we have 1628. March. proposed on
his part, as to relieving us upon their Charge, the fear we had that insisting
upon having them of gift, would have obstructed all, hindered our pressing the
execution of that promise; we only requested him to make the advance, and that
you will reimburse them from thence. There are some particular Merchants which
have laden that which goes to you; and as it is the hope of Gain that induces
them to it, we assure our selves, that your Prudence knows well to judge how
much it is of import, that they be contented by you, that others may thereby be
obliged to undertake the same. The Wind having staid Sieur Vincent, he is yet
here, and therefore can assure you how much it is that we are all,

London, Feb. 14. 1628. Messieurs, Your most humble and most obedient Servants,
David, Vincent, Dehinse.



A Relation touching the Negotiation of the Deputies of Rochel in England,
since the Contents of their Letter of December. 25.
THe third of January, 1628. my Lord Montjoy, and the rest who had been taken
Prisoners in the Isle of Re, arrived at London, being conducted by the Sieur de
Meaux, who presented them to the Queen, from the Queen her Mother, who had
obtained of the King the sending of them without Ransom, and boasted of the
courteous Entertainment which they had received, even that they had been
defrayed thorough the Kingdom: 1628 March The Gentleman that brought them (who
is a witty man) negotiated with the Principal of the Council, for a Treaty of
Accommodation, for which the Ambassadors of Denmark had formerly made some
Overtures; we observed, that he gave them frequent Visits, and that accordingly
they took a sudden resolution to go to France, where we discovered they had a
design to pursue that Negotiation.

Upon this we had our double fears, one that these Propositions of
Accommodation was but an Artifice for retarding the preparations, the
consequence of which we saw from the smalness of the Provisions that we knew
was in the City: The other, that in case a Treaty should be agreed on in
earnest, it would be to our disadvantage; in that it was unlikely, that after
the disgrace at Re, the English would be under the necessary consideration of
leaping into that Port and Citadel, which their Arms could not batter; and
therefore, upon these grounds, we resolved to endeavor to divert the Duke from
hearkening thereunto.

When we sought an opportunity to discourse the Duke in this matter, he
preventing it, told us, the eleventh of this Month, that he apprehended very
well to what end the courteous deportment of the French tended, that not to
give place to them in courtesy, his Majesty would also send back the French
Prisoners, which should be conducted by Monsieur Dolbier. In the mean time,
that we should esteem our selves entirely assured (and give the like to those
of Rochel) that they would not come upon any thing which shall tend to a
Treaty, until that by some notable Exploit they should put themselves into a
condition to do 1628. March. it advantageously, both for them and us; that if
in France they have any other belief, it cannot but be advantageous to us,
because they may thereupon abate; whereas on the contrary, as to them, they
would redouble their diligence.

It was not a little satisfaction to us to hear him speak in this manner; and
above all, when the next day he made us an Overture, to present us to the
Council, and to express our just fears with earnestness, that upon the noise
which might be scattered of an Accommodation, our Common Affairs might receive
prejudice. And thus we have given you a Narrative of the discourse it self.

The 13th, we carried him our Memorial, which having approved, he rendezvoused
us next day in his Chamber, where about four in the Evening he came to us
himself, and brought us into the Council; but before he did it, he held a
discourse which filled us full of thoughts, advertising us not to be
astonished, if any should enquire what we had to offer to his Majesty in
consideration of our demanding his assistance; and above all, what assurance we
could give the King, if he should engage himself in our further assistance,
that the City should not be carried to a particular Treaty: As to himself, he
was far from any such thoughts; yet nevertheless, to serve us the more
profitably, he desired to know of us what he should say to them, in case they
should propose any such thing; and above all, what judgment we should make of
an Over^ure for the City to send hither a certain number of Children, of the
most considerable Families, which being treated Honorably at the Kings Charge,
should serve as Hostages for the Faith of the City.

1628. March. This Proposition, notwithstanding the Dukes Artifice, was of a
very ill relish to us, and fearing that a sudden Answer could not be so well
framed, as that it would not prejudice us, whether in being too reserved, which
might disgust them, and retard the sending of succors, or in yielding too much
beyond our Instructions, in such sort, as we should be disowned. We told him in
general, that we could give all assurance that Rochel would never deny any
reasonable Overtures, for giving all just contentment to his Majesty therein;
but as to that which was upon particulars, we most humbly besought him, that as
it had pleased him to command us to couch our desires in writing, that it would
likewise please him, to let us be answered in the same manner; to the end, that
agreeing among our selves upon that which has been proposed to us, that which
we have to say may be the better digested.

Having testified his approbation hereof, he led us from thence into the
Gilded Chamber, where the King was in full Council; before whom having
kneeled, and by his Command standing up, Monsieur David represented in brief,
that which we had more at large done in writing, which accordingly he presented.

The King having taken it, gave it us again, and commanded us to read it to
him, which we did with a loud and distinct voice, to the end that all might
hear it, and was of this Tenure.

The Deputies of the City of Rochel to his most Serene Majesty, having had
formerly some advice, that he silently treated for an Accommodation betwixt the
two Crowns, in which the Ambassadors of the King of Denmark labored, and
finding 1628. March. themselves confirmed in this belief, by the sending a
Gentleman as Envoy from France, under pretext of conducting some Prisoners, who
has diverse times had conference thereupon with the Lords of the Council, and
has also had close Conferences with the Ambassadors of Denmark; and that in
prosecution thereof they went readily to Paris, they have thought it their duty
most humbly to supplicate his Majesty to give them Audience, to the end they
may give him and the Lords of the Council, to understand what they believe is
their necessary duty to represent upon this occasion.

First, they find themselves obliged to acknowledge they have already had the
Honor to render to his Majesty their most humble thanks; and desire now to
reiterate the same, for that it has pleased him, from his own good and proper
motion, to hold it incumbent upon him to make good to them his Royal Word, in
reference to the Articles of Peace, which the King their Sovereign had agreed
with him concerning them in the year 1626. and for the execution of the same,
had sent upon their Coasts a puissant Army, under the Conduct of his great
Admiral, in the Month of July 1 st.

A^ his Majesty in this assistance has made his Piety and Gene^osity appear to
all the World, and the entire confidence that may be put in his Royal Word, by
all those to whom he gives it, so we hold it indubitable, that he will be
pleased to make it seen by us, how happily they are protected, whom he
undertakes to defend with his Arms; and that as they are invincible, so his
Prudence cannot be circumvented by any Artifice.

1628. March. Hereupon they supplicate him, in all humility, to consider what
is the true end that those propose to themselves, who manage these Overtures,
and bring in debate the Propositions for a Treaty.

It is true, that Peace is desirable above all things, and the City, for which
they act, have an ardent passion for it, especially being but newly delivered
from the miseries of two Wars successively.

But the question is, whether the present conjuncture considered, that which is
proposed is the true means to arrive at it; and whether, in the contrary, there
is not cause to fear, that it is a snare extended for their ruin; which (if it
please not his Majesty to provide against) they see it most inevitable, making
no doubt but this Negotiation draws with it these necessary consequences.

First, That though it may not slacken the true and good affection of his
Majesty, whereof they have an entire confidence, yet it may at least the
diligence of my Lords, his Ministers, in their preparations for their succors,
considering that the Treaty coming toward a conclusion, the intercessors for
it will not (without doubt) be wanting, in designingly giving all imaginable
hopes, which out of frugality may retard preparations; and now the least delay
will be their ruin, considering the condition in which they find themselves.

Secondly, The news of Treating being noised, will certainly keep at home those
who prepare themselves to take Horse so soon as the Spring appears, there being
nothing more imprudent, than to put on Harness, when Peace is ready to be made.

Thirdly, The bruit of a Treaty will endanger 1628. March. the dissipating the
Duke of Rohan's Troops, Experience having always showed, that Forces of the
nature of his, composed of Volunteers without pay, are easily scattered by any
hopes of Accommodation, every one being impatient of returning home to his own
house.

Fourthly, The worst is, that during this delay, those who besiege their City,
will with ease build all their Forts, and finish their Line on the Land side,
assemble their Naval Army, which is not yet in a good condition; they will work
at the Digue (or Bank) which they have begun, without loosing one moment, and
at shutting the passage by Sea, and inaccessibly imbarrass their Haven: The
Provisions which remained in the City, after their furnishing his Majesty's
Army, will be presently consumed. In brief, the Affairs are in such a state,
that the opportunity of relieving them being passed, all the Forces of Europe
will not be able to do any thing, and then consequently, the Treaty now
proposed will vanish; his Majesty will be derided, and the City which has
engaged with him, will necessarily be forced to render, and submit to the rage
of a Victorious and irritated Master.

As his Majesty knows well how to judge of the validity of these Reasons and
Consequences, so they supplicate him in all humility, that notwithstanding all
the practices that may have been used to the contrary, he will provide that
there may be no slackning, in any kind, of the necessary diligence for
preparing the relief which it has pleased him to promise them: And since the
Convoy of Men and Victuals is almost ready, by the great care that the Duke of
Buckingham High-Admiral has taken, it would please him to command the whole
Navy 1628. March. to set sail with the very first, in expectation (...) his
Majesty may by his Forces do some (...) worthy of the puissance of so great a
(...), and oblige those to think seriously of a good (...), who at present have
no intentions (...) it.

This is word for word as we read it; and we (...) that the King, at the word
(...) smiled, looking upon the President of the (...) who was on his right
hand, and the Duke (...) was next to him, and said something to them (...)
English which we could not hear, but by his (...) we apprehended, that he
declared his (...) to it. As to all the rest, both he and the (...) heard it
very attentively, and commanded us (...) deliver our Writing to my Lord Conway,
Se^^etary of State, the King promising us to (...) of it: Then we took our
leave with a Serene ^ountenance, without having any of the Proposi^^ons made at
that time to us, which the Duke had (...) of.

The 16th, which was the Lords day, we devoted (...) his service, and the next
morning waited upon (...) Duke as he rise, who told us, that he, and (...) more
of the Council, were nominated for ^ommissioners, to make a Formal Treaty with
us (...) the Name of his Majesty, which would serve to publish to all the World
such a Union between ^im and us, as would put them out of hopes of his
^bandoning us, or that we should leave him by a separate Accommodation: But
after this, he came again to the Proposition that he had before made (...), and
told us, that we were to consider what we could on our parts propound, the
better to secure his Majesty, and to oblige him to the great expense 1628.
March. that he must be at, by undertaking in go^ earnest our defense.

To this demand, we judged it safer to interr^gate, than to answer, and told
him, that the in^nite disproportion betwixt us, and so great an^ puissant a
Monarch considered, we could not ha^^ so much temerity as to believe, that we
had a^^ thing to offer worthy of him, or to put in balanc^ with the glory of so
great and generous an actio^ as that will be of relieving us; that great King^
are in this the Image of God, who does good to them from whom he can receive
nothing: Nevertheless, if there were any thing wherein we could testify to him
our entire acknowledgment, and to assure him of the sincerity of our
intentions, in never making a separate Treaty, we should hearke^ to it with all
respect.

Upon this, with difficulty enough, and in words sufficiently confused, as a
man who had something to say which he would not express, he touched upon two
things: First, that which he had before opened, touching some Children to send
hither as Hostages: Secondly, that in case of necessity, we would engage our
selves to give retreat to the Kings Sea Forces, as well as Land; and added,
that he had desired to confer with us hereupon, before our Conference with the
Commissioners; to the end, that before them, there might be nothing to debate
of, which might be of prejudice to us.

We answered, that since his Majesty had freely offered, that we should draw a
Conceit for a Treaty, we would thereupon discourse the matter among our
selves, frame the Articles, and communicate them to him with all speed; which
he approved 1628. March. of, and promised to send to us after Dinner Monsieur
de Vie, his Secretary.

When we were withdrawn, to commune among our selves, we all agreed, that the
Dukes two O^ertures were dangerous, and a snare, extended against our liberty;
and as to the Hostages, that that would be grievous to our Fellow-Citizens, to
see themselves bereaved of their Children sent to breath in a strange Air, and
to be bound by such dear Pledges. And as to the other, that the consequence of
that seemed more great, and the danger more eminent, since that if they had any
thoughts of seizing us, they will have no more to do, than under a color of
seeking retreat, enter the Forts, and so force the City to return to their
Ancient Yoke; and that if such an unhappiness should befall us, our City would
be an eternal Theater of War, in that the King would never receive us into his
favor: But that which was most to be feared was, that the Yoke of their
Domination would be too hard to submit willingly unto; and therefore if we must
lose our Liberty, right Reason obliges us to remain under our true and
legitimate Master, and seek, whilst we may, to make our Conditions with him:
but since this was the last remedy, we ought in prudence to prevent the
reducing us to such a Condition, and at present to temporize and avoid these
Propositions, so far as was possible, without discontenting them; but if they
insisted upon it at a time so important, as was the present relieving of the
City, we must not retard it, by rejecting what they demanded, but agree to all,
referring it to the City, who afterward will ratify so much thereof, as they
shall judge necessary for their security.

1628. March. Being all three of this Sentiment, according^ in all our actions
we have been most unanimou^ we took Pen and Ink, and framed the Project for a
Treaty, to the end that the Articles for the same being agreed on by us, and
put in writing^ we might barter more securely in our Communication, whether
with the Dukes Secretary, or with the Commissioners; and having long enough
conferred together on the matter, we gave him this Conceit.

The Treaty between the most glorious Prince Charles by the Grace of God King
of Great Britain, and the Mayor, Sheriffs, Peers, Burgers, and Inhabitants of
the City of Rochel, their Deputies subscribing for them.
THe Deputies of the City of Rochel, provided with full and ample Power, being
at present with his most Serene Majesty, and having most humbly supplicated him
to take and receive those of the City of Rochel under his Protection and
Safeguard, and to make them sensible of the effects, by an assistance worthy of
his Majesty, by the means of which they may be delivered from the oppression
they now lie under, and be restored to the favor of their Prince, the most
Christian King, and to the enjoyment of an assured Peace; and his most Serene
Majesty inclining favorably to this Request, has granted them his Protection,
and accordingly the Articles following have been reciprocally stipulated.

First, As to the said Rochellers, they promise all the aid and favor that is
to them possible, for the advancement and happy success of the Arms of 1628.
March. his most Serene Majesty, in equipping as many Men of War as is possible
for them, for favoring the Sea Army of his Majesty in all their undertakings,
as in furnishing experienced Pilots for their Neighbor Coasts, and the
blocking up of Rivers, in providing for those in their City his Majesty shall
give orders to, appointing Magazines and proper places for Storehouses for all
sort of Provisions, if it be judged necessary, in receiving Vessels which
Storms may constrain to put into their Harbor, or shall be thrust thither by
some other necessity, that even in case all the Army of his Majesty should be
thereunto pressed, to give them retreat and shelter, and provide for their
security.

Secondly, The said Rochellers will not hearken to any particular
Accommodation, nor embrace any Treaty of Peace whatsoever, save with the good
liking and entire consent of his Majesty.

Thirdly, If it shall hereafter happen that any Enterprise shall be made on the
behalf of France upon the Estates of his Majesty, because of the said
assistance, the which he now offers them, they will declare themselves in his
favor, and will divert, with all their power, all designs to his prejudice.

Fourthly, For the assurance of this, the said Deputies, from this time
forward, do promise it in the name of the said Rochellers, and obliges
themselves to cause these Articles to be ratified with a solemn Oath, as well
by the Mayor, Sheriffs, and Peers of the Common Hall, as also by all the
Burgers and Inhabitants extraordinarily assembled to that end.

Fifthly, As to his most Serene Majesty, he promises 1628. March. in the word
of a King, to succor them at his own proper Cost and Charges, both by Sea and
Land, according to his Royal Puissance, until he has freed them from the Forts
that are as well in the Isle of Re, as about their City, and procured them a
Peace; and to that end, he will henceforward arm puissantly against the Spring,
to execute something worthy of his Majesty, using means to divert the designs
that are against the City, and oblige the Troops that are about the City to
retreat, until by the happy success it shall please God to give to his Arms, it
shall be entirely delivered.

Sixthly, His Majesty, during all the time that the War shall continue, shall
assist the said City with such a number of Soldiers of his Subjects, as it
shall judge necessary for its Guard, the said Soldiers being paid by his
Majesty.

Seventhly, His Majesty shall permit, as well to his Subjects, as to the
Inhabitants of the said City, to lade in all his Territories all ProvisIons of
which it has need, and cause Authentic Patents to be dispatched, and sent to
all the Ports and Havens, to the end, that by virtue thereof, without any other
Pass-Ports, Merchants may freely buy in their Cargazons, and not be troubled in
their transportation of them.

Eighthly, That from this time forward, his Majesty shall cause to be sent
away, with a sufficient Convoy, the Corn, and other Provisions, which by his
Command is already laden, for to be sent with all speed to the said City, to be
distributed there at an honest price.

Ninthly, To ease the poverty of the City, and to help its most pressing
necessities, his Majesty 1628. March. shall permit a Collection in all his
Estates, and at present establish such order as is necessary for that.

Tenthly, There having been heretofore certain Articles of Treaty compiled
betwixt the Duke of Buckingham, High-Admiral of England, and the said
Rochellers; to some of which the said Lord Admiral did agree, with the good
liking of his Majesty, and referred the rest to a more particular Conference:
From henceforward his Majesty does agree to, and holdet^ for good and valuable,
those that the said Admiral has allowed of; and as to the rest, he will with
the first examine them, and give the said Rochellers such just contentment
therein, as they can expect.

Eleventhly and lastly, In case it happens that his Majesty shall come
hereafter to a Treaty of Peace with the most Christian King, the said
Rochellers shall be thereunto called by his Majesty; and no Treaty shall be
concluded, without stipulation expressly for their Privileges and Immunities,
according to the Memorials they shall give in to his Majesty, who obliges
himself further, to be Garrantee for the said Treaty.

David, Vincent, Dehinse.


With these Articles thus compiled, we expected the Secretary of the Duke, but
he came neither this day, nor the next; so that the nineteenth, we went with
them to the Duke, who kept them to consider of at leisure, and promised that he
would confer upon them with the Commissioners, and send for us.

1628. March. Being returned home, we found his Secretary there, who seemed
very sorry for his delay, and made multitude of business his excuse; but for
our parts, we were well pleased that he had not seen us, desiring rather to
communicate with the Master, than Servant.

We waited until the 22th, and seeing then that he did not send for us, we
sought an occasion to present our selves to him; but he prevented us, by
sending us word, that he was employed in the urgent Affairs of the King, though
the truth was, that he avoided Meeting us, upon a difficulty that he and the
other Commissioners made of the fifth Article of our Treaty, which he would
have changed; but nevertheless, desired not to enter thereupon into a contest
with us.

The means that he chose, was to send his Secretary to the Duke of Soubize,
whom he acquainted, that the terms upon which we desired that the King would
oblige himself to us, had something of too much strictness; and therefore
desired him to be a means of bringing us, to qualify and receive them in these
terms; ( viz.) That his Majesty, being moved with the good affections which he
has always had for the Churches, and particularly for the City of Rochel, he
promised in the Faith and Word of a King, to give them all convenient
assistance, unto the obtaining of a good and firm Peace.

The Duke of Soubize, having hereupon conferred with us, we received great
displeasure from this change; and fearing that he avoided coming, from some
doubt they had of not being able to obtain a Peace which would deliver us from
our Fetters, and above all, from that Fort for which they had undertaken the
War; yet nevertheless, we 1628. March. judged it not fit to show the least
backwardness to the Treaty; for we polished our Articles, and so carried them
the 27th ditto, corrected to the Duke, who receiving them of us, and reading
them in our presence, made show of approving them; and told us, that without
further Communication with the Commissioners, of whom he stood not in need, all
being agreed unto, carried them to the King, presented them to the Council, and
assured us, that we should have all contentment.

Leaving him, it was matter of great joy to us, that the Duke took no more
notice of Hostages, or receiving the Armies into the City; and that without
being obliged to any debate with the Commissioners, our Articles were received.

The 28th ditto, receiving advice that there was a competent quantity of
Provisions at Plymouth, we waited upon the Duke, to beg of him, that the Earl
of Denby might depart the next day; and that the Sieur Dehinse, our Colleague,
might, according as it was agreed upon, accompany him in his Voyage, and have
the honor to receive the Commands of the King, and his own.

He carried us immediately to the King, who received us with these Expressions;
I understand that the Earl of Denby will set sail without delay; take not that
which he carries at present for a succor, it is but for a refreshment, to the
end to give courage to your City, until time will permit a more puissant
assistance. And after a little pause, for fear that the word Time would not be
taken by us according to his intention; I mean, said he, the season, and so
soon as the Spring shall be come: To which having returned him most humble
thanks, he said yet further; Be assured, that I will assist you so powerfully,
1628. March. as shall obtain you a good Peace. The Duke added, that all War was
for arriving at Peace; and that his Majesty in speaking, intended none but such
a one as was good: To which having answered, that we should receive from his
Majesty such a Peace as himself should esteem reasonable and good: I had
rather, said he, it should be ill for me, than for you; for for me I can always
conte^d it; but as to you, you will be totally lost. After these words, Sieur
Dehinse bowing himself to receive his Commands; Assure (said he to him) those
of Rochel, that I will not abandon them: Upon which the Duke told us, you see,
Gentlemen, you have the Word of a King. As to your Articles that you
communicated to me yesterday, the King likes them well, and goes now to have
them ratified in Council, and cause the Confirmation thereof to be delivered to
you.

Very much contented with these good words, we withdrew, and the next morning
heard that the Earl of Denby prepared for Plymouth, which obliged Sieur
Dehinse, our Colleague, to begin his journey thither.

What passed since on the occasion of Sieur Gorribon's arrival, which
occasioned the retarding the sending of the Provisions, is contained in our
Letter of the eleventh of February.

This is the Contents of the Packet which Captain Sacremore delivered the
Mayor, and his Council, by which they had a full account of all the proceedings
of their Deputies, and commended the diligence and care they had had of sending
them diverse Duplicates of their Packets, to the end that one might come to
hands, if the other should miscarry, as it fell out.

The 24th ditto was cast in Rochel four Pieces of 1628. March. Cannon, two of
28 pound Ball, and the other two of 10 pound Ball; of which there were but
three good, one of the greatest miscarrying by the Mould not being well dry.

The 30th, the Mayor, Sheriffs, Counselors, Peers, Burgers, and Soldiers,
being assembled in the City-Hall, swore and promised to keep the Treaty which
their Deputies had made with the King of England, for their protection and
safeguard, which they did without disowning their Fidelity and Obedience that
they owed to the most Christian King, their Natural Lord and Sovereign.

APRIL.
April, 1628. arrived at Rochel a young man, one Vivier, servant to Sieur
Vincent, dispatched by him from Holland (where following the order that was
given him he passed) to give account of the Negotiation of his Master for
procuring some relief of Victuals and Munition for the City; and delivered to
the Mayor this Letter, dated the sixth of March, of this Tenure, in Ciphers.

Sieur Vincent's Letter from Holland to the Rochellers, dated March 6. New
Style, 1628.
Gentlemen,
BEsides two men that I have sent you from this Country, this third follows, to
give you an account how I left Affairs in England, and how it is with me here:
I may tell you, that there they dispose themselves to relieve you with great
Forces, both by Sea and Land, and have resolved to furnish you with 1628.
April. Provisions; and to further it, Messieurs, Bragneau and Dehinse were set
forward from London to Plymouth, the 14th passed, and the Earl of Denby was
speedily to follow them. I hope you have e're this received something from
thence: I came from London the 17th with Monsieur Dolbier, who came hither to
buy Arms and Horses, and arrived the 21th in Zealand, where I stayed eight
days, for to dispose some particular persons to the lading of Corn to send to
you, which having put in order, I hope you will find the effects thereof, and
that there will go from thence to you 150 Tun: I am here where I spoke
yesterday with the Prince of Orange, who received me very well; and I am not
without hopes, that we shall underhand receive from hence some assistance, at
least of Money. I hope to make a great Cargaison at Amsterdam, whither I shall
presently go, having already disposed by Letters many Merchants to enter upon
it. Above all, I believe that it is of greatest import to you, to have advice,
and not to spare Money in Messengers, but send them frequently, that of many,
one at least may come to you. I have given a hundred Livres to this Man; and I
pray, if he acquit himself well of his promise, deal honestly with him: I am,

Gentlemen, Your most humble and most obedient Deputy and Servant, Ph. Vincent.


The hopes that men had of the speedy arrival of the Earl of Denby, according
to these Letters, rejoiced greatly the Rochellers.

1628. April. The 8th, in the night, the Battery Royal, and the Forts Louys,
Meroeil (called S. Esprite, which had never yet shot) and la Fons, shot
Fire-Bullets, from nine in the Evening, until four in the Morning, without
killing or hurting any Person, or setting any House on fire, being prevented by
the care they took, having set Sentinels in the Steeples, who as soon as the
Bullet was fallen, gave notice of the place, whither men went to search for it
with a Hook of Iron, made expressly for that end, with which they easily seized
them, and carried them into the Street; otherwise their burning was such, that
letting them lie never so little, they would presently set the Floor of the
Rooms on fire, which are ordinarily of Fir; and it was found, that in a little
time they would pierce three Stories.

The 10th, the Mayor having had advice that the Besiegers mined in the first
Houses of de la Fons, at five hundred paces from the City, they sallied out
from the Port Coigne, with two Companies of Foot, and fifteen or twenty Horse,
to know the truth. At first they sent out eight Horse, and a Party of fifteen
Soldiers, conducted by a Sergeant, to discover what force there was, whilst
the rest stole along, under Covert of the great high way, until they came to
the Houses, of which they hoped to render themselves Masters; but the succors
which came to their relief from the next Forts forced them to retire, and the
greatest part of them to put themselves into the Mill-Houses and Arbours, at
three hundred paces from the Counterscarp, whither the others came presently to
skirmish, and though few enough to draw them into the Ambuscade which they had
1628. April. laid for them, at a hundred paces from thence, in a low bottom of
the Highway; it was without effect, they maintaining themselves in their Fort,
until succors coming from the City, enabled them to retire: Of those without,
a Sergeant was wounded to death with a shot of a Fire-lock cross the Body, and
was interred at the Port Coigne: of those within, a Soldier was slightly
wounded in the Leg. This Sally not discovering what they had a desire to know,
the Mayor, at all adventure, caused the making of a Mine in the middle of the
Trench, from the said Port unto the Bullwark.

The 12th, at night, or about four or five a Clock next morning, a Fire-Bullet
coming from the Port Louis, set one of the Houses of the Hospital on fire,
which being full of Hay and Straw, was hard to extinguish; and there was one
man slain, and another hurt with a Cannon-shot from the Fort Louis, which
discharged twenty times during the Fire; the Hospital nevertheless received no
damage, by reason of succors which were diligent.

The 15th, in the night, a Fire-Bullet coming from the Royal Battery, killed
one going the Round, as he went from the Court of Guard of the Port Coigne, to
that of the Bastion of the great Coney Warren.

The 17th, in the morning, by break of day, the Mayor caused to sally out by
the Port Coigne, twenty five Horse, and five Companies of Insantry, with some
Volunteers, to discover if the Besiegers continued to work, as was said, at the
first House de la Fons, but they found not any body there, nor any appearance
of working.

1628. April. The 19th, in the night, those of de la fons came to raise and
demolish to the ground some of the Houses of the Mills near the City, which
were half broke, and from thence set three Mills on fire, nearest to the City,
from which there went up a very high flame in the Air, which made those of the
Forts Louis, Miroet, and the Royal Battery believe, that the Fire was in many
Houses within, and occasioned them to shoot all the rest of the night with
Fire-bullets, and others, cross the City: This was nevertheless without killing
or wounding any person, though there was shot that night a hundred sixty five
Cannon-shot.

The 23th, about two or three a Clock in the Afternoon, the King arrived the
second time before Rochel, having kept his Easter at Surgres: for his welcome,
they discharged three times the Cannon round the Batteries and Ships, and above
all, there were many Fire-bullets shot against the City; and in the Evening the
same Music was heard, without other effect, than the breaking the Roofs of
some Houses. His Majesty had been absent from the tenth of February, to the
three and twentieth of April, that is two Months and thirteen days.

The 24th, came to the Port of Coigne a Drum and two Trumpets, to know if those
of the City would receive a Herald, in case the King would send one to them;
but they made no Answer, forasmuch as that they knew not yet that his Majesty
was in the Camp. The same day, about eleven a Clock, a Fire-bullet from the
Royal Battery, set fire on a House full of Hay and Straw, before the Steeple of
S. Bartholomew, joining to the great School, which is one of the Magazines of
the City; 1628. April. and this House was almost all burnt, without damaging
the Magazine; as well because the walls were good, and very thick on that side,
as because there was great endeavors for extinguishing it with Oxe-Hides, and
other such like things.

MAY.
May was Elected Mayor, in place of John Godfrey, Esquire Sieur Richard John
Guitton, Esquire the same who had been Admiral for the Rochellers in the Wars of
1621. and 1625.

The 4th ditto, there was found on the Coast of St. Nicholas a little Box of
Deal-boards, very tite and close, in which was a Note or Billet, advertising
the Rochellers to look to themselves, for that in a few days they would be
attacqued in several places, and principally at the Chain, and Fort of Tadon;
and that there would be thrown into the City great quantity of Fireworks,
which made them double their Guards, and be in a ready posture.

The eleventh, about two or three in the Afternoon, the English Army, Commanded
by the Earl of Denby (Brother-in-law to the Duke of Buckingham) appeared at the
entry between the Isle of Re, and the Main Land, composed of eleven of the
Kings Ships, thirty or forty lesser Men of War, and as many other Vessels,
laden with Corn, and Provisions, and about four or five a Clock in the Evening
came to Anchor at the Head of the Bay: At his arrival, the Army of the King,
which was in the Road, put themselves under the Covert of of the Digue, and
Batteries, at the Points of Coureille; and the Head of the Bay, which the King
had made there on purpose to batter in the said Road, 1628. May. and hinder the
Ships which would pass for ^rrying Provisions into Rochel: These Batteries
(...) so incommode the English Army (and amongst others the Admiral, who had
moved nearest to (...) Land) that in the Evening he disanchored, to (...) more
at large, and out of the reach of the ^annon of the said Batteries.

The 14th, the Sieurs Bragneau and Gobert, De^uties for Rochel and all the
French Captains, see^^g that the Earl of Denby and his Council did ^ot
endeavor to force the Pallisades, for making ^is way with relief into Rochel,
and that time was ^pent without doing any thing, they presented to ^im, and his
Council, a Writing signed by them ^oth, by which they supplicated them to put
in execution the Commands that the King their Master had given them; which was,
so soon as he should arrive before Rochel, to force the entry of ^he succors
sent thither; and told them, that to effect the same, it was necessary:

1. To furnish the French Barks, wherein was Victuals, with a sufficient number
of Soldiers, for defending them against the Pinnaces and Galliots which kept
the Pallisades.

2. That each Fire-ship ought to have, beside his Shalloop, a good great Boat,
well armed and equipped with men, to defend them against the Impediments which
they might meet with in their execution.

3. That all the English Ships, as well those of his Majesty, as others, ought
by their Command to advance to the Pallisades, that with the French Men of War
they might make the Besiegants retire; and in doing of that, make way for the
passage of the Ships into the City, as well French as English, laden with
Victuals.

1628. May. And the better to encourage them, they promised, by virtue of their
Commission, as well in their own private names, as in the name of the City,
that in case they should by this Enterprise come to lose any Ships, the just
value thereof should be paid to the King, or to those whose loss it should be:
And further, that being got into the City, if they could not come out, their
Expenses should be born at the charge of the Public.

This Writing being presented to the Earl, and his Council, and the Deputies
having livelily represented by word of mouth all they could to animate them,
they answered, that their Commission was not to Fight, but that it was only to
conduct them to the place where they were, to the end that their presence might
facilitate their entry into Rochel, if it were to be done: That having executed
their Order, they were resolved to set sail on Thursday in the Evening, to
return for England; and the rather, because they were advertised, that there
would suddenly come upon these Coasts a Naval Fleet from Spain to fight them,
which they would avoid, because they would not hazard the losing any of the
Kings Ships.

The English being obstinate in this resolution, the Sieurs Bragneau and
Gobert, considering in what danger Rochel was, dispatched immediately one
called Vidault, the same Evening, to advertise the Rochellers thereof, in a
little Skiff that the Earl of Denby gave them, and furnished him with two
Letters, one that he was to cast into the water over against the Pallisade,
which contained chiefly, that the Rochellers were not to be astonished, if on
Thursday in the Evening they saw the Fleet set sail, for that they had therein
no other design, 1628. May. than after having been at Bell Isle, to meet a part
of their Fleet which Storms and ill Weather had divided from the Body, to
return the more powerful, to succor them with the peril of their ^ives; and
the other altogether contrary, and most true, to advertise their
Fellow-Citizens of ^he little and no affection or good will at all, that the
English Army had to relieve them, and of the resolution they had taken to set
sail for England on Thursday in the Evening, notwithstanding all the Prayers
and Remonstrances that they could make for Fighting, or at least for remaining
in the Road some time, to the end, that whilst it should be there at hand, the
Rochellers might have re^course to the Bounty and Clemency of their Prince for
Grace, instead of a total ruin, as this retreat would import. Things being
thus, they advised them thereof, to the end that they might see, that as long
as the Navy remained with them, they had not sought the Clemency of the King,
or essayed to make their Agreement.

The same Evening the said Vidault got into the City at eleven at night, having
passed without Impediments, crossing the Men of War, and Pallisades, and
setting a good face on it, filled all the City with good hopes, and told
wonders of the resolution of the English; but to the Mayor represented
particularly the true state of things, and delivered him his Letter.

The same hour the Mayor assembled the Council of War, and before reading of
the Letter, he made them all take a solemn Oath of secrefie, as to the Contents
of it, and then communicated it unto them; and after that, called in Vidault,
who informed them of all that passed in the English 1628. May. Army. Hereupon
they resolved not to lose time; and before it was too late, to seek the Kings
Grace, under the best Conditions they could, and in such sort, as they should
not know it came from them; and as they were in pain how to govern themselves
in it, they concluded they could not better do it, than by making use of Sieur
de la Leu, who some days before had desired permission to retire out of the
City, and had obtained a safe Conduct of the King for it; and gave order to
John Godfrey, Esquire and Sieur du Richard, to go to him, and desire him, in their
names, to accept the Commission; which Sieur Godfrey did the next morning,
going to Sieur de la Leu, who accepted of it, and agreed, that if there were
any hopes on the Kings side to obtain a Peace under good Conditions, he would
within a day send a Trumpet, if under passable, and not too advangeous, a Drum;
and if he could not obtain anything, he would not send either one, or the
other; but when he had run the adventure of losing his life, he returned to the
City, giving them an account of what he had done.

This being agreed upon, and reported by the said Godfrey to the Mayor, and
Council of War, they ordered that de la Leu should go from the City on Tuesday
morning, by six a Clock, whilst people were at Church, that he might not be
observed by any person, fearing that if they saw him go out, his Enemies would
stir up the people against him, to do him some mischief; and in the mean time
to make show of good news, and gave out, that there should be given a Chain of
Gold to the said Vidault, to the end, that that being reported in the Kings
Camp, the management of 1628. May. that they had projected might be the more
advantageously acted.

Before the Mayor dismissed the Council, he made them all take an Oath upon the
Bible, that they would not either directly or indirectly buy any Provisions
whilst the English Army should be at the Head of the Bay, fearing that that
would discover to the people, that the said English Army (finding themselves
too weak to force the Digue, and enter the City with relief) would retire, and
leave them as a Prey; and thereby not only hinder the Treaty which they desired
to have by the means of Sieur de la Leu, but even put all the City into a
Consternation.

On Tuesday, at the hour designed, the Sieur de la Leu went away unobserved,
save by a very few, and about three in the Evening (whether it was from his
Intercession, as he had promised, or from other cause, is not known) a Trumpet
presented himself at the Fort Tadon, but one of the Captains that commanded
there, caused them to shoot at him, without suffering him to finish his
sounding, or a Drummer his beating, whose Drum he broke; nor did they advertise
the Mayor of their coming, he and many others being full of wrath against the
Mayor, and Council, for not communicating to them the Letter, nor tell them why
they had sent Sieur de la Leu out of the Town; they came even so high, as to
accuse them of designing by him to make a particular Peace for themselves, and
abandon the rest to the mercy and discretion of their Enemies, insomuch, that
they were constrained to insinuate something of the Letter to some of the most
enraged, for they cried, that they believed that Godfrey had done it, and that
1628. May. it was signed by Bragneau and Gobert, before their departure; and
that it was an Artifice to destroy them, to save themselves: But Thursday in
the Evening, when the English Army set sail, it appeared but too soon what the
Letter was, and that those Opiniastres had prejudiced themselves by their too
much curiosity, and little confidence in them that labored more for their
good, than for their own; whereof some repented, and acknowledged their fault,
when it was more than time.

So soon as the said Vidault was come into Rochel, the Mayor caused Signals by
Fire to be made from the Towers of S. Nicholas, of the Chain, and from the
Lanthorn, to advertise the English Army of his arrival; and in the morning,
they fixed Ensigns upon the said Towers, which were to remain there until the
English Army should return into England.

The 15th, the English sent a Fire-ship, full of Fireworks, in the fashion of
Petars, into the Kings Fleet, to set fire on them; but taking fire before its
time, the Fire-Ship, and those that were in it, perished miserably, without any
being saved.

The 18th, betwixt two and three a Clock Afternoon, the English Fleet set sail
for England, having been eight days in the Road, at the Head of the Bay,
without making any attempt, or Essaying to send any relief into Rochel, which
greatly dejected the Rochellers, and put them in great pain and perplexity;
nevertheless they resolved to suffer the greatest Extremity, before they would
render, and to that end, bought one of another all sorts of Provisions; and
that they might hold out the longer, retrenched their Ordinary to the moiety of
that which they had accustomed to eat; 1628. May. and above all, the Bread,
which they began now to weigh.

This following is a Relation composed by the Sieur Gobert.
THe same day that the English Army set sail, the Sieur Bragneau and Gobert
(...) ^n the morning the assembling of all the French Captains aboard Sieur
Bragneau, and upon the reso^^tion that the English Fleet had taken to set sail
for E^gland, without being prevailed with to the contrary, by all the
Remonstrances, Prayers, and Supplications that they could make to give them
their assistance, for facilitating the entry of the Ships into Rochel with
relief, it was judged necessary, and was agreed upon, with the unanimous
consent of all, that the Sieur Gobert should pr^sently take the Pinnace of
Captain Guillet, to carry him with all diligence into England, to represent un
o^ the King the small endeavors that his Naval Army had made, and the eminent
danger that it l^ft Rochel in, to the end that it might please his Majesty to
remedy it: Sieur Gobert accepted of it, and the Wind being favorable, arrived
the 22th present at the Isle of Wight; from thence he went to Portsmouth and
took Post for London, where being, arrived, he immediately waited upon the Duke
of Soubize, to whom having given an account of what had passed in his Voyage,
and of the return of the English Fleet, without having done any thing, they
went together to carry the ill news to the Duke of Buckingham, who seemed to
resent it very much, and carried them presently to the King, to whom Sieur
Gobert giving a particular Relation of all, 1628. May. he was thereat very much
concerned, and enquired what was the cause of his Fleet making so speedy a
return, before having first fought, and relieved Rochel: And then taking Sieur
Gobert by the hand, ^ed him to a Window, and leaning upon his shoulder,
weeping, reiterated to him the same demand, in these words, What cause have my
people had to retreat, and to abandon this poor City? To which he answered,
that he knew none, save a Panick Fear which seized them, upon an uncertain
noise of a Spanish Naval Fleet ready to come to those Coasts of France, and the
fear they had of running the adventure of losing their Ships. His Majesty at
this being moved more than before, stepping three or four paces back said,
What, are my Ships made to fear, and not to hazard themselves in Fight? and
immediately commanded the Duke of Buckingham to call the ^ouncil, which was
presently done, where Sieur Gobert being called, and enquired of what day the
Fle^t arrived before Rochel, what Fight it had been constrained to make, how
many slain, and what damage it had received there: He declared, that the Fleet
arrived before the City the Eleventh, and for Fights they had had none, the
King of Frances Fleet retreating near the Digue; but that only from the Land,
and the Points which advances, the Admiral had received from the Batteries
which are there a Cannon-shot, without so much as hurting any Person: Upon
which, the King and Council resolved to dispatch a Gentleman, with Sieur
Gobert, in the same Vessel that brought him, to the English Fleet, wherever
it should be, with express Command to the Earl of Denby, to return, and come to
Anchor in the Road of Rochel, and to expect there the Aid that he was 1628.
May. further preparing for the City; and at the same time commanded the Sieur
Gobert to write a Letter to those of Rochel, advising them, not to be
astonished at the retreat of his Fleet without doing any thing, for that he
would prepare them a puissant succor, which he assured them would relieve
them. In brief, that he would lose the Moiety of his Kingdom, rather than
suffer them to perish; which Sieur Gobert did write, in the presence of all the
Council: and the King having signed it, it was sent by an Express to those of
the City. After which, the abovesaid Gentleman, and Gobert, took Post for
Portsmouth, where being arrived, they embarked in the said Pinnace,
endeavoring to meet the English Fleet, as they did, the fourth day after their
departure from Portsmouth, on the Coast of Cornwall, but for the most part
already dissipated, there not being more than four or five Men of War with the
Admiral, all the rest being retired to the nearest Harbors in England;
nevertheless they went aboard the Admiral, and presented to the Earl of Denby
the Packet they had to him from the King and Council, and the Commands of his
Majesty to return to the Coast of France: To which he answered, that that was
altogether impossible for him to do, because his Fleet was dissipated, and his
Victuals for the most part consumed; and continuing his course, he came to
Anchor betwixt the Isle of Wight and Portsmouth.

The English Fleet thus retreated, and the Rochellers notwithstanding resolving
to stand out, they made choice of Sieur Grosetiere, a Gentleman of Poictue, to
go into England, to advertise the King of Great Britain, and their Deputies, of
their condition 1628. May. and necessities, and hasten relief. He parted the
21th, and was the Messenger of this Letter.

The Rochellers Letter to the King of Great Britain, dated the 28th of May,
1628.
SIR;
WE are assured that the Image of our Miseries have prevented our Complaints,
and that your Serene Majesty having a sensible impression of them in your
Spirit, these cannot fail of a favorable Audience from a Heart so generous and
great as yours: Sir, you have vowed us your Grace, and promised us Deliverance;
you have also taken Arms, to force them to keep the Public Faith of Treaties,
that they have deposited with you; but your People, Sir, have abandoned us,
contrary to your Magnanimous and most faithful Instructions, your General not
daring to breathe near, nor look upon the danger of the glorious execution of
your Sacred Word. What sort of Excess or Prodigy can it be, that has ^o
conspired against the Dignity of your Name, and the Condition of our poor
Country? Sir, we speak to you with Tears in our Eyes, glasp^d Hands, Hearts
struck thorough with many Wounds, whilst we have the Honor of remaining under
the condition of your Protection. When things were well with us, we despised
the Counsel of our Friends; and, if we may so express it, the Respects of our
Native Country, even until all is lost; let us find at least (if you please)
Sir, in your Justice, that which we have now no more means of recovering 1628.
May. by the Clemency of the King our Sovereign. God has furnished us yet with
life and vigor enough, though with Wounds altogether fresh and bleeding, to
expect your relief, yet one Month more: Let your Majesty second this Miracle,
and to your Immortal Glory see us raised, and the Churches of this Kingdom
restored, who without your aid cannot expect less than the stroke of the Knife
that iss held so near our Throats. Behold, Sir, our most humble and most ardent
Supplications, or to express it better in one word, it is our Testament, which
we shall leave written upon your Throne, before Heaven and Earth, for a
Memorial to Posterity, of the most strange and memorable Desolation that an
Innocent people ever suffered; the incomparable occasion whereof, may ever
serve to sum up the Might and Puissance of a great King, as you. Pardon, Sir,
to Women, little Children, Mothers and Fathers, dragged together to the same
punishment, if they cannot speak at this time but with cutting words, the face
of dying persons is always frightful, but the anguish of Death shall never make
us deny to be for all this, your Serene Majesty's,

Rochel, May 18. 1628. SIR, Most humble and most obedient Servants, the Mayor,
Sheriffs, Counselors, Peers, Burgers, and Inhabitants of Rochel; and for all
Guitton, Mayor.


1628. June. JUNE.
The first of June, in the night, the Rochellers sent out two Shalloops, one
full of Fireworks, and the other a Fire-ship, to blow up some of the Vessels
of the Pallisade, to the end to make way for the Galliots which they were to
send into England; but having set fire too soon, one, wherein were the
Fireworks, flew in pieces, before her arrival at the Pallisade, and the other
run ashore toward Port-Neuf, which obliged the Galliots to return into the City.

The same day, about six or seven in the morning, the Sieur Tallement came into
Rochel, as well about some Affairs of his own, as to sound the Rochellers, if
they would come to a Treaty; but making no advance in it, returned in the
Evening.

The same day the Sieur Grandzy, Colonel of a Regiment of light Horse, came to
the Port Coigne, demanding to speak with the Mayor, or with some on his behalf:
Immediately the Sieurs Pro^, Pierre Toupet, Defos, and Mosquay, were nominated
by the Council, to whom he offered, on the behalf of Monsieur Bassompier (as
having Power from the King) to do all he could for procuring them a good Peace;
they answered him, speaking in the Name of all the Body, and following their
Instructions, that they desired to remain under the Obedience they owe the
King, but that they could do nothing before they had communicated it to their
Deputies in England, the Duke of Rohan, and the Churches; so that after
returning most humble thanks to Monsieur Bassompier, they supplicated him to
mediate for them to the King 1628. June. for necessary Pass-Ports, and in the
mean time permission for some competent Provisions to come into the City, that
during the Negotiation, they might spare their Magazines. After this Answer he
parted, promising to return the next day in the morning, to bring them an
Answer; which he also did, and declared to them, that the King would not
receive their Propositions, but that his will was, that they should submit to
an Entire Obedience; to which it was told him, that the City could not
understand that, and that they would rather expect such Event as it should
please God to give them; and so they separated.

The 7th, with the Night-tide, betwixt ten and eleven in the Evening, the
Rochellers sent out a Galliot to cross the Pallisade; which he found impossible
for him to do, because those of the Pollisade kept good Guards with their
Galliots, and pursued him unto the Haven, making a great many Cannon-shot at
him.

The 10th, in the morning, at the opening of the Port S. Nicholas, entered the
Sieur de la Land du Lac, coming from England, bringing a Letter from the King
of Great Britain, signed Charles Rex, dated the 19th of May, old style;
directed to the Mayor, Sheriffs, Peers, Burgers, and Inhabitants of the City of
Rochel, without having any from their Deputies, which caused great jealousy in
the Rochellers, they not being able to believe that the King had writ, because
their Deputies, who were near his Person, did not advise of it; by which Letter
he gave them an assurance of a puissant succor within a few days, and of his
good will toward them, and concern for them, exhorting them to be of good
courage; and that in a short 1628. June. time they should ^e^ themselves
delivered. The Letter is as follows.

Gentlemen,
BE not discomforted, though my Fleet be returned, hold out unto the last, for
I am resolved that all my Fleet shell perish rather than you should not be
relieved, and to this end I have countermanded it, and have s^nt Ships to make
them change their design that they had taken to come back: I shall shortly send
you some number of Ships to reinforce it, and with the help of God, the success
will be happy for your Deliverance.

May 19. N. Style. Your good Friend, CHARLES R.

A Messieurs les Maire, Escheuin, etc.

The 15th, the Rochellers writ this Letter to their Deputies in England, as
well to let them understand their n^cessities, as to cause them to hasten the
succors.

A Letter from the Rochellers to their Deputies in England.
Gentlemen,
This is the seventh since our last perplexity; and is to press you, being on
our parts strangely pressed, and almost oppressed even to that degree, that our
total loss seems not far off, if you come not readily to relieve us: We have
Provisions but for one Month, to reckon 1628. June. from this day,
notwithstanding the best order that we can take: there is already many Families
in horrible extremity, and who live only of Herbs, yet nevertheless, we hope by
the help of God, to draw out our lives until the middle of July; and do you
raise Arguments from hence, for your pressing with diligence and importunity,
without end, his Serene Majesty, from whom (notwithstanding our extreme
necessity, and the Artifice which men have used) it has not been in any kind
possible to divide us. Some days passed they made us new Invitations to Treat,
but having demanded Pass*ports for sending to his Majesty, and the Duke of
Rohan, upon the refusal thereof the Treaty is broke. Fail not to represent this
to him, as also the confidence that we put in his Royal Word, which next to God
is our only support. We promise our selves as much his relief, as we know the
facility to it is certain; and if the Earl of Denby had desired it, he had
infallibly carried away the Pallisade: Now our fear is, that if they there
delay, they will not here be guilty of neglect, but finish the Digue by Masons
work: If the Count had stayed, he had famished the Kings Camp, and maintained
in us a strong hope, as also the Affairs of the Duke of Rohan in great
Reputation; you know how to make your Conjectures. To conclude, Gentlemen, we
send you these words of Consolation, that God in mercy has revived us more
than ever in this Common Calamity, we being all resolved to expect speedily
from you an assured Life, or to take Death patiently, rather than survive the
loss of 1628. June. our Religion, Country, and the butchery of our Families.
These are from,

Messieurs, Your most affectionate servants, the Mayor, Sheriffs, Counselors,
Peers and Burgers, and for all, Guitton, Mayor.
Rochel, June 5. 1628.

This Week some Soldiers killed Horses, and sold the Flesh for Beef, at ten or
eleven Sols the pound; but being discovered, they were imprisoned for it,
because they were not then reduced to eat such Meat, having yet Beef, Mutton,
and Poultry, which they sold publicly.

The ^1th, in the morning, there came to Rochel from England a Soldier called
la Paillette, bringing a Letter from the King of Great Britain, dated the ^7th
of May, old style, sealed with the Arms of England, subscribed, Your good
Friend, Charles R. and another from our Deputies, writ at Plymouth, the ninth
of June, the tenure of which confirmed that of Sieur de la Land du Lac; as also
did that brought by another Gentleman, called S. Martin, who arrived the 24th,
about eleven or twelve in the Evening, sealed with the Kings Seal, and red Wax,
subscribed your good Friend, Charles R. which is as follows.

Gentlemen,
I Have been troubled to hear that my Fleet was upon the point of returning,
without answering my Commands, which was, to force the entry of your
Provisions, 1628. June. whatever came of it, and have given new Orders to
return into your Road, and not stir, until it has relieved you with Victuals,
or that I have sent them an additional strength, for which I have caused men to
work with all diligence: Be assured that I will never abandon you, and that I
will employ all the force of my Kingdom for your deliverance, until it please
God to bless me with giving you an assured Peace.

Given at our Palace of Westminster, May 27. 1628. old style. Gentlemen, Your
good Friend, CHARLES R.


During this time, the Digue was made by Stonework every day stronger than
other, and was advanced in such sort on both sides, that there remained but a
little Channel to shut, where passed the Current of the Tide; and this Channel
was filled from one end to the other with Vessels and Engines: besides that,
there was before the Digue a Pallisade of floating Vessels, anchored and tied
one to another by great Cables, and Chains of Iron, which rose and fell with
the Sea, as it came in, and went out, with many Engines and Candlesticks, (an
Engine called so, because made in the form of a Candlestick,) to the end that
their intanglement might render the access more difficult and perilous for
those that would undertake to force it, and enter Rochel.

At this time died in the City the Sieur de Loudriere, of a Burning Fever, and
was honorably interred, according as his Rank and Quality of Chief Justice
required.

1628. July. JVLY.
About the end of this Month, and beginning of July, they began to kill Horses,
Asses, Mules, Dogs, Cats, and other such Creatures, the F^^^h of which was sold
for ten and eleven Sols the pound: that of Horseflesh was above all savoury,
there being little difference betwixt it and Se^f. In the mean time, the Famine
so increased, every one reserving to themselves their Provisions, that the
greatest part were in great want, and Bread failing, they had recourse to
Brazil Sugar, Dregs, Colworts Frigased, with a little Tallow, and such other
nourishment: A little before, and above a^ when the English showed themselves
at the Head of the Bay, in the Month of May, the Mayor and h^s Council caused
more than two hundred Hogsheads of Pilchers, which were a little spoiled, ^o be
cast away, for fear they should bring a Contagion in the City, believing they
should have ^o need of them, succors being at their Gates; but in this
necessity, they would have been of ^reat use: for want of other Victuals, the
people scattered themselves upon the Fens, where the Saltpans were, to make War
with Eels and other little Fishes, and on the Coast to fish for Cockles, and
after that eat all sorts of Herbs, as Pu^slain, Savage, Sampire, water
Caltrops, good and bad, boiling them in two or three waters* to take away the
bitterness and ill taste and filled themselves with them. In the end, they sell
on Leather Hides, and every thing that they could steep and boil, and cutting
them into little morsels, they sold them in the Tripe-Market, making Frigases
of them, with a little Tallow and Water in the 1628. July. Stewing-pan; others
did it with Gelly and Sugar: from this time the Famine increased exceedingly.

Besides other Evils with which the City found it self pressed, ill Diet begot
in many a Disease in the Mouth which caused the Gums to rot, a shortness of
breath, the Jaws black, and by little and little killed those that were
infected with it, being such, or very near it, as they call the Scurvy, which
is but too well known to those that make long Voyages by Sea, when their
Victuals corrupt. At first there was many died of this Disease; but a Physician
of the City, called Matthias Goyer, a knowing and experienced man in his Art,
advised a Remedy which they had used in another sickness succesfully, and found
the same as to this: It was Mustard in Herbs, of which the Hillocks in the Fens
afforded as great quantities as was needful, the which they bruised in a
Mortar, and mingled it with White Wind, and gave the quantity of an ordinary
Glass thereof in the morning fasting; and though this Medicine neither wrought
by Stool, or Urin, or caused any other effects which appeared, it nevertheless
healed infallibly in eight or ten days. At first some would have concealed this
Remedy for the Physicians profit, as indeed it was enough to have made him
rich; but he said he would not make the Public Calamity the means of his
inrichment; and that, since God as by Inspiration had discovered this secret to
him, he would give the Receipt of it gratis to every one, as he also did, and
therein merited much from the Public, and saved the lives of a multitude of
people. As to the Gout, Gravel, and other such sicknesses, there was then none
heard of.

The second of July was seen on the side of Estre, 1628. July. and from de la
Lieu, many Horse and Foot in Battle, which troubled much the Rochellers; but in
the Evening they knew it was the mustering of the Army.

The eighth, there came to the Port of Coigne a Drum, which brought a Letter to
the Mayor from Cardinal Richelieu, demanding the Rendition of the City. Those
that were at the Guard made scruple of receiving it; but having advertised the
Mayor of it, he came accompanied with those of his Council, to whom he read the
Letter; and then said with a loud voice to the Drummer (to the end that all
those that were there might understand the Answer he gave) That they were not
upon the point of Rendering or Treating, and that they had Provisions beyond
what they were made believe; besides, that within eight or fifteen days they
hoped to be relieved both by Sea and Land from England, and that they had no
other Answer to give.

The 10th, John du Mont, called la Rose, a Native of Bourdeaux, being well
known in the City, where he had a long time sojourned, but had been gone from
thence some years for ill behavior, being come from the Camp, was Convicted of
a Conspiracy; and besides that he had been suspected from his arrival, there
was a Letter writ from Mantaubon to the Duchess of Rohan giving advice to
seize his Person; which being done, they found about him a Table Book which
Convicted him: They stuck not to give him the ordinary and extraordinary Rack,
to know if he had not Accomplices, but he accused no body; yet upon the Gibbet
exhorted the Rochellers very much, not to rely upon any Promises or
Capitulations that might be proposed to them, telling them, that he knew they
1628. July. would not be kept, and that their ruin was determined, whatever it
cost, which occasioned the death of many people.

The 14th, with the Evening-tide, and betwixt two and three after Dinner, the
Digue was beat upon with a very great and impetuous South-Eastwind, in such
sort, as it was almost totally overturned, the Ships walled up, removed from
their place, the Engines and Bridges broken to pieces, and part of the Wrack
drive within the Chain, with a Bark of 25 or 30 Tun, which greatly rejoiced the
Rochellers, and kept them in good hopes, that thence forward the like Storms,
and ill weather, would undo more in one Tide, than they could remake in many
Months.

The same day an Artisan, called Pierre du Bourg, fled hither some years since
for refuge, was hanged in the Castle-yard, for holding Intelligence with the
Besiegers, and was discovered by his own Son of eleven or twelve years old,
whose Innocence he made use of to carry his Letters to a certain place, whither
those without came for them. Upon the Rack he accused diverse Inhabitants, but
at the Gibbet confessed, that the torment of the Rack made him say more than he
knew, and that they were Innocent of that which he had laid to their Charge:
This saved them, otherwise they had run the same Adventure as he, their Process
being already well advanced.

The 24th, the Deputies in England seeing that the preparations that were made
for the relief of Rochel went but slowly forward, made to the King sitting in
his Council a free and pressing Harangue, by Sieur Vincent, as follows.

1628. July. The Harangue of Sieur Vincent to the King of Great Britain, drawn
out of Sieur Vincent's own Journal.
JVLY. SIR,
THe griefs and sorrows which oblige us to ^o ^ll the Ears of your Majesty, and
to reiterate them so often, ought to be most extreme: Behold us now, Sir, at
your Feet, to wash them with our Tears, and we wish we do not in a little time
come to sigh out our last breath with the news of the dissolution of our poor
City. We know not, Sir, how to conceal it, the sense we have of its being at
its last gasp, puts us into despair, seeing that the succors which your
Majesty has made us hope would be ready, has been deferred from day to day,
for many Weeks together. Sir, the City of Rochel did by us beg of you to
receive them into your Protection, and you as solemnly agreed to it, and since
that they have had at diverse times all the assurances possible, as well from
your own mouth, as the Hand of your Majesty, that you would never abandon them;
and accordingly, by a Miracle of Constancy, they have held out hitherto (a
whole year) contending with the horrors of a most ghastful Famine, that they
might thereby give leisure to your Majesty to send them the succors you
pleased to promise them; and thus constant were they, even when all Europe
believed they ought to have despaired, in that after having had relief, as they
thought, several days in their sight, it returned without effecting or
attempting any thing: and though our Enemies 1628. July. have taken occasion
from thence to make them diverse Propositions of Accommodation, which the
extremity of their necessities seemed to counsel the hearkening unto, yet they
chose rather to run the hazard of their perpetual destruction, than to be
wanting in the least to the promises that we had sworn for them to your
Majesty, or to show the least diffidence of yours. After all this, Sir, shall
it be recorded in the History of your Reign, that they perished in your hands,
without reaping any other fruit of the good will your Majesty has professed
toward them, or of the assurance they have therein relied upon, than the
rendering them irreconcilable to their King, from whom otherwise they might
have found Grace. Pardon, Sir, this, from a People that finds themselves upon
the Threshold of their Sepulchers, if they cannot avoid sighs that may be
undecent in your presence. It is ordinary with those that are near their end,
to finish their lives with groans; and such will be our case, if after the
precedent neglects, there follows the least delay. In the Name of God, Sir,
whilst there is yet resting to us any Breath, and before we totally expire,
command that your succors be hastened to our assistance; and provided that
diligence be yet used, we will remain Caution to your Majesty, with the peril
of our Heads, that they will arrive time enough to save us. And as to the
impossibility that some will suggest to be in it, permit us, we beseech you,
Sir, to tell you freely, that that Opinion proceeds either from fear, or want
of affection; and that besides the contrary Report that some unsuspected have
made, thereof to your Majesty. It is not tobe thought that our City, 1628.
July. who is within sight of the Digue, and Pallisade, and Carriage of her
Cannon, would send time after time to beg your assistance, if they knew it
would be unprofitable to them; and having every day offers of advantageous
Conditions to Treat upon, if they would hearken to it for themselves alone,
they could be so imprudent as to neglect the opportunity. But we are ready, if
it please your Majesty to permit it, to take upon us the first Adventure of the
execution, to the end to justify the sincerity of our proceedings to all the
World; and that it may not be imputed to us, that we are prodigal of the blood
of your Majesty's Subjects to ill purpose, or that we will spare our own: No,
Sir, there is no impossibility in the case, as is feigned; but the only cause
of our fears proceeds from the continual neglects from one day to another, and
from one Week to the next, which make our hopes recoil. After thereturn of your
Fleet, we comforted our selves with the promise that was made us from your
Majesty, that it should set sail again within fifteen days; and when more than
twenty were past, they added thereunto fourteen: After that, diverse other
neglects, in such sort, as make up now two Months complete. Good God, Sir, time
seems long with them that have not Bread; we know well the good Inclinations
that your Majesty has for us; as also we have had most certain proofs of the
Duke of Buckingham (your High-Admiral) passionate applying himself for us, and
the same of the Lords of your Council; but shall we not be excusable, if seeing
the effects crossed by delays, we entertain jealousies that your Majesty is not
well served, and that there is some hidden 1628. July. hand which obstructs
that which the zeal of others endeavor to advance. It is ordinary with men in
misery to be suspicious, and possibly we are injuriously so; and indeed we do
not know any person upon whom to determine our diffidence, nor do we intend the
calling to mind any thing that is passed; for for ever, Sir, may that remain
buried in perpetual Oblivion: and as for the time to come, let those at least
to whom your Majesty shall give your Commands, answer your kindness to us with
their affection and diligence, in putting your Fleet to Sea without any more
delay, for delivering us out of the Jaws of Death. If upon this occasion, Sir,
you discern those that serve you faithfully from others (if there be any such)
let your Majesty hold it indisputable (if it please you) that all those, who
under any pretext whatsoever, shall counsel the least neglect, do it from an
evil intention, there being none that are ignorant of the horrible necessities
of our City, and that one day of delay may be its ruin: Have consideration
thereof, Sir, we beseech you, by the tears and pitiful cries of more than
twelve thousand languishing Souls, whom Hunger devours, and who are all ready
to perish by the interest of more than a Million of others, who without doubt
will see themselves buried under our Ruins, and will find the Knife at their
Throats the next day after we are lost: By the glory of your Scepter, under the
Sanctuary of which we are come to put our selves, and which it has pleased you
to tender us for our security; by the Magnificent Title of Defender of the
Faith, which obliges your Majesty to relieve those that are oppressed out of a
hatred to it: In ^ine, by the Faith and Word of a King, which it 1628. July.
has pleased you in grace and favor to engage to us; Permit not, Sir, our
Innocent Blood to reflect upon your Crown, to stain it, to Ages that shall
succeed you, and at present to cry against your Majesty before God and Men.
This is that, Sir, which our Consciences, and the duty we owe to our afflicted
Fellow-Citizens obliges us to represent again unto your Majesty, in whose
Charity, Magnanimity, Piety, and inviolable Fidelity we have such confidence,
that we assure our selves you will take this in good part, and into convenient
consideration. And now, seeing that all our supplications tend to the making
your Fleet (without delay) set sail, and that to that end your presence at
Portsmouth is so absolutely necessary, that without it we can scarce hope for
any success, we are forced to take the boldness to supplicate in all humility
the putting in execution the resolution you have taken to go thither: And now,
Sir, we fall upon our knees before your Majesty, with most ardent prayers and
cries to God, that it will please him to make us find more and more favor in
your sight; and that even we who now supplicate you, and are come to render to
you our most humble acknowledgment, as our Great Deliverer, from whom, after
God, we hold our goods, honors, and lives, may have cause to leave the memory
of our Deliverance to our Children, to the end they may Celebrate it after us.

The 27th of July, the Duchess of Rohan caused two of her Coach-Horses to be
killed, as well for her own eating, as for the nourishment of her Family:
besides (her necessity, whereof she was sensible) it was an example to others
to suffer the utmost extremity, rather than to render the City.

1628. July. At this time the necessity, which was horrible, obliged diverse to
seek ways and means to pass the Line, others to scatter themselves in
Vineyards, to gather even but Verges, Grapes, and some to render themselves
willingly. It was now published in the Camp, upon pain of death, not to suffer
them to approach the Line, nor to take Prisoners any that should come out of
Rochel, but by Musket Shot force them to return within their Counterscarp and
Ports, from whence many were killed, choosing rather to finish their lives by a
Musquet-Bullet, than to return home to die there miserably of Famine: And many
Women and Maids of the common people, going into the Vineyards, were violated,
and beaten with Forks, and shafts of Halberts; then stripped as naked as when
they came from the Wombs of their Mothers, and so sent back to the City; and in
this sort I have seen some return: But to meet them, other Women went to carry
them Gard-robes, and Cloaks to cover their nakedness.

AVGUST.
August the Sieur Fequiere (who had been Prisoner in the Tower of Moureil seven
or eight Months) acquainted the Mayor by his Guards, that he desired to speak
with him, or some from him, to the end to see if there were no way for coming
to an Accommodation, or Treaty of Peace. He immediately sent the Sieurs Viette
and Defos, who having heard his Propositions, made presently report thereof to
the Mayor, and his Council; but they found it in many things very difficult,
and above all, who they should depute toward the King, which they judged of
too great 1628. Aug. consequence, for fear that the noise of a Treaty being
spread, it should hinder their relief: besides that, la Rose's words at his
death, for not trusting to Articles, had made great impressions upon the
spirits of men; and so the thing went no further.

The eighth of August, upon* a Remonstrance made the day before by Sieur Paul
Mervault, Master of the Artillery, to the Mayor and Council of War, that he
found no Bullets in the Magazine for Culverines and Bastards, and that to
undertake to cast more (as they had done three Months before) was time and
money lost, for that they knew not the secret of the Mould. It was published
thorough all the parts of the City, that all those that had Bullets proper for
the said Pieces, should bring them to the Master of the Artillery, who should
pay for them seven Livres ten Scus per quintal, which furnished the said Pieces
in some small kind, because those that had any brought them to him. The same
day diverse Seamen of the City went over to the Camp, being debauched, and had
been sent into the City to pervert them. This caused the Mayor to proclaim
thorough the several quarters of the City, that all Seamen that should be taken
going to the Camp, should be immediately hanged upon the place; and after this
we heard not of any that went away.

The ninth of August, the Sieur Ferriere, Councellor, who commanded that day as
Captain at the Port of Coigne, as also with him Sieur Desmartes went very early
in the morning, as if they walked out, and rendered themselves to the Fort
Beaulieu: Those that were on the Guard at the said 1628. Aug. Port, perceiving
them near the Fort, could not do other than make some shot at them, but did not
touch them. The cause of their retreat was this, the Sieur de la Tourvert, Son
of Sieur de Fleura, a Gentleman of Augoumois, was killed in a particular
Quarrel in the Castle yard, as he walked there: The Lieutenant Criminal, upon
the complaint made to him thereof, decreed the taking of the Body, and judging
the case; but the Mayor, and Council of War, being advertised thereof, would
have the Cognizance of the business, because both the Murdered and Murderer
were people drawn thither by the War, and Siege. Upon this they contested, and
each made their Party; but the Mayor prevailing, the Assistant of the Judge
Criminal, with three or four others of the Seat of Justice, gave a secret
Sentence against him, and the Council of War condemned them in twelve thousand
Livres penalty, payable by any one of them for the whole, his remedy reserved
against the others. Of this Sentence, there were four Exemplifications to
remain by each one of them, shut up and hid in a place the most secret they
could devise, reserving the execution unto the relief or change of the
condition of the City. It came to pass some time after, that the Assistant upon
some suspicion (though nevertheless could not be proved) was made Prisoner, and
his Papers seized, among which was found this Sentence, which was the thing
that moved these two Counselors to leave the City; but it wanted little of
bringing them into a Burning Fever; for being presented to the Kings Council,
it made ill for them, for that being Officers they remained in the City, from
whence it was concluded 1628. Aug. that they came away from necessity, and not
from affection to the service of the King; so that they ran a great hazard of
not having the relief that Monsieur Thoiras had promised them: but having a
great kindness for Monsieur Desmartes, he obtained of Cardinal Richelieu the
referring of them to the Marshal Schomberg, who some time after took their
Parol. As to the fourth Judge, who was John Ogier, Sieur of Moriniers, he left
not the City, finding himself supported by a number of Friends and Soldiers,
whom he had commanded as Camp-Master of a Regiment, insomuch that without
difficulty he made his agreement; and as to the Assistant Criminal, he remained
in Prison until the reduction of the City.

This following Narrative is taken out of the Relation of Sieur Veronneau.
THe tenth of August, the Sieur de la Fit (Serjeant-Major to Meilleraye's
Regiment) together with Sieur de Delon, (Lieutenant of a Company in the same
Regiment) sent out between eight and nine in the morning a Drum, who demanded,
on the behalf of two Gentlemen, without naming them, if they might have half an
hours discourse with Sieur de la Gout, Honorary Advocate to the King, and
Sieur Peter Toupet. The Guard of Maubec, who received the Drum, brought him to
the Mayors House, where the Council was assembled, and the Drummer having told
them the cause of his coming, they demanded of the Sieur de la Gout, and
Toupet, who those were that enquired after them, and if they knew 1628. Aug.
what they desired of them. The one and the other finding themselves surprised
by this question, asked leave to go and see who it was, and speak to them; and
to the end that the Council might be informed of all that might be said and
done, during their discourse, they chose from among themselves, of the Council,
Benjamin Veronneau Advocate, to assist at the said Conference; which being
begun with imbracements, made particularly by the said Sieur de la Fit of the
said de la Gout, and Toupet, with whom he had had long acquaintance, Sieur de
la Fit began to speak in this sort: Gentlemen, the King being most well
informed of your Fidelity toward him, and that you have the Flower de Luces so
impressed upon your hearts, that you have rejected all the Propositions that
men could make you, for shaking off his Dominion, to serve another Prince, is
the sole subject of our Message. Cardinal Richelieu, who knows that I have
some Acquaintance in your City, has commanded me to endeavor to confer with
some of you upon the subject of your misery, to the end to prevent your ruin,
which you seem to affect, by not seeking to your Prince (who is altogether
good) for his Grace, when he would never refuse it you, if you humble your
selves to him: He knows that your Famine is great, that your Houses are already
full of dead Bodies for want of Bread, that the voice of dying persons sounds
in your Streets, and that those that have been most provident are not furnished
until the first of September; it is your duty to save rather those that are
remaining, than to loose them, because they which remain are the most
considerable; scarcity begun with the lowest sort, most subject to Rebellion;
he had rather have your Hearts, than your Walls; and be assured, that if you
are once reduced to his 1628. Aug. service, you will not any more depart from
it. You believe, or suspect, that the King will take away your Religion, and
that the Cardinal will persuade the banishing it the Kingdom; you are mistaken,
the King would be most easy, would you have confidence in him, and desires to
win you with sweetness, without using violence. The experience of times passed
does sufficiently demonstrate to France, that Religion is not to be planted
with the Sword, and that it is God alone that inclines the Heart, and
illuminates the Understanding with his knowledge. Think of it then whilst there
is time, and perish not, expecting Bread from England; those People think not
of you, and if they should have a desire to succor you, they will not now be
able to do it: The King has a powerful Sea-Army to destroy all the force they
can bring, and the Digue is in such a condition, that the English will not dare
to hazard the breaking of it with their Ships: I pray you, Gentlemen, have pity
of your selves.

This Discourse being received with Applause by the aforesaid Sieurs de la
Gout, Toupet, and Veronneau, after a short Discourse full of Thanks, they
acknowledged their desire of entering into the favor of their Prince, and that
they were come thither to hear the Propositions and Overtures that would be
made, that they might report them to the Council, and of their own good
Intentions, they might assure his Majesty, the Cardinal, and the Lords of the
Council; and most earnestly entreated the said Sieurs de la Fit, and de
Delon, to impart to them the Propositions: To which they answered; they could
not do that, having no order therein; but if the Inhabitants of the City would
enter into a Treaty, it behoved them to do it with the Cardinal, who would be
at the Fort de la Fons 1628. Aug. when they should desire it; and that he might
be near at hand, if they would give security for his coming within the
Percullis of the Port Coigne, he would not refuse it; provided, that as caution
for his Person, they would give a competent number of the most qualified
Citizens to remain as Hostages, during the said Treaty: And after this, the
said Sieurs de la Fit, and de Delon, delivered diverse Propositions, but, as
they said, without Commission. The first was, that since the Rochellers would
not upon any account whatever renounce their obedience to France, according as
they had testified to those that would have drawn them to it, they ought to
cherish the Honor of their Prince, and treating with him, give some marks of
their submission to his Majesty: That Subjects ought not (in any time) to think
to treat with their King as Equals, especially when he sees them at the last
gasp. You ought to think of some Overtures which may content both Parties, such
as may evidence the humility of the Rochellers, and advance the glory of their
Prince; they should of themselves demolish the Bastion of the Port Coigne,
which being done, the King will retire without entering the City with any of
his Army, either by that way, or any other. To which was replied by Messieur de
la Gout, Toupet, and Veronneau, that if all the inhabitants of the City would
have as much confidence as they in the bounty of the King, and word of his
Principal Ministers, their Proposition might be received; but that the City
being composed of persons timorous and fearful, they had no hopes of persuading
them that they could be in security against the Army that besieged them, after
there should be such a breach in their Walls, 1628. Aug. and begged of them not
to believe that they could be so simple, as to make such a Proposition, and
much less to make it valid, and strengthen it, by alleging their reasons.
After this, the said Sieurs came to a second Overture, which was, that the King
should enter the City with two hundred persons by the Port Coigne, without
going into the Streets; and going along the Ramparts, return by the Port S.
Nicholas. This second, as more sweet, was better hearkened unto, yet
nevertheless not received by the Sieurs de la Gout, Toupet, and Veronneau, who
relying upon the knowledge they had of the said Inhabitants, replied, that to
demand the entry of the King alone, were as much as to demand the entry of all
his Army; for that there is not one in the City, who seeing his Majesty in it,
would not think rather to humble themselves before him, and to beg his pardon,
than to give order that there should but two hundred persons come in, when upon
such an occasion there may be some Lords with the King, who against his good
intentions, exceeding the promise given, would do that which he in no wise
would have done, persuading the people that they could not have any security in
their diffidence of him. This Exception being also judged reasonable, they came
to a third Overture, which was, that in all cases to show, as well to the
Kingdom, as to Strangers, that the King had the advantage of his Subjects of
Rochel, they would demolish one of the three Towers upon the Haven of the City
unto the height only of the Walls. This Proposition was found so moderate, that
the Sieurs de la Gout, Toupet, and Veronneau answered, that if his Majesty
would, be content with the demolishing of all the three Towers, 1628. Aug. and
would solely depend thereupon, they would submit thereunto, without expecting
more. After this Conference, which was three hours at least, both Parties
retired, resolving to report each to their Principals, what had passed in this
Interview, endeavoring to bring things to an Accommodation, and to engage in a
Treaty. And indeed the Sieurs de la Gout, Toupet, and Veronneau, having in
general made report to the Council, (who continued sitting, expecting them)
they approved of what had passed, and appointed after Dinner to consider
thereof; when after having heard more particularly from the Sieurs de la Gout,
Toupet, and Veronneau, what had been propounded, and their Answers, they
resolved of engaging in a Treaty; but the manner of it was found so greatly
difficult, that in the end, by plurality of Voices, they deferred it some days,
to give every one time to consider with himself of the best and convenientest
method and means.

The day after, by order of the Council of War, Sieur Paul Mervalt caused to be
put upon the Ports, and the Detachments from the Port Coigne, and upon the
Casements of the said Ports, upon the Port and Hearse, or Portcullis of Maubec,
upon the Ports and Bridge of S. Nicholas, and of the two Mills, 230 great
Bullets of Battery, that in case of any attempts to scale the Walls, to cast
down upon them that should storm them.

The 16th of August, betwixt two and three a Clock in the Afternoon, came
within a Musquetshot of the Port Coigne a Herald with two Trumpets, to summon
the Rochellers to render themselves to the King, to whom no answer was given.

1628. Aug. The 21th ditto in the night, the Rochellers sent out by Land a
Messenger with this Letter to their Deputies in England; as follows.

Gentlemen,
WE earnestly entreat you not to lose any time, for Famine presses us. You
know we have been long without receiving any relief: the Digue is the most
facile in the middle, having nothing there but floating Vessels, and some
Engines: The Enemies Navy consists but in thirty great Ships, the others being
small: they have also one Gally and about thirty Shalloops, but ill equipped,
not having in all six hundred Seamen. To facilitate the passage, our Fireships
are good, and the others for the Mire are better: some men with Hatchets to cut
are necessary: We believe you will be courageous in undertaking the execution
of the Commands of the King of Great Britain; after God all depends upon you:
Be assured, that for our parts we shall do our duty, who are,

Rochel, Aug. 20. 1628. Gentlemen, Your most affectionate Servants, the Mayor,
Sheriffs, Counselors, and Peers of the City of Rochel; and for all, Guitton,
Mayor. The Superscription, Messieurs, David, Vincent, Bragneau, Dehinse, and
Gobert.


The 22th the Rochellers received advice, that the Sieur Grossetiere (who had
been taken returning from England, whither he was sent to hasten succors)
1628. Aug. had been carried to the Kings Camp, to be proceeded against by way
of Process; whereupon, besides that from the first news of the taking him, they
had writ to the Camp, demanding the having him treated as a Prisoner of War,
and to be used in his Quarters, as had been hitherto practiced by one to
another, declaring, that they should do the same to the Sieur Fiquere, their
Prisoner, as they should do to others belonging to them. They writ also to
Cardinal Richelieu by a Drummer, who found him at Chatiliers Barlot, whither he
was gone for change of Air, because of the Contagion that was in the Army, and
delivered him this Letter following.

The Rochellers Letter to Cardinal Richelieu, in favor of Grossetiere.
My Lord,
IT is some time since we understood the taking of the Sieur Grossetiere, a
Gentleman gone from hence in the employment of this City, under our
Commissions, who passing thorough one of the Provinces of this Kingdom, was
taken, arrested, and brought into the Kings Army. We immediately writ thereof
to one of the Generals, relying upon the Common Right of War, and of the
quarter that has been always given hitherto by the one to the other; but we
now hear this morning, that they pretend to draw up Process against him, and
deliver him over to the Court of Justice, to condemn him to Death, as if he
were accused of some Crime, as a man without Authority, at which we are most
justly concerned, he not having undertaken either Voyage, or any action since
this War, but with Commission from us, by which he has been Authorized: It is
therefore 1628. Aug. that we address our selves finally to you, my Lord, who
knows perfectly the intentions of the King, and to manage them with most
excellent prudence, and by your Authority to keep men within bounds, contrary
to the natural heat of particular persons, to the end to supplicate your
Greatness, that the said Sieur Grossetiere may not meet with any evil
treatment, who has not in his Comportment done any thing to be spoke against,
having had our Order and Commission for all his Transactions, according as we
now certify you; and let it please you, that we dare from your bounty promise
our selves, that by the present Messenger, who is an Express, you will let us
know that this Address will not be fruitless, and that you will cure us of the
perplexity we are in upon this occasion, and of all troublesome Events which
may proceed from this Occurrence. Above all, we remain,

Rochel, Aug. 22. 1628. Monseigneur, Your most humble and most obedient
Servants, the Mayor, Sheriffs, Counselors, Peers, Burgers, and Inhabitants of
the City of Rochel, Guitton, Mayor.


Cardinal Richelieu's Answer to the Rochellers by the same Messenger that
carried theirs.
Gentlemen,
IAm sorry that your Actions beg not the favor you desire from the bounty of
the King, rather than your words; but I am greatly astonished, that hindering
1628. Aug. all the City where you are from receiving the effects of his
Majesty's mercy, you seek it upon a particular account, wherein the generality
of your Citizens have not any interest; you are not in a state or condition to
treat as Equals with your Master, and to desire it is Criminal: Nevertheless,
not to augment by this way the number of your faults, I do not know what is the
Kings pleasure (whose Bounty is infinite) upon the subject of Grossetiere: But
this I know, that he cannot receive any punishment that is not less than his
demerits. It is your duty to keep those that are in the City, where you are,
within the Circuit of your Walls, his Majesty being resolved not to suffer any
longer that his Soldiers pass the Line toward Rochel, nor those of Rochel
approach the same bounds, and pass unpunished: I advertise you hereof, to the
end that none of you be taken by inadvertency. In the mean time, I pray you
believe, that I have with passion desired that you may give me cause to
evidence my affection, and that I am very glad of an occasion to let you know
that I am,

From Chastellier, Aug. 23. 1628. Gentlemen, Your affectionate Servant,
Cardinal Richelieu.


The 24th ditto, the Rochellers sent a Letter to their Deputies in England of
this Tenure.
Gentlemen,
WE have expected three Months ago the effects of the excellent Letters that we
received from the King of England, but we do not hear by what disaster it is
that we remain here miserable, without seeing 1628. Aug. any succors appear:
Our Soldiers can do no more, they die of Famine in the Streets, and all our
Families are frightened with groans, sighs, indigency, and uncertainties;
nevertheless, we shall hold out until the last day: But in the Name of God stay
not longer, or we shall perish.

Rochel, Aug. 24. 1628. Yours, etc.


The 26th ditto, about eight or nine a Clock in the Evening, the Rochellers
sent out by Land an Inhabitant of the City, called Beron, a Watchmaker, as a
Messenger into England, to hasten their relief; but being in the Kings Quarters
at Estre, he was discovered, and as soon taken; and having found by him a
Billet in his Doublet behind, betwixt the shoulders, where he had hid it, they
condemned him to be hanged, as they did also two others, who went out at the
same time.

SEPTEMBER.
September, the Sieur Arnault, Master of the Camp of the Carrabines of the
King, came on behalf of his Majesty to the Port de Coigne, to speak to them,
making his pretense to be the desire of treating for the exchange of Sieur
Fequiere, his Brother-in-law, with the Sieur Grossetiere. Immediately there was
sent thither, on behalf of the Mayor and his Council, the Sieurs de Fiefmignou
and Riffault, for the Common Hall, and Defos and Moquay for the Burgers,
carrying also with them the Sieur Fiquiere. They remained with him in
Conference from eight in the morning, until one in the afternoon, and continued
1628. September. the same Conference the ninth, as also the twelfth, thirteenth,
and fourteenth following: and in the end, after these long Debates, it was
decreed, that the next day in the morning there should be Deputies sent to
Cardinal Richelieu, and to that end were nominated Sieurs Riffault, and
Journault, who after having had Pass-ports of the King, went to wait upon the
Cardinal at Ronsay, with whom they conferred until the Evening, and then
returned to their City, with hopes of obtaining their Peace under Conditions
good enough; but the coming of two Natives of the City (viz.) Mesnier and
Beaumont, who arrived the same day from England, caused the breaking off of the
Treaty, by the assurances they gave that the English Army would be on this
Coast with the first favorable weather; the Letter which they delivered to the
Mayor being as follows.

The Deputies Letter to the Rochellers.
Gentlemen,
GOD is our Witness of the anguish of our hearts for the miseries that you
suffer, and men shall be the same of our continual endeavors and intercessions
with his Majesty, and the Lords of the Council, for hastening your assistance:
Hitherto we have been so unhappy, that notwithstanding the excellent
inclinations that they have here, and the particular good Offices that the Duke
has done us, we have met with nothing but cross upon cross, ever since the
departure of Monsieur Grossetiere, insomuch that their good will cannot be
seconded with the diligence promised by them, and which is necessary 1628.
September. for you. On the Lords day there arrived with us the Brother of the
deceased Forest with your Letters, the abovesaid Grossetiere having not judged
it fit for him to charge himself with them. We cannot tell you how much we have
been troubled, finding that which we have ever justly feared: we have always
foretold your extreme necessities; to morrow we will present to the Duke that
which you have addressed to him, and by his means to his Majesty that which you
have writ to him, and read also to them that which you have been pleased to
write to us, though they speak enough of it themselves; for so it is, that the
Duke of Soubize, and we, do accompany them with the most instant supplications
that is possible for us, and with abundance of tears, who show great trouble at
the excess of our grief; and his Majesty showing himself extraordinarily
concerned, caused at the same time the assembling of his Principal Officers, to
dispatch them to the Havens where the preparations were made. In brief, he
established all necessary Orders for to make them diligent, and indeed they
have the three last days since advanced very much, in such sort, as we have now
great hopes, that within fifteen days at furthest, the Fleet will set sail, if
God give a favorable season. It goes so well furnished of all things
necessary, with so much resolution, carrying a Command so express from his
Majesty, to conquer or die, that we hope (by the help of God) for all happy
success. In the mean time, because contrary Winds may happen, his Majesty has
thought good, besides six which have been dispatched by us since the return of
the Earl of Denby, to send 1628. September. you back this Messenger, to the end,
that if the season prove unfavourable, and retards your succors, you shall
remain assured, that with the first fair wind you shall not fail of it. Seeing
then that things are in this condition, in the Name of God, Gentlemen, continue
the Miracles of your Constancy: we know that your necessities cannot be other
than frightful, representing to our selves our Children, who with yours cry out
of Hunger; we eat scarce a morsel, that we water not with our tears; but do you
retrench all Nutriture, and even to our Children (God knows nevertheless how
dear they are to us) and to all such as are not capable of applying themselves
to the Common Defense, make of Extreme Necessity a Virtue, in expectation that
God will Crown it with his Deliverance. We write you this with eyes bathed with
tears, desiring nothing more than to be with you to bear a part of your
Miseries, as we have done of Prosperity: But since the Providence of God has
disposed otherwise of us, we beseech you to have this confidence in our
Fidelity, that we shall not spare any labor, until God in his mercy make us to
see this work conducted to his end, and your Consolation, and to the confusion
of the Enemies of God, and yours. It remains resolved, that one of us will
imbark with them in the Fleet, but we are in contestation which of us it shall
be, each desiring it with passion. We shall yield nevertheless to reason,
seeing that we judge it necessary that one of us remain here, and shall agree
amicably in this, as we have always done in all other things, after we have
weighed that which shall seem most profitable to us: In the 1628. September. mean
time we join with you in prayers to God, that he will uphold you by his Power,
according as hitherto he has done; and as we are assured, that all Europe has
at this time their eyes upon you, as an example of the greatest courage and
generosity that can be heard of, so that you will continue, in such sort, as
Posterity shall also admire you, for not having bowed under the greatest
necessity, having surmounted things the most insurmountable. This is the desire
and firm assurance of those who are so long as they shall have the least breath
of life,

Gentlemen, Your most humble and most obedient Servants and Deputies, J. David,
Ph. Vincent.

London, July 14. 1628. The Sieur Dehinse is at Plymouth, as also the Sieurs
Bragneau and Gobert at Portsmouth, where they labor in your business.
Gentlemen,
WE add these lines, to tell you in behalf of the Duke, that in case it fall
out, that if the first Assault be not accompanied with success, that he hopes
you will not doubt but he will make a second, a third, and so on, until he
perish, or that he has relieved you: In the mean time he expects, that if the
Wind is such as he can serve you, or in case it turns, and is against him, that
you think favorably of him. You must not spare to do on your side all that is
possible with your Fireships; we doubt not of your establishing 1628. September.
so good order, that the Enemy shall have no opportunity of surprising you, as
of old the Turks did a place in the Morea, which they gained after a long
Siege, whilst the people imprudently ran to the Haven, where they received
relief.




The 12th of August, betwixt two and three a Clock Afternoon, Bouffard, Sieur
of Magdeleine, entered a Horseback into Rochel by the Seaside, but not
without running adventure three times of being taken by the Kings Horse, who
pursued him all along the shore from Port-Neuf, until very near the Port of two
Mills, carrying news to the Rochellers, that the English Army was shipped, and
ready to sail with the first good wind to come to their relief.

The 20th of August, in the night, the Heavens was seen from ten or eleven in
the Evening, until break of day, all on fire, and Lightnings in such manner, as
made it as clear as in full day, without any noise or thundering in the Air:
Some reported to have seen on the Seacoast an Apparition, like men, fighting
one with another: Afterward it was noised thorough the City, that at midnight
there appeared in the Heavens, over the Digue, a Naval Fleet, where after a
great Combat there was a breach made, which gave passage to the Ships; the
wise gave no heed to this, but the common people comforted themselves with it;
whatever it was, this night had something extraordinary, which caused the
inflammation of the Air in such a manner, as occasioned a great Allarum in the
City, and that all run to the places of Arms, and Court of Guards, where they
remained until day, upon the fear of those Fantasmes which the Watch took for
men.

1628. September. The 28th of August, an Inhabitant, called John Mattin, came
into Rochel from England, bringing a Letter from the Deputies, advising that
the Army was put to Sea, and was on this side the Channel, and that it had come
sooner, had not the death of the Duke of Buckingham, who was killed at
Portsmouth by a Lieutenant, hindered it; the History of whose Death, because he
was a great Lord, and the first Author of this War, I have inserted here, with
the circumstances of it, having extracted it from the Journals of one of the
Deputies who was in England, and since his return has given me a Narrative of
it.

An Extract of the Journal of Sieur Vincent.
THe 26th of September, 1628. being at Portsmouth, where the preparations for
the Naval Army were preparing with all diligence, the Duke of Buckingham sent
for us early in the morning, and communicated to us some Letters received from
the Kings Camp before Rochel; by which they gave him advice, that the City had
then received a notable refreshment of Victuals, and particularly fifty or
sixty Oxen: We answered, that these reports were scattered artificially to
retard our relief, and that except Oxen could fly, it was impossible that the
News could be true. The Duke of Soubize came in at the very instant of time,
and confirmed the same that I had said, beseeching him not to slacken upon this
noise his good affections and diligence in our Affairs: He promised us that
there should not be one moment of delay; but however, he continued the news,
and intended himself to carry it to the King, who 1628. September. was four miles
from thence; and thereupon he got a slight Breakfast, and going from the Table,
he was presented with a certain Platform for a Building, by a Captain of a
very little stature, and viewing of it, went toward the door, where the
Tapistry being held up for him, he stayed some time looking upon, and
considering the Platform. In this place, and at this instant, there came up a
certain young man, a Lieutenant of a Company, who over the shoulder of the said
Captain stabbed him with a Knife at one blow in the Stomach, and so retired
into the Crowd: The Duke laid presently his hand upon his Sword, and pursued
him the length of the Antichamber, pronouncing these words, Ha Dog, thou have
killed me: Then finding himself to faint, let fall his Sword, and pulled out
the Knife himself, which he who stabbed him had left in his Body. As soon as it
had taken wind, he fell upon the ground, and being lifted up by his Servants,
was laid along upon a Table to make the blood come from him, which came out at
his mouth, and then he gave no more any sign of life. This was so sudden, as
one can scarce imagine. We being in the Chamber, at the door where he was
stabbed, there rise a report that the French had killed the Duke: The noise and
confusion which was in the Crowd, being amongst his Train, put us into a most
great Allarm, every one laying their hands upon their Swords, crying and
demanding who it was, and we had assuredly run a great Adventure, had not he
who committed the Murder, seeing others wrongfully accused, accused himself,
declaring with a loud voice, that it was he. Whereupon being seized, and
interrogated upon the cause which 1628. September. had moved him to this action,
he answered, that they would find it in the Crown of his Hat, where (presuming
that he should be killed upon the place) he had hid them; and there they found
a Writing, the substance whereof was, that the Duke having been declared by
Vote of Parliament (a Copy of which he recited) an Enemy to the State, his
Life, by the Laws of the Kingdom, was exposed as a prey; and to this public
injury he joined another, as to his own particular, ( viz.) in that for
advancing his own Favorites, he had twice prevented him of a Captains Command,
when it was his due; so that he believed he had a right to revenge by that Stab
both himself and the Public: And as he had committed this to writing, he
continued afterward to declare the same by word of mouth, that having killed a
Public Enemy, he was authorized therein by the Laws of the Land; and other
Confession than this they had no way to draw from him, the Rack not being
permitted in England. But to return to the Duke, so soon as he was expired, all
the great Crowd which filled his House, went away by little and little, and
returning thither two hours after, I found the Body extended in a Corner of the
Room upon a miserable old Mat, and guarded solely by one Valet de Chamber: And
this opposed to the splendor in which we saw him in the morning, having about
him all the gallantest Nobility of the Kingdom, and the Principal Captains of
the Army, presents to us a sad document of the vanity and inconstancy of the
fading things of this World. The News was carried presently to the King, who
was in his Chapel at that days service. When they told it him in his Ear, he
stirred 1628. September. not from his place, nor enquired after any particulars
of it, which was taken for a Testimony of the great Reverence he carried to the
Place and Action, which he would not trouble; only as a mark of a grand
Emotion, they observed the blood to come into his face, which became as black
as a Hat. Prayers being ended, he enquired after the Fact, sent to condole the
Widow, and assured her, that the Offices of the Father should be preserved for
the Son; and sent us word also, that this accident should not in any kind
divert his good will and kindness, giving us order to acquaint our City with
the same.

This was the end of this great Lord raised by King James, and had all the
Power under the present King his Son; who having put him upon amplifying the
Rights of his Royalty beyond what the Laws of England seem to permit, he had
drawn upon him the hatred of all the Kingdom, as appeared during his life, and
much more after his death, in that they would at a great rate have redeemed the
life of him that had assassinated him.

The 27th of September. new Style, about seven or eight in the Evening, the
Landforces, and all the Batteries, made a Consort with Cannon and
Musket Shot, mixed with an infinite number of Fireworks, and cries of Vive le
Roy, which continued above an hour and a half in Celebration of the Kings
Nativity.

The 28th of September. arrived in Rochel a Gentleman called Champ Flewry, from
the English Army, with two Letters in Ciphers, the one from the Duke of Soubize
to the Duchess his Mother, and another from the Deputies to the Mayor, 1628.
September. and Body of the City, assuring them, that before day was gone, they
would see the English Fleet arrived; and about four or five in the Evening, a
great Party of the same appeared at the entering into the Road, betwixt the
Island and the Main, and came to Anchor in the great Road of S. Martin, and a
la Palisse, expecting those of the Fleet which were behind.

The 30th ditto, it came to the Head of the Bay, being joined in the morning
with a Squadron, as it was in the Evening with another, which came in by
Antioch, and so joined altogether.

In the mean time, those of the Camp remained not idle, but put themselves in a
posture of powerfully resisting the English, and wrought diligently day and
night to reinforce anew the Digue and Pallisade, by sinking of Ships, raising
of Batteries, placing of Candlesticks and Engines, furnishing the Ships with
Men and Ammunition, and guarding the Coasts with Horse and Foot. In brief, they
omitted nothing that could be done upon this occasion.

OCTOBER.
October. new Style, the Rochellers seeing their succors at the Head of the Bay,
sent by Land the Sieur de la Land du Lac, to acquaint them with the extremities
that they were reduced unto, and how the Digue was composed, and the places
where they might pass it.

The same day in the Evening the Rochellers received a Letter from their
Deputies in England, as follows.

1628. October. The Deputies Letter to the Rochellers.
Gentlemen,
THe Fleet being scattered at Sea, and not being able to re-assemble until
Saturday in the Evening, you have seen that the Weather since has been
improper for them, but rest assured, that they will take the first opportunity,
and that all are so disposed to do well, that they will not depart before they
have, with Gods assistance, relieved you. This is the Resolution of his
Majesty, the Intention of the General, all the Captains, and Soldiers; remain
therefore most assured hereof.

From the Road in the Head of the Bay, October. 1. 1628. Gentlemen, Yours, etc.


The third of October. new Style, about seven or eight in the morning, the
English Army, Commanded by the Earl of Linsey, set sail, and seemed to give
order to advance betwixt the two Points, but stayed there two hours, with some
light approaches on each side, but nevertheless without coming to blows; nor
did they any thing more, than discharge many Cannon-shot, and send some
Fireships, without any effect, and after this retired, to the great trouble of
the Rochellers, who believed they ought to have done better, for they had
already, in their hopes, swallowed the Provisions brought them by the Fleet.

During this shadow of Attacque, the Rochellers discharged many Cannon-shot
from their Steeples, Towers, and Batteries on that side, of which it 1628.
October. was reported in the Evening, that one shot from the Tower of S.
Nicholas, killed four Persons of Quality on the side of Coureille: In the City
was also killed with one shot, coming from the Gally, the Sieur Gedeon
Mignonneau.

The fourth of October. the English Army returned a second time, as if it
intended to attacque the Army of the King, but did no more than the day before,
discharge some Cannon-shot, and set six of their Fireships on fire; but being
a Calm, and the Wind at North, they effected nothing, but burnt behind the
Points of the Head of the Bay, and Coureille, unto the Plain of Angulin. This
saddened the hearts of the Rochellers greatly, and took from them (by their ill
beginning) almost all hopes of being delivered by this Army.

The seventh, the Sieur Paul Mervault caused to be cast in Rochel four
Culverines, one whereof failed, the other three proving good.

The same day the King sent a Gentleman into the City, to know if they would
come to any Treaty of Peace; but he returned the next day without doing any
thing, the Rochellers refusing all particular Treaties, and making again the
forementioned difficulty of knowing how to address to the King.

The eighth ditto, the English Army made a Signal, accompanied with a
Cannon-shot, upon the arrival of Sieur de la Land du Lac, which the Rochellers
answered with the contrary Signal, of a Fire upon the Tower at the Chain, and
with a Cannon-shot.

The eighth ditto, there came into Rochel three Soldiers, called Chardeuine,
la Verdue, and la Paillette, coming from the English Army, with 1628. October.
each a Letter, which they delivered to the Mayor, being of this Tenure.

The Deputies (aboard the Duke of Soubize) their Letter to the Rochellers.
Gentlemen,
WE have given you already advice of our coming, and of our firm resolutions to
relieve you; we send this, to reiterate the assurances we have before given
you, and to tell you, that though the Skirmishes of Tuesday and Wednesday had
no effect, you ought not to be discouraged, but to hold your selves assured,
that with the help of God we will not depart from hence, before you are either
saved, or we destroyed. We have, with Gods help, force sufficient to make us
hope well, and see his bounty in your speedy deliverance; if you can help us
therein, we do certainly conclude that you will not be sparing in it: If you
have any advice to give us touching the Pallisade, and the manner of attacquing
it, endeavor to let us know it; in the mean time, we pray God to fortify you:
The Duke of Soubize, who will subscribe this, salutes you, and desires you to
let this be as well for the Duchess his Mother, as for you. We are,

From aboard the Duke of Soubize, October. 6. 1628. Gentlemen, Your most humble
and most obedient Servants and Deputies, Soubize. Ph. Vincent, J. Dehinse, D.
Bragneau, J. Gobert.



1628. October. Besides this Letter, the Messenger that brought it, told
Wonders of the Preparations that were made against the next High-tide; and
above all, that they had three Ships to use as a Mine to blow up the Digue
with, in each of which there were many thousands of Powder, from which they
expected great effect for breaking the Digue, and entirely opening the passage.

This caused some particular persons (forejudging that with the said High Water
Victuals would come into the City) to make on the tenth, eleventh, twelfth, and
thirteenth, a public sale of Corn, Bisquet, and all sorts of Provisions; and
there was found one amongst others, who had forty Bushels of Corn, and as many
of Wheat, ten Quintals of Bisquet, twelve Bushels of Beans, and as many of
Pease, six Bushels of Fitches, one Bale of Rice, twelve Quintals of dried Fish
of Virginy, and six Barrels of Butter. As this did well with many, so it killed
a great many others, whose Stomachs being debilitated by ill nourishment, and
the little that they had in a long time eaten, were left without heat for
digestion, in such sort, that having eaten greedily, they fainted away, as I
have seen many.

The 14th ditto, with the Evening-tide, the English Army made a Signal of Fire,
upon the arrival of a Soldier that the Mayor had sent, upon which the
Rochellers made immediately another in the Tower of the Chain, and from the
Lanthorn.

The 15th ditto, in the night, came into Rochel a Soldier, who reported, that
my Lord Montague was come into the Camp to treat of a Peace with the King; and
after having been well received of his Majesty, and Cardinal Richelieu, he was
returned 1628. October. thence into the English Army: He said also, so, that a
Cannon-shot from the Steeple of S. Bartholomew fell in the Fort Louis, over
against the King, who having at that time the said Montague with him, they were
by it covered with dust, which was the cause that betwixt three and four a
Clock in the Evening, there was many Cannon-shot discharged from the said Fort
against the City: And this accident obliged the Rochellers to redouble their
Prayers every day at their Sermons, for the preservation of his Majesty from
all evil.

At this time, the Mayor and his Council seeing that the Springtide was
passed, without the English Army attempting any thing, the weather having been
always very calm, so that they could not hope for relief sooner than with the
next Springtide, assembled the Council in the Townhouse, to the end to
consider how to govern themselves for the time to come. Amongst other things
they ordained, that there should be established in all the Companies of the
City, Commissioners to make search in all Houses to see what Corn there was, or
other Provisions, and to leave thereof, in each House where any was found, for
fifteen days, or three Weeks at the most, and to take the rest to distribute to
those that had none. The search being made, there was found in all but 150
Bushels of Corn of all Grain, each having done of themselves, at the arrival of
the English, what now the Council would do, and helped their Parents and
Friends with what they had over, expecting nothing less than to see the English
Fleet a Month in the Road without doing any thing.

This little Corn that was found, was reserved 1628. October. for the
nourishment of the Soldiers, who with the inhabitants were like Anatomies, and
by little and little died away. And it is most observable what befell two
English Soldiers, who finding that they could do no more, went together to the
House of a Joyner, to bespeak each their Cossin for the next day by eight in
the morning: he at first refused it, believing they mocked him, as thinking
himself more wasted with Famine than the Soldiers; have you not strength, said
they, to work? and pressing of him, and paying him in advance, the gain made
him undertake it; and before them, and in their presence, began to work, and
finished these two Coffins, and came at the time they appointed with them, when
he saw the same Evening one die, and the other the next day, betwixt ten and
eleven in the morning.

The 17th of October, the Sieur Arnault came to the Port S. Nicholas to Parley;
there were nominated to hear him the Sieurs Viette, Riffault, Journault, and
Mocquay: he returned the next day, and conferred long with them, but could not
conclude any thing.

The 18th, in the morning, the Mayor and Council sent out Chardeuine to go to
the English Army; but as he would have passed the Line, he received a
Musket Shot in his shoulder, which obliged him to return to the City.

The 19th, in the morning before day, the Mayors Lodgings were set on fire, and
he had run an adventure of being burnt, had it not been that one that passed
that way discovered it, crying, Fire, Fire, which brought together the
Neighborhood, who quenched it readily, before it had time to burn more than
part of the doors, and 1628. October. blacken the Planks of the Shop: It was
believed that this proceeded from some Inhabitants, who despairing of relief,
desired the rendition of the Town.

Now the Famine increased dreadfully, nothing being left, the greatest number
having in three Months time not known what Bread was, nor any thing of ordinary
Provisions; Flesh of Horses, Asses, Mules, Dogs, Cats, Rats and Mice, were all
eaten up; there was no more Herbs or Snails left in the Fields, so that their
recourse was to Leather, Hides of Oxen, skins of Sheep, Cinnamon, Cassia,
Liquorish out of Apothecaries Shops, Flemish Colewort frigased, Bread of Straw
made with a little Sugar, Flower of Roots, Irish Powder, Gelly of the skins of
Beasts and Sheep, Horns of Deer beaten to Powder, old Buff-Coats, soles of
Shoes, Boots, Aprons of Leather, Belts for Swords, old Pockets, Leather
Points, Parchment, Wood beaten in a Mortar, Plaster, Earth, Dung (which I have
seen with my eyes) Carrion, and Bones that the Dogs had gnawn, and indeed all
that came in their sight, though such food gave rather death than sustenance,
or prolongation of life, from whence there passed not a day that there died not
two or three hundred, or more persons, in such sort, that not only the
Churchyards, but even the Houses, Streets, and out-parts of the City, were in
a little time filled with dead bodies, without having other Sepulchers than the
places where they fell, the living not having so much strength as to throw them
into the Ditch, even many went to die in the Church yards.

During these Calamities and Miseries, some, who having reserved hidden
Provision, sold them 1628. October. underhand at an excessive price, to wit,
the Peck of Corn (which is the eighth part of the Bushel of the City) for the
sum of two hundred Livers, which is twelve pound ten shillings Starling; a
Bisquet, which scarce weighed seven or eight ounces, for ten or twelve Crowns,
which is forty five or fifty four shillings Starling; a Calf a thousand Livers,
which is seventy five pound Starling, with some reserve for the seller; a
Sheep, from three to five hundred Livers, at eighteen pence Starling the Liver,
and all the rest, after the same rate; and yet they thought themselves happy,
who by the Intercession of Friends, could get any thing at these Rates. In the
mean time, it was a mavelous thing, that the necessities being such, and the
Mortality so great, there was no Confederation or grumbling in the City,
neither by the common people, nor others, to oblige the Mayor and his Council
to Capitulate, but all suffer themselves to be led to their deaths without
complaints and murmuring, testifying their satisfaction and contentment, which
shows the great influence that Religion and Liberty have upon the spirits of
men. As to those without, I mean the Kings Army, it was also mavelous, that
having advice of the lamentable and frightful necessity, and the extreme
feebleness that the place was reduced unto, they never attempted the Storming
of it, when it was impossible for them within to have resisted, having no
strength left them, not so much as to traverse their Cannon, or to Toll their
Great Bell for the Sermon; and when they set their Guards, they found often
half of them dead in the morning; and the like by their Sentinels, in so much,
that many Nights passed, without 1628. October. having any persons in the
greatest part of the Courts of Guard, so that the least attempt had carried the
City; but God looked upon us in mercy, and prepared the King to exercise
toward us the Wonders and Miracles of his Mercy and Clemency.

During the horror of this Famine, as there was Examples of Cruelty, there was
also many of great Charity, in a free and voluntary distribution of their
Overplus, as others had done of their Plenty, for enriching of themselves; and
especially Sieur Thinault, a Merchant, and one of my Uncles, called Sieur
Duprat, who having in their House a most great quantity of Wheat, and other
Corn, sold not one grain, but distributed it to those whom they judged to be in
want, for to repay them only when God should restore them to peace and ability.

Others there were who distributed Charity so in secret, as the Authors thereof
were never discovered; and amongst others, I had knowledge of one which seems
to me most remarkable: Le Sieur de la Gout, a Honorary Advocate to the King,
had a Sister, Widow to a Merchant called Prosni, who being a very religious and
charitable Woman, when the Famine begun to be more sharp than ordinary,
assisted freely the Poor; her Sisterin-law, Wife to the Sieur de la Gout,
being of another humor, reproved her for it, asking her in choler, what she
would do when she had given all away; to which she answered, My Sister, the
Lord will provide for me. The Famine increasing, and the Siege continuing, this
poor Widow, who had four Children, finding her self in a straight, having no
Provisions at all left, went to 1628. October. her Sister for relief; but
instead of comforting her, she reproached her, telling her, she had provided
well to be so reduced with all her great Faith, and fair words, that the Lord
will provide for me; and that in good time he would provide for her. This poor
Woman's Heart was wounded with these words, and returning to her House much
troubled, resolved to take death patiently: Being come home, her Children met
her with great joy, as formerly they used to do, but now told her, that a Man,
whom they did not know, it being late, knocked at the door, and as soon as it
was opened, threw in a Sack of Wheat of about a Bushel (which is near two
English Bushels) and then went readily away, without saying any thing to them:
This poor Woman, though hardly able to believe her own eyes, went presently out
of doors, and with the greatest speed she could (in her famished condition) run
to her Sister-inlaw, and told her with a strong voice, as soon as she saw her,
My Sister, the Lord has provided for me; and then returned, without
discoursing further with her. By the means of this unexpected relief, coming so
opportunely, she spun out the time until the Kings entrance, and never knew to
whom she was obliged for this good and merciful act.

The 21th ditto, betwixt seven and eight a Clock in the Evening, the Kings
Naval Army sent four Fireships against the English Fleet, which obliged some
Ships to cut their Cables, but others defended themselves, and turned them
aside, by the help of their Dragontins and Shalloops.

The 23th ditto, with the morning-tide, the English Army set sail, coming to
the Pallisade, and 1628. October. behind the Point of Coureille, but without
making any attempt, contented themselves with making some unprofitable
Cannon-shot.

The 25th in the night, the Mayors House was again set on fire with dry
branches cut from Firtrees, well prepared with Sulphur, Pitch, Turpentine, and
other combustible things, but it was presently discovered, and as soon
extinguished: And further, the same night, two hours before day, twenty or
thirty Soldiers set fire on the Port of Coigne, but those that were on the
Guard at the said Port, put it out immediately.

The 26th, there came by Land into Rochel a Gentleman from the English Army,
who brought three Letters, one from the Duke of Soubize to the Duchess of
Rohan his Mother, the other two from Sieur Vincent; the one to the Mayor in
particular, and the other to the Body of the City in general, by which they
gave advice of all that passed in the said English Army; and above all, that my
Lord Montague having communicated with Cardinal Richelieu for a Treaty of
Peace, was gone Post for England, from whence they expected him every day; and
intimated, that in the mean time they would procure a Passport for two of
themselves (their Deputies) to go to the Kings Camp to communicate with them,
and from thence to go to them in the City, to the end that at the arrival of
the said Montague, all things might be disposed to a good Peace; and that the
General charged them to give this advice, and that in the mean time he was
resolved to attempt against the Digue, if the weather would serve*

The same day this Gentleman was sent back to the English Army with Letters in
Ciphers, which 1628. October. expressed the great and last extremity of the
City, conjuring them, if they would relieve it, to do it within a Week at
furthest, otherwise they should be forced to render to any conditions.

Immediately after this Gent. was sent back with his dispatch to the English
Army, the Mayor assembled the Council in the Town House, to consider of what
was necessary to be done, and after mature consideration of the matter
contained in the abovesaid Letters, the report of the said Gentleman, the
miserable condition to which they were reduced, the great and extreme
necessities which pressed them, their great feebleness, such as they were not
sufficient, nor capable to resist the least assault their Enemies should make,
and the little or no appearance of being relieved by the English, who had been
there a Month with folded Arms, they concluded, that it was in vain to expect
any longer relief from the English, or also from their Treaty, for that they
should be all dead before their Negotiator would return; and therefore, upon
the whole, they resolved to apply themselves to the King for his grace and
mercy.

For that end, they took occasion from a Letter that the Sieur Arnault had writ
that day to the Sieur Fequiere, by the Drummer who brought him his Victuals,
which represented to them the strength of the Digue, and the little hopes they
had of relief from the English, and that a good Peace would be better for them
got, by sending to the King to receive them into his Grace. The said Sieur
Fequiere having communicated his Letter to the Mayor, they prayed him in his
Answer to Sieur Arnault, to advise him to come the next morning to the City,
and they would confer with him.

1628. October. The said Sieur Fequiere accepted most willingly this
Commission, and presently writ accordingly.

Now I hold my self obliged in duty to impart unto the Public a Narrative
which came from Cardinal Richelieu's own particular Family, a little after the
rendition, which is believed to have been composed either by one of his
Secretaries, or possibly by himself, which may very well serve to illustrate
that which follows, touching the Conditions granted the Rochellers, and show
the manner and grounds upon which they were granted; the Tenor of which is as
follows.

Cardinal Richelieu understanding by Letters from Sieur Fequiere to Sieur
Arnault his Brotherin-law, that the Rochellers desired Pass-ports to seek his
Majesty's Grace (which he was pleased with) his first care was to give the King
ready advice thereof, who received it with great joy, and immediately did the
Cardinal the Honor to go to him to Sousay, where he assembled the Council, for
to deliberate upon some Conditions under which they would receive the City,
notwithstanding their obstinacy in their Rebellion.

All agreed, that they had merited a most rigorous Chastisement, and that they
ought to make them a Signal Example to all those of the Kingdom, which might
for the time to come have a thought of opposing the will of the King, and
making Revolts or Commotions in the Estate.

But when it came to be debated, though all agreed, that the King might in
Justice take the severest way, yet whether that would be most for his Grandeur
and Glory, and most agreeable to the true Maxims of State, they were divided
into 1628. October. three different Opinions; some for the ^igour of Justice,
others that the King should take this occasion to signalize his Clemency; and a
t^^^d sort, were for a middle way betwixt both, that after the punishing some
of the greatest M^t^^^ers, to show Grace to the rest.

The Cardinal gathering the sense of one and the other, without giving his
Opinion, represented all to the King, to the end that he should make a decision
thereof; yet nevertheless tempered his discourse so, as his inclinations might
thereby appear.

Beginning with those who were for making the City an Example of Justice, he
said, their advice was very well fortified, and possible that none can be
rendered more deserving punishment, considering her obstinacy, the trouble it
has a long time given his Majesty, and that the Ruins of no place which the
King has demolished to the Foundations, cry higher for teaching the people
obedience to their Sovereigns that this; and that there is no Ramparts secure
against Rebellion.

As to those which held the middle Opinion, he extolled their Reasons, and
said, that in such Rencounters, the punishment of the most Culpable was an awe
upon Mutineers, and the pardoning others showed the bounty of the Prince, and
hindered the obstinacy of a Community in like cases, as is ordinary with those
that despair not of mercy, of which the Rochellers was even then an Example.

But when he came to the advice of those that concluded for a General Pardon,
he enlarged and insisted very much upon their Reasons: And first, he
represented, as most considerable, that which 1628. October. they had supposed,
that possibly there was never so Illustrious an occasion as this presented to
any Prince, to signalize his Clemency, which is the virtue by which Kings
approach nearest to God, whose Image they are most in well doing, giving life,
and not in destroying and exterminating it: Further, that the more culpable
that Rochel was, and had given the King cause of great irritation, the more it
would make his Magnanimity appear, in after overcoming the City with his
Invincible Arms, reducing it to a naked submission to him, to surmount himself
in pardoning it; in doing of which, the Celebrated Name of this City would
proclaim his Glory thoroughout the World, and transmit it to Posterity, showing
him thoroughout as an incomparable Prince, be it in conquering, or in the
moderate use of his Victories.

In the second place, he weighed the Reasons they had alleged, drawn from
Rochel it self, who though it was culpable beyond what they could say,
nevertheless the lives of so many thousands as their faults had cost, were
sufficient Victims to the Justice of his Majesty, and interceded for the
remainder of the miserable People which might be left, which may be judged of
by those that are every day seen as Anatomies and Fantasmes about the Line; and
indeed, true Images of Death, the sight only whereof does suffice to disarm his
Majesty of all revenge, and though he had had a design to triumph over and
consume them, to change all his Irritation and Thundering into pity.

He added, that it seemed good that they should also consider of what had been
alleged, and that though their Crimes were most great, and without 1628.
October. excuse, yet they had not committed that offense which ought to exclude
the people from all hopes of mercy, as if they had shaken off the Authority of
their Sovereign, and submitted to another Scepter: Indeed factious spirits made
use of the danger of his Majesty's forcing their Religion, to deceive them into
the adhering to the Arms of England, for the preserving of their Privileges;
but his Majesty knows, that the Rochellers made use only of that pretense to
the English, and that there were other reasons which carried them to the
undertaking of this War, for that he was perfectly informed that the Rochellers
never intended to give themselves up to them; which he knew as well by diverse
of his Servants which he had secretly in the City, as from his Confidents which
he maintained in England, who had constantly writ him, that though they had
every way assaulted the Fidelity of their Deputies, and deferred relief, to
oblige them to offer themselves to them, they would never hearken to it; and
the perfect Confirmation of this they received by the Packet, which one of
their Pinnaces, coming from England, threw into the water, when at the passing
of the Digue they thought they should be taken: Their Treaty made with the King
of England, and all their Negotiations being deciphered, it appeared, that
though the English had highly Courted them, for getting Conditions to the
prejudice of this Crown, they would never be brought to it; and defended
themselves therein, with all the constancy and firmness that their condition
could bear: And therefore, though they are most Culpable, yet since they have
preserved their hearts and affections for France, it seems to invite his 1628.
October. Majesty to mercy, and not to use them as such who would have shaken
off the Yoke of the Monarchy, and offered the hand to another Master.

In the third place, he insisted much upon reason of State, upon which this
advice was founded, and pressed the present Constitution of Affairs, to require
that his Majesty by a Signal example of Clemency, and an exact Capitulation,
mutually agreed upon, should endeavor to overcome the Arms of the Duke of
Rohan, and other rebellious Cities, who had all their eyes upon Rochel, for
according to the usage that they shall meet with, they will conclude as to
themselves: suppose then that his Majesty exercising rigor toward them, he
makes the least paultry Town stand out a Siege, and obstinately resist unto the
last, were it not better to grant an absolute Pardon to this City, whereby he
may dispose the rest to beg the Clemency of his Majesty, who by this means will
in a little time see all his Country in peace, and may then pursue his designs
against the Spaniards Invasion of his Allies.

He added that which themselves had also alleged, that though in all
appearance the Rochellers were not able to do any more, yet nevertheless he was
not to believe, that they had deferred treating until the last morsel; and that
as they had been three Months deceived in their Opinion, that they still could
not hold out any longer, it may be that those that have the major Vote, and who
fear their Heads, may prevail for hindering the rendition, and hold out yet
some time, and the least delay is of great consequence, the Affairs of Italy
being very pressing. Above 1628. October. all, it behooves us much to consider,
that my Lord Montague, who was gone into England, was expected back every day
with the allowance of his King for the rendition of the City; and it will be
infinitely more for his Majesty's glory, to receive his Subjects into Grace,
upon their repentance and voluntary submission to his Commands, than at the
Intercession of a Stranger Prince; and therefore it imported them very much to
prevent the said Montague, to the end, that at his arrival he might find his
Majesty Triumphant in the place of his glorious Conquest; and that they might
not be obliged in Contests, which otherwise they may have with him, touching
the Conditions of this rendition, and to engage in a further War with England,
when their Affairs require the contrary, the making of Peace with them.

This was the substance of that which Cardinal Richelieu represented to his
Majesty, who declared, that having well weighed all circumstances, he would
deceive those of Rochel, in giving them cause to bless his entry into the City,
and commanded that they should have all the assurances possible given them for
their Lives, Goods, and Religion; and that forgetting all their faults, they
should be treated as his other Subjects, provided they remained faithful for
the time to come; but that he intended to demolish all their Walls, for taking
from them the means of rendering themselves at any other time miserable, and
that they should not speak any more of their Privileges, which had hitherto
inflamed them unto so high a degree.

This is the Contents of the abovementioned Piece, which I esteem worthy to be
inserted in this 1628. October. place, it serving to clear the Articles which
were afterward agreed to Rochel.

The 27th, the Mayor and Council being assembled, those that had been sent to
the Sieur Fequiere reported, that he thought it necesiary for reaping the fruit
of his Intercession, which they had desired that they should nominate some with
whom he might communicate before the arrival of his Brother-in-law, who would
not stay, as he hoped; which being approved of, they deputed to him the Sieurs
Viette, Riffault, Mocquay, and Charles de la Cost.

The same day, about ten in the morning, Sieur Arnault presented himself with
Pass-ports for the Deputies, if they would send any; and the four abovenamed,
being chosen, went with him to the Cardinal Richelieu, who after hearing them,
told them, that he had no Commission from the King to treat with his Subjects
of the City of Rochel, but only to hear their Propositions and Demands:
Nevertheless, that he would not cease to intercede for them to his Majesty, to
procure them their Lives, Religion, and Estates; but as to their Privileges,
and form of Government, his Majesty would reserve that in his own Power: not
that he would put Soldiers into the City, nor make a Citadel, but rather
demolish the fortifications, and that in a day or two at furthest they should
return the same to him, or other Conditions to accept of; and besides, that he
gave them this Answer by word of mouth, he gave it them also in writing, in a
little Note.

Being come back, the Mayor and Council ordered that the Bell of the City-House
should be tolled the next day, being October 28. at seven in the 1628. October.
morning, to the end that they might resolve upon these offers; and being
assembled in the Hall of the City, and having heard the report of the Deputies,
according to the tenure of the said Note or Billet, they resolved to receive
the best Conditions of Peace that they could get; and to that end was named the
Sieurs d'Angoulin., and de la Gout, to agree with the abovesaid Deputies upon
the Articles.

Having composed the Articles, and showed them to the Council, the Deputies
went from the City betwixt three and four in the Evening, and came to Sausay to
wait upon Cardinal Richelieu, who deferred them till the next morning, but in
the interim caused them to be well treated, both as to Bed, and Board.

The next morning (being the 29th) they were called before him, finding him
with my Lords the Keepers of the Seal, Marshal Schomberg, and other Lords of
the Council, and presented to him their Propositions and Demands; upon which he
told them, that the King was pleased, of pure grace, to grant them their Lives,
Estates, and Liberty of Conscience; but as to that Head which imported the
treating in general for all those of their Party, that it did not behove them
to meddle with any thing but what concerned themselves only, according as the
French in the English Army treated for themselves apart: and the better to
persuade them to it, he showed them the Deputies from the English Fleet, but
without permitting them to speak together. In the end, after many Contests, and
above all, about liberty of the exercise of their Religion within the City,
they agreed upon Articles of Peace, under the Conditions as follows.

1628. October. The Mayor, Sheriffs, Peers, Burgers, and Inhabitants of the
City of Rochel, represented by John Berne, Esquire Sieur d'Angoulin, Esquire and
Sheriff, Peter Viette, Daniel de la Gout, James Riffault, Peers, Elie Mocquay,
and Charles de la Cost Burgers; having the Commission of Deputies from the
Body of the said City, acknowledging the great faults that they have committed,
not only in resisting the just will and pleasure of the King, as they have a
long time done, in not submitting to him, and opening of the Gates of Rochel,
as they were obliged; but further, in adhering to Strangers who have taken Arms
against this State, do supplicate with all humility his Majesty to pardon them
the Crimes which they have committed, in governing themselves in this manner,
and to receive for satisfaction thereof the obedience which they desire at
present to render to him, opening the Gates of the City, which they will
actually deliver into his hands, to dispose thereof as it shall please him, and
to prescribe to them such manner of living as he shall think most proper for
the time to come, without other Conditions than such as it shall please his
Majesty in bounty to give them, which they implore with humility, beseeching
him to treat them as his Subjects, who will hereafter live and die in the most
perfect obedience that has ever been rendered to any Sovereign.

The King, having regard to the repentance of his Subjects, the Inhabitants of
the City of Rochel, and to their Protestations, of living for the time to come,
as they are obliged by their Birth; and that they will the thirtieth of October
give Evidence thereof, by opening the Gates of the said City of Rochel, and
deliver the City up to his Majesty, for him to dispose thereof, as shall seem
good unto him, has commanded, and given in charge to the Sieurs Marillac, and
du Halier, 1628. October. Marshals de Camp of his Armies, to promise them in
his Name, as follows.

First, The pardon of their Faults and Rebellions committed since the last
Commotion, with all security for their Lives, and the exercise of the Reformed
Religion in Rochel.

Secondly, That they shall be established in all their Estates, moveable and
immovable, of what nature soever they be, notwithstanding all Condemnations,
Gifts, and Confiscations which may have been made by reason of Rebellion,
except the enjoying the Revenue of their Lands, their Movables, Woods that
have been cut, and Debts which have been actually and without fraud hither to
received.

Thirdly, That all Soldiers, Subjects of the King, who are at this time in the
City of Rochel, though not Burgers or Inhabitants of the said City, shall of
grace enjoy what is above expressed; and the Heads, Captains, and Gentlemen,
shall go out of the City with their Swords by their sides, and the Soldiers
with white Staves in their hands, after the Names and Sirnames of every one,
and their Oaths is taken never to bear Arms more against the service of his
Majesty, upon pain of forfeiting the present Grace: And as to the Captains and
Soldiers that are English, who are in the said City, they shall, if it please
his Majesty, be conducted by Sea into England, without any prejudice done to
them.

Fourthly, The said Rochellers, as well Inhabitants as Soldiers, shall be
discharged of all acts of Hostility in general whatever, Negotiations in
strange Countries, and of all others, without being proceeded against for any
of them, except such as are excepted for their execrableness by the Edicts, and
such as may concern the Person of the King.

1628. October. Fifthly, In like manner the said Rochellers shall remain
discharged for casting of Cannon, minting of Money, seizing and taking of
Money, as well belonging to the King, as Ecclesiastics, and others in the said
City, together with Contributions ordained for the maintenance of Soldiers,
decreed against the absent, and even constrained by the demolition of their
houses, and of all other employments, in things abovesaid in the said City.

Sixthly, All the Inhabitants and Soldiers shall, in like manner, remain
discharged of all Judgments, Sentences and Decrees, which possibly may have
been given against them for their Rebellion, during these troubles.

Seventhly, That all Judgments, as well Civil as Criminal, given in the
Councils held extraordinarily in the said City, the Judges and Commissaries who
have assisted therein, shall not therefore be proceeded against, nor even for
the particular profits received by Prizes, or Spoils; and above all, silence
herein is imposed upon the Attorney General, and his Substitutes.

Eighthly, That the Judgments, Amercements, Condemnations, Suspensions, and
Interdictions given by the Chief Judges, as well against the Mayors of the said
City, as those that assisted them, shall remain null and void, as if they had
never been; And also, in like manner, the proceedings made against any of the
said Judges shall remain null and void, and none of those that have been
employed on either side shall be molested.

Ninthly, The Judgment for the death of Tourvert shall remain null, and those
who are therewith charged by the said Judgment, shall not for that cause be
troubled.

Tenthly, That all the Contents abovesaid shall be 1628. October. ratified by
the Mayor, Sheriffs, Peers, Burgers, and Inhabitants of the said City, and the
said Ratification thereof shall be delivered this day by two a Clock after
Dinner, in good and authentic form: After which, the King will be pleased to
deliver to the said Deputies Pattents of Declaration, which shall approve and
ratify the abovesaid Articles.

Eleventhly, The said Ratification being delivered, the Gates of the City shall
be opened, and put into the hands of such as it shall please his Majesty to
appoint, to the end that after this he may make his entry in person, when, and
in such manner as shall please him; his Majesty promising in bounty to cause
such ord^r ^t the entry and quartering of the Soldiers in the said City, that
no Inhabitants, Women or Children, shall receive any prejudice either in person
or goods.

Acted and Ordained in the Castle of Sausay, the twenty ninth of October. 1628.
Signed, Lowis de Mavillac, John Berne, Peter Viette, Riffault, de la Gout, de
la Cost, and Mocquay.


At the same time the Deputies which were with the English Fleet, and sent by
them, made their Treaty apart, after that for the City was concluded; and
because that their management being secret, and their arrival in the Camp
unexpected, many have had a desire to know the particular Transactions. I have
taken care to inform my self thereof, and believe it my duty to impart it to
the Public, as a thing belonging to this History, which follows word for word,
as it has been communicated to me, extracted from the 1628. October. Journals
of Sieur Vincent, whereof I have seen the Original.

The seventh of October. 1628. a Shalloop coming from the Kings Army, and staying
in the middle of the way, called la Pallice, with a white Flag, demanded to
communicate with the Deputies of Rochel, and the French.

By the permission of the English General, the Sieur Forin, Deputy for the Duke
of Rohan, with some others, and Mr. Montague (who was since made Abbot of
Pontoise in France) went aboard the Shalloop, where they found the Sieur
Treillebois, one of the Kings Captains, and one that made profession of the
Reformed Religion, with the Sieur Lisle, Adjutant-Major in the same Army, who
made Propositions to all the French in the English Army, to retire, and seek
the Kings Grace and Pardon, assuring them, that he would receive them to mercy,
and would like it, if they should intercede with him for the City of Rochel:
upon which they broke, only Montague making himself known, desired the
abovementioned Treillebois to present his service to Cardinal Richelieu.

The thirteenth, there returned four English who had been taken Prisoners by
the Kings Ships, and who applauded the good entertainment that had been given
them; and said, that they had it in charge from Cardinal Richelieu to tell the
Sieur Montague, that he took his Salutations in good part, and gave him
assurance of all good entertainment, in case he would confer with him; and from
thence should hope for good success for the two Crowns.

The next day, being the 14th ditto, the Council 1628. October. was assembled,
to which was called the Duke of Soubize, and the Deputies for Rochel: The Sieur
Montague proposed it as necessary, to make a thorough discovery of the Digue,
taking occasion from the invitation that had been made him the day before to go
into the Kings Camp, and carrying with him an Engineer, he brought back from
thence all new assurances.

The Deputies cried out against that Proposition, showing, that nothing but
mischief could from thence arrive them, since that so soon as the least noise
should be spread in the Army of a Treaty, they ought not to hope any more that
that courage which was already enough damped, would afterward resolve to
fight: And as to the design of discovering the Digue, that those who should do
it, were at least as crafty as those who will not show themselves, except in
places most perplexed; and that their report about the Digue would not serve
for any thing save the breeding of a Consternation, and dispondency in the
Soldiers.

Notwithstanding this opposition, Montague was resolved to make the Voyage with
a German Engineer; and presently parting, returned the same day, reporting,
that Cardinal Richelieu had received him well, and made Propositions concerning
the general good of Christendom, upon which he had charged them to confer with
the General.

The 15th ditto, Montague returned to the Kings Camp, which putting the
Deputies into an Allarm, they went aboard the General, representing to him the
evil consequences of such Communication; to which he answered, that there
should be nothing done to their prejudice.

The 19th, Montague returned with his Engineer, 1628. October. and reported, as
was before prophesied, that the Digue was altogether inforceable, and that
Cardinal Richelieu had made him Propositions, by the means of which Rochel
might hope for a reasonable treatment, and the two Crowns a good Peace betwixt
them; upon which occasion it was necessary for him to go Post into England, to
communicate to the King what he had in charge.

The Deputies hereupon said, that they saw now the effects of what they
formerly foresaw, that Rochel was not in a condition to expect a Voyage from
England, since they knew her frightful necessity; and though they had formerly
reported that the Digue was inforceable, yet they ought to have essayed to
force it; and above all, to have made show of employing one Ship, at least, as
a Mine, who having double the powder of those that were employed at the
Pallisades at Antwerp, would make a passage sufficient, if the Digue were
double the strength. In brief, they omitted nothing of what they judged might
be said for breaking this design.

It was notwithstanding resolved, that Montague should take Post, promising to
return within fifteen days at the furthest, with promises nevertheless made by
the General to the Deputies, that if the Wind did but serve, they should spare
no Attempt.

The 21th, the General sent for Sieur Vincent, and told him, that God seemed to
fight from Heaven against the passionate desire he had to do some generous
execution for the relief of Rochel; that since his arrival, there had slipped
away 22 days, the Calms, or contrary Winds, having all that time prevented the
attempting of the Digue; 1628. October. that the Principal of his Army seemed
to have little affection for the Enterprise, having agreed in opinion, that it
was not executable; that from the Head the Malady had infected the Body, in
such sort, that he observed throughout in his Army, a great coldness; yet
notwithstanding that, he had spared nothing, nor would, of that which depended
on him, for coming to the end of his Enterprise; but to provide against all
Events, and supposing that the Season might continue unfavourable, he judged it
best to advise the Rochellers to commence a Treaty, that they may be disposed
thereto against the arrival of Montague, when all things would be prepared for
a good Accommodation, if there be not other means for relieving it.

The Sieur Vincent communicated this with the Duke of Soubize, and the other
Deputies, who jointly concluded, that it was absolutely necessary to acquaint
those of Rochel herewith, and to remember them of the instance that the Sieur
Treillebois had formerly made them, telling them, that they (their Deputies)
were resolved to intercede with the King for his Grace, and endeavor to bring
them (their Fellow-Citizens) to it, that they may owe it to his Bounty, rather
than to the Intercession of Strangers, and believed that it would be grateful
to have Communication thereof with him, and that it behoved them to seek the
means. This they made known to the English General, of whom having had the
approbation, they dispatched a Prisoner, called Farnon, belonging to the said
Treillebois, to whom they writ this Letter.

1628. October. The Letter writ by the Deputies in the English Army, to Sieur
Treillebois, a Captain in the Kings Army.
SIR,
SInce your Conference with the Sieurs Forin and Montague, the last having been
in his Majesty's Camp, and had Conference with Cardinal Richelieu upon the
means of an Accommodation betwixt the two Crowns, by which may be procured the
good of the General Affairs of Christendom, and in particular the ease of our
poor C^t^, the extreme desire that we have to contribute (to our utmost
ability) to so good a work, causes us who are here for Rochel, to become
Suitors to the General of this Army, for his Approbation of our most humble
supplication to his Majesty, to grant us a Passport from hence, to communicate
with such as it shall pleas^ him to command, which we have obtained of the
General; so that if his Majesty find himself in like manner disposed, and that
it is agreeable to him, that to this end some of us come to his Camp, there is
great reason to believe that good will come of it; there remains nothing, save
that we find a way to make known our desire, and know his pleasure. Now we
believe we should do you wrong (seeing that your affection carried you to be
before us, by your invitation to the same thing for which we now act) if we had
employed the Intercession of anyother. We address our selves now to you, to the
end that it may please you to manage this by such ways, as in your wisdom and
prudence you shall think best. We mention not the names of those we shall choose
for the Voyage, for it behooves us to leave them in blank: But upon our word you
may give yours, that we acknowledge our selves desirous 1628. October. of
Peace, having hearts truly French. As to the form of the Pass-ports, it is
superfluous to desire them, such as those as shall go under the Faith of them,
may be in full assurance of having an entire liberty of going and coming. This,
and all the rest which can concern this Affair, we refer to your great care,
and expect your Answer by the Sieur Farnon, for whom we have procured liberty
to bring us thither, after the delivery of this to you. We will not hold you
longer, than to desire God that it would please him to calm these Storms which
has so long exercised France, our dear Country, and to establish there a firm
Peace, by the means of which we may serve it, obey our King and Prince, and
deceive the Enemies of the Crown in the hopes which they may have conceived. In
our particular we are,

In the Road at the Head of the Bay, October. 22. 1628. Monsieur, Vos, etc.


The Prisoner was dispatched the two and twentieth with this Letter: Captain
Forant brought a Ship, about two hundred Tun, well equipped for War, who
without resistance was suffered to take him aboard, where there commanded one
Poyane of the Religion, but long suspected; and where was also a Gentleman,
called Beaurepair. Having presented these to the General, it was found fit to
arrest Poyane; and as to the other, being acquainted, that from the beginning
he had things of great consequence to impart, which required secrecy, they
heard him in particular.

He declared there, that being come from Spain, where he was Prisoner for his
Religion, they had 1628. October. stipulated with him to be serviceable to the
King, upon occasion, as his Majesty shall find fit to employ him; that having
promised any thing to free himself from danger, and the misery he was under,
they had associated him with Poyane, to come into the English Army, under
pretext of serving the Party; and that he had order with the first opportune
occasion by night to entangle himself with the Generals Ship, or with that of
the Duke of Soubize; and that saving themselves in a Shalloop, should set the
Powder on fire; and to the end to gain the more credit, his order was to offer
his service even to carry Letters into Rochel, and to bring back Answers, in
which they would facilitate to him the means of going and coming, without
taking notice of him, until he had acted the design.

Having well deduced the whole by steps, in conclusion he said, that the other
had the intention of those that sent him, and he his own; and that his chief
Obligation being to his Conscience, and his Religion, he had been willing to
declare from the first what they had stipulated with him, and the design of
Poyane, to the end it might be prevented. And further, that if they judged it
to purpose to manage for their advantage what was designed against them, he was
ready (keeping the thing secret) to go into the Kings Camp, feigning always to
be well intentioned, and to gain belief in what he pretended, he offered to
carry their Letters to Rochel, and to bring other back, and to execute all
faithfully, and acquaint those of Rochel with the truth, and what they should
desire him to impart to them, and bring them back again the estate and
condition of the City.

1628. October. Having heard his Propositions, though he seemed to the Deputies
to speak with ingenuity, yet nevertheless they thought there was no reason to
confide much in one that had dealt so double, and that it might be a triple
Treason: But notwithstanding, all things maturely considered, and reducing
things to a point, they judged it convenient to serve themselves in all
Adventures, managing things in such sort, that if he should cheat them, and
follow the directions of those who first employed him, their Deputies might
make their advantage by it, which was to maintain a Communication betwixt them
and the City, and prepare things for the Accommodation projected.

Having thus agreed among themselves, and having communicated it to the
General, they gave him two Letters; one without Ciphers, which he might show to
the Lords the Ministers, being accommodated to that which they desired they
should know, and the other in a most difficult Cipher, and such as never any of
their intercepted Letters, whereof there was many, could be deciphered; by
which they expressed the true Foundation of their Intentions, with charge to
the Messenger not to show them at Court, but deliver them only to the Mayor:
And further, in the second Letter, the Duke of Soubize sent one to the Duchess
of Rohan, his Mother, of the same Tenure; all three, which were trusted with
this Man, are as follows.

1628. October. The Letter not in Ciphers from Sieur Vincent, to the Messieurs
of Rochel.
Gentlemen,
SInce the coming of Sieur la Land du Lac, whereof we have advertised you by
the Signals agreed upon, we have not sent any to you, because that which
Chardeuine delivered you, contained all that we had to tell you, since that the
obstinate Calms and contrary Winds has hindered us from attempting any thing;
hut nevertheless they have not slackned their firm resolution of relieving you,
whatever it cost them: If it may be by a Treaty, rather than by the Effusion of
Blood, you and we shall have cause to praise God. We hear there are some
Reciprocal Inclinations for this, and the Conference between the Cardinal, and
Monsieur Montague, and his Voyage with a Passport for England, seems to
promise the effect: For our part, we endeavor it here; we sought yesterday a
way for obtaining, if it can be, a Passport, to the end that two of us might
go to the Camp of his Majesty; which if it be granted, and that we discover
that they will treat freely with us, we will endeavor to get leave to visit
and confer with you, to inform you of all, to the end that you may thereupon
take your Resolutions. In the mean time we will not dissemble the fears we
have, that by Conferences they may lay snares to surprise you, and lull us
asleep. Your diligence will in the first place remedy it; and on this side, you
may rely upon our care, in as much as it is seconded by the good intentions of
the General. For the rest, we refer you to this Gentleman, conformable to that
abovementioned; and upon the assurance that he has given us to be able to go
and come, we hope he will report to us at 1628. October. large your condition.
And now we pray God to continue to you the Miracle of your patience, until it
shall please him to deliver you altogether. Gentlemen, your most humble and
most obedient Servants, in behalf of all your Deputies to the King of Great
Britain, in the absence of Sieurs Bragneau, Dehinse, and Gobert, who are in
another Ship, to whom we cannot give advice of this occasion.

Ph. Vincent,
from aboard the Duke of Soubize, October. 13. 1628.

Since the writing of this, there has been a Skirmish which you may have seen;
it cost not the life of any of our men, but the liberty of many Captains, for
not having carried themselves, others being substituted in their places to do
better: Be not discouraged, but be assured, that if God please, they will
labor with all affection and diligence to relieve you; and that the Errors
passed are of Learning to them for the time to come.

The other Letter in Cipher, from Sieur Vincent to the Mayor in particular, was
as follows.

Monsieur,
BEsides the general Letter, I write this to you in particular, to which,
though it is not signed by any but my self, you may please, nevertheless, to
give an entire belief to it; because that what the Duke of Soubize writes to
the Duchess of Rohan, his Mother, will confirm to you the Contents: The one,
and the other, is to testify to you our extreme fears from the Voyage of Sieur
Montague to England, there being great appearance, that he has agreed upon
some things with the Cardinal to our prejudice, and that he is 1628. October.
gone thither to get the King of Great Britains consent thereunto. Besides this,
we find our selves under another trouble which is greater, to wit, that we
observe too visibly a great coldness in many, from a belief which they would
impress upon themselves, that it is impossible to force the Digue. Against
these two Evils, which are extreme, we would with all our might provide some
Remedies: And as to the first, the Duke of Soubize has writ effectually to the
said King, and I most particularly to Monsieur David; and that which gives us
hope that they will not advance any thing against us on that side, is, that
knowing the true generous Inclinations of that Prince, we cannot think that any
thing is capable to turn him from that which he has so often promised us,
except that Montague officiously foretelling, that if we do not relieve you
before his return, your extremities cannot wait for him; so that we must either
save you speedily, or you will be for ever lost. Our greatest labor is to keep
up the spirits of the people from fainting, among whom there are many, who for
to palliate their Cowardice, alleges the fear of want of Victuals, as also
the Sickness that is begun in several Ships. Contrary to this, we endeavor all
we can to fortify the General, who as to himself is most well disposed, and
promises us always, that with the first favorable Wind he will do what is
possible to finish the Enterprise. In like manner the Earl of Morton, who is
Vice Admiral, and the Principal Captains, promise us marvels, and there passes
not an hour that we do not solicit them, especially the Duke of Soubize
applies himself therein with an extraordinary affection and assiduity;
nevertheless, he and we fear, that those upon whom depends the next execution,
will not second the good intentions of their Captains, but do as ill as they
did in the second attacque; 1628. October. and that whilst time slips away, it
will cost us our ruin. And thus thinking it entirely necessary to have two
Cords to our Ark, and seeing that Montague has opened the way to a Treaty, it
is advisable to try what is to be done on that side; and therefore after
having engaged the General by a most solemn promise, that he will keep his
word, for giving way to it, when God shall present the occasion, we dispatched
yesterday a Prisoner to Monsieur Treillebois, (who had heretofore invited us to
seek the King, assuring us, that he would receive you into favor) to whom we
have writ, that if he will procure for us a Pass port, two of us will go to the
Camp to confer with such as his Majesty shall appoint, and contribute what in
us lies for the gaining a good Accommodation. We expect an Answer to our
Letter; and if this Passport be granted us, our design is to hear what will be
proposed to us, and without rejecting or approving any thing, carry our selves
so, that they may give us Pass-ports for to go and confer with you. This is the
true condition of our Affairs, which I assure my self will cause great
perplexity in you; but in my Opinion, all that you can do at present is, to
write pressingly to the General, and represent the indignity it will be to him,
if after you have so long languished, and seen the greatest part of your
Fellow-Citizens die of famine, in the expectation of so often reiterated
promises from his Majesty, which he was come to execute, he should either
return without having employed the Power that he was furnished with, for
relieving you, or be a means of an Accommodation, when they have put the Knife
to your Throats. When you shall please to write us, I beseech you to express
very particularly your state and condition, and above all, how long you can yet
hold out, we assuring you, that we will manage it with all imaginable
discretion, 1628. October. and omit nothing that is possible for conducting
this affair to a happy end, notwithstanding the difficulties that is found in
it. The Lord bless all to us, the grief that I have for your miseries, will
testify for me the endeavors that I have made for preventing them, and if my
life would serve to remedy them, I should most cheerfully lay it down: I hope,
nevertheless, that in the end the Divine Bounty will look upon us in pity, and
that I shall have the comfort to return thanks with you, and to assure you of
the affection that I have for you, who am,

From aboard the Duke of Soubize, October. 23. 1628. Monsieur, Your most humble,
and most obedient Servant, Ph. Vincent.


The Letter in Ciphers, from the Duke of Soubize, to the Duchess of Rohan, his
Mother.
My Dear Mother,
THe Enclosed expresses particularly our whole and true state and condition;
it is addressed to you, to the end that having deciphered it, you may please to
deliver it to the Mayor, and confer with him upon the Contents, and management
of them, as much as the importance of the thing requires: Remain still, Madam,
(if you please) assured, that we shall leave nothing unattempted, and that we
hope, however it is at present with us, that the Lord will in his mercy save
us: I believe you make no doubt of the extreme displeasure I am cast under by
the difficulties we have here met with, from him who has engaged us in so
prodigious negligence or lingering; but it behooves us to bend under that which
1628. October. God has ordained, and to move him by our prayers, who I assure
my self will hear them; and that he will yet in mercy give me the opportunity
to embrace you, as being,

My Dear Mother, Your most humble and most obedient Son, Soubize.


This Gentleman being dispatched with these Letters, and necessary
Instructions, went to the Kings Camp, where they debated, whether he should go
to Rochel or no; but in the end it was carried for going; and the 26th he went
thither, where, according as he had promised, he delivered all the Letters
which he was trusted with, and the 27th carried an Answer back to the English
Army, where he remained till after the reduction of the City, and has not
since returned into France, at least that any knows of; from whence one may
gather, that he had some doubt with himself, whether he had not served the
Deputies more faithfully, than those to whom he was first engaged.

What effects these Letters produced when delivered, belongs to the History of
the carriage of the Citizens within the Town; whatever it was, the same day
they were communicated with the Sieur de Fequiere (who they kept Prisoner) to
manage the Treaty of Peace, which a little after was brought to perfection, and
signed the 29th following.

The Deputies which were in the English Army seeing the weather favorable
(after which they 1628. October. had so long groaned, was at last come) the
Wind being fair, and that the English were contented to make show of setting
sail, and yet but at a distance to fire their Cannon, they were more and more
confirmed in their thoughts, that it was high time to save the City, if by a
Treaty they could do it; and besides the abovenamed, of whom they were in
diffidence, dispatched two others to carry the same advice.

The 24th ditto they received Pass-ports, under the Faith of which Sieur
Vincent and Bragneau went the next morning in a Shalloop to the half way, to de
la Palice, to confer with the Sieurs Treillebois and Lisle, with whom they
spoke in conformity to the Letter written at first, and promised, if it pleased
his Majesty to give them Passports for Rochel, they would do what was possible
for them to dispose their Fellow-Citizens to seek his Grace, rather than to
come to extremity; and told them in their ear, that though the English would
not consent unto a Treaty except by their Intercession, they should not be
wanting by inducements to persuade their Fellow-Citizens to have recourse
rather to his Majesty directly, as judging it would be more agreeable to him,
than by engaging Strangers in it.

The Pass-ports from the Kings Camp being arrived for two of their Deputies,
the English General, and Duke of Soubize, judged it most convenient to commit
that Employment, the 26th ditto, to the Sieurs Vincent and Gobert, to whom the
General gave this Passport:

WE have permitted to the Sieurs Vincent and Gobert, Deputies for Rochel, to go
by 1628. October. Shalloop to confer with the French; and in case that they
have brought them a Pass port, to transport themselves to the French Kings Camp.

From aboard our Ship the Admiral, October. 26. 1628. LINDSEY.

By Virtue of this Passport, the abovenamed Vincent and Cobert went to confer
with the same persons with whom they had already communicated, who waited for
them in the same place, and the same Evening conducted them aboard of Monsieur
de Valencey Admiral, who received them very kindly, and treated them very
splendidly.

The 27th, being next day, early in the morning a Carro^s met them, and carried
them to Sausay, accompanied by the abovesaid persons, who presented them at
eight in the morning to Monsieur the Cardinal.

They told him at their Entry, that having the Honor to present themselves
before him, it was not without confusion, to see those with whom they were
Parties; nevertheless they were imboldened in it, by their Consciences bearing
them witness, that they had kept their hearts firm and true to France, though
amongst Strangers; for even as the Fish keeps their sweetness in a salt
Element, upon which they swim, to give witness of themselves; in the like kind,
as soon as they understood that there was an Overture to treat amicably, they
rather than by effusion of blood sought means to communicate with his Grandeur,
and to offer themselves to his Majesty, to be employed to their Fellow-Citizens
for bringing them to give him contentment, in acknowledging their Errors,
supplicating him the Cardinal to procure 1628. October. them his Majesty's
Grace, as well as them who had the honor to speak to him, and believe that
they walked herein with all candor and clearness, and possibly not
unprofitably for the service of his Majesty.

He answered, that what they said for themselves, did not surmount theirs or
their Fellow-Citizens faults, which they confessed to be great; but the bounty
of the King was yet greater for pardoning of them, to whom he would freely
employ his Intercession, if on their part they would return to their duty; and
thereupon he demanded of them, what assurance they had of those of Rochel,
which gave them hopes of being able to bring them to a submission.

They replied, that they had not yet communicated with them thereupon, but if
it would please his Majesty to suffer them to go to confer with them, they
believed they should be able to lay before them such pertinent Reasons, as they
durst confidently hope would bring them to the consideration thereof.

The Cardinal desiring that they would give him some light, they told him, that
not having any subtilty, but to proceed with all simplicity, they would speak
to him with all freedom, and to him above all others, as to one not to be
imposed upon, and on whom all our hope or fear depended; and would therefore
tell him, that having followed the Instructions of those that sent them, they
had not been any way wanting in endeavoring relief, in the greatest measure
and readiness that was possible for them, but that in their Solicitations they
had found it a misery to expect it from Strangers, who lay not to heart the
interest 1628. October. of those that they engage, except their own be equally
in it, and are seldom faithful to them; that having studied more than a year
the intentions the English had for them, they were still as ignorant of it as
the first day: It is true, they gave us abundance of good words, but as to
effects, they had found them all such, as if their design was to lose Rochel;
and in this an infinite of Circumstances concurred, that the reason of their
engaging in Arms, was for the gathering in their Harvest, having then put their
Sickles into the Corn, and that which made the want of their Harvest the more
bitter was, that the English had drawn from them great quantities of their
Provisions when they were in Re, which seemed a second means to come infallibly
to their end; that having so often promised to send them Corn, in way of
returns they would never do it, although their Deputies solicited them Evening
and Morning for it, and that it was most easy for them to have done it; that
having sent a Relief in the Month of May last, it came to no other end than to
make a show, returning without making the least attempt, and without even
suffering the French, which they had in their Ships, to do it, who offered to
run the Adventure, and give Hostages as caution for payment for their Ships.
Indeed, they had at last prepared a brave Army, and brought it within their
sight, but was so late in it, as they seemed to design that Rochel, whose
necessities they knew should render before they could be there, and since their
arrival, it seems, that they came thither but for their own affairs with the
King, and capitulating the reduction of the Town. Indeed they had puissant
means, and particularly three Ships to Mine, 1628. October. which they
protested they would employ, and promised better success, than at the Stuccade
or Pallisade at Antwerp; but all was but words without effect, and our Deputies
seeing the going and coming of Montague to treat, knew from the English
themselves, that they had sent him into England to have that Kings allowance;
and considering all these circumstances, they concluded, that since they spoke
of a Treaty, it would be much more agreeable to the King, as also to their
Fellow-Citizens, to receive Grace from his own hand, than from that of a
Stranger Prince, who had been so ill a Garrantee to them of the last Peace: And
that upon these considerations, they had sought by those ways known to the
Cardinal, the means of speaking to him for obtaining of his Majesty by his
favor the liberty of waiting upon him, and open to him all their hearts, and
to endeavor also (as they hoped) to impress upon him their resolutions of
leaving all thoughts of the English, and instead of letting themselves die upon
the expectation of their promises, they would return to their duty, in seeking
the Grace of the King, where they should find that, which the relief of the
others put them in danger of losing, adding, that God seemed to fight for him
from Heaven, having given him all weathers to his own desire, both in building
of the Digue, and hindering what the English could do there.

The Cardinal being profoundly attentive to all this discourse, commended the
good intentions which they gave testimony of, and said, that they took the
right way, in having recourse directly to the grace of his Majesty, which will
be better and more surely granted them, than if a Foreign 1628. October.
Prince should be interested in it: but he further demanded, what caution they
could give for their serving his Majesty, as they promised.

They answered, that they would give two good Assurances; one, that the
Interest of those for whom they acted required it; the other, that being two
Deputies, one should remain (if it pleased the King) as caution with his Head,
for the fidelity of his Companion, excepting only the success.

The Cardinal said, that he hoped that his Majesty would trust them, and
approve of the Project designed by them to this end; and to give them light in
what they were to treat of, he told them his intentions touching them, that he
would not conceal from them, that the Affairs of Italy pressed his Majesty, and
to such a point, that days to him were years; and that he would buy them at a
dear rate; that those of Rochel had given him to understand, that they had yet
enough for three full Months: If so, he would give them a blank Paper to write
their own Conditions; but if they were not able to hold out longer, it was not
reasonable that obdurate obstinacy should have such Conditions as a free and
voluntary submission; and propounded in the first place, that his Majesty
should send Commissioners into the City, with whom their Deputies should be
joined, to examine their Provisions, and to make a faithful report thereof,
reiterating, that if they had to hold out three Months, they should grant them
such Capitulations as themselves should desire; but if extreme necessity forced
them to render, it was but just to do it upon discretion.

In reply to this, they supplicated him not to 1628. October. render them
Messengers to their Fellow-Citizens of such bad news, and said, that the
Expedient in searching what Victuals was remaining was impracticable, as to a
true discovery thereby, because in times of necessity particular persons hide
and lock them up, as the treasure of their lives, so that there may be for
three Months, and beyond, and yet impossible to make it appear; as upon the
review in the Month of May, there was not found more than for one Month,
notwithstanding that it is now near six Months since: Besides that, a reckoning
ought to be made of all that the Sea brings, of Fish and Cockles, of all the
Herbs that the ground produces, of all the Skins, Soles, Parchments, and
generally of all that has any juice or moisture, from which by the ingenious
preparations of men Hunger can receive any nourishment: And though all this is
not sufficient to maintain the whole number for three Months, yet reserving the
Victuals for those that shall be capable to resist, leaving others as a prey to
Famine, it may be able to pass beyond even that term: they told him, they knew
there would never want persons, who to render themselves acceptable, would
perpetually bring news, that they are ready to render from day to day, and that
they knew such news had been entertained this four Months, by which the vanity
of it had appeared; but the uncertainty herein may much better be judged of by
their being yet as hardened as ever, and it could not rationally be thought,
that they could be so imprudent, as having no Victuals, to suffer themselves to
be reduced to the last point, before making Conditions, or thinking of
Capitulating: And all this considered, he said, as their 1628. October. Deputy,
he most humbly supplicated, that they might be made the Messengers of his
Majesty's Grace, to the end that they may be the better able to value it for
his service, and to consider it for the good of those for whom they have to do,
seeing by experience, that when they cannot live, they know how to die: Upon
which Sieur Vincent, who spoke, could not contain himself from weeping.

The Cardinal made hereunto answer, that the representation merited
consideration, and that he would the same day go to his Majesty, and hoped to
procure his approbation for their going to their Fellow-Citizens, according as
they had propounded.

The Deputies returning him thanks, added, that they hoped that his Majesty
would consider, that though the Crimes of their Fellow-Citizens were most
great, and that they would not pretend to excuse them no more than themselves;
nevertheless, the Flower de Luces, which have always remained entire upon their
Gates and Walls, were yet more in their hearts, and that they had always
conserved them there; and that because they showed themselves deaf to diverse
Propositions, by which the English would have detached their Fidelity from this
Crown, they had so long retarded their succors, and suffered them to languish.
He answered with a benign Countenance, and that which evidenced his Approbation
of what they said: We know, said the Cardinal, that what you say is true, and
it is the only door left you to enter by into the favor of the King your
Sovereign.

Parting thus from him, they hoped that a permission 1628. October. for going
into the City would have been given them; but the same day in the Afternoon
^hey were surprised with the news brought them, that there was arrived at
Sausay (the same place where they were) Deputies from Rochel, to treat of
Conditions for surrendry of the City.

This made them, the Deputies from the English Army presume, that the City
having received their Letters of the twenty third, they agreed with them, that
it was to no purpose to expect any thing from the English by force of Arms, and
for what was of Treaty, that they had the same consideration as they had had;
that it would be of more advantage and security to them, to seek by themselves
the favor of his Majesty, than by the Intercession of any so little agreeable,
as one might judge that of the English would be; and approving altogether their
Counsels, they regretted only, that having writ them, that they would endeavor
a Passport for going to them, they had not expected the effect, for that it
had been better that they should have sought it for them, rather than
themselves, which administered jealousy of a great extremity.

As these Deputies reasoned thus one with another, the other Deputies from the
City were with the Cardinal, and other Ministers of State, treating for
Conditions; who to obtain the better, endeavored to give jealousy of the
English succors; upon which it was told them, that they abused themselves in
relying upon them, and that the English having lost all hopes of doing any
thing for their relief, had sent their own Deputies to manage a particular
Treaty for them, without speaking of Rochel: And when they made difficulty
1628. October. of believing that the Deputies from the English Army were there,
they were sent for, and showed to them in the Council Chamger, where they
saluted and embraced one another, but without being permitted to confer
together; only the Cardinal told the new Deputies, that he could not but
observe how greatly their City was obliged to their old Deputies, their
Fellow-Citizens (which he had showed to them) for their abundant affection, for
that in treating for them, they could not come upon their Condition without
tears, interceding for them with excessive earnestness; and after this he
obliged them to withdraw.

When they were apart they all agreed that the Cardinal had dealt with them
with more Art than was common, in making them, the several Deputies from the
City and English Army, to see one another without suffering them to speak
together, that so he might make use of their several Discourses to each Party,
as might best serve his turn. But however, finding that their last Letters to
the City had been delivered, by which they had acquainted them how they had
managed a Passport for going to them, they concluded that the Council of the
City could not be wanting in advertising their Deputies sent to Court with the
Effects of their Letters, that they might thereby apprehend the cause of their
coming thither: Besides, there were some of their Company, who, upon all
occasions, came to see them, and particularly they found means to speak with
Sieur de Lisle, who without making show of it, had always had his Eye upon
them, and coming to them, told them, That the City-Deputies were advised that
they were there upon their Accounts, to endeavor 1628. October. the Conclusion
of a Treaty for the City, and that by the inducement of the English themselves,
who though they were frequent in continual promises for attempting what was
possible for their relief; they nevertheless saw no reason to expect much from
them, nor upon that account to interrupt the Treaty; only it behoved them to
manage it with setting as good a Face on the matter as they could for obtaining
the better Conditions.

These Deputies from the City, being returned thither the same day, went again
the next day and concluded the Rendition under the Articles which they esteemed
good, or to express it better, such as they could obtain without, that the
other come from the English Army having any part in them, or that it was then
possible for them to know the truth of what they were agreed upon.

The Deputies from the English Army knowing in general that the Treaty was
concluded without making any mention of them, because the King would not suffer
it, they supplicated the Cardinal to procure them also the Grace of his
Majesty; and to the French in the English Army, and in general to all those
which the Commotions had forced either into England, or other Countries, which
he promised them; and having ordered them to treat thereof with Monsieur
Chateauneuf, in the end they obtained the Declaration of 29. October. importing,
That the King pardoned them for all things passed, permitting them to come
again into their Havens, even with the Prizes that they had taken; for that
they should enjoy the same Grace as his other Subjects, with free exercise of
their Religion, giving them all their Goods, except the Fruits received, and
Debts confiscated 1628. October. and actually paid, allowing three months to
those of Re and Rochel who were in England for returning to enjoy the same
Grace.

The Keys of the City being brought to the King the 29. and his Troops entering
the 30. it was agreed among the said Deputies, That the Sieur Gobert should go
to the City, and Sieur Vincent to the English, to whom having carried this ill
news, the General expressed his great dislike of it, and the more because
Montague, having used the diligence he promised, was returned, and had brought
all necessary Orders for the Treaty, to which the English had very willingly
consented, but were desirous to have had all to pass thorough their hands.

Montague upon the whole was very angry that his runnings had been
unprofitable, and fell upon Sieur Vincent in full Council for rendering of the
City, blaming their impatience, and accusing them of having ill requited the
King of England's good will toward them.

The Sieur Vincent answered him, That he would force a man wounded with grief
to tear it from his Bosom; and told him, That as to his poor Country, in behalf
of which he durst so unjustly accuse him, it was he, and such as he, that by
their secret Conspiracies had reduced it to the miserable condition wherein it
now was: That he did not speak of his serene Majesty of England, whose
Intentions he knew had always been for saving of this poor City; nor did he
intend the present General, of whose sincerity and goodwill he desired to be
very cautious; but as to Montague, and others of his Faction, who underhand had
been nourished by him, they had always 1628. October. crossed the best and most
generous designs, and that by their delays from day to day in England they
hindered the Succors from parting in time, and have continued the same
Practices since the departure and arrival of the Fleet, by spreading
discouraging reports of the Digue, which had abated the courage of the men, and
have since obstinately hindered in Council the employing of the Vessels which
were for the Mine, and which was the only means of opening the Digue: That he
in particular had lost them all by his obstinate Communication with the other
Party, though they spared not to remonstrate the consequence thereof, and that
after the Army appeared to treat there was no more hopes left for them, each
desiring rather to have the Quarrel decided by Composition, without danger to
him, than by fighting, where he might be slain. That having then these just
reproaches against him, it ill became him to complain of those that he had
ruined, and was the cause of all whereof he accuses them. It was notorious to
all that the City had given proof of a miraculous and not to be paralleled
Constancy, and were left by them to dye by thousands; for expecting the
performance of the word of their King, their Master, and the relief that he had
promised them; that the Succors arriving after so long expectation they saw
them remain a whole Month making such feeble Attaques as seemed to be in jest,
leaving Famine to finish her last spoils, adventuring the City to be taken
away by their first Attaque, as considering their feebleness and small number
it had indubitable been, had the Enemy made the least Attempt; That if in the
end they did capitulate they knew 1628. October. it to be after they saw their
last Morsel, and after they knew that Montague had designed their reduction,
and was gone to consert it in England, from whence it was to be doubted whether
he could return so soon as he promised. Hereupon they resolved (since it
behoved them to render, and not to act any longer as they had done) to accept a
Capitulation, which at least would conserve their lives. Sieur Vincent called
Heaven and Earth, and all honest men that were present, to witness if it were
not unjust and inhumane to lay the blame of this occasion upon them, thereby to
ravish them of the sole Consolation left them in their misery, and so to leave
nothing und one that might aggravate their sufferings, instead of endeavoring
to defend them who have witnessed a Constancy, which Posterity will think a
Prodigy, or hardly believe it.

The General, who carried fair to Sieur Vincent, acknowledged the truth of that
which he said; and, seeing him transported with grief, stayed the Discourse,
and restrained Montague, who, in great passion, demanded reparation for this
discourse, and so left the Company.

This passing, the 31. October. the Sieur Vincent, conferring the same day with
the Duke of Soubize, and the other Rochel-Deputies who remained there, touching
the French in the English Army, and what course they should take: They agreed
that it was best to assemble them, and communicate the stipulations for them,
to the end that those that would might lay hold of the Grace which was obtained
for them; and acquainted the General with it, who approved of it, declaring
that having no Commands from his Majesty but for their 1628. October. good and
ease, if they esteemed it best for them to return home, he would not hinder it;
and accordingly being aboard, Captain Bragneau, Sieur Vincent, made known to
them what had passed, causing the Kings Declaration to be read to them, which
they had obtained in their favor, adding what he had understood from the
General, as to that which concerned them, to the end they might participate
with them.

This was the cause of a long Contestation among them, some inclining to
return, and others said, they could not trust to the promises that had been
made.

Sieur Vincent's advice being thereupon desired, he represented to them, that
considering the different Sentiments which he found them in, he could not judge
it in his power to satisfy all: That it was true, that those who showed
diffidence, wanted not apparent reason for it; but in his opinion there was
more than enough to assure him, that the Treaty had been made by the
Intercession of the Cardinal, who was very jealous of his word, that fear of it
ought to proceed from some great profit which would redound from the breach of
it, as there can be none at all for Rochel, with its Privileges, being now
given up as the price of our Lives, Estates, and Liberty; those remaining in
the Ruins are not other ways considered, than as other private persons of the
Religion in the Villages of Bries; that an evil Treatment is not to be feared,
but with reason to expect favor, seeing Montauban and the other Cities hold
out; yet so, that the usage of Rochel will be a President of hope or fear to
them. As to himself, they knew that he would be well received if he returned
into England, 1628. October. and would find advantageous means of subsisting
there; but he believed it to be his duty, in Charity to his Fellow-Citizens, to
submit to the same Conditions with them; and that with more reason they, to
whom he spoke, ought to do the same, who returning into a strange Country,
would be reduced to Alms, and lose their Estates on this side; but concluded
that each was to do as he should think best, but it seemed to him, that those
that should return for England, would follow ill counsel.

The greatest part yielding to these Reasons, resolved to take the benefit of
the Declaration; but the next morning, the first of November, there were some
that changed their minds: That which passed aboard Captain Bragneau, being come
to the knowledge of the English, some represented to the General, that if they
parted with the French, they should be* so weakened, as not to be able to
execute the Enterprises they designed, amongst which there was one upon Brouage
not to be acted until their return, when they shall have need of their Conduct
all along the Coast, even unto the Channel, or Narrow Seas, because they had
more knowledge therein than they had: Above all, that it would concern the
Honor of their King, that being under his Banner, they should make a Treaty
without him, nor ought they to ratify it, but leave the thing entire to his
Majesty.

The Council being assembled, it was hereupon resolved to carry all the French,
and even the Sieur Vincent, to give an account to the King of what he had done
in the Treaty.

The General having sent for him aboard, acquainted him with it; to which he
answered, that 1628. October. if they detained them, they should protest
against the Violence; and that besides their general complaint for not
relieving them, but suffering their City to perish, they had done them this
particular injustice, to expose their Estates as a Prey to those who
henceforward would have them in their disposition: That the City of which they
were, and for which they had acted, not being any more but lost, thorough want
of being relieved in time by his Majesty, the Treaty made with him had no more
place; and that without doubt it would be to him more agreeable that they
retired without noise, than to see before his eyes the sad Objects which would
reproach him with the ruins of their poor Country, by being engaged with him
in Arms. As to him in particular, if he had no regard but to himself, he knew
he should have the Kings savor, and that which would be much better for him,
than what he could hope for from a desolate City, where he foresaw he should
suffer greatly, and see Spies upon him in his future employment, and upon the
least suspicion, in danger of his life; but he prayed him to consider the Cords
that obliged him to his Fellow-Citizens, who having cherished him in their
prosperity, he should be unworthy and treacherous if he forsook them in their
adversity: Above all, that being one of their Pastors, he should never forget,
and especially not in this great Shock, to do all that he could (according to
the ability God had given him) for to help to sustain and comfort them under
their misfortunes. In the end, those that had given the advice to carry him
back, found it not (as is probable) for their Interest to do it, because if
once he should have had the Honor to speak to the 1628. October. King, he
might happily have informed diverse particulars which would not have been to
their advantage.

The General heard this discourse with attention, and having communicated it
with the Duke of Soubize, and Monsieur de Laval, retracted the first advice of
carrying back all the Vessels, and restrained it to some particulars, and among
others, to that of Captain Bragneau; and then gave a Shalloop to Sieur Vincent,
of whom the General and Chief Officers took an amicable leave; and so he was
brought the second of November to the Chain cross the Digue: some also of the
French Vessels put here and there into Havens, whilst the rest were obliged to
follow the English, who set sail on Saturday the fourth in the Evening. And now
upon the whole, thus has been the Commencement, thus the Progress, thus the
unfruitful issue of the Deputation of Sieur Vincent, and the others; and thus
also the management of the Treaty of Peace.

Having transcribed this, as aforesaid, out of the Journal of Sieur Vincent, I
thought it my duty to insert it here.

To continue this History; after the Articles for the rendition of the City was
signed by both Parties, the Deputies returned into the Town to have them
approved of; and to that end the Council was assembled in the Common Hall,
where was called first the Nobless, the Heads of the Soldiers, the Burgers and
Inhabitants, and there the Deputies gave an account of all their management,
and told them, that all which they could obtain was contained in the Articles,
which they caused to be read to them; that truly they had 1628. October. done
what was possible for comprehending the Duchess of Rohan within the Treaty,
but that the Ministers would not upon any terms hearken to that, telling them,
that without their concerning themselves in it, his Majesty would do therein
what was convenient, he acknowledging her to have the Honor to be his
Kinswoman, that they had insisted unto the last for comprehending the Sieur
Grossetiere, but that they also rejected it, and declared outright, that if
they would stick upon that Article, they might return; and that his Majesty,
who showed them grace, would advise upon what he further should agree to; that
they had essayed the same for the Deputies in England, and the French which
were in the English Ships, but they did also silence them upon that point, and
said, that his Majesty would not be pleased, that after their faults confessed,
and in the condition they now were reduced to, they should make any Demand
beyond what he had of his own free Grace granted them; that having been forced
to receive the conditions as they were brought, there was one of them conceived
to be already wholly broke, in that the exercise of Religion granted, was
without specifying it to be meant in the City; upon which having desired an
Explanation, they refused to give it, but declaring resolutely and plainly,
that they could not conclude any thing, nor return into the City without that
Article; and remaining firm for it, they in the end obtained it.

After this, they approved with one Voice all their Negotiation, only some
objected, that the Preamble to the Articles seemed rude; and above all, in the
word Crime, which was there inserted; 1628. October. but others replied, that
it was not for them to cavil at words, and that in truth all resistance of a
Sovereign by Arms in his own Country, passes for a Crime: And further, that to
weigh impartially the terms of the Preface, they seem to import something of
softness, in that there are diverse degrees of Crimes, and that his Majesty does
not attribute to them the greatest Crime, but restrains it, as in calling it
only, A Fault in having resisted his Will, in not opening their Gates, and in
having adhered to Strangers: Whereas to resist, is less than to have been
charged with complotting for the withdrawing from under the obedience of the
Crown, as some passionate persons would have accused them of: And likewise to
charge them with adhering to Strangers, was less than to have charged them with
having invited, or sought to give themselves voluntarily up to them, of which
their Calumniators would have defamed them: So that his Majesty in his
Expressions had washed them from those spots, as willing to give them cause to
rely upon him, who considered them as his Subjects, because though they had
sailed, they had nevertheless been right at bottom, and kept their hearts for
him, and accordingly he had treated them; that to render themselves worthy,
they ought to accept of his Grace, without bartring for more than it pleases
him to offer them.

After the mature consideration of this wise advice, every one unanimously
ratified the Articles as the Deputies had brought them, and joined to the
present Deputies, the Sieurs Andrew Trouppet, Prou, Beaupreau, Huet, Godfrey,
and Prevast, Junior, to go altogether to carry the Ratification 1628. October.
to the King, who they found at la Leu, betwixt two and three in the Afternoon,
and kneeling down before him, Sieur de la Gout, in the Name of the City and
Deputies, spoke as follows.

SIR,
THose who have a long time been shut up in dark Prisons, when they come
abroad, cannot without being dazzled behold the light of the Sun; so also we
having been a long time shut up within the enclosure of our Walls, coming now
to appear before your Majesty, we cannot support the splendor of it without
obscurity, and some horror of our faults passed, which augmenteth our
confusion; but nevertheless, the Bounty of your Majesty, of which we have so
often had the experience, and have now fresh resentments, give us the boldness
to prostrate our selves at your feet to obtain pardon, though our frequent
relapses into the same Crimes can give us no hopes, other than by the sole
consideration of our present resentment, and our extreme passion, for giving
testimony to your Majesty, that you shall not have henceforward any Subjects
more faithful and obedient than we. This Protestation that we now make you is
from your City of Rochel, in which King Henry the Great, your Father, (the
honor of whose amity and kindness we can never loose the memory) did always
find a great affection to his service, they having had the honor to serve him
at other times in his Retreats and Residence. The City protests to your
Majesty all Fidelity and Obedience, the execution whereof taking away the
remembrance of our Rebellions, they hope your Bounty, after you have given them
your pardon, will in grace and favor 1628. October. lose the memory thereof,
since we are resolved to live and die henceforward in the obedience that we
acknowledge to owe you, and do vow to your Majesty there shall not be hereafter
any Subjects and Servants more faithful and affectionate to your service, than
those of the City of Rochel.

The King made answer in these words, I pray God that what you say be from your
hearts, and not from the necessity you are reduced unto: I am not ignorant that
you have been always very malicious and mutinous, and have deserved a severe
Chastisement, but I will return good for evil. I pardon you your Rebellions; be
for the time to come good and faithful Subjects to me, and I will be to you a
good Prince; and if your actions be conformable to the Protestations you make
me, I will keep my Promise with you.

They excused to him the Mayors not coming with them, to render to him in
Person his most humble submission and homage, saying, that according to Custom
he was to remain in the City, to receive his Majesty there, and either cause a
piece of the Wall to be beaten down, or take down one of the Gates, according
as it should please his Majesty to order his Entry: All which being pleasing to
the King, he sent them back well content.

Being returned into the City, the same Evening they delivered the Articles,
sealed with the Great Seal, to the Mayor and Council, and told them, that the
King had assured them, that all that he had granted them should be effectually
kept, and that the would not do wrong to any person, nor s^ffer the H^nour of
Women or Maids to be violated; 1628. October. and that he would cause to be
observed so good order among the Soldiers, that they should be therewith
content: And further commanded, that they should assemble in the morning the
Nobless, Captains, Officers and Soldiers, as well French as English, to be
ready at eight in the morning to go out of the City, according to the
Capitulations, because at nine a Clock the Regiment of Guards, and that of
Swisses should enter; and said further, that he understood that every one of
the City was to carry their Arms into the Town Hall.

The thirtieth, in the morning, all was without delay executed, but it was a
great astonishment to the Kings Troops, to see the remainder of twelve
Companies of French Soldiers, which they raised in the beginning of the Siege,
reduced to sixty; and betwixt four and five hundred, which the Duke of
Buckingham left, reduced to sixty two men; the first took part where they
pleased, without being blamed, and the others were conducted to the English
Army.

The same day, about nine in the morning, the Duke of Angoulesme, the Marshal
Schomberg, and the Sieur Marillac entered, with a moiety of the Regiment of
Guards, and that of Swisses, by the Gate de Coigne, of which they took
possession, as also of all the other Ports, places of Arms, Towers, Ramparts,
Cannons, Magazins, and Munition, placing Guards and Sentinels in all the
Corners and principal Streets; and at the same time (as had been done in the
Camp) made Proclamation thoroughout the City, by the King, and the Duke of
Espernon, Colonel of the French Infantry, 1628. October. prohibiting all
Soldiers for quitting their Ranks, Posts, and Courts of Guard, to go into any
House, or touch the Honor of any Woman or Maid, upon pain of being hanged and
strangled: They possessed themselves also of the Fort Tadon, into which was put
two Regiments to guard it.

The same day, all the Quarters being marked in the City, Cardinal Richelieu,
accompanied with many Lords, and Nobless, made his Entry about two a Clock
after Dinner, and having caused a quantity of Victuals and Ammunition-Bread to
be brought, he distributed them gratis, and published thorough the Streets, by
sound of Drum, that every one that was in want should fetch them, for he had so
much pity and compassion toward the Soldiers, in seeing the Inhabitants
Anatomies, and half dead, that in passing thorough the Streets they cast into
their Arms Ammunition-Bread, whose Throats they would the day before have cut:
indeed there was so good order established, that there was no abuse committed,
or offense given to any person.

At the Cardinals entrance the Mayor would have saluted him, but he would not
permit it, and commanded to have those discharged who marched before him with
Halberts, and to lay down the Function of Mayor.

The 31th, the Cardinal commanded from the Camp some Pioners to inter the Dead
which were in Houses, and other places of the City.

1628. November. NOVEMBER.
The first of November, betwixt two and three a Clock after Dinner, the King
made his Entry by the Port de Coigne, mounted upon a brave Horse, accompanied
by the Cardinal, and many Lords and Nobless, with the Gens d' Arms, and
Musquetee^s of his Guard, and the remaining Companies of the Regiment of
Guards, and that of Switz; and without the Gate there was fifty or sixty of the
principal of the City, who observing the directions of the Marshal Schomberg,
fell on their knees as he passed, crying, Vive le Roy and Misericord* the
people doing the same in the City, whilst all the Guns from the Forts and
Ships, as also from the City, made themselves to be heard. The Kings descent
was at S. Margarets Church, where after hearing Vespers, and the Sermon of
Father Souffran, he retired in the Evening to la Leu, but returning the next
morning, laid in the City.

It was observed, that the King at his Entry seeing the poor Inhabitants as
Anatomies, who with pain and trouble, for want of strength, had done him
honor, he had compassion for them, even to the shedding of tears.

The third of November, profession was made in Rochel, the King with all the
Court assisting, the Windows being full of people, and above all of Rochellers
desirous to see his Majesty, of whose Entry being very jealous, they found him
contrary to what they feared, and considered him as a good Angel come to
deliver them from the deep Abyss of their misery, and from the Jaws of Death.

The King after his entry into the City, commanded 1628. November. the last
Mayor, the Sieurs Salbert and Polinier, Ministers, and about ten others, as
well of the Corpse of the City, as Burgers, to leave the City, and to absent for
six Months; which was done by a mere Verbal Command.

The fourth and fifth, they ranged in the Castleyard all the Cannon of the
City, as also of the Forts and Digue, and Quarters of the Camp, in order to the
conveying them from thence to Brouage, and other places, as was done some days
after.

The same day, about four in the Evening, the English Fleet, after having been
a Month and six days in the Road, and seen from thence the reduction of Rochel
to the obedience of the King, set sail to carry the news of it for England, and
carried with them a great Party of French.

The sixth, seventh and eighth of this Month was so great a Storm at
South-East, and with such violence, that the Digue in many places, and above
all upon the Coast of Portneuf, was so shaken, the Engines and Candlesticks so
broken and removed, that a Flemish Ship of two hundred Tuns, laden with
Victuals for the relief of the City, which had stayed at the Head of the Bay,
being driven by the impetuosity of the Storm, ru^ on shore, having passed the
Digue with little difficulty, which we observed as the Lords particular
protection of the affairs of his Majesty, since had this Storm come eight days
sooner, the City had been relieved.

Some days after the King went to Port de Coigne, to see a Mine sprung which
they had made at a Piece detached from the said Port, to the end, that
according as this should succeed, they might 1628. November. deal with the new,
as well as ancient Walls of the City, having ordered the demolishing of all its
fortifications; and this Mine succeeded well.

The sixteenth, the Keeper of the Seal sent for the Registers of the Council,
and made a strict search into the Memoires and Instructions given the Deputies
the City had sent to the King of England, and of the Treaties made by them with
the said Prince, and found that the said Instructions and Treaty had always
been with the reservation of their Fidelity which they ought to the Crown. It
was said that this search was made, that they might the better know how to
frame the Kings Declaration, which was soon after published; and that some were
of opinion, that in the Preamble of it the King should allege for cause of his
Arms, that Rochel had not only called in the English, but also given themselves
up to them; but the said Keeper of the Seal refused it, not judging it honest
or convenient, except they could make the truth of it appear; whereas by all
the Inquest that they could make, as well as by those Public Records finding
the contrary, the Declaration touched not at all thereupon: But he gave order,
that as well the said Registers, as all the other Instruments, should be
carried to Paris, to the Chamber of Accounts, where they still are.

The eighteenth was published thorough the ordinary Quarters of the City the
Declaration of the King, establishing the Order which he would have observed by
the same; he dissolves and abolisheth the Common Counsel of the City, and all
her Privileges, as the Dignity of Mayor, the Prevote or ordinary Jurisdiction
of the City, uniting 1628. November. them to the Chief Justiceship, with an
Intendant of Justice, reducing the five Parishes to three, assigning to every
Cure three hundred Livers, upon the Revenue of the Townhouse; the said Hall,
together with all other Edifices and common places, being united to the Kings
Demain, discharged those of the City in general of all acts of Hostility
whatever, Negotiations in Foreign Countries, and of all other acts, without
being liable to prosecution for the same, saving in cases execrable, excepted
by the Edicts or Laws, and such as may concern the Person of the King; and in
like manner discharge them for casting of Guns and Cannon, Minting of Money,
seizing and taking of Money, as well belonging to the Ecclesiastics as the
King, together with the levying of Soldiers, and constraint used against the
absent, even by demolishing of their Houses, willing that the exercise of the
Religion to the Inhabitants which make profession thereof be left free to them
within the City, with prohibition n^vertheless to all others of the said
Religion, for coming to live there, if they had not dwelt there before the
descent of the English; that the Taxes of the City shall, in favor of Trade,
be limited to four thousand Livers; that the fortifications, both new and old,
shall be demolished and razed, even with the ground, except from the Port of S.
Nicholas, to the Tower of the Lanthorn joining to the Port of two Mills, which
is on the side of the Sea; and that the Policy be administered by two
Counselors, and four Burgesses, which the King shall every year make.

This Order being established, the King with all 1628. November. his Court, and a
great number of Lords and Nobless, took Horse the nineteenth for Paris, betwixt
seven and eight in the morning, and left Monsieur de Vignolles with four
Regiments (to wit) those de Chappes, du Plessis Praulin, Castlebayrd, and la
Meilleraye, to remain there until the demolition of the fortifications were
finished: The Kings second Residence here was six Months twenty five days: he
held the City besieged, from the fourteenth of August, 1627. when the Duke of
Angoulesme took up his Quarters at Estre, until the thirtieth of October, 1628.
that the Marshal Schomberg and Marilac made their Entry, being one year, two
months, and sixteen days. And thus ended the Siege of this so long Celebrated
City of Rochel, which for the space of about seventy years had given France so
much exercise, and drawn the Eyes of the greatest part of Christendom upon them.

THE EDICT OR STATUTE Granted by Henry the Fourth of France to those of the
Reformed Religion of that Kingdom for the free Exercise of their Consciences in
matters of their Religion, and c. called the Edict of Nantes, because Enacted
at that City, with the Kings Declaration upon the precedent Edicts of
Pacification.
HENRY by the Grace of God King of France and Navarre,
To all present and to come, Greeteth.
Among the infinite mercies that God has pleased to bestow upon us, that most
signal and remarkable is, his having given us power and strength not to yield
to the dreadful Troubles, Confusions, and Disorders, which were found at our
coming to this Kingdom, divided into so many Parties and Factions, that the
most legitimate was almost the least, enabling us with constancy, in such
manner to oppose the storm, as in the end to surmount it, reducing this Estate
to peace and rest; for which to him alone be given the honor and glory, and us
the grace to acknowledge our obligation, in having our labors made use of for
the accomplishing so good a work, in which it has been visible to all, that we
have not only done what was our duty, and in our power, but something more than
at another time, would (peradventure) have been agreeable to the Dignity we now
hold; as in not having had more care, than to have many times so freely exposed
our own life. And in this great concurrence of weighty and perilous Affairs,
not being able to compose all at one and the same time, we have chosen this
Order. First to undertake those who were not to be suppressed but by force, and
rather to remit and suspend others for some time, who might be dealt with by
reason and justice: for for the general differences among our good Subjects,
and the particular evils of the soundest parts of the State, we judged might be
easily cured, after the principal cause (the continuation of the Civil Wars)
was taken away, in which we have, by the blessing of God, well and happily
succeeded, all Hostility and Wars thorough the Kingdom being now ceased, and we
hope he will also prosper us in our other affairs, which remain to be composed,
and that by this means we shall arrive at the Establishment of a good Peace,
with tranquillity and rest, (which has ever been the end of all our vows and
intentions) as all the reward we desire or expect for so much pain and trouble,
as we have taken in the whole course of our life. Amongst our said affairs
(toward which it behooves us to have patience) one of the principal has been,
the many complaints we have received from diverse of our Provinces and Catholic
Cities, for that the exercise of the Catholic Religion was not universally
re-established, as is provided by Edicts or Statutes heretofore made for the
Pacification of the troubles arising from Religion; as also the Supplications
and Remonstrances which have been made to us by our Subjects of the Reformed
Religion, as well upon the execution of what has been granted them by the said
former Laws, as that they desire to have some addition for the exercise of
their Religion, the liberty of their Consciences, and the security of their
Persons and Fortunes: presuming to have just reasons for desiring some
enlargement of Articles, as not being without great apprehensions, because
their ruin has been the principal pretext and original foundation of the late
Wars, Troubles, and Commotions. Now not to burden us with too much business at
once, as also that the fury of War was not compatible with the Establishment of
Laws, how good soever they might be, we have hitherto deferred from time to
time giving remedy herein. But now that it has pleased God to give us a
beginning of enjoying some rest, we think we cannot employ our self better,
than to apply to that which may tend to the glory and service of his holy Name,
and to provide that he may be adored and prayed unto by all our Subjects: and
if it has not yet pleased him to permit it to be in one and the same Form of
Religion, that it may at the least be with one and the same intention, and with
such Rules as may prevent amongst them all trouble or tumults: and that we and
this Kingdom may always conserve the glorious Title of most Christian, which
has been by so much merit so long since acquired: and by the same means take
away the cause of mischief and trouble, which may happen from the actions of
Religion, which of all others are most prevalent and penetrating. For this
cause, acknowledging this affair to be of the greatest importance, and worthy
of the best consideration, after having considered the Papers of Complaints of
our Catholic Subjects, and having also permitted to our Subjects of the
Reformed Religion to assemble themselves by Deputies, for framing their
complaints, and making a Collection of all their Remonstrances; and having
thereupon conferred diverse times with them, viewing the precedent Laws, we have
upon the whole judged it necessary to give to all our said Subjects one general
Law, clear, pure, and absolute, by which they shall be regulated in all
differences which have heretofore risen among them, or may hereafter rise,
wherewith the one and other may be contented, being framed according as the
time requires: and having had no other regard in this deliberation, than solely
the zeal we have to the service of God, praying that he would henceforward
render to all our said Subjects a durable and established Peace. Upon which we
implore and expect from his Divine bounty the same protection and favor, as he
has always visibly bestowed upon this Kingdom from our Birth, during the many
years we have attained unto, and give our said Subjects the grace to
understand, that in the observation of this our Ordinance consists (after
that which is their duty toward God and us) the principal foundation of their
union, concord, tranquillity, rest, and the re-establishment of all this Estate
in its first splendor, opulency, and strength. As on our part we promise to
cause all to be exactly observed, without suffering any contradiction. And for
these causes, having with the advice of the Princes of our Blood, other Princes
and Officers of our Crown, and other great and eminent Persons of our Council
of State, being near us, well and diligently weighed and considered all this
affair: WE HAVE by this Edict or Statute perpetual and irrevocable said,
declared, and ordained, saying, declaring, and ordaining;

I.
That the memory of all things passed on the one part and the other, since the
beginning of the month of March 1585. until our coming to the Crown, and also
during the other precedent troubles, and the occasion of the same, shall remain
extinguished and suppressed, as things that had never been. And it shall not be
lawful or permitted to our Atturnies General, nor other person or persons
whatsoever, public or private, in any time, or for any occasion whatsoever it
may be, to make mention thereof, Process or prosecution in any Courts or
Jurisdiction whatsoever.

II.
We prohibit to all our Subjects of what state or condition soever they be, to
renew the memory thereof, to attaque, resent, injure, or provoke one the other
by reproaches for what is passed, under any pretext or cause whatsoever, by
disputing, contesting, quarrelling, reviling, or offending by factious words;
but to contain themselves and live peaceably together as brethren, friends, and
fellow Citizens, upon penalty for acting to the contrary, to be punished as
breakers of the peace, and disturbers of the public quiet.

III.
We Ordain, That the Catholic Religion shall be restored and re-established in
all places and quarters of this Kingdom and Country under our obedience, and
where the exercise of the same has been intermitted, to be there again
peaceably and freely exercised without any trouble or impediment. Most expressly
prohibiting all persons of what state, quality, or condition soever, upon the
penalties beforementioned, not to trouble, molest, or disquiet the
Ecclesiastics in the Celebration of Divine Service, enjoying and receiving of
Tithes, the Fruits and Revenues of their Benefices, and all other Rights and
Duties belonging to them: and we command, that all those who during the
troubles have invaded Churches, Houses, Goods, and Revenues belonging to the
said Ecclesiastics, and those who detain and possess them, do deliver over to
them the entire possession thereof with a peaceable enjoyment, and with such
Rights, Liberties, and Security as they had before they were disseized. Most
expressly forbidding to those of the Reformed Religion, to preach or exercise
their said Religion in the Churches, Houses, and Habitations of the said
Ecclesiastics.

IV.
It shall be in the choice of the said Ecclesiastics to buy the Houses and
Structures built upon their ground in profane places, and made use of against
their wills during the troubles, or compel the Possessors of the said Buildings
to buy the ground, according to the estimation that shall be made by skilful
persons, agreed upon by both Parties: and to come the better to an agreement,
the Judges of the place shall provide such for them, except the said Possessors
will try the Title to whom the places in question belong. And where the said
Ecclesiastics shall compel the Possessors to buy the ground, the
Purchase-money, if of estimation, shall not be put in their hands, but shall
remain charged in the Possessors hands, to make profit thereof at 5. per Cent.
until it shall be employed to the profit of the Church: which shall be done
within a year. And after that time, if the Purchaser will not continue any
longer the Money at the said Interest, he shall be discharged thereof by
consigning the money to a responsible person, with the Authority of the
Justice. And for such places as are sacred, advice shall be given therein by
the Commissioners who shall be ordained for the execution of the present Edict,
for which we shall provide.

V.
Nevertheless the ground and foundations of places used for the reparation and
fortification of Cities and places in our Kingdom, and the materials employed
therein, may not be sold nor taken away by the Ecclesiastics, or other persons
public or private, until the said reparations and sortifications shall by our
Order be demolished.

VI.
And not to leave any occasion of trouble and difference among our Subjects, We
have permitted and do permit to those of the Reformed Religion, to live and
dwell in all the Cities and places of this our Kingdom and Countries under our
obedience, without being inquired after, vexed, molested, or compelled to do
any thing in Religion, contrary to their Conscience, nor by reason of the same
be searched after in houses or places where they live, they comporting
themselves in other things as is contained in this our present Edict or Statute.

VII.
We also permit to all Lords, Gentlemen, and other persons, as well Inhabitants
as others, making profession of the Reformed Religion, having in our Kingdom
and Countries under our obedience High Justice as Chief Lord (as in Normandy)
be it in propriety or usage, in whole, moity, or third part, to have in such of
their houses of the said High Justice or Fiefs, as abovesaid (which they shall
be obliged to nominate for their principal residence to our Bailiffs and Chief
Justice each in their Jurisdiction) the exercise of the said Religion as long
as they are resident there, and in their absence, their Wives, or Families, or
part of the same. And though the right of Justice or whole Fief be
controverted, nevertheless the exercise of the said Religion shall be allowed
there, provided that the abovesaid be in actual possession of the said High
Justice, though our Attorney General be a Party. We permitting them also to
have the said exercise in their other houses of High Justice or Fiefs
abovesaid, so long as they shall be present, and not otherwise: And all, as
well for them, their Families and Subjects, as others that shall go thither.

VIII.
In houses that are Fiefs, where those of the said Religion have not High
Justice, there the said exercise of the Reformed Religion shall not be
permitted, save only to their own families. Yet nevertheless if other persons,
to the number of thirty, besides their families, shall be there upon the
occasion of Christnings, visits of their friends, or otherwise, our meaning is,
that in such case they shall not be molested: Provided also that the said
houses be not within Cities, Boroughs, or Villages belonging to any Catholic
Lord (save to us) having High Justice, in which the said Catholic Lords have
their houses. For in such cases those of the said Religion shall not hold the
said exercise in the said Cities, Boroughs, or Villages, except by permission
and leave of the said Lords High Justices.

IX.
We permit also to those of the said Religion to hold and continue the exercise
of the same in all the Cities and places under our obedience, where it has by
them been established and made public by many and diverse times, in the year
1586. and in 1597. until the end of the month of August, notwithstanding all
Decrees and Judgments whatsoever to the contrary.

X.
In like manner the said exercise may be established and re-established in all
the Cities and places where it has been established, or ought to be by the
Statute of Pacification made in the year 1577 the particular Articles and
Conferences of Nerac and Fleix, without hindering the said Establishment in
places of Domain granted by the said Statute, Articles, and Conferences for the
places of Bailiwicks, or which shall be hereafter, though they have since been
alienated to Catholics, o^ shall be in the future. Not understanding
nevertheless that the said exercise may be re-established in places of the said
Domain, which have been heretofore possessed by those of the said Reformed
Religion, which has been done in consideration of their persons, or because of
the Privilege o^ Fiefs, if the said Fiefs are found at present possessed by
persons of the said Catholic Religion.

XI.
Furthermore, in each ancient Bailiwick, Jurisdiction and Government holding
place of a Bailiwick with an immediate Appeal (without mediation) to the
Parliament, We ordain that in the Suburbs of a City, besides that which has
been agreed to them by the said Statute, particular Articles, and Conferences;
and where it is not a City, in a Borough or Village, the exercise of the said
Reformed Religion may be publicly held for all such as will come, though the
said Bailiwicks, chief Jurisdictions, and Governments have many places where
the said Exercise is established, except and be excepted the Bailiwicks new
created by the present Edict or Law, the Cities in which are Archbishops and
Bishops, where nevertheless those of the said Reformed Religion are not for
that reason deprived of having power to demand and nominate for the said
Exercise certain Boroughs and Villages near the said Cities: except also the
Signories belonging to the Ecclesiastics, in which we do not understand that
the second place of Bailiwicks may be established, those being excepted and
reserved. We understanding under the name of ancient Bailiwicks, such as were
in the time of hedeceased King Henry our most honored Lord and Father-in-law,
held for Bailiwicks, Chief Justiceships, and Governments appealing without
intercession to our said Courts*

XII.
We do not understand by this present Statute to derogate from the Laws and
Agreements heretofore made for the reduction of any Prince, Lord, Gentleman, or
Catholic City under our obedience, in that which concerns the exercise of the
said Religion, the which Laws and Records shall be kept and observed upon that
account, according as shall be contained in the Instructions given the
Commissioners for the execution of the present Edict or Law.

XIII.
We prohibit most expressly to all those of the said Religion, to hold any
exercise of the same, as well by Ministers preaching, discipling of Pupils, or
public Instruction of Children, as other ways, in this our Kingdom or
Countries under our obedience, in that which concerns Religion, except in the
places permitted and granted by the present Edict or Law.

XIV.
As also not to exercise the said Religion in our Court, nor in our Territories
and Countries beyond the Mountains, nor in our City of Paris, nor within five
leagues of the said City: nevertheless those of the said Religion dwelling in
the said Lands and Countries beyond the Mountains, and in our said City, and
within five leagues about the same, shall not be searched after in their
houses, nor constrained to do any thing in Religion against their Consciences,
comporting themselves in all other things according as is contained in our
present Edict or Law.

XV.
Nor also shall hold public exercise of the said Religion in the Armies,
except in the Quarters of the principal Commanders, who make profession of the
same, except nevertheless where the Quarters of our Person shall be.

XVI.
Following the second Article of the Conference of Nerac, We grant to those of
the said Religion* power to build places for the exercise of the same in Cities
and places where it is granted to them, and that those shall be rendered to them
which they have heretofore built, or the foundations of the same in the
condition as they are at present, even in places where the said exercise was
not permitted to them, except they are converted into another nature of
building: In which case, there shall be given to them by the Possessors of the
said Buildings, other houses and places of the same value that they were before
they were built, or the just estimation of the same, according to the judgment
of experienced persons, saving to the said Proprietors and Possessors their
trial at Law to whom they shall belong.

XVII.
We prohibit all Preachers, Readers, and others who speak in public, to use
any words, discourse or Propositions tending to excite the people to Sedition;
and we enjoin them to contain and comport themselves modestly, and to say
nothing which shall not be for the instruction and edification of the Auditors,
and maintaining the peace and tranquillity established by us in our said
Kingdom, upon the penalties mentioned in the precedent Statutes. Expressly
injoyning our Atturnies Generals and their Substitutes to inform against them
that are contrary hereunto, upon the penalty of answering therefore, and the
loss of their Office.

XVIII.
Forbidding also to our Subjects, of what quality and condition soever they be,
to take away by force or inducement, against the will of their Parents, the
Children of the said Religion, to baptize or confirm them in the Catholic
Church: as also we forbid the same to those of the said Reformed Religion upon
pain of being exemplarily punished.

XIX.
Those of the said Reformed Religion shall not be at all constrained, nor
remain obliged by reason of Abjurations, Promises, and Oaths, which they have
heretofore made, or by Caution given concerning the practice of the said
Religion, nor shall therefore be molested or prosecuted in any sort whatsoever.

XX.
They shall also be obliged to keep and observe the Festivals of the Catholic
Church, and shall not on the same days work, sell, or keep open Shop, nor
likewise the Artisans shall not work out of their Shops in their chambers or
houses privately on the said Festivals, and other days forbidden, of any Trade,
the noise whereof may be heard without by those that pass by, or by the
Neighbors: the searching after which shall notwithstanding be made by none but
by the Officers of Justice.

XXI.
Books concerning the said Reformed Religion shall not be printed or sold
publicly, save in the Cities and places where the public exercise of the said
Religion is permitted. And for the other Books which shall be printed in other
Cities, they shall be viewed and visited by our Theological Officers, as is
directed by our Ordinances. Forbidding most expressly the printing, publishing,
and selling of all Books, Libels, and Writings defamatory, upon the penalties
contained in our Ordinances, injoyning all our Judges and Officers to seize the
same.

XXII.
We Ordain, That there shall not be made any difference or distinction upon the
account of the said Religion, in receiving Scholars to be instructed in the
Universities, Colleges, or Schools, nor of the sick and poor into Hospitals,
Sick-houses, and public Almshouses.

XXIII.
Those of the Reformed Religion shall be obliged to observe the Laws of the
Catholic Church received in this our Kingdom, as to Marriages and Contracts,
and to contract in the degrees of Consanguinity and Affinity.

XXIV.
In like manner those of the said Religion shall pay the Rights of Entry, as is
accustomed for Offices unto which they shall be chosen, without being
constrained to observe or assist in any Ceremonies contrary to their said
Religion: and being called to take an Oath, shall not be obliged to do it
otherwise than by holding up the hand, swearing and promising in the Name of
God to say all the truth: nor shall they be dispensed with for the Oath by them
taken in passing Contracts and Obligations.

XXV.
We Will and Ordain, That all those of the Reformed Religion, and others who
have followed their Party, of what state, quality, or condition soever they be,
shall be obliged and constrained by all due and reasonable ways, and under the
penalties contained in the said Edict or Statute relating thereunto, to pay
Tithes to the Curates, and other Ecclesiastics, and to all others to whom they
shall appertain, according to the usage and custom of the places.

XXVI.
Disinheritations or Privations, be it by disposition in lifetime or
Testamentary, made from hatred only, or for Religion sake, shall have no place
neither for the time passed or to come among our Subjects.

XXVII.
To the end to reunite so much the better the minds and good will of our
Subjects, as is our intention, and to take away all complaints for the future,
We declare all those who make or shall make profession of the said Reformed
Religion, to be capable of holding and exercising all Estates, Dignities,
Offices, and public Charges whatsoever, Royal, Signioral, or of Cities of our
Kingdom, Countries, Lands, and Lordships under our obedience, notwithstanding
all Oaths to the contrary, and to be indifferently admitted and received into
the same, and our Court of Parliament and other Judges shall content themselves
with informing and inquiring after the Lives, Manners, Religion, and honest
Conversation of those that are or shall be preferred to such Offices, as well
of the one Religion as the other, without taking other Oath of them than for
the good and faithful service of the King in the exercise of their Office, and
to keep the Ordinances, as they have been observed in all times. Also vacancies
happening of such of the said Estates, Charges, and Offices as shall be in our
disposition, they shall be provided by us indifferently, and without
distinction of persons, as that which tends to the union of our Subjects.
Understanding likewise that those of the Reformed Religion may be admitted and
received into all Councils, Deliberations, Assemblies, and Functions depending
upon the abovesaid things, without being rejected or hindered the enjoyment
thereof by reason of the said Religion.

XXVIII.
We ordain for the Interment of the Dead of the said Religion throughout the
Cities and places of this Kingdom, that there shall in each place be provided
for them by our Officers and Magistrates, and by the Commissioners that we
shall depute for the execution of our present Edict or Statute, a place the
most commodious that can be: and the Burying-places which they have had
heretofore, and whereof they have by the troubles been deprived, shall be
restored unto them, except they be found to be converted into Buildings of what
quality or kind soever it be, in which case a compensation shall be made
another way.

XXIX.
We enjoin most expressly our Officers to look to it, that no scandal be given
in the said Interments: and they shall be obliged within fifteen days after
request made, to provide those of the said Religion with convenient places for
Sepulchers, without delay, upon penalty of five hundred Crowns in their own
proper and private names. And it is also forbidden, as well to the said
Officers as to all others, to exact any thing for the conduct of the said dead
bodies upon penalty of extortion.

XXX.
To the end that Justice be given and administered to our Subjects, without any
suspicion, hatred or favor, as being one of the principal means for the
maintaining Peace and Concord; We have Ordained and do Ordain, That in our
Court of Parliament of Paris shall be established a Chamber composed of a
President and sixteen Counselors of the said Parliament, which shall be Called
and Entitled the Chamber of Edict, and shall take cognizance not only of the
Causes and Process of those of the said Reformed Religion which shall be within
the Jurisdiction of the said Court; but also of the Appeals of our Parliaments
of Normandy and Bretagne, according to the Jurisdiction which shall hereafter
be given to it by this present Edict or Statute, and that until in each of the
said Parliaments there shall be established a Chamber for rendering Justice upon
the place. We Ordain also, That of four Offices of Counselors in our said
Parliament, remaining of the last erection which has by us been made, there
shall be presently provided and received in the said Parliament, four of the
said Reformed Religion sufficient and capable, which shall be distributed; (to
wit) the first into the Chamber of Edicts, and the other three in like manner
shall be received in the three Chambers of Inquests; and besides, the two first
Offices of Counselors of the said Courts, which shall come to be vacant by
death, shall be supplied by two of the Reformed Religion, and the same
distributed also in the two there Chambers of Inquests.

XXXI.
Besides the Chamber heretofore established at Castres, for Appeals from our
Parliament of Toulouse, which shall be continued in the estate it is, We have
for the same reasons Ordained, and We do Ordain, That in each of our
Parliaments of Grenoble and Bourdeaux, there shall be in like manner
established a Chamber, composed of two Presidents, one a Catholic, and the
other of the Reformed Religion, and twelve Counselors, whereof six shall be
Catholics, and the other six of the said Religion; which Catholic President
and Counselors shall be by us chosen and taken out of the body of our said
Courts. And as to those of the Religion, there shall be made a new Creation of
one President and six Counselors for the Parliament of Bourdeaux, and one
President and three Counselors for that of Grenoble, which with the three
Counselors of the said Religion, which are at present in the said Parliament,
shall be employed in the said Chamber of Dauphine. And the said Officers shall
be Created by a new Creation, with the same Salaries, Honors, Authorities, and
Preheminencies, as the others of the said Courts. And the said seat of the said
Chamber of Bourdeaux shall be in the said City of Bourdeaux, or at Nerac, and
that of Dauphine at Grenoble.

XXXII.
The Chamber of Dauphine shall take Cognizance of the causes of those of the
Reformed Religion within the Jurisdiction of our Parliament of Provence,
without having need of letters of Evocation, or Appeal, or other Provisions,
than in our Chancery of Dauphine: As also those of the said Religion of
Normandy and Bretagne shall not be obliged to take letters of Evocation or
Appeal, nor other Provision than in our Chancerie of Paris.

XXXIII.
Our Subjects of the Reformed Religion of the Parliament of Burgundy, shall
have the choice to plead in the Chamber ordained in the Parliament of Paris, or
in those of Dauphine: And shall not be obliged to take Letters of Evocation or
Appeal nor other Provisions than in the said Chanceries of Paris or Dauphine,
according as they shall make choice.

XXXIV.
All the said several Chambers composed as is said, shall have Cognizance, and
by decree shall judge in Sovereignty and last Appeal exclusive to all others,
the Process and Differences that are already, or shall arise, in which those of
the Reformed Religion are or shall be parties, principals or guarentees, in
demanding or defending in all matters as well Civil as Criminal, if demanded
before contestation in the Cause, and commencing of the Suit, whether the
process be by Writing or verbal appellation; excepting nevertheless all Customs
belonging to Benefices and the possessors of tenths, not infeoffed, the
Ecclesiastical Patrons and their Suits for their rights and duties, and the
demains of the Church; all which shall be tried and judged in the Courts of
Parliament exclusive to the said Chambers of Edict. As also we will and require
that as to judging and deciding the criminal process which may happen betwixt
the said Ecclesiastics and those of the Reformed Religion, that if the
Ecclesiastics are Defendant, in such Case the Cognizance and Judgment of
criminal process shall belong to our Sovereign Courts distinct as to the said
Chamber; and where the Ecclesiastick^ shall be (...), and one of the Reformed
Religion Defendant, the Cognizance and Judgment of Criminal process shall
belong in last appeal to the said Chambers established. And we acknowledge also
the said Chambers in time of Vacations for matters attributed by the Edicts and
Ordinances to belong to the said Chambers established for times of Vacation,
each within his Jurisdiction.

XXXV.
The Chamber of Grenoble shall be from henceforward united and incorporated
into the body of the said Court of Parliament, and the President and
Counselors of the Reformed Religion shall be called President and Counselors
of the said Court, and hold the rank and number of the same: And to this end
shall be first distributed through the other Chambers, and then drawn from them
to be employed and serve in that which we now ordain of new; with Condition
nevertheless, that they shall assist and have voice and session in all the
deliberations which the Chamber assembled shall have, and shall enjoy the same
Salarie, Authority and Pre-eminence which the other Presidents and Counselors
of the said Court do enjoy.

XXXVI.
We Will and Ordain, That the said Chamber of Castres and Bourdeaux be United
and Incorporated in the same Parliaments, in the same manner and form as the
others: and when need shall require, and that the Causes which have moved us to
make this establishment shall cease, and shall not have any more place among
our Subjects; then shall the Presidents and Counselors of the same of the said
Reformed Religion be held for Presidents and Counselors of the said Courts.

XXXVII.
There shall also be a new Creation or Erection in the Chamber ordained for the
Parliament of Bourdeaux, of two Substitutes for our Procurators, or Attorneys
and Advocates General, whereof one shall be Catholic, and the other of the
Reformed Religion, which shall have the said Offices with competent Salaries.

XXXVIII.
These Substitutes shall not assume other qualities than that of Substitutes;
and when the Chambers or Courts ordained for the Parliaments of Toulouse and
Bourdeaux, shall be United and Incorporated to the said Parliaments, the said
Substitutes shall have the Office of Counselors in the same.

XXXIX.
The dispatches of the Chancery of Bourdeaux shall be perused in the presence
of two Counselors of the same Chamber, whereof one shall be a Catholic, and
the other of the Reformed Religion. In the absence of one of the Masters of
Request of our Palace, one of the Notaries and Secretaries of the said Court of
Parliament of Bourdeaux, shall be Resident in the place where the said Chamber
shall be established, or else one of the ordinary Secretaries of the Chancery
to sign the dispatches of the said Chancery.

XL.
We Will and Ordain, That in the said Chamber of Bourdeaux, there shall be two
Commissioners of the Register of the said Parliament, the one Civil and the
other Criminal, who shall exercise their Offices by our Commissions, and shall
be called Commissioners to the Register Civil and Criminal; but nevertheless
shall not be revoked by the Registers of the Parliament, yet shall be
accountable for the profits of the Offices to the said Registers, which
Commissioners shall be Salaried by the said Registers as the said Chambers
shall think fit to appoint. There shall be ordained some Catholic Messengers,
who shall be taken in the said Court or elsewhere, according to our pleasure;
besides which there shall also be two de novo freely chosen of the Reformed
Religion: and all the said Messengers, or Door-keepers, shall be regulated by
the said Chamber or Court, as well in the exercise of their Offices as in the
Profits or Fees which they shall take. There shall also be a Commission
dispatched for payment of Salaries and receiving of Amerciaments of the said
Court, which shall be such as we shall please to appoint. If the said Chamber
shall be established in other place than the said City, the Commission
heretofore agreed for paying the Salaries of the Chamber of Castres, shall go
out in its full and entire effect, and there shall be joined to the said Office
the Commission for the Receipt of the Amerciaments of the said Court.

XLI.
There shall be provided good and sufficient Assignations for the Salaries of
the Officers of the Chambers ordained by this Edict.

XLII.
The Presidents Counselors, and other Catholic Officers of the said Chambers
or Courts, shall be continued so long as we shall see it to be for our service,
and the good of our Subjects: And in dismissing any of them others shall be
admitted in their places, before their departure, they having no power during
their service to depart, or be absent from the said Chambers, without the leave
of the same, which shall be judged of according to the Ordinance.

XLIII.
The said Chambers or Courts Mypartis, shall be established within six months,
during which (if the establishment shall be so long in doing) the Process
Commenced, and to be Commenced, where those of the Religion shall be parties
within the Jurisdiction of our Parliaments of Paris, Roven, Dyon, and Rennes,
shall be presently removed to the Chamber or Court established at Paris by
virtue of the Edict of 1577. or else to the great Council at the Election of
those of the said Religion if they require it: and those which shall be of the
Parliament of Bourdeaux, to the Chamber or Court Established at Castres, or to
the said grand Council at their Election, and those which shall be of Provence
to the Parliament of Grenoble. And if the said Chambers, or Courts, are not
established within three months after the presentation of our Edict, that
Parliament which shall make refusal thereof, shall be prohibited the Cognizance
and Judgment of the Causes of those of the Religion.

XLIV.
The Process not yet judged, depending in the said Courts of Parliaments and
great Council of the quality abovesaid, shall be sent back in what estate
soever they be, to the said Chambers or Courts, each within his Jurisdiction,
if one of the parties of the Religion require it within four months after the
Establishment of the same; and as to those which shall be discontinued, and are
not in condition of being judged, those of the said Religion shall be obliged
to make declaration upon the first intimation and signification to them of the
prosecution, and the time passed shall not be understood to require the
dismission.

XLV.
The said Chambers (or Courts) of Grenoble, and Bourdeaux, as also that of
Castres, shall keep the forms and style of Parliaments, where the Jurisdiction
of the same shall be established, and shall judge by equal numbers of the one
and the other Religion, if the parties consent not to the contrary.

XLVI.
All the Judges to whom the address shall be made for execution of Decrees,
Commissions of the said Chambers, and Patents obtained in Chanceries for the
same, together with all the Messengers and Sergeants, shall be obliged to put
them in execution, and the said Messengers and Sergeants shall do all acts
throughout our Kingdom, without demanding a Placet, or peremptory Warrant, upon
penalty of suspension of their Estates, and of the Expenses, Damages and
Interests of the parties, the Cognizance whereof shall belong to the said
Chambers.

XLVII.
No removal of Causes shall be allowed to any whereof the Cognizance is
attributed to the said Chambers, except in Cases of Ordinance, the removal by
which shall be made to the next Chamber established according to our Edict. And
the dividing of the Process of the said Chambers shall be judged by the
nearest, observing the proportion and forms of the said Chambers, where the
Process shall be proceeded upon; except the Chamber of Edict in our Parliament
of Paris, where the Process divided shall be distributed in the same Chamber by
the Judges, which shall be by us named by our particular Letters Patents for
that effect, if the parties had not rather wait the removing of the said
Chamber. And happening that one and the same Process be divided in all the
Chambers, Myparty, or half one Religion, half the other, the division shall be
sent to the Chamber of Paris.

XLVIII.
The refusal that shall be proposed against the Presidents and Counselors of
the Chambers, half one Religion, and half the other, called the Court of Edict,
may be judged by the number of six, to which number the parties shall be
obliged to restrain themselves, otherwise they shall be passed over without
having regard to the said refusal.

XLIX.
The examinations of the Presidents and Counselors newly erected in the said
Chambers of Edict, Mypartis, shall be made in our Privy Council, or by the said
Chambers each in his Precinct, when they shall be a sufficient number; and
nevertheless the Oath accustomed shall be by them taken in the Courts where the
said Chambers shall be established, and upon refusal, in our Privy Council:
except those of the Chamber of Languedoc, in which they shall take Oath before
ou^ Chancellor, or in the same Chamber.

L.
We Will and Ordain, That the reception of our Officers of the said Religion,
be judged in the said Chambers half Papists and half of the Reformed Religion
by plurality of voices, as is accustomed in other Courts, without being needful
that the opinions surpass two thirds, following the Ordinance which for the
same Cause is abrogated.

LI.
There shall be made in the said Chambers Mypartis, the propositions,
deliberations and resolutions which shall appertain to the public peace, and
for the particular State and Policy of the Cities where the same Chambers shall
be.

LII.
The Article for the Jurisdiction of the said Chambers ordained by the present
Edict, shall be followed and observed according to its form and tenure, even in
that which concerns the execution or breach of our Edict, when those of the
Religion shall be parties.

LIII.
The Kings subordinate Officers, or others whereof the reception belongs to
our Courts of Parliaments, if they be of the Reformed Religion, they may be
examined and received in the said Chambers, viz. those under the Jurisdiction
of the Parliaments of Paris, Normandy, and Bretagne in the said Chambers of
Paris; those of Dauphine and Provence, in the Chamber of Grenoble; those of
Bourgondy in the said Chamber of Paris, or Dauphine, at their choice; those
under the Jurisdiction of Toulouse, in the Chamber of Castres; and those of the
Parliament of Bourdeaux, in the Chamber of Guyenne; without that others may
oppose themselves against their reception, and render themselves parties, as
our Procurators General and their Substitutes, and those enjoying the said
Offices: yet nevertheless the accustomed Oath shall be by them taken in the
Courts of Parliaments, who shall not take any Cognizance of the said
receptions; and in refusal of the said Parliaments, the said Officers shall
take the Oath in the said Chambers; after which so taken they shall be obliged
to present by a Messenger or Notary, the Act of their Reception, to the
Register of the said Courts of Parliaments, and to leave a Copy thereof
examined by the said Register; who is enjoined to Register the said Acts, upon
penalty of all the Expense, Damage and Interest of the parties; and the said
Registers refusing to do it, shall suffer the said Officers to report the Act
of the said Summons, dispatched by the said Messengers, or Notaries, and cause
the same to be in-Registred in the Register-Office of their said Jurisdiction,
for to have recourse thereunto when need shall be, upon penalty of Nullity of
their Proceedings and Judgments. And as to the Officers, whereof the Reception
has not been accustomed to be made in our said Parliaments, in case those to
whom it belongs shall refuse to proceed to the said Examination and Reception,
then the said Officers shall repair to the said Chambers for to be there
provided as it shall appertain.

LIVE.
The Officers of the said Reformed Religion, who shall hereafter be appointed
to serve in the body of our said Courts of Parliaments, Grand Council, Chambers
of Accounts, Courts of Aids, Officers of the General Treasuries of France, and
other Officers of the Exchequer, shall be examined and received in places where
they have been accustomed; and in case of refusal or denying of Justice, they
shall be appointed by our Privy Council.

LV.
The Reception of our Officers made in the Chamber heretofore established at
Castres, shall remain valid notwithstanding all Decrees and Ordinances to the
contrary. And shall be also valid, the Reception of Judges, Counselors,
Assistants, and other Officers of the said Religion made in our Privy Council,
or by Commissioners by us Ordained in case of the refusal of our Courts of
Parliaments, Courts of Aids, and Chambers of Accounts, even as if they were
done in the said Courts and Chambers, and by the other Judges to whom the
Reception belongs: And their Salaries shall be allowed them by the Chambers
of Accounts without difficulty; and if any have been put out, they shall be
re-established without need of any other command than the present Edict, and
without that the said Officer shall be obliged to show any other Reception,
notwithstanding all Decrees given to the contrary which shall remain null and
of none effect.

LVI.
In the mean time until the Charges of the Justice of the said Chambers can be
defrayed by Amerciaments, there shall be provided by us by valuable
assignations sufficient for maintaining the said Charges, without expecting to
do it by the goods of the condemned.

LVII.
The Presidents and Counselors of the Reformed Religion heretofore received in
our Court of Parliament of Dauphine, and in the Chamber of Edict incorporated
in the same, shall continue and have their Session and Orders for the same;
that is to say, the Presidents, as they have enjoyed, and do enjoy at present,
and the Counselors, according to the Decrees and provisions that they have
therefore obtained in our Privy Council.

LVIII.
We declare all Sentences, Judgments, Procedures, Seisures, Sales, and Decrees
made and given against those of the Reformed Religion, as well living as dead,
from the death of the deceased King Henry II* our most honored Lord and
Father-in-law, upon the occasion of the said Religion, tumults and troubles
since happening, as also the execution of the same Judgments and Decrees, from
henceforward cancelled, revoked, and annulled, and the same we cancel, revoke,
and annul. And we ordain, that they shall be razed and taken out of the
Registers Office of the Courts, as well sovereign as inferior: And we will and
require also to be taken away and defaced all Marks, Footsteps, and Monuments
of the said Executions, Books, and Acts Defamatory, against their Persons,
Memory and Posterity, and that the places which have been for that occasion
demolished or razed, be rendered in such condition as they now are to the
proprietors of the same, to enjoy and dispose at their pleasure. And generally
we cancel, revoke and null all proceedings and informations made for any
enterprise whatsoever, pretended crimes of high Treason, and others:
notwithstanding the procedures, Decrees, and Judgments containing reunion,
Incorporation, and Confiscation: and we further will and command, that those of
the Reformed Religion* and others that have followed their Party, and their
Heirs, re-enter really and actually into the possession of all and each of
their Goods.

LIX.
All Proceedings, Judgments, and Decrees given during the troubles against
those of the Religion who have born Arms, or are retired out of our Kingdom, or
within the same into Cities and Countries by them held, or for any other cause
as well as for Religion and the troubles; together with all Non-suiting of
Causes, Prescriptions as well legal, conditional, as customary, seizing of
Fiefs fallen during the troubles, by hindering legitimate Proceeding, shall be
esteemed as not done or happening; And such we have declared and do declare,
and the same we have and do annihilate and make void, without admitting any
satisfaction therefore: but they shall be restored to their former condition,
notwithstanding the Decrees and Execution of the same; and the Possessions
thereof shall be rendered to them, out of which they were upon this account
disseised. And this, as above, shall have like place, upon the account of those
that have followed the Party of those of the Religion, or who have been absent
from our Kingdom upon the occasion of the troubles. And for the young Children
of Persons of Quality abovesaid, who dyed during the troubles, We restore the
Parties into the same condition as they were formerly, without refunding the
expense, or being obliged for the Amerciaments: not understanding nevertheless,
that the Judgments given by the Chief Judges, or other inferior Judges against
those of the Religion, or who have followed their Party, shall remain null, if
they have been given by Judges sitting in Cities by them held, which was to
them of free access.

LX.
The Decrees given in our Court of Parliament, in matters whereof the
cognizance belongs to the Chambers or Courts ordained by the Edict in the year
1577. and Articles of Nerac and Flex, into which Courts the Parties have not
proceeded voluntarily, but have been forced to allege and propose declinatory
ends, and which Decrees have been given by default or foreclusion, as well in
Civil as Criminal matters, notwithstanding which alligations the said Parties
have been constrained to go on, shall be in like manner null and of no value.
And as to the Decrees given against those of the Religion, who have proceeded
voluntarily, and without having proposed ends declinatory, those Decrees shall
remain without prejudice for the execution of the same: yet nevertheless
permitting them, if it seem good to them, to bring by Petition their Cause
before the Chamber ordained by the present Edict, without that the elapsing the
time appointed by the Ordinances shall be to their prejudice: and until the
said Chambers and Chanceries for the same shall be established, verbal
appellations, or in writing interposed by those of the Religion before Judges,
Registers, or Commissioners, Executors of Decrees and Judgments, shall have
like effect as if they were by Command from the King.

LXI.
In all Inquiries which shall be made for what cause soever in matters Civil,
if the Inquisitor or Commissioner be a Chatholick, the Parties shall be obliged
to convene an assistant, and where they will not do it, there shall be taken
from the Office by the said Inquisitor or Commissioner one who shall be of the
Religion, and the same shall be practiced when the Commissioner or Inquisitor
shall be of the said Religion for an assistant who shall be a Catholic.

LXII.
We Will and Ordain, That our Judges may take Cognizance of the Validity of
Testaments, in which those of the Religion may have an interest if they require
it; and the appellations from the said Judgments, may be brought to the said
Chambers ordained for the Process of those of the Religion; notwithstanding all
Customs to the contrary, even those of Bretagne.

LXIII.
To obviate all differences which may arise betwixt our Courts of Parliaments,
and the Chambers of the same Courts, ordained by our present Edict, there shall
be made by us a good and ample Reglement, betwixt the said Courts and Chambers,
and such as those of the Religion shall enjoy entirely from the said Edict, the
which Reglement shall be verified in our Courts of Parliaments, and kept and
observed without having regard to precedents.

LXIV.
We inhibit and forbid all our Courts, Sovereign and others of this Realm, the
taking Cognizance, and judging the Civil, or Criminal Process of those of the
Religion; the Cognizance of which is attributed by our Edict to the Chambers of
Edict; provided that the appeal thereunto be demanded, as is said in the 40.
Article going before.

LXV.
We also Will and Command, for the present, and until we have otherwise therein
ordained, that in all Process commenced, or to be commenced, where those of the
Religion are Plaintiffs or Defendants, Parties principals or Garantees in
matters Civil, in which our Officers and Chief Courts of Justice have power to
judge without Appeal, that it shall be permitted to them to except against two
of the Chamber, where the Process ought to be judged, who shall forbear
Judgment of the same; and without having the Cause expressed, shall be obliged
to withdraw, notwithstanding the Ordinance by which the Judges ought not to be
excepted against without cause shown, and shall have further right to except
against others upon showing cause. And in matters Criminal, in which also the
said Court of Justice and others of the King's subordinate Judges do judge
without Appeal, those of the Religion may except against three of the said
Judges without showing cause. And the Provosts of the Mareschalsie of France,
Vice-Bailiffs, Vice-Presidents, Lieutenants of the short Robe, and other
Officers of the like quality shall judge according to the Ordinances and
Reglements heretofore given upon the account of Vagabonds. And as to the
Household charged and accused by the Provosts, if they are of the said Religion,
they may require that three of the said Judges, who might have cognizance
thereof, do abstain from the Judgment of their Process, and they shall be
obliged to abstain therefrom without having cause shown, except where the
Process is to be judged, there shall be found to the number of two in Civil,
and three in Criminal Causes of the Religion, in which case it shall not be
lawful to except without cause shown: and this shall be reciprocal in the like
cases, as above, to the Catholics upon the account of Appeals from the Judges,
where those of the Religion are the greater number; Not understanding
nevertheless that the Chief Justice, Provosts of the Mareschalsies,
Vice-Bailiffs, Vice-Stewards, and others who judge without Appeal, take by
virtue of this that is said, cognizance of the past troubles. And as to crimes
and excess happening by other occasions than the troubles since the beginning
of March 1585. until the end of 1597. in case they take cognizance thereof, We
will that an Appeal be suffered from their Judgment to the Chamber ordained by
the present Edict: as shall be practiced in like manner for the Catholics and
Confederates, where those of the Religion are Parties.

LXVI.
We Will and Ordain also, That henceforward in all Instructions other than
Informations of Criminal Process in the Chief Justices Court of Tholose,
Carcassonne, Rouergue, Loragais, Beziers, Montpellier, and Nimes, the
Magistrate or Commissary deputed for the said Instruction, if he is a
Catholic, shall be obliged to take an Associate who is of the Religion,
whereof the Parties shall agree; or where they cannot agree, one of the Office
of the said Religion shall be taken by the abovesaid Magistrate or
Commissioner: as in like manner, if the said Magistrate or Commissioner is of
the Religion, he shall be obliged in the same manner, as abovesaid, to take an
Associate a Catholic.

LXVII.
When it shall be a question of making a Criminal Process by the Provosts of
the Mareschalsies or their Lieutenants, against some of the Religion a
Housekeeper who is charged and accused of a crime belonging to the Provost, or
subject to the Jurisdiction of a Provost, the said Provosts or their
Lieutenants, if they are Catholics, shall be obliged to call to the
Instruction of the said Process an Associate of the Religion: which Associate
shall also assist at the Judgment of the difference, and in the definitive
Judgment of the said Process: which difference shall not be judged otherwise
than by the next Presidial Court assembled with the principal Officers of the
said Court which shall be found upon the place, upon penalty of Nullity, except
the accused should require to have the difference judged in the Chambers
ordained by the present Edict: In which case upon the account of the
Housekeepers in the Provinces of Guyenne, Languedoc, Provence, and Dauphine,
the Substitutes of our Procurators General in the said Chambers, shall at the
request of the said Housekeepers, cause to be brought into the same the
charges and informations made against them, to know and judge if the Causes are
triable before the Provost or not, that according to the quality of the Crimes
they may by the Chamber be sent back to the ordinary, or judged triable by the
Provost, as shall be found reasonable by the Contents of our present Edict: and
the Presidial Judges, Provosts of the Mareschalsie, Vice-Bailiffs,
Vice-Stewards, and others who judge without Appeal shall be obliged
respectively to obey and satisfy the Commands of the said Chambers, as they
use to do to the said Parliaments, upon penalty of the loss of their Estates.

LXVIII.
The Outcries for Sale of Inheritances, and giving notice thereof by warning
pasted or chalked according to order, shall be done in places and at hours
usual, if possible, following our Ordinances, or else in public Markets, if in
the place where the Land lies there is a Market place; and where there shall be
none, in the next Market within the Jurisdiction of the Court where Judgment
ought to be given: and the fixing of the notice shall be upon the Posts of the
said Marketplace, and at the entry of the Assembly of the said place; and this
Order being observed, the notice shall be good and valid, and pass beyond the
interposition of the Sentence or Decree, as to any Nullity which might be
alleged upon this account.

LXIX.
All Titles, Papers, Instructions, and Documents which have been taken, shall
be restored by both Parties to those to whom they belong, though the said
Papers, or the Castles and houses in which they were kept, have been taken and
seized by special Commission from the last deceased King, our most honored
Lord and Brother-in-law, or from us, or by the Command of the Governors and
Lieutenants General of our Provinces, or by the Authority of the Heads of the
other Party, or under what pretext soever it shall be.

LXX.
The Children of those that are retired out of our Kingdom since the death of
Henry II. our Father-in-law, by reason of Religion and Troubles, though the
said Children are born out of the Kingdom, shall be held for true French and
Inhabitants: And we have declared and do declare, That it is lawful for such at
any time within ten years after the publication of this present Edict, to come
and dwell in this Kingdom without being needful to take Letters Patents of
Naturalization, or any other provision from us than this present Edict,
notwithstanding all Ordinances to the contrary touching Children born in
Foreign Countries.

LXXI.
Those of the Reformed Religion, and others who have followed their Party, who
have before the Troubles taken to farm any Office, or other Domain, Gabel,
foreign Imposition, or other Rights appertaining unto us, which they could not
enjoy by reason of the Troubles, shall remain discharged, and we discharge them
of what they have not received of our Finances, and of what they have without
fraud paid otherwise than in to the Receipts of our Exchequer, notwithstanding
all their obligation given thereupon.

LXXII.
All Places, Cities, and Provinces of our Kingdom, Countries, Lands, and
Lordships under our obedience, shall use and enjoy the same Privileges,
Immunities, Liberties, Franchises, Fayrs, Markets, Jurisdictions, and Courts of
Justice, which they did before the Troubles begun 1585. and others preceding,
notwithstanding all Patents to the contrary, and translation of any of the
Seats of Justice, provided they have been done only by occasion of the
Troubles, which Courts or Seats of Justice shall be restored to the Cities and
places where they have been formerly.

LXXIII.
If there be any Prisoners who are yet kept by Authority of Justice, or
otherwise, in Galleys, by reason of the Troubles, o^ of the said Religion, they
shall be released and set in full liberty.

LXXIV.
Those of the Religion shall never hereafter be charged and oppressed with any
Charge ordinary or extraordinary more than the Catholics, and according to
their abilities and Trades: and the Parties who shall pretend to be overcharged
above their ability may appeal to the Judges to whom the cognizance belongs,
and all our Subjects as well Catholic as of the Reformed Religion, shall be
indifferently discharged of all charges which have been imposed by one and the
other part, during the troubles, upon those that were on the contrary party,
and not consenting, as also of debts created and not paid, and expenses made
without consent of the same, without nevertheless having power to recover the
Revenue which should have been employed to the payment of the said charges.

LXXV.
We do not also understand, that those of the Religion, and others who have
followed their party, nor the Catholics who dwell in Cities and places kept
and employed by them, and who have contributed to them, shall be prosecuted for
the payment of Tailles, Aids, Grants, Fifteens, Taillon, Utensils, Reparations,
and other Impositions and Subsidies fallen due and imposed during the troubles
happening before and until our coming to the Crown, be it by the Edicts,
Commands of the deceased Kings our Predecessors, or by the advice and
deliberation of Governors and Estates of Provinces, Courts of Parliament, and
others, whereof we have discharged and do discharge them; prohibiting the
Treasurers General of France and of our Finances, Receivers General and
particular, their Commissioners and Agents, and other Intendants and
Commissaries of our said Finances, to pros^cute them, molest, disquiet directly
or indirectly, in any kind whatsoever.

LXXVI.
All Generals, Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, Officers, Common Councils of Cities
and Commonalties, and all others who have aided and succored them, their
Wives, Heirs, and Successors, shall remain quitted and discharged of all Money,
which have been by them and their order taken and levied, as well the Kings
Money, to what Sum soever it may amount, as of Cities and Communities, and
particular Rents, Revenues, Plate, Sale of moveable Goods, Ecclesiastic, and
other Woods of a high growth, be it of Domains or otherwise, Amerciaments,
Booty, Ransoms, or other kind of Money taken by them, occasioned by the
troubles begun in the month of March 1585. and other precedent troubles, until
our coming to the Crown, so that they or those that have by them been employed
in the levying of the said Money, or that they have given or furnished by their
orders, shall not be therefore any ways prosecuted at present, or for the time
to come: and shall remain acquitted, as well themselves, as their Commissaries,
for the management and administration of the said Money, reporting all thereof
discharged within four months after the publication of the present Edict made
in our Parliament of Paris, Acquittances being duly dispatched for the Heads of
those of the Religion, or for those that had been commissioned for the auditing
and balancing of the Accounts, or for the Communities of Cities who have had
command and charge during the said troubles, and all the said Heads of the
Reformed Religion, and others who have followed their party (as if they were
particularly expressed and specified) since the death of Henry II. our
Father-in-law, shall in like manner remain acquitted and discharged of all Acts
of Hostility, Levies, and Conduct of Soldiers, minting and valuing of Money
(done by order of the said chief Commanders) casting and taking of Ordnance and
Ammunition, compounding of Powder and Salt-peeter, Prizes, Fortifications,
dismantling and demolishing of Cities, Castles, Boroughs, and Villages,
Enterprises upon the same, burning and demolishing of Churches and houses,
establishing of Judicatures, Judgments, and Executions of the same, be it in
Civil or Criminal matters, Policy and Reglement made amongst themselves,
Voyages for Intelligence, Negotiations, Treaties, and Contracts made with all
Foreign Princes and Communities, the introduction of the said Strangers into
Cities and other places of our Kingdom, and generally of all that has been
done, executed, and negotiated during the said troubles, since, as aforesaid,
the death of Henry II. our Father-in-law.

LXXVII.
Those of the said Religion shall also remain dischanged of all General and
Provincial Assemblies by them made and held, as well at Nantes as since in
other places, until this present time; as also of Councils by them established
and ordained by Provinces, Declarations, Ordinances, and Reglements made by the
said Assemblies and Councils, establishment and augmentation of Garrisons,
assembling and taking of Soldiers, levying and taking of our Money, be it from
the Receivers General or particular Collectors of Parishes, or otherwise, in
what manner soever, Seisures of Salt, continuation or erection of Taxes, Tolls,
and Receipts of the same at Royan, and upon the Rivers of Charant, Garonne,
Rosne, and Dordonne, arming and fighting by Sea, and all accidents and excess
happening upon forcing the payment of Taxes, Tolls, and other Money by
fortifying of Cities, Castles, and Places, Impositions of Money and day-works,
Receipts of the same Money, displacing of our Receivers, Farmers, and other
Officers, establishing others in their places, and of all Leagues, Dispatches,
and Negotiations made as well within as without the Kingdom: And in general of
all that has been done, deliberated, written, and ordained by the said
Assembly and Council, so that those who have given their advice, signed,
executed, caused to sign and execute the said Ordinances, Reglements, and
Deliberations, shall not be prosecuted, or their Wives, Heirs, and Successors,
now and for the time to come, though the particulars thereof be not amply
declared. And above all perpetual silence is hereby commanded to our
Procurators General and their Substitutes, and all those who may pretend to an
interest therein, in whatsoever fashion or manner it may be, notwithstanding
all Decrees, Sentences, Judgments, Informations, and Procedures made to the
contrary.

LXXVIII.
We further approve, allow, and authorize the Accounts which have been heard,
balanced, and examined by the Deputies of the said Assembly* Willing and
requiring that the same together with the Acquittances and Pieces which have
been rendered by the Accomptants, be carried into our Chamber of Accounts at
Paris, three months after the publication of this present Edict, and put into
the hands of our Procurator General, to be kept with the Books and Registers of
our Chamber, to have there recourse to them as often as shall be needful, and
they shall not be subject to a^ review, nor the Accomptants held in any kind
liable to appearance o^ correction, except in case of omission of Receipts or
false Acquittances: and we hereby impose silence upon our Procurator General,
for the overplus that shall be found wanting, or for not observing of
formalities: Prohibiting to our Accomptants, as well of Paris as of other
Provinces, where they are established, to take any cognizance thereof in any
sort or manner whatsoever.

LXXIX.
And as to the Accounts which have not yet been rendered, We Will and Ordain
that the same be heard, balanced, and examined by the Commissaries, who shall
by us be deputed thereunto, who without difficulty shall pass and allow all the
parcels paid by the said Accomptants, by virtue of the Ordinances of the said
Assembly, or others having power.

LXXX.
All Collectors, Receivers, Farmers, and all others, shall remain well and duly
discharged of all the Sums of Money which have been paid to the said
Commissioners of the said Assembly, of what nature soever they be, until the
last day of this month. And we Will and Command, that all be passed and allowed
in the Accounts, which Accounts they shall give into our Chambers of Accounts,
purely and simply by virtue of the Acquittances which shall be brought; and if
any shall hereafter be delivered, they shall remain null, and those who shall
accept or deliver them, shall be condemned in the penalty of forgery. And where
there shall be any Accounts already given in, upon which there shall have
intervened any raisings or additions, we do hereby take away the same, and
re-establish the Parties entirely, by virtue of these Presents, without being
needful to have particular Patents, or any other thing than an Extract of this
present Article.

LXXXI.
The Governors, Captains, Consuls, and Persons Commissioned to recover Money
for paying Garrisons held by those of the Religion, to whom our Receivers and
Collectors of Parishes have furnished by Loan upon their Credits and
Obligations, whether by constraint, or in obedience to the commandment of the
Treasurers General, and the Money necessary for the entertaining of the said
Garrisons, until the concurrence of the State which we dispatched in the
beginning of 1596. and augmentations since agreed unto by us, shall be held
acquitted and discharged of all that which has been paid for the effect
abovesaid, though by the said Cedules and Obligations no mention has been
thereof made, which shall be to them rendered as null. And to satisfy therein
the Treasurers General in each Generality, the particular Treasurers of our
Tailles shall give their Acquittances to the said Collectors; and the Receivers
General shall give their Acquittances to the particular Receivers: and for the
discharge of the Receivers General, the Sums whereof they should have given
account, as is said, shall be indorsed upon the Commissions levied by the
Treasurer of the Expenses, under the name of Treasurers General for the
extraordinaries of our Wars, for the payment of the said Garrisons. And where
the said Commissions shall not amount to as much as the establishment and
augmentations of our Army did in 1596. We ordain, That to supply the same,
there shall be dispatched new Commissions for what is necessary for the
discharge of our Accomptants, and restitution of the said promises and
obligations, in such sort as there shall not for the time to come be any thing
demanded thereof from those that shall have made them, and that all Patents of
Ratifications which shall be necessary for the discharge of Accomptants, shall
be dispatched by virtue of this present Article.

LXXXII.
Those also of the said Religion shall depart and desist henceforward from all
Practices, Negotiations, and Intelligences, as well within as without our
Kingdom; and the said Assemblies and Councils established within the Provinces,
shall readily separate; and also all the Leagues and Associations made or to be
made under what pretext soever, to the prejudice of our present Edict, shall be
cancelled and annulled, as we do cancel and annul them; prohibiting most
expressly to all our Subjects to make henceforward any Assessments or Levies of
Money, Fortifications, Enrollments of men, Congregations, and Assemblies other
than such, as are permitted by our present Edict, and without Arms: And we do
prohibit and forbid them to do the contrary upon the penalty of being severely
punished as Contemners and Breakers of our Commands and Ordinances.

LXXXIII.
All Prizes which have been taken by Sea during the troubles, by virtue of the
leave and allowance given, and those which have been made by Land, upon those
of the contrary Party, and which have been judged by the Judges and
Commissioners of the Admiralty, or by the Heads of those of the Religon, or
their Council, shall remain extinguished under the benefit of our present
Edict, without making any prosecution; the Captains or others who have made the
said Prizes, their Securities; Judges, Officers, Wives, and Heirs, shall not be
prosecuted nor molested in any sort whatsoever, notwithstanding all the Decrees
of our Privy Council and Parliaments, of all Letters of Mart and Seisures
depending and not judged of, We will and require that there be made a full and
entire discharge of all Suits arising therefrom.

LXXXIV.
In like manner there shall not be any prosecution of those of the Religion for
the oppositions and obstructions which they have given formerly, and since the
troubles, in the execution of Decrees and Judgments given for the
re-establishment of the Catholic Religion in diverse places of this Kingdom.

LXXXV.
And as to what has been done, or taken during the troubles out of the way of
Hostility, or by Hostility against the public or particular Rules of the Heads
or Communalties of the Provinces which they commanded, there shall be no
prosecution by way of Justice.

LXXXVI.
Forasmuch that whereas that which has been done against the Rules of one
Party or the other is indifferently excepted and reserved from the general
abolition contained in our present Edict, and is liable to be inquired after or
prosecuted, yet nevertheless no Soldier shall be troubled, whence may arise
the renewing of troubles; and for this cause, We will and ordain, that
execrable Cases shall only be excepted out of the said abolition: as ravishing
and forcing of Women and Maids, Burnings, Murders, Robberies, Treachery, and
lying in wait or ambush, out of the way of Hostility, and for private revenge,
against the duty of War, breaking of Pass-ports and Safeguards, with Murders
and Pillages without command from those of the Religion, or those that have
followed the Party of their Generals who have had Authority over them, founded
upon particular occasions which have moved them to ordain and command it.

LXXXVII.
We Ordain also, That punishment be inflicted for crimes and offenses committed
betwixt persons of the same Party, if acts not commanded by the Heads of one
Party or the other by necessity of Law and order of War. And as to the levying
and exacting of Money, bearing of Arms, and other Exploits of War done by
private Authority and without allowance, the parties guilty thereof shall be
prosecuted by way of Justice.

LXXXVIII.
The Cities dismantled during the troubles, may with our permission be
re-edified and repaired by the Inhabitants at their costs and charges, and the
provisions granted heretofore upon that account shall hold and have place.

LXXXIX.
We Ordain, and our will and pleasure is, that all Lords, Knights, Gentlemen,
and others of what quality and condition soever of the Reformed Religion, and
others who have followed their Party, shall enter and be effectually conserved
in the enjoyment of all and each of their Goods, Rights, Titles, and actions,
notwithstanding the Judgments following thereupon during the said troubles, and
by reason of the same; which Decrees, Seisures, Judgments, and all that shall
follow thereupon we have to this end declared, and we do declare them null and
of no effect and value.

XC.
The Acquisitions that those of the Reformed Religion, and others which have
followed their Party, have made by the Authority of the deceased Kings our
Predecessors or others, for the Immoveables belonging to the Church, shall not
have any place or effect; but we Ordain, and our pleasure is, That the
Ecclesiastics re-enter immediately, and without delay be conserved in the
possession and enjoyment really and actually of the said Goods so alienated,
without being obliged to pay the Purchase-money which to this effect we have
cancelled and revoked as null, without remedy for the Purchasers to have
against the Generals, etc. by the authority of which the said Goods have been
sold. Yet nevertheless for the re-imbursement of the Money by them truly and
without fraud disbursed, our Letters Patents of permission shall be dispatched
to those of the Religion, to interpose and equalize the bare Sums that the said
Purchases cost, the Purchasers not being allowed to bring any Action for their
damages and interest for want of enjoyment, but shall content themselves with
the re-imbursement of the Money by them furnished for the price of the
Acquisitions, accounting for the price of the fruits received, in case that the
said Sale should be found to be made at an under rate.

XCI.
To the end that as well our Justices and Officers as our other Subjects be
clearly and with all certainty advertised of our will and intentions, and for
taking away all ambiguity and doubt which may arise from the variety of former
Edicts, Articles, secret Letters Patents, Declarations, Modifications,
Restrictions, Interpretations, Decrees, and Registers, as also all secrets as
well as other deliberations heretofore by us or the Kings our Predecessors,
made in our Courts of Parliaments or other ways, concerning the said Reformed
Religion, and the troubles happening in our said Kingdom, we have declared and
do hereby declare them to be of no value and effect: And as to the derogatory
part therein contained, we have by this our Edict abrogated, and we do
abrogate, and from henceforward we cancel, revoke, and annul them. Declaring
expressly, that our will and pleasure is, That this our Edict be firmly and
inviolably kept and observed, as well by our Justices and Officers, as other
Subjects, without hesitation, or having any regard at all to that which may be
contrary or derogatory to the same.

XCII.
And for the greater assurance of the keeping and observing what we herein
desire, We will and ordain, and it is our pleasure, That all the Governors and
Lieutenants General of our Provinces, Bailiffs, Chief Justices, and other
ordinary Judges of the Cities of our said Kingdom immediately after the receipt
of this same Edict, do bind themselves by Oath to keep and cause to be kept and
observed each in their district: as shall also the Majors, Sheriffs, principal
Magistrates, Consuls, and Jurates of Cities either annual or perpetual.
Enjoining likewise our Bailiffs, Chief Justices, or their Lieutenants, and
other Judges to make the principal Inhabitants of the said Cities, as well of
the one Religion as the other, to swear to the keeping and observing of this
present Edict immediately after the Publication thereof: And taking all those
of the said Cities under our protection, command that one and the other
respectively shall either answer for the opposition that shall be made to this
our said Edict within the said Cities by the inhabitants thereof, or else to
present and deliver over to Justice the said opposers.

We Will and Command our well-beloved the People holding our Courts of
Parliaments, Chambers of Accounts, and Courts of Aids, that immediately after
the receipt of this present E^ict they cause all things to cease, and upon
penalty of Nullity of the Acts which they shall otherwise do, to take the like
Oath, as above, and to publish and register our said Edict in our said Courts
according to the form and tenor of the same, purely and simply, without using
any Modifications, Restrictions, Declarations, or secret Registers, or
expecting any other Order or Command from us* and we do require our Procurators
General to pursue immediately and without delay the said Publication hereof.

We give in Command to the said People of our Courts of Parliaments, Chambers
of our Courts, and Courts of our Aids, Bailiffs, Chief Justices, Provosts, and
other our Justices and Officers to whom it appertains, and to their
Lieutenants, that they cause to be read, published, and inregistred this our
present Edict and Ordinance in their Courts and Jurisdictions, and the same
keep and observe punctually, and the Contents of the same to cause to be
enjoyed and used fully and peaceably by all those to whom it shall belong,
ceasing and making to cease all troubles and obstructions to the contrary. For
such is our pleasure: And in Witness hereof we have signed these Presents with
our own Hand; and to the end to make it a thing firm and stable for ever, we
have caused to put and indorse our Seal to the same.

Given at Nantes in the month of April in the Year of Grace 1598. and of our
Reign the ninth. Signed, HENRY.
And underneath, the King being in Council, FORGET.
And on the side, VISA.
This VISA signifies the Lord Chancellors perusal.
Sealed with the Great Seal of green Wax upon a red and green String of Silk.
Read, published, and registered, the Kings Procurator or Attorney General
hearing and consenting to it,

in the Parliament of Paris, the 25th of February, 1599. Signed, VOYSIN.


Read, published, and inregistred in the Chamber of Accounts, the Kings
Procurator General hearing and consenting,

the last day of March, 1599. Signed, DE LA FONTAINE.


Read, published, and registered, the Kings Procurator General hearing and
consenting,

at Paris in the Court of Aids, the 30th of April 1599. Signed, BERNARD.



PARTICULAR ARTICLES Extracted from the General which the King has granted to
those of the Reformed Religion, and which his Majesty would not have comprised
in the said General, nor in the Edict which has been made and framed for the
same. Given at Nantes in the Month of April 1598.
And yet nevertheless His Majesty has agreed that they shall be entirely
accomplished and observed altogether as fully as the Contents of the said
Edict. And to that end they shall be registered in his Courts of Parliament and
in other places where it shall be needful, and all necessary Declarations,
Provisions, and Patents shall be therefore dispatched.

THE FIRST ARTICLE.
THE sixth Article of the said Edict touching Liberty of Conscience and
permission to all the Subjects of his Majesty, to live and dwell in this
Kingdom, and the Countries under his obedience, shall have place, and be
observed according to its form and tenor, and as well for the Ministers and
Pedagogues, as all other Professors and Masters of School, and generally for
those who are and shall be of the said Religion, whether Inhabitants only, or
others, so long as they comport themselves according as is contained in the
said Edict.

II.
Nor may those of the said Religion be constrained to contribute to the
reparation or building of Churches, Chapels, or the Houses of Priests, nor to
the buying of Sacerdotal Ornaments, Lights, Casting of Bells, Consecrated
Bread, Rights of Convents or Fraternities, Rents of Houses for Priests or
Friars to dwell in, and the like, if they are not obliged thereunto by
foundations, endowments, or other disposition made by them, or the Founders and
Predecessors.

III.
They shall not also be constrained to hang and adorn the outside of their
houses upon Festival days, as is ordained; but suffer them only to be hung and
adorned by the Authority of the Officers of the place, without that those of
the Religion shall contribute any thing upon that account.

IV.
Nor in like manner shall those of the Reformed Religion be obliged to receive
exhortation, when they shall be sick or near death by Condemnation of Justice,
or otherwise, from other than from the same Religion; and they may be visited
and comforted by their Ministers, without being therefore troubled: and as to
those that shall be condemned by Justice, the said Ministers may in like manner
visit and comfort them, and visiting them in the Prisons may pray by them
there: and out of the said Prisons may assist and comfort them, without praying
in public, except in places where the said public Exercise is by the said
Edict permitted to them.

V.
It shall be lawful to those of the said Religion to have public exercise of
the same at Pimpoul, and for Dieppe in the Suburbs of Pouler; and the said
places of Pimpoul and Pouler shall be ordained for places of Bailiwicks. As to
Sancerre, the said exercise shall be continued, as at present, except for the
establishing it within the said City, the Inhabitants do make the consent of
the Lord of the place to appear to them that shall be appointed by the
Commissaries which his Majesty shall depute for the execution of the Edict. The
said Commissioners shall provide for those of the said Religion in the Cities
of Chaalons upon Marne, Vascy, and French Vitry, permitting them the said
exercise within the said Cities or Suburbs of the same during War, if they
cannot with safety ^njoy the same in places where they ought to have it by the
said Edict. And the said free and public exercise shall be also re^^^ablished
within the City of Montagnac in low Languedoc.

VI.
Upon the Article making mention of the Bailiwicks, it has been declared and
agreed as follows. First, that for the establishment of the exercise of the
said Religion in two places in each Bailiwick, chief Jurisdiction, and
Government, those of the Religion shall name two Cities, in the Suburbs of
which the said exercise shall be established by the Commissaries which his
Majesty shall depute for the execution of the Edict. And where it shall not be
judged convenient by them, those of the Religion shall name two or three
Market Towns or Villages near the said Cities, for each of the same, whereof
the said Commissioners shall choose one: And if by Hostility, contagion or other
lawful impediment, it cannot be continued in the said place, there shall be
given to them others for the time that that obstruction shall continue.
Secondly, that in the Government of Picardy there shall not be appointed more
than two Cities, in the Suburbs of which those of the Religion may have the
exercise of the same for all the Bailiwicks, chief Seats of Justice and
Governments which depend thereon: and where it shall not be judged convenient
to establish it in the said Cities, there shall be given them two commodious
Market Towns or Villages. Thirdly, for the great extent of the chief
Jurisdiction of Provence and Bailiwick of Vienna, His Majesty does agree, that
there shall be in each of the said Bailiwicks and chief Jurisdictions, a third
place, whereof the Choice and Nomination shall be as above, for establishing
the exercise of the said Religion, besides the other places where it is already
established.

VII.
That which is agreed by the said Article for the exercise of the said
Religion, shall have place in the Territories which appertained to the deceased
Queen Mother of his Majesty, and in the Bailiwicks of Beaujolois.

VIII.
Besides the two places agreed for the exercise of the said Religion by the
particular Articles of 1577. in the Isles of Marenne and Oleron, shall be given
to them two others for the convenience of the said Inhabitants, (viz.) one for
all the Isles of Marenne, and another for the Isle of Oleron.

IX.
The provisions granted by his Majesty for the exercise of the said Religion in
the City of Mets, shall go forth in their full and entire effect.

X.
His said Majesty wills and intends, that the twenty seventh Article of his
Edict touching the admission of those of the said Religion to Offices and
Dignities be observed and kept according to its form and tenor,
notwithstanding the Edicts and Agreements heretofore made for the reduction of
any Catholic Princes, Lords, Gentlemen, and Cities under his obedience, the
which shall not have place to the prejudice of those of the said Religion in
that which concerns the exercise of the same: And the said exercise shall be
regulated according as is contained by the Articles which follow, and according
to the same shall be framed the Instructions for the Commissioners which his
Majesty shall depute for the execution of his Edict, according as is contained
in the same.

XI.
According to the Edict made by his Majesty for the reduction of the Duke of
Guyse, the exercise of the Reformed Religion may not be made nor established in
the Cities and Suburbs of Reims, Rocroy, St. Disier, Guyse, Joinville,
Montcornet, and Ardannes.

XII.
Nor shall also be made in other places about the said Cities and places
forbidden by the Edict 1577.

XIII.
And to take away all ambiguity which may arise upon the word [in and about]
his Majesty declares his meaning to be of places which are within the Bailiwick
of the said Cities, in which places the exercise of the said Religion is not to
be established, except permitted by the Edict 1577.

XIV.
And for as much as by the same the said Religion was generally permitted in
Fiefs possessed by those of the said Religion, without excepting the Circuit
belonging to Fiefs: his said Majesty does declare, that the same permission
shall have place even in Fiefs which shall be within those held by those of the
said Religion, according to the import of his Edict given at Nantes.

XV.
According also to the Edict made for the reduction of the Marshall de la
Chastre, in each of the Bailiwicks of Orleans and Bourges there shall be but
one place for the exercise of the said Religion, yet nevertheless it may be
continued in the places where it is permitted to them to continue by the said
Edict of Nantes.

XVI.
The permission to preach in Fiefs shall in like manner have place in the said
Bailiwicks, according to the form directed by the said Edict of Nantes.

XVII.
The Edict made for the reduction of the Marshall de Bois-Dauphin, shall be in
like manner observed, and the said exercise may not be practiced in Cities,
Suburbs, and places brought by him to the Service of his Majesty: and as to the
Circuits about and belonging to the said places, there the Edict of 1577. shall
be observed even in houses of Fiefs, according to the import of the said Edict
of Nantes.

XVIII.
There shall be no exercise of the said Religion in Cities, Suburbs, and Castle
of Morlays, according to the Edict made upon the reduction of the said City,
and the Edict of 77. shall be observed in the Jurisdiction of the same, even
for Fiefs, according to the Edict of Nantes.

XIX.
According to the Edict for the reduction of Quinpercorintin, there shall not
be any exercise of the said Religion in all the Bishopric of Cornoaille.

XX.
According also to the Edict made for the reduction of Beauvais, there shall
not be any exercise of the said Religion in the said City of Beauvais, nor
within three leagues of it. But it may nevertheless be established in the rest
of the Bailiwick in places permitted by the Edict of 77. even in houses of
Fiefs, as the Edict of Nantes imports.

XXI.
And for as much as the Edict made for the reduction of the deceased Admiral de
Villars is but provisional, until the King shall order otherwise, his Majesty
wills and understands, that notwithstanding the same his Edict of Nantes
shall have place for the Cities and Jurisdictions brought under his obedience
by the said Admiral, as the other places of his Kingdom.

XXII.
According to the Edict made for the reduction of the Duke of Joyeuse, the
exercise of the said Religion shall not be in the City of Tholose, the Suburbs
of the same, nor within four Leagues of it, nor nearer than are the Cities of
Villemur, Carman, and the Isle of Jordan.

XXIII.
Nor shall it be restored in the Cities of Dalet, Fiac, Auriac, and
Montesquiou, upon Condition nevertheless that if any of the said Religion in
the said Cities, do sue to have a place for the exercise of the same, there
shall be given them by the Commissioners which His Majesty shall depute for the
execution of this Edict, or by the Officers of the places assigned for each of
the said Cities, a commodious place, and of safe access, which shall not be
above a League from the said Cities.

XXIV.
The said Exercise shall be established, according as is contained by the Edict
of Nantes, within the Jurisdiction of the Court of Parliament of Tholose,
except nevertheless in the Bailiwicks, or Chief Jurisdictions, whereof the Seat
of Justice has been brought back to the obedience of the King by the said Duke
of Joyeuse, in which case the Edict of 77. shall have place: His said Majesty
understanding nevertheless, that the said Exercise may be continued in Places
of the said Bailiwicks, or Chief Jurisdictions, where it was at the time of the
said reduction, and that the granting of the same in houses of Fiefs, has
place in the same Bailiwicks and Chief Jurisdictions, according as is contained
by the said Edict of Nantes.

XXV.
The Edict made for the reduction of the City of Dijon shall be observed, and
following the same there shall be no other exercise of Religion, than that of
the Catholics, in the said City or Suburbs of the same, nor within four
Leagues of it.

XXVI.
The Edict made for the reduction of the Duke of Mayenne, shall in like manner
be observed, and accordingly there shall be no exercise of the Reformed
Religion in the Cities of Chaalon, Seure, and Soissons or Bailiwicks of the
said Chaalon, nor within two Leagues of Soissons, during the time of six Years,
to begin from the Month of January 1596. After which time the Edict of Nantes
shall be there observed, as in other Places of this Kingdom.

XXVII.
It shall be permitted to those of the Religion, of what Quality soever they
be, to inhabit, go and come freely in the City of Lions and other Cities and
Places of the Government of Lyonnois, notwithstanding all prohibitions made to
the contrary by the Syndics and Sheriffs of the said City of Lions, and
confirmed by His Majesty.

XXVIII.
There shall not be ordered more than one place in a Bailiwick, for the
exercise of the said Religion in all the Chief Jurisdictions of Poictiers,
besides those where it is at present established, and as to the Fiefs, they
shall follow the Edict of Nantes. And the said exercise shall be continued in
the City of Chauvigny.

XXIX.
The said exercise shall not be established within the Cities of Again and
Perigueux, though by the Edict of 77. it may be there.

XXX.
There shall not be more than two places in the Bailiwick for the exercise of
the said Religion in all the Government of Picardie, as has been said before,
and the two said places shall not be given within the Jurisdiction of the
Bailiwick and Government, reserved by the Edicts made for the reduction of
Amyens, Peronne, and Abbeville, but the said exercise may nevertheless be made
in houses of Fiefs, throughout all the said Government of Picardie, according
as it is contained in the said Edict of Nantes.

XXXI.
There shall not be any exercise of the said Religion made in the City or
Suburbs of Sens, and there shall not be ordered more than one place in the
Bailiwick for the said exercise in all the Jurisdiction of the Bailiwick;
without prejudice nevertheless to the permission granted for the houses of
Fiefs, which shall have place according to the Edict of Nantes.

XXXII.
In like manner there shall not be the said exercise practiced in the City or
Suburbs of Nantes, nor there shall not be any place ordered in the Bailiwick
for the said exercise within three Leagues of the said City, but nevertheless
in Houses of Fiefs it may be practiced, according to the said Edict of Nantes.

XXXIII.
His Majesty wills and intends that his said Edict of Nantes be observed
henceforward in that which concerns the said Religion, in the places where, by
the said Edicts or Agreements made for the reduction of any Catholic Princes,
Lords* Gentlemen and Cities, it was forbidden by provision so long as until it
was otherwise ordered. And as to those where the said prohibition is limited to
a certain time, the time being expired it shall not have any more force.

XXXIV.
There shall be given to those of the Religion a place for the City,
Provostship and Viscounty of Paris, within five Leagues at most, in which they
may have public exercise of the same.

XXXV.
In all places where the exercise of the said Religion shall be publicly
practiced, they may assemble the People also by the Sound of a Bell, and do all
Acts and Functions belonging as well to the exercise of the said Religion, as
to the regulating of discipline, as in holding Consistories, Conferences,
Synods provincional and National by the permission of His Majesty.

XXXVI.
The Ministers, Elders, and Deacons of the said Religion shall not be
constrained to answer in Courts of Justice in quality as a Witness for things
that shall be revealed in their Consistory, when they shall pass Ecclesiastical
Censures, except for things concerning the Person of the King, or the
conservation of his State.

XXXVII.
It shall be lawful for those of the said Religion, who live in the Country, to
go to the exercise of the same in Cities, Suburbs, and other places where it
shall be publicly established.

XXXVIII.
Those of the said Religion may not keep public Schools, except in Cities and
Places where the public exercise of the same is permitted them, and the
provisions which have heretofore been granted to them for the erecting and
keeping of Colleges, shall be verified when it shall be needful, and issued out
with full and entire power.

XXXIX.
It shall be lawful for Fathers making profession of the said Religion, to
provide their Children such Tutors as shall seem good unto them, and to
substitute one or more by Testament, Codicils, or other declaration passed
before Notaries, or in writing signed by their hands, whilst the Laws received
in this Kingdom, the Ordinances and Customs of places are in force and virtue,
for gifts and provisions for Tutors and Curators.

XL.
For the Marriages of Priests, and Religious Persons who have been heretofore
Contracted, his said Majesty for many good considerations will not, nor does
not intend that they be searched after, or therefore molested; and in these
cases he imposes silence to his Procurators General, and, other Officers of
the same. But his said Majesty declares nevertheless, that he understands that
the Children issue of the said Marriages, may inherit only Movables, Acquests,
Conquests, and Immoveables of their Fathers and Mothers; and for want of such
Children, the Kindred most near, and qualified to succeed, and the Testaments,
Donations and other dispositions made, or to make by persons of the said
quality, for Goods, moveable Acquests, and Conquests immovable, are declared
good and valuable: But his said Majesty will not nevertheless, that the said
Men and Women professing Religious lives, may come to any Succession directly
or collaterally, but may only take the Goods which have been left them, or
shall be left them by Testament, Donations, or other Dispositions, except
nevertheless those of the said Successions direct or collateral: and as to
those who shall have made profession before the age appointed by the Ordinances
of Orleance and Blois, the said Ordinances shall be followed and observed in
that which regards the said Successions, and the tenor of the said Ordinances,
each according to the time that they have had place.

XLI.
His said Majesty will not also, that those of the said Religion, who have
heretofore contracted or shall hereafter contract Marriage in the third or
fourth degree, may be therefore molested, nor the validity of the said
contracts called in question, nor likewise the Succession taken away, nor the
Children born or to be born of the same, to be quarrelled with; and as to the
Marriages that may be already contracted in the second degree, or of the second
or third, amongst those of the said Religion, applying themselves to his said
Majesty, those who shall be of the said quality, and shall have contracted
Marriage in such degree, there shall be given them such provisions as shall be
necessary for them, to the end that they shall not be inquired after, nor
molested, nor the Succession quarrelled at, nor their Children troubled about
it.

XLII.
For to judge of the Validity of Marriages made and contracted by those of the
Reformed Religion, and to decide if they are lawful; if he of the said Religion
be Defendant, in that Case the Judge Royal shall have Cognizance of the said
Marriage; and when he shall be the Plantiff, and the Defendant a Catholic, the
Cognizance thereof shall belong to the Official, and Judge Ecclesiastic, and
if both parties are of the said Reformed Religion, the Cognizance shall belong
to the Kings Judges: His Majesty wills that in regard of the said Marriages,
and differences which shall arise from the same, the Judges Ecclesiastic and
Royal, together with the Chamber established by his Edict, shall have
Cognizance respectively thereof.

XLIII.
The Donations and Legacies made and to make, be it by disposition of Money by
the last Will and Testament at death, or during life, for the maintenance of
Ministers, Doctors, Scholars and the Poor of the said Reformed Religion and
other pious uses, shall be valid, and shall issue out in their full and entire
effect, notwithstanding all Judgments, Decrees and other things to the
contrary; without prejudice nevertheless of the rights of his Majesty, and
others; in case that the said Legacies and Donations fall to one that is dead,
all actions and prosecutions necessary for the enjoying of the said Legacies,
pious uses, and other rights, shall be made by the Procurator in the name of
the body, or Commonalty of those of the Church, or Commonalty of the said
Religion, who shall have Interest; and if it is found that heretofore there
has been a Disposition of the said Donations and Legacies, otherwise than is
contained by the said Article, there shall not be any restitution other than
what is found without having the property altered.

XLIV.
His said Majesty permits to those of the said Religion, to assemble before the
Judge Royal, and by his Authority to levy equally upon themselves such sums of
money as he shall judge necessary to be employed for defraying the charges of
their Synods, and entertaining of those who perform the duties in the exercise
of their Religion, of which they shall give an account to the said Judge Royal,
for him to keep the Copy thereof, which shall be sent by the said Judge Royal
from six months to six months to his said Majesty, or to his Chancellor, and
the Taxes and Impositions for the said money may be distrained, notwithstanding
any opposition and appellation whatsoever.

XLV.
The Ministers of the said Religion shall be exempt from going upon the Guards
and Rounds, and quartering of Soldiers, and other Assessments, or gathering of
Tailles together from Tutorships, Curators and Commissions for the keeping
Goods seized by authority of Justice.

XLVI.
In case that the Officers of his Majesty do not provide convenient places for
the Sepulchers of those of the said Religion, within the time appointed by the
Edict, after demand made, and that there is delay and remissness in the thing,
it shall be lawful for those of the said Religion, to Interr their dead in the
burying places of the Catholics, in Cities and places where they are in
possession to do it, until they are otherwise provided. And as to the
interrment of the poor of those of the said Religion heretofore used in the
Churchyards of the said Catholics, in whatsoever place, or City that it is,
his Majesty does not understand that there shall therefore be any search, or
prosecution for the same, and it shall be enjoined to his Officers to defend
them in it; and in reference to the City of Paris, besides the two Churchyards,
that those of the said Religion have there at present (to wit) that of the
Trinity, and that of St. Germains, there shall be given them a third place
commodious for the said Sepulchers in the Suburbs of St. Honor or St. Denis.

XLVII.
The Presidents and Catholic Counselors, who shall serve in the Chamber
ordained for the Parliament of Paris, shall be chosen by his Majesty upon the
Register of the Officers of Parliament, and there shall be therein employed
Persons just, peaceable, and moderate.

XLVIII.
The Counselors of the said Reformed Religion, who shall serve in the said
Chambers, shall assist if it please them in the process which shall be decided
by Commissioners, and shall have there a deliberative Voice, without having
part of the Money consigned, except when by Order and Prerogative of their
reception they ought to assist therein.

XLIX.
The ancientest President of the Chambers Myparties, shall preside at the
hearing of Causes, and in his absence the Second, and shall make distribution
of the process of the two Presidents conjunctively or alternatively, by month
or by week.

L.
Upon the Vacation of Offices, whereof those of the Religion are, or should be,
provided in the said Chambers of Edict, they shall be furnished with persons
capable, who shall have attestations from the Synod or Assembly whereunto they
belong, that they are honest men, and of the same Religion.

LI.
The abolition agreed to with those of the said Reformed Religion, by the 74
Article of the said Edict, shall be valid for the taking the Moneys belonging
to the King, be it by breaking open of Chests, or otherwise, even in reference
to those who took it away upon the River of Charente, though it had been
destinated and assigned to particular uses.

LII.
The 46 Article of the secret Articles, made in the Year 1577. touching the
City and Archbishopric of Avinion, and County of Veniss, together with the
Treaty made at Nismes, shall be observed according to form and tenor, and
there shall not be any Letters of Mart by virtue of the said Article and
Treaties, given then by Letters Patents from the King, sealed with his great
Seal. Nevertheless, those who desire it may obtain them by virtue of the
present Article, and without other Commission by the Kings Judges, who shall
inform of the Breach of Covenants, denying of Justice, and the iniquity of
Judgments, proposed by those who shall desire to obtain the said Letters, and
shall send them with their advice enclosed and sealed to his Majesty, for him
to order therein as shall seem reasonable to him.

LIII.
His Majesty wills and agrees that Master Nicholas Grimoult be
re-established and maintained in the title and possession of the Offices of
Lieutenant General Civil and Ancient, and Lieutenant General Criminal in the
Bailiwick of Alencon, notwithstanding the resignation by him made to Master
John Marguerit, reception of the same, and the provision obtained by Master
William Bernard of the Office of Lieutenant General, Civil and Criminal, in the
Court of Justice at Exmes, and the Decrees in the Privy Council against the
said Marguerit, the Resignee, during the troubles in the Years 1586, 1587,
1588, by which Master Nicholas Barbier is maintained in the Rights and
Prerogatives of Lieutenant General ancient in the said Bailiwick, and the said
Bernard in the said Office of Lieutenant at Exmes, the which his Majesty has
cancelled and annulled and all others to the contrary. And besides his said
Majesty for certain good Considerations, has agreed and ordained, That the
said Grimoult shall reimburse within three months the said Barbier the money
that he is out to the parties casually for the Office of Lieutenant General,
Civil and Criminal, in the Viscounty of Alencon, and of fifty Crowns for
Charges: Enjoyining to this end the Bailly of Perch, or his Lieutenant at
Montaigne, to make the reimbursement; or else that the said Barbier refusing or
delaying to receive it, his said Majesty has forbidden the said Barbier, as
also the said Bernard, after the presentation of this present Article, to act
more in the exercise of the said Offices upon penalty of Forgery; and to send
this same Grimoult to the enjoyment of those Offices and Rights appertaining
thereunto. And in so doing the processes which were depending in his Majesty's
Privy Council, betwixt the said Grimoult, Barbier, and Bernard, shall remain
terminated and extinguished, his Majesty prohibiting the Parliaments and all
other Courts to take Cognizance thereof, and the said parties any further
prosecution therein. And besides, his Majesty charge himself to reimburse the
said Bernard a thousand Crowns, casually paid to the parties for the same
Office, and with sixty Crowns for the Gold Mark and Charges: Having for this
effect presently ordained good and sufficient assignation for recovering of the
same, which shall be speedily done at the Charges of the said Grimoult.

LIVE.
His said Majesty will write to his Ambassadors to solicit and treat for all
his Subjects, even for those of the Reformed Religion, that they may not be
prosecuted for their Consciences, nor subject to the Inquisition, in going,
coming, sojourning, negotiating, and trafficking through all Foreign Countries
of the Allies and Confederates of this Crown, provided they offend not against
the polity of the Country where they shall be.

LV.
All those of the Reformed Religion, who remain titular of Benefices, shall be
obliged to resign them within six months to Catholic Persons. And those who
have promises of Pensions upon the said Benefices shall have them paid, and the
payment of the said Pensions continued, and those that owe the said Pensions
shall be constrained to pay them the Arrears, if there be any, provided that
they have actually enjoyed the profits of the same Benefices, except
nevertheless the Arrears which fell due during the troubles.

LVI.
His Majesty will not that there be any search made after the Receipts of any
Impositions which have been levied at Royan by virtue of any Contract made with
the Sieur of Kendal, and other Acts for continuation of the same, his Majesty
approving, and making valid the said Contract, for the time that it was in
force according to its contents until the 8th of May next.

LVII.
The excesses happening in the person of Armand Courtines, in the City of
Millan, in the year 1587. and of John Rames, and Peter Singuret, together with
the proceedings against them, by the Consuls of the said Millan, shall remain
abolished and extinguished by the benefit of the Edict, without being lawful
for their Widows, Heirs or the Procurators General of his Majesty, their
Substitutes, or other persons whatsoever to mention the same, make inquiry
thereof, or prosecute, notwithstanding the Decree given in the Chamber at
Castres the tenth of March last, to which there shall be no regard, for that
they shall remain null, and of none effect; as also all the Informations and
Proceedings made on one part and the other.

LVIII.
All Prosecutions, Proceedings, Sentences, Judgments and Decrees, given as well
against the deceased Sieur de la Nove, as against the Steur Odet de la Nove his
Son, since their restraints and imprisonments in Flanders, happening in the
months of May 1580. and of November 1584. during their continual employment in
the Wars, and service of the King, shall remain cancelled and annulled, and all
that consequently followed the same, shall be received in defense of them, and
the said de la Nove's shall be restored to the same condition as they were in
before the said Judgments and Decrees, without being obliged to refund the
expenses, or assign the payment of the Penalty, or Fines if they have incurred
any; nor shall men allege against them any Nonsuit, or Prescription during
the said time.

Done by the King, being in his Council at Nantes, the last day of April 1598.
Signed, HENRY.
And below, FORGET.
And Sealed with the great Seal of yellow Wax. HENRY by the grace of God King
of France and Navar,
To our trusty and well-beloved the members of our Court of Parliament at Paris
Greeteth.
Besides, and above the Articles contained in our Edict, made and granted in
the present month concerning the Reformed Religion, we have yet farther Granted
some Particulars, which we did not esteem necessary to comprehend in the said
Edict, and which nevertheless we will and require that they be observed, and
have the same effect as if they were therein comprised, and to that end that
they be Read and Inregistred in the Offices of our Court of Parliament, to have
recourse thereunto when it shall be needful, and the Case require it. For this
Cause we Will, Command, and most expressly Enjoin, That these Articles Signed
by our own Hand hereunto annexed, under the Counter-Seal of our Chancery, you
shall enter in the Registers of our said Court; and cause the same to be
observed in all points, in the same manner as it is, and ought to be in our
said Edict. For such is our will and pleasure.

Given at Nantes, the last of April 1598. and of our Reign the ninth. Signed,
by the King in Council, FORGET.
And Sealed with the great Seal of yellow Wax, with a single Label.


A DECLARATION
By the present French King, Lewis the XIV. in favor of his Subjects of the
Reformed Religion, confirming the Edicts of Pacification, Declaration,
Reglements, and Articles heretofore granted them. Dated at Paris, the 8th of
July 1643. and Verified in Parliament the 3d of August 1643. Printed at Paris
1644. with the Kings License.

LOVIS, by the Grace of God King of France and Navarre;
To all to whom these presents shall come, greeting.
The deceased King, our most honored Lord and Father, acknowledging that the
most necessary and effectual means for the preservation of peace in this
Kingdom, consisted in suffering his Subjects of the Reformed Religion, to live
under the benefit of his Edicts, and defending them in the free exercise of
their Religion, he had a particular care to prevent, by such ways as he judged
suitable to his Authority, the troubling, or disquieting of them in the said
Exercise. Having to that effect, immediately after his coming to the Crown,
confirmed the said Edicts, by his Letters Patents in form of a Declaration,
dated the 22th of May 1610. to the end that he might thereby so much the more
oblige his Subjects, of the said Religion, to a dutiful obedience. And to
follow his example, and imitate him in his bounty, we will give them a
testimony of ours, and treat them as favorably as is possible, if they shall
render themselves worthy thereof, by the continuation of their fidelity, and
obedience toward us (as they have protested they will) and never withdraw from
us. This makes us to hope that comporting as good and Loyal Subjects, and
living in that Union and Concord, which is requisite for the good of our
Service, we may as it is our greatest desire, with Divine assistance, and under
the prudent and wise administration of the Queen Regent our most honored Dame
and Mother, whose good and sincere intentions are known to every one, make all
our Subjects, as well Catholics as of the said Reformed Religion, to be
sensible of our affection toward them, and of our desire of maintaining them
in a firm and assured peace. We do therefore hereby give you to understand,
That we for these reasons, and upon the most humble supplication on the behalf
of our said Subjects of the Reformed Religion, after having brought this affair
into deliberation in the presence of our most honored Dame and Mother the
Queen Regent; We by her advice, together with that of our most dear and beloved
Uncle the Duke of Orleance, and of our most dear and beloved Cousin the Prince
of Conde, first Prince of our blood, Dukes, Peers, and Officers of our Crown,
and many eminent persons of our Council, have said and declared, and we do say
and declare by these presents, signed with our Hand, that it is our will and
pleasure, That our Subjects making profession of the Reformed Religion enjoy,
and have the free and entire exercise of the said Religion, according to the
said Edicts, Declarations, and Rules made upon this account, without being
troubled or inquieted in any sort or manner whatsoever. The which Edicts,
remaining as well good as perpetual, we have de novo so far as is or shall be
needful confirmed them, and we do by these presents confirm them; willing and
commanding the opposers of the same, to be punished and chastised as disturbers
of the public Peace. And we command our well beloved the members of our Courts
of Parliament, Chambers, or Courts of Edict, Bailiffs, Chief Justices, their
Lieutenants, and other our Officers to whom it shall belong, each in his place,
that he cause these presents to be Inregistred, Read and Published where need
shall be, and all the contents thereof to be received, kept, and observed
according to their form and tenor; and inasmuch as there may be need of these
presents in many and sundry places, we will and require that, two Copies duly
examined by one of our well beloved Counselors and Secretaries, faith be given
to them as to the Original: For such is our pleasure. In witness of which we
have caused our Seal to be put to these presents.

Given at Paris the 8th day of July 1643. and of our Reign the first. Signed,
LOVIS.
And upon the fold, the King and Queen Regent his Mother being present, Signed,
PHILIPPEAVX.
And Sealed with a double Label, with the great Seal of yellow wax. Read,
published and inregistred in the Registers of the same, requiring the
Procurator General of the King, to execute it according to its form and tenor,
and to send examined Copies to the Bailiwicks, Chief Jurisdictions of this
Circuit to be there in like manner read, published, Registered and executed with
diligence, by the Substitutes of the said Procurator General, who are enjoined
and obliged to the execution of the same, and to certify the Court within a
month of having done it.

At Paris in Parliament the 3d of August, 1643. Signed, GVYET.



THE DECLARATION
Of King Louis XIV. of France, confirming the Privileges granted to his
Subjects of the Reformed Religion. Given at St. Germain in Lay the 21th of
May, 1652.

LOUIS, by the Grace of God King of France and Navarre;
To all to whom these Present shall come, greeting;
The deceased King, our most honored Lord and Father, acknowledging that one
of the most necessary things for conserving Peace in this Kingdom, consisted in
maintaining his Subjects of the Reformed Religion in the full and entire
enjoyment of the Edicts or Laws made in their favor, and to suffer them to
enjoy the free exercise of their Religion; He had a most particular care to
prevent by all convenient means the troubling them in the enjoyment of the
Liberties, Prerogatives, and Privileges granted them by the said Edicts;
Having to that effect, immediately after his coming to the Crown by Letters
Patents of the 22th of May 1610. and since his Majority by his Declaration of
the 10th of November, 1615. declared and required that the said Edicts should
be executed, to the end to give to his said Subjects so much the more reason to
keep within the bounds of their duty; and after the example of so great a
Prince, and to imitate him in his Bounty, we have resolved to do the like,
having from the same motives and Considerations by our Declaration of the 8th
of July 1643. willed and ordained that our Subjects of the Reformed Religion
shall enjoy all the Concessions, Privileges, and Advantages, especially of the
free and entire exercise of their said Religion, according to the Edicts,
Declarations, and Reglements made in favor of them upon that Subject. And
forasmuch as our said Subjects of the Reformed Religion have given us certain
testimonies of their affection and fidelity, especially in our present Affairs,
from whence we remain most satisfied; We therefore give you to understand, That
We for these reasons, and upon the most humble supplications which have been
made us in behalf of our Subjects of the Reformed Religion, and after having
brought this Affair into deliberation in our Council, We being present, We,
from the advice of the same, and from Our certain Knowledge and Royal Authority,
have said, declared, ordained, saying, declaring, and ordaining that our Will
and Pleasure is, That our said Subjects of the Reformed Religion be maintained
and kept; as certainly we will maintain and keep them in the full and entire
enjoyment of the said Edict of Nantes, other Edicts, Declarations, Decrees,
Rules, Articles, and Breviats expedited and dispatched in their favor,
registered in Parliaments and Chambers of Edict, especially in the free and
public exercise of the said Religion in all the places where it has been
granted by the same, notwithstanding all Patents and Decrees, as well of our
Council as by our Sovereign Courts or other Judicatures, to the contrary;
willing and requiring that the Opposers of our said Edicts be punished and
chastised as Disturbers of the public Quiet. And therefore we command and
require our well beloved the members of our Courts of Parliaments, Chambers of
Edicts, Bailiffs, Chief Justices, their Lieutenants, and other our Officers,
each in his place, as it belongs to him, That they cause the said Presents to
be inregistred, read, and published where it shall be needful, and all the
Contents to be kept, observed, and maintained according to their Form and
Tenor; And forasmuch as there may be need of these Presents in many and sundry
places, We will and require, That to the Copies thereof, duly examined by one
of our well-beloved Councillors and Secretaries, faith be as well given as to
the present Original; for such is our Will and Pleasure: In testimony of which,
we have caused our Seal to be put to these Presents.

Given at St. Germain in Lay the 21th day of May, in the Year of Grace 1652,
and of our Reign the tenth. Signed, LOVIS.
And under the King, PHILIPPEAVX.
And sealed with the Great Seal.
EXTRACT OF THE Registers of the Council of State.
UPon that which is represented to the King being in Council, by the General
Deputy of his Subjects of the Reformed Relion, because of the poverty of the
Inhabitants of diverse places making profession of the said Religion, and of the
want of the money which has formerly been granted them for the maintenance of
their Ministers in Consideration of the Tenths which they pay to the
Ecclesiastics, they are constrained to cause one and the same Minister to
preach in several places, where the exercise of the said Reformed Religion is
permitted, which they call annexed places: Now though they do not any thing
herein which is not permitted them by the Edicts; So it is that diverse Decrees
in the Council of his Majesty have been made, which prohibit the said
Ministers to preach in other places than those of their habitation, which
causes great trouble and vexation to them, for which it being necessary to
provide, his Majesty being in Council, has ordained, and does ordain, That the
exercise of the said Reformed Religion may be publicly practiced by one and
the same Minister in diverse places, in which the said exercise is permitted by
the Edicts, and no where else, nothwithstanding all Decrees given to the
contrary, which his Majesty has cancelled, and revoked as contrary to the
Edicts. And his Majesty prohibits all his Officers and Subjects, even to the
Ecclesiastics, to trouble those of the Reformed Religion in their enjoyments
of the said Edicts. Done in the Council of State of the King; his Majesty being
there.

Held at St Germains in Lay the 21th of May, 1652. Signed, PHILIPPEAVX.

LOVIS, by the Grace of God King of France and Navarre:
To our first messenger or Sergeant upon this request greeteth;
We command thee, and do command thee by these Presents, signed with our hand,
That the Decrees of our Council of State, whereof the Extract is here annexed
under the Contra-Seal of our Chancellor, thou signify to all to whom it shall
belong, to the end they may not pretend ignorance thereof, and defer obedience
thereunto: and further cause them to defend the Contents hereof, and all other
acts and things requisite and necessary for the execution of the said Decree;
and we give thee power, Commission, and especial Command herein, without
demanding other permission; Willing, that to the Copies examined of the said
Decree, and of the said Presents, faith be given as to the Originals, for such
is our pleasure.

Given at St Germains in Lay May 21. 1652, and of our Reign the tenth. Signed
LOVIS, PHILIPPEAVX. by the King in Council.
Examined with the Original

by me Councellor, Secretary of the King, and of his Finances.



EXTRACT OF THE Registers of the Council of State.
THE King being willing that his Subjects of the Reformed Religion should enjoy
what his Majesty had granted them by his answer to the Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth
Aticles of the Paper presented to him the 17th of this present month of May, by
the Deputy General of his said Subjects, concerning the Consulship, and Charges
or Offices Politic of the Cities and Places there named; His Majesty being in
his Council, conformable to the answer of the said Paper, has ordained, and
does ordain, That the Decrees of the abovesaid Council of the 18th of March,
and 11th of April last, for an equal Division of the Charges of the Consuls,
and others thereupon depending, given in favor of his Subjects of the City of
Montpellier, making profession of the Reformed Religion, shall be executed
according to their Form and Tenor. And as to Sommieres, Ginac, Lunc^,
Montagnac, Bariac, Bagnols, Bedarrieux, Florensac, Vendemain, Pignan, St.
Andre, Aimargu^s, and Mogmo, It his Majesty's Will and Pleasure that in the
next Elections, and others following upon the days accustomed, the Consulships
and Offices thereon depending, shall in like manner be equally divided in the
said places, provided there is no immemorial possession or Capitulations to the
contrary, according to the Declaration of the 19. of October, 1631. and
conformable to the same, His Majesty ordains, That there shall be no
alteration at Alles, nor at any other places for the second Consul which shall
be of the Reformed Religion, no more than for the first, which shall always be
a Catholic.: And for the City of Nismes, His Majesty also wills, That the
Council Politic be augmented with one Councellor of the Reformed Religion,
which shall abstain from going into the said Council, when the Bishop of the
said City, or his chief Vicar shall not be there; and this shall be executed
notwithstanding any oppositions or appellations whatsoever, which shall not be
made use of for deferring it; and if any things intervene, they shall be judged
in the Chamber of Edict at Castres, to which his Majesty gives therein all
power, Jurisdiction, and Cognizance, and prohibits the same to the Court of
Parliament of Toulouse, until his Majesty shall otherwise ordain. His Majesty
enjoining, That all Patents and Declarations herein necessary be dispatched,
acted and done in the Council of State of the King, his Majesty being there.

Held at St. Germains in Lay the 21th of May, 1652. Signed, PHILIPPEAVX.

LOVIS, by the Grace of God King of France and Navarre:
To our Chief Messenger or Sergeant in this Case required, greeteth;
We command thee, and thou art commanded by these Presents, signed with our
hand, That thou signify the Decree of our Council of State, the Extract of
which is here^nto annexed under the Counter-Seal of our Cha^^^ry, to all to
whom it shall appertain, to the end they may not pretend ignorance for
deferring obedience, and further to cause them to defend the Contents hereof;
and to do this and all other acts and matters requisite and necessary for the
execution of the said Decree, giving thee Power, Commission, and especial
Command, without need of other permission; And we will that to the Copies of
the said Decrees and of these said Presents, faith be as well given as to the
Originals; For such is our pleasure.

Given at St. Germains in Lay^ the 21th of May, 1652. and of our Reign the
10th. Signed, LOVIS.
By the King in his Council, PHILIPPEAVX.
Examined with the Originals

by me Counselor, Secretary to the King, and of his Finances.



FINIS.
Books Sold by John Wickins at the White Heart over against St. Dunftans Church
in Fleetstreet.
ROyal Pharmacopoeia, Galenical and Chemical, according to the Practice of the
most eminent and learned Physicians of France, and published with their several
approbations. By Moses Charras, the Kings Operator in his Royal Garden of
Plants. Faithfully Englished. Illustrated with several Copper Plates. fol.

Resuscitatio; or, Bringing into public Light several Pieces of the Works,
Civil, Historical, Philosophical, and Theological, hitherto sleeping, of the
Right Honorable Francis Bacon, Baron of Verulam, Viscount Saint Albans. In two
Parts. The Third Edition. According to the best corrected Copies; together with
his Lordship's Life. By William Rawley, D. D. his Lordships Chaplain, and
lately his Majesty's Chaplain in Ordinary, fol.

The History of the Affairs of Europe in this Present Age; but more
particularly of the Republic of Venice. Written in Italian by Battista Nani,
Cavalier, and Procurator of St. Mark. Englished by Sir Robert Honywood, fol.

The History of Barbados, St Christophers, Mevis, St Vincent, Antego,
Martinico, Monserrat, and the rest of the Caribby Islands, in all 28. In Two
Books. The First containing the Natural, the Second the Moral History of those
Islands, Illustrated with several Pieces of Sculpture, representing the most
considerable Rarities therein described. fol.

The Chirurgions Storehouse, furnished with forty three Tables cut in Brass,
in which are all sorts of Instruments, both Ancient and Modern; useful to the
performance of all Manual Operations, with an exact Description of every
Instrument, together with an hundred choice Observations of famous Cures
performed, with the Indexes. First, Of the Instruments. Secondly, Of Cures
performed; and, Thirdly, Of things remarkable. Written by Johannes Scultetus, a
famous Physician and Surgeon of Vlme in Suevia. Octavo.

The Memoirs of Philip de Comines, Lord of Argenton. Containing the History of
Lewis XI. and Charles VIII. Kings of France; with the most remarkable
Occurrences in their particular Reigns, from the Year 1464 to 1498, Revised and
corrected from diverse manuscripts and ancient Impressions. By Denis Godefroy,
Counselor and Historiographer to the French King, and from his new Edition of
it Printed at Paris, faithfully translated into English. Octavo.

The History of the Present State of the Ottoman Empire; Containing the maxims
of the Turkish Polity, the most material Points of the Mohammedan Religion,
their Sects and Heresies, their Covents and religious Votaries, their military
Discipline; with an exact Computation of their Forces both by Land and Sea.
Illustrated with diverse Pieces of Sculpture, representing the variety of Habits
amongst the Turks. In Three Books. By Paul Rycaut Esquire In Octavo.

The History of France, under the Ministry of Cardinal Mazarine; Containing all
the remarkable and curious Passages in the Government of that State, from the
Death of King Lewis XIII. which happened in the Year 1643 to the death of the
Cardinal, which was in the Year 1664. Done into English by Christopher Wase. 8o.

The History of the twelve Caesar's, Emperors of Rome. Written in Latin by
Caius Suetonius Tranquillus, Newly translated into English, and illustrated
with all their Heads in Copper Plates, oct.

A Relation of three Embassies from his Sacred Majesty Charles II. to the Great
Duke of Muscovy, the King of Sweden, and the King of Denmark. Performed by the
Right Honorable the Earl of Carliste, in the Year 1663 and 1664. Written by an
Attendant on the Embassies, and published with his Lordships approbation.
Octavo.

The Art of Chemistry as it is now practiced. Written in French by P. Thibaut,
Chemist to the French King. And now translated into English by a Fellow of the
Royal Society. Octavo.

The Annals of Love; Containing secret Histories of the Amors of diverse
Princes Courts. Pleasantly related. In Octavo.

The Loves of sundry Philosophers, and other Great Men. Translated out of
French. Octavo.

The Voyage of Italy; or, a Complete Journey through Italy. In two Parts. With
the Character of the People, and the description of the Chief Towns, Churches,
Monasteries, Tombs, Libraries, Palaces, Villa's, Gardens, Pictures, Statues and
Antiquities. As also of the Interest, Government, Riches, Force, and c. of all
the Princes, with Instructions concerning Travel. By Richard Lassels, Gent. who
traveled through Italy five times, as Tutor to several of the English Nobility
and Gentry. Duod.

The Present State of Holland. Duod.

The Art of Complaisance; or, the Means to oblige in Conversation. Duod.

The Present State of Italy. Duod.


