For the Good of the Public. A True Method, SHOWING All Ranks and Degrees of
Men, How to purchase an Estate, Or make Provision for Posterity, out of idle
Expenses: AND How a Gentleman may advance the Fortune of his Children, without
impairing his Estate; and how a Tradesman may do the like for his, and never
miss it out of his Stock; and how that None can be so poor, but that they may
be Purchasers.

Also Ways and Means discovered to enlarge Trade and Commerce, and the
Improvement of Navigation, and the Advancement of the King's Revenues,
plentifully supplying the poor; and for the common Good of all Merchants and
Traders, either by Sea or Land.

Recommended to all Cities and Corporations in Great Britain and Ireland.

By John Middleton, Esquire

The first Edition.

Edinburgh, Printed for the Author, and are to be sold at the
Union-Crown-Fire-Office, in the Head of the Canongate. Price Sixpence.

To the Right Honorable, the Lord PROVOST, BAILIES, DEAN of GILD, TREASURER,
and other Members of the Honorable Council of the Ancient and Loyal City of
Edinburgh.
Right Honorable,
AS it has been the constant Practice of your noble Ancestors to do Good, a
Virtue whose radiant Luster shines no less refulgently in your Honor; for
which Reason, Sir, first asking your Honor's Pardon, I make bold to shelter
this my Labor under the shadow of your Honorable Name, not in the least
doubting but that you will, not only patronize, but encourage any Undertaking
that may be for the public Good, and Welfare of all Ranks and Degrees of Men,
in this ancient and Loyal City, of which your Honor fills the Pretorian Chair.

Nor can I do less than persuade my self, but that your Honor and all who bear
Office in this ancient Body, being Gentlemen of such noble Worth and
unblemished Characters, placed as Rulers over this honorable Town, by the
unerring Hand of Divine Providence, to defend the Rights of its People by your
just Administration of Law and Justice; all Men having just Reason to believe,
you have its Welfare near at Heart; will give all suitable Encouragement to
promote any Undertaking that will be for the Good of all Ranks and Degrees of
Men.

And that every particular Member may not be wanting to carry on so good a
Work, I do assure them, if any of them please to embark in this Undertaking,
that a true Method is found out, showing how to purchase an Estate out of idle
Expenses, and to make Provision for Posterity, for less than One Penny per Day
for 20 Pounds, and less than five Pence per Day for 100 Pounds,

By your most obedient Servant, J. M.

To the READER.
Courteous Reader,
NOtwithstanding there have been several Funds erected in several Parts of this
Kingdom, in order to promote the Public Good, yet never was any erected, which
will be so generally beneficial as this, because in this every one that enters
is sure to be a Gainer; so that in this Fund there is no Hazard run upon any
Account whatever, nor need any be in Fear of entering.

For this Fund will not only be advantageous and profitable in general, but
will be a Bank to supply the immediate Exigencies of any of its Members, and
thereby prevent their being imposed upon for the future, by the merciless
Cruelty of the gripping Pawn-brokers and ravening Usurers, who many times ruin
and destroy their Neighbors under Pretense of Friendship, by making them pay
such extravagant Interest, as is no way justifiable by the Laws of GOD or Man.
I have known several Persons that have been obliged to pay after the Rate of
sixty per Cent to these Extortioners, which have been the Ruin of themselves
and Families, by paying such extravagant Interest.

Now this Bank for the future will prevent all such Misfortunes to every one of
its Members; for every Subscriber shall have what Money they shall have
Occasion for, at five per Cent, without any Trouble or Charge; which most
certainly will be a great Advantage. Now this Office of Insuring upon Lives,
and other Insuring Offices are allowed by several Acts of Parliament, to be
founded upon Truth and Justice, and are for the apparent Interest of the
Public, settled upon Funds, Contingencies answering their Ends, whereby the
Members will be great Gainers, and the Undertaking supported, and th Ruin of
many prevented. The Author having no other Design in promoting this
Undertaking, but the common Good of all Men, as a Duty incumbent upon all, and
more especially when the Good of the Public and the Interest of the Poor is so
nearly concerned: But I hope here will be a Fund where they or their Posterity
may be rich, which that they may, is the Desire of

Your humble Servant, J. M.

The Introduction to the Articles.
BEfore I proceed to the Articles, something, by way of Introduction, will be
highly useful for the better understanding of the Articles themselves: For here
is a noble Prospect before you, in which if you please to embark, you will be
sure to be a Gainer; an Undertaking that can never fail of its desired End,
being settled upon the Foundation of Law and Justice, where no Fraud or Deceit
can be committed by any, nor can the Governors run away with one Penny of the
Profit; for the Governors will be chosen out of the Subscribers themselves,
such as take out 10 Bonds, and insure upon 10 Lives each, and will be elected
by the rest of the Subscribers; for every Subscriber will have a Right to vote
at the Election of their Governors; so by this Means the Governors will be
Gentlemen or substantial Tradesmen, and undoubtedly Men of more Honor than to
commit any Fraud for fifthy Lucre's sake.

And that this Undertaking will be advantageous to all Ranks and Degrees of
Men, is very demonstrable to the meanest Capacity; for here a Gentleman may
advance the Fortune of his Children, and leave them One or Two hundred Pounds
for less than Fivepence per Day for a L. 100, and never miss it at the Year's
End, and a flourishing Tradesman may do the like by his, and never miss it out
of his Stock; so likewise Mechanics, for less than one Penny a Day, may leave
their Children L. 20 out of idle Expenses, and seafaring or laboring Men may
do the like, and not miss it at the Year's End, because it will go out by so
small a Matter at a Time. Which fully persuades me that there can be none so
poor, but may be Purchasers in this Undertaking, if they please; as will appear
more fully by the following Articles.

ARTICLES TO Establish a Company for settling a Bank in Edinburgh, by which all
Ranks and Degrees of Men may purchase Estates, or make Provision for Posterity.
ARTICLE I.
THAT there shall be Five, Seven, or Nine Governors, with the Secretary, who
shall always be one of the Governors, and the rest of the Governors shall be
elected annually, out of such of the Subscribers as shall insure upon ten Lives
each: That public Notice shall be given to the Subscribers, to come to the
Office, and elect their Governors on the (...) Day of (...) who shall take Care
of the Cash, and inspect the Books once every Quarter, and take an Account of
what Money is paid into the Office, and what is let out upon Interest, and what
paid out of the Office by the Secretary, his Deputy, or Clerk, to the insured,
at the Death of their Nominee: And a Note of what remains in the Office to pay
Claims, and to be let out on Interest, shall be locked up in the Chest, for
which the Secretary shall be accountable; and if he imbezel any of the
Company's Money, he shall make it good.

ART. II. Every Person that insures in this Company, shall pay for every Life
that he or she insures upon, the Stamp-Duty, one Shilling for the Bond, and two
Shillings Entrance to the Secretary, his Deputy, or Clerk, and five Shillings
and Sixpence per Quarter to the Company, and Sixpence per Quarter to the
Secretary for defraying of Charges.

ART. III. Every Person who insures, shall for every Life that they insure
upon, pay 5 sh. 6 d. per Quarter to the Company, and Sixpence per Quarter to
the Secretary, for the defraying of Charges belonging to the Office, which 5
sh. and 6 d. shall ly as a Fund in the Stock of the Company to make all Claims
good, as they become due.

ART. IV. Every Subscriber that insures upon the Life of any Person not
exceeding the Age hereafter mentioned, and shall pay 9 Months to the Office,
shall be entitled 20 Pounds in the Stock of this Company, and shall at the
Death of his or her Nominee, receive the same within 15 Days after the next
Quarter Day the Person insured upon shall die.

ART. V. That every Subscriber at the Death of his or her Nominee, shall give
Notice to the Secretary, his Depute, or Clerk, that they may acquaint the
Governors of the same; and if the Person insured upon die not in Town, the
Insurer shall bring a Certificate under the Hand of the Minister,
Churchwardens, and Parish-clerk of the Parish, where the Person insured upon
died, to satisfy the Governors, that the Person insured upon is really dead.
To prevent any fraudulent Practice being put upon the Company, he by whom it is
committed shall be excluded from all Right or Interest in this Undertaking.

ART. VI. That every Subscriber may insure upon the Life of any Person, of any
Age or Sex, under, not above 50, without their Knowledge or Consent; giving an
Account in writing of their Name and Place of Abode, that he may enter them in
the Office-book.

ART. VII. Any Person may insure upon as many Lives as they please, paying upon
each Life they insure upon, the Stamp-Duty, and one Shilling for the Bond, and
two Shillings Entrance to the Secretary, his Deputy, or Clerk, and 5 sh. 6 d.
per Quarter to the Company, and 6 d. per Quarter to the Secretary for defraying
of Charges.

ART. VIII. Every Subscriber that insures upon ten Lives, shall have five upon
Interest; and every one that insures upon eight, shall have four upon Interest;
and every one that insures upon seven shall have three upon Interest; and every
one that insures upon six, shall have two upon Interest; and every one that
insures upon five, shall have one upon Interest; and every one that insures
upon one, two, three, or more, for every Life that they insure upon, shall
after have one upon Interest, paying the Interest every Quarter, and deducting
the Principal as the Claims become due.

ART. IX. If any Person insured, or any Person insured upon, remove his or her
Habitation, the Person insured shall give Notice thereof to the Clerk, and have
their Bond indorsed at the Office, paying one Shilling to the Clerk. Also every
Person insuring, shall pay their Quarterage within 15 Days after every
Quarter-Day, upon the Forfeiture of his, or her Bond: And when any Person pays,
a Receipt shall be given for the same, signed by the Secretary or the Clerk of
the Company.

ART. X. If any Person insured die before his or her Nominee, the Interest of
his or her Bond, shall continue to his or her Heirs, Executors, Administrators,
and Assigns, they taking out a new Bond in their own Name, and paying for it
according to the second Article; at which Time they must return the old Bond to
be filed in the Office.

ART. XI. That a general Court shall be held within 14 Days after every
Quarter-Day, at the Office, where all Claims will be paid, according to the
exact Tenor of these Articles; at the Receipt of which, 5 per Cent shall be
deducted, and all such Deductions shall be paid back into the Stock of the
Company, to increase and augment the same; and at all such Quarterly Courts,
Notice shall be given to the Subscribers, to come and elect their Governors,
according to the first Article, out of such of the senior Members, as have not
as yet served as Governors.

ART. XII. No Person (insuring in this Office of Insurance upon Lives) shall
pay Quarterage above ten Years upon one Life, for after ten Years are expired,
all Payments to this Company cease, except two Shillings per Quarter to the
first 500: Which two Shillings per Quarter will entitle them to L. 20 in the
Stock of this Company for ever; and at the Death of every new Nominee that they
insure upon, they shall receive L. 20; and the second 500 shall be entitled to
L. 20 in the Stock of this Company, as long as they live, for paying one
Shilling per Quarter at the Death of every new Nominee, after ten Years are
expired, Sixpence per Quarter of which must go to the Secretary, for defraying
of Charges, and the rest into the Stock of the Company; so that they who enter
young in the last 500, will be sure to be great Gainers, for they will receive
L. 20 at the Death of every new Nominee so long as they live, and the last 1000
shall (so long as they take out Bonds, and pay their Quarterage) be entitled to
L. 20 in the Stock Company.

ART. XIII. No Person shall receive any Claim or Benefit before 9 Months are
expired, and then if the Person insured upon die in the 10th Month, the insured
shall receive L. 20; and if the Person insured upon die before 9 Months, the
Insurer shall (if he pleases) take out another Bond, and at the End of 9 Months
be entitled to L. 20, and at the Death of his Nominee receive the same.

ART. XIV. That if it should please God, at any Time to afflict these Parts
with the Plague, Pestilence, or Famine, or any other violent and raging
Distemper, in such Case the Office shall be shut up, and no Claims paid till
such Contagion is over, and no Subscriber insuring upon such who shall lay
violent Hands to themselves, or die by Duelling, or suffer for Treason,
Rebellion, or any other capital Crime, or die any other than a natural Death,
shall receive any Claim. But that they may be no Losers by this Undertaking,
any of the Persons to whom such Misfortune shall happen, shall have Liberty to
take out a new Bond, and pay no Quarterage till the same be expired that they
had before paid, and at the Death of their Nominee receive L. 20.

ART. XV. Any of the Members of this Company having Occasion for Money, shall
be supplied with what they want, leaving their Bond or Bonds in Pledge of their
Security, with the Secretary, or his Deputy, and a Note from under their Hands
for this Money they receive, paying the Interest after the Rate of 5 per Cent
every Quarter, till they can pay back the Principal into the Office; at which
Time a Receipt shall be given them on the Back of the Bond; that any Insurer
may by Assignment or Transfer, make over the Interest in his or her Bond to any
other, and they to whom the Bond is assigned, must take out a Bond in their own
Names, and the Person before insured upon, and then they shall be entitled to
L. 20 for each Bond so assigned, and all other Privileges thereunto belonging;
and will, at the Death of his or her Nominee, receive the same.

ART. XVI. John Middleton, Gentleman, and his Assigns shall be Secretary and
chief Clerk of this Company of Insurance upon Lives for ever, and that he shall
be accountable to the Governors for all the Subscribers Money paid into the
Office, within 15 Days after every Quarter-Day; and that the Secretary shall
pay all Charges, as the Rent of the Office, Books, Printing, Pens, Ink, Paper,
Fire, Candle, etc. and the Governors Charges, for the Time being, till their
Salaries can be settled out of the Sixpence per Quarter: And what remains over
and above defraying of the aforesaid Charges, shall be employed by the
Secretary for his own proper Use.

ART. XVII. That a strong Chest be provided to keep the Company's Cash, with
three, five, or seven Keys; which Keys shall be kept by the Secretary and
Governors for the Time being. Each of them shall have a particular Key, and
shall always be present at the opening of the Chest every Quarter-Day; so that
the Company shall have the Care of the Cash in their own Hands, and be their
own Security, which will be a sufficient Satisfaction to the Subscribers, that
no Fraud can be committed by any; and if any Equality happen at any of the
Quarterly Courts, the senior Governor shall have the casting Vote; and it shall
be in the Power of the Secretary and the rest of the Governors to make any
By-law, Rules, or Order, if they govern themselves according to these Articles,
for the Good and Welfare of the Company, and may when they have Stock
sufficient, buy Land for their Security when they please, etc.

ART. XVIII. That the Person insured upon be in perfect Health at the Time of
Entrance, and that as soon as 250 Bonds are delivered out, a proper Place for
the Office shall be taken, the Governors elected, and Claims shall be paid as
they become due: And to prevent the Suspicion of the least Fraud or Hazard that
any Subscriber may fear in this Undertaking, this is to satisfy every
Subscriber, that they shall pay no Quarterage to the Office, till such Time as
the Governors are ready to take Charge of the Cash.

ART. XIX. That when this Company is complete, and the Governors Salaries
settled, a Deed of Settlement shall be drawn between the Secretary and the
Governors, and shall be enrolled in the High Court of Chancery, according to
Act of Parliament, and a true and exact Copy of the aforesaid Deed shall always
be kept in the Office, and read over to the Company every Year, before the
Election of their Governors, and a Seal belonging to this Office alterable at
Pleasure.

EXPLANATION.
TO show my Readers that this Undertaking is not founded upon Chimera's of an
idle and fantastic Brain, but is real Matter of Fact, and will make all Claims
good according to the Articles.

And to set every Thing in as true a Light as I can, and make it appear to
every one's understanding as plain as the Sun at Noonday; I shall show what
Number of Persons shall die every Year, according to the common Computation of
Lives, and what Money the Claimants will receive, and what the Interest of the
grand Stock or Bank will be every Year for 10 Years, and what the Increase will
amount to in 10 Years Time, and what the 11th Years Increase will also amount
unto.

If 1000 Persons insure the first Year, 15 may die, and the Claimants will
receive L. 300, and the insured will pay L. 1100; which with the L. 15
Deduction, when the Claims are paid, will be in this Year no less than L. 815
Increase.

If 1500 insure in the second Year, 30 may die, and the Claimants receive L.
600, and the insured will pay L. 1650; which will pay the Claims, and L. 1080
remains; which with the Interest of L. 815, which is L. 40 sh. 15; and the L.
30, Deduction, will in this Year be L. 2935, sh. 15.

If 2000 insure in the third Year, 60 may die, and the Claimants receive L.
1200, and the insured pay L. 2200, which with L. 60 deducted, and the Interest
of L. 2935, sh. 15; which L. 146, sh. 15 and d. 9, will pay all Claims, and L.
4141, sh. 10 and d. 9 will remain this Year.

In the fourth may die 60, and the Claimants receive L. 1200, and the insured
pay L. 2200, which with the Interest of L. 4141, sh. 10 and d. 9 and the L. 60
deducted, will pay all Claims, and L. 5408, sh. 12 d. 3 remain.

In the fifth Year may die 60, and the Claimants receive L. 1200, and the
insured pay L. 2200, which with the Interest of L. 5408, sh. 12 d. 3, which is
L. 278, sh. 8 d. 6, and so L. 60 deducted will pay all Claims, and L. 6746 sh.
18 d. 10 remain.

In the sixth Year may die 60, and the Claimants receive L. 1200, and the
insured pay L. 2200, which with the Interest of L. 6746, sh. 18 d. 10, which is
L. 337, sh. 6 d. 11, will pay all Claims, and L. 8144 sh. 5 d. 10 remain.

In the seventh may die 60, and the Claimants receive L. 1200, and the insured
pay L. 2200, which with the Interest of L. 8144 sh. 5 d. 10, which is L. 405,
sh. 4 d. 3 will pay all Claims, and L. 9609, sh. 10 d. 2 remain.

In the eighth Year may die 60, and the Claimants receive L. 1200, and the
insured pay L. 2200, which with the Interest of L. 9609, sh. 10 d. 2, which is
L. 480, sh. 9 d. 6, and the L. 60 deducted, will pay all Claims, and L. 11149,
sh. 19 d. 8 remain.

In the ninth Year may die 60, and the claimants receive L. 1200, and the
insured pay L. 2200, which with the Interest of L. 11149, sh. 19 d. 8, which is
L. 557 sh. 9 d. 11, and the L. 60 deducted, will pay all Claims, and L. 12767,
sh. 9 d. 7 remain.

In the tenth Year may die 60, and the Claimants receive L. 1200, and the
insured pay L. 2200, which with the Interest of L. 12767, sh. 9 d. 7, which is
L. 638 sh. 7 d. 6, and the L. 60 deducted will pay all Claims, and L. 14465 sh.
17 d. 1 will remain.

In the eleventh may die 60, and the Claimants receive L. 1200, and the insured
pay L. 2200, which with the Interest of L. 14465 sh. 17 d. 1, which is L. 723
sh. 5 d. 9, and the L. 60 Deduction, will pay all Claims, and L. 16249 sh. 2 d.
10, remain at the End of the eleventh Year, which will be a Stock sufficient to
make all Claims good, according to the Articles; for there will be coming to
the Stock of this Company every Year upwards of L. 800 per Annum, to pay the
first and second L. 500, besides their Quarterage after 10 Years are expired,
which will be L. 200 per Annum, and L. 600 by those that have received their
Claims, besides the Quarterage of such as have not paid 10 Years upon one Life.
So that you plainly see, that in this Company there will be no Hazard run, nor
can any Person that embarks, be in any Fear of being a Loser, because here will
be Fund sufficient to pay the first 500 Subscribers, and their Heirs, their
Claims for ever, and the second during their Life, and the Stock continually
increasing. Such an Undertaking, which several very wise and ingenious Men are
obliged to confess, when they come to a full Understanding of it, to be the
most useful and beneficial to all Ranks and Degrees of Men, that ever was made
public to the World in any Age before; and for this Reason it is that I
recommend it to the serious Consideration of all, as highly useful and
necessary for a public Good, and make no Doubt but it will meet with great
Encouragement in many more Parts of this Kingdom, where it would be highly
useful, and a Means to advance the Fortunes of many for the future.

And whereas by several Acts of Parliament made for the Payment of Customs of
diverse Goods, Wares, Merchandise, imported into Great Britain, an Allowance of
6 per Cent and upwards, for others to 12 per Cent, is made to all Merchants
upon prompt Payment of their Customs.

And whereas many Merchants and Traders, though Men of good Credit and
Substance, by Reason of Losses abroad and Disappointments at Home, may be, and,
as is well known, are oftimes put to great Straits and Necessities, and for
want of ready Money, are obliged to allow very great and exorbitant Premiums,
besides Interest for Advance thereof, to pay the said Customs, most Part
whereof must be paid before any Goods can be landed; or, which is of worse
Consequence, they are forced to leave their whole Cargo aboard, or in the
King's Warehouse, or Boats made for that Purpose, where the Goods often suffer
much Damage, and the Merchant loses a good Market, and if perishable Wares, the
King oftimes loses the Customs, and the Trader is undone.

The better then to promote Trade, and to prevent the like Mischief for the
future, it is purposed, That at this Office will be kept considerable Sums of
Money, which will be managed by some rich and substantial Gentlemen, who are to
be Governors and Directors of this Society: Which said Governors shall be upon
the same Footing that the South Sea, and East India Companies are upon: Which
will be an Advantage to all Merchants in general, as well as the Crown.

The Fund is to supply all Merchants and Traders with ready Money for 3 or 4
Months without Interest, in order to make prompt Payment of such Goods, Wares,
and Merchandise as are settled upon the Crown by Acts of Parliament, for the
speedy Discharge of all Ships; for which, I think, it is plainly apparent for
the Merchants and Traders either by Sea or Land their Interest.

This Method most certainly will make Scotland have a flourishing Trade; and so
much the more for this Reason; for as soon as any Foreign Ships come in, here
will be no want of Money or Funds, so there can be no Delay in unlading the
Ships, and clearing them out, and making ready for to load again for any other
Port; which will cause several Voyages more to be made in a Year, than they
could have done, if they should want such great Advantages as they, I hope,
will receive here.

For what greater Advantage can any Merchant or Trader find, than to be always
supplied with ready Money upon all Occasions; which perhaps if they should
want, might be a Detriment, and perhaps the Ruin of many Owners, Merchants and
Sailors. By this Scheme all Traders will be encouraged, and the Poor have
plenty of Work, and a better Price for it: Nay, all other Traders whatsoever
will partake of the same Benefit, and the King's Revenues increased, and no
Person imposed upon, or pay, or run Sixpence Hazard upon any Account
whatsoever; the like whereof never was known in any public Undertaking in
Europe. Now by several Acts of Parliament made for the Consideration of prompt
Payment, which, by a true Medium, may reasonably be supposed to amount to 9 per
Cent. take one sort of Goods with another, this 9 per Cent. being often
returned, may make to the Company 18 per Cent. per Annum; which I hope will not
only be a Benefit to the Founder of this Office, but also to every one that is
concerned in it. This Method is so fully explained, and so fully demonstrated
unto all Capacities, That the very Nature of the Undertaking explains it self;
and there is no doubt but it will answer every Particular of the proposed End.
That I may make all things as plain as the Sun at Noonday, I have spared for
no Cost or Pains to answer all Objections that may arise; and to make good
every Thing that asserts for this End; which I hope is plainly made appear to
the meanest Capacity, how advantageous such an Office will be to Merchants and
Tradesmen in general; and for this Reason that Merchants and Gentlemen are very
cautious of entering into Bonds to the Crown; which if they do not, they oftimes
are forced to give 12, 15, 18, nay, perhaps 20 per Cent. for Money to
Money-Traders: But here they have Money without troubling Friends to manage
their Affairs, and which makes the greater Advantage, to have Money, without
Interest: And by this Scheme I hope the Company will be fixed upon as good a
Foundation as any Company, Bank or Fund in Europe.

For which this Author does not only hope to have the Concern of all Persons as
Subscribers where this Book shall come; but hopes to have their Prayers and
Well-wishes to GOD for promoting so good an Undertaking for the Advantage of
the Poor.

N. B. That if any Gentlemen or others cannot be fully satisfied of the true
Intent and Meaning of this Undertaking, if they please to enquire at Mr.
Bailie's in the Canongate, they shall receive full Satisfaction, from the
Author or his Clerk, who will constantly attend there for that Purpose, till
the Office is opened.

Every one that shall buy one of these Books and subscribe, shall when he takes
out his Bond, have his Money returned, and shall have the Book gratis.

Advertisement.
TO secure the Rights and Properties of Copies in the Proprietor's Person,
accordiag to several Acts of Parliament, and to prevent the publishing thereof
by any other Person whatsoever; Notice is hereby given, That the Author hereof
has registered and entered these Presents in the Hall-Book of Offices: And that
if any Person or Persons shall Print, Reprint or publish these Articles, or any
Part thereof, or any Thing thereunto belonging, the Proprietor hereof will, in
Pursuance to the Liberty allowed by the said Acts of Parliament, prosecute all
and every of the said Persons, and all Printers and Publishers whatever.


