

OBSERVATIONS Upon the LAWS and CUSTOMS OF NATIONS, AS TO PRECEDENCE.

BY Sir GEORGE MACKENZIE of Rosehaugh, His Majesty's Advocat in the Kingdom of
SCOTLAND.

PETRON. -- Hos gloria tulit Honores.

EDINBVRGH. Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty. Anno DOMINI, M. DC. LXXX.

To the King.
May it please Your Sacred Majesty,
THis Book, having for its subject Precedence, should have, for its Patron,
that KING from whom our Precedence flows, as Rays do from the Sun: And beside
the nobleness of the Questions here discussed, wherein Crowned-heads are
oft-times the Clients, and Honor the Prize; These Discourses have the great
Charms of newness and variety, which do singly so delight this Age, without any
other advantage. I know, Sir, that Dedications have degenerated into
Panegyricks; but why should I say any thing of You, of whom the most of Your
Subjects believe better things, than the most eloquent of Your Advocats can
express? It being amongst the other wonders of Your life, that You are the best
loved, though not the best obeyed King in Christendom; the one being the effect
of our Conviction, and the other of Your admired Clemency. And yet I might be
allowed to say as much of Your Majesty's merit, as some others of Your
Subjects; having in those many occasions I had of attending You upon our
public Concerns, been oftentimes both pleased and ashamed to find You
understand my Trade (that great Art of Reasoning) far better than my self;
discovering to me the weakness of some of my Reasons, and improving others. But
what I admired more was, (for I admire Justice more than Wit) to find Your
Majesty always more concerned for Your Peoples Security, than for Your own
Prerogative: So that if any Kingdom be happier than we, it is because they
understand better their own Interest and not because they have a better King.
Leaving then, Sir, this beaten path, I hope all wise and just men may expect,
that none who owe You and Your Predecessors the Interest they have in Your
Kingdoms and Parliaments, because of the Titles You have bestowed upon them,
will be so ungrate and imprudent as to oppose You, to please a Re-publican
Party, who would turn them out of all that Interest they have now in the
Government, and punish them most remarkably, by levelling them with the
Populace which some adore. There is not a Nobleman in these Nations, who has
not been raised by the Royal Bounty; all Preferments of the Army or long Robe,
being the reflex of Your Favor upon their merit, and without which, their
greatest Parts had been at best, but excellent Colors lodged in the dark: And
therefore, when they get Precedence, Preferments, Matches, or Respect, for
being Noblemen, they ought to consider to whom they owe all this, and to
remember how little they signified when a Commonwealth prevailed: And if any
of their Creatures used them, as some have done the Monarchy, we should hear
that Eloquence, which is now used to decry the Government and Your Ministers,
employed in railing against the ingratitude of those their Creatures. Nor is it
to be feared, that the Nobility and Gentry, who value themselves so much upon
the just descent of their Blood, will bear patiently that the Royal Line should
be cut, or the Succession diverted from its just and royal Channel; since Your
descent, Great Sir, has the advantage over not only all Subjects, but likewise
over all Monarchs, that we know, when their Predecessors rose from among the
Vulgar; whereas, the first thing History discovers of Yours, is, that they were
Kings: God having wrapped up Your Origin in this wonderful mysteriousness, as it
were, to teach Your Subjects, that You hold Your Imperial Crown of Him, alone
and immediately; and in showing them how to reverence You, has obliged You to
depend upon His Divine Majesty, the only and immediate Author, as well as
Support, of Your Power and Greatness; and who has heaped upon You so great, and
so remarkable mercies, as may in letting Your enemies see his just indignation
against them, let you also see, what sincere and exemplary Piety He, as Your
kind and omnipotent Master, expects from You. I know, Sir, that You will allow
me to own, that I hate Slavery, and love Property, as well as any of our high
pretenders: But, I think our Freedom and Property securer under Your Majesty,
whose Right cannot be shaken, without the ruin of ours; it being Your great
interest to maintain that Law, which makes so many thousands obey You, in
spite of their ambition and avarice. And I still see, that the true Proprietar
is the kindest Master; whereas, on the other hand, it is certain, that they who
oppose most the Government, are those who did themselves cruelly oppress us
under the late Usurpers, or their impenitent Children; Those, who being picqu'd
at want, or loss of Preferment, are acted by revenge and malice; or these who
are so easily fooled, as to believe those who are such, and who inveigh against
Your just Power, that they themselves may thereby become arbitrary; many of
whom are themselves greater grievances than any they exclaim against, and
greater judgments than any they threaten. So that all we can expect is, to
empty our Veins and Purses, for the liberty of being sold or trampled upon, as
formerly, by such as have neither so great interest in us, nor affection for
us; whilst You, Sir, generously pity what You may chastise, and suffer our
extravagancies to grow up to be their own punishment. None of us can say, that
we, or our predecessors have for six hundred years, felt the tyranny of any of
our Kings: nor can any of us deny, that all our Miseries and Civil Wars have
sprung from the ambition and factiousness of Subjects, who designed indeed to
govern them and us; which should in reason make us rather jealous of our own
factiousness, than of our Monarchy. And therefore, Sir, That God may always
teach Your Subjects to be just to Your Merit, and to remember the last Age; and
may make Your Ministers careful to maintain, but not to stretch Your
Prerogative, shall be the constant and ardent Prayer of,

May it please Your Sacred Majesty, Your Majesty's most Faithful, most Humble,
and most Loyal Subject and Servant, GEORGE MACKENZIE.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. THE Precedence of Kings and Commonwealths. CHAP. II. Of the
Precedence due to the Kings of Scotland. CHAP. III. That the Crown of Scotland
was not subject to England. CHAP. IV. The debates betwixt the Kings of Pole,
Sweden, Denmark, etc. and other Princes. CHAP. V. The Precedencies amongst
Commonwealths. CHAP. VI. Of the Precedence of the Electors, and the Princes of
the Empire. CHAP. VII. Of the Precedence of Churchmen. CHAP. VIII. General
Observations concerning the Precedence of Subjects. CHAP. IX. The Precedence
due to Women.
Forty four considerable Questions concerning Precedence, Resolved, Viz.
Question 1. WHether in Competitions betwixt Kingdoms, States, and Towns, is
their present Condition to be considered, or what they were formerly? Quest. 2.
Whether a Kingdom becoming a Commonwealth, or a Commonwealth a Kingdom, does
their former Precedence remain? Quest. 3. Whether he who is elected to a
Dignity, ought to have Precedence thereby, as if he were actually admitted?
Quest. 4. Whether ought one who has been twice or oftener elected to any
Dignity, be preferred to him who was only once elected? Quest. 5. What
influence has the conjunction of more Dignities upon Precedence? Quest. 6. How
far do former Dignities influence a present Advancement, and determine the
Precedence depending thereupon? and what Rank is due to honorary and
extraordinary Offices? Quest. 7. Whether amongst such as have equal Dignity,
the first in time ought to be preferred? Quest. 8. When many are promoted at
once in the same Writ, or when many are nominate in the same Commission,
whether is the order of naming therein expressed to be observed? Quest. 9. In
what cases does Age prefer, and what is its prerogative in the matters of
Precedence. Quest. 10. Whether does appearancy of Blood give Precedence before
actual Investiture and Possession? Quest. 11. Whether does the apparent Heir
his assuming and using the Title and Precedence of his Predecessor, make him
liable to his Predecessor's Debts, and infer a passive Title against him, as we
speak? Quest. 12. Whether does the appearancy of Blood give Precedence, where
the Predecessor is not dead? Quest. 13. Whether should an elder Brother, who
was born before the Father was preferred to the dignity of a King, Marquess,
Earl, etc. be preferred to a younger Brother who was born after his Father had
attained to either of these Dignities? Quest. 14. Whether ought a Son, who is
in public Employment and dignified, to precede a Father who is not? Quest. 15.
Whether may he who has the survivance of an Employment, challenge any
Precedence upon that account? Quest. 16. Whether does the daughter of a Lord,
who would himself have been an Earl if he had lived, take place from the
daughter of a younger Earl? Quest. 17. Whether if the elder brother be mad, or
dumb, etc. does the second brother get the same Precedence, as if his brother
were dead? Quest. 18. Which of two or more Twins ought to precede, when it is
controverted which of them was first born? Quest. 19 Whether do Natural
Children born before a lawful Marriage precede? and should they be preferred to
the Children born in a lawful Marriage, if they be legittimated thereafter?
Quest. 20 Whether ought the order of the nomination to be observed in
Commissions, where the Persons are ranked otherwise then can be consistent with
the King's former express Grants? Quest. 21. In the competition betwixt two who
are advanced at the same time, but in different Writs, as if two Patents were
subscribed by his Majesty to two several Earls on the same day; which of the
two were to be preferred? Quest. 22. Whether is Precedence to be ruled
according to the date of the provision, Investiture, or actual Possession?
Quest. 23. Whether does the dignity of him who bestows the Honor, regulate the
Precedence that is bestowed among Equals? Quest. 24. Whether can a Prince
nobilitate any of his own Subjects in the Territories of another Prince? Quest.
25. Whether when the President of any Court or Incorporation is absent, may the
eldest Member convocate the Incorporation? and who ought to precede in that
case? Quest. 26. Whether may a Peer be degraded, because he has not an Estate
sufficient to entertain a person of his Quality, and by whom may he be
degraded? Quest. 27. Whether is a Patent never made use of by the Father, valid
after his death? Quest. 28. Whether if the Father use any low or base Trade
which derogates from Nobility, will his Children and Descendents lose it
thereby? Quest. 29. One having resigned a Dignity or Employment, and returning
thereafter thereto, whether does he who has so resigned return to his former
Precedence? Quest. 30. Whether may a Nobleman resign his Honors in favors of
a third party? and if the King's confirmation thereupon will exclude the
nearest Agnats, who would else have succeeded by their right of Blood? Quest.
31. Whether does the former right of Precedence remain with him who has
resigned the Office by which he enjoyed the Precedence? Quest. 32. If a Person
do not of himself resign, but be called from his Charge by the Prince to
another Employment, and one provided to his Place, and returning thereafter to
his first Dignity by the Princes command, whether does he get Precedence
according to his first or last Installment? Quest. 33. Whether does he who is
suspended from the exercise of an Office, return to the same Precedence when
the suspension is taken off? Quest. 34. Two having Offices, and changing one
with another their Employments for a time, whether when they resume their
former Employments, do they return to their former Precedence? Quest. 35.
Whether is he, who is restored by the Prince to a Dignity from which he was
degraded, to be restored to the same Precedence which he had formerly? Quest.
36. Whether have the Ambassadors of Monarchs the Precedence from other
Monarchs or Princes themselves, if personally present, even as the Kings would
do whom they represent? and if in all cases, an Ambassador ought to have the
same Precedence that is due to his Constituent? Quest. 37. Whether have such as
have been Ambassadors, or have been in such honorable Employments, any
Precedence thereby when their Employment is ended? Quest. 38. What place is due
to the Representatives of Subjects, such as Vicars, Deputes, Assistants? etc.
Quest. 39. What Precedence is due to Assessors appointed for Judges, and to
extraordinary Judges? Quest. 40. Whether can the King creat now an new Earl,
and ordain him to precede all the former Earls, or any such number of them as
he pleases? Quest. 41. Whether if a King should creat an Earl, with Precedence
to all other Earls, during his life? or if when an Earl is forefaulted, will
his Lady in either of these cases retain the Precedence she formerly enjoyed
during her Husbands life? Quest. 42. Whether amongst those of the Royal-Line,
does the next to the Royal-Stock precede? or does the Precedence belong to the
eldest of that Branch? Quest. 43. Whether, or when is the right or left Hand
the chief mark of Precedence? and whether is the place opposite to the seat of
the chief Person who sits betwixt the two, preferable to either right or left
Hand? Quest. 44. Whether in Improbations raised to secure Precedence, can
Certifications be granted as well against Patents of Honor, as against other
Writs? Courses taken by Princes and Judges, when they intend to shun the
deciding of Controversies concerning Precedence, and to preserve the Rights of
all the Competitors.
Errata.
Page 13. Line 48. dele former. p. 14. l. 21. read the French words thus,
Aubaines, sont estrangers nais en pais, etc. l. penult, for in the dependent,
r. independent. p. 16. l. 40. for imitating, r. intimating. l. 44. for then, r.
when. p. 20. l. 20. r. filiolem. p. 27. l. 2. r. was not then decided. p. 31.
near the foot, r. and aliis Magnatibus. l. penult. r. sons. p. 39. l. 32. r.
Senescallo. p. 46. l. 44. r. his Procutor. l. 47. for Antoun, r. Aiton. p. 69.
Quest. 11. l. 2. r. current. p. 74. Quest. 17. l. 14. r. defective. p. 77. l.
5. r. officium. l. 10. dele at the same time. p. 80. l. 2. for perceed. r.
precede. p. 91. l. 36. r. unnecessar.

Literal faults and errors in the Pointing, may be easily perceived by the
Reader.

Advertisement from the Author, to be subjoyned to the third Chapter of the
Precedence.
BEing desired to prove, that from Chronology it is Impossible, that Kenneth 3.
King of Scots, did row Edgar King of the English Saxons over the Dee; I prove
it thus: Kenneth the 3. did not Succeed to the Crown of Scotland, till the Year
977. At which time, Ethelred, Edgars youngest Son, did Reign in England:
Ethelred having begun his Reign, Anno 975. two Years before Kenneths coming to
the Crown of Scotland. It is also remarkable, that Heylen relates, that the
King of Scotland was ordained at the Council of Constance, to precede the King
of Castile, as being one of the five absolute Monarchs; which was inconsistent
with his being a Tributary, or Homager Prince. This was done in Presence of the
King of Englands Ambassador, who reclaimed not, as certainly he had done, if
the King of Scotland had been Vassal to his Master. By all which we see how
solidly Heylen writes upon this Subject. And the learned Speed does in his
History of Great Britain most Solidly, and Modestly, in many Parts thereof,
clear us from this pretension; and especially in the Life of William the
Conqueror, who, to clear Marches between Scotland and England, did set up a
Cross at Stranmoor, with the Arms of England on the South side, and the Arms of
Scotland on the North side; The King of Scotland doing only Homage for
Cumberland. And in the Life of Edward the first, when some of the Great Men of
Scotland waited on Edward in Northumberland, in the Controversy betwixt the
Bruce and Baliol; he says, that Edward made then claim to the Superiority of
Sotland, alleging that the Crown of Scotland was holden of him. To whom the
Scots replied, that they were ignorant, that any such Superiority belonged to
the King of England, neither could they make answer to such things without a
King, etc. And that thereupon the King delivered to them his Letters Patents,
in which he acknowledged, that the coming of those Scots, on this side the
Water of Tweed, should not be at any other time urged to prejudice them, for
coming again into England; That is, (says he) that their example should not so
be drawn to an Argument of King Edwards right over them, as if they were to
come again upon Duty: So prudently jealous (says this Author) were these
Patriots of their Countries Liberty. And a little after, he acknowledges, that
King Edward was then Plotting this Homage, because Scotland wanted a Head. He
also confesses, that Baliol lost the love of the Scots, by the Homage he had
made, and that by Letters to King Edward, he did afterward renounce this Homage
as being contrary to his Oath, as extorted by violence, and as being made
without consent of the three Estates. And speaking of King Edwards big Oath, as
that he swore by the Lord, he would consume all Scotland from Sea to Sea, if he
heard any more debate in that; adds, that the Scots did boldly enough reply,
that in this Cause they would shed their blood, for defense of Justice, and
their Countries liberty. And further, in the Reign of Edward the third, he
observes, that this short lif'd pretense, was renounced by that King, who
quitted Scotland of all claim and pretense of right to the Superiority thereof,
and delivered up the Roll, called Ragmans Roll, wherein were contained the
Names of those few Scots who had been forced to acknowledge this Superiority.

Advertisement from the Printer.
IT being objected by some, who are not so well acquainted with the methods
taken by Heralds, in handling the Art of Blasoning, that many old Sirnames,
and Noble Families of this Kingdom, are omitted, and not set down in the
Treatise of Herauldry, and others of less Note insert: To satisfy such, it is
answered, that the Author did never design, (as no other Writer on that Subject
ever did) to publish a Register of all the Sirnames and Bearings in the Nation,
(These being to be found in the Lions Registers only) nor does he intend any
advantage to such as are insert, or disadvantage to such as are left out; as
not being induced to name any for instances of Bearings, either from the
Antiquity and greatness of the Families, and Sirnames, or his relation and
kindness to them, but merely from the specific suitableness of their Arms to
the several kinds of Charges and Ornaments Treated of throughout the Work.

It is to be noticed, that the observe made Preced. p. 52. l. 4. of a mistake
committed p. 42. is now unnecessary; The Sheet wherein that mistake was, being
since Reprinted.

OF PRECEDENCE.
CHAP. I. The Precedencie of Kings and Commonwealths.
MEN'S Ambition, as well as Curiosity, does breed in them a Desire to understand
this Subject, which is a part of the Civil Law, and Law of Nations* exceeding
as far all other parts of the Law, as Honor exceeds Money; But the same
Ambition, which makes men very curious to know this Subject, will make them
very unwilling to hear any thing that may decide against themselves: And so
such as writ upon it run a great risque of Displeasing those whom they intended
to Satisfy. But my design being to defend, and inform my own Country, I
shall be little disappointed, though I want praise and esteem, since I do not
deserve, or expect either: And he is an unworthy man, who does not think the
serving his Country a sufficient Sallarie, for greater Pains than I have here
bestowed.

Amongst those who are Supreme, Kings have the Preference from Commonwealths;
and amongst Kings, the Emperor is allowed the first place, by the famous
Ceremonial of Rome, as succeeding to the Roman Emperors, who are alleged to
have been Universal Monarchs; Because in Scripture they are said to have taxed
the whole world. And therefore the German and Italian Lawyers, who are subject
to the Empire, have with very much Flattery, asserted that the Emperor is the
Vicar of GOD in Temporals, Bald. in l. 1. c. de Iure aur. an. And that
Jurisdictions are derived from him, as from the Fountain; calling him, Dominum
and Caput totius Orbis: And for this they do very impertinently cite several
Texts of the Civil Law, which being Laws made by the Romans themselves, cannot
bind or prove against other Nations. Nor is the Translation of the old Roman
Dignity upon Charles le maigne by Leo the 3. of greater Authority, amongst such
as acknowledge the Pope to be no infallible Judge. And whatever may be debated
against other Kingdoms, which were once Subject to the Roman Empire; Yet his
Plea against Scotland is very ill founded, since in the opinion of Scalliger,
and the best of Historians, Scotland nor its Kings were never subject to the
Roman Empire, nor conquered by them; for they, to defend themselves against the
Scots, were forced to build a Wall, called Vallum Adriani, which is Extant to
this day as an undeniable Proof, that Scotland did set Limits to the Roman
Empire: And thus as Scalliger observes, Romani Imperii fuit olim Scotia limes.

It is likewise pretended by the German Lawyers, that the Emperor ought to
precede all others; because he is crowned with three Crowns, one of Iron at
Aquisgrane, one of Silver at Milan, and one of Gold at St. Peter's Church,
Gloss. ad Clement. 1. And since the King of the Romans who is but Emperor in
hope, debates with other Kings, as in anno 1533. he who is actual Emperor,
ought to be preferred to them.

For the Emperor it is also pretended, That in the Ottomon Court, and in all
other Courts, the Emperors Ambassadors are still preferred, and that he only
is still styled, your Majesty, in all Adresses made to him by all other Kings,
as by France, anno 1628. by Pole, anno 1621. etc. And that the Kings of Pole,
Sweden, Denmark, and others have taken Confirmations from him, and ab eo
petierunt veniam aetatis, Hering. de fidejus. c. 2. And yet the Kings of
Britain and France may debate the precedence with him, because the Empire is
but Elective, whereas they are Hereditary, the Empire is a Limited, but they
have Absolute Monarchies, vide Peregrin. de jur. fise. tit. 1. number. 47.

The French King debates his precedence with the King of Spain; the Spaniard
contending that he ought to be preferred, because he is the most Catholic
King, and King of maniest Kingdoms; and some of them are so foolish as to say,
That the Spainish Nation is more ancient than the French, as owing their Origin
to Athamaricus, one of the first Governors amongst the Goths. But for the
French it is answered,

1. That they are the most Christian Kings.

2. That they are Consecrated and Anointed.

3. That Swardus was first King of that Nation, in the Reign of Alexander the
Great.

4. That they were preferred in many General Councils to the Spaniards, as in
the Lateran Council, anno 1215. in the Council of Constans, anno 1416. and in
the Council of Basil, anno 1433. That the Venetians preferred the French after
much Debate, anno 1558. the Case being submitted by both to that Senate; and
Pius the IV. preferred him at Rome, anno 1564. the King of Spain having
appealed from the Venetian to him. And though the Emperor has of late decided
in favors of Spain, yet that Decision is little considered, because of the
Relation which the Emperor has to the Spainish Crown; And therefore the French
King does very wisely send only Envoys and Residents to the Imperial Court,
lest if he sent Ambassadors, the Spainiards might be preferred to his. Nor was
this Precedence ever acclaimed by the Spaniard, till the Reign of Charles the
V. who being both Emperor and King of Spain, did begin this Debate; which
after many Contests, the Spainiard has at last ceded, having commanded his
Ambassador, the Marquess de la Fuente, to acknowledge the same to the most
Christian King, in Satisfaction of the Injury done to his Ambassador, in anno
1661. at London.

The King of Great Britain founds his Precedence to both, upon 1. His being
King of that Isle, which was first Christian. 2. Upon his being Anointed, and
one of the quatuor Vncti, which were before all other Kings. 3. That having
conquered France, in the time of Henry the V. he has Right to all the
Precedence which France can acclaim. And to Spain, the King of England was
preferred in the General Councils of Pisa, Constans, and Basil. I find likewise
in Golstad. lib. 1. cap. 30. That Pope Julius the II. decided, after debate, in
favors of Henry the II. King of England, against Ferdinand the V. Caspar. Eup.
thesaur. polit. part. 3. apot. 63. And therefore in the Book of Roman
Ceremonies, 1504. England was placed before Castil. nor can it be denied, but
that Charles the V. in ranking the Knights of the Golden Fleece, did give the
right hand to the King of England, and the left to the King of Spain. And
though of late the Court of Rome has decided in favors of Spain, yet that
proceeds from the dislike that Rome had to England for its Separation, and the
great Esteem which daily grows there for Spain; because Spain has never
indulged any who have left the Romish Church.

CHAP. II. Of the Precedence due to the Kings of SCOTLAND.
I Must here crave Leave to say, That the King of Great Britain may justly
claim the Precedence from all those Kings, as he is properly King of Scotland.
For it is an uncontroverted Ground in Law, That amongst those of equal Dignity,
he, who first attained to that Dignity, is to be preferred, L. 1. C. de Consul.
Quis enim prior esse debet in eodem genere Dignitatis, nisi qui prior eum
adeptus est, L. 1. ff. de albo scribendo. With which agrees the Canon Law, Cap.
1. de major. and ob. And this is declared the uncontraverted Test of
Precedence, by Crus, de jur. preced. page 66. Menoch. council. 51. and Cuj. ad
L. 2. C. de Consul. And we see that this Rule holds in all other Dignities,
without respect to Riches, or multitude of Possessions: And thus amongst Dukes
or Earls in all Nations, the first who attained to the Dignity, is still
preferred; though others be much richer, and have suceeded to more Earldoms.

This being then the true and solid Ground of Preference, I may truly subsume,
That the King of Scotland being equal in Dignity, with the Kings of England,
France, and Spain, attained to that Dignity, before either of these. For our
King Fergus came into Scotland 330. years before the birth of CHRIST; Whereas
Polydor an English Historian, confesses that Egbert the first King of England,
did begin his Reign eight hundred years after our Saviors birth, and the King
of Scotland married the daughter of Ambrosius Aurelius, who was the first King
of the Britans, and whose Reign preceeded the Origin of the English Kingdom.

As to the Monarchy of Spain, and their Race of Kings, they are no older than
Rudolphus King of the Romans, elected in the year 1273. by whom the house of
Austria did rise to this Dignity.

As to the Kings of France who now Reign, they are only descended from Hugh
Capet, who usurped that Throne in anno 987. And not being descended of either
the Carolovingian or Merovingian Races, they cannot compet with our Kings,
Achaius King of Scotland having been contemporary with Charles le maigne, the
first of the Carolovingian Race; and yet Achaius was but the 65. of our Kings,
and the Leagues betwixt Achaius and the said Charles, are asserted not only by
our Historians and the French, but confessed by all Strangers.

To evite this Argument, some Historians have of late asserted, that we had no
Kings before Fergus the II. and Cambden observes, that the Scots were unknown
till the days of Constantine the great, which is a most unjust and groundless
Calumny; since four Monastries of our Nation, viz. Melrose, Pluscarden,
Paisley and Scoon, did keep constant and distinct Annals of all that past in
this Nation, after the Establishment of the Christian Religion, which was in
anno 199. and have transmitted to us what was delivered to them, by the pious
and remarkable Christians of those first Ages of the World, who, as they were
eyewitnesses of what past since our Christianity, so are not to be presumed to
have recorded any thing of what preceeded their own age, without sufficient
Warrant: And as it is incredible, that so Sincere and Pious men would have
lied, so it is not imaginable, that so many Societies would have conspyred
together, in a whole Tract of so circumstantiat a History as ours is; and there
can be nothing brought to convell the Faith of so large a History, but what
may, with the same force, be urged against the whole Roman History, few or none
having related what is said in the Roman History, besides the Romans
themselves: Whereas Galdus (or as Tacitus names him, Galgacus) opposed Agricola
under Domitian; and that he was a Scot, is clear by Lipsius Notes upon that
Place, Egregium membrum, and qualta multa in corpore hujus Orationis Galgaci
Scoti: But the Text makes this most clear to me, for this Discourse is said to
have been made, ad montem Grampium, which is known to be a Scottish Tract of
Hills, dividing the North and South of Scotland. Hegesippus, who lived in the
days of Hadrian the Emperor, and so an hundred and ten years before
Constantine* does write of the Scots as a warlike People, to whose Authority
Cambden can make no answer, but that he contraverts the Authority of the
Translation or Impression; by which answer, all Antiquity may be confounded;
and seeing that Translation was the work of St. Ambrose, it cannot but be above
all censure. Claudian does make the Scots to have Reigned in the days of
Honorius, for in his second Consulat he has, -- Scotumque vago mucrone sequutus
^regit Hiperboreas, remis audacibus, undas.


And in another place he says, Scotorum cumulos flevit glacialis Iernae. And
William of Westminster confesses, That we came into Britain in the 77. year
after CHRIST: Beda likewise another English man, makes us to have been in this
Isle, before the days of Julius Caesar. And as it cannot be denied, that we
were still subject to Monarchy, so no Historian can pretend, that we obeyed any
Race, save that which now Reigns: Whereas we can condescend, where the English
and French were conquered by Strangers, and had their Royal Line dethroned, and
inverted.

Another Ground of Precedence may be adduced for the King of Scotland, from his
being the undoubted Lineal Sucessour of 110. kings: whereas the Line of France
runs no higher than Hugh Capet, who lived in anno 987. and did in that time
dethrone the former Race: The kings of Spain, are only descended from the
Counts of Tierstiem. And the present kings of England are descended from
William the Conqueror. So that whatever may be pretended for the Antiquity of
those kingdoms, yet their kings are not so ancient as ours: and Precedence
ought to be given, amongst Equals, to the Eldest Race, and not to the eldest
Kingdom. In such Dignities, the preference must be given, either according to
the Antiquity of the People or Country, or Race which Reigns there. If the
Country be considered, there can be no Precedence acclaimed by any; for as all
countries were created at the same time, so none can know which of these
kingdoms were first inhabited: and that none can be preferred upon the
Antiquity or Riches of their country, is clearly determined by Lawyers,
Regionis, Locique, cui Principes praesunt, ratio, and sic de eorum locorum
praestantia, veterum elogia necquicquam ad praecedentiam faciunt, Gothofred. de
praeced. cap. 3. number. 30. If we consider the Antiquity of the People, who are
commanded, though that could give Precedence to them, or to any who represented
them, yet that ought not to give precedence to the king; for, principum
precedentia metienda est ex sua dignitate, non extra: And the Learned Speronius
Speronii, has proved this in a large Discourse, written in the Italian Tongue;
but if this be considered as a ground of precedence, then we ought to be
preferred to the English; for we are still the same People and Nation, but the
English are not the old Britans, but are a mixture descending from Danes,
Saxons, and French: And so we being the Eldest People, our King ought to have
the precedence upon that account. Even as our king was preferred to the late
kings of Jerusalem, though they commanded the people who now live in Judea, and
who came in place of the ancient Jews, a kingdom very ancient formerly. But the
Antiquity of the Race that Reigns, is the ground of precedence: For this reason
it is, that the elder brother succeeds, without respect to the Greatness of
Estate, or Antiquity of those whom he commands. And though these considerations
give preference inter impares dignitate, yet inter pares dignitate, familia
quae prior dignitatent est adepta, semper praeferenda in incedendo, sedendo,
etc. Menoch. consil. 902. number. 57. Rebuff. ad l. 1. c. de consul. Platea ad l.
2. c. ut dignit. ordo. And since it shall be proved, even from Foreign
Histories cited in this Chapter, that we had Kings before any of the Races now
Reigning in either of these, our Kings ought to be preferred to them.

Since Christianity was established, Christian Princes have been preferred
according to the date of their having received the Christian Faith, Gothofred.
de jur. praeced. cap. 3. number. 23. Grotius de jur. bell. lib.. 2. cap. 5. and
that is the chief Ground of Precedence observed in the Court of Rome, and
especially in general Councils; but I conceive it ought not to be a Ground of
Precedence any where else, since amongst Equals, the Antiquity of Blood ought
to be preferred to the date of Christianity; Christianity rather discharging
all Care for Precedence: But even according to this Rule, the eldest Christian
Race ought to be preferred, Religion having still Respect to Christian parents;
whereas on the other hand, it is of no advantage to any person, that he
succeeds to an Estate which was formerly possessed by Christians, these having no
Connection with one another: and a man should by the same Rule be preferred,
because he dwells in a house where Christianity was first professed, which were
in it self very ridiculous: And if the first Christian Race be allowed the
Preference, the King of Scotland ought to be preferred; for Donald King of
Scots embraced the Christian Faith in anno 199. before either William the
Conqueror succeeded to England, or Hugh Capet to France, and long before Spain
obeyed this Race of Monarchs; for which we can cite not only our own
Historians, but Baronius ad annum 449. Duchesne, and many others, and
particularly Beda and Polidor, the worthiest of English Historians. Beda
relates, That imbuebantur a Scotis parvuli Anglorum, quin and ipse Alsridus
Anglorum Rex, in Insulis Scotorum operam dedit, and sacras Literas didicit,
lib. 3. hist. c. 27. Reges Angliae cupidi salutis aeternae, Legatos ad Eugenium
quartum Scotorum Regem miserunt, ut ille digneretur Viros idoneos mittere, per
quos illi Christianae Fidei Rudimenta docerentur, and sacro Baptismatis font
abluerentur, quod ille haud gravate indulsit. Which clears fully, that our
Kings were Christian before those of England, and so ought to be preferred to
the Kings of England, by their own Arguments, and their own Authors.

King Donalds Conversion is attested by Bellar. in his Answer to King James, by
Barronius, ad annum 429. Sanderus lib. 4. de clav. David Arnoldus de
conversione Gentium, etc. And since King Donald was before Fergus the second,
it appears clearly, even from Foreign Histories, that we had Kings before
Fergus the II..

I cannot deny, but that in the Council of Constans, England and France were
preferred to Scotland: but that proceeded, as Gothofred. observes, from the
partiality of the Church of Rome, which always preferred those who were able
to do them most Service; but if we consider the Principles of the Christian
Religion: according to these, that Race ought to be preferred, whose Title is
justest; and I am sure, that according to this Rule, Scotland ought to be
preferred, for its Kings have not Usurped over the People which they Governed.
And not only does Religion consider this ground of Preference, as suitable to
Devotion; but the Law considers it, as suitable to Justice: And Lawyers have
therefore thought a Succession of Kings, enjoying a just Title, free from
Violence and Tyrrany, one of the chief Grounds of Preference and Precedence.
And thus Vasquez. in praefat. ad illustres questiones, says, That multum ad
nobilitatem and praelationem confert, ex veris and legittimis Regibus, and non
a Tyrannis descendisse.

Nor does the Custom either of Courts or Councils, invert the Precedence which
is founded upon Antiquity, and the right of Blood, from which Consuetude cannot
derogat in the matter of Precedence, since that Consuetude is only respected in
Law, quae in se rationabilis juri nec naturae nec gentium contrariatur: And
likewayes since this matter of Precedence is settled by Lawyers, upon these
solid Foundations, for securing the public Peace and Interest of mankind, it
were unjust that the same should be so easily overthrown by the Partiality of
Interested Churchmen, or the Pride and Power of other Competing and Rival
Princes; and therefore to secure the Rights of Justice and Blood, against all
such Invasions, Lawyers have unanimously concluded, that Consuetudine induci
non potest ut prior in dignitate praeferatur posteriori, Crus. de praeemi. cap.
12. Which Principle they so far assert as to conclude, that this could not be
conceded even by express Paction, Rumellin. dissert. 1. these. 18. even though
that Paction were confirmed by an Oath, Rippa. ad l. 3. ff. de donat. And
albeit it may seem that every man may renounce that which is introduced in his
own favors; yet to this it is answered, That men cannot renounce what is
introduced in their own favors, when that which they renounce was not
principally introduced in their favors, but arose to them necessarily, by the
Laws of Nature and Nations, or was introduced principally, in favors of the
common interest of Mankind, rather than of them, and in which, third parties
would likewise be concerned: All which is clear not only by the principles of
Reason, but by L. 3. ff. de pactis, and it cannot be denied, but that the
Precedence from the Antiquity of blood, is no such private Right as may be
renounced, it being a privilege not given by Law, but arising from nature, Lex
non data, sed nata, and introduced for regulating the common Interests of
mankind, and preventing their differences or oppressions; whereas how
unfortunate or irregular should men be? if subjects might force their
Magistrates, or younger brothers the Elder, or stronger Princes the weaker, to
Renounce by Paction, or might serve from them by Custom and Inadvertance, the
Seniority and Precedence due to them; whereas now, the impossibility of
prevailing in such Designs, takes happily away all lusting after them, and
whatever may be ascribed to Consuetude or Decisions in that Precedence, which
because it sprung merely from Custom, may be regulated by it, or in dubious
Cases, where a grain weight may cast a balance; yet I see no Law nor Reason
that can be adduced, for taking away by Decisions, Negligence, or Consuetude, a
clear right of Precedence, founded upon the Antiquity of Blood. Especially
since all who writ upon precedence are clear, That no man can prejudge his
Successors, as to the precedence due to them by blood, Licet positus in
dignitate suo ipsius facto, possit sibi prejudicium afferre, non tamen
praejudicare potest quoad successores suos, Dec. consil. 21. number. 74. vid.
Gothofred. de praeced. page 55. Rub. decis. 298. qui tradit ea quae a genere
and natura tribuuntur, non obstante facto majorum manent incolumia. Which Rule
should rather hold in Kings than in any else, because they are but
Administrators. But in this case, there is no Decision against our Kings, nor
have they ever consented to any such preference: And therefore whatever may be
said for others, against them, in a possessory Judgment, the matter of Right
is still entire.

Vasquez. the illustrious Spainish Lawyer, did, at the Council of Trent, adduce
several Arguments for the precedence of the king of Spain, which, if they were
well founded, would I confess, infer a Precedence to England and France, and
which I shall the willinglier adduce and answer, that I have heard them urged
for France and Spain, against the King of Britain; and because they are the
general topics and common places, which are necessary to be known, and
understood for clearing not only the Precedence of Princes, but even of the
Nobility and Gentry.

The first is, That these who are most powerful and greatest, ought still to
be preferred, c. statuimus de major. and obed. and he must be accounted most
powerful, who is most powerful, the time of the debate: Nam qualitas adjecta
verbo, debet intelligi secundum tempus verbi, l. in dilectis si extraneas ff.
de noxalibus.

The second is, That those who command the noblest and best Subjects, are
accounted the noblest and best, Authent. de defensoribus civitatum nos igitur.

3. Riches are the rise and occasion of Dignity, and therefore are the chief
grounds of precedence amongst Equals.

4. He is to be preferred in Dignity, whom generally men esteem the greatest.

5. Since Honor is the Reward of pains, and dangers, those who take most
pains, and are liable to most dangers for Christendom, and the Christian Faith,
ought to have the precedence, in Christendom, and amongst Christian Princes:
And that pains and dangers are grounds of predency, is urged from l. semper
negotiatores ff. de jur. immunitat.

6. As all Goodness is the Nobler, the more communicative it be, so these must
be concluded the Noblest, by whom most people have advantage: and therefore
these Kings, under whom Trades flourish most, and who bestow Sallaries upon,
and give a livelihood to most men, ought by Mankind to be preferred.

To a'l which Arguments it is answered, that if preference were to be given by
choice, and did not descend from the Right of Blood and Antiquity, then the
former Arguments were indeed considerable, and ought to direct the Electors;
but where the Antiquity of Blood can be instructed, it still gives precedence,
as is clear from the Authors above cited. And thus though we do confess, that
the Kingdoms of France and Spain, and particularly the kingdom of England, are
Richer, Greater, and more Considerable upon these Accounts, than Scotland is;
yet since the Race of our Kings is more Ancient than either of theirs, I
conclude, That therefore they ought to be preferred.

CHAP. III. That the CROWN of Scotland was not subject to England.
SOme English Historians, Lawyers, and Heralds, do too frequently abuse the
World with a most Groundless Tradition; by which they contend, That the Kings
of Scotland were Vassals to the Kings of England, and did them Homage for the
Crown of Scotland: Which if it were true, would have taken from the Kings of
Scotland, not only the Precedence, for which I have been debating, but would
have placed them after the Kings of Castile, and many others to whom they were
preferred. And therefore, not only to remove this Objection, but to free my
Country from this most unjust Imputation, I am Resolved (with very much Respect
to the English Nation, whose Wit, Courage, and Learning, I very much esteem) to
inform the Curious, how unjust this pretense is; and to which I have been not
only inclined, but forced, upon the Reading of a Rapsodie printed lately, by
Mr. Prin, in Vindication (as he speaks page 487.) of the Dominion of the
English Kings, against the Ungrate, Perfidious, and Rebellious Kings of
Scotland. In which none of the Learned or Discreet English are concerned, since
I find none who deserve that praise, engaged in this Debate, which has been
agitated only by such of that excellent Nation, as have had more Humor than
Discretion. I deny not, but that the Kings of Scotland did hold the Lands of
Northumberland, Cumberland, and Westmerland, in capite, of the Crown of
England, and that they did them Homage for it, which was not Dishonorable to
Scotland, that being most ordinary amongst Sovereign Princes: For thus, Henry
King of England, and several others of their kings, did Homage to Philip, and
other kings of France, for the Provinces possessed by them in France; and the
king of Spain does at this day Homage yearly to the Pope, for Naples and
Sicily. And yet the Homage done for these Countries, has been the occasion of an
ignorant Mistake in some, and a malicious pretext for others, to misrepresent
the Homage done for these Counties, as done for the Kingdom of Scotland. And
the Occasion of getting these Provinces from England, is too Honorable to be
denied by us; it being most undeniable, That the Scots being called in to
assist first the Britans against the Romans, and thereafter the Saxons against
the Danes, they had these provinces bestowed upon them, as a Reward of what
they had done, and an Encouragement to them to continue their Friendship for
the future. And by a Statute made by St. Edward, and ratified by William the
Conqueror, as Holinshed observes, the Scots were for that Service likewise
Naturalized English, for which Naturalization that Statute gives two Reasons,
one, quia omnes ferme Scoti Proceres ex Anglis conjuges coeperunt; and ipsi
rursus ex Scotis; and the other was, quia simul and in unum contra Danos, and
Norvegos atrocissime pugnaverunt. But that the kings of Scotland did hold the
Crown of Scotland, as Vassals of England, or did Homage to the kings of England
therefore, will appear to be most false from the following Arguments; which
must not be tried by the Law of England, but by the Civil and Feudal Laws,
which are now become the Laws of Nations, and are reverenced as the sole Judges
in all Differences betwixt Nation and Nation, and which must be presumed equal
to both Nations, since made by neither.

1. All Lands are presumed to be free from Servitude, except the Servitude be
clearly instructed; but much more are all kingdoms presumed to be free, since
ex natura rei, kings and kingdoms are independent, and qualitas quae inesse
debet, inesse presumitur,; and by how much the presumptions are strong, by so
much ought the probation, which elids them be the stronger. And albeit all
Domestic proof ought to be rejected in all cases, as suspect and partial; yet
the English can adduce nothing, for obtruding this Servitude upon us, save the
Testimonies of their own Historians, Lawyers, and Heralds.

2. The Natural and Legal way of proving any man to be a Vassal, is by
production of the Feudal Contract, betwixt the Superior and Vassal; all Feus
requiring necessarily writ in their Constitution: Nor can Vassalage be legally
proved otherwise; whereas here the English can produce no formal, nor original
Constitution of this Fue; such as is to be seen betwixt the Pope, and the King
of Spain, the Emperor, and the Princes of the Empire, etc. For all they can
adduce, is only posteriour acknowledgements of this Vassalage, via facti, which
is but a begging of the question; and these, being but Accessories, and
Consequential Inferences, cannot subsist, except the original Constitution be
first proved, no more then the payment of Feu Duties to a Superior, either by
Force, Ignorance, or Mistake, could prove the Payer to be Vassal for the
future, except the original Feu were produced: And as this is necessary in
Law, so it cannot be imagined in Reason, but that some Obligation in Writ, or
Feudal Contract, would have been taken by the English, who were a very wise
people, and consulted very prudently their own Securities in every thing else:
And if this Contract had been once entered into, it had been yet extant, since
the English cannot allege, that ever they lost any of their Monuments, or
Records: And it is clear that we had Charters for these Lands we held in
England, and that England had Charters at the same time, for the Lands they
held in France: And it is very observeable, that in the Reign of King Edward
the 1. that King styles himself, Rex, and superior Dominus Regni Scotiae;,
during his violent Usurpation over Scotland; whereas never any King of England
did so formerly: And yet, if they had had any such pretensions, they had
assumed the same Titles; but this imaginary Title began, and ended with the
Force, which only maintained it.

3. The English cannot condescend upon any Reason, which might have prevailed
with the Scots, to have become Vassals to England, nor any particular time when
they first became Vassalls; and all they can allege is, That upon some
impressions of Force, some of our own Kings being prisoners, or some of our
people being oppressed, they did elicite from them acknowledgements of a
Vassalage, formerly stated: Whereas Force, renders all acknowledgements null;
and that these acknowledgements were null upon many other Accounts, and that
the Kings of England have been forced, to grant the like to other Princes,
shall be proved clearly, in answer to the Instances which the English adduce.

4. Scotland has been habit, and repute, and acknowledged to be a free
Monarchy, and their Kings Independent and Supreme; and that not only by all
Foreign Princes, (the best Judges in this Case) who have received and
preferred their Ambassadors, as the Ambassadors of free Princes, but even in
General Councils, the King of Scotland has been preferred to the Kings of
Castile, Hungary, Pole, Navarr, Cyprus, Bohemia, Denmark; and thus they were
ranked by Pope Julius the II. anno 1504. vid. Besold. sinop. doct. politicae.
lib. 20. cap. 10. Which could not have been done, if he had been only a
Feudatory Prince; since all free princes, are preferred to all feudatory
princes: Yea, and if Scotland had been Vassals to England, for the Crown of
Scotland, the Kings of England had certainly craved, and obtained the
precedence from other Kings upon that account, since he had been Rex Regum. And
since France craved to be preferred to Spain, because the king of England was
his Vassal, as Chassanaeus observes, part 5. consider. 19. so much rather ought
the Kings of England to have been preferred; because they might have alleged,
that there was a Crown holden of them, whereas they held only some Feu-Lands of
the kings of France.

5. Not only Christian Princes and Councils, but even Popes have declared
Scotland to be a Free Kingdom, and Independent from England. And thus Pope
Honorius allowed to Scotland, That is Subjects should not be obliged to answer,
by way of Appeal, to any Court without their own Kingdom, salva solummodo
authoritate sedis Apostolicae. 2. Edward king of England having petitioned Pope
Innocent the IV. that the Kings of Scotland might not be Anointed or Crowned,
without his Knowledge, quod non posset se facere, ipso inscio in Regem coronari
vel inungi, the said Pope did refuse the same, presentibus procuratoribus
parium in Consilio Lugdunensi, satis per hoc determinans Regnum Scotiae Regno
Angliae non subesse. 3. The King of England having likewise petitioned the same
Pope Innocent, that he might have Liberty to Collect the Tiths of Scotland,
since he had Right terrarum omnium suae jurisdictioni subjectarum, the same was
also refused. 4. Pope Boniface the eight, does in a Letter to Edward king of
England, Declare, That ad celsitudinem regiam potuit pervenisse, qualiter ab
antiquis temporibus, etc. quodque Regnum Scotiae (sicut accepimus) a
progenitoribus tuis, Regni Angliae Regibus feudale non extitit, nec existit,
etc. The copy of which Letter I have at present. and Duchesne writing the
History of Great Britain, does, page 661. relate, That le mesine Pape renvoya
d' autres Lettres au roy d' Anglterre, pour soustenir que le royaume de Escosse
ne dependoit point d' Anglterre, and que contre le droit Divin, and la justice
il s' en vindicoit la subjection. That is to say, The same Pope sent Letters at
the same time, to the King of England, in which he maintained, That the Kingdom
of Scotland was no way subject to that Kingdom, and that his seeking to subject
it to him as superior, was contrare to the Law of GOD and Men.

6. By the Feudal Law and Law of Nations, a Vassal cannot Mortify any part of
his Feu, without the consent of his Superior; because the Superior, by the
Mortification, looses the Services due to him out of his Feu, Churchmen being
obliged to no reddendo, but Praeces and Vota: And therefore in all
Mortifications made by Vassals, the Superiors Confirmation is still required;
and it cannot be imagined, but that if Scotland had been a Feu holding of
England, the Popes, their Conclaves, and the Monastries themselves, would have
sought Confirmations from the Kings of England, of the Mortifications made by
the Kings and Subjects of Scotland, there being more Erections of that kind in
Scotland, than in any Nation of equal Revenue; and yet never any such
Confirmation was sought or pretended to: But on the contrare the Pope still
confirms these Erections, as made per Reges Scotiae, as he does in all other
Nations, or the Kings of Scotland confirm these Erections, if they be made by
any of his Vassals: and it is observable, that the Pope does in these
Confirmations design our King, Regem Scotiae, and not Scotorum.

7. The Historians also of other nations, did concur with those of our Nation
in asserting this freedom; and thus Arnisaeus, the best Lawyer who has writ
upon these politic questions, does look upon this pretense, as a mere fiction,
lib. 1. cap. 5. Anglus Scotorum regem habebat sibi fiduciarium sive ratione
aliquot regionum, sive ratione ipsius regni, ut nimis audacter asserit. Math.
Steph. Nam haec vetustate temporis, and obscuritate authorum sunt incerta. And
Duchesne page 21. speaking of Scotland, asserts positively, That its Kings does
recognosce no Superior but GOD, and is every way a Sovereign Prince,
notwithstanding of the old pretentions of England, Le Roy le possede en toute
souverainte sans recognoistre au cun superieur que dieu, bien que c' estoit
ancienne praetension des Anglois, que le Roy D'escosse est vassal de leur
couronne.

8. Not only have foreign Princes, General Councils, and the Lawyers and
Historians of other Nations, declared Scotland to be a free Kingdom, but even
the Kings of England, have acknowledged this freedom, and independency; as may
appear by these instances. 1. The King and Parliament of England, have treated
with the Ambassadors of Scotland; whereas no Superior can treat with his own
Vassal, as a forreigner; nor can a Vassal send Ambassadors to his Superior;
for an Ambassador must be equal to him, to whom he is sent, and is, in Law, no
way liable to his Jurisdiction. And this is, amongst others, the opinion of
Alberic. Gentil. an Engglish Lawyer, de Legationibus l. 2. c. 10. And it is
clear from Live. lib. 6. and lib. 43. 2. King Henry of England, being to enter
upon a War with Simeon, Earl of Leister, did entreat Supply from Alexander King
of Scots; and lest this might infer any Acknowledgement of his Superiority, he
did by Letters under his hand, and by his Ambassadors publicly declare, that
he did not crave this aid as Superior, to which Superiority he had no
pretense. 3. The same King Alexander, being invited to assist at the Coronation
of King Edward, and being unwilling to go there, lest it might infer an
acknowledgement, King Edward did declare, Quod non ex Debito, sed ex Gratia
tantummodo hoc petebat. 4. The same King Alexander, being to make homage in
England to king Edward, for the Lands of Penrith and Tindale, which he held of
king Edward, he did publicly protest, Quod non pro Regno Scotiae, sed pro
terris in Anglia, dictum Homagium faciebat; Rexque iste Angliae hujusmodi
Homagium admisit: per quod praesumitur talia fuisse, and similia prius facta
homagia, Regno Angliae per Reges Scotiae: Nam talia fuisse praesumitur, quale
fuit illud declaratum and expositum Homagium; nam talia sunt subjecta, qualia
praeadicata admittunt. which are the very Words used in the Answer made by the
Scots, before the Pope, where all the former four instances are fully
discussed, and were offered to be proved by Witnesses, beyond all Exception;
the Writs themselves having been designedly taken away by king Edward. And
Fordon has in his History, unprinted Copies of several Letters, written by the
said Pope Boniface and others, declaring that those Instances consisted in
their knowledge, and some of those Instances are fully repeated, by Duchesne
page 661. who is to be believed, since he is a Stranger: And even Matthew
Paris, a Learned English Historian, does declare, That king Richard the first
did, when he was going to the Holy War, disclaim this pretended Superiority
over Scotland, anno 1188. Which Disclamation is likewise observed by Hovedean,
another Historian of the same Nation: And when Matthew Paris speaks of the
Homage done to the king of England, he makes it only to be for his Lands in
England, Rex Scotorum Willielmus, fecit Homagium Regi Anglorum Ricardo de jure
suo in Anglia. Which is ordinarily the style used by Historians, when they writ
of this Subject: And thus Duchesne says, that Alexander made Homage to Henry
the third, for his possessions in England, but refused to make him Homage for
Scotland; and that king Alexander sent a Cartell to king Henry, for asserting
that he had made him Homage for Scotland. The Copy of the Homage is yet extant
at Rome, and the minute of it is thus expressed, in the Records of our old
Abbacies, Memorandum, anno Gratiae milesimo ducentesimo septuagesimo octavo,
Apostolorum Simonis and Iudae apud Westmonasterium, Alexander Rex Scotiae,
fecit Homagium domino Edwardo Regi Angliae, filio Regis Henrici sub his verbis,
Ego devenero hominem vestrum pro Terris, quas de vobis teneo in Regno Angliae,
de quibus Homagium vobis debeo, salvo regno meo; tunc dixit Episcopus
Norvicensis, and salvum sit Regi Angliae, si jus habuerit ad homagium vestrum
de regno; cui Rex statim respondit, aperte dicens, ad homagium regni mei
Scotiae nullus jus habet, nisi solus DEUS, nec de ullo teneo nisi solo DEO. 4.
King Alexander having dyed without Males, Edward the first, treated for a
Marriage, betwix Margaret, Princess of Scotland, called the Maid of Norway, and
Edward his son: In which there are many pregnant Acknowledgements of this
Freedom, Volentes and concedentes, quod deficientibus praedictis Edwardo and
Margarita, vel eorum altero, absque Liberis extantibus, in omni casu and
eventu, in quo ad proximiores haeredes regnum praedictum debeat de jure
reverti, integre habere, absolute absque ulla subjectione, revertatur and
restituatur iisdem. And in the close of that paper it is said, That there shall
be no prejudice done to either of the kingdoms, Quin libere habeant statum
suum: And in the Deputation given by the Governors of Scotland, dated at
Melross, anno 1289. for treating that Marriage, this express Reservation is
insert, Salvis tamen in omnibus and singulis, and per omnia, Liberate and
Honor Regni Scotiae: Which Reservation is likewise insert, in a Warrant
granted by king Edward, for treating the said Marriage. And it is observable,
That in all the Scottish Addresses to him, and accepted by him, he is only
designed Rex Angliae, Dominus Hiberniae, and Dux Aquitaniae, but never designs
himself, Dominus superior Scotiae, till after the War; which shows, that his
former airie Title was very unjust.

9. As the kings of England have acknowledged the Scots to be no Vassals, so
have their Laws and Lawyers. For it is contented by these, That the Scots were
Aliens to England, and could not have succeeded to any Estate in England,
without being Naturalized; whereas alibi genitura, presupposes, that the alibi
nati, are not Vassals: For this jus alibi geniturae, called by the French,
droit d' aubeyne, is settled upon this Maxim of the Feudal Law, That because
Feus are granted by Over-lords or Superiors, upon design and promises, that
their Vassals shall serve them upon all occasions, against all persons, and
never reveal their secrets, nor conceal what may be their disadvantage;
therefore Feudalists do justly conclude, That no man can be Leidge man to two
supreme Superiors or Over-lords, because these Duties are imprestable to both;
seeing the secrets of the one, may be incompatible with the Safety of the other,
and they may, by warring against one another, distract the Alleadgeance of
their Vassal. And because men are more prone to serve their Native Prince, then
others, therefore Strangers are always suspect, nor have they allowance to
sell the Feus, to which they succeed, lest they should carry away the price out
of the Country, and possibly employ it against the same Country. Which
principle seems at first to have flowed from the Roman Law, by which, the Goods
of Strangers dying in Rome, fell to the Exchequer or Fisk, and fiebant caduca.
With this foundation of the Feudal Law, founded upon so clear Reason, do the
Customs of other Nations agree; who account not these Aliens, who live under
the same Alleadgeance: Thus Rageau page 67. Aubains sont estrangers, mais
(...), qui n' est pa de la soveraignete de la Courounne de France. Vid.
Bacquet. du droit d' aubeyne, printed in the year, 1557. And by the Custom of
Milain, (the Expertest Feudalists of all the World) alibi genitura extends not
to any, who have sworn Alleadgeance, and live within the Spainish Dominions,
though not within Milain: since then the English would not allow us the Right
of Sucession, nor the other benefits due naturally to Subjects, it was
strangely monstrous and repugnant, that they designed to make the World
believe that we were Subjects.

It is also very remarkable, that if our Kingdom had been only a Feu holding of
England, our Nobility could not have precedence from others, according to their
Antiquity; for all the Nobility of the Superior Kingdom ought, in the opinion
of such as writ of precedence, to be preferred to these, who live in the
Vassal-kingdom.

10. If Scotland had been a Feu to England, the king of England as Superior,
would have had the keeping of our young Princes, and the disposing of them in
Marriage, and the Feu would have been in his hand, during their Minority, that
being employed in the Right of proper Feus, by the Feudal Law: And this must be
presumed to have been a proper Feu, as all Feus are presumed to be, except the
Vassal can prove, that the Nature of the Feu was impropriated for the Vassals
Advantage. But yet no king of England did ever pretend, to the Guardianship of
our young Princes, nor to name Governors during their Minority: But on the
contrare, Alexander king of Scotland, having left only a young Princess, called
Margaret, who was Nice to the King of England, he did not pretend to the
keeping of the young Princess, but entreated that she might be married, to
Edward the second his son; and that if there should be no issue of that
Marriage, Scotland should remain a free Kingdom, as it was formerly, inthe
dependent from all pretentions of the kings of England: Which is likewise
another acknowledgement, made by the kings of England themselves, of the
independency of Scotland. And if the kings of England had been Superiors of
Scotland, there would have been some Vestige of this Superiority, to be seen in
our Laws; whereas all our Laws call still our Crown, the Imperial Crown of
Scotland: Or in our Coin, all Coyns bearing some Impressions from the
Superior. And the Kings of England might have remanded from our Courts, or out
of our Country, such as had committed crimes against their kings, or Laws: It
being an undoubted principle of the Feudal Law, That qui habet dominium
directum, potest jurisdictionem suam explicare, tam in territorio Vassalli,
quam in suo: habet enim dominus jurisdictionem cumulativam cum Vassallo. But so
it is, that it can never be alleged, That the Kings of England offered to
exerce any Jurisdiction in Scotland, or did require any criminals, who had fled
into Scotland, to be delivered up to them: Nor did ever the English pretend to
punish such Scotsmen, as were taken fighting against them abroad, as Traitors,
and Guilty of Treason; as certainly they would have done, if they had been
Vassals to England: But on the contrair, the English did also ransom them, and
use them every way, as they did other Strangers and Foreigners.

11. The Scots having intended a Declarator of Freedom against Edward the
first, king of England, the Process was delegated by Pope Boniface the VIII. to
Baldredus, one of the greatest Lawyers of that time, who considered very fully,
the Reasons proponed hine inde, by both parties, and having made a full Report
to the Pope, the Pope did very sharply reprove the king of England, and
declared, that Scotland did not depend upon it, any manner of way; and that the
English had attacked Scotland most unjustly, against all both Divine and humane
Laws; as Duchesne observes page 66. The Letter it self that was writ to the
king of England, with all the process (which was called Processus Baldredi)
being yet extant, in Fordons Chronicle: And it cannot be denied, but that
England might have expected much more favor, from the Pope, than Scotland
could; since they paid him a constant Revenue, called Peter's pence; and since
England was known to afford much greater Casualties to the Pope, then could
have been expected from this kingdom.

In stating the Arguments, which are proposed by the English, for proving that
the kings of Scotland were Vassals, for their Crown, to England; I shall begin
with these, which were insisted upon by King Edward the 1. in the former
process.

The first was, That Brutus, descended from the Trojans, did conquer Britain,
and divided it amongst his three sons, to the Eldest of whom, called by
Historians Locrin, or Locuus, as he is termed in that process, he left Logria,
now called England: To the Second, called Albanactus, he left Albanie, now
called Scotland: To the Third, called Camber, he left Cambria, now called
Wales. But Humbert King of the Huns, having killed Albanactus, Locrin the
elder, to revenge his brothers Death, did kill Humbert, and reunite Albanie to
Logria or England.

The second was, That Donvall king of the Britans, killed Staterius king of
Scotland, who rebelled against him, and became Master of the whole Isle; which
Dunvall having two sons, Belinus and Brounus, he left the Superiority of
Scotland with England, to the eldest, and the property only of Scotland to the
second.

The third was, That Arthur king of the Britans, having overcome Scotland, he
gave that kingdom to Angusell, who acknowledged him as his Superior, and
carried the Sword before him.

The fourth was, That Aldestan king of England, having conquered Constantine
king of Scotland, did pray to GOD, that by the intercession of St. John de
Benlaco, he might by a miracle, be declared the just Superior of Scotland:
Whereupon he did strick with his sword, at a Rock near Dumbar, and made a Gape
in it a full yard in length.

The fifth was, That William king of Scotland, did acknowledge himself Vassal,
to William the Conqueror; Alexander king of Scots, acknowledged himself Vassal
to king Henry: And that the Nobility of Scotland called in the said Edward, to
arbitrate the Differences betwixt the Bruce and Baliol.

Peter Heylen, speaking of Scotland in his Geographie page 1289. affirms, That
the Kings of Scotland were still Vassals to the Crown of England; which he
endeavors to confirm by these Arguments, 1. By the Homages, Services, and
other Duties, done by the kings of Scotland, to those of England: Malcome the
third doing Homage to William the Conqueror, as William one of his Successors,
did to Henry the second; and that not only for three Counties in the North of
England, or the Earldome of Huntingdoun (as is by some pretended) but for the
very Crown it self: Kenneth the third being also one of those Titulary or
Vassal Kings, who rowed king Edgar over the Dee. 2. By the interposing of king
Edward the first, and the Submission of the Scots to that interposing, in
determining the Contraversie of Succession, betwixt Bruce and Baliol: as in the
like case, Philip the fair adjudged the Title of Artoys, which was holden of
the Crown of France, and then in question betwixt the Lady Mawd, and her Nephew
Robert: Or as king Edward the third, in the Right of the said Crown of France,
determined of the Controversy, betwixt John Earl of Montford, and Charles of
Bluis, for the Dukedom of Bretaigne. 3. By the Confession, and acknowledgement
of Prelates, Peers, and others the Estates of Scotland, subscribed by all their
hands, and seals, in the Roll of Ragman; wherein they did acknowledge the
Superiority of the kings of England, not only in regard of such Advantages, as
the sword had given him, but as his original and undoubted Right: Which Roll
was treacherously delivered into the hands of the Scots, by Roger Mortimer,
Earl of March, in the beginning of the Reign of king Edward the third. 4. By the
tacit Confession of the kings themselves; who in their Coyns, Commissions, and
public Instruments, assume not to themselves the Title of kings of Scotland,
but of Reges Scotorum, or the kings of the Scots, and thereby imitating, that
though they are kings of the Nation, yet there is some Superior Lord (king
Paramount as we may call him) who has the Royalty of the Land. 5. By the
Judgments, Arrests of the Courts of England, not only in the times of king
Edward the first, but in sometimes since: For ^hen William Wallace, a Scotsman
by birth, and the best Soldier of that Country, was taken prisoner, and
brought to London, he was adjudged to suffer Death as a Traitor; which had been
illegal and unrighteous judgment, had he been a prisoner of War, and not looked
upon by the Judges as subject to the Crown of England. The like done in the
case of Simeon Fra^^ll, another of that kingdom, in the same kings Reign. In
like manner, in the time of king Edward the third, it was resolved in the
Court, in the Lord Beaumonts case, when it was objected, That one of the
Witnesses was a Scot, and therefore as an Alien not to give his evidence, that
his Testimony was to be allowed, because the Scots, in the Law of England, did
not go for Aliens. And when one, indicted for a Rape, in the thirteenth year of
Queen Elizabeth's Reign, desired a medietatem linguae, because he was a
Scots-man, and so an Alien; it was denied him by the Court, because the Scots
were not reputed here as Aliens, but as Subjects rather. So also, when Robert
Vmsramville, Lord of Kyme, was summoned to the Parliament of England, in the
Reign of king Edward the third, by the name of Robert Earl of Angus, which is a
Dignity in Scotland; and after in a Writ against him, was called by his own
name of Vmsramville, without any Addition of that Honor, the Writ was adjudged
to abate; which I conceive, the Learned Judges had not done, if Scotland had
not been reputed, to be under the Vassalage of the kings of England. 6. And
lastly, by a Charter of Lands and Arms, which I have in my Custody, granted by
king Edward the first, in the last year of his Reign, to Peter Dodge of
Stopworth, in the County of Chester, one of the Ancestors of my mother: In
which it is expressed, that the said Lands and Arms were conferred upon him, by
that king for his eminent Services encontre son grand enemi and rebel Baliol
king of Scotland, and Vassal of England.

In Answer to these Objections, founded upon the Reign of Brutus; I need say no
more, save that Cambden, and the other Learned English Writers, do look upon
the same, as a mere fiction. And for proving the Crown of Scotland to hold of
England, there must be authentic Documents in Writ produced, as has been
formerly debated: And this does sufficiently answer all that is said of
Bellinus, king Arthur, etc. But to refute these Fictions, and to show how much
of Cheat is in all these Contrivances, I need only cite a passage, from the
Learned Aylet Sammes, in his Britannia antiqua, page 159. whose words are,

That which gave some Authotity to this Fiction, was the use king Edward the
first made of it, in vindicating his Title to Scotland, against the pretense of
Pope Boniface, and the Church of Rome, who laid claim to that kingdom by
ancient Right, as part of St. Peter's Patrimony, and that Churches Demesne. It
appears, that the Monks and Friars had a great hand, in making out this Title
by Brute, which story was now new vampt, and from all parts sent out of these
shops, where at first it had been forged and hammered out. And this does more
evidently appear, if we consider many other parts of the same Letter, as it is
found in the Records cited by Mr. Prin; but especially that miracle of king
Adelstane, who ( in perpetuam rei memoriam) to give an evident sign of his
Right to Scotland, with his sword, struck a blow upon a Rock near Dumbar, that
he Cleft it at least an Elne wide.

As to the Homage made by king Malcome, to William the Conqueror, it is
answered, That the matter of Fact is absolutely denied: And not only do our
Historians, and the Historians of Foreigners, mention no such submission, but
they do on the contrair, relate, That William the Conqueror having come with a
Design to conquer Scotland, he was forced by Malcome king of Scotland to a
Peace, very Honorable and Advantageous for Scotland; one Article whereof was,
That William the Conqueror should restore such of the English Nobility, as had
fled to Scotland for shelter, to their Estates and Honors. And how can it be
imagined, that Scotland being then very Unite, and living under a most warlike
Prince, would have submitted to a king, who had too much to do at home; or that
King Malcome would have submitted to him, whom he forced to restore even the
English, who had Rebelled against him. And as the Constitution of Vassalage
requires Writ, so if any such Vassalage had been acknowledged, he had accepted
of a Charter holding of the Conqueror, as all the other Vassals did.

As to King Williams Homage to Henry the second, it is Answered, That William
having been treacherously made Prisoner, he was forced by a long and tedious
Imprisonment, to make this Homage; and consequently, the Homage it self was
null, being extorted by Force, and made by a person who was not sui juris,
being in prison. It being certain by the Laws of all Nations, That Deeds done
by Prisoners are null; but especially in this case, where the Deed was such, as
that it would have been null however. For even the most absolute Kings, are so
far from being able to alienate their Kingdom, or enslave it, that by so doing,
(as some say) they forfeit their own Right, and make the Throne void for the
next Successor, who is not obliged by what they have done. And if any such Act
as this were binding, then England, by the same Argument, had remained a Feu of
the Empire; since Richard the first their King did Homage to Henry the
Emperor, for England; and King John his brother, did the like Homage to the
Pope, and offered to hold England, in capite, of Murmelius a Sarazen. King
Edgar's being rowed over the Dee, by Kenneth king of Scotland, is taken off by
the former Answer, though it were true as it is not, nor can it be made appear,
by a Chronological Computation, if the Enquiry were worth our pains.

The great Instance founded upon the Homage made by the Baliol, is as weak;
since it is known, that King Robert the Bruce refused to do Homage to King
Edward, choosing rather to want a Crown, then to be a Vassal for it: But John
Baliol the other Competitor, preferring his Ambition to his Native Country, was
therefore justly disowned by the Nobility, who (as Duchesne a Stranger to us
observes) sent Ambassadors to King Edward, to show him that they did Revoke,
and Disown the Homage made by the Baliol, and asserted their primitive Liberty.
And so hateful an Act was this esteemed in him, that he losed the Crown by it;
whereas had this pretense of England been founded upon any Justice, it could
never have been so severly either opposed or punished. But though Baliol had
been a lawful King as he was not, (King Robert the Bruce's Title being
preferable in Law;) yet could not the Baliol have subjected the Kingdom in
Vassalage to England, since by the Feudal Law, a Superior cannot superinduce
or interpose another Superior, nec sine Vassalli consensu alienare jus suum
directum, c. 1. ex eodem descendit de Leg. Lotharii. And though some debate,
that by such Alienations of the Superiority, the Superior forfeits his Right,
yet all agree that the Alienation is null; nulla and irrita, D. D. in cap.
imperialem praeterea de prohibit. alien. per Fredric. Curt. p. 16. number. 3. and
latissime Rosenth. cap. 9. conclus. 62.

Whereas it is pretended, That the Parliament of Scotland consented; It is
Answered, That any Parliamentary Consent is altogether denied: For though we
have exact Records of all our Parliaments, yet there is not so much as Mention
made amongst all our Statutes or Books, of any Parliament held by John Baliol.
And albeit Prin has published all the Records, which the English have upon this
Subject, yet he dares not so much as assert, much less produce the Copy of any
such Act of Parliament: And certainly if there had been such an Act of
Parliament, not only the Records of that Parliament, but that particular Act
had been carefully preserved and published; and that this Parliament and
Statute is a mere Fiction, appears not only by our own, but Foreign
Historians. And it is not imaginable, that the greater part of the Nobility and
Kingdom, having immediately disowned the Baliol, for acknowledging this
Subjection, that they would themselves have ratified it in a free Parliament.
But though this were true as it is not, yet there is not any Kingdom so Loyal,
Happy, or Invincible, but some few Cowards or Rogues may be found in it, who
may assume the name of a Parliament, and disown the true Interest of the
Kingdom, without any Warrant from the People for that effect. And I would very
willingly know, if England remains still Vassal to the Pope, because a Monk
prevailed with King John, to hold his Crown of him? or if Portugal should not
be acknowledged a free Crown, because Spain did once elicite from them a
National Consent, by Force of Arms? Or if these three or four pretended English
Parliaments, who acknowledged Oliver Cromwell the Usurper, did settle a Legal
Right upon him by their Concourse? Nor did Prescription Supply here the
Original illegality of that Consent; for the Scots did immediately reclame, and
did within much fewer years, than Prescription requires, restore themselves to
their Liberty, under the Conduct of that Glorious Prince, King Robert the
Bruce, for whom GOD did so Miraculous things, as did Convince the World, how
much the LORD of Hosts detasted the Bribry, and Cruelty of King Edward the
first: Et ita res facile redeunt ad suam naturam, and quae mox rediit
divertisse non videtur.

But to show how great Aversion even that Generation had, for any such
Submission to the English Monarchy, I have set down the Copy of a Letter yet
extant, under all the Seals of our Nobility, directed to Pope John, in anno
1320. Wherein they Declare, that if their King should offer to submit to
England, they would disown him, and choose another. Not that the power of
Electing Kings, was ever thought to Reside in our Nobility; But because it was
represented to them, as the Opinion of all Lawyers, that a King could not
alienat his Kingdom, or submit himself by his sole Consent, to a Foreign
Prince: Since by that Alienation and Submission, he does Forfeit his Right to
the Crown. As to which Letter likewise I think fit to observe, to prevent any
Mistake as to the Calculation of the number of our Kings, that the Writers
thereof have, as is usual with us, numbered amongst our Kings such of the Royal
Family, as were for the time Regents or Viceroys. The Letter follows.

SAnctissimo Patri in CHRISTO ac Domino, Domino Ioanni, Divina Providentia
Sacrosanctae Romanae and Vniversalis Ecclesiae summo Pontifici, Filii sui
humiles and devoti, Duncanus Comes de Fyfe, Thomas Ranulphi. Comes Moraviae,
Dominus Manniae, and Vallis Anandiae, Patricius de Dumbar, Comes Marchiae,
Malisius Comes de Strathern, Malcolmus Comes de Levenox, Willielmus Comes de
Ross, Magnus Comes Cathaniae and Orcadiae, and Willielmus Comes Sutherlandiae,
Walterus Senescallus Scotiae, Willielmus de Souls Buttelarius Scotiae, Iacobus
dominus de Douglas, Rogerus de Moubray, David dominus de Brechine, David de
Grahame, Ingelramus de Vmsravile, Ioannes de Meneteith Custos Comitatus de
Meneteith, Alexander Frazer, Gilbertus de Haia Constabularius Scotiae, Robertus
de Keith Mariscallus Scotiae, Henricus de Sanctoclaro, Ioannes de Grahame,
David de Lindesey, Willielmus Olifant, Patricius de Grahame, Ioannes de Fenton,
Willielmus de Abernethie, David de Weyms, Willielmus de Monte fixo, Fergusius
de Ardrosan, Eustachius de Maxwell, Willielmus de Ramsay, Willielmus de Monte
alto, Alanus de Moravia, Douenaldus Campbell, Ioannes Camburn, Reginaldus le
Chen, Alexander de Seton, Andreas de Lescelyne, and Alexander de Straton,
caeterique Barons and Libere-tenentes, ac tota Communitas Regni Scotiae,
omnimodam Reverentiam filiolem, cum devotis pedum osculis beatorum.

Scimus, sanctissime Pater and Domine, and ex antiquorum Gestis and Libris
colligimus, quod inter caeteras Nationes egregias, nostra sciz. Scotorum Natio
multis Praeconiis fuerit insignita: Quae de majori Scythia per mare Tirenum,
and Columnas Herculis transiens, and in Hispania inter ferocissimos, per multa
temporum Curricula, residens, a nullis quantumcunque Barbaricis poterat alicubi
subjugari; Indeque veniens, post mill and ducentos annos a transitu populi
Israelitici, sibi seeds in Occidente quas nunc obtinent, expulsis Britonibus,
and Pictis omnino deletis, licet per Norwegienses, Danos and Anglos saepius
impugnata fuerit, multis sibi Victoriis, and Laboribus quamplurimis adquisivit;
ipsasque ab omni servitute liberas, ut priscorum testantur historiae, semper
tenuit. In quorum Regno, centam and tresdecem Reges de ipsorum Regali Prosapia,
nullo alienigena interveniente, regnaverunt. Quorum Nobilitates and merita,
licet ex aliis non clarerent, satis tamen patenter effulgent, ex eo quod Rex
Regum Dominus JESUS CHRISTVS, post Passionem and Resurrectionem suam, ipsos in
ultimis Terrae finibus constitutos quasi primos, ad suam Fidem sanctissimam,
convocavit: Nec eos, per quemlibet in dicta fide, confirmari voluit, sed per
suum primum Apostolum, quamvis Ordine secundum vel tertium, sanctum Andream
meritissimum beati Petri Germanum, quem semper ipsis praeesse voluit ut
Patronum. Haec autem sanctissimi Patres and Praedecessores vestri solicita
mente pensantes, ipsum Regnum Populum, ut beati Petri Germani peculium, multis
favoribus and privilegiis quamplurimis muniverunt. Itaque Gens nostra, sub
ipsorum protectione, libera hactenus deguit and quieta; donec ille Princeps
Magnificus Rex Anglorum Edwardus, Pater istius qui nunc est, Regnum nostrum
Acephalum, Populumque nullius mali aut doli conscium, nec Bellis aut Insultibus
tunc assuetum, sub amici and confoederati specie, innumerabiliter infestavit:
Cujus Iujurias, Caedes and violentias, Praedationes, Incendia, Prelatorum
Incarcerationes, Monasteriorum Combustiones, Religiosorum Spoliationes and
Occisiones, alia quoque enormia, quae in dicto populo exercuit, nulli parcens
Aetati aut Sexui, Religioni aut Ordini, nullus scriberet, nec ad plenum
intelligeret, nisi quem Experientia informaret. A quibus malis innumeris, ipso
juvante qui post vulnera medetur and sanat, Liberati sumus per serenissimum
Principem, Regem and Dominum nostrum, Dominum Robertum, qui pro Populo and
Haereditate suis, de Manibus inimicorum liberandis, quasi alter Maccabaeus, aut
Josue Labores and Taedia, Inedias and Pericula, Laeto sustinuit Animo: Quem
etiam Divina Dispositio, and juxta Leges and Consuetudines nostras, quas usque
ad mortem sustinere volumus, juris Successio, and debitus nostrorum Consensus
and Assensus, nostrum fecerunt Principem atque Regem. Cui tanquam illi per quem
salus in Populo facta est pro nostra Liberate tuenda, tam Iure quam Meritis
tenemur, and volumus in omnibus adhaerere. Quem, si ab inceptis desistet, Regi
Anglorum aut Anglicis nos, aut Regnum nostrum volens subjicere, tanquam
inimicum nostrum, and sui nostrique Iuris Subversorem statim expellere
niteremur; and alium Regem nostrum, qui ad defensionem nostram sufficient,
faciemus: Quia quamdiu Centum vivi remanserint, nunquam Anglorum dominio
aliquatenus volumus sebjugari. Non enim propter Gloriam, Divitias aut Honores
pugnamus, sed propter Libertatem Solummodo, quam nemo bonus nisi simul eum vita
amittit. Hinc est, Reverende Pater ac Domine, quod Sanctitatem vestram, cum
omni Praecum instantia, Genu flexis Cordibus exoramus; Quatenus sincero cord,
menteque pia recensentes, quod apud eum cujus vices in terris geritis, non sic
pondus, and pondus nec distinctio Iudei and Graeci, Scoti aut Anglici,
tribulationes and angustias nobis and Ecclesiae DEI illatas ab Anglicis,
paternis occulis intuentes; Regem Anglorum, cui sufficere debet quod possidet,
eum olim Anglia septem aut pluribus solebat sufficere Regibus, monere and
exhortari dignemini, ut nos Scotos in exili degentes Scotia, ultra quam
habitatio non est, nihilque nisi nostrum cupientes in pace dimittet. Cui pro
nostra procuranda quiet quicquid possumus, ad statum nostrum respectu habito,
hoc facere volumus cum effectu. Vestra enim interest, Sancte Pater, hoc facere,
qui Paganorum feritatem, Christianorum culpis exigentibus, in Christianos
saevientem aspicitis, and Christianorum terminos arctari indies: Quare ne quid
vestrae Sanctitatis memoriae derogat, and si, quod absit, Ecclesia in aliqua
sui part vestris temporibus patiatur Ecclipsin aut Scandalum, vos videritis.
Exhortet igitur Christianos Principes, qui, non causam ut causam ponentes, se
singunt in subsidium Terrae sanctae, propter guerras quas habent cum proximis
ire non posse: Cujus impedimenti causa est, vereor, quod, in minoribus proximis
debellandis, utilitas proprior and resistentia debilior aestimantur. Sic quam
laeto cord dictus Dominus Rex noster, and nos, si Rex Anglorum nos in pace
dimittet, illuc iremus; qui nihil ignoret satis novit: Quod CHRISTI Vicario
totique Christianitati ostendimus and testamur. Quibus si Sanctitas vestra
Anglorum relatibus nimis credula, fidem sinceram non adhibet, aut ipsis in
nostram confusionem favere non desinat; corporum excidia, animarum exitia, and
caetera quae sequentur incommoda, quae ipsi in nobis, and nos in ipsis
fecerimus, vobis ab altissimo cro^imus imputanda. Ex quo sumus and erimus in
his quae tenemur, tanquam obedientiae filii, vobis tanquam ipsius Vicario in
omnibus complacere; ipsique tanquam summo Regi and Iudici, causam nostram
tuendam committimus: Cogitatum nostrum jactantes in ipso, sperantesque finem,
quod in nobis virtutem faciet, and ad nihilum rediget hosts nostros.
Serenitatem and Sanctitatem vestram conservet altissimus Ecclesiae suae sanctae
per tempora diuturna.

Datum apud Monasterium de Aberbrothock in Scotia, sexto die Aprilis, Anno
Gratiae milesimo trescentesimo vicesimo, Anno vero Regni Regis nostri supra
dicti, quintodecimo.

This answers likewise Ragmans Roll; nor are we to consider who consented to
Slavery: Since it is known that not only the Dowglass, the Grahame, and
Wallace, but Thousands of others, never yielded even to that short Impression:
And their Country preserved its Privileges, by their Loyalty; it being an
undoubted Principle in Law, That in re pari potior est conditio prohibentis,
and in re communi nemo dominorum juri quicquam facere potest invito altero, l.
subimus ff. ad exhibendum.

To that Argument by which it is urged, That our Kings did never assume the
Title of Kings of Scotland, but called themselves only Kings of Scots, It is
Answered, That the Argument is very Ridiculous; for first it is founded upon a
false Supposition, it being most evident from our Writs in the Reign of King
David the Maiden, that our King was entitled, Rex Scotiae; but in the
Confirmation of the Abbacy of Aberbrothick, King William is called Rex Scotiae,
and his Queen Regina Scotiae. Like as in that Register, there is a Charter
granted by King John of England, wherein ad petitionem Willielmi Regis Scotiae,
he grants a Liberty to the Monks of Aberbrothick, to Transport their Goods
through England, free from Custom: And Matthew. Par. in many Treatises related
by him gives them that Title: And Pope Innocent the third, in an express
Rescript in the body of the Canon Law cap. 4. decret. de immunit. Eccles.
writes Innocentius III. Illustri Regi Scotiae, which behoved to be to King
William, who did reign in that Popes time. Nor is this Argument from the
Designation concluding, since it is not convertible; For even Feudatory Kings
did, and do assume their Designation from the Kingdom they hold, as the Kings
of Naples, Sicily, etc. Which evinces that it follows not necessarly, that the
Kings of these Kingdoms are Feudatory Kings; because they were designed Reges
Scotorum, and not Scotiae. And in many places of his History Matthew. Paris calls
the Kings of England, Reges Anglorum, as in the whole Lives of King John, Henry
the third.

It appears also, by the former Transaction betwixt Edward the first, and the
Governors of Scotland, that Margaret is even by the King of England,
constantly Designed Regina ac Domina Scotiae: And I observe, that in the
Contract of Marriage, betwixt Henry the VII. for his Daughter Queen Margaret,
and James the IV. that sometimes the King of Scotland is called Rex Scotorum,
and sometimes Rex Scotiae, in the same paper; and the Commission granted by the
King of Scotland, for completing that Marriage, is called Commissio regis
Scotiae pro matrimonio; in all which Contract, the King of Scotland is called,
Charissimus noster frater, a Title never granted to a Feudatory King by his
Superior, and the people of Scotland, are there called Subditi Regis Scotiae,
whereas if the King of Scotland, had been only a Feudatory Prince, we had been
Subjects to the King of England, and not to the King of Scotland. And there
needs no other Argument against Heylen, to prove that the Kings of Scotland,
were oft-times called reges Scotiae, than the instance brought by himself, of
the Charter granted by King Edward the first to Peter Dodge, wherein Baliol is
confessed by himself to be called Roy de Escosse, King of Scotland: And this
proves that the said Heylen lays down Grounds, which are not only false, but
inconsistent. But secondly, though this were true, yet it proves nothing; seeing
the Goths and Picts were a free people; and yet their Kings were called Reges
Pictorum and Gothorum, which Phrase was ordinary amongst Conquering Nations,
such as the Scots were, whose Princes having at first no fixed Kingdom, did,
whilst their people were spreading themselves in Collonies, rather assume a
Title from the people, than from their Country. And seeing Men are Vassals and
not Land, it will follow, according to the terms used by Feudalists, that seeing
our Kings were reges Scotorum, that therefore the men were not Vassals; and so
they hold not their Land of the Crown of England, nor were ejus subvassalli,
aut Valvassores.

The Argument urged from many Decisions in England, finding that we were
punishable as Traitors in England, and that we were looked upon as Subjects and
not as Aliens, by their Judges, deserves no other Answer, then that since their
Kings by their power, could not make us Vassals, neither could their
Parliaments or Judges treat us as such; And if their Gown-men could have made
us such, they needed not have employed Arms to have shed so much Blood in the
quarrel: Nor can such Domestic Testimonies prove in a case of so great
importance. And yet even the English Proceedings against those of our Nation
shows, that their own Judicatories and Lawyers, consider us not as Vassals, but
as the Subjects of a free and independent Kingdom. And amongst many other
Instances, I shall only remember that of Queen Mary, against whom that Nation
proceeded not as a Vassal, but as a person who had made her self liable to
their Jurisdiction, ratione loci delicti. Which is very clear by Zouch. de
judicio inter gentes, part. 2. sect. 6. whose very words I have here set down,
to prove not only this, but that the Kings of Scotland were absoluti, and equal
to, and independent from those of England, being both pares and absoluti
principes, His words are, Erant boni rerum Estimatores, qui asperius cum illa
actum affirmabant, eo quod fuerit Princips libera and absoluta, in quam solius
Dei sit Imperium, quod in majestatem peccare non posset, cui subdita non fuerit
quod par in parem non habeat potestatem, unde judicium Imperatoris in Robertum
Siciliae regem, irritum pronounciatum est, quia Imperio ejus non esset
subditus. Alii aliter censebant, illam scilicet, subditam esse etsi non
originariam, tamen temporariam; Quia duo absoluti principes quoad authoritatem,
in uno Regno esse non possunt; parem in parem habere potestatem, quoties paris
judicio se submiserit, vel express verbis, vel tacit contrahendo, vel
delinquendo, intra paris scilicet jurisdictionem, and Papam sententiam
Imperatoris in Robertum Siculum rescidisse, quod factum in territorio Imperiali
non fuerit, sed Papali. Denique nullum magnum extare exemplum, quod non aliquid
ex iniquo habeat. And in the Process against the Bishop of Ross, as it is
related both by the Foreign Lawyers, and by Cambden, it clearly appears that
he was proceeded against, not as a Subject of England, but as a mere stranger,
who not being subject ratione originis, became subject ratione delicti, as they
alleged. And the Learned Author of the late jus maritimum, page 451. having
spoken of the Jurisdiction of England over Ireland, has these words, But in
Scotland it is otherwise, for that is a Kingdom absolute, and not like
Ireland, which is a Crown annexed by Conquest, but the other is by Union: And
though they be United under one Prince ad fidem, yet their Laws are distinct,
so as they had never been United; and therefore the Execution of the judgments
in each other, must be done upon Request, and that according to the Law of
Nations. Nor need I answer the Argument brought from the procedure, against the
Heroic Wallace and others, for these instances show rather an excessive
resentment upon present Hostilities, then the Justice of those, who against the
Law of Nations, proceeded to murder such as were indeed prisoners of War,
fighting for their own Native King and Country: And even the English of that
age, by entering into Truces, Ransoming of Prisoners, and doing all other things
(which are only allowable in a just War) may convince all Mankind, that in this
and the like Instances, they succumb'd to the bitterness of their present
Passion.

I must here also crave Leave to assert, That though Vassals are not to be
treated as Aliens, yet we find very frequently in History, that whole Nations
have been Naturalized, and have had all the Privileges of Subjects
communicated to them, without being Vassals or Subjects: And thus the Pelopidae
were naturalized Persians, by Artaxerxes King of the Persians, and allowed to
enjoy all their Privileges, in remuneration of the great Services done by them
to the Persians, as Plutarch observes in the Life of Pelopidas: And thus the
Athenians communicated their Privileges to the Rhodians; and the Latins to the
Romans, as Livius observes lib. 25. And it is very clear, that the like was
done by the English to us, by a Statute of St. Edward, which is yet extant in a
Book called (...) published by William Lambert, anno 1568. And Ratified by the
Conqueror, amongst the good Laws of that Prince, as Hollenshed observes.
Amongst others who are to be reputed of the same Nation with the English, we
find the Scots mentioned in the Statute; for which two Reasons are given in it,
quia omnes ferme Scoti proceres ex Anglis conjuges coeperunt, and ipsi rursus
ex Scotis, and sic sacti sunt duo in carne una; That is to say, Because most of
all the Scottish Nobility did take Wives of English Extraction, and the English
of Scottish.

The second Reason added in that Statute is, quia simul and in unum contra
Danos and Norwegos atrocissime pugnaverunt. And it is very well known to such
as understand History, that until these late and unhappy Wars, occasioned by
the Shires of Northumberland, Westmorland and Cumberland, the Scots assisted
the English in all their Wars; especially, as that Statute says, against the
Danes and Norwegians, by whom they were called by those Invaders, to share in
the Victory; but they refused the offer, and fought near two hundred Years
against these Usurpers: In which Wars, they are said to have lost two Kings,
with an hundred thousand Men; all which the Scots might have preveened, by
suffering the Danes to pass peaceably to England, through their Territories.
And it is observable in the Histories of both Nations, that the Danes were
never expulsed from England, till they were first beat in Scotland; till at
last they were forced to swear, that they should never return into this Isle;
and in Return of which Assistance, we got from England this Privilege in the
same manner, that Lewis the XII. communicated to us a general Naturalization in
France, with all the Privileges competent to the Natives of that Kingdom, when
we were forced to associat with it, to secure our selves against the invasions
of our old friends.

CHAP. IV. The Debates betwixt the Kings of Pole, Sweden, Denmark, etc. and
other Princes.
THe King of Sweden pretends to Precedencie from the other two; and Nolden in
his Treatise of Nobility, chap. 9. number. 107. leaves the Precedencie betwixt
Sweden and Denmark to be dubious: And though some prefer the Dane as a Member
of the Empire, grafted therein in anno 1542. Yet others think him, upon that
account, the less preferable, because he is thereby in a manner no free and
Sovereign Prince; Peter King of Denmark having really become Vassal to
Fredericus 1. Emperor, Otto. Fris. lib. 2. cap. 21. But Pontanus relates that
the Emperor did upon this account give him the right hand, and thereby
preferred him to Sweden. I find also in the Council of Basil, that Ravallus
Archbishop of Vpsale, did claim Precedencie to his Master the King of Sweden
from all the Christian Princes, he being the true Successor of the Gothish
Kings, who exacted Tribute even from the Emperors and Kings of France. Both
Denmark and Sweden, claim the Precedencie from the King of Pole, as an Elective
and Limited Monarch: And in the Ceremonial of Rome, Pole is placed after the
other two: And it is undeniable, that Sigismund King of Swed, being chosen King
of Pole, he did in all his papers prefer always the Title of Sweden to that of
Pole.

The King of Pole has debated for Precedence with the King of Portugal, in anno
1557. But at Rome, Pope Julius the second, preferred Portugal: And yet the
Debate was renewed under Charles the fifth, In whose Reign, both their
Ambassadors meeting in his Court at Church, and the Ambassador of Portugal
having possessed the first place, the other made a sign, as if he would have
spoken in private with him, at which the Portugal rose, whereupon the Polonian
run in to his seat, Hottoman de Legate. lib. 3. cap. 21.

The King of Hungary contests for Precedence with the King of Pole: But in the
interview betwixt Maximilian the Emperor, Sigismund King of Pole, Vladislaus
King of Hungary, and Lodowick King of Bohemia, in anno 1515. the King of Pole
was preferred to walk on the Emperors right hand. But this Controversy being
renewed at the Council of Trent, They, as all other Kings were ordained to take
place, not according to their Dignities, but according to the date of the
Production of their Commissions in the Council.

The King of Hungary argues for the Precedence from the King of Bohemia:
Because, amongst the Emperors Titles, Hungary is set down before Bohemia; But
Bohemia oppons the Golden-bull of Charles the fourth Emperor, Wherein it is
ordained, that in all Acts which concern the Empire, Bohemia shall proceed all
other Kings: So that it seems that the King of Hungary ought to preceed in all
things not relating to the Empire; But that Bohemia is to preceed in all that
relates thereto.

There are other Sovereigns who are not Crowned-heads, Such as Savoy, Mantua,
Florence, Ferara, Parma, Venice, who Debate also their respective Precedencies
in this manner.

The Duke of Savoy is by Pius the fifth, Declared to be the first Prince of
Italy, And in the Chapels of France, Venice, etc. gets the first S^^l, And as
King of Cyprus pretends to be ranked amongst the Crowned-heads: But it may be
admired why the Duke of Savoy takes the Title of Royal Highness; For, if he be
King of Cyprus, he ought to have the Title of Majesty; and if he be not King,
Royal Highness is not due to him. And the Duke of Mantua did contend with him,
though his Competition was not sustained, vid. Crus. page 511. And though the
Title of Eminency was bestowed upon the Duchess of Mantua, by Ferdinand the
second; Yet that was a Complement bestowed by the Emperor, rather with respect
to her Sex, and her Relation to the Imperial Family, then to the true Dignity
due to her as Duchess of Mantua, vid. Limneum, Iur. pub. lib. 5. cap. 14.

The Duke of Florence was still preferred to the Duke of Ferara, by Charles the
fifth, And Port. lib. 4. Resp. Juris. 167. confesses, That Florence was
acknowledged to be first, by the Emperor, by Rome, and by France: But yet Paul
the third considering that the Duchy of Florence was only erected in anno
1531. Whereas the Family of Est, were raised to be Dukes by Paul the third,
1452. and were declared Dukes of Ferara by the Emperor, 1454. did therefore
prefer Ferara to Florence.

CHAP. V. The Precedencies amongst Commonwealths.
IT cannot be denied, but that Kings and Crowned-heads have the Precedence from
Commonwealths; though they contend that they being the Freest of all men, are
the Noblest; And being in Effect a Country of Kings, ought to be preferred to
any one King: Especially, since their Government is elder then that of Kings,
men having drawn themselves into Societies, before they either submitted to
Kings who assumed that Government by Force, or Elected Kings, because they
could not agree amongst themselves.

There are some Commonwealths who claim precedence, as having right to
Kingdoms: And thus Venice claimed the same precedence with Crown'd-heads in the
Popedom of Urban the eight, and Innocent the fifth, because they had right to
the Kingdom of Corsica; But this was denied.

Genoa contended with Venice for precedence at the Coronation of the King of
Cyprus, 1373. but that King preferred Venice: And to extinguish these
Differences amongst the Commonwealths of Italy, Venice is by opinion of all
Lawyers, preferred to all the Commonwealths of Italy, Calefat. de Equestr.
dignit. n. 124. Crus. de preced. page 536.

Genoa and Sienna did also contend, anno 1530. at the Coronation of Charles the
fifth; but the Debate was then decided: And yet Crus. page 545. prefers Genoa.

The States General contend with Venice, and all other Commonwealths, as being
the more powerful, and being a Society of Commonwealths. They pretend also to
Precedence from all the Princes of the Empire, as being more Independent then
they, and being equal to Kings; Whereas these Princes are but Subjects, which
is delicately Debated by Besold. de praeced. cap. 2. But yet the present
Emperor has preferred the Electors to all Ambassadors of Commonwealths, by
an express Ordinance related in Crus. p. 545. And now Holland, as having a
kindness for the Empire, Treats the Ambassadors of the Electors, as those sent
by Crowned-heads: And in return of that Kindness, the Electors Treat such as
are sent from Holland, with the same Respect, Memor. Ambassad. page 523.

Of old the Duke of Savoy did preceed the Commonwealth of Venice: But Emanuel
Philbert Duke of Savoy, during the Oppression he lay under from Charles the
fifth, put himself under the protection of Venice, and became a Son of St.
Mark; And thereafter, as the Father behooved to preceed the Son, the Dukes of
Savoy yielded to Venice: And as that Duke pretends Right to the Crown of
Cyprus, by the Marriage of Anne of Cyprus, and the Donation of Charlot of
Cyprus: So Venice pretends Right to the same Crown by the Donation of Catharine
Cornara, Widow to James King of Cyprus. The Difference is now thus settled,
That Venice shall Treat the Ambassadors of Savoy, as they do these of Kings,
with the title of Excellency, And Savoy shall allow Venice the Precedence,
Memor. Ambassad. page 347.

Mazarin treated the Ambassadors of the Commonwealth of England, as those
sent from Kings, Mem. Ambassad. page 334.

The Cantons of Swisse were even of late a part of the Empire: But by the
Treaty betwixt the Empire and the King of Swed, 1648. they are declared Free
States, Et in possessione seu quasi possessione libertatis, and exemptionis ab
Imperio. And now their Ambassadors or Envoys take place after the Venetian,
and States General. And albeit Nolden de Stat. Nobil. Thinks that if they were
called to fit with the States of the Empire upon any extraordinar Occasion,
they were not to be preferred to the Princes of the Empire, and much less to
the Electors: For licet jura Principum habent passive and materialiter,
Principes tamen non sunt formaliter and active. Yet other Lawyers prefer them
to all the other States and Princes of the Empire, except the Electors, Crus.
page 556. The French King treats them with the title of Magnifiques Seigneurs:
And though their Deputies could not prevail with the French King, in anno 1602.
and 1603. to be covered when he received them; Yet I conceive, that now they
will be received as the Ambassadors of Holland or Venice, who are covered at
their Reception, since in anno 1646. they are acknowledged to be a Free State.

The Grison Ambassadors were received in anno 1627. as the Ministers sent by
the Princes of the Empire, and with the same Honors.

CHAP VI. Of the Precedence of the Electors and the Princes of the Empire.
AMongst the Princes of the Empire, the Electors are still preferred: Which
Electoral College (though said to be Founded by the Emperor Otho the third,
and Pope Gregory the fifth, anno 997) yet it is more probable, that the said
Constitution arose from the great Difficulties under which the Empire was Sunk,
after the Death of Frederick the second.

Amongst the Electors, the Ecclesiastics are preferred to the Laics.

The Ecclesiastic Electors, are, the Archbishops of Mentz, Cullen, and
Treves, whose Precedence amongst themselves was first Determined by Charles the
fourth: So as that the Bishop of Treves was to sit just over against the
Emperor; The Bishop of Mentz, was to take place in all his own Dyocie, and in
all Germany* Whereas the Archbishop of Cullen, was to take place in all his
own Dyocie, and in Italy, and France. And of old in the Election of the
Emperor, the Bishop of Mentz was preferred as Arch-chancellor of Germany: The
Archbishop of Treves as Arch-Chancellour of France: And the Archbishop of
Cullen as Arch-chancellour of Italy; Which Order was confirmed by Frederick the
1. anno 1158.

The Secular Electors are Ranked thus, by the Golden-bull of Charles the fourth.

The Duke of Saxony carries the Sword, immediately in all Processions before
the Emperor: The Count-Palatin the Imperial Aple, walking on the Emperors
Right hand: The Marquess of Brandenburg the Scepter, on the Left hand; And the
King of Bohemia was to follow him immediately. But when they sit at any
Solemnity, by the same Bull, The King of Bohemia (being a Crowned-head) was to
sit first, upon the Emperors Right hand, after the King of the Romans, and the
Archbishops of Mentz, and Cullen: And upon the Left, after the Ecclesiastic
Electors, the Duke of Saxony had the first place, and the Marquess of
Brandenburg the second. But yet I find Beutherus, and other German Lawyers,
contend from old Manuscripts, That at first Brandenburg had the Precedence from
the Electors, Palatin, and Saxony.

The Duke of Bavaria did of old Contend with the Duke of Saxony, in anno 1521.
and their Debates continued by protestations for many years; And with the
Elector Palatin, till the Emperor Lewis the fourth Ordained the Palatin and
Bavaria to preceed one another alternately: Though since the late Waries of
Germany, the Elector Palatin having Usurped the Crown of Bohemia, the Duke of
Bavaria was made the first Elector in his place, the Elector Palatin being now
the last of the Electors.

It is also observable, That if any of the Electors themselves be present, they
are preferred to the Ambassadors, and Representatives of all the absent
Electors; as was Decided in anno. 1654. Excepting only the Ambassadors of
Austria, and the Ambassadors of Foreign Kings, were still allowed to take
place from all the Electors, except the King of Bohemia, in all the Solemnities
of the Empire. But the Ambassadors of Commonwealths having claimed the same
precedence, The Emperor Leopold has Decerned against them, in favors of the
Electors, Crus. lib. 4. cap. 4.

The eldest Sons of the Electors preceed all the other Princes of the Empire.

The Archdukes of Austria have the first Seat next to the Electors.

CHAP. VII. Of the Precedence of Churchmen.
I Need not debate the Differencies that have fallen in amongst the Patriarchs
of Rome, Constantinople, Antioch, Alexandria, and Jerusalem: Those of Rome and
Constantinople having claimed Precedence, because their See were the seats of
the Roman and Grecian Empires; Those of Jerusalem claiming preference, because
the chief Priesthood was once settled there; Those of Antioch claiming
precedence, because Antioch was the first seat of Christianity, as is clear by
the 11. chapter of the Acts; And those of Alexandria, pretending that they were
equal to the Roman Patriarch, at least, because Alexandria was the chief City
of the East before the building of Constantinople, and the Church thereof being
by Eusebius. lib. 11. said to be (...). vide, Salmas. de Primat. pap. cap. 12.
Thus far did Precedence invade even Religion, and raise Emulation amongst those
who pretended to be the greatest Paterns of Humility.

The Roman Patriarch was by Phocas the Emperor raised above all the rest, in
the year 606. since which time they have raised themselves by several Degrees
to the Papacy, though it cannot be denied but even before that time, the
Bishops of Rome had the first Seat in all Councils, as is clear by Justinians
Novella. 131. cap. 2. And in the Council of Nice, Adrian Bishop of Rome had
(...): But the (...) Or the power of preceding did still belong to the
Emperors, as has been fully cleared by Crusius and others: And though it be
pretended, that Constantine the Great did from Christian Humility, prefer the
Successor of St. Peter as Vicar of JESUS CHRIST to himself; and that in the
Canon Law, cap. Constantinus 14. Did. 96. the Emperor Constantin is brought
in acknowledging himself to have led the Popes Bridle, and in the Famous
Ceremonial of Rome: Fol. 21. the Emperor is allowed no higher place then the
Popes Footstool; Yet Frederick the 1. Emperor did contentiously Debate this
Precedence with Adrian the fourth, since which time it has been variously
acquiesced in by Popes and Emperors. And though the Legates be Representatives
of the Popes, yet Thuan tells us, lib. 98. That the Learned Brissonius
President of the Parliament of Paris, would not suffer the Popes Legate to
preceed him. And at the Coronation of Charles the fifth, the Pops Legate was
denied the precedence from the Electors.

The Cardinals have Debated for Precedence with the Patriarchs, though by the
Novella, 132. c. 2. Justinian places Patriarchs next to the Pope: And Panormit.
in cap. antiqua X de privileg. and excess. Praelat. prefers the Patriarchs to
the Cardinals; and now by the Concession of Sextus Quintus, that Pope, has
raised the Cardinals to an equal Degree with Kings, and if Kings be present at
Table, or other Solemnities with Cardinals, If there be but one King, he is to
sit after the first Cardinal Bishop, and if there be more Kings, they sit mixtly
with the Cardinals, first a Cardinal and then a King: But though this holds
amongst Popish Princes, yet the Author of Les Memoirs des Ambassadeurs does
Observe, That Leicester, Grotius, and the other Ambassadors of PROTESTANT
Princes never yielded Precedence to Cardinals, till Lockhart Ambassador for
Cromwell yielded it to Cardinal Mazarine; Where he likewise observes, That
though the Prince of Condie, yielded the Precedence to Cardinal Rechlieu, yet
the Count of Soisson refused it.

The Bishops of Scotland preceed in this manner.
Archbishops of St. Andrews, Archbishops of Glasgow. Bishops of Edinburgh,
Bishops of Galloway, Bishops of Dunkel, Bishops of Aberdeen, Bishops of Murray,
Bishops of Rosse, Bishops of Brechin, Bishops of Dumblane, Bishops of
Caithness, Bishops of the Isles, Bishops of Argyl, Bishops of Orknay.
I find by Letter in anno 1625. that before King James going into England, the
Marquesses of Scotland did take place from the Archbishops; But now the
Archbishops take place from all Dukes and Marquesses, in imitation of England:
And by a Letter in anno 1626. renewed in anno 1664. The Archbishop of St.
Andrews is to take place from all Subjects, which is to be limited, as not to
exclude the Kings Children, and Brothers as I conceive; And de facto the
Archbishops of St. Andrews ceds to the Chancellor, since the Letter.

The Bishops of England Preceed thus*
Archbishops of Canterbury, Archbishops of York. Bishops of London, Bishops
of Durham, Bishops of Winchester, Bishops of St. David's, Bishops of Ely,
Bishops of Norwich, Bishops of Hereford, Bishops of Salisbury, Bishops of
Peterborough, Bishops of Carlisle, Bishops of Worcester, Bishops of Rochester,
Bishops of Landaff, Bishops of Lincoln, Bishops of Bangor, Bishops of Exeter,
Bishops of Chichester, Bishops of St. Asaph, Bishops of Oxford, Bishops of
Lichfield and Coventrie, Bishops of Bristol, Bishops of Gloucester, Bishops of
Chester, Bishops of Bath and Wells.
CHAP. VIII. General Observations concerning the Precedence of Subjects.
NObility is divided with Us, as in England in Nobiles Majores and Minores, the
Greater and the Lesser Nobility: Under the Greater are comprehended all such as
are Lords of Parliament: Under the Lesser are comprehended Knights and
Gentlemen. And though all these be not Peers of Parliament, yet they are all
Peers to one another; And thus a Gentlemen may be offered to a Dukes Daughter,
whose Ward and Marriage falls to the King, as has been often decyded, nor can
that Match be refused upon the account of Inequality: And it has been found,
that though Noblemen must be judged by their Peers, yet Landed Gentlemen may
pass upon their Assyse; and a Nobleman is obliged to accept of a Challenge
from a Gentleman as his Peer, where Duels are Lawful. Under the word Barron all
Our Nobility are comprehended, as is clear by the 81. Act. Parl. 14. Ia. 2d.
And the Inscription of the first Parliament of K. Ia. 5th. where the Parliament
is said to be holden per Regis and Regni tutorem una cum Praelatis Barronibus
and Burgorum Commissariis. Albeit the Parliament of Rob. 1. was cum Episcopis,
Abbatibus, Prioribus, Comitibus, Barronibus, and aliis Magnatibus, which shows,
that there were other Magnates infra Barrones. It may be Doubted, Whether the
Younger Son of Dukes, Marquesses, etc. are to be Ranked inter Nobiles majores,
since they sit not in Parliament; Or inter Nobiles Minores, since they are
designed Lords, and take place from many of the Nobiles Majores.

The Sons of the Kings of France were all Kings, and Sovereigns in the first
two Races, Because, according to the old German Custom, the Few and Honors
were divided equally amongst the Sons: As now all the Sons of a Duke are Dukes
there, etc. But thereafter all the other Children, except the Eldest, got only
place and Precedence according to their Offices or Dignities, until Philip de
Valois Succeeded as Prince of the Blood in a remot Degree; After which, the
French thought fit to give Precedence to those, who might one day be their
King: And so all the Princes of the Blood got precedence from all Subjects.

With Us the Kings Children, Uncles, and Nephews, only had precedence from all
Subjects; And in SCOTLAND no remoter Degree preceed as Princes of the Blood,
For the Families of Hamiltoun, Kinghorne, Fintrie, and others are Descended
from Our Kings by lawful Marriages, but had no precedence upon that account.

The first place next to the King is due to the Prince of SCOTLAND amongst Us,
who is likewise Duke of Rothesay; as the second Son is Earl of Ross, that
being an Appanage inseparable from him by Act of Parliament: But at present his
Royal Highness is with Us Duke of Albany, as he is Duke of York in England.

It has been doubted, Whether the Kings Son, Uncle, Nephew, etc. have the
Precedence from the Kings Officers in the actual exercise of their Office, as
at Coronations, Riding of Parliaments, in which it is the Constables privilege
to ride upon the Kings Right hand, and the Marishals on his Left, in his return
from the Parliament house: The Reason of which Difficulty is, because these are
Acts which follow the office and not Blood, and the Nature of the Action
requires that they should be posted, where they may be most serviceable. I find
likewise, that this has been Debated in France, whereupon in anno 1576. Henry
the third emitted an Ordinance in Favors of the Princes of the Blood; And with
Us, his Royal Highness the Duke of York at His Majesty's Coronation preceeded
all the Officers.

Amongst the Princes of the Blood, the Last descended from the Royal Family has
still Precedence accordingly; But though this hold in the Branches, yet the
Eldest of the same Branch will preceed all of that Branch, and thus the Prince
Palatins Grandchild would succeed to the Crown before Prince Rupert his
Brother, though Prince Rupert be several Degrees nearer.

I find that of old all Churchmen were Ranked together, and were first Ranked
before all Laics: And thus the Parliament of King Robert the first, was habito
Solemni tractatu cum Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Comitibus; and even
before the Kings Sons, Brothers, or Nephews. Thus King Robert the first grants
a Charter to the Abbacy of Aberbrothick, Confirming a Ratification made to them
be Lundie, wherein the Witnesses are, Reverendis Waltero and Gilberto
Episcopis, etc. Davide Duce de Rothesay, Comite de Carrick, Carissimo nostro
Filio primigenito, Roberto Duce de Albania Comite Fyffe and Fratre nostro: And
even the Abbots and Priors were Ranked before them, and when any of them were
Officers of State, they were named according to their Ecclesiastic
preferments: Thus Iacobo Sancti Andreae Episcopo, Galvino Archiepiscopo
Glaseuensi Cancellario nostro. And in the Session when it consisted of half
Churchmen, half Laics, the Churchmen sat on the Chancellors Right hand, and
Voted first: But it does not follow from these Instances, that therefore of old
any Churchman did take place from the Kings Son, no more then that a Bishop
took then place of an Earl, because he was named before them.

The Archbishop of St. Andrews was by a special Letter in anno 1626. and
Renewed in January, 1664. Declared to have the Precedence from the Chancellor,
and all His Majesty's Subjects: In time of Popery, he was Legatus natus, and
both then and now he is totius Scotiae Primas; But though by this Letter he is
Ordained to take the place of all Subjects, yet I think it would not give him
place from the Kings Sons, Uncles, and Nephews, though they be likewise
Subjects; since the word Subjects must be here Interpret according to the
Custom of Nations, by which these near Relations of Princes are preferred to
all other Subjects. The Nobility of Scotland were either Declared such by
Feudal Erections, their Lands being Erected by the King in a Duchy, Earldom,
etc. which did of it self make him a Duke or Earl, in whose Favors the Lands
were so Erected; Or else they got Patents of Honor, Declaring them Dukes,
Earls, etc. and this is a much later way, none being Nobilitated by Patents
amongst Us before King James the first.

The third way of Nobilitating with Us, is by Creation and Solemn Investiture,
the whole Form whereof will in all its Ceremonies be best known by the
following Narration.

The Form of the Creation of the Marquess of Hamilton, and Marquess of Huntly,
tuesday the 17 of April, 1599.
IN His Majesty's great Chamber in the Abbay of Holy-rood-house, where the like
Ceremony was wont to be done, being richly hung with Tapistry, five Stages or
Degrees of Timber were Erected; One for His Majesty on the West Side, whereon
His Majesty's Chair of State was set under the pale of Honor; One for the
Duke; One for the Earls; One for the Lords; and one for the Knights: There was
also before the Throne a Table covered with cloth of Gold, whereon was laid
the Sword, Scepter, and Crown, the Noblemen attending the Ceremony in their
respective Seats in their Robes, and His Majesty in His Rob-Royal, being
placed in His Chair, The Queen sitting by; The Lion King of Arms, and Master of
Ceremonies, With the Heralds and Pursivants in their Coats, and Trumpets
sounding, brought in before His Majesty these two Noblemen, viz. The Earls of
Arran and Huntly, the first conveyed be the Duke of Lennox, and Earl of Mar,
the second be the Chancellor, and Earl of Caithnes. Thereafter the Lion asked
His Majesty, If His Majesty would be pleased to promote these Noblemen to
further Honors: His Majesty answered, Yes. Then the Lion, Master of
Ceremonies, with Heralds, Pursivants, and Trumpets, Conveyed them into the
Green Council Chamger, where they were Divested of their Comital Robes, and
Vested in the habit of a Marquess, And so were again conveyed to His Majesty's
presence thus,

The Ordinary Macers that attend the Chancellor and Session making place:
Master of Ceremonies. Trumpets sounding with the Noblemens Colors at their
Trumpets, Pursivants in their Coats; Heralds in their Coats; Four Gentlemen
for each of the Persons to be Created, bearing their Honors, viz. For my Lord
Arran, Robert Hamilton of Goslington, the Penon; Alexander Hamilton of Fenton,
the Banner; Claud Hamilton of Shawfield, the Marquess Crown; John Campbel of
Ardkinlas, the Patent. For my Lord Huntly, John Ogilvy of the Craig, the Penon;
John Crichton of Frendraught, the Banner; Mark Ker of Ormistoun, the Crown;
Alexander Gordon of Strathdon, the Patent. Lion King of Arms.


The two Earls conveyed be the forenamed Noblemen in their respective Robes,
and Crowns on their Heads:

Coming before the King they made their Reverence; Then they were led up by the
Master of Ceremonies some steps, and sitting down on their Knees on Velvet
Cushions, the Lion made an Harrangue, both to His Majesty and to them,
Declaring to the Noblemen, That it pleased His Majesty to promote them to that
Dignity, and that he desired them to Fear GOD, and obey His Power: Then he took
their Oaths, that they should obey GOD, his Majesty, and mantain the Religion
then professed. Thereafter the Lion delivered to His Majesty the Patents, and His
Majesty redelivered them to the Lion, who gave them to the Noblemen, In token
that they should obey GOD and His Majesty's Laws: Afterward, the Lion
delivered His Majesty the Marquesses Coronets, His Majesty redelivered them to
the Lion, The Lion put the Crowns on their Heads, saying, John Marquess of
Hamilton, Earl of Arran, Lord Even, etc. George Marquess of Huntly, Earl of
Enzie, Lord Gordon, and Badzenoch, etc. The same was Proclaimed forth of the
windows by the Heralds and Pursivants, with sound of Trumpet: Then were they
conveyed to their Seats, and placed above the Earls, upon the Kings left Hand,
Trumpets sounding.

The Lion desired His Majesty to Honor the Gentlemen, who bare the Honors,
with the Honor of Knighthood, His Majesty consented: The Lion caused them sit
down on their Knees at the foot of all the Stage, and after he had made an
Exhortation to them, and received all their Oaths, they holding up their Hands,
and promising to obey all the Injunctions, The Lion presented the Sword to His
Majesty, who stroke each of them therewith on the Right shoulder, and Sir
offered the Spur, the Lion first proclaiming their Styls, and after the
Heralds and Pursivants at the windows with sound of Trumpet.

I find this Difference in the Creation of many Earls from what is here set
down, That the four Gentlemen bear the Honors thus, The first, the Penon; the
second, the Standart; the third, Sword and Belt; the fourth, the Crown; and
lastly, the Lion bear the Patent in a Velvet bag: And that the Lion offered
first to His Majesty the Sword and Belt, and receiving it back, put it on the
Person Nobilitat.

As also when the King was not present, and after His going to England, The
Ceremony was performed be His Majesty's High Commissioner, if there was one at
the time; Or otherwise a Writ was direct to the Lord Chancellor appointing him
Commissioner for that Creation, And then the first thing that was done after
the person to be Created was brought in, the Lion gave the Patent to the
Commissioner, who gave it to the Register, or Clerk of Council to be read. And
I Observe this in all Our old Creations, that if the person to be Dignified was
a Lord formerly, he was conveyed in be two Lords, and the Ceremony of the new
Creation being over, was conveyed to his place by two of that degree to which
he was advanced.

The English Nobility are sometimes Created by being called in a Write to
Parliament, under the Designations of Earls, Viscounts, etc. Which way is
unknown to Us in Scotland, though the King may introduce it at His pleasure.

The Precedence amongst Subjects is thus Established in both Kingdoms.
Dukes of the Blood Royal, Other Dukes according to their Creation, The Eldest
Sons of Dukes of the Blood Royal, Marquesses according to their Creation, Dukes
Eldest Sons, Earls according to their Creation, Marquesses Eldest Sons, Dukes
Younger Sons, Viscounts according to their Creation, Earls Eldest Sons,
Marquesses Younger Sons, Barrons whom We call Lords, Viscounts Eldest Sons,
Earls Younger Sons, Barrons Eldest Sons, Barronets, Viscounts Younger Sons.
But the Officers in England are by Act of Parliament, Henry the 8. thus Ranked:
Lord Chancellor, Lord Thesaurer, The Lord President of the Privy Council, The
Lord Privy Seal.
These four being of the Degree of a Barron, or above, shall sit in Parliament
and all Assemblies of Council, above Dukes not being of the Blood Royal.

The Lord Great Chamberlain, The Lord High Constable of England, The Earl
Marishal of England, The Lord Admiral of England, The Lord Great Master or
Steward of the House, The Lord Chamberlain of the Household.
These last Six, and the Kings principle Secretary, take place according to
their present State; So that if they be Barrons, they take place above all
Barrons; If Earls, above all Earls; If Dukes, above all Dukes.

By a Decree and Establishment under the Great Seal of England 1o. Iacobi, the
following persons are thus Ranked, Knights of the Garter, Knights of the Privy
Council, The Master of the Wards and Liveries, The Lord Chancellor, and
Under-Thesaurer of the Exchequer, The Chancellor of the Duchy, The Chief
Justice of the Kings Bench, The Master of the Rolls, The Chief Justice of the
common Pleas, The Chief Barron of the Exchequer, The other Judges and Barrons
of the degree of the Coif, The Younger Sons of Viscounts, The Younger Sons of
Barrons, The Barronets.


The Precedence amongst Our Nobility differs nothing from what is here set
down, England and We agreeing in all points since the Union of the two
Kingdoms; And especially since the Coronation of King Charles the first, at
which time, he Declared he would have it so: But to prevent Differences betwixt
the Nobility of both Kingdoms, It was Ordered, That all those of the same
Degree in England, should in England take place from all those of the same
Degree in Scotland; And all those of the same Degree in Scotland, should in
Scotland take place of the English: That is to say, All the English Dukes
should take place in England of all the Scots Dukes; And all the Scottish Dukes
in Scotland, should take place of all the English Dukes, which was very Just
and Suetable to the Laws of Nations.

But as to the Ranking of Our Officers, We Differ much from England: For
clearing whereof, it is fit to know, That with Us there were Officers of the
Crown, and Officers of State: The Officers of the Crown were all Designed of
Scotland, as Constabularius Scotiae, etc. In King Malcom the II. his
Parliament; The Offices then Extant were, The Chancellor, the Justice General,
the Chamberlain, the Steward, the Constable, and Marishal; and they are thus
Ranked and have their Respective Fees. But by the Act 31. Parl. 11. Ia. 6. The
Offices of the Crown are Declared to be, The Thesaurer, Secretar, the
Collector, (which Office is now joined with the Thesaurers) the Justice
General, Justice Clerk, Advocat, Master of Requests, Clerk of Register: And
though these be called Officers of the Crown there, I conceive they Differ not
from the Officers of State; And these words Officers of the Crown, and Officers
of State are now Equipollent Terms, so far that all the Officers of State are
Officers of the Crown by this Act: But the High Chamberlain, Constable,
Admiral, and Marishal, are Officers of the Crown, but are not Officers of
State; The speciality of Officers of State being, That in all Acts or Meetings
which concern the State, they sit as Members by Virtue of their office, as in
Parliaments, Conventions, etc. where the Chamberlain and Admiral come not as
such, nor the Constable and Marishal if they were not Earls.

The Officers of State have often contended for Precedence amongst themselves:
And therefore King James did in Privy Council, upon the 17. of June, 1617.
Declare, That in that and all other Parliaments, none should sit as Officers of
State, save eight, and though there should be more of the said Officers by
Deputation, Division, or otherwise; Yet eight only should sit, which eight he
did thus Rank by Act of Council; Thesaurer, Privy Seal, Secretary, Register,
Advocat, Justice Clerk, Thesaurer-deput, Mr. of Requests: And yet His Majesty
having appointed Sir Archibald Atchison to be second Secretary, and he having
contended that his place was to be next the principal Secretary; This was
Opposed by the Register and Advocat, founding themselves upon the said Act of
Council: It was answered thereto, That His Majesty might, notwithstanding of
the said Act, have as many Secretaries as he pleased, and by that His Majesty
was only Limited to eight Officers of State in Parliament; But that
notwithstanding thereof, he might make use of any eight he pleased, and
accordingly he had made use of the Chancellor, Collector, and Comptroller, as
Officers of State in several Parliaments, notwithstanding that they are none of
the eight Officers mentioned in this Act; Likeas K. Ia. had appointed the Lord
Chancellor, being a Nobleman, to sit amongst the Noblemen, and not as
Chancellor, or an Officer of State: The Council did remit this Debate to the
King.

I find that upon the 20. of February, 1623. the whole matter of Precedence
amongst His Majesty's Officers and Counselors is thus Stated: The Lord
Chancellor, The Lord Thesaurer, The Archbishop of St. Andrews, The Archbishop
of Glasgow, The Earls and Viscounts according to their Ranks, Bishops
according to their Ranks, Lord Privy Seal, Lord Secretary, Lord Register, Lord
Advocat, Lord Justice Clerk, Lord Thesaurer-deput, The Lords of the Session
according to their Admission, Barrons and Gentlemen, being Counselors,
according to their Admission.


It is observable from this Act, that Lords of the Session have Precedence from
Privy Counselors in Scotland, otherwise any Counselor of an elder Admission
would be preferred to them; And yet in England, Privy Counselors are preferred
to all the Judges, and even to the chief Justices: And with Us I find no Privy
Councellor take place as such, from any person whatsoever, which seems very
strange; For since the Judicatur it self is placed before the Session, and that
its President has Precedence from the President of the Session, that therefore
its Judges ought to preceed the Judges of the Session. 2do. Though the Lords of
Session are Lords of Council and Session, yet there being Secret Counselors,
gives them a greater nearness, and Argues a greater Trust: And in all matters
of Precedence, these are the Chief Topics for Precedence. 3o. In Law
Counselors are called by the Emperor, Pars Corporis nostri l. quisquis C. ad
L. Iul. Majest. And so to assault them was Treason, and is with Us. 4o. In
France this Question betwixt the Members Magni Concilii, and the Senators of
the Parliament of Paris, is Debated by Boerius, and he prefers the
Counselors; And in Sweden they have place from all the Nobility. 5o. The
Lords of Privy Council have more supereminent power, then the Lords of Session:
For they can stop the Precedor of the Justices, they can Adjourn the Session,
they can grant Precognitions, moderat punishments, etc. Notwithstanding of all
which, such Respect has Our Kings to the Lords of Session, who Distribute
Justice Equally to the People, that they still preferred them to all the
Subjects, except the Lords of Parliament, and their eldest Sons.

It has been contended by the Younger Sons of Noblemen, That they ought to have
Precedence from the Lords of Session; Because, says the second Son of an Earl,
I have Precedence from the Eldest Son of a Lord, and yet he has place from the
Lords of Session, and it is a certain Rule in Precedence, That if I preceed
you, I must preceed him who preceeds you: And if an Earls second Son, and a
Lords eldest Son, and a Lord of Session did meet together, the Earls second
Son could not preceed the Lords eldest Son, except he preceeded also the Lord
of Session. To which nothing can be answered, save that the eldest Sons of
Peers, being presumptive Peers, and such as will be Peers, It is fit that the
Lords of Session, who have but a Temporary Precedence, should not preceed them.

But I find that though in England, the younger Sons of the preceding Rank,
take still the place from the eldest Son of the next mediat, as the younger
sons of Dukes, from the eldest sons of Earls, and the younger Sons of
Marquesses from the elder Sons of Viscounts: And that all the Chain of
Precedence is founded upon this Gradation, and that it seems that Nature has
led men to this Establishment; Yet the eldest Sons of Our Lords (Lord Barons)
refuse to Cede to the second sons of Earls, and it was so of old with Us, and
that which may be given as a Reason for this, is, that it is unreasonable, That
they who are to be Peers, and to have a constant Title, should Cede to such as
have but a Temporary Honor; But if this Reason were sufficient, the younger
Sons of Dukes should not preceed the eldest Sons of Lord Barons.

With Us the eldest Sons of Lord Barons are Designed Masters, as the Master of
Rosse, etc. And of old the Uncles of Lords, after the Death of their elder
Brother, though he left a Son, were called Masters, till the Nephew had a Son:
For which I know no other Reason but that, because they wanted a Tittle, they
took this: For their Father being Lord, there was no Degree below to take, as
the elder Sons of Earls took that of Lord. And I believe, that thus the word
Master was given in England to meaner People, when their name was not known:
For though the word Dominus was refused by Augustus, as importing Slavery,
which the Romans could not bear, rather then from a secret Impulse, as St.
Augustine says, In respect Our SAVIOVR was then Born, who was the True Master,
since Sueton tells, That Tiberius also refused this Title; yet in Complement
even then such as were not known, were called Domini: Obvios (says Seneca) si
nomen non succurrit, Dominos salutamus, and thereafter with the Roman Slavery
this Title grew from being a Complement, to be a Duty: And thus the Grecian
Emperor was called (...), and the eldest son (...): and from this Title of
Master, came Meship amongst Us, which was given to all such as had not a
special Title, as Lord, Sir, etc.

By Act of Parliament likewayes, 14. May 1661. The Lord President of the
Session is Declared to have Precedence from the Register, Advocat, and
Thesaurer-deput; And the Register and Advocat, are Ordained by the same Act to
have Precedence from the Thesaurer-deput: But the Thesaurer-deput pretending
that he is in effect Thesaurer in the Thesaurers absence, and not the
Thesaurer-deput, and that the foresaid Act of Parliament was in absence, he now
pretends Precedence from both the Register and Advocat.

To the end the several Offices may be the better understood, It is fit to know
that the Chancellor is in effect the first Officer in the Nation, and is by his
Office, and by a particular Statute, President in all Courts, Act 1. Parliament
1. Charles the second, which Act of Parliament was made to declare that he was
Presedent of the Exchequer, as well as of other Courts, this having been
pretended to by the Thesaurer: He has his title not from the power of
Cancelling, as the old Gloss says, That Cancellarius est qui habet Officium
scripta responsaque Principis inspicere, and male scripta Cancellare; For it is
not imaginable that he would take his title from what he destroys, and not from
what he does: But from the Cancelli and Bars, within which the Judges did sit
enclosed, (...) as is clear by Cassiodor lib. 11. Epist. 1. Those Cancellarii
of old were in effect the Clerks, and the Chancellor is so called now,
Because, he signs all the public Papers, and Appends the Seal, Ideo quod ad
eum universae publicae referrentur conscriptiones, ipseque eas annulo Regis
sive* Sigillo firmaret, Simaque lib. 1. calls him Questor Legum, Conditor
Regalis, Consilii, Particeps, Iustitiae Arbiter: Which names I conceive are
given to him, because Novel. 114. Divinae jussiones debent habere
subscriptionem gloriosissimi Questoris, and many of the Novels are signed
Questor Legum.

I find that in the Laws of King Malcolm Keanmore, the Chancellor is placed
before all the Officers, and sometimes many of the considerable Earls are
placed betwixt him and the rest of the Officers: Thus King Alexander grantes a
Charter, Testibus Willielmo de Bosco Cancellario meo, Malcolmo Comite de Fyffe,
Alano Senescall^ Scotiae, etc.

Some think that there is a Difference betwixt Cancellario meo, whom they make
Director of the Chancery, and Cancellario Regni, whom they make High
Chancellor: And others make a Difference betwixt Cancellarium Regni and
Cancellarium Regis, as Spotswood in his History observes. But I find that the
High Chancellor is called Cancellarius meus, as in the foresaid charter, and
sometimes Cancellarius simply, and sometimes Cancellarius Noster, and sometimes
Regni, and sometimes Cancellarius Scotiae; And the same Willielmus de Bosco, is
in the Chartularies of Aberbrothick, and Calco, or Kelso, named under all these
Designations.

I find the Director of the Chancery, was only a servant to the Chancellor of
old: For in King Malcolms time, amongst the Fees to be paid to the
Chancellours Clerks, there is a Fee to be paid to his Clerks for the Breeves,
which Breeves belong to the Director of the Chancery; And therefore Skeen does
justly Observe, hinc liquet Officium Directoris Cancellariae apud majores
nostros ad Cancellarium pertinuisse, and which is very clear by the Statutes of
King Rob. 3. cap. 1. verse. 3.

I find that in these Laws, Iusticiarius, that is to say, The Justice General
is placed next the Chancellor, but afterward Scotland was divided in two
Justitiaries, on upon the South Side of Forth, who was called Iusticiarius
Lothaniae, and in old Charters Iudex Laudoniae: And the other on the North-side
of Forth. The Justice General is now neither Officer of the Crown, nor Officer
of State; But yet he thinks he ought to have Precedence from the President of
the Session, the Justice Court being older than the Session; And being
President of a supreme Court, he is to preceed any Inferior Member of any
other Supreme Court: And the King by Declaring that he advanced the Register,
when he made him Justice General, has clearly signified, that the Justice
General ought to preceed the Register: This place likewise has been generally
possessed by Noblemen, and is the same with Us, that the Chief Justice of the
Kings Bench is in England: And this Jurisdiction was amongst others possessed
at Rome, by the Praefectus Praetorio, who was their chief Magistrate.

The Justice Clerk by the foresaid Statutes of King Malcolm, appears to have
been but his Clerk; And though by the foresaid Act of the 11. Parliament K. Ia.
6. The Justice Clerk be named before the Register and Advocat, yet that is
only ob continentiam causae, because they are set down, The Justice, Justice
Clerk, and their Deputs. It is Observable by that Act, that the Justice General
is put after the Thesaurer and Secretary, and there the Justice Clerk is not
made his Officer, as in the Laws of King Malcolm Keanmore. I find that Alanus,
Iusticiarius Scotiae, Designs himself Hostiarius and Iusticiarius Scotiae,
which shows that Hostiarius was a preferable Office: and this I take to be
Commander of the Kings Host; For Ostiarius is not written with an H, and is a
meaner Office then Justice General: This Charter is granted in anno 1253. to
the Abbacy of Aberbrothick, and though others may mistake the Ranking of a man's
Titles, yet the Bearer will carefully Rank his own Designations.

The third Officer named in those Laws is the High Chamberlain, Camerarius
Domini Regis: And I find him in all the old Writes placed as Witness, before
all the other Officers, next to the Chancellor. There was Magnus Camerarius,
who was chief Judge over all the Burrowes; And there were other under
Chamberlains, who are oftentimes Designed Camerarii, without the adjection of
magnus; And I find in a Charter granted be K. David, in anno 1495. the
witnesses are, Alexandro Domino Huyme, magno Camerario nostro, Iohanne Domino
Drumond Iusticiario nostro, Ricardo Murehead Secretario nostro, and Waltero
Drumond nostrorum Rotulorum, and Registri, ac a Consiliis.

It is Observable, that the Officers were oft-times named according to the
quality of the Bearers, and not according to the precedence of the Offices: But
in the former Charter, Dominus de Huyme* and Dominus de Drumond, being of the
same quality, the Chamberlain is put before the Justice General. This Office of
Chamberlanry was possessed Heritably of late by the Dukes of Lennox, and the
Badge was a Golden Key.

This Office is the same with praepositus Sacri Cubiculi, mentioned by
Justinian, and equaled by him to the Praefectus Praetorio, and placed inter
illustres Palatinos, or Counts of the Palace, And is now in France called Grand
Chambrier, and was constantly possessed by the Family of Burbon.

I find the Magnus Camerarius placed before the Thesaurer in a Confirmation,
anno 1520. to the Abbacy of Aberbrothick.

Senescallus Domini Regis, is next in these Laws, that is to say, The High
Steward of Scotland, and Allanus Senescallus Scotiae, is very Famous in all the
old Charters, and he is still placed before the Constable and Marischal: And it
appears, that the High Steward, and the Steward of the Kings House were the
same, for those Laws mention only the Steward of the Kings House; but now the
Prince is Senescallus natus Scotiae: Under him are there placed the Panetarius,
who commands over all the Bakers, and Buttelarius, who commands over all the
Keepers of Taverns, etc.

I find the Lord Souls was Buttelarius Scotiae, in the Letter before set down,
Directed from the Nobility of Scotland to the Pope, in the Reign of King Robert
the Bruce; And I have seen a Charter, wherein John and Thomas Murrayes, sons to
the Governor of Scotland Sir Andrew Murray, were designed Panetarii Scotiae,
upon the Forfeiture of John Cunning Earl of Monteith, in anno 1348. which Earl
of Monteith was formerly Panetarius.

Next to these are named in the foresaid Laws, the Constable and Marischal: But
now the Constable and Marischal take not place as Officers of the Crown, but
according to their creation as Earls; The Reason whereof I conceive to be,
because of old, Offices did not prefer those who possessed them, but they took
place according to their Creation; whereas now the Privy Seal precedes all
Dukes, and the Secretary takes place before all of his own Rank: But the
Constable and Marischal, being now the only two Officers of the Crown that are
Heretable in Scotland, continue to possess as they did formerly: But in France,
England, and all other places, the Constable and Marischal take place as
Officers of the Crown; and it seems very strange, that these who Ride upon the
Kings right and left Hand, when he returns from His Parliaments, and who guard
the Parliament it self, and the Honors, should have no Precedence by their
Offices; And yet I cannot deny, but that of old, other Earls were placed before
them, for in the former Charter granted by King Alexander, Malcolm Earl of Fife
is placed before them.

And I conceive their Precedence has not risen of late to the same proportion
with others; Because of late Our Armies have been commanded by other Officers,
and so there was little use for the Constable and Marischal.

The Constable with Us in these Northern-Nations, is the same Office that the
Comes Stabuli was under the Roman Empire, which may be confirmed by two clear
Testimonies of great Antiquity, one is of Aimon. lib. 3. cap. 7. Land* gesilis
Regalium praepositus equorum, quem vulgo Comes Stabuli vocant; The other is
from Rhegino, lib. 2. Annalium Burchardum Comitem Stabuli sui (quem corrupt
Constabulum appellabis) cum class misit in Corsicam: Though the Learned Cujac.
does believe that this Title comes from the word (...), which signifies, a
company of Men of War, ad l. unic. de Commit. and Tribun. Scolar. And there are
some who derive it from the word Koning, which signifies a King; and Staple,
which signifies a Hold, because some Constables were Commanders of the Kings
Houses: But I find that the High Constable did command the Kings Armies, but
was expressly debarred from commanding either His Houses or Garrisons; as
L'oiseau well observes, lib. 4. cap. 2. Because, says he, It was a great power
that one man should command both the Army, and the Garrisons: The Badge of his
Office was, and is a naked Sword, which in the Roman Empire was the Badge of
the Office, Praefecti Praetorio; and Trajan giving the naked Sword to Suro
Licinius, who was his Praefectus Praetorio, gave it with these words, Pro me si
mereor in me; Which words were thereafter put by Buchanan, with a naked Sword
upon the Money, Coined during the Minority of King James the sixth. The
Constable with Us, was by the Laws of King Malcolm cap. 6. Judge to all Crimes
committed within twelve Miles to the Kings House or Habitation; Though Skeen
observes, that the best Manuscripts bear only two Leagues: But now his
Jurisdiction is only exercised either as to Crimes or otherwise, during the
time of Parliament, which some extend likewise to all general Conventions.

The Marischal is a German word and Office originally, as the Learned Tillet
proves fully, a Marker of Camps* and the Ax which he bears as the Badge of his
Office, was that Instrument wherewith he did break the Ground, though now this
part of his Office is delegated to the Marischal du Camp. The Marischal
commanded the Horse as Tillet proves, whereas the Constable commanded both: But
yet our Learned Craig calls the Constable only Praefectus Equitum; And yet as
Tillet observes, the Marischal was not under the Constable, else he could not
be an Officer of the Crown: For it is essential to all Officers of the Crown,
and Officers of State, to depend upon none but the King. Of old I find the
Orders in Military cases run, to Our Constable and Marischal.

The Office of Marischal has never been out of the Family of Keith: But the
Earls of Athol and several others have been Constables of Scotland; And
therefore it is that the Earl Marischal has no other Title; But the High
Constable designs himself Earl of Errol.

We had no Knight Marischal in Scotland till King Charles the Firsts
Coronation, in anno 1633. at which time it was Erected by a Letter to the Privy
Council; by his Office he is to take place immediately after the younger Sons
of Lords.

The Thesaurer is not mentioned amongst these Officers of the Crown under King
Malcolm Keanmore, and of old it has been thought but an Office of the Kings
House; For in a Confirmation granted to the Abbacy of Aberbrothick, in anno
1529. by King James the fifth, after Reverendissimis Episcopis, and dilectis
consanguineis, are enumerate as Witnesses, dilectis Familiaribus nostris
Roberto Barton, nostro Thesaurario and Computorum nostrorum Rotulatore: Nor do
I find a Thesaurer designed as Witness in any of the Kings Charters till then,
though some foolishly think that Panetarius was Thesaurer. And though the word
Familiar Counselor be now given to all Officers of State, who are not Earls,
because they cannot be called Cousins; Yet of old it was only given to those of
the Kings own Family, and was derived a Familia, though now Familiar is thought
to be the same with Intimate.

Till of late, Thesaurer, Comptroller, and Collector of the Augmentations were
three different Offices, but now they are all joined in one: Comptroller is in
the old Registers called Rotulator.

The Thesaurer takes now place, as second Officer of State, next to the
Chancellor; Next to the Thesaurer is the President of the Privy Council; After
him the Privy Seal; but the Secetary is only first of his own Rank, that is, if
a Duke, the first Duke, etc.

Of old the Secretary was a very Honorable Employment; For as Cassiodor, lib.
1. opist. 4. well observes, Honor hic datur egregiis, dum ad Imperiale
Secretum, tales constat elegi, in quibus reprehensionis vitium non potest
inveniri. But yet I find the Secretary only named in the former Confirmation,
inter Familiares: Of old I find he was Styled, Clericus Regis, though some
Interpret this Clericus Regis, to be either Clerk-Register, or the Kings
Confessor, and Clerk to His Closet, and some that he was Almoner.

We have no Master of Requests now, that charge being swallowed up by the
Secretaries Office; Their Office with Us was, as at Rome, To represent to the
King the complaints of the People, Referendarii says Cassiodor. lib. 6. dolores
alienos asserunt, conquerentium vota satiant, and per eos Iudices corriguntur.

I find that Advocatus Fisci, now Our Kings Advocat, or Atturney-General, was
dignified with the Title of Comes, which is now Earl, l. jubenius i. de Advoc.
diverse. jud. and with the Titles of Clarissimus and Spectabiles, which was only
bestowed on the chief Nobility, l. 4. and 6. eod. tit. and from this seems to
have flowed Our calling them Lord Advocat; And the French calling them Messire,
which Title only the Chancellor and Advocat there get: Upon this Officer, Rome
in the Reign of Claudius the Emperor, bestowed so much Honor, that he said,
Tantum Honoris and Authoritatis concessisse procuratori Caesaris, ut eum suis
Legibus adaequaverit, volueritque ut quod ipse statuisset perinde ratum esset,
ac si ab ipso foret constitutum: And of old they were still of the Order of
Knights; for Tacitus in the life of Agricola, says, utrumque avum procuratorem
Caesaris habuit quae equestris Nobilitas est. The Kings Advocat is with Us, as
in France, Consiliarius Natus, that is to say, is by virtue of his Office a
Privy Counselor, in a more peculiar way than the rest: For I find by the
Records of Council in Queen Mary's time, that the Register and Justice-Clerk
are expressly mentioned in the Commission of Council, but the Advocat is in all
the Sederunts, though he be not named in the Commission. And though with Us it
was not allowed to the Kings Advocat, till Sir Thomas Hope's time, that he
should be present at the Lords advising of Causes, where the Advocat was
himself Interested; Yet I conceive, in Causes which he pleads merely upon the
Kings Account, he ought to be present even when the Cause is advising: This was
allowed Advocato Fisci, for Trajan writing to Plinius, Commands eos adhibere in
Consilium a Praesidibus cum de causa Fiscali agitur, which explains very well,
L. 7. de Iur Fisc. Where si Fiscus alicui status controversiam faciat, Fisci
Advocatus adesse debet, quare si sine Fisci Advocato pronunciatum sit divus
Marcus rescripsit, nihil esse actum and ideo ex integro cognosci opportere: Of
which Office the Learned Budeus gives this Character, Magistratus is est in
quem omnes suas actiones, Princeps, Populus, universi transcripserunt, asylum
Legum, arx Iustitiae, innocentiae vim passae, aut Iudicio circumventae,
propugnaculum, intercessor rerum malarum, suasor rerum bonarum, praesentis
semper animi, Actor, and Defensor, de sententia Iuris and Equitatis.

I find, that though per L. nemo C. de assessor. no man can be both a Judge and
Advocat, yet the Kings Advocats in France have been allowed to be Judges at the
same time they were Advocats; for it was thought that the Office of Kings
Advocat, did naturally participate both of the Judge and Advocat, and so was
not inconsistent with the Employment of a Judge, l. ult. c. de Advocat. Fisc.
and this was so decided by the Parliament of Paris, in June 1605. And from this
We probably in Scotland took occasion, a little after that time, to make Sir
William Oliphant, and of late Sir John Nisbet, both Advocats and Lords of the
Session.

The Almoner with Us has no Precedence for ought I know, though in France, Le
grand Aumosnier is thought to be an Officer of the Crown: He is very often a
Witness in all Our Charters granted be Our Kings, and some think that Clericus
noster was Almoner.

I find that Cockburn of Lanton, who was also custos magni Sigilli, in the
second year of King Robert the thirds Reign, is made heretable Ostiarius nostri
Parliamenti, that is to say, Usher of the Parliament. The Lion and he does
Debate who shall go next to the King, or His Commissioner, in Parliament and
Conventions, The Usher pretending, that if he behoov'd to go after the Lion, he
behooved to go before the Heralds, and so he behooved to walk between the Lion
and his Brethren, which were not decent, (though both in England, and with Us,
I find, that several Degrees of Persons do in all Processions, walk between the
Garter or Lion and his Brethren Heralds;) Likeas, it is employed in the nature
of the Ushers office, that he should immediately usher him to whom he is Usher;
but in England, I find, that at the Cavalcad, when His Majesty entered London,
in anno 1660. and at His Coronation, Garter King of Arms did walk in the midst,
having the Mayor of London on his left hand, and the Knight of the Black-Rod on
his right: And the Author of Les Memoirs des Ambassadeur tells Us, that in anno
1629. at the Procession, for Celebration of that solemn Peace betwixt France
and Spain, the King of Arms did walk immediately before the French King, Le Roy
d'armes merchant immediatement devant Le Roy. I am likewise informed, that in
England, the Precendency runs thus, King of Arms, Usher of the Black-Rod,
Master of Ceremonies, and after him the Gentlemen of the Privy-Chamber, etc.

The Title of Duke came from Dux, a Leader and Commander of an Army, and was at
first a Title of Office, but now is a Dignity given by Kings and Princes, to
men of Blood and good Merit; And with Us, the Prince of Scotland (as is already
said) is Duke of Rothesay.

The word Marquess was first appropriate to the Lords of the Marches and
Frontiers, but is since become a Title of special Dignity betwixt a Duke and
Earl.

Earl came from the Saxon word Ear-ethel, which was abridged to Ear-el, and
afterward by Abbreviation Earl, with the Dutch called Eorle; and at this day
the Germans use the word Grave for it: They are in Latin called Comites with
Us, because in the Roman Empire, Comitatus was called the Court of the Prince,
l. 43. de Testament. Militar. l. 13. ff. de re Militar. and those who attended
the Emperor were called Comites, or his Companions: They were appointed to be
Governors of the several Countries of the Empire, which were from them called
Comitatus or Counties, and Earls are to this day designed Earls of such a
Shire; But the Kings thereafter, being desirous to have their Subjects
depending immediately upon themselves, did appoint Sheriffs in their place to
command the Counties, who are therefore still called Vice-comites.

Some were likewise appointed to command Towns, and so these Comites Vrbium,
were of a meaner Degree, than the Comites Provinciarum; But now Earls who have
their Designations from Towns, are in the same Degree with those who have their
Designations from Provinces.

Counts Palatine were such as had Office in the Kings Palace, and had their
name a Palatio, as is clear by the whole Titles, C. de Palavinis sacrar.
Largit. and tit. de Castren. Palatinorum peculio: But it is fit to know that
these Counts Palatin, or Officers of the Palace differed in the Roman Law from
Domestici, for the Domestici these were properly and only those who were of
the Emperors guards, as is clear, by l. 3. c. de Protect. and Domest. and
Cujac. upon that law. The Counts Palatin in England were such as had Regal
power within their own Jurisdictions, nor do I in my reading find any Counts
Palatin in Scotland, save Walterus Palatinus de Stratherne, who designs himself
Atholiae and Cathaniae Comes; he gives his lands of Cortowhy to the Bishop of
Brichen, in anno 1429. And I believe the Reason why We have so few Counts
Palatin in Scotland, is, because Our Lords of Regality have the same power; But
properly the Officers of the Kings house are only now what the Comites
Palatini were of old.

For Regulating the Precedence amongst Earls and Lords with Us, K. James the
6. did grant a Commission to some Noblemen in March 1606. who upon Citation did
pronunce the following Decreit, according to which Decreit these Noblemen are
at present Ranked, and if any of the Noblemen therein prejudged do Reclaim,
they use to raise a Reduction of the said Decreit before the Session, and
Adject a Conclusion of Declarator, Craving it may be found and declared that
they ought to have Precedence from the Noblemen whom they therein cite:

This Decree is from its Effect called the Decree of Ranking, whereof this is
the Tenor.
AT Edinburgh the 5th. of March, 1606. anent Our Sovereign Lords Letters
directed, Makand mention; Forasmuch as His Majesty and the Lords of His Secret
Council, Considering the great contentions and differencies, quilks many times
occurrit and fell out amongst the Nobility of this Kingdom of Scotland, anent
the Precedence and Priority in Ranking and Voting in Parliament, and general
Councils, and how that this their Contentions lay ever unremembred or agitat,
but at the very instance of their Meeting at His Majesty's Parliaments and
Coventions, at whilk time there was greater matter of Impashment offered to the
Estates to compone their Differences, then to entreat upon the principal
Subjects, for whilk they were assembled: His Majesty and the said Lords,
therefore being careful to have this Contention removed, and the contraversies
and elists, whilks arises amongst the Nobility for that cause settled and
pacified, wherethrow the Estates and Nobility being freed and relieved of such
matter of Contention, they may in Peace, Love, and Amity, concur together, and
Deliberat upon such matters as shall be entreated and motioned in Parliament
hereafter: His Majesty for this effect has given his Highness Commission under
the great Seal, to a number of His Nobility, and who are most indifferent, and
no ways suspect of partiality, to conveen and call before them, the hail
Noblemen of this Kingdom of Scotland, and according to their Productions and
Verifications to set down every man's Rank and Place, as in the Commission
foresaid, past under the great Seal at length is contained; and anent the
Charge given to Lodovick Duke of Lennox, John Marquis of Hamilton, George
Marquis of Huntly, Patrick Earl of Orkney, George Earl of Caithnes, Alexander
Earl of Sutherland, James Earl of Murray, Francis Earl of Errol, George Earl
Marishal, David Earl of Crawfurd, James Earl of Athol, John Earl of Montrose,
James Earl of Pearth, Earl of Monteith, Andrew Earl of Rothes, Alexander Earl
of Dumfermling, Archibald Earl of Argyl, James Earl of Glencairn, John Earl of
Cassils, Earl of Eglington, William Earl of Angus, William Earl of Morton, John
Earl of Mar, Alexander Earl of Lithgow, Earl of Winton, Alexander Earl of
Home; Simond Lord Fraser, Edward Lord Bruce of Kinlosse, John Lord Forbes,
Patrick Lord Glames, James Lord Ogilvy, Alexander Lord Spynie, Patrick Lord
Gray, Laurence Lord Oliphant, John Lord Murray of Tillibairn, David Lord Scoon,
James Lord Lindsey, Lord Sinclar, James Lord Balmerinoch, Patrick Lord Lindors,
James Lord Colvil of Culros, John Lord Fleyming, Alexander Lord Elphingston,
Alexander Lord Stuart of Ochiltry, Thomas Lord Boyd, Allan Lord Cathcart, Hugh
Lord Lowdoun, Robert Lord Semple, Lord Pasley, James Lord Abercorn, John Lord
Maxwel, John Lord Harres, Robert Lord Sanchar, Lord Ross, James Lord Carlyl,
Robert Lord Roxburgh, James Lord Hay of Yeaster, Lord Newbottle, James Lord
Thirlstain, James Lord Torphichen, James Lord Borthwick, Thomas Lord Dirlton,
Lord Seaton; And the Tutors and Curators of the said Dukes, Marquesses,
Earls, Lords, if they any have, to have compeard before the said Lords
Commissioned at an certain day by gain, and to have brought and produced with
them such Writs, Evidents, Documents, and Testimonies, as they have or can use
for acclaiming that Rank and Place of Precedence and Priority challenged be
them before others, To have been seen and considered be the said Lords,
Commissioners, and they to have heard and seen their Ranks and place of
Precedence and Priority appointed and set down be them, according to their
Antiquities of their Productions, and that whilk should be verified in their
presence, and they and every one of them directed to take that place, whilk
should be appointed and prescrived unto them be the said Commissioners, as
said is, Certifying, all such persons as should not compear themselves, or
their Procutors in their names, That the said Lords, Commissioners, will go on
forward in setting down every man's Rank, according to that which should be
verified as said is, and should proceed according to the several Instructions
given be His Majesty to the said Lords Commissioners for this purpose, and the
said Lords Commissioners their Determination should stand in full force and
effect, aye and while an Decreit before the ordinar Judge be recovered and
obtained in the contrar; Likeas at more length is contained in the said Lords
Executions and Indorsations thereof, which being called, and diverse Times and
Dyets kept to that Effect; And the said John Earl of Montrose, Alexander Earl
of Dumfermling, Francis Earl of Errol, George Earl Marishal, and Alexander Earl
of Lithgow, Compearand personally, and the said Alexander Earl of Sutherland,
compearand be Mr. Robert Learmont their Procutor, and the said Earl of Mar,
compearand be Mr. Thomas Hope his Procutor, the said David Earl of Crawfurd
compearand be Laurence Scot his Procutor, the said Andrew Earl of Rothes
compearand be Mr. David Antoun his Procutor, the said William Earl of Mortoun
compearand be Mr. Thomas Learmond his procutor, the said Earl of Monteith
compearand be Graham his Procutor, the said Heugh Earl of Eglington compearand
be John Bell his procutor, and the said John Earl of Cassils compearand be John
Hamilton, and Gilbert Ross, and the said Andrew Lord Stuart of Ochiltry, James
Lord Balmerinoch, James Lord Abercorn compearand personally, the said Lord
Lindsey of the Byres compearand be the said Mr. Robert Learmont his procutor,
the said John Lord Forbes compearand be James Fogo his procutor, the said
Patrick Lord Glames compearand be Mr. Patrick Sharp younger his procutor, the
said Patrick Lord Gray compearand be Patrick Whyllie his procutor, the said
John Lord Seaton compearand be Mr. William Livingston his procutor, the said
Allan Lord Cathcart compearand be George Angus his procutor, the said James
Lord Carlyl compearand be the said Robert Hamilton his procutor, the said
Robert Lord Sanchar compearand be Creichton his procutor, the said James Lord
Hay of Yester compearand be Mr. James Burchar his procutor, the said John Lord
Harres compearand be Corbal Cunningham his procutor, the said James Lord
Torphichen compearand be Mr. Robert Learmont his procutor, the said Lord
Thirlstain compearand be Thomas Fleyming his procutor, the said Alexander Lord
Spynie compearand be the said Mr. Robert Learmont his procutor; And the hail
remanent Lords and Earls particularly abovewritten, being oft-times called and
not Compearand; diverse Terms and Dyets assigned to them for this effect, the
Writs, Evidents, Documents, and Testimonies produced be the said Persons
compearand, and every an of them acclaiming the Priority and Precedence before
others, being diverse times and at diverse Dyets very diligently and exactly
Sighted, Tried, Examined, and Considered be the said Lords Commissioners, and
the said Lords therewith being, as also with the Ranks and Places of such
Earls and Lords as were Promoted and Created in His Majesty's own time, well
and thoroughly Advised; The said Lords Commissioners has Decerned, Decreited,
Appointed; and set down, and be these presents Decerns, Decreits, Appoints, and
sets down the Ranks and Places following, to the hail Noblemen of the Kingdom,
to be Kept, Bruiked, and Possessed by them, in all Parliaments, General
Councils, and public Meetings hereafter.

In the first, The said Lords Commissioners Discerns, and Ordains the Duke of
Lennox to have the first place, the Marquis of Hamilton the second, the Marquis
of Huntly the third, because be the custom inviolablie observed in all Kingdoms
the place of Honor amongst Nobility, is first in the persons of Dukes, and next
Marquesses, and then in the persons of Earls, and Lords; and next unto them
the said Lords Commissioners, Discerns, and Ordains the Earls abovewritten,
to have Bruiked and Possessed their Ranks and places, according as they are
here written, Ranked, and set down, in Order following, Viz. Angus* Argyl,
Crawfurd, Errol, Marishal, Sutherland, Mar, Rothes, Morton, Monteith,
Eglington, Montrose, Cassils, Caithnes, Glencairn, Buchan, Murray, Orkney,
Athol, Linlithgow, Home, Pearth, Dumfermling, and Dumbar: And sicklike, the
said Lords Commissioners Dicerns, and Ordains, the Lords particularly
abovewritten, to have Bruiked and possessed their Ranks and Places, according
as they are here Written, Ranked, and set down in Order following, Viz.
Lindsey, Forbes, Glames, Fleyming, Salton, Gray, Ochiltrie, Cathcart, Carlyl,
Sanchar, Yester, Semple, Sinclar, Harres, Elphingston, Maxwel, Oliphant, Lovat,
Ogilvy, Borthwick, Rosse, Boyd, Torphichen, Pasley, Newbottle, Thirlestain,
Spynie, Roxburgh, Lindors, Lowdoun, Dirleton, Kinloss, Abercorn, Balmerinoch,
Murray of Tillibairn, Colvil, Culrosse, and Scoon. And Decerns and Ordains, all
Earls, and Lords particularly abovewritten, to Keep, Bruik, and Posses their
Ranks and Places in all times coming, according to the Orders and Ranks
abovewritten, now set down, Appointed and Prescrived to them, and to make no
Question, Trouble, nor Plea in this Matter, to any appointed to have place and
rank in the manner foresaid. But prejudice always to such Person or Persons,
as shall find themselves or their Interests prejudged be their present Ranking
to have recourse to the ordinar Remeed of Law, be Reduction before the Lords of
Council and Session of this present Decreit recovered; and of their due Place
and Ranks, be Production of more Ancient and Authentic Writs, nor has been
used in the Contrary of this Process, Summonding all such persons thereto, as
shall think themselves wrongously Ranked, and placed before them: And in the
mean time this present Determination, to stand in full Force, Strength, and
Effect, ay and while the Party Interested and Prejudged obtain Lawfully an
Decreit before the said Lords of Council and Session, as said is; And Ordains
these presents to be Insert and Registrat in the Books of Privy Council, and an
Authentic Extract thereof to be delivered to the Clerk Register, and another
Extract to be delivered to the Lyon-herauld, to be kept be them for the better
knowledge and Information of every man's Ranks and Place, when the Occasion of
their Ranking shall be Presented. Extract de libris Actorum Secreti Consilii,
Act. 8. D. N. Regis, Per me Jacobum Primrose Clericum ejusdem sub meo signo and
subscriptione manualibus.

It is fit to know, that the Earl of Douglas was by Act of Parliament, Declared
to have the first Vote in Parliament, and the Carrying of the Crown, and
leading of the Vanguard; But K. James did in anno 1582. prevail with that Earl,
to suffer the Duke of Lennox to carry the Crown for that time, and in anno
1632. There is a Charter granted to the said Earl in life-rent, and to his Son
in Fee, cum omnibus privilegiis, etc. and specialiter cum privilegio aciem
ducendi, Coronam gerendi. etc. But in anno 1633. the said Earl being Created a
Marquess, it is Declared by Act of Council, that he did quite privilege of
having the the first Vote in Parliament, upon his Promotion; And yet the
Marquis of Douglas still pretends, that any such Renunciation could not have
prejudged the Family, since the Granter of that Renunciation was only a
Life-renter, his son having been in Fee.

I find there are some titles of Nobility in England annexed to places, so that
whoever is in possession of that place, has right to the tittle: Thus it was
found in the case of the Lord Abergavenny, that he in possession of the Castle,
ought to have the title, albeit he be not Heir of Blood. Their Reason is,
because it is a Barony-marchiere, and it has been found, that Baronies and
Castles situate upon the Borders of Scotland and Wales, belong always to the
Owners; the words of the Tenor being per servitium Patriae custodiendae. It is
alleged, as one of the Reasons in that caise, that the Owners of lands,
holding in capite and per Baroniam, have Precedence, albeit they be not next
Heirs.

The next Degree to the Earls is that of Viscount, in Latin Vicecomes; as
being of old Lieutenant to an Earl, Vicecomites, olim dicibantur, quibus castri
Dominus Vices suas committebat seu executionem Iurisdictionis. But afterward
Our King gave not the Government of Counties, or Shires, to Earls, but
appointed Sheriffs who depended upon their own Nomination; and were therefore
called Vicecomites. In Bretagn Barons take place from Viscounts; But there are
no Viscounts in Germany, Bourgrave being in their place, Speculat. tit. de
Vicecometatu and la Roque de nobilit. C. 83. We had no Viscounts in Scotland
before 1606. for by the aforesaid Decree the Lord is declared next to the Earl.

Barons according to Spelman, sunt Clientes Feodales, and Vassalli Capitales,
qui Pagos, Vrbes, Castra, vel eximiam ruris portionem, cum Jurisdiction
acceperunt a Rege; And the word according to him comes from Vir or Vi, i. e.
robur belli: But it is more probable that it comes from the Greek word (...),
gravis, they being chosen wise, and Discreet men. With Us, all are called
Barons who hold their lands of the King in libera Baronia, and who have power
of pit and gallows; and of old they were all heritable Members of Parliament,
as all Barons in England are, as is clear by Act 52. Parl. 3. Ia. 1. whereby
all Barons are appointed to come to Parliament; and though this Act may seem to
be abrogated by the 101. Act, Parliament 7. James the first, whereby the Barons
of each Shire are allowed to choose two wise men to Represent them, which is
the custom at this day; Yet it is observable, that though by that Act they may
for their convenience choose two, yet they are by no express Law discharged to
come in greater numbers: And by the 78. Act Par. 6. Ia. 4. no Baron that had
below the Rent of 1OO. Merks, was to be compelled to come to Parliament, unless
the King particularly wrote for him. And when Taxations were laid on by the
Council, I find by the old Records, as particularly in October 1562. that
Noblemen and Burgesses are called, but no Barons: the Barons and Noblemen
having been then represented promiscuously, and that long after the Act of
Parliament, allowing them to send Commissioners. And this is the Reason, why
Our old Barons, who are not Lords, and hold only their lands in free Barony,
have supporters in their Achievement; and that with some reluctance they yield
the Precedence to Knights-Baronets, they being Originally heritable
Counselors to the King as Members of Parliament, and not Debarred. The
several Degrees of Nobility before Treated of, did always bear their
respective Coronets, as in England, excepting the Lords, who had no Coronet
till the year 1665. There being a Warrant under His Majesty's hand, in June
1665. Allowing to the Barons or Lords of Parliament in Scotland, a certain
Crimson Velvet Cape, with a Golden Circle, decored with six Pearls on the Top,
equally distant one from another, which is the same with the Barons Coronet in
England: But the figure of this Coronet on the margin of the principal
Signator, is done far contrare to the words in the Body; The same having points
like to that of the Earls, which has certalnly been a mistake and ignorance in
the Painter, and ought to be adverted to be the Lion, and Heralds: This
Warrant is Registrat in the books of Council, and in the Lion Books.

I have here set down for the Readers further Satisfaction, a List of all the
Nobility at present in this Nation, their Sir-names and Principal Titles, And
Titles of their Eldest Sons; With such Officers as have Precedence be Virtue of
their Offices.

The Duke of Albany, only Brother to His most Sacred Majesty.
Lord Chancellor, Lord Thesaurer, Lord President of the Privy Council, Lord
Privy Seal, Lord Secretary, above all of his degree.
* Nota. Stuart Duke of Lennox, was the premier Duke, but this Family is lately
extinct.

DUKES.
Hamilton Duke of Hamilton, His Eldest Son. Earl of Arran, Scot Duke of
Buccleuch, His Eldest Son. Earl of Dalkeith, Maitland Duke of Lauderdale, His
Eldest Son. Earl of Lauderdail, Lenos Duke of Lennox. His Eldest Son. Earl of
Darnly.
MARQUESSES.
Gordon Marquess of Huntly, His Eldest Son. Lord Gordon, Douglas Marquess of
Douglas, His Eldest Son. Lord Angus, Graham Marquess of Montrose, His Eldest
Son. Lord Graham, Murray Marquess of Athol. His Eldest Son. Lord Murray.
EARLS.
Campbel Earl of Argyl, His Eldest Son. Lord Lorn, Lindsay Earl of Crawsurd,
His Eldest Son. Lord Lindsay, Hay Earl of Errol, His Eldest Son. Lord Hay,
Keith Earl Marischal, His Eldest Son. Lord Keith, Gordon Earl of Sutherland,
His Eldest Son. Lord Strathnaver, Areskin Earl of Mar, His Eldest Son. Lord
Areskin, Graham Earl of Airth, and Monteith, His Eldest Son. Lord Kilpont and
Kilbryd* Lesly Earl of Rothes, His Eldest Son. Lord Lesly, Douglas Earl of
Morton, His Eldest Son. Lord Aberdour, Areskin Earl of Buchan, His Eldest Son.
Lord Auchterhouse, Cuningham Earl of Glencairn, His Eldest Son. Lord Kilmawrs,
Montgomery Earl of Eglington, His Eldest Son. Lord Montgomery, Kennedy Earl of
Cassils, His Eldest Son. Lord Kennedy, Stuart Earl of Murray, His Eldest Son.
Lord Down, Maxwel Earl of Nithisdale, His Eldest Son. Lord Maxwell, Seton Earl
of Winton, His Eldest Son. Lord Seton, Livingston Earl of Linlithgow, His
Eldest Son. Lord Livingston, Home Earl of Home, His Eldest Son. Lord
Coldingham, Drummond Earl of Pearth, His Eldest Son. Lord Drummond, Seton Earl
of Dumfermling, His Eldest Son. Lord Fyvie, Fleeming Earl of Wigton, His Eldest
Son. Lord Fleeming, Lion Earl of Strathmore, and Kinghorn, His Eldest Son. Lord
Glames, Hamilton Earl of Abercorn, His Eldest Son. Lord Paslie, Ker Earl of
Roxburgh, His Eldest Son. Lord Ker, Areskin Earl of Kelly, His Eldest Son. Lord
Pettinweem, Hamilton Earl of Haddington, His Eldest Son. Lord Binning, Stuart
Earl of Galloway, His Eldest Son. Lord Garlies, Mackenzie Earl of Seaforth, His
Eldest Son. Lord Mackinzie, Ker Earl of Lothian, His Eldest Son. Lord
Newbottle, Hay Earl of Kinnoul, His Eldest Son. Lord Duplin, Campbel Earl of
Lowdown, His Eldest Son. Lord Mauchla^, Crichton Earl of Dumfries, His Eldest
Son. Lord Crichton, Douglas Earl of Queensberry, His Eldest Son. Lord
Drumlanerick, Alexander Earl of Striveling, His Eldest Son. Lord Alexander,
Bruce Earl of Elgin, His Eldest Son. Lord Kinlosse, Carnagie Earl of Southesk,
His Eldest Son. Lord Carnagie, Stuart Earl of Traquair, His Eldest Son. Lord
Linton, Ker Earl of Ancram, His Eldest Son. Lord Nisbets, Weems Earl of Weems,
His Eldest Son. Lord Elcho, Ramsay Earl of Dalhoussie, His Eldest Son. Lord
Ramsay, Ogilvy Earl of Airly, His Eldest Son. Lord Ogilvy, Ogilvy Earl of
Findlator, His Eldest Son. Lord Deskfoord, Dalziel Earl of Cranwath, His Eldest
Son. Lord Dalziel, Livingston Earl of Callender, His Eldest Son. Lord Almond,
Lesly Earl of Leven, His Eldest Son. Lord Balgonie, Ruthven Earl of Forth, His
Eldest Son. Lord Ettrick, Iohnston Earl of Anandale, His Eldest Son. Lord
Iohnston, Maule Earl of Panmure, His Eldest Son. Lord Maule, Murray Earl of
Dysert, His Eldest Son. Lord Huntingtour, Hay Earl of Tweeddale, His Eldest
Son. Lord Yester, Carnagie Earl of Northesk, His Eldest Son. Lord Rosehill,
Bruce Earl of Kincardin, His Eldest Son. Lord Bruce, Lindsay Earl of Balcarras,
His Eldest Son. Lord Balne^l, Douglas Earl of Forfar, His Eldest Son. Lord
Wendal, Midleton Earl of Midleton, His Eldest Son. Lord Clearmont, Scot Earl of
Tarras, His Eldest Son. Lord Alemoor, Gordon Earl of Aboyn, His Eldest Son.
Lord Glenlivet, Boyd Earl of Kilmarnoch, His Eldest Son. Lord Boyd, Cochran
Earl of Dundonald, His Eldest Son. Lord Cochran, Douglas Earl of Dumbritan, His
Eldest Son. Lord Douglas of Attrick, Keith Earl of Kintore, His Eldest Son.
Lord Inverury, Sinclar Earl of Caithnes. His Eldest Son. Lord Berrendule.
VISCOUNTS.
Carry Viscount of Faulkland. Constable Viscount of Dumbar, Murray Viscount of
Stormont, Gordon Viscount of Kenmore, Arbuthnet Viscount of Arbuthnet, Crichton
Viscount of Frendraught, Seton Viscount of Kingston, Macgil Viscount of
Oxenford. Livingston Viscount of Kilsyth, Osburn Viscount of Dumblane,
LORDS.
Forbes Lord Forbes. Fraser Lord Salton, Gray Lord Gray, Cathcart Lord
Cathcart, Sinclar Lord Sinclar, Douglas Lord Mordington, Semple Lord Semple,
Elphingston Lord Elphingston, Oliphant Lord Oliphant, Fraser Lord Lovat,
Borthwick Lord Borthwick, Ross Lord Ross, Sandilands Lord Torphichen, Lesly
Lord Lindors, Elphingston Lord Balmerinoch, Stuart Lord Blantyre, Areskin Lord
Cardross, Balfour Lord Burleigh, Drummond Lord Madderty, Cranston Lord
Cranston, Melvil Lord Melvil, Napier Lord Napier, Fairfax Lord Cameron,
Richardson Lord Crawmond, Macky Lord Rae, Forrester Lord Forrester, Forbes Lord
Pitsligo, Mackleland Lord Kircudbright, Fraser Lord Fraser, Hamilton Lord
Bargeny, Ogilvy Lord Bamff. Murray Lord Elibank, Galloway Lord Dunkel, Falconer
Lord Halkerton, Hamilton Lord Bethaven, Sandilands Lord Abercromby, Carmichal
Lord Carmichael, Sutherland Lord Duffos, Rollo Lord Rollo, Ruthven Lord
Ruthven, Colvil Lord Colvil, Mackdonald Lord Mackdonald, Bellenden Lord
Bellenden, Lesly Lord Newwark, Rutherfurd Lord Rutherfurd, Ker Lord Iedburgh,
Weems Lord Bruntisland.
It is to be observed, that the eldest Sons of Viscounts and Lords are designed
Masters by their Fathers Titles.
Lord Thesaurer-deput, Lord Register, Lord Advocat, Lord Iustice-Clerk.
This is the Precedence stated by the present Rolls of Parliament, albeit it is
not acquiesced in by all the Nobility: For the Earl of Sutherland contends with
all the Earls who are ranked before him, and generally such as are
dissatisfied with these Rolls, do protest whilst the Rolls are called, against
such as they conceive are unjustly ranked before them. Sometimes also the Son
has a different Precedence, from what was possessed by his Father; As the Earl
of Lothian, who now as succeeding to his great Grandfather by the Mother,
comes to have his Precedence next to the Earl of Wigton, though his Father
taking place by a new Patent was ranked as in the above written Rolls. The
Justice General pretends to the same precedence with the Lord Chief Justice of
the Kings Bench in England, by a report made by the Lord Thesaurer in the Kings
name, the 17. June 1637. but neither is the Letter to which this report relates
extant, nor has he been in possession since. And it is fit to observe, that
notwithstanding of what is said before, page 42. (by a Servants mistake) that
the Lord Privy Seal takes place with us as in England.

The Order of Baronet in Scotland was erected for advancing the Plantation of
Nova Scotia in America, and for settling a Colony there, to which the Aid of
these Knights was Designed. The Order was only intended be K. Ia. 6. before
his Death, for in his first Charter of Nova Scotia, in favors of Sir William
Alexander, 10. Septem. 1621. And in another Charter granted to Sir Robert
Gordon of Lochinvar of a part of Nova Scotia, Designed the Barony of Galloway,
8. Novem. 1621. there is no mention made of this Order: So that the same was
only erected by K. Charles 1. anno 1625. In the several Patents granted to
Baronents, His Majesty did dispone to each of these Knights a certain portion
of land in Nova Scotia, erecting the same in a free Barony with great and ample
privileges, unnecessary to be insert here. And moreover, for their
encouragement, did Erect, Creat, Make, Constitute, and Ordain that Heritable
State, Degree, Dignity, Name, Order, Title, and Style of Baronet, to be enjoyed
be every of these Gentlemen who did hazard for the good and increase of that
Plantation: And so preferred them to that Order and Title, Creating them and
their Heirs Male heritable Baronets in all time coming, with the Place,
Preeminency, Priority, and Precedence in all Commissions, Breeves,
Letters Patent, Namings, and Writes, and in all Sessions, Conventions,
Congregations and places, at all times and occasions whatsomever before all
Knights, called Aequites aurati, all lesser Barons commonly called Lairds, and
before all other Gentlemen: Excepting Sir William Alexander His Majesty's
Lieutenant of Nova Scotia, who (with his Heir, their Wives and Children
conform) is not only excepted in each of these Letters Patent granted to the
Knights, his Consorts; But likewise the Charter granted to himself be King
Charles 1. 1625. did bear expressly this exception and provision: As also,
excepting Knights-Bannerets who should be Created under the Royal Standard in
His Majesty's Army, and in open War, the King himself being present, and that
during the Bannerets lifetime only: And with Precedence before all of the same
Order whose Patents are of a posteriour date. His Majesty did moreover Declare,
and Ordain, That the Wives of these Knights, and of their Heirs Male, should
have the Precedence as well after as before the deaths of their Husbands, if
they should happen to survive, before the Wives of all those of whom the
Knights, Baronets, and their Heirs Male had the Precedeny, and even before the
Wives of Knights-Bannerets before excepted; (the Degree of Baronet being
heritable) And also that the Children Male and Female of the Baronets, should
take place before the Bairns Male and Female respectively, of all persons of
whom the Baronets and their Heirs Male had the Priority: And likewise before
the Children of the Bannerets; and that the Wives of the Sons of the Baronets,
and of their Heirs Male, should preceed the Wives of all persons whom their
Husbands might preceed, and that as well their Husbands being dead as living.
And further, His Majesty did Declare, and Promise, That whenever the eldest
Sons and appearand Heirs Male of the Baronets should attain to the Age of
twenty one years, they should be by His Majesty and his Successors created,
Equites aurati, or Knights Batchelours, without payment of any Fies or Dues for
the same, providing they should desire it. But here it is to be observed, that
some of the eldest Sons of Baronets pretend to the title of Knight at their
Majority, be virtue of this clause, without any previous desire or dubbing,
which certainly is an error, for if they will not be at the pains to desire it
of His Majesty, or His Commissioner, they should not assume it. Likeas His
Majesty did Declare and Ordain, That the Baronets and their Heirs Male should
as an additament of Honor to their Armorial Ensigns, bear either on a Canton
or Inescutcheon in their option, the Ensign of Nova Scotia being argent, a
cross of St. Andrew azur, (the Badge of Scotland counterchanged) charged with
an inescutcheon of the Royal Arms of Scotland: supported on the dexter by the
Royal Unicorn, and on the sinister, by a Savage or Wild-man proper: and for the
crest a branch of Laurel, and a Thistle issuing from two hands conjoined, the
one being armed, the other naked, with this Ditto, Munit haec and altera
vincit. And that they and their Heirs Male should in all time coming have place
in all His Majesty's and His Successors Armies in the middle Battle, near and
about the Royal Standard for defense thereof. And that they and their Heirs
Male may have two Attenders of the Body for bearing up the Pale, one principal
Mourner, and four Assistants, at their Funerals; And that they should be always
Called, Entitled, and Designed be the name and title of Baronet, and that in
all Scottish Speeches and writings, the addition of Sir, and in all other
discourses and writings, a word signifying the same should be preponed to their
names and other titles, and that the style and title of Baronet should be
postponed and subjoyned thereto in all Letters Patent, and other writes
whatsomever, as a necessar addition of Dignity, and that each of them should be
entitled, Sir A. B. Baronet, and his, and his Sons Wives, should enjoy the
style, title, and appellation of Lady, Madam, and Dame, respectively, according
to the usual phrase in speaking and writing. And also His Majesty did thereby
promise, That the number of the Baronets as well in Scotland, as the new Colony
of Nova Scotia should never exceed the number of 150. (albeit this number is at
present somewhat augmented) and did likewise Declare, That He nor His
Successors should never Create, nor Erect in time coming any other Dignity,
Degree, Style, Name, Order, Title, or State, nor should give the Priority or
Precedence to any Person or Persons, under the Style, Degree, and Dignity of a
Lord of Parliament of Scotland, which should be, or should be presumed to be
Higher, Superior, or Equal to that of Baronet: And that the Baronet should
have liberty to take place before any such who should happen to be created of
any such degree or order; and that their Wives, Sons, Daughters, and Sons Wives
should have their places accordingly: And that if any question or doubt should
arise anent their places and prerogatives, the same should be decided and
judged according to these Laws and Customs, by which other degrees of Heritable
Dignities have their privileges cognosced and determined. And finally, that
none should be created Baronet, either of Scotland or Nova Scotia, till he had
first fulfilled the conditions designed by His Majesty for the good and
increass of that Plantation, and until he had certified the same to the King by
His Majesty's Lieutenant there.

These Patents were ratified in Parliament, and were always of this form till
the selling of Nova Scotia to the French, after which time they were made much
shorter, and granted in general terms with all the Privileges, Precedencies,
etc. of the former Baronets. And in the year 1629. His Majesty did allow these
Baronets a particular cognizance, which will be best known by the copy of the
following Letter direct be his Majesty, K. Charles the first, to the Privy
Council here.

RIght Trusty, and right well beloved Cousin and Counselor, Right trusty and
well beloved Cousins and Counselors, and right trusty and well beloved
Counselors, We greet you well;
Whereas upon good consideration, and for the better advancement of the
Plantation of New-Scotland, which may much import the good of Our Service, and
the Honor and Benefit of that Our ancient Kingdom, Our Royal Father did
intend, and We since have erected the Order and Title of Baronet in Our said
ancient Kingdom, which We have since established and conferred the same on
diverse Gentlemen of good quality. And seeing Our trusty and well beloved
Counselor, Sir William Alexander Knight, Our principal Secretary of that Our
ancient Kingdom of Scotland, and Our Lieutenant of New-Scotland, who these many
years bygon has been at great charges for the discovery thereof, has now in
end a Colony there, where his Son Sir William is now resident; And We being
most willing to afford all the possible means of encouragement that
conveniently We can to the Baronets of that Our ancient Kingdom, for the
furtherance of so good a work: And to the effect they may be honored and have
place in all respects according to their Patents from Us, We have been pleased
to Authorize and Allow, as by these presents, for Us and Our Successors, We
Authorize and Allow the said Lieutenant and Baronets, and every one of them,
and their Heirs Male to wear and carry about their Necks in all time coming, an
Orange tannie silk ribbon, whereon shall hang pendant in a Scutcheon argent, a
saltir azur, thereon an Inscutcheon of the Arms of Scotland, with an Imperial
Crown above the Scutcheon, and incirled with this motto, Fax Mentis Honestae
Gloria; Which cognizance Our said present Lieutenant shall deliver now to them
from Us, that they may be the better known and distinguished from other
persons; And that none pretend ignorance of the Respect due unto them, Our
Pleasure therefore is, that by open proclamation at the mercat cross of
Edinburgh, and of all other head Burghs of Our Kingdom, and such other places
as you shall think necessar, you cause intimate Our Royal pleasure and
intention herein to all Our Subjects. And if any person out of neglect or
contempt shall presume to take place or precedence of the said Baronets, their
Wives, or Children, which is due unto them by their Patents, or to wear their
Cognizance, We will that upon notice thereof given to you, you cause punish
such offenders by Fining, or imprisoning them as you shall think sitting, that
others may be terrified from attempting the like. And We Ordain, that from time
to time, as occasion of granting or renewing their Patents, or their Heirs
succeeding to the dignity shall offer, that the said power to them to carry the
said Ribbon and Cognizance, shall be therein particularly granted and inserted.
And We likewise Ordain, their presents to be insert and Registrate in the books
of Our Council and Exchequer, and that you cause Registrate the same in the
books of the Lion King at Arms, and Heralds, there to remain ad futuram rei
memoriam; And that all parties having intress, may have authentic copies and
extracts thereof. And for your so doing, these Our Letters shall be unto you,
and every one of you from time to time your sufficient Warrant, and Discharge
in that behalf.

Given at Our Court at Whitehall, the 17. of November, 1629. years.

The order of Baronet in England was erected by King James the sixth, for
advancing the plantation of Vlster in Ireland, and these Knights have
Privileges and Precedencie much like to those above set down; and there being
a Contraversy for Precedence betwixt them and the younger sons of Viscounts,
and Barons, managed in presence of King James, it was determined in favors of
the younger sons of Viscounts and Barons; But at the same time it was declared,
That such Bannerets as should be made by His Majesty or Prince of Wales under
the Kings Standard, displayed in an Army Royal, As also, the Knights of the
Garter, Privy Counselors, Master of the Court of Wards and Liveries,
Chancellor and Under-Thesaurer of the Exehequer Chancellor of the Duchy,
Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, Master of the Rolls, Chief Justice of the
Common Pleas, Chief Barons of Exchequer, and other Judges, and Barons of the
degree of the Coif, should have place and precedence both before the younger
sons of Viscounts, and Barons, and before all Baronets: by which some
alterations may appear from the Ranking appointed by Henry the fourth.

Beside what has been formerly observed in the description of Knights,
Baronets. I find that of old a Banneret (or a Ban-rent) has been with us a
title higher than a Baron, for by Act 101. Parl. 7. Ia. 1. Barons may choose
their own Commissioners, but Bishops, Dukes, Earls, Lords, and Ban-rents are
to be summonded to Parliament by the Kings special precept; And it is probable
that these Ban-rents were Knights of extraordinary reputation, who were allowed
to raise a company of men under their own Banner, but now it is commonly taken
for such as are Knighted by the King or Prince under the Royal Standard in time
of War. But I conceive that those could not now sit in Parliament upon the
Kings precept, the former Act of Parliament being in desuetude: They have the
precedence from Baronets, though their Wives have not, this being but a
temporary Dignity, and the other an heritable.

Barons in England are Lords with us, but a Baron with us is properly he who
has power of pit and gallows; And yet of old I conceive that Lords and Barons
were the same, for the Statutes of K. Robert 1. bear to be made in his
Parliament holden at Scoon, with Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons, and
others his Noblemen of his Realm: And in Our old Original Acts of Parliament, I
find that the Lords and Barons are put in one column undistinguished and under
the common name Barons; And in the first Parliament of K. Ia. the 4th. I find
the Master of Glames, i. e. the Lord Glames, eldest son sitting inter Barons.
Now the Lords are called the Great Barons, and the rest are called Small
Barons, in the 101. Act. 7. Parl. Ia. 1. and ever since; But yet I find by the
166. Act. 13. Parl. Ia. 6. every Earl or Lord pays 2000. pounds, for
Lawborrows, and every great Baron 1000. pounds; but by great Baron there is
meant a Baron of a considerable estate, because that Act was to proportion the
Surety to be found to the estate of him who finds the Surety.

The old Barons (or Lairds) amongst us especially where they are Chiefs of
Clans, or the Representatives of old Families that were Earldoms, as Pitcurr is
of the Earl of Dirleton, and as Chief of the name of Halyburton, have never
ceded the Precedence to Knights-Baronets, much less to ordinar Knights. Though
the other pretend that a Baron is no name of Dignity, and that Knights-Baronets
have a special privilege, that there shall be no degree betwixt them and
Lords, except the Bannerets; And though militia non est per se dignitas,
Chassan. fol. 344. yet generally it is believed, that next to Knights-Baronets
succeed Knights-Batchelours, and next to them our Lairds, or Landed-Gentlemen,
though a Lord in effect is but the corrupt word of a Lord.

Amongst such as profess Sciences, the Ranking goes thus uncontravertedly, 1o.
Such as profess Theology. 2o. Such as profess the Canon Law. 3o. The Civil-Law.
4o. Philosophy. 5o. Medicin. 6o. Rhethorick. 7o. Poescy. 8o. History. 9o.
Grammar. 10o. Logic. 11o. Arithmetic. 12o. Geometry. 13o. Music. 14o.
Astronomy; Chassan. de gloria mundi pars decima. And amongst these, such as are
Doctors preceed these that are not, and amongst Doctors, the priority goes by
Age.

In Towns, These who inhabit Cities are preferred to such as inhabit Burghs,
and generally those in the Metropolitan, or capital. City are preferred to all
the rest: And those who have born Magistracy, are even when their Magistracy is
over, preferred to all others. And so far is this Precedence observed, that 1o.
A younger Alderman or Bailie takes not Precedence from his Senior, because he
is Knighted, or as being the elder Knight, as was found in the case of the
Alderman Craven, who though all the rest of the Alderman were Knighted at the
Coronation of King James, kept the precedence formerly due to him as Senior
Alderman. But though this hold not only amongst Aldermen, but that even all
Knights of the Country, being Burgesses of a Town, do cede to these who have
been their Magistrates in it, as to public meetings relating to the Town; Yet
it is doubted whether such a Knight will be obliged to give place to an
Alderman, or Baily in a neutral place. But it is determined in the Heralds
Office of England, that all such as have been Mayors of London, that is to say,
Provosts with us, do take the place of all Knights-batchelours every where,
because they have been the Kings Lieutenants.

It is there likewlse remarked, That Sir John Crook Sergeant at Law, was
Knighted before any other Sergeant his Ancient, and standing upon Precedence by
reason of his Knighthood, It was adjudged against him by the Judges, viz. that
he should take place according to his Serjeancy, and not after his Knighthood,
yet his wife took her place of a Lady before other Sergeants wives.

The Members of Courts do take place amongst themselves according to the
precedence of the Courts, where they serve; as the Clerks of the Privy Council
take place of the Clerks of the Session.

In Families likewise, the Chief of the Family takes place of any Gentleman of
the Family: And though generally it be believed, that Gentlemen have no
precedence one from another, yet Reason and Discretion do allow that a Gentlman
of three Generations, should cede to a Gentleman of ten, if there be not a very
great disparity betwixt their Fortunes, and that for the same Reason almost,
that a Gentleman of three Generations claims precedence from any ordinary
Landed-man, who was newly acquired his lands.

CHAP. IX. The Precedence due to Women.
WOmen before their Marriage have Precedence by their Father, but there is this
difference betwixt them and the Male-children, that the same Precedence is due
to all the Daughters that is due to the eldest, though it is not so amongst
Sons; and the reason of the difference seems to be, that Daughters would all
succeed equally, whereas the eldest Son excludes all the rest; But if this be
the adequat and true reason, then where the Estate and Honors are provided to
the eldest Daughter only, excluding the rest, they ought not to have the same
Precedence that the eldest Sister has. And therefore I ascribe this difference
rather to the custom of Nations merely founded upon the respect due to that
Sex.

During the Marriage, the Wife regularly participats of the condition of her
Husband by the Civil Law, and Law of Nations, L. 3. C. de Dignitat. Mulieres
Honor maritorum erigimus, genere nobilitamus, and since she was to be sharer
in his misfortunes, the Law thought it just that she should be sharer in his
Advantages; And the Wife by the Canon Law is called Socia divinae and humanae
domus, and L. Foeminae, ff. de Senate. it is said, that Foeminis dignitatem
clarissimam mariti tribuunt: But yet this rule has some exceptions, for though
in France the wives of those who have their Dignities by Offices, enjoy the
same Precedence with their Husband, together with a communication of his title,
and thus they say there, Madam la Chanceliere, Madam la Praesidente: Yet it is
not so with us, who think, that Offices are bestowed on Husbands upon a
personal account, which is not communicable to their Wives; and yet in some
Temporary Dignities, such as that of a Knight-batchelour, the Wife participates
of the Husbands title and precedence: Though I find by the Heralds Records,
that this proceeded originally, rather from Courtesy than from Law, and that
of old a Knights wife enjoyed only his Honors during the Spousals, nor were
they to be called in Law Dame Alice, or Dame Catherine, etc. after the Marriage
was dissolved.

By our Law likewise, If a woman have Precedence by her Birth, or Descent, she
retains still the same, notwithstanding she marry a person of inferior
dignity, contrare to the Rules of the ivil Law; And thus if the Heiress of a
Duchy, or Earldom, marry a Gentleman, she has still the precedence due to a
Duke, or Earl, albeit by the Civil Law, L. 8. de Senate. it be expressed that
Parents donee Plebeiis nuptiis fuerint copulatae, etc. the reason whereof is
as Faber observes upon that Law, because it were most absurd that the Wife
should have more dignity then her Husband; and thus Livius observes, that
Virginia daughter to a Patrician, or noble Roman, was debarred from the Honors
due to her Birth, because she had married a Plebeian; And it seems indeed that
he being her Head, it is most unnatural that any part should be more honorable
then the Head: Nor can there be any thing more contrare to that superiority,
given both by the Law of GOD and Man to Husbands, nor any means fitter to make
a Wife despise her Husband than this is. But I think this precedence has arisen
from the Feudal Law, for the wife having once a noble Fee, she cannot forfeit
the same by her Marriage, and therefore she must retain the dignity that is
annexed to it, which is incommunicable to her Husband, because he is not in
Fie. But it is observable, that if the daughter of a Nobleman marry another
Nobleman, she will lose the precedence due to her by her Birth, though she
would not have losed it if she had married a Gentleman, and the reason of this
seems to be, because by marrying a Nobleman she receives another Feudal
dignity, which suppresses the first.

I find it observed in Judge Cook. lib. 12. fol. 112. that if a Baron dies,
having diverse daughters, the King may conferr upon either of them the title;
And thus the Lord Cromwell having died without heirs Male, Burchier who married
the youngest daughter was made Lord Cromwell, of which we have no example in
Scotland; for by our Law, if the title descend to Females by the Patent, the
eldest only can succeed to the title, but if it descend not by the Patent to
Heirs Female, then the King may admit neither to the title, or either as he
pleases.

After the Husbands decease, the Wife did by the Civil Law enjoy her Husbands
precedence during her Widowity, but if she marry to a person of inferior
quality, she loses that Precedence, L. 8. de Senate. which holds with Us and in
England; And yet sometimes the King allows her the same Precedence, by a
Letter, as he does also to the daughters of Dukes, and others who have lost
their Precedence by Marriage, which Letters, or Warrands, are direct to the
Heralds Office, and Registrated there. And the Queen never loses her former
Dignity though she marry the meanest person after the Kings death. And
generally, all the privileges due to the King, are communicated to the Queen,
per L. 31. ff. de Leg: Augusta, autem Legibus soluta non est, Principes tamen
eadem illi privilegia tribunut quae ipsi habent. Notwithstanding whereof,
Lawyers think that her Bastards are not Noble as the Bastards of Kings, nor
does the Womb ever nobilitate. The Country of Campaigne in France only
excepted, where it is sufficient that either the Father or Mother be Noble,
which was allowed to the Ladies of that Country, upon the killing of all the
Nobility at a great fight, Papon. de Nobles. number. 3. By the Civil Law also, a
Widow living leudly, loses her former dignity, Arg. Fin. in authent. de restit.
but this holds not with us, vide Bon. de Curt. de Nobilitate, cap. 12. number. 194.

It has been doubted, whether a mean woman marrying a Nobleman, retains the
privilege due to her by her Husband, who has been degraded by forfeiture, or
otherwise, and Corbin cites a decision, 27. August. School. whereby it was
resolved, that she retains still her former privilege, since crimes are
personal, which is also our Custom.

It has been likeways doubted abroad, whether a Noblewoman marrying a Plebeian,
and thereby losing the Precedence due to her Birth, if she marry a Gentleman in
the second Marriage, she will thereby recurr to her first Dignity, the person
be whom she lost the first Dignity being dead; And it was found that she will
not, for in Law that which is once extinct does not revive; and therefore Women
in such cases take Letters of Restitution, as they call them, or procure a
warrant from the King, for that effect as the custom is with us, ut interveniet
Principis restitutio quae plebecitatis maculam abstergat, Traitte de la
noblesse, page 324. But there would be no place for this question here, since
with us a Noblewoman would not lose her Precedence by marrying a Plebeian, but
the doubt behoov'd to be thus stated with us, viz. Whether a Noblewoman
marrying a Nobleman of an inferior degree, would recover her first dignity,
she marrying thereafter a Gentleman: Or, whether a Knight-Baronets Lady
marrying a Plebeian, could thereafter recover her dignity if she marry a
Gentleman. For I conceive a Knight-baronets Lady, does not like a Noblewoman,
retain her Precedence when she marries a person of inferior quality, and I
think neither of them would recover their former dignity without a special
Warrant.

I find that the Commissioners appointed to regulate Queen Anns Funerals, did
upon the 20. of May, 1619. declare, That the Ladies of the Privy Chamber should
in time of mourning, take their places as if the Queen were living, till the
Funerals were ended, and that the Queens Chamberers should for the present
Funeral go before Countesses women, without prejudice to Countesses women, at
any time thereafter.

It is fit to observe, That the Wives and Daughters of all Dukes, Marquesses,
Earls, etc. do take the same place that the Husbands and Sons do, conform to
the Precedence formerly expressed, page 35. And I find in the Heralds Office of
England, an establishment settled thus amongst women, by Jasper Duke of
Bedford, and other Noblemen, by warrant from Henry the fourth.

The Wives of Dukes of the Blood Royal. The Wives of other Dukes. The Wives of
the eldest Sons of Dukes of the Blood Royal. The Daughters of Dukes of the
Blood Royal. The Wives of Marquesses. The Wives of the eldest Sons of Dukes.
The Daughters of Dukes. Countesses. The Wives of the eldest Sons of Marquesses.
The Daughters of Marquesses. The Wives of the younger Sons of Dukes. The Wives
of the eldest Sons of Earls. The Daughters of Earls. The Wives of Viscounts.
The Wives of the younger Sons of Marquesses. The Wives of Barons, (that is to
say our Lords.) The Wives of the eldest Sons of Viscounts. The Daughters of
Viscounts. The Wives of the younger Sons of Earls. The Wives of the eldest
Sons of Barons or Lords. The Daughters of Barons. The Wives of
Knight-bannerets. The Wives of the younger Sons of Lords. The Wives of
Knight-batchelours. The Wives of the eldest Sons of Knights-bannerets. The
Daughters of Bannerets. The Wives of the eldest Sons of Knight-batchelours. The
Daughters of Knight-batchelours. The Queens Maids of Honor. The Wives of the
younger Sons of Banerets. The Wives of the younger Sons of Knight-batchelours.
The Wives of Esqueirs. The Wives of Gentlemen. The Daughters of Esquiers. The
Daughters of Gentlemen. The Wives of Citizens. The Wives of Burgesses.
From all which it is to be observed, that the wife of the eldest Son of any
degree, takes place before the Daughter of that same degree, and both of them
take place of the younger Sons wife of the preceding degree; Thus the Lady of
the eldest Son of a Marquess preceeds the Daughter of a Marquess, and both
preceed the Ladies of Dukes younger Sons: Item, the Wife of the next degree as
a Countess, preceeds the Lady of the eldest Son of the preceding degree as of
a Marquess, and the Daughter of a Marquess.

3o. This holds not only in comparing degrees amongst themselves, but also in
comparing Families of the same degree amongst themselves, as for instance,
though the Marquess of Douglas Lady would give place to the Marquess of Huntlys
Lady, yet the Wife of the Marquess of Douglas eldest Son would take place from
the Marquess of Huntlys Daughter.

4o. Though of old with us in Scotland, the Wives of Lords did contend, that
they had the Precedence from the Daughters of Earls: Yet since that Letter
written by King Charles the first at his Coronation, we follow the custom of
England, in preferring the Earls Daughter, who takes place immediately after
her eldest Brothers wife.

5o. Though the Daughter of a Marquess gives place to the wives of the eldest
Sons of all Marquesses, yet if that Daughter be an Heiress, and the Daughter of
an elder Marquess, then she takes place from the wives of the eldest Sons of
all younger Marquesses, as Segar. observes, page 240. It is likewise
observable, that since this Ranking under Henry the fourth, there are several
new additions; For after the wives of Lords eldest Sons and Lords Daughters are
Ranked, the Wives of Privy Counselors and Judges, Wives of the younger Sons
of Viscounts, and of Lords or Barons, the Wives of Baronets, the Wives of
Bannerets, the wives of the Knights of the Bath, and the Wives of
Knights-batchelours, etc. as in the former List.

Some considerable Questions concerning Precedence, Resolved.
QVESTION I. WHether in Competitions betwixt Kingdoms, States, and Towns, is
their present Condition to be Considered, or what they were formerly?
To which it is answered, with this Distinction, viz. Either the Kingdom, or
other places betwixt which Competitions are Stated, remain the same that they
were in their Substantials, and then the former Precedence is still continued;
as for instance, Though Rome whilst it was a Commonwealth did sometimes admit
of a Dictator, who had indeed the power of a King, yet they remained still the
same Commonwealth; and therefore being the same in substantials, they ought to
have the same Degree of Precedence continued: Or when two or three Kingdoms are
without any alteration United in one, as the Kingdoms of Scotland and England
were United into the Kingdom of Great Britain, under Kings in the same Race,
who succeeded to both, as is fully Demonstrated by Alb. Gentil. page 82. and
this is likewise clear from L. proponebatur ff. de Iudiciis and l. 24. ff. de
Legate. 1. But where there is a substantial alteration called by Aristotle (...)
vel (...) there the former Condition is not considered, but the (...), or
present condition of the places in Competition is that which ought to be
considered: And thus when a Kingdom comes to be Conquered by a Stranger, and by
a Strange and Foreign Nation, there the State of the Kingdom is absolutely
Innovated, especially if the Laws of the State be altered: And therefore the
French Lawyers are of Opinion, that the Precedence of England ought only to be
Computed from William the Conqueror, Because, at that time a Stranger and a
Strange Nation did conquer the said Kingdom, and the Fundamental Laws of it
were much Innovat; and if this be not an Alteration none can be: For the
Antiquity of Land cannot give Precedence, for all Land was Created together,
and there are few Nations so Conquest, as that the former people do not remain,
so that there can be no Precedence upon that account, though some who are
extravagant in their Zeal for their Country do Argue its Precedence from the
first Ages of the World; as Vasquius does that of the Spanish Empire, in
deryving it from Tubal Cain, praefatio in Contravers. Illust.

QVESTION II. Whether a Kingdom becoming a Commonwealth, or a Commonwealth a
Kingdom, does their former Precedence remain?
This Question has two Branches wherein the Difficulties differ,

The first is, Whether that Town or Place which was a Republic, having become
a Monarchy or Principality, ought it to Retain the Precedence due to the former
Commonwealth? And that it ought to Retain the same Precedence may be Argued,
Because, when one thing is surrogat in the place of another, that which is
surrogat ought to have the same privilege with that in whose place it is
surrogat, surrogatum subit naturam surrogati; But so it is, that the subsequent
Principality is surrogat in place of the former Commonwealth, and therefore
ought to have the same Precedence: this Reason is likewise seconded by a
Decision of Charles the fifth, who in the Debate betwixt the Duke of Florence,
and the Duke of Ferrara, did prefer the Duke of Florence, because the Republic
of Florence was formerly preferred to Ferrara.

From this Decision some would distinguish betwixt the Case, where a Citizen of
the former Commonwealth is preferred by common consent of his fellow Citizens,
in which case they who Governed formerly still Govern, Because they choose the
new Duke, Prince or King: And the case wherein a Stranger comes in and
Conquers, in which case the former Government is absolutely Altered, and none
of those who Governed formerly continue to Govern: Nor does the Argument of
Surrogation hold in this case, because that Argument only holds where one
thing is surrogat to an other by common consent, and where the Reason of the
Privilege pleaded in the one case remains in the other, neither of which can
be alleged where there is a Conquest; because there, neither is there a
Consent, nor does the Government, nor State remain the same, And consequently,
ought not to have the same Precedence, seeing the sameness of Precedence depends
upon the sameness of the State, which ought to have the Precedence.

The same is likewise to be concluded, where One of the same City or Republic
Usurpes the Government; For in that case the former Arguments hold: And though
Aristotle libro quinto Politicorum says, eundem Statum Reipublicae manner, ubi
rem suam and summam Resbublica^ ante libera civi alicui suo regendam deinceps
comittit, (...). Yet this requires two conditions, The one is, that one of the
Citizens Govern; and the other is, That the Government be transmitted to him by
the common consent of those his fellow Citizens who Governed formerly; An
eminent Example thereof We find in that famous Lex Regia, mentioned L. 1. ff. de
Constable. Princ. whereby the Romans transmitted all the power they had to the
Emperor, quae de Imperio lata est qua populus ei and in eum omne suum Imperium
and potestatem contulit, and upon this account it is, that the Roman Emperors
pretend the same Precedence that was due to the Commonwealth of Rome, since
the Commonwealth did surrender and transmit to them their power.

The next Branch of the Question is, Whether a Kingdom being turned into a
Commonwealth, ought to have the same Precedence that was due to the former
Kingdom? And it would appear that it ought not, since in becoming a
Commonwealth, it is Degraded from its former Dignity, Commonwealths being by
the consent of all Nations postponed to all Kings, or Crowned-Heads; Nor does
the Argument of Surrogation hold in the matter of Precedence, where there is
not only a substantial Alteration, but a Degradation: The former Argument of
Surrogation does not likewise take place, where there has an intermediate
Impediment interveened* as for Instance, Though Spain had been formerly a
Kingdom, and though England was really a Kingdom of old, yet both these having
become afterward Provinces to the Roman Empire, they cannot Reassume the
Dignities and Precedence due to them before they were subdued, and became
Tributaries; since that Degradation was a medium impedimentum, as Lawyers call
it, Which hindered the present condition of their Kingdom to be drawn back to
its old State: A thousand instances of which may be given in other cases, and
even in the matter of Precedence, If a Family be Degraded, and continue so for
a long time, if though they be thereafter restored; Or if an Earl should resign
his title in the Kings hands, and so extinguish his title, though he were
restored, yet he would not be restored to his former Precedence, in prejudice
of those who had acquired titles medio tempore.

QVESTION III. Whether he who is Elected to a Dignity, ought to have Precedence
thereby, as if he were Actually Admitted?
This question has been often Agitated, and may be of great Use amongst persons
of all Degrees: It was first Debated in anno 1521. betwixt the Ambassadors of
Charles the fifth, who was then Elected Emperor, and the Ambassadors of
Francis the first King of France, who alleged, that though Charles the fifth
was Elected Emperor, yet not being Crowned and Anointed, the Election being
but an incomplete Act, could not give him Preference; and that it could not was
Argued from these Reasons. 1o. Before the Emperors Admission and Consecration,
he is not called Emperor, but only King of the Romans, and therefore he ought
not to have the place as Emperor, for the King of the Romans is inferior to
the Emperor, and the Inferior cannot have the Superiors place. 2o. If
Election could give the Precedence, there needed not any further Solemnity; For
by the Election, the person Elected would be Emperor, for none can have the
Emperors place but the Emperor. 3o. That which is Imperfect cannot operat as
much as that which is perfect* L. Aedificia perfectissime ff. de edil. edict.
and that which is Imperfect is judged in Law to be no more, then if it were
not, Imperfectum, and nullum idem sunt: And therefore as he could not have
Precedence, if there were no Election, so neither can he have it, where there
is but an incomplete Election. 4o. Where there are two Degrees subordinat one
to another, the Inferior Degree cannot aspire to that which is due to the
Superior; But so it is, that Election is but subordinat to Admission, Ergo, it
cannot Operat as much as Admission. Notwithstanding of all which, I find that
Gothofred. and others decide for the Emperor, and are of opinion that an
Election has in it the Radical Power and Force of Admission, and so gives as
much Precedence as Admission does; Yet with Us, We see that an Elect Bishop
takes not the same place, that is due to him after he is Admitted: And
therefore the Distinction would be made here betwixt such an Election, as
transfers all the power that Admission can, as We see in the Emperor, King of
Poland, and others, who can receive no more Power after they are Elected, and
delay their Coronation and other ceremonies for their own conveniences; And
the case of Bishops and inferior Magistrates, who are oft-times to receive
some further power beyond their Election; and so, their Election not being
equivalent to an Admission, it gives not the same Precedence that the other
can: and therefore I may conclude generally, that Precedence follows Power and
Administration.

QVESTION IV. Whether ought One who has been twice or oftener Elected to any
Dignity, be Preferred to him who was only once Elected?
The Roman Emperors have differed in this, for the Eldest and the Latest
Emperors did think, that such repeated Elections did augment the Dignity to
those who were Elected, and thus Valentinian novel. 48. and this was likewise
Hadrians Opinion, as Spartianus Observes in his Life: But Theodosius the
Younger thought, that these repeated Elections did show the Merit of him who
was Elected, but did not augment his Dignity, repetiti enim fasces virtutem
sepe meritam comprobant, non augent, quia nihil est altius Dignitate, L. 1. C.
de Consul. vid. Cujac. ad l. illam, and with this last agrees Goth. These. 28.
With Us if the Precedence be determined by a voice, this holds not, as if one
should be Elected to be the first Alderman, and another to be a second
Alderman, this second would not have the Precedence, though he had been
ofttimes formerly preferred; But in dubious cases, certainly repeated Elections
do prefer: And though the Imperial Diet has decided Precedence upon this
Account amongst Generals of an Army, to him who had been twice formerly a
General, though the other had been first a General, as Goldast. observes; Yet I
find it more Reasonable, that he who was the eldest General, should have been
preferred: For that is the mark of greatest Experience, and the not being
frequently Elected might have proceeded from want of new Occasions or of
Inclination; And it were Absurd to think, that if One had been an old General,
and his Commission had continued for many years, that thereafter another,
though thrice Elected in a shorter time, should be preferred to him. With Us
also, I find that One who was been twice or ofter preferred to be Provost or
Mayor, is preferred to him who has been only once Mayor; and it is Reasonable
that they both living in one place, and being preferred by those of the same
City, should be preferred in Meetings relating to the same City.

QVESTION V. What Influence has the Conjunction of more Dignities upon
Precedence?
There are some Lawyers who think, that he who has most Employments ought to be
Preferred to him who was but one: And thus they say, That he who has two or
three Dutchies, or Earldoms, ought to be preferred to him who has but one,
Even as two or three Lights are greater then one, and two or three Cords are
stronger then one; And for this they cite L. Fin Cod. de edict. d. Adrian. and
of this Opinion was Menochius, Consil. 902. And for this cause, Marz. Consil.
26. thought that the Duke of Ferrara ought to be preferred to the Duke of
Florence; And Navarrus Consil. 1. thought that a Cardinal who was a Chancellor
ought to be preferred to an elder Cardinal who was not; And that a Doctor of
the Civil and Canon Law, ought to be preferred to a mere Doctor of the Civil
Law. But yet Gothofred is of a contrary Opinion, cap. 3. These. 2. And in Our
Practice the greater Dignity is preferred to many lesser Dignities, yea, and
the Elder in the same Dignity is preferred to him who was last Promoted to the
same Dignity, though he have many lesser Dignities joined to it; But betwixt
two Dignities that are different, if it be not known to which of the Two the
Precedence is due, the conjunction of the lesser Dignities with the Dignity
contraverted ought to prefer; Even as if it were doubted, which of two Bodies
weighed most, or which of two Lights shined most, the least addition to either
would certainly cast the Balance and alter the Proportion: But if these many
be all Inferior to one Employment, they ought not to be preferred, no more
then many little Pearls ought to be preferred to a great one; and yet if it be
doubted which of two Pearls are of greatest Value, the addition of two or
three little ones to either, will raise the Value of that one to which they are
thrown in.

QVESTION VI. How far do former Dignities Influence a present Advancement, and
Determine the Precedence depending thereupon? And what Rank is due to Honorary
and Extraordinary Offices?
Lawyers give diverse instances of this, As first, a Judge is made a Privy
Counselor, but thereafter the President of that Court, where he is a Member
or Judge, is admitted to be a Privy Counselor; in that case though the other
was first admitted to be a Privy Counselor, yet the President, though last
admitted, will have the Precedence, and Vot first even in the Privy Council;
Because it is indecent, that a Member should have the Precedence, or Vot before
his own President: And thus Papon. tells Us, it was decided by the Parliament
of Paris, vid. lib. 4. tit. 2. Art. 5. which is not unlike what Vitellius
says, in Tacitus 19. Annal. Foedum si de Honoris praerogativa dimicare cum
ducibus audeant, sub quorum sig^is stipendia fecerant. A second case is, That
though a Honorary or Extraordinary Officer will not be preferred to an Officer
Ordinary, Yet if a person be a Honorary or Extraordinary Officer, before
another be admitted to be an Ordinary Officer, if that person who was but
formerly an Extraordinary Officer, be thereafter admitted to be an Ordinary
Officer, he will be preferred to him who was admitted before him, though to an
equal Degree; Because, though he was not the first Officer in Ordinary, yet he
is now equal in Dignity with him, and was an Extraordinary Officer before him:
as for instance, If One be admitted to be an extraordinary Physician to his
Majesty, and thereafter become an ordinary Physician, he will have the
Precedence from them who were Admitted in Ordinary before him, if they were
admitted to be Ordinary Physicians after he was admitted to be Extraordinary;
Precedence being to be taken in that case from the Time of the first
Advancement, L. 4. Cod. de Consulibus: But though this be Observed abroad, yet
I doubt if it be Observed in Britain. A third case is this, There are two made
Counselors, but he who is last Admitted a Counselor, is first Nobilitat, and
therefore even as Counselor he will have the Precedence, though the other was
made the first Counselor; And this was so decided by the Emperor Theodosius,
L. unica Cod. Theodos. de Consulibus: and is in Observance with Us, amongst
whom the youngest Counselor, being made an Earl, is preferred to elder
Counselors, and though the elder Counselor be thereafter made an Earl, yet
the eldest Earl will always be preferred; Though it would seem that upon the
first Counselors being made an Earl, he ought to be preferred, as in the
former case where an Extraordinary is preferred, when he becomes to be in equal
Dignity with the prior Ordinary Officer. But the Reason of the Disparity is,
because Earls are always to preceed according to their Priority, but Officers
are not, An Office being but a thing Temporary, and there being no Difference
betwixt an Ordinary and Extraordinary Officer, but that the Ordinary has a
Sallary, and waits more immediately upon the King, but yet the Extraordinary
Officer was truly of equal Dignity with the Ordinary. These Extraordinar
Officers were called Honorarii seu Codicillares, L. 9. C. de metatis quibus
citra cingulum Dignitas pro solo Honor delata est, they had no advantage save
the Dignity, Nov. 70. nihil aliud nisi purum Honorem habent, L. 7. de Decur.
they are called inanes umbrae and cassae imagines dignitatum. I have heard this
case also Stated with relation to the same quaere, viz. By the Erection of the
Town of Brichen, in a Burgh Royal the Bishop of Brichen is first to Elect, and
then the Town are to Elect their Bailies: From which the question arises,
Whether if the Bishop choose One who was never a Bailie formerly, and the Town
choose those who were formerly Elected Bailies, should the Bishops Bailie
preceed? It being pretended, that though he is to have the first Nomination,
and the choice of all, yet that should not give his Bailie or Alderman the
Precedence, in respect that by the constant Custom observed by all the
Burrowes, when many are Elected to be Aldermen or Bailies at once, he who has
been formerly a Bailie preceeds always him who was never.

QVESTION VII. Whether amongst such as have equal Dignity, the first in time
ought to be Preferred?
It is Answered, That Generally and Regularly the first in Time ought to be
Preferred, amongst such as are equal in Dignity; Which is clear be the Civil
Law, not only in Kingdoms, but in all the Degrees of Nobility and Promotions:
And this Our Reason may teach Us without Law, for if there were not some
Certain and Stated Rule whereby Precedencies might be known, it were impossible
to evite Confusion, and all other Rules except this are uncertain, but yet this
Rule has some Exceptions. 1o. Princes of the Blood, viz. the Sons, Brothers,
Grand-sons, and Nephews of Kings are excepted from this Rule: For though they
be Dukes or Earls of a latter Creation, they are preferred to all of that
Dignity. 2o. In Germany, if the Chief of a Family come to a Dignity, equal to
one of his Kinsmen who formerly enjoyed that Dignity, he will be preferred to
him, though his Kinsman did first attain to the Dignity; An Example whereof
Gothofred gives cap. 3. These. 16. this Exception seems to be founded upon the
right of Blood, to which those of the same Family seem to give that Respect as
to an elder Brother; But though those of the Family may give this Respect out
of Favor, yet in Law they are not thereto Obliged; For the Prince being the
Fountain of Honor, he only can give Preference, and his Patent may prefer one
Cousin to another, since he can bestow Employments which can prefer a Son to a
Father: And therefore in Britain, the date of the Patent is only considered.

QVESTION VIII. When many are Promoted at once in the same Write, or when many
are Nominate tn the same Commission, Whether is the Order of Nameing therein
expressed to be Observed?
It is answered, That Ordinarily he who is first named ought to be preferred, L.
1. ff. de Albo scrib. Albericus ad L. inter Claras C. de sum. Trinit. but
though this hold, where the Write wherein many persons are named is drawn upon
Design to Prefer those who are named, because, there Promotion being the
design, It is to be presumed that the Order of the Promotion was Observed,
Glossa. ad. ult. Auth. de Defens. Civit. and Clement. 1. de Baptismo, yet where
the Write had any other design* and the Nomination did only proceed by way of
Narration, there an Argument from the Order of Nomination is not still
Concluding; especially, Considering that such as draw public Papers* are not
always versed in (...) And thus I have my self seen old Charters wherein the
Chancellor is oft-times placed after the Lord Chamberlain, and both of them
after some of the Nobility; and if any man will consider Our Statutes, wherein
Commissions are granted, they will find this Order very ill Observed: And
Lawyers conclude this Argument very weak in such cases, Everard. in Topicis
loco ab ordine number. 13. Golstad. lib. 1. cap. 23. And there are very clear
Examples of this given, cap. 2. de Iudiciis, cap. Pastoralis de Concess.
prebend.

But yet in dubious cases, where the Person injured cannot otherwise prove his
Precedence, this ought to bear great weight, especially, If many such Papers
can be showed of one tenor; And if the Office granted by that Commission gives
Precedence, above what the persons therein named could otherwise pretend to,
then the first Nomination has the Precedence: As when Ordinar Gentlemen are
named in the Commission of the Privy Council, etc. I find also by the old
Records of Parliament and Privy Council, that the Members of Parliament and
Counselors are in the Sederunts named as they entered into that particular
Meetings, but now they are named according to their true Precdency.

QVESTION IX. In what cases does Age prefer, and what is its Prerogative in the
matters of Precedence?
The Concession of the Prince being the Rule of Honor, he who has the first
Concession ought to be preferred in the matter of public Honor, except in
three cases observed by Gothofred. cap. 3. These. 14. First, in cases dubious.
Secondly, where the pretenses are absolutely equal; And thus of the two Roman
Consuls, the Eldest always preceeded, as Plutarch observes. Thirdly, to take
away Contraversies amongst persons of the same Family, but of different Lines.
It is observed in Germany and other places, that the Eldest has always the
Precedence, as Golstad and other German Authors observe; And this last holds
likewise with Us, if the Precedence be not clear, and was so decided by King
James the sixth, betwixt Blair of that ilk, and Blair of Balthaiock.

QVESTION X. Whether does Appearancy of Blood give Precedence before actual
Investiture and Possession?
Though it may seem, that since Marquisats, Earldoms, etc. being Feudal
Honors, conferred oft-times by erecting Lands in a Marquisat or Earldom, that
therefore till the apparent Heir be actually Invested, or Infeft as We call it,
he ought to have no Precedence; Yet that being expressly* Debated, in anno 1608.
in the case of Frederick Duke of Wirtemberg, it was decided, that the very
right of Blood transmitted the Precedence: But Golstad. Coment. de Reg. Bohem.
lib. 3. cap. 6. is of opinion, That though this may hold where the apparent
Heir sought to be Invested or Infeft, and his not being Entered nor Infeft was
not his Fault; Yet if he did not seek to enter, he ought not to have the
Precedence: With Us though an apparent Heir never enter, yet he has still the
Precedence due to his Predecessor.

QVESTION XI. Whether does the apparent Heir his Assuming and Using the Title
and Precedence of his Predecessor, make him liable to his Predecessors debts,
and Infer a Passive Title against him, as We speak?
To this it is answered, That it makes him not Liable, in payment according to
the present Curent of Our Decisions, because Honor descends from the King, and
is not any lucrative Accession, out of which Debt may be paid, and no man
should be made liable to Debts for enjoying that which cannot pay Debts: Nor
does the Son possess this Title by his Father, but by his Family; And Lawyers
have resolved that Filius retinet Nobilitatem etiam repudiata haereditate,
Bart. in L. Iurisjur. 1. ff. de Oper. lib. Iac. and in L. si non sortem ff. de
condict. in debit. But yet this decision may seem unsuteable to the Analogy and
Principles of Law, For 1o. Since Honor is by the first Patent and Erection
granted to a man and his Heirs, It seems Just and Legal that none can enjoy the
same, but such as are Heirs; so that this seems to be a qualified Right granted
by the King, and consequently, can be enjoyed by none but such as Purge and
Purify the qualities and are Heirs. 2o. We see that in other Rights granted to
a man and his Heirs, no Successor can have Right without being Heir, and since
this holds in Accessions of the meanest Nature, Why should it not much rather
hold in Titles and Dignities which are things of great importance? 3o. We have
no way nor method to know who is Heir, but by an Inquest, after which he who is
served Heir is liable to all Debts, and if he who is to use the Title, needs
not be found Heir by an Inquest, any man may use the Title of a Deceist Peer,
and if two contended for it, this could not be tried without an Inquest and
Service. 4o. The making men liable to their Predecessors Debts for using his
Title, would be very advantageous for the Defuncts Creditors, and it is the
Interest of the Commonwealth that Creditors should be paid; nor could the
apparent Heir complain, since he may choose to use the Title or not as he
pleases. 5o. It were advantageous to the Commonwealth that none had a Title,
but he who had the Estate which was given out with it, and out of which it was
to be mantained, a Poor Nobility being a great burden upon a Commonwealth and
a ruin to it: And I find that the Parliament of England did Degrade George
Nevil from being Duke of Bedford, for want of an Estate suitable to his
Dignity, which Statut. 17. Ed. 4. expresses the inconveniences here mentioned,
which are greater in Scotland than in England, because Our Peers have more
Interest in laying on Taxes than Lords in England have. 6o. The Law considers
not in other cases, whether the thing used by the apparent Heir, may be
advantageous to him, Or whether he may pay Debt with it, for the using of mere
Ornaments, which can yield no Money, Or things of the meanest advantage, do
make him liable, yea, and he would be liable though he were a looser by the
thing he used; whereas not only are Honors and Precedence things of great
Advantage, and which men would buy at any Rate; But if a man have Liberty once
to use the Title of his Predecessor, it gives him a great Opportunity to
inhance his Predecessors Estate by indirect means: And the former Arguments
prove only that the Blood interest as to Honor is transmitted without a
Service, but not that the Feudal Title of Earl can be so transmitted.

QVESTION XII. Whether does the Appearancy of Blood give Precedence, where the
Predecessor is not Dead?
This is called by the Doctors, Spes and expectantia successionis (...) and
upon this account it is Debated, Whether the Son of a King ought to be
preferred to his Brother and all the Peers? And generally, whether the Nephew
ought to be preferred to the Uncle who was his Fathers second Brother? And I
find it Recorded that Lycurgus did decide for himself against his Nephew, being
the Son of his eldest Brother: But I would distinguish here thus, First in the
Families of Kings and Princes, all the Kings Children are preferred to the
Kings Brothers, and all the Kings Brothers to the Kings Uncles, and thus it was
decided in France by Henry the third, Rupanus page 508. But formerly the Uncles
were preferred by the Constitution of Philip the Long anno 1316. And though in
the Roman Empire before Alexius Comnenius the Emperors Son was still preferred
to his Uncle; Yet that Emperor desiring to put a Mark of Respect upon his own
elder Brother, preferred him to his Son, and now the Sons of Princes are so
far preferred, that not only they, but all the Princes of the Blood are
preferred to all other Peers, though they be last Created, as was found by the
Parliament of Paris, anno 1541. betwixt the Dukes of Neveres and Monpensier.
2o. If in other Families the Brother be of a Dignity equal to his elder
Brother, then the Brother will be preferred to the Nephew; as if the Brother be
an Earl, and the Nephew a Lord as being an Earls Son, in this case Expectation
will not prefer the Nephew, because there are other actual Degrees of
Preferrence. 3o. If the Uncle were a Lord by Creation, and the Nephew a Lord by
Birth, in which case, if the Uncle was a Lord before the Nephew was born, the
Uncle ought to be preferred as first in Time, but not if the Nephew was first
born, and thus Baldus distinguishes, ad L. ut intestato C. de su. and Leg.
Hered. 4o. If neither the Nephew nor Uncle have any special Dignity, then the
Son of the elder Brother is to be preferred to the Uncle; And this last case
shows, that the immediate hope of Succession, or jus expectantiae, is in it
self a ground of Precedence, and since a man and his apparent Heir are una and
eadem Persona in the Construction of Law, and that in many things that are
Disadvantagious to the Son, he is looked upon as Heir apparent, in the same way
as if his Father were dead; it is therefore just, that as he has the
Disadvantages of an apparent Heir, so he ought to have the Advantages of an
apparent Heir: And thus We see that Our Statutes having Declared Comprisings
bought in by the apparent Heir to be Redeemable by the Defuncts Creditors, It
was found that a Comprising bought in by the eldest Son, even whilst his Father
lived, was Redeemable from him and that he was an apparent Heir, in the
construction of Law; And therefore since the Law puts him in the same case, as
if the Father were Dead, he ought to have the same Precedence, and consequently
ought to be preferred to his Uncle, to whom he would certainly be preferred, if
his Father were dead. It is remarkable that in Scotland, the Uncle was of old
acknowledged to be King during not only the Pupillarity of his Pupil; but
during the Uncles own Natural Life, which being an Invasion upon the Natural
Right of Our Kings, was abrogated under Kenith the third.

QVESTION XIII. Whether should an elder Brother, who was Born before the Father
was Preferred to the Dignity of a King, Marquess, Earl, etc. be Preferred to a
younger Brother who was Born after his Father had attained to either of these
Dignities?
Lawyers have varied very much in this Point, For some have been of Opinion,
that those that are born before the Dignity was attained, cannot pretend to the
Precedence due to the Father, for he cannot be said (say they) to be the Son of
a King, or Marquess, whom a King or Marquess did not beget; And since those who
are born before a Crime is committed, loose not their Dignity by the Fathers
committing of the Crime, So by the Rule of Contraries, he who was Born before
his Father was Advanced to a Dignity, ought not to participat of that Dignity:
This they found likewise upon express Laws, L. si Senatus Cod. de Dignitat. L.
Imperalis Cod. de Nupt. and thus Darius was preferred to be King of the
Persians to Artabazanes. Others do more justly conclude, that these are to be
Preferred though Born before the Dignity was obtained; For, if he who was Born
in that Condition can be called the Kings Son, he must be the Kings eldest Son;
And it were very absurd that the Father should be Noble, and the Son not; And
if a King had but one Son, he could not be King if this were allowed: and this
is most clear L. Senatoris Filium ff. de Senate. where it is said, That he is
as well to be called the Son of a Senator, who was Begot before the Father was a
Senator, as he who was Begot after; And though this be true as to Succession,
and as to the Degree of Nobility in general, yet many Lawyers are of Opinion,
that they do not attain to so eminent a Degree of Nobility, as if they had been
Born after the Father attained to his Nobility; For by the former Law, si
Senator natus ex illustri ante Dignitatem adeptam, est clarissimus; solum natus
postea, illustris: Others there are who say, That these who were Born before,
may succeed to Honors which descended from old Predecessors, but those which
were acquired in the Fathers own time, should only descend to such as were
Born after these Honors were acquired. But now generally in Europe, and
particularly with Us, even those who were Born before the Father attained to
any Dignity, do participat of his Dignity, as if they had been born after the
same was acquired in all cases.

QVESTION XIV. Whether ought a Son who is in public Employment and Dignified,
to Preceed a Father who is not?
It is answered, That a Son being in public Employment ought to preceed a
Father who is not. And thus Fabius Maximus commanded his Father, to light down
from his horse, when he was to meet him; and was praised for mantaining the
Dignity of the Roman Empire in this case: And the Son in this case is not a
private person, but Represenrs the Prince or Commonwealth, who are to be
preferred to any person; and therefore Laurentius Celsi was justly taxed at
Venice, because he would not meet his Son when he was newly made Duke of
Venice, least by being discovered before him he should lessen the Perogative of
a Father.

But it may be doubted, Whether though this hold in Employments, it ought to
hold in Titles, since in these the Son Represents not the Commonwealth; And
therefore in these cases the Laws of Nature ought to prevail above the Laws of
Honor, especially, if there be none present but Father and Son; But if there
be a third person present who will take the place from the Father, but not from
the Son, then the Son must preceed the Father; because, though he yield to his
Father, yet he should not yield to a third Party: And it is a general Rule in
matters of Precedence, that I must preceed you, if I preceed him who preceeds
you, which is not unlike that Maxim used in other parts of Law, qui vincit
vincentem me, vincit me.

QVESTION XV. Whether may he who has the Survivance of Employment, challenge
any Precedence upon that Account?
To this it is answered, That he cannot Claim any Precedence: For, though there
be there the hope of Succession, and that the person to succeed be in actu
proximo, and that likewise it may seem that he is advanced to a Dignity, and so
ought to have a Precedence suitable to it, and that it may likewise seem fit
for the Interest of the Commonwealth, that these should be Respected and
Preferred who are marked out for the Service of the Commonwealth; Yet Law nor
Custom have given them no Precedence, for since they have actually no Dignity
nor Power, they ought to have no actual Precedence: And thus it was found by
the Parliaments of Paris, and Tholows in anno 1551. and 1560. that these who
had Survivances were only to be preferred, according to the dates of their
actual Admission; And so these who were Admitted to be Councillors or Judges,
after they got their Survivance, ought to have the Precedence from them, if
they did actually administrate before them, vid. Maynerd Notabil. quest. cap.
72. Math. de afflict. deciss. Neapolitan. 1.

QVESTION XVI. Whether does the Daughter of a Lord, who would himself have been
an Earl if he had lived, take place from the Daughter of a younger Earl.
It may be alleged that the Daughter of the Lord should not preceed, because,
an Earls Daughter should still preceed a Lords Daughter, and this Ladies
Father was never an Earl, nor are We to consider futur Honors in the matter of
Precedence; And as she would not take it in her Fathers time, so neither ought
she after his death: And as her Father himself, being a Lord though an Earls
Son, would not have taken place from the younger Earl, so neither should the
Lords daughter from the Earls daughter, he being a younger Earl then that
Lords Father: And I find by the Heralds Records in England, that Sir Thomas
Lees daughter got a Warrant from the King, to take place as a Lords Daughter,
her Father having died before his Father the Lord Lee, which proves that she
could not have taken place otherwise, and this is commonly received in England.
But yet it may be Debated, That the Daughter of that Lord should have the
Precedence, since her Father would have been an elder Earl; And though she
could not take place during her Grandfathers time who was the elder Earl, yet
per jus accrescendi, and the right of Representation, she comes after her
Grandfathers death, to be the Daughter of the elder Earl, for Honor is but a
part of Succession; and therefore as she might have right to her Fathers
Succession, if she have not Brothers, she may by the same reason have Right to
the Honors: And it were very ridiculous to Argue so, as that her elder Brother
(if she had any) might take place as an Earls Grandchild, and that she could
not take the same place as his Sister; and consequently, since he would take
the place of that younger Earl, so should she of that younger Earls Sister or
Daughter: And the Reason why she comes to a higher Degree of Precedence by the
death of her Grandfather is, because by the right of Representation her
Fathers Family comes in the Grandfathers place. And to show, that this
Argument, viz. Your Father had not the Precedence of me, therefore you cannot
have it of my Daughter, is a weak Argument in cases of Representation, may
appear from this, That if it were a good Argument, the younger Earl might
as well say to that Lords Son, Your Father never took the place of me, so
neither can you; And though it may be Answered to this Argument, that the
Disparity betwixt the Brother and Sister lies in this, That the Son Represents
the Grandfather, but the Daughter does not; Yet if We consider it nearly, even
this Answer is Fallacious: For though the Daughter Represents not the
Grandfather, yet the Fathers Family Represents the Grandfathers, and so
participats all the Honors of the Grandfathers Family by that Representation;
And as the elder Brother becomes an Earl, Because, if his Father had lived he
had been an Earl, so she ought to have the Precedence as an Earls Daughter,
because her Father would have been an Earl for the same Reason.

QVESTION XVII. Whether if the elder Brother be Mad or Dumb, etc. does the
second Brother get the same Precedence, as if his Brother were dead?
I have heard this case much Debated, some Contending, That such as were
Incapable of succeeding, were to be Reput as dead, and per cap. 1. an Mutis
Surdis, it is expressly declared, that such as are born Deaf or Dumb, or are
naturally Idiots shall not Succeed: But others thought that even these are to
Succeed, but have only their nearest Agnats given them for Curatours, and so
they are Heirs; And consequently, the Precedence is not due to their nearest
Friends during their Life, and they may have children who would exclude their
nearest Agnats. I find some Lawyers distinguish betwixt such Defects as are
Natural, and follow the Havers from their Birth, and these Defects do Exclude
from the Succession, so that the next Heir has the same Precedence, as if his
elder were dead, if the Succession be of Kingdoms, or Fews that have a Dignity
annexed to them: But in private Rights, and where the Defects are Accidental,
they assert that the Right remains with the Heir though defectuus, and
consequently he retains also the Precedence, Tiraquel. quaest. 23.

QVESTION XVIII. Which of two or more Twins ought to Preceed, when it is
Contraverted which of them was first Born?
We have a remarkable instance of this, Genesis 38. where the Mother desired the
Scarlet thread to be bound about his wrest who should be first Born, and as to
this point Lawyers have differed very much, For some think that the Estate
ought to be divided amongst the Pretenders, if it be divisible of its own
Nature; Or if it be indivisible the Superior may prefer either he pleases, if
the Succession be of a Few; Or the Decision may be referred to Lot in private
Persons; Or to the Vote of the Representatives of the Kingdom, if the
Succession be to a Monarchy. Some likewise are for the Brothers possessing by
turns and alternately: and though one Witness be not sufficient generally to
Establish the Right of Succession, yet if any one Woman was only present, her
Testimony would certainly prefer either, necessity forming it self into a Law
here as in other cases, vid. Tiraquel. de Iur. primi Genesis quaest. 17.

QVESTION XIX. Whether do Natural Children Born before a Lawful Marriage
preceed? And should they be preferred to the Children Born in a Lawful
Marriage, if they be Legitimated thereafter?
This case did exist in a most illustruous instance in Scotland: For King
Robert the second having begot a Son upon Elizabeth Mure, he thereafter Married
Eupham Daughter to the Earl of Rosse, and had by her the Earls of Strathern,
and Athol; after which having married the said Elizabeth Mure, that Marriage
did Legitimate her Children, and by Act of Parliament her Children were, by a
Recognition and acknowledgement of Parliament, preferred to the Children Born
in the Lawful Marriage. The Reasons pro and contra, urged in that Debate at
that time are now unknown; But the Arguments which might have been urged in the
case, are, 1o. That a Son so Legitimated would seclude without all Contraversie
all Uncles, and other Agnats, Therefore by the same he should Seclude his other
Brothers, si quis autem defunctis Authent. quibus mod. not. cap 1. qui Filii
sunt legit. 2o. Legitimation is Retrotracted and drawn back to the time of the
Nativity, cap. tanta qui fill. sunt legit. and Legitimation puts the Person so
Legitimated in the same Condition as if he had never been a Bastard, L. si quis
Filio pen. ff. de injust. Test. and this is bestowed as a particular Respect
upon Marriage and its Sacred Character, and to invite men to make Satisfaction
for the wrong they have done. 3o. By the Roman Law those that were born in
Captivity were not capable of Succession, but how soon they were Ransomed and
had returned, they were restored to the Right of primo-genitor, and preferred
therein to those who were thereafter born at Rome: And therefore since such was
the Force even of a Civil and unreasonable Fiction, much more ought greater
Force to be allowed to Legitimation, which is founded upon so Just and Pious
Principles. 4o. Quo-ad the Right of Succession, the time of the Defuncts death
to whom he is to succeed, does regulat the quality of the Succession: And
therefore since the Person Legitimated was capable of Succession the time the
Defunct died, and was then likewise the eldest, he ought to Succeed as eldest,
whatever his Condition was the time of his Birth, L. post Consanguineos
proximam ff. de suis and Legit. nec enim prius debet de cujusque condition
queri quam haereditas vel legatum ad eum pertineat, L. in opportet. ff. de
Legate. 2. 5o. The eldest Son was always eldest, and was only hindered from this
Right of primo-genitor and Precedence, by the Legal imperfection of his Birth,
and therefore this impediment being removed by the same Law which put it, his
Birthright continues entire.

But whether this Privilege should be granted to such as are Legitimated by
the Prince, and not by the subsequent Marriage, may be doubted? And I incline
to think it should not, because the special Reason of the former Concession
depends upon the Favor and Honor of Marriage; and this is likewise clear,
cap. and quoniam Auth. quib. mod. not. vid. Imolam. in cap. Grand. de sup.
negl. Praelat. And my second Argument is That the Prince cannot by any deed of
his prejudge third Parties; But here such a Legitimation, would prejudge the
Children of the intermediate Lawful Marriage.

QVESTION XX. Whether ought the Order of the Nomination to be Observed in
Commissions, where the Persons are Ranked otherwise then can be consistent
with the Kings former express Grants?
An instance of this may be given in this case, viz. The Mayor or Provost of a
City being Patron of a College within their own Town, His Majesty grants a
Commission for visiting that College, wherein he names first the Bishop, then
the Mayor, etc. The question may be moved whether the Bishop ought to preceed,
because he is first named; or the Mayor because he has most interest, being
Patron, Who may likewise allege, that the Bishops Nomination proceeded only
from the Ordinary Custom of naming Ecclesiastics first.

As also, If in a Commission of Justiciary, three Lords of the Session being
named, and the youngest of the three being first named in the Commission, It
may be doubted, whether the Seniority formerly acquired in the Session ought to
be Observed, and give Precedence in Sitting and Voting; or if they ought to Sit
and Vote, according as they are named in the Commission: And it may be alleged
that the Seniority in the Session ought to be Respected, there being a right of
Precedence thereby acquired, which cannot be prejudged by a Nomination, which
might have proceeded upon mistake; since it is not to be presumed that His
Majesty would Degrade any whom He continued otherwise in so eminent a Dignity:
And as if two Brothers were named in a Commission, the elder would sit and vote
first, though the younger were first named, that inversion being presumed to
proceed from Error; so ought the same to be observed amongst Judges who are in
effect Brothers. Some likewise use to Argue in such cases from the reiterated
Order of Nomination, and think that if the Persons Commissionated be often named
after the same Order, that the Order of Nomination in that case is presumed to
have proceeded from an express Design of giving Preferrence, and this they call
argumentum a geminatione actuum; But in my judgment it is no infallible
Argument, for these Repetitions proceed in course.

QVESTION XXI. In the Competition betwixt two who are Advanced at the same
time, but in different Writes, As if two Patents were subscribed by His Majesty
to two several Earls on the same day, which of the two were to be preferred?
In answer to this, It is generally concluded, that though both be granted on
the same day, and in the same hour, the Priority of His Majesty's Subscription
would prefer him in whose Favors His Majesty did first superscrib; which may
be cleared by His Majesty's own Declaration, for he being the fountain of
Honor, he is the only fit Judge in all Contraversies concerning it, or if his
Majesty do not remember, the Declaration of His Secretary is undoubtedly to be
believed, nam in his quae attingunt off^ium, officium gerentibus est credendum;
But if both His Majesty, and His Secretary were dead, some think that there
were place left for the succeeding King to gratify either, since the
completing of Rights depends absolutely upon him, who is the first Granter:
And by the Feudal Law, and Ours, if Resignation be made at the same time in the
Superiors hands, in favors of several Persons at the same time, locus est
gratificationi, as Craig also tells Us, and he may prefer either as he pleases.

Some contend that where several Patents are granted in the same day, the King
may prefer either, though it be known which of the two Patents were first
signed and superscribed: For in Law, where the difference of time is so little,
the Law looks upon it as no Difference at all, nam de minimis non curat
praetor, and Albericus who has write a Treatise de minimis, is of this Opinion,
and We see that the Law in other cases brings in equally such as approach so
near one another in time, nor can the King be said to be functus officio, and
to have denuded himself of the power of Preference, where the right of
Preference is so small; as when the King superscribes both the Patents at the
same time, as that he does not intermix any other business, nec divertit ad
alium actum, there indeed it seems that neither can claim Preference by the
Priority of Signing, since it appears His Majesty had no design of Preferring
the one to the other, and papers are ordinarily presented to him by accident, as
they fall in course. It may then be alleged, that in such dubious cases, where
Preference cannot be known from the superscription of the Patents, and where
His Majesty does not Declare the Preference by any posterior Act, but leaves
both Parties to the Common Law, that there he who had the Precedence before
these Patents ought to be continued in the Preference, since in all dubious
cases the Law still prefers the Possessor, and semper in casu dubio pro
possessore respondendum; Nor can it be imagined that His Majesty designed to
Degrade a person whom He has actually Preferred; But so it is, that to
postpone a man to him to whom he was formerly preferred, is somewhat to Degrade
him: And since Accumulation and Conjunction of Titles has very many effects in
the case of Preference, the least effect it can have, is to prefer the Haver in
such a dubious case.

I likewise conceive, That if two Patents were given at the same time, One to a
Person who had served His Majesty, and much more to an actual Domestic, and
the other to a Person who had not served, nor were no Domestic, that in these
cases he who had served, or were a Domestic would be preferred, because of the
presumed affection of the Prince, and the former Service of the Receiver.

QVESTION XXII. Whether is Precedence to be Ruled according to the date of the
Provision, Investiture, or actual Possession?
There are three several times from which ordinarily Precedence is computed, The
first is the time when the Honor is first granted, which is called by Lawyers
tempus provisionis, If the Advancement be of one single Person to a single
Dignity; or tempus Cooptationis, if the Person Advanced be associated into any
Society, as to be One of more Judges, etc. The second period of Time, is the
time of the Investiture, as when a Nobleman is brought in in his Robs. The
third is, the time when he apprehends actual Possession.

These who write upon this Subject do conclude, That Precedence is to be given
not from the time of Promotion or Provision, but from the entry to Possession,
so that he who is last Provided or Dignified will have Precedence, if he first
actually apprehended possession, Bald. in cap. cum olim. de consuetud.
Gothofred. de Preced. cap. 3. number. 18. and thus he observes the Courts of Rome,
Paris and Tholows to have decided, and for this he cites l. ult. ff. de
Excusat. Tutor. l. 1. Cod. Theod. quis in Grad. Prefer. and since
Administration is the end of that Advancement, the Act is not Complete till
then.

Though this hold in Honors which require Administration, such as the being in
a Judicatory, etc. Yet it holds not in Honors where no Administration is
requisite, And thus, if two be Advanced to be Earls, he whose Patent is first
past the Kings hand will have the Precedence, though the other serve in the
first Parliament, or be present there a day before the other, or have his
Patent first Registrat; for it is the King, and not his Clerk, that makes
Noble, but yet this is Debated by La Rocque, cap. 66. Lawyers likewise Observe
that the former Rule, preferring him who has first Served to him who was first
Provided or Invested, holds good, though he who was first Provided or Invested
was not in mora, and did not delay to take Possession, but was hindered by some
extrinsick Impediment, such as Sickness; And this they say was decided the 27 of
April, 1594. in Rota Romana, and this is observed to be the common Opinion by
Gonzales ad regulam 8. Cancel. and this they prove by the Analogy of other
Feudal Rights, which being to be completed by Possession, the Law considers
not whether the Party who should have possessed was hindered from attaining to
Possession, but who first attained to Possession.

QVESTION XXIII. Whether does the Dignity of him who bestows the Honor,
Regulate the Precedence that is bestowed among Equals?
It is answered, That it does, all other things being Equal; and thus those who
have the same Dignity from a King, as for instance, Those who are made Knights
by a King are preferred to those who are made Knights by a Commonwealth; And
amongst Commonwealths, those who are made Noble by the greater Commonwealth
are preferred, to those of the same Degree made Noble by a lesser
Commonwealth, Gloss. ad L. 2. de Alb. scribend. Menoch. Consil. 126. Lauderus
de Dignitat. Conclus. 32. and this holds so far, that the youngest Knight
admitted by the one is preferred to the eldest admitted by the other: But
Knights admitted by a Commissioner, are not upon this account to be postpon'd
to those made by the King himself, since they are in the Construction of Law
admitted by the same Dignity, and qui facit per alium, facit per se.

It is very observable, that the French King prefers the Dukes made by the
Emperor, not only to the Dukes made by himself, but even to the Ambassadors
of Foreign Kings; though I think this is allowed only to these Dukes, who are
Sovereign Princes. By this rule likewise it is, that the Clerks of a Superior
Court are preferred to these of an Inferior, since they derive their power
from a higher Jurisdiction.

QVESTION XXIV. Whether can a Prince Nobilitat any of his own Subjects in the
Territories of another Prince?
It has been Argued that he cannot; because he cannot bestow Honors, but where
he is a Prince, but so it is, that he is not a Prince, at least has no power
in the Territories of another Prince: Which Opinion seems to be founded on L.
ult. ff. de Off. prefect. Vrb. and therefore Sigismund the Emperor having
designed at Lions in France, to Creat the Earl of Savoy, Duke of Savoy, he was
resisted by the Governor of Lions, till the French King should be advertised;
And Charles the fifth having whilst he was Emperor, Created some Lords and
Knights in France, though at the desire of Francis the first the French King,
their Creation being thereafter Contraverted by their Peers, It was found
Illegal: But yet I incline rather to Noldus's opinion de Nobilitate c. 2. who
thinks that a Prince may Exercise any Voluntar Jurisdiction without his own
Dominions, especially in Relation to his own Subjects, L. 1. ff. de Officio pro
Consul. Bartol. in L. 1. Col. 9. La Rocque triact de la noblesse, c. 76. and if
they should attempt against his Life, they would be guilty of Treason, though
the attempt was made in a Foreign Nation. Lawyers likewise have allowed to
Princes all manner of Jurisdiction, even within the Dominion of others: And
therefore I much admire, how these Honors that were bestowed by Charles the
fifth, could have been thereafter contraverted, if the persons to be Dignified
were the Emperors own Subjects; but I believe they were not.

QVESTION XXV. Whether when the President of any Court or Incorporation is
absent, may the eldest Member Convocat the Incorporation? And who ought to
perce^d in that Case?
To the first of these questions it is answered by some Lawyers, That the
President being absent, the eldest Member in Dignity, may by his own Authority
call the meeting Convocare Collegium, as they call it, and of this opinion are
Hostiensis, Panorm. Bald. ad cap. 1. de Mayor and Obed: but others are of
opinion that the Major part has only right to conveen the rest in that case
Innocent. ad cap. 2. de operi. nov. nunc. But a third Sect of Lawyers do, for
agreeing the former opinions, assert that in Ecclesiastic meetings, the eldest
may by his own Authority call the rest, but not so in Laick meetings; and the
reason of this Distinction seems to be, because Churchmen are bound to give
more Obedience to their Seniors, and there is less fear of Design amongst them,
both because they are presumed to be more disinterested, and because in their
meetings their Posterity is not to gain: But without any Distinction I should
think, that the eldest may always Convocat, for there may be hazard in delay,
if the greater part were requisite, for the question still recurrs who should
call the greater part, nor can there be great hazard in calling, for the only
hazard is the packing of a Quorum, and this may be prevented, by imposing a
necessity upon those who meet to advertise the rest.

To the second question it is answered, That this is much to be determined by
Custom, and Our Courts in Scotland suffer not the eldest to preceed, but choose
always one to preceed in the absence of their constant President; and this
seems to be most Reasonable, because every Member of a Court is not ordinarily
fit to be a President: And yet there are some Lawyers who distinguish betwixt
such Courts, to whom the chief Magistrate has chosen no constant President; and
in these they say the eldest cannot preceed, though they say he ought to
preceed in these Courts where the King has choos'd a President, for as in these
the members cannot choose a constant President, so neither can they choose a
Vice President, since surrogatum subit naturam surrogati, whereas the eldest is
a President by the Magistrates tacit Election, since he has that Seniority from
the King, or supreme Magistrate, which does prefer him to be President: and we
see that amongst Soldiers, the eldest Officer always commands, when the
superior Officer is absent.

QVESTION XXVI. Whether may a Peer be Degraded, because he has not an Estate
sufficient to entertain a Person of his Quality? And by whom may he be Degraded?
It would seem that a Peer cannot be Degraded, though he has not a suitable
Estate, because the King may Nobilitate a person that wants an Estate, and
Nobility being a right derived from Blood, it seems to have no Dependence upon
Riches, and as the having of Riches gives not Nobility, so neither should the
want of them take it away; Likewise this is very express by the Roman Law, Lege
humilem, Cod. de Incest. nupt. where it is said, humilem and abjectam foeminam
non eam esse quae licet pauper sit ab ingenuis tamen parentibus nata est. And
that this has been very anciently the opinion of the World, is clear from that
of Euripides, apud Stob. sermon. 86. (...).

But I find that Cook 4. inst. folio 355. and the Author of Ius Imaginis, page
25. conclude that Poverty is a good cause for the Degrading of a Peer, an
instance whereof, they give in George Nevil Duke of Bedford, who was Degraded
by Act of Parl. 17. Edward the fourth, of which Act this is the tenor, And
forasmuch as it is openly known, that the said George has not, nor by
Inheritance may have any livelihood to support the said Name, Estate, and
Dignity, or any name of Estate, as oftentimes it is seen, that when any Lord is
called to high Estate, and have not livelihood convenient to support the same
Dignity, it induces great Poverty, and Indigence, and causes oftentimes
Extortion, Embracery, and Maintenance to be had, to the great trouble of such
Countries, where such Estate shall happen to be inhabited; Wherefore the King
by Advice of his Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in this present
Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, Ordains,
Establishes, and Enacteth, that from henceforth the same Erection, and making
of the same Duke, and all the names of Dignity to the said George, or to John
Nevil his Father, be from henceforth void, and of none effect, etc.

From which Act three things may be well observed,

First, That the said Duke had not any Possessions to support his Dignity, yet
his Dignity could not be taken away from him without an Act of Parliament.

Secondly, The inconveniences appear, where a great Estate or Dignity, is not
accompanied with a livelihood.

Thirdly, This is a good Cause to take away the Dignity by Parliament.

For reconciling which opinions, it seems indeed, that though a person who is
noble by Birth should fall into poverty, yet that poverty can no more Degrade
him from his Nobility, then it can taint his Blood; but though it cannot root
out that Noble Character from his Blood, and make him no Gentleman, yet it
seems a good reason why he may be Degraded from being a Peer of the Realm: For
the being a Peer, is no necessar effect of Blood, but a mark of the Royal
bounty, bestowed for the better Government and Advantage of the Kingdom, Earls
being by their Original Praepositi Comitatus, or Commanders of the County, and
Counties or Shires are so called, because they are the Governments of a Count
or Earl: And therefore when the King and Parliament find that they are not fit
to bear this quality, they may justly take away that Honor that was given, nor
can there be any thing so inconvenient, as that these should represent the
Kingdom in its greatest concerns, and burden it with with Taxes, who have no
interest in the one, nor can bear any share in the other. And that these Feudal
Dignities and marks of Nobility may be taken off by the loss of the Fews, is
clear by Bartolus in L. inam. Cod. de Dignitatibus, and that this is the
custom of Sicily is clear, Afflictus. Col. non. in 6. not.

It may likewise seem reasonable, that as the King only can bestow Nobility,
so that it should be only proper for him to Degrade; And since he may Create
any Nobleman though he be poor, so he may continue him so, notwithstanding of
his Poverty, specially seeing the being a Peer is but to be the Princes
Counselor, nor can any judge who are fit to be his Counselors, but himself;
nor is the Parliament any thing but his great Council: But since this
Degradation is a kind of Forfeitur, it seems that the Parliament only can be
Judges therein, since the King does not use to Forfeit by his own Authority;
And though the former Arguments may prove that a Peer cannot be Degraded for
poverty, except the King pleases, which is certainly true, since no Act of
Parliament can pass without his Royal consent, yet they prove not that the King
may Degrade a Nobleman by his own Authority, except he may Judge all cases
immediately by himself.

QVESTION XXVII. Whether is a Patent never made use of by the Father, valid
after his death?
It is answered, That though the Patent being granted to such a man therein
Designed seems to die with him, and that the Father dying with this quality
cannot transmit it to his Son, yet it is certain, that the Patent is valid to
his posterity: For except where it was Designed to be personal, it is conceived
in Favors of a man and his Heirs; and thus it was judged in the cause of
Quesnel Advocat in Rowan, 4. May 1623. vid. La Rocque cap. 67.

QVESTION XXVIII. Whether if the Father use any low or base Trade which
Derogates from Nobility, will his Children and Descendents loose it thereby?
In answering to this case, We must distinguish betwixt such as derive their
Nobility from their Fathers only, and some think that in that case, the
misbehaviour of the Father does extinguish the Nobility of the Race, and that
the Descendants are no more Noble, except they be restored by an express Gift;
Or otherwise the Nobility of the Race has descended from a long Series of
Predecessors, and then the Fathers Deed does not prejudge them, since they do
not owe their Nobility to him, and the Prince having Nobilitat such a man and
his Posterity, they owe their Nobility to the King, and derive it from him
equally with the Father, which Distinction I find in the Learned Faber. Cod. L.
9. T. 28. Def. 1. But it seems that by this last reason, Even that Nobility
which is begun in the Father cannot be lost by his fault: And therefore some
Lawyers have been of Opinion, that that Nobility which descends by immemorial
possession, and which flows not from a particular privilege and Concession,
can never be taken away by the Fathers baseness or crime, Warnaesius tom. 1.
responsorum de Iure Pontificio Consil. 20. number. 7. and thus we find in the
Roman Story, that Marcus Emilius Scaurus was found not to have lost his
Nobility by his Fathers becoming a bearer of Coals, Curt. conjectur. jur.
civil. lib. 2. cap. 20. and others think that as it is sufficient for acquiring
Nobility, that the Grandfather and Father have been repute Noble; So by the
rule of Contraries, it is sufficient for extinguishing Nobility, that the
Father and Grandfather have been repute Ignoble; And though the rights of
Blood cannot be lost by prescription, yet Nobility may be lost, as all other
privileges can, by not exersing or owning it time out of mind.

It is fit to know, that in this Isle not only that Nobility which comes by
Succession and Immemorial possession, but even that which comes by privilege
and Concession can be Forfeited by the Fathers Crime; and in this We differ
from Warnesius opinion, and therefore the Children must be rehabilitat and
restored by the King; But the Fathers unworthiness in exercising mean shifts
and Trades, does not amongst us Derogate from the Childrens Nobility, as in
other Nations; Nor do I see any reason for the distinction used by Warnesius,
for all Nobility must be acknowledged to have flowed originally from the King
by Concession, and even that Nobility, which comes by privilege, does descend
upon the Children by the Kings grant to them as well as the Father, and so
cannot be prejudged by any personal deed of his, except in the case of a Crime
against the King, for that is still employed in the Concession, and it is not
just that the Children of Traitors should enjoy those titles, and that
Nobility which might be useful to them in revenging their unjust quarrels.

QVESTION XXIX. One having resigned a Dignity or Employment, and returning
thereafter thereto, whether does he who has so resigned return to his former
Precedence?
To this it is answered, That he does not; but having embraced again the
employment he had formerly resigned, he is only to have Precedence according
to his last Reinstalment, Langleus 7. Semest. 8. where it is laid down as a
rule that Precedence once lost is never recovered, and an instance of this is
given cap. ex Insinuatione 26. in a Chanon: who having once renunced his
Benefice, and having thereafter embraced it, is only to be preferred according
to the date of his last title.

From this last rule, viz. that a Precedence once lost cannot be recovered,
Gothofred. de Preced. cap. 6. number. 43. observes these Exceptions,

First, If the person who renounced his Dignity was preferred to a Higher or
more Noble, in which case if he return to his first Employment, he looses not
the Precedence due to it, for a greater Dignity never prejudges the lesser, L.
3. C. de Dignitatibus Rupanus, lib. 7. cap. 27. and contains in it the lesser,
per eminentiam, as Lawyers speak, superveniens major Dignitas auget non minuit
statum, except the two Offices be incompatible in themselves, for then the
lesser is extinguished by the greater, L. si debitoris ff. de fidejussor.

The second exception is, If the person in whose favors the Resignation was
made, will not accept, and upon his refusal the Resigner does presently return
to his Precedence, L. si forte ff. de Offic. Presid. And the reason is, because
the Resignation being there made in favors of another has that tacit Condition
in it, that if the other in whose favors it was made accept not, the
Resignation shall be null, and this is the nature of all Resignations in
favorem with us as to all Fews, as Craig well observes.

The third Exception is, If he who made the Resignation do presently repent,
for in that case likewise he is in the condition, as if he Resigned not; And
thus the Law takes not advantage of Our sudden and undigested thoughts, Et uxor
quae mox rediit divertisse non videtur.

The fourth Exception given by him is, If he who Resigned reserved to himself
his former Precedence: for which though there be several Roman decisions, yet
it is very debateable, how far a man can by Protestation or Paction,
distinguish and reserve a Precedence, when he has Resigned or Disponed the
Employment to which it was annexed; For since the Precedence is only due upon
the account of the Employment, it would seem that he who has Resigned the
Employment, cannot retain the Precedence, and to do so, were to retain accidens
sine subjecto:

QVESTION XXX. Whether may a Nobleman resign his Honors in favors of a third
Party? And if the Kings Confirmation thereupon will exclude the nearest Agnats,
who would else have succeeded by their right of Blood?
This question seems of great Importance and intricacy: For it may seem that he
may transfer his title in prejudice of his nearest Heirs, because the title is
only a Fee, and all Fews may be alienated; nor is this a mere right of Blood,
but a privilege bestowed by the King, and consequently may be transferred by
his consent: Nor can their be any thing more for the interest either of the
Kingdom or of Noble Families, than that when the nearest Heir is unfit to
succeed, wanting either Means or Wit suitable to such a Dignity, it should be
in the power of the King, and the Noble person himself to choose a fit
successor. Like as this was so decided in the case of Robert King of Sicily,
Cl. pastoral. de re Iud. And many Lawyers have been of opinion, that even elder
Brothers might resign their right of Succession and primo-genitur in favors of
the third Brother, passing by the second, vid. c. 1. praeterea tit. quib. mod.
feud. amit. and Bald. Consil. 389.

But others conclude, That the nearest by Blood are not prejudged by such
Resignations: Because this is a right flowing from the favor of Nature and
Law, Naturae and Legis donum quod non potest auferri, L. si arrogater, ff. sed
an ff. de Adopt. nor is Dignity exposable to sale or in Commerce, L. Iulianus
ff. si quis omiss. Whereas if such Resignations or transmissions were
sustainable, all titles might be sold, and the meanest Fellow if Rich, might by
the favor of a Minister, and the folly of the present Possessor, exclude the
Noblest Race: And by the Feudal Law, though a Vassal may denude himself, yet he
cannot transmit his Fee in favors of remoter Heirs to the prejudice of the
nearer, cap. Titius tit. si de feud. fuer. Contravers. this case is not decided
with us; but the King upon a Resignation from the late Earl of Caithnes in
favors of Glenurchy, confirmed the title in his favors, but by a new Patent,
and without the former Precedence, and discharged by a letter the next Heir to
use the title, till the matter should be decided by the Judge competent. But I
find that in England Ed. 2. granted to Edmond de Lincourt upon his Petition a
Patent under the great Seal, impowering him to assign his Surname, Arms, and
Barony: But the Lord Hoe having assigned his Name, Arms, and Dignity without
the Kings license, the deed was adjudged void in Parliament; From which the
Author of Ius imaginis, page 27. concludes first, That the title of Nobility
may be assigned: Secondly, That it cannot be assigned without the Kings
license: And yet I find that in the Viscount Purbecks case, it was lately found
by the parliament of England, that a Nobleman could not levey a fine upon his
Honor in prejudice of his Heir, that is to say, That a Nobleman could not do
any deed to the prejudice of his Honor, by alienating or surrendering the same
to the prejudice of his Heir, though I am informed that there were very many
instances adduced for clearing the contrare opinion.

QVESTION XXXI. Whether does the former right of Precedence remain with him who
has resigned the Office by which he enjoyed the Precedence?
It seems that the Honor being in that case due upon the account of the
Office, should cease with its cause: But yet such respect is given by the Law
to those who have once enjoyed an Office, and used it well, that the former
Dignity and Precedence is allowed them after they have resigned the Office, L.
eam Legem ff. de excusat. Illi in quos munera nostra redundarunt, beneficiis
eorum non solum quamdiu militaverunt, sed etiam quamdiu vixerint, perfruentur,
and Guide. Pap. relates decis. 377. that it was so decided: For the being
esteemed worthy to possess such an Office is a quality inherent to, and
inseparable from the person so advanced, and in most cases even Deprivation
does not extinguish the Precedence, because the order still remains, as if a
Bishop be deposed he is still a Bishop, and therefore has Precedence as such;
But in such cases as the deprivation destroys the order it self, it destroys
also in that case the Precedence, as if a Knight were degraded for
Cowardliness, he is no more a Knight, and so looses the Precedence annexed to
the Order, L. 12. de Dignit. si Iudices se furtis and sceleribus fuerint
comaculasse convicti, ablatis codocillorum insignibus and honor exuti inter
plebeios habeantur.

QVESTION XXXII. If a person do not of himself resign, but be called from his
Charge by the Prince to another Employment, and one provided to his place, and
returning thereafter to his first Dignity by the Princes command, whether does
he get Precedence according to his first or last instalment?
I find this to have been agitated in the Parliament of Savoy, anno 1590. in
the case of the Bishop of Alby, who being called from being a Counselor in
that Parliament to a Bishopric, and his place being filled by another, he
thereafter was called back to be a Counselor: And this may fall out with us
in many cases, as for instance, If one should be called from being a Lord of
the Session to be Justice General, and should thereafter be returned to be a
Lord of the Session: And I find it was decided in Savoy, that the person so
recalled ought to preceed according to his first instalment; but the reason
there was that the Prince had expressly declared at his Demission, that if he
returned he should return to his first Precedence, and that it were indecent
that he who was first formerly in that Judicature, should thereafter sit in the
lowest place, merely because he was once called away to a higher preferment:
And in my opinion, If the Prince had not so expressly declared at the first
Demission, the case might have been harder, but that Declaration made that
those who were thereafter preferred, could not think themselves prejudged by
this new readmission, since their instalment was still burdened with this tacit
quality. I likewise think, that if he had returned before any others had been
advanced, the difficulty had been much less, since there no third party was
prejudged of a right acquired medio tempore; albeit it might be alleged that
by his Translation, the other Judges formerly below him succeeded to his right
of Precedence; For against this I conceive the former protestation could have
easily guarded, albeit that protestation does seem contraria facto, and the
quality adjected to be inconsistent with the nature of the thing, where the
place was filled by another, since regularly two cannot preserve the same Rank
or Degree, Arg. L. cum in Testamento ff. de haered. instituend. It may be
likewise argued, that though this quality and protestation was admistable,
where the party so called away was called to a higher Dignity of the same rank,
that there the lesser was possessed by possessing the greater, as if a Justice
General should be called back to be a Lord; Yet this would not hold,
notwithstanding of the former protestation and quality, where he is called away
to a lesser employment, or where he is called to an employment of a different
and incompatible Nature, as from being a Judge to be a Colonel: And yet all
these questions seem of less difficulty with Us, where the Prince may certainly
admit a Judge to be the first or last: And therefore amongst Us these questions
would only take place, where the person formerly installed was called away or
preferred without any such Declaration of the King in his favors.

QVESTION XXXIII. Whether does he who is suspended from the Exercise of an
Office, return to the same Precedence when the Suspension is taken off?
To this it is answered, He does: For though a Suspension may seem a
Degradation and a Privation of the former Honor, and all Privations
extinguish, nec datur regressus a privatione ad habitum, yet, Suspension is in
Law declared to be only a temporal Interdiction from the Exercise, but not an
extinction or Privation of the right: And this is clearly determined, L. 2. ff.
de Decurion. and by Langlaeus 7. Semest. 8.

QVESTION XXXIV. Two having Offices, and changing one with another their
Employments for a time, whether when they Resume their former Employments, do
they return to their former Precedence?
It is answered, Where two did exchange Employments, and thereafter returned to
their old Employments, Lawyers are of opinion, that in that case they return to
their former Precedence, and that their employments are not looked upon as new
employments, because the one possessed still by the other, and so the possession
was still the same, as if it had been by themselves, L'oiseau lib. 1. cap. 7.
Rupan. lib. 7. cap. 27. but though this may hold where both of them changed but
for a time, since there indeed the one possessed by the other; yet this seems
harder, in the case where both of them exchanged absolutely and for ever: For
there, their former right seems to have been extinguished, and the Employments
to be new as to both.

QVESTION XXXV. Whether is he who is restored by the Prince to a Dignity, from
which he was Degraded, to be restored to the same Precedence which he had
formerly?
To which it is answered by Gothofred. cap. 6. These. 45. That he is not by this
Restitution to recover his former Precedence from which he was Degraded, but he
must preceed by virtue of his new title only: But I should rather distinguish
betwixt these who are restored by way of Justice, in which case the Precedence
ought to be the same, because the Restitution be way of Justice takes away the
Impediment and Degradation, as if it had never been; but where the Restitution
is only by way of Grace, there the Fault and Sentence still remains, though
the punishment be taken off; and there the Restitution ought not to restore the
Precedence, in prejudice of those who had acquired titles betwixt the
Forfeitour and Restitution: A clear instance whereof we have in the Earl of
Crawfurd, who being Forfeit for Rebelling against K. James the 2. at the Battle
of Brichen, and being thereafter restored, he was not restored so as to take
place from the Earl of Huntly? But yet it is observable, that the 4. Act. p.
16. p. 87. I. 6. which appoints restitutions per modum gratiae, not to prejudge
third paties; speaks only of lands, possessions, and such other parts of the
Estate forfeited, but speaks not of Honors; and therefore some conclude that
persons forfeited may be restored to the Honors of their Family,
notwithstanding the Precedence by the rest of the Nobility in the interim,
which is the rather received amongst us, that the King may with us creat an
Earl with the Precedence from all others, as he could have done in England
before the statute of Hen. 8. For I find by the Herald records, that Edmond of
Hadham is created Earl of Richmond, and quod habeat sedem in Parliamentis and
alibi proximum ducibus: And Henry Beauchamp Earl of Warwick, is made primus
Comes Angliae, whereas he was formerly almost last, and thereafter is created
Duke of Warwick, with this addition; That he shall go Mate-like with the Duke
of Northfolk, and above the Duke of Buckingham. And since our Kings had this
prerogative, and that they have not restricted themselves, they might have it
still, though they should use it sparingly.

QVESTION XXXVI. Whether have the Ambassadors of Monarchs the Precedence from
other Monarchs or Princes themselves, if personally present, even as the Kings
would do whom they represent? And if in all cases an Ambassador ought to have
the same Precedence that is due to his Constituent?
To this it is answered, That though an Ambassador represents the Monarch from
whom he derives his Commission, and that some learned Lawyers do upon that
account assert, that they are to have the same Precedence that is due to their
Master, and so to be preferred to all Kings and Princes though present, to whom
their Constituents would have been preferred, Paschal. de Legate. cap. 38. yet
the custom of Nations has run contrar to his opinion, in preferring even
inferior Kings and Princes: And it is decided amongst the Princes of Germany,
Tit. 25. Aureae Bullae, Car. 4. And in anno 1542. the Ambassadors of Charles
the fifth Emperor, were decerned to cede the Precedence to Ferdinand King of
the Romans, and the reasons are, 1o. Because Princes found it their Interest to
have no Subject compete with them, or to have their own presence lessened by
such marks of Disrespect. 2o. In a Prince who is present there resides True and
Original Majesty; whereas an Ambassador is only dignified with a
Supposititious and Representative Honor, shining (if I may so say) with
borrowed rays: And of this opinion are Brunus de Legate. lib. 5. cap. 8. and
Costa Consil. 44. though Zouch. de Iure inter Gentes seems to favor Paschals
opinion.

It may be likewise doubted, whether an Ambassador does retain the same
Precedence due to him as Ambassador, when the Prince who sent him comes to the
place himself: And this was debated by the Earl Marishal who was sent over
Ambassador to Denmark, when K. Ia. 6. went over in person thereafter, and
brought over Chancellor Maitland with him, who challenged the Precedence from
the Earl Marishal, alleging that an Ambassadors Power evanishes upon his
Princes appearance: Which debate was decided by King James in favors of the
Chancellor, albeit the Earl contended, That as his Ambassie ceased upon the
Kings coming thither, so did the others Office as Chancellor cease in a
foreign Kingdom, and therefore that he should have preceeded as being an Earl.

The former opinion preferring inferior Princes when Personally present,
(...), is so much the rather true, that Ambassadors are not, when they come to
visit the Judicatures of the Nations where they preceed allowed the same
Precedence; And generally it is given as a rule by Lawyers, that in locis and
actibus Iudicialibus Legatis praecedentia solita non servatur, and non pro
dignitate Regis aut alterius a quo ablegati sunt, Gothofred. de Iure
praecedentiae, cap. 7. number. 47. so that though Kings themselves would sit above
all these Judicatures, yet their Ambassadors sit but among them; Thus the
Venetian Ambassador was only placed in the Parliament of Paris after the
Bishops, as Rupan. observes, lib. 7. cap. 10.

Though Ambassadors have the same Precedence that is due to their
Constituents, yet Agents and Residents of Princes have not, nor has the Popes
Nuncio the Precedence that is due to an Ambassador, Gothofred* ibid. for these
in effect are sent oftentimes to prevent the Debates that might-fall amongst
Ambassadors, and therefore the French King sends very rarely his Ambassadors
to the Emperors Court, because he knows that Court would give the Spanish
Ambassadors the Precedence, which he thinks is due to his Ambassadors.

QVESTION XXXVII. Whether have such as have been Ambassadors, or have been in
such honorable Employments, any Precedence thereby when their Employment is
ended?
To which it is answered, That though after an honorable Employment is over,
whether by Dimission, or by the expyring of the Commission, the Precedence
thereto annexed ceases with it; Yet the Prince sometimes gratifies the person
with a continuance of some Precedence and Honor: And in the Records of the
Herald Office in England, I find that in a Court Marishal, Sir Dudley Diggs,
and Sir Thomas Smith, were adjudged to have the Precedence from other
Knights-Batchelours of their own Degree, because they had been Ambassadors,
though their Commission was expired. In the customs also of most Nations, a
Judge retains still amongst those of his own Bench the same Precedence that he
had formerly before his Dimission, or his being laid aside, except he has been
laid aside for a Crime or Fault.

QVESTION XXXVIII. What place is due to the Representatives of Subjects, such
as Viccars, Deputs, Assistants, etc?
It would seem that as Ambassadors have the same place that is due to him whom
they represent, so those who represent Subjects, as Viccars who represent the
Bishop, Deputs who represent Judges, ought to have the same place that is due
to those whom they represent: I find that L. 7. de Bonorcodicil. C. Theod.
there are four Dignities Ranked, viz. Praefectorum, Proconsulum, Vicariorum,
and Exconsularium. And certainly in those Acts, wherein they represent their
Constituent, they have the same Precedence that is due to him, Felin. in cap.
cum olim de Offic. de Legate. And thus by the Canon Law, the Bishops Viccar is
preferred to the Dean, and Arch-dean, and not only are these representative
Dignities preferred in the acts of their Jurisdiction, but even in all other
deeds, which necessarily preceed or follow them; And some Lawyers are of
Opinion, that they are to be preferred to the same Dignity, in all promiscuous
and indifferent Acts which fall in during the time of the Representation, and
thus Cautuccius decis. 582. is of Opinion, that the Bishops Viccar sent by him
to hold a Synod, is to have Precedence before all the Chapter, not only in the
Synod it self, but likewise in all other Assemblies, Visits, and Intertainments,
during his Commission: But the contrare of this is mantained by Menoch, Consil.
51. And in my Opinion, these Doctors may be thus reconciled, viz. If the
Representation flow immediately from the Law, as for instance, If the Council
should Delegat any man to be Sheriff, there the person substitut would have in
all cases during his Commission, the same place that is due to him in whose
place he was surrogat, for there Surrogatum sapit naturam surrogati; But if the
Representation flow from the person himself whom he Represents, in that case
the Representative has only the Precedence, whilst he is exercising the
Office, or in Actions thereto relating; And thus Sheriff-deputs with us have
only the Precedence due to their Constituents, whilst they are exercising
these Acts which relate to their Office: And yet I think, that those
Representatives of Subjects have even in all extrinsick and indifferent Acts
the Precedence due to their Constituents, when they meet with others of the
same Degree, and thus amongst Sheriff-Deputes, etc. the Precedence is to be
given according to the Precedence that is due to the Principal Sheriffs.

QVESTION XXXIX. What Precedence is due to Assessors appointed for Judges, and
to extraordinary Judges?
I conceive that Assessors chosen by a Judge get no Precedence thereby, since
Subjects cannot bestow Dignities; but that where the Prince names any man
Assessor to a Judicature, the person so named has thereby the Precedence next
to the Judge to whom he is named Assessor, nam est ejus umbra, his shadow as
the Law speaks, and the shadow should follow the body: And with Us when the
Council names Assessors to the Justices, the Assessors vote only after the
Justices; And yet in France I find that Assessors take place after the
President, and before the other Councillors, and so it was decided at Paris,
1608.

It may be also doubted, whether Our extraordinar Lords of Session who sit with
and vote after the ordinar Judges, should have place after them if they were
not Earls or Noblemen, as by the institution they are obliged to be (but not
either as that the King may not promote Gentlemen hereafter) quo casn, I think
they would take place after the ordinar, as they vote after them: For these
extraordinar Lords are like to these adscriptiti^ or allecti, L. 2. C. ut
dignit. ord. servetur. of whom Capitolinus in the life of Pertinax, qu^m
Commodus allectionibus innumeris praetorios miscuisset, senatus consultum
Pertinax fecit jussitque eos qui praeturas non gessissent sed allectione
accepissent post eos esse qui vere praetores fuissent.

QVESTION XL. Whether can the King Creat now an new Earl, and Ordain him to
preceed all the former Earls, or any such number of them as he pleases?
It would seem that the King cannot: For there being a Precedence acquired to
the former Earls by their first Gift, the King cannot by any new gift prejudge
third Parties, and this were in effect to Forfeit them of their Precedence;
Likeas it would seem, that since most Earldoms were granted by erecting lands
in an Earldom in favors of the Receiver, that therefore the Concessions of
Land and Honors are of the same Nature, and that no new grant can prejudge the
one more then the other.

But it may be urged on the Kings part, that the King being the only fountain
of Honor, he may do therein as he pleases, except in so far as he is limited
by Law; And therefore since there is no Law with us limiting the King in this
point, he may do therein as he pleases. 2o. The King by Act of Parliament,
Henry the eight, is limited as to this point in England, so that he can grant
no such Preference; And therefore it may be concluded that this was formerly in
his power even there, and that since he is not limited here, his power is here
entire as to this point, whereof many instances are given in answer to quest.
35. and since that statute, it is thought that His Majesty may ordain the last
Knight to preceed all the rest formerly dubbed and created, because Knights are
not expressed in that statute. 3o. We see the King in Scotland does empower
Countesses to retain their former Precedence, though they marry a Husband of a
Rank inferior to their first Husband; And Dukes Daughters even after their
Marriage to retain the Precedence due to them as Dukes Daughters. 4o. His
Majesty does by new Confirmations transfer the Honors to Hiers Female, though
the Patents at first were only granted to Hiers male, and so by the not
existing of the Hiers Male, those Earls who have the next Precedence might
as well allege, That the King could not by any new right in favors of the
Hiers Female prejudge them. 5o. His Majesty does sometimes appoint any of His
Officers of State to preceed other as he pleases, though these may likewise
allege, that there is jus quaesitum to them by their prior Gifts: 6o. His
Majesty restores the Sons of persons forfeited to their Fathers Precedence,
notwithstanding of the jus quaesitum, by others medio tempore. 7o. The King has
obliged himself not to prefer the Knights of Nova Scotia, or Knights-Baronets,
otherwise then according to their Creation, which had been unnecssar, if the
King could not have preferred them by His Royal prerogative: Sometimes also His
Majesty confirms to the Nobility the entails of their Estates, whereby they
have power to name their Successor with the Precedence due to themselves,
which right being ordinarily ratified in Parliament, uses to establish and
transfer the Precedence upon the Heir or Successor so nominated; But since
Ratifications pass without observation, and oftentimes without reading, it may
be doubted whether such a Ratification should prejudge even these who were
Members of Parliament, but much more such as were not present, or such as were
Created thereafter, these Ratifications not being properly public and
Legistative statutes, and so can bind only such as consented.

QVESTION XLI. Whether if the King should creat an Earl with Precedence to all
other Earls, during his life? Or if when an Earl is Forfeited, will his Lady
in either of these cases retain the Precedence she formerly enjoyed during her
Husbands life?
To which it is answered, That as to the first it was expressly decided in
England, in the case of the Earl of Notingham, that he upon the surrender of
the Admirals Office, being by King James allowed the same Precedence that
belonged to John Lord Moubray his predecessor, That therefore his Lady should
enjoy the same Precedence if she survived him, because this was not a Dignity
of Office, but a real Dignity settled in his person; and generally in all real
Dignities such as those of Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, etc. the wives participat
the Husbands honor even after his death, for it is not the Patent that confers
the Honor upon her, for else she could not enjoy the same except she were
therein mentioned, but her right flows from the Common Law which illustrates
the Wife with the Husbands Dignity, because Marriage is individua vitae
consuetudo; And in the Law, the Husband and Wife are one person, and for the
same reason we see likewise that the Wives of Knights-Batchelours, and Knights
of the Bath, enjoy the same Precedence that was due to their Husbands, though
they enjoyed the same for Life: And whereas it may be objected that the Husband
having the Honor but for Life, it cannot be continued longer then for the time
limited, or to be transferred to the Wife after the death of her Husband. It is
answered by the same rule and proportion no wife whatsoever should enjoy the
title of her Husbands honor after his deceas, but then all the honor and
place should surceas, for she challenges nothing but from her Husband: The
Honor for perpetuity to the Heirs, concerns only the Descendents and they are
thereby Enobled; But to her a state for Life, and a state to the Heirs is all
one. I find also that Sir William Heram having married the daughter and Heir of
the Lord Say, and so being in her right a Baron, and by reason of that
Marriage summoned to the Parliament as a Peer of the Realm, having survived his
wife, albeit he had no Issue by her, he notwithstanding enjoyed that title and
dignity during his life.

To the second branch of this question it is answered, That the wife of a
person forfeited enjoyes the same title and dignity that was due to her before
the forfeiture; for though it may seem that the dignity of the Family is
extinguished, and consequently she cannot enjoy it; Yet the crime punishes
only the person, and corrupts only the blood quo-ad the Descendents, but not
quo-ad the Wife: And though the honor be extinguished, yet being extinguished
upon a personal account, the punishment ought not to reach further then the
crime.

QVESTION XLII. Whether amongst those of the Royal Line, does the next to the
Royal Stock preceed? Or does the Precedence belong to the eldest of that Branch?
The reason of this doubt is, Because as in other Nobility the first who is
dignified has still the Precedence, as being farthest removed from the Dreggs
and Lees of the Vulgar; So amongst those who are descended of Kings, the last
is still preferred as being nearer to the Common-Stock, by which all are
Enobled: And therefore the Uncle, it seems, should preceed his Nephew by the
elder Brother, as being a Degree nearer to the Stock, as was alleged by the
Cardinal of Bourbon Uncle to Henry the fourth; But yet it was justly decided
for Henry the fourth, because though the younger Branch be still preferred, yet
amongst these of the same Branch the eldest is still preferable, for by the
right of Representation he Represented his Father, which Father would have been
preferred, and here again the right of Birthright still returns: And this
holds not only in France, as Tillet observes, but with us in Britain, and
generally in all Law, Exodus 6. and 1. Cron. 4. vid. Dec. Consil. 445. albeit of
old in Scotland the Uncles did oftentimes usurp upon this account, L'oiseau
chap: 7. And to this day the eldest Cadets in private Families do still take
place with us, from the last descended beyond the Brothers of the Family, and
those old Cadets take place of the Nephews, which is an Error.

QVESTION XLIII. Whether and when is the right or left Hand the chief mark of
Precedence? And whether is the place opposite to the seat of the chief Person
who sits betwixt the two preferable to either right or left Hand?
To this it is answered, That amongst both the Jews, Greeks, and Romans, where
three were either sitting or walking, the midle-place was thought the chief
place; but where two were without a third, the right Hand was concluded the
more Noble amongst the Jews: and thus the Scripture tells us, That such as are
to be saved shall sit at the right hand of GOD; And yet in Jacobs Blessing
Ephraim and Manasseh, the left hand was preferred, Genes. 48. vid. Pansirol.
lib. 1. page 501. But amongst the Romans it was doubted which of the two was
preferable, Demsterus Antique Roman. page 866. And yet it is certain that
amongst the Turks the left side is acounted the more Noble, because he commands
his neighbors Sword; And though these be the chief Seats, yet he who is set
opposite to him who sits in the middle, is thereby preferred to him who either
sits upon the right or left hand, since in effect he is made the Correspondent
of the chief Person, as Golstadus defends by many instances, page 433.

QVESTION XLIV. Whether in Improbations raised to secure Precedence, can
Certifications be granted, as well, against Patents of Honor as against other
Writes?
This question having occurred in a Debate January 1672. betwixt the Earl of
Sutherland and the Earl of Errol, It was urged that in Declaratours of
Precedence, and Improbations raised for securing thereof, no Certification
could be granted, because 1o. such Certifications were only granted where the
Right and Title to be improven was constitute by Write; But so it is, that the
Dignity and Honor of Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, etc. was not only established
by Patents, or Infeftments, but might be acquired by bringing them in to
Parliament in their Robes, and such other forms of Creation, as have been
practiced both amongst us and other Nations, against which no Certification
could operat. 2o. Certifications are only allowed where the Pursuer of the
Improbation has a direct title to that whereof the Right is to be improven,
exclusive of all others: But so it is that the Earl of Sutherland, nor no other
has an express, and explicit Right to be the first Earl of Scotland, and any
right he has to the Precedence; arises only consequentially. 3o. Improbations
being only a remedy introduced by our Law and the native design thereof being
to secure real rights, and private Estates: it ought to be extended to no such
case, as that of Dignities and Honors, to which it has never heen applied,
during these many years that Improbations have been used here, and to which
certainly our Predecessors would have applied them, if the nature of the
action would have allowed it.

To which it was answered, That Certifications being introduced amongst us, to
secure the Pursuer against any Evidents in the Defenders hand, which might
prejudge the Pursuers right, they ought to be extended to Honors established
by Patent, or Infeftment, these being rights that are transmitted by Write, and
this being the nature of those Certifications, they ought to take place every
where except where express Law or Decisions have restricted them. And
therefore, since there is no Law nor Decision, Declaring that Certificationss
shall not be granted against Patens, or Infeftments which transmit Honor: they
ought to be granted against these, as well as against other rights. Nor is it
craved, that these Certifications should run against Honors transmitted via
facti, such as Robing, and Belting, and though the Pursuer be not designed by
his Infeftments the first Earl, yet that cannot hinder him from removing by
this Certification, all Writes, or Evidents, which may hinder him to be the
first, Upon which Debate, the Lords refused to grant Certification against such
Patents, or Infeftments.

Courses taken by Princes and Judges, when they intend to shun the decyding of
Contraversies concerning Precedence, and to preserve the Rights of all the
Competitors.
First, They ordain the Competitors to preceed one another by turns, and
alternatively: And thus the Emperor Lewis the fourth did in anno 1328. decide
betwixt the Prince Palatine, and the Duke of Bavaria, and so the Parliament of
Paris decided in anno 1616; but lest the first turn should give the Precedence
that uses to be decided by lot. And I find this alternation very old, for the
Thebans did so decide betwixt the Brother-Kings, Etheocles and Polinix; and
Plutarch observes the same betwixt Thyestes and Attreus.

Secondly, They use to assign one of the Competitors a place out of all Rank;
as was done to the Spanish Ambassador in the Council of Trent, and is
frequently done in Our Parliaments; But though this preserves the Right, it
insinuates a Ceding: And therefore the juster way is to place both so without
the Benches, as that neither of their seats can show any Preference, as was
done at the Council of Trent betwixt the Emperors Ambassador and the Cardinal
of Trent.

Thirdly, They use to cause them enter by several doors, as was observed
betwixt the Queen of France, and Margaret sister to Charles the fifth, as
Guicciardin observes.

Fourthly, They use round tables, or to write the names of the Pretenders in a
circle, an example whereof we have in Gaius, lib. 1. Institut. and Pope Vrbane
having desired the Franciscans to give him three of their number out of which
he might choose one to be Cardinal, they wrote down their three names
circular-ways; but in this case, the names should be written down exactly in
the middle of the table or paper; for else as Crantzius observes, he whose name
is next to the top of the paper has thereby some Precedence.

Fifthly, The eldest of the Competitors is still ordained to preceed: Of which
Livius gives an instance, lib. 42. and King James the sixth decided so between
several Families in Scotland, and particularly between the Lairds of Blair and
Balthaok.

Sixthly, Sometimes he who was first promoted to a Benefice or Office is
preferred, where the difference is betwixt the Offices or Benefices; and thus
it was decided betwixt the Sees of Rheims and Treves.

Sevently, Sometimes also the Competitors are preferred according as they
produce their Commissions, as was done in the Council of Trent betwixt the
Ambassadors of Portugal and Hungary; and the Polonians do frequently in
Competitions between Ambassadors, prefer him who first enters their
Territories, Bodin. de Repub. lib. 1. cap. 9.

Eighthly, Sometimes also the Competitors are ordained to give their suffrage
and preceed according to the respect due to the Nations, and not to the
persons: as was decided in the Council of Constans and Basil.

Ninthly, It is observed that Octavius Farnesius Prince of Parma and Placentia,
to shun the difference of Precedence betwixt his two Towns of Parma and
Placentia, did write himself Duke of P. P. And King James the sixth to shun any
debate that could have been between Scotland and England, assumed the title of
King of Great Britain.

Tenthly, Some use to secure themselves against such contests by Protestations,
which certainly do interrupt prescription, and preserve the Protesters right,
L. 14. 8. ff. de Relig. but in that case the protestation must be presently
interposed, for protestations after the deeds contraverted are ended and past,
are concluded to be of no value, Carpzol. def. 22. for protestations cannot be
drawn back: But it has been doubted whether the person against whom the
protestation is taken, does prejudge himself, when he does not protest in the
contrar, for this seems to infer an acquiescence that the protestation is just,
since qui tacet consentire videtur, and this is the occasion, why in our
Judicatures when one protests, the other ordinarily protests in the contrare;
But yet it is generally concluded that Silence in that case does not prejudge
him against whom the protestation is taken, since he knows that in Law the
protestation secures his right, Tusc. tom. 6. Conclus. 941.

FINIS.

