Imprimatur,

November. 13. 1669. SAM. PARKER.

A SHORT VIEW OF THE FRAVDS, and ABUSES Committed by APOTHECARIES; As well in
Relation to PATIENTS, as PHYSICIANS: AND Of the only Remedy thereof by
PHYSICIANS making their own MEDICINES.

BY CHRISTOPHER MERRETT Dr. in Physic, Fellow of the College of Physicians, and
of the Royal Society.

-- Fingunt se Medicos omnes, Idiota, Sacerdos,
Nutrix, and Tonsor, Pharmacopaeus, Anus.
The Second Edition more correct.

LONDON, Printed for James Allestry, Printer to the Royal Society, at the Rose
and Crown in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1670.

A Short View of the Frauds and Abuses committed by Apothecaries, as well in
Relation to Patients, as Physicians; and of the only remedy thereof by
Physicians making their own Medicines.
DOubtless it will seem strange to most men, that after 30 years not
unsuccessful practice in this great City, I should now at last forbear sending
my Bills to the Apothecaries, knowing that hereby a whole Company of men
interessed in the World (who by their number, noise, and tricks, may be able to
decry any Physician) will become my implacable adversaries, and by their
private whispers of untrue tales, will endeavor to their utmost, either to
keep me from any new, or shuffle me out of my fixed employment. But not fearing
the utmost their malice can invent, or proclaim; I shall publicly assert what
I privately practice, preferring the public good, and the honor of my
profession before my own private profit. And although I have had some
experience what their groundless anger can do, when they some years since
proclaimed me in their public Hall their Enemy, for acting the College
Interest, and of late for saving my Patients lives and purses, by dispencing
gratis my Medicines. Yet I hope no indifferent person, when he knows that I
have thus long slighted their weak endeavors, will believe I can now at length
have so poor an end as revenge; especially when they shall consider on the one
hand, the universal and daily complaints of both Patient and Physician, the
great cause they have to do so, and the little hope of a remedy, and on the
other, besides that general obligation all men have of doing their Countrymen
good, and the particular necessity I have of justifying my actions, by leaving
the World their judge upon the account I shall here deliver of them. And lastly,
that which will leave my Enemies not any objection, I take upon me not only a
great trouble, but charge, without any other design then doing mankind good, by
endeavoring to restore my profession to its ancient and deserved honors. And
had I none of these inducements, I am sure the vulgar excuse of friends
importunities may be satisfactory to all persons for my publishing what I here
do, when I must acknowledge that many of my Colleagues and other Practisers in
several parts, upon reading these papers furnished me not only with some bad
practices of their own experience, but thereupon enjoined the publishing of
them. So that in these papers I do but speak the common language of all
Physicians, and of very many Patients. Neither are all their frauds and abuses
here inserted, the rest (perhaps more in number) being reserved to another
opportunity. I shall only add by way of preface; that the last year a Book was
printed on the same argument, by an inquisitive person, now Dr. in Physic,
which might have spared me this labor, but that it was too large for every
ones reading, and in some things short. It was his fate to be called by them
Fool, Ass, and Simple Fellow, and much worse language, bragging that some of
their Boys should answer him. But upon more serious thoughts, the whole Company
have suffered it to find the credit it well deserves, without the least reply
but that of revilings.

In these ensuing papers, I hope to prove, that these abuses complained of by
all sorts of persons, arise from this only cause, that Physicians dispense not
themselves such Medicines, they use for the relief of their Patients, but
commit this work to the Apothecaries, or rather their Servants.

Now the Apothecaries abuses generally relate either to the Medicines,
Patients, or Physicians; which three do comprehend all I shall say on this
subject.

But the Reader is to take notice, that all here charged on the Apothecaries,
is not meant of every single one, but of some, or more of them, and may in a
short time in all probability be verified of them all, according as their
number, cajoling the ignorant, and bold daring in Physic increase.

But before I descend to particulars, I shall first lay down this Proposition,
their own confession, and in their own Language, viz. That they may be the
veriest Knaves in England. Because they may put in bad ingredients, and more or
less then the composition requires, they may substitute one thing for another;
and all this without being detected, and consequently not be punished for such
misdemeanors; but more especially in Medicines for private men's uses, wherein
they may do what they please without the least discovery of the Patient, and
from this general confession of theirs, it clearly follows, that whatsoever
deceit, covetous wits can invent, may at least be suspected to be used by them,
and whatsoever is here alleged may find easier belief.

And Secondly, Most men wonder, that this Corporation, being but of few years
standing, and to the setting up of whose Trade so small a Stock is necessary;
should live so high, spend so freely, gain so great Estates, by their return of
so little money yearly, which how it is done every man may conceive to be
effected by the following Artifices.

More particularly, the Frauds by them committed relate either to their
falsifying of Medicines, or secondly, to the number of their Bills, and
prescriptions, or thirdly, to the prices of them.

First, They use Medicines quite contrary to the prescription, Myrtle-leafs
showed the Censors for Sena, a Binder for a Purger. Mushroms of the Oak, etc.
rubbed over with Chalk for Agaric, which Mr. Evelyn in his late published Book of
Forest Trees, page 27. observes, to the great scandal of Physic as he adds;
Hemlock-Dropwort Roots for Paeony Roots, Poisons for wholesome remedies; Privet
by some, by others Dog-berries, for those of Spina Cervina, no Purgers for a
strong one. Sheeps Lungs for Fox Lungs, the Bone of an Ox Heart for that of a
Stags Heart, Damsons for Damasc Prunes, Syrup of Limons, for that of Citrons,
Bryony Roots for Mechoacan, etc.

Secondly, They falsify the grand Compositions of the London Dispensatory. It
being a common trade with them to buy unsound, and decayed Simples of some
Druggists, and to return them back so much of the composition as will pay for
the Simples. Secondly, whereas Apothecaries are bound to show publicly to the
Censors of the College, and the Master and Wardens of their Company,
Mithridate, Diascordium, Alkermes, etc. Yet for all this some of them privately
make a great deal more of the Composition then is showed, of unsound Drugs, and
some without any view at all; others put in the Scrapings that ought to be
thrown away; and by these Arts they under-sell, and ruin one another, selling
the Composition at a lower rate then good Ingredients cost them; and with these
complaints they daily mutiny amongst themselves.

Thirdly, It Is very common for them to load Medicines with Honey, and other
cheaper ingredients, and to leave out in whole or in part, those of greater
value; viz. Saffron in Ruffus Pills, and in Oxycroceum Plaster, which latter,
they color of a Saffron color with Turmeric, Sanders, etc. Ambergrise in
Alkermes, Diascordium was found by the Censors in their search made only of
Honey, and Bole-Armeniac. Which false composition was taken away by the then
Master of the Company.

Such Chemists which sell preparations honestly made complain, that few
Apothecaries will go to the prices of them. Whence it comes to pass, that most
of the preparations found in the Shops are sophisticated, to the great abuse of
City and Country. These abuses daily increase since the Censors, discouraged by
the multitude of Empirics swarming in every Corner, have omitted their wonted
searches, being to their loss of and expenses out of their own Purses for the
public good only. Now since the Chemical Oils, by reason of their great prices
are most of them adulterated, and very few of them right good, and that nothing
has been published on this matter, and to leave the buyers of them
unexcusable, I shall here add briefly, yet sufficiently the ways to discover
these Cheats. First for sweet-scented Chemical Oils, viz. those of Cloves,
Cinnamon, and Sassaphras. Only drop a little of them into fair water, and that
part which is true good will sink under the water, but the adulterated part
will swim on the top of it. Some others draw deep tinctures from the said
Spices with Spirit of Wine highly rectified, and sell them for the Oils; but
these mix with the water throughout, neither swimming, nor sinking. Others more
craftily digest with the said tinctures some of the true Oils, which compound
being put into water, will for a time render it white. Another way of
sophisticating is with Oil of Turpentine mixed in great quantity with that
which is adulterated; You may easily discover the Oil of Turpentine, by setting
it on fire, for it yields abundance of illscented smoke, with very little
savor of the Herb, Flour, or Seed, etc. and soon takes fire. To correct the
ill smell of the Turpentine, they digest it with, and distilit off with Spirit
of Wine. Those sophisticated with Turpentine, fired in a Silver Spoon color
it, and quickly diffuse themselves upon a Knife, or Paper. The best way to try
by ^iring, is to put a drop or two of these Oils on the end of a broad pointed
Knife, which being first heated, and then thrust into a lighted Candle,
presently take fire, and break out into a flame with much dark smoke; but if
you will try them in a Spoon, heat it first over a Candle, and then blow the
flame of lighted paper, or of a Wax Candle on them. To try the scent, blow out
the flame of the good Oils, and your smell will soon discover the ill scent of
the Turpentine from that of the good Oil. But on the contrary, all Oils drawn
from Plants by distillation hardly flame, and the flame soon goes out, and the
smoke gives a full flavor of the Plant it self, whereas those sophisticated as
before, differ from the true in both. The same Oils are also sophisticated with
cheap ones drawn from decayed Oringes, and Limons; Your smell on firing will
soon discover these mixtures. A third way of sophisticating Chemical Oils is,
by mixing with them such Oils as are made by expression, which are easily
discovered by rubbing them on white paper, which being held and dried at the
fire, the Chemical part soon flies away, and leaves the paper transparent,
looking no otherwise then oyled paper; but pure Chemical Oils totally fly away,
leaving the paper white as 'twas before, and not transparent, and in this way
Oil of sweet Almonds and Spike have a great share. As for Oils drawn by Retort,
they all of them smell so strong of the ^ire, that neither smell nor taste can
well discover any fraud in them. Now for the fixed Salts, most of them are made
of the Ashes of Tobacco-stalks, etc. More might be said for the discovery of
the Cheats of other Chemical preparations, which shall be reserved to another
opportunity, and had Physicians just encouragement, they would spend both their
time and moneys on the like discoveries for the public Utility.

Fifthly, Add to the former (though perhaps it is an error of ignorance only)
that if such Simples are prescribed they know not, they fetch from the
Herb-women what they give them, true or false; for many of these Women give to
very many Plants false names; Now if the Apothecary be so careful to consult an
Herbal, which few have, and fewer know how to make use of, yet they too
frequently mistake the thing by reason of several names given to the same
thing, or of one name to several things, and many of them consult the common
Dictionaries only, which are most erroneous in the names of natural things;
insomuch that in my first practice (being curious of these particulars) I have
found two or three mistakes in one prescription, a Catalogue of which mistakes,
and names ill given, I had collected, but the late fire consumed it, though
many of them my memory has reserved.

Sixthly, Many of the London, and most of the Country-Apothecaries, buy of the
wholesale men, who affirm of one another, especially of such who gain great
Estates in short time, that they cannot sell their Medicines honestly made at
so low a rate as they do.

Seventhly, I shall need to say little of such distilled waters, as discover
themselves neither to smell, nor taste, but shall only recite a known Story of
an Apothecary, who chid his man for sending away a Customer that came for
Plantan water, telling him there was enough at the Pump.

Eighthly, As for Ointments, and Plasters, they are sold by some at so low a
price, viz. 3 d. per l. for Ointments, as I have been informed, that it is not
possible to make them at, and yet such however falsified maintain a trade
amongst Country, and low-priced City- Apothecaries, and the Surgeons profess
they cannot effect their Cures with the Shop-Medicines, and that this is the
reason why they make their own Oils, Ointments, etc. as the Apothecaries
Charter allows them to do; and why may not Physicians think this to be the
cause why they sometimes fail in their Cures, as well as Surgeons? and also
make their own Medicines as well as they, especially since the Apothecary may
as easily falsify, and to greater profit in the one, then in the other?

Ninthly, As to their use of bad or decayed Drugs, it is so common a practice
that I shall need to give but one notorious instance of it, and it is this; I
having occasion to use some Seeds, sent for them to a Seedsman, the Messenger
desiring to have those of the same Year. The Tradesman knowing him to live with
me, asked, if they were for Physical use, he replied in the affirmative,
whereat he presently showed him others, which were of 6 or 7 years old (as he
confessed) affirming them to be as good for that use as the newest, which he
sold only for sowing, and that he kept the others, though never so old, for the
Apothecaries only, who still asked for them, buying them though 20 years old,
not regarding if they were decayed and wholly effete (for no Seed will preserve
its vegetative faculty above 7 years much less its Physical) so they could but
have them cheap. Besides their pretty knacks (as they call them) of making
their Compounds fair to the eye, more vendible, but worse for use, by restoring
them to their color and consistence, that they may pass for good, which
perhaps it is better to pass over in silence, lest by confuting I should teach
the younger Fry, who may better be honestly ignorant of them. Now for their
substituting one thing for another, and detracting where they please, I shall
add but one Story of an Apothecary, who commanded his man (who told him they
had no good Rhabarb in the house) that he should put in double quantity of what
they had. Nay I have known one simple of a quite different nature used for a
whole composition.

Tenthly, I shall conclude this ungrateful Discourse, with saying that by
reason more frauds may be committed by the Apothecaries, then by any other
Trade, and by supposition that gain will tempt most men to dishonest actions,
especially where they may act undiscovered; I say, that this seems to be the
cause why they have two Supervisors set over them more then any Company that I
know of, viz. the Censors of the College of Physicians, and the Master and
Wardens of their own Company.

The next thing is the enlarging and multiplying their Bills and Medicines.

First, When in Chronical Diseases a Physician is consulted, they go on of
their own heads with the same prescription, frequently enough to the Patients
great disadvantage, both of health and purse.

Secondly, By giving and intermixing Medicines of their own Fancy, with the
Physicians prescriptions, viz. some pleasing Medicine, whereby too often the
Physicians intention is quite crossed, and the effect made uncertain, and
hazardous.

Thirdly, By giving Medicines themselves on small accounts, and such as require
only a good ordering, and no more.

Fourthly, By repeating long courses of Physic unadvisedly, and needlessly, when
either nothing, or very little is needful to be done.

Fifthly, By creating diseases in easy men's Phansies, and so decoying them
into courses of Physic.

Sixthly, Some of them get private and worthless receipts, and sell them at
what rate they please; Mr. Delaune by one Pill alone, though not a very safe
one, got some thousands of pounds.

Seventhly, If one of them get a private receipt from a Physician called by the
inventor his Nostrum, if another Apothecary have occasion to use it, he shall
be sure to pay sauce for it.

Eighthly, Another trick is when the Patient is cured, and the Physician
therefore has given over his Visits, then comes the Apothecary and insinuates
by his words and passions, either some danger of relapse, or some other present
distemper, and repairs to the Physician for a Bill to cure the imaginary
disease.

Ninthly, But their principal Art of all is, to cry up, and bring in to
Patients such Physicians, who through design must comply with the Apothecaries
Interest, and such Practisers they extol and cry up for good Physicians, which
some of them call more expressly good Apothecaries Physicians, and such without
doubt, the whole Company will endeavor to raise unto a fame and practice. But
such as write only for the good of the Patient, and not at all for the benefit
of the Apothecary (as all honest men ought to do) they will endeavor to
prevent their calling in, or to shuffle them out.

Now this good Apothecaries Physician, they describe by his frequent though
needless visits, but especially by the multitude of his Bills, by his visiting
twice a day, or oftener (a very careful and painful Doctor) and by still writing
new Medicines, when half the former, or perhaps none of them have been taken,
making an Apothecaries Shop in the Patients House, planting the Cupboards and
Windows with Glasses and Gally-Pots, and not a quarter of the whole made use
of. He prescribes a Medicine for every slight complaint, and never goes away
from the Patient, or the Patient from him, without a Bill, for fear of the
Apothecaries grumbling.

And from this burdening the sick with multiplicity of Medicines, too often
contrary to, and destructive one of another, it proceeds that in the Small Pox,
and Measles, many are afraid to use Physicians, and commit the care of the sick
to Nurses, and Old Women, and perhaps sometimes not without cause, for by
continual multiplication of Medicines, the humors of the body may be made, or
kept in too great a state of fluidity, whence the Flox follows. Whereas a
Medicine or two duly administered, may suffice to bring them well forth, and
then there needs no more but good ordering, unless perhaps some accident arise,
which may require further care. And here as well as in other Cases, the Patient
is to be rectified, who requires the Physicians Visits, and yet dismisseth him
without a reward, unless he writes a Bill, whereas it might have been better if
nothing at all had been prescribed, and the Physician left to his own judgment;
and hence it is that many enlarge their Bills, that the Patient may think he
has enough for his money, whereby the Apothecary is gratified, who ought to
commend the Medicines as necessary for the sick person, and singular in
themselves, whereas in truth this great farcy proves ungrateful to the taste and
stomach; inconvenient to health, by curing one disease, but creating more; and
by this means keeping them continually in a way of Physic.

A third abuse of the Apothecaries relates to the prices of their Medicines;
first they put what rates they please on their Simples, Compounds, and
Receipts, and none are judges of them, but those of their own Trade; insomuch
that they gain a 11 d. in the Shilling, if they say true of themselves. Whereas
the Colleges of Physicians beyond Sea, yearly set a tax upon the Simples, and
Compounds of the Shops. So that the Customer can tell the price of what he has
occasion to use, and not stand at the mercy of the Apothecary to rate them as
he lists, and to this purpose they put in print the prices of them every year.

Secondly, Suppose a Physician has prescribed a Pint of Juleb, etc. to be
taken at four several times, some Apothecaries carry not the whole pint at
once, but divide it into four parts, and carry but one at a time, and so of
other Medicines, and then will charge their Bill for every single Potion, or
Draught, as they ought the whole Pint; so that by this Art they gain four times
as much for the whole Medicine as in Conscience they ought; and a Juleb, which
cost them six pence, will be rated at 10, 12, or more Shillings. But perhaps
it is fit they should be paid for their created Visits; and for this unnecessary
officiousness, persons of great estates may be contented to pay roundly, if
they please.

Thirdly, When a Physician has prescribed 20 Pills, some of the Apothecaries
will make 30 of them, under pretense the Patient cannot swallow them else; now
reckoning each Pill at a certain rate (as they usually do) they gain a third
part more then they ought.

Fourthly, To advance the prices, you shall hardly ever see a Bill without
Bezoar, or Pearls in it, to make people think them very chargeable; whereas
sometimes there is not above a grain or two of these dear ingredients in the
prescription, and a few grains of these or Ambergrise doubles or trebles the
prices of the Medicines, and are sure never to be omitted in their Bills,
besides the guilding of the Pills, and covering their Bolusses, and Electuaries
with Cold (which have only an imaginary and no real use in Medicines so used)
much inhanseth their prices, and a rich Cordial inserted exceedingly advances
most of their Bills; or if China or any other dear ingredient be in the receipt
it is not omitted.

Fifthly, Some Apothecaries offer, and perhaps some Physicians have taken
presents to help them to Customers, which must necessarily be squeazed out of
their higher-rated Medicines.

Sixthly, I have heard some prudent persons complain of their bringing in their
Bills but once in a year, or two; supposing they made them pay Lombards Usury
for their forbearance. And through this neglect they sometimes lose their
money, and whether they raise other Men's Bills to make up these losses, I
affirm not.

Seventhly, Another cause of raising their prices is a necessity of keeping in
their Shops such Medicines as are seldom used, or such as must upon necessity
decay, and grow useless. Now suppose they throw such away, this reason is good,
but you will find a remedy for this hereafter.

To conclude this second Complaint. By reason of the dear Bills of the
Apothecaries, many are deterred from going to the Physician, and run to common
Mountebanks, and I think this to be the reason (as some disabused persons have
confessed to me) why they have so much cried up the abilities of Apothecaries
for practice, because they would save their credit in taking Physic of them.
St. Augustine heartily in his Book of Confessions declares, that through
covetousness he repeated a course of Physic, without consulting the Physician
(who had before cured him of the same disease) to his greater charge, danger of
his life, and offense against God.

Having done with the Apothecaries abuses relating chiefly to the Patients
Health and Purse, and such as are wilfully committed (though all of them
reflect on the Physician) I shall now touch on a few neglects, and mistakes
proving often very mischievous.

First, They frequently mistake the Physicians directions, which of what
dangerous consequence it is, every one can tell.

Secondly, They carry a Medicine appointed for one sick person to another.

Thirdly, They often neglect the sending of Medicines in due time, especially
such as have no Servants, or but raw ones, when the Master is out of Town, or
upon long visits.

Having now done with the Apothecaries as they relate principally to the sick,
I shall in the next place speak of them, as they relate to Physicians, and that
either to the profession in general, or to the particular practisers of it.

As to the Physicians in general, they endeavor to extirpate them, and some
have been so bold to say, they hope in few years to see never a Physician in
London, and to profess they will scramble with them for practice. And that this
has been and is their intention, the following particulars will clearly
demonstrate.

First, They have always endeavored and aimed at the depression and ruin of
the College of Physicians, the only Corporation of that Art in England,
considering rightly, that the depression of the College is their interest and
rise, and that the total subversion of it will make them absolute Masters in
Physic, and Physicians their Servants. In Order hereunto they have constantly,
both publicly and privately opposed the College in whatsoever has been
offered to setle the liberty of practice on them, their only privilege and
subsistence, though they have been offered all they could desire for the
security of their Trade, and legal employment, and far beyond whatsoever any
Corporation of Apothecaries in all, or in any foreign part enjoy, yet nothing
would ever content them, but an unlawful, unreasonable, dangerous, and
destructive Usurpation of liberty to some pretended practice, that thereby they
might gain the whole.

Secondly, They have continually traduced the College, and troubled them in
Parliaments, at the Council Board, etc. to their great charge and molestation.
And for such their great demerits against the College, the King and his
Council, Anno 1639. granted a Quo Warranto to the Attorney General (the Judges
having first heard the whole matter) to take away their Charter, which
doubtless had been effected, had not the troubles, and long civil War
immediately ensued.

Thirdly, And in this present Parliament, how did they endeavor to prepossess
the Members of the House of Commons with strange, and false prejudices and
assertions drawn from irrational, and groundless suppositions, making us the
greatest Tyrants in the World, inferring ridiculously that a Lady, or
Charitable Gentlewoman (for in that believing Sex they have gained a great deal
of ground by their falsities) might not give the Poor a Cordial, etc. without
being questioned by the College; whereas they know in their Consciences, that
the College has power enough by their first Charter to act as much in this
kind against themselves, and all other persons, as they desired of this present
Parliament; And yet neither Apothecary, or any other who practiced charitably,
were ever troubled for so doing. They pretended also they were abridged wholly
from their Trade, and might not sell a pennyworth of Mithridate, etc. without
a Doctors Bill. Whereas there is not a word in the Charter to that purpose; the
sole intent whereof was to keep them as well as other Mountebanks, from
prescribing (which they call selling) the Physicians only livelihood. And as to
the Bill it self so much railed on by them in Westminster Hall, Coffee-Houses,
Alehouses, etc. it is easy to make it out, that this Charter as proposed gives
the Apothecaries more liberty and freedom of exercising their lawful Trade,
then is enjoyed in any other Nation, where both Corporations are erected; and
that it does in nothing infringe, or diminish their freedom as Citizens, or
their Charter as Apothecaries; and that our Charter was compiled by some, and
perused and approved by others the most eminent Lawyers in England for Worth
and Place; and yet none of these could find any thing in it either Illegal,
Tyrannical, or unfit to be desired of the Parliament. Nay many misinformed
Members being rightly instructed in the true state of the matter, have
acknowledged the justice of it; And was no more then King James by his Letters
Patents, dated the 18th of October, in the 15th year of his Reign, granted to
the said College; near about the same time the Apothecaries Charter was
granted; and being almost nothing else but a supply of what was short in their
former Grants, viz. That whereas their Charter granted by King Henry the
Eighth, gave power to punish offenders in the practice of Physic; and because
there was no power given to summon, nor penalty imposed for nonappearance of
such offenders; therefore by their nonappearance, the said power of the
Censors was eluded; for no such offenders would appear before them, and
consequently no punishment could be inflicted on them, according to the true
meaning of the said Act. Now this Charter so much declaimed against, prayed
only a supply of this defect, and also better and more necessary ways and
means, without which, such and all other offenders against the lives and
healths of his Majesty's Subjects could not be discovered; and they had reason
not to doubt a grant of the said power, since by the said Charter a power was
granted them to imprison offenders, whom the Keepers of the Prisons would not
receive, because no command, nor penalty was imposed on them, for not receiving
such offenders sent by the Censors (a thing ridiculous to our present Lawyers)
however this defect was supplied by an Act in the first of Queen Mary. Now
whereas since the making of the said Acts and Powers, granted to the College,
several other Trades, besides the Apothecaries, relating to Physic (being then
all Members of the Grocers Company) viz. Druggists, Chemists, Sellers of
Strong Water and Oils, have arose distinct from each others, and many abuses
have been and are committed in each of them, as they all confess. The said
Charter prays for the public good only (there being the same reason of all)
they might have the same power of Surveying them also, as they have of the
Apothecaries, which most of the Judicious, and sober of the said Companies, as
well in relation to their own private profit, and also the public, by having
all Medicines good, did not oppose, but liked well of. Nay there was nothing in
the said Charter, but what was judged good by all or most of the Judges of
England, several times convened by Order of the King and his Council, to
deliver their opinions concerning some Quaeries, which comprised the main of
what was desired and petitioned for by the College, of this present Parliament.
But before the Committee could make report to the House, the Parliament was
adjourned, whereupon Apothecaries falsely gave out, and made people believe our
Charter was taken from us. And in this transaction before the Committee, one
Cocket an Apothecary exhibited in the name of the Chemists such a Scandalous
Libel, as the Committee would not suffer to be read; drawn as some conceive by
the assistance, and countenance, if not contrivance of his Company.

Lastly, The Company of the Apothecaries are bound by their Charter to bring
their Servants (before they make them Free) to be examined by the Censors of
our College, and to have their approbation of their fitness to exercise their
Art, and set up their Trade. Now that they have herein neglected their duty,
and consequently may be dis-franchised and lose their Freedoms for this
omission, it is manifest not only by the vapors of some of them to some members
of our Body, that they never underwent this examination; but also by comparing
of our Register (wherein are recorded the names of all such as have been
examined) with theirs, if they keep any for this purpose. Sure I am, that in
two years together, when I was Censor, very few, if any, did appear to their
examination, whereas yearly a very great number set up their Trades. Nay since
the firing of London not one Apothecaries Servant has been examined by the
Censors, for more then these three Years last past, in which time perhaps no
less then 100 have been made free by the Company.

Before our presenting this Charter to the Parliament, they would admit no
Arbitrators betwixt our Corporation, and Theirs, not contenting themselves with
their Charter lately granted in King James's Reign, and that by the procurement
of some of our College for these unthankful persons. For they would not refer
themselves (as the Surgeons without many words or dispute did) to the most
upright, and most knowing Sir Orlando Bridgeman then Lord Chief Justice, and
now Lord Keeper, for a clause to be by him drawn, in order to preserve their
immunities and Charter; which they refused, fearing belike he would exclude
them from the Practice of Physic, which the Law has already done, and which is
all they could doubt of; but the Corporation of Surgeons did acquiesce in
the clause drawn by the said Lord Chief Justice, and never appeared before the
Committee against the said Charter.

Their increasing dis-respect, and undervaluing the College, appears in this,
that of late years they place our Censors invited to their new Masters Dinner,
at their second Table; whereas always heretofore they were seated at the first
Table, next to the Master of the Company.

And to hinder the building of a New College, a^ the Contribution of the
Honorary Fellows thereunt^ they tell them that we deceived them in their
adm^on, and never intend the building of a New College* though a large
contribution has been made, and ground purchased in order thereunto by the
Members of their Corporation.

And their further design appears in their great triumphing, and rejoicing when
any illiterate person has gained any reputation for a Cure performed,
especially where Physicians have been concerned, though the Patients neglect or
obstinateness, have been the sole cause of this nonperformance, and by their
continued detraction from Physicians, and applauding themselves, hoping by the
former, that people will think such Mountebanks able to do better Cures then
learned Physicians, and then they can easily insinuate themselves superior to
such Mountebanks, and consequently to Physicians. By the latter, they seek to
depress, and level us to themselves, being conscious they can never rise to
that worth and ability, required in a Physician.

Another manifest sign of their endeavor to usurp our Practice is, their
absurd calling the sick their Patients, for it is most certain that in all
reason and language the Physician and Patient only have relation to each other,
but not to the Apothecary, who is but a Tradesman, and manual Operator. Now a
Tradesman and his Customer, or Chapman, are Relatives each to other, but those
Apothecaries who intrude themselves and usurp on our profession, may call their
Customers Patients, and that in a true literal sense, when by their ignorance
they make them really sufferers under them; and if they deny Apothecary and
Patient to be nonsense, they show themselves pitifully ignorant in the Laws,
and Rules of Reason, or else profess themselves Physicians. And the like
nonsense they commonly utter by calling Physicians that make their own
Medicines, Mountebanks and Quacks, whereas none can be such but those who
practice without Lawful Authority, as the Apothecaries, etc. do; and they are
not ignorant in this their malice, that the Law of England would punish them
roundly for so saying; And were I troublesome or vindicative, I could make some
of them examples, but I freely remit their slanders in this kind that are past.

Having done with the main part of the Disease, next follows the Remedy; and
the only firm and proper one will appear to be, that Physicians make their own
Medicines; the benefit whereof to the public, the reasonableness of the thing
it self, the necessity in relation to the Physician, will be manifest by that
which follows.

And First, All that has been said demonstrates this last proposition.

Secondly, The desire of most persons, and the censure of all wise men, who say
we are wanting to our own interest, if we make not use of the remedy in our own
hands, performing our Art in all its members, whereof making of Medicines is a
chief one.

Thirdly, The common practice, and constant usage of all former and ancient
Physicians in all other Nations, and in England also (for it is easy to say
when there was not one Apothecary in this Kingdom) the Laws of our Nation, nay
even the Apothecaries Charter allow it, the Language of all Physicians, our
College voting it honorable so to do, nay Apothecaries themselves commending
it in such Physicians as buy their Medicines of them.

Fourthly, The Kings Physicians have formerly made the Kings Medicines, as it is
manifest by my Lord Coke, in his 4 th. Book of the Institutes, part 4. page
251. where he comments on Rot. Pat. 32 H. 6. m. 17. He there first recites the
Roll it self, wherein are appointed (the King being then sick) 3 Physicians and
2 Chirurgeors, to freely minister and execute Physic about the Kings Person,
and there are also recited in general, Medicines external, and internal. And on
this Roll Coke among other things infers, that the Physicians may use the aid
of those Surgeons named in the Warrant, but of no Apothecary, but to prepare
and do all things themselves, etc. And the reason of all this is, the precious
regard had of the health and safety of the King, who is the head of the
Commonwealth. And I am told by one of his present Majesty's Physicians, that
the King himself affirmed heretofore we are unwise in neglecting our duty
herein, and lately of these papers, that 'twas the public interest so to do.

Fifthly, Surgeons (as before) will not trust them to make external
Remedies; and the King, and East India Company commit the making of their
Chests for their Fleets to the Surgeons.

Sixthly, Have not Ladies and Charitable Gentlewomen their Closets well
furnished with various Medicines for the Poors use, and for their own also,
when Physicians are called to their houses in the Country? Distillers of
Strong Water, Makers of Plasters, Confectioners make Medicines bought by the
Apothecaries, Alehouses sell purging Drinks, and Booksellers sell Chemical
Medicines, and all this without much regret of the Apothecaries. But if a
Physician intermix a Medicine with theirs, though the Patients life be saved
thereby, what noise, and murmuring, and proclaiming of it the next Market Day
to the rest of their Company? to what purpose any one may judge.

Seventhly, Why should not Physicians, being lawfully authorized thereunto,
practice with their own Medicines, as well as the Apothecaries with theirs,
though against Law, and incurring thereby the penalty of 5 l. per Month, which
the College never troubled them for, or exacted of them?

Eighthly, Physicians will be necessitated to it for their subsistence and
honor, and to preserve their Art from being prostituted to illiterate persons,
the Apothecaries becoming now their Competitors.

Ninthly, By this means Physicians will avoid multitudes of inconveniences,
proceeding from writing of Bills, and the Apothecaries Visits.

First, The mistakes, and frauds in the Ingredients, especially committed by
the great practicing Apothecaries, who may, as appears by the following story,
be suspected to send, instead of what was prescribed, the remains of his own
practice, or else some cast-by Medicines; for else how could it be when a
Medicine was prescribed to stand in Infusion or steep a whole night, that it
should be brought two hours after the Bill was written, even the very same
Evening? Which by accident the Patient confessed, wanting the expected success.

Secondly, By this course Physicians will avoid the many opprobrious terms cast
upon them by Apothecaries:

As First, In saying that if he had not omitted or added something, the Patient
might have miscarried; which he may say at pleasure without any contradiction,
though doubtless many have been killed by this means.

Secondly, By saying the Bill could never have been made without some
alteration of the Apothecary, thereby insinuating the Doctors ignorance in
compounding.

Thirdly, In saying the Doctor is not versed in Medicines, because forsooth he
varieth not at every Visit, and multiplieth not new Bills for the Apothecaries
profit.

Fourthly, In saying they teach Physicians, and help them to, and in their
practice. The first and last are vile and foolish Scandals; as to the Second,
it is true indeed, that younger Apothecaries recommend Physicians to their
acquaintance; but it is no longer then they have learned enough (as they think)
to set up for themselves.

Fisthly, In saying, they knew beforehand what such a Doctor would prescribe,
and hence it is they have nicknamed some Physicians of no mean practice, by
the Medicines they frequently use, which names in respect to the persons, I
shall conceal; and of such Physicians, they brag they can prescribe as well as
they. But if a Physician advise things unknown to them, or out of the common
tract, then they say the Doctor intends to puzzle them.

Sixthly, He will avoid the censure of his Bills, which every pitiful fellow,
nay their very Boys will absolve or condemn at pleasure, and that openly too,
nay sometimes to the Patient himself, and thereby call in his good Apothecaries
Physician. Now what a shame is it, that a Physicians credit and livelihood,
should stand at the mercy of such pitiful ignorant, and self-ended Souls? I
have heard one of them say of the now most Eminent Practiser in London, that
his Boy could write as good a Method as he, and that he understood the practice
of Physic as well as any Physician in London, except 2, or 3, though the same
person was soon made to confess, he neither knew the Disease, Cause, nor Cure
of a Pleurisy, pretended to be thoroughly understood by him.

Thirdly, He will avoid the trouble put upon him after he has writ his Bill,
by the Apothecaries ignorance in not understanding it, who to be informed came
to the Doctor heretofore, with their Hats off, but now send their Boys, who
soon put theirs on. Such respect do they give Physicians, when they come to
them as to their Masters to teach them.

Fourthly, He will avoid the impertinent Visits of the Apothecaries, and
non-sensical, troublesome, and discouraging, frightful discourses to the
Patient, of whom no man can expect more then the Common Proverb gives to
Praters, and impertinent Speakers, That they talk like Apothecaries.

Fisthly, He will avoid the mischiefs from their Visits, who by their shrugs,
signs, or words, may diminish the Physicians reputation, and good opinion,
whether in his skill, or Medicines, whereby good Medicines are neglected, and
the expectation of a good success upon the use of them taken away, or at least
causing an averseness to them; which actings do exceedingly prejudice the
Patient, in reference to his Cure.

Sixthly, He will avoid this inconvenience, that some Apothecaries have
attributed the Cure to some of their intermixed Medicines, or alteration of the
Doctors Bill.

Seventhly, He will avoid that incivility of such of them, who in the
Physicians presence, will feel the Pulse, judge of the Urine, discourse the
Cause, Nature, what the Disease is, and what will be the issue of it, propose
Medicines, nay sometimes endeavor to advise with the Physician, to contradict
and dispute with him, to compare and set himself above the Physician; and to
say truth, these odious and intolerable Comparisons and intrusions daily
complained of by my Colleagues, were a great cause of my departing from them.

Eighthly, He will avoid those Scandals they have opportunity to raise, that
such a Physician is Covetous, Proud, Negligent, and minds not his practice, and
the like without the least ground, and are frequently by such Artifices, the
Cause of introducing another Physician, knowing that thereby more Bills will
come to their File, and many times the former Medicines be laid aside, and in
this shuffling in and out of Physicians, they have commonly a great share.

Ninthly, Apothecaries being now Competitors with Physicians for practice, and
downright Enemies to such as make their own Medicines; why should not we
suspect them of this false Play, by telling the Patient the Doctors Medicine
will not work (which he knows well enough how to effect) and then to tell him
he will prepare him one of his own that will work, when perhaps that he calls
his own preparation, was nothing but what the Doctor had prescribed before; and
by this Artifice to advance himself above the Physician.

Another mischief in sending Bills to the Apothecaries is, that though the
Apothecaries be honest (and who can tell which of them is so?) yet the Servants
neglect, or ignorance (to whom they commit the whole care of dispensing, and
are intruth the Apothecaries (and not their Masters) may mar all in their
Masters absence, who is visiting abroad, or at his recreations.

And now I have done with the unpleasant task of raking into the faults of the
Apothecaries, and with discoursing how Physicians may save themselves from
their devices, I shall next show the advantages that will come to the Patient,
the Physician, and people, by this way of remedy proposed.

As for the Patients, they may hereby save most of the great charges of
Apothecaries Bills, which in long Cases amount to very great sums in a year,
although the Physician has received very few Fees; the Physician may so order
his business as to take his Fee for his Visits only, and at home such competent
Fees for his advice alone, as are usually given, and in both Cases take nothing
for his Medicines, and so save the Patient the whole charge of the Apothecaries
Bill, which very seldom comes short, and for the most part manifoldly exceeds
the Physicians Fees. And this he may very well do by making fewer, less
chargable, more effectual, and durable Medicines then the Shops afford, and
suffer nothing in the non-use, or decay of his Medicines; because he need make
no more then will serve his own practice: and I must here profess, that which I
intended not to have published, that this is the course I have generally taken,
for the four Months last past, since I made my own Medicines, but that some
Apothecaries have given out most falsely, that I have sent in Bills to Patients
for money; but to convince such of their wonted lying, I do hereby oblige my
self to give 100 pound to any of them that shall produce such a Bill. Secondly,
This way will not clog the Patient with more Medicines then are needful, nor
will omit any thing may conduce to his recovery, for if he fails in either,
it is to his prejudice, either in spending more Medicines which cost him money,
or in not performing his Cure, which loses his practice.

But I do not propose this course of mine as a general rule to all Physicians,
but leave this to every man's private judgment; Neither do I hereby bind my self
to the same practice, because some few Cases may fall out (though to an equal
advantage to the Patient) may persuade me to the contrary. For I find some
persons of that persuasion, as to think they have not given satisfaction,
unless they have paid for the Medicines; but to such persons, I have always
allowed them to give me what they pleased themselves, for the cure only, to the
full satisfaction of both parties. Though I will not deny but some persons out
of gratitude for their Cure, have rewarded me beyond this proposal. Some of my
acquaintance have desired me to be more plain in this last Paragraph,
especially in that part of it where I say I do not bind my self to the said
practice; and to declare more fully the Cases that may persuade me to the
contrary; which are these and such as these. First, Where Patients of their own
free offers will contract with the Physician^, or have formerly too meanly
rewarded him for his Cure, in both which the Statutes of our College allow a
contract to be made with Patients. Another case is, if a Physician be consulted
once, and for his Fee has given Medicines gratis, if the Patient frequently
send for his Medicines without the least reward at all. Or if the Patient
living far in the Country, having (as before) once consulted the Physician, as
in the last case, and shall for weeks, nay months, send for the same Medicines.
Or if the Patients friend shall recommend a Medicine to another friend of his
unknown to the Physician; and where he gives no Counsel, if a Physician in the
Country shall desire some of his Medicines, which are all the cases that occur
at present; I say in some of these, the Physician must needs be paid for his
Medicines; but in other, it is rational he should be paid for his advice, as he
desires new Medicines, which charge will be far short also of the Apothecaries
Medicines, whether repeated or prescribed upon new advice.

Now the great charge of Apothecaries Bills, and nauseousness of their
Medicines, appears to be the cause why long habitual diseases, as the Kings
Evil, Falling Sickness, Convulsions, Melancholies, and Winds in the Bowels,
Gouts, etc. become seldom relieved, though they may with a constant, facile
way, be perfectly cured, where neither the great charge, not unpleasantness of
Medicines, deterr them from a continued necessary use of Remedies. And for the
same reasons many will be kept from relapses, who being tired out with taking
variety of Medicines, give over before the tone and strength of their parts is
restored, which is necessary to be done in all long Diseases.

He may so contrive his Medicines, first, That they may be taken in small
quantity, and be made more grateful to the taste, and stomach, and perform more
then those of the Apothecaries, commonly slovenly made, and of themselves
Fulsom, Nauseous, and Sluggish. Secondly, His Medicines made for particular
persons, may last Weeks, Months, nay Years, whereas the Apothecaries Drinks,
especially in the Summer time, must be renewed once, or twice every day, to the
excessive charge of the Patient.

That his Medicines may be fewer, is evident in Physicians that practice in the
Country, who ride far to Patients, and carry in their Man's Cloak-bag, Medicines
enough, not only for the person he is sent to, but also for most other persons,
and Cases he meets with in his Travels, and therefore his Closet needs contain
but few, yet noble and generous Medicines, and such as may serve him upon all
occasions, supplying what is defective from the Fields or Gardens. He may avoid
all pompous, useless, chargable Medicines of the Shops, and substitute in their
place, cheaper, and more conducible to health; He may very well lay aside the
precious Stones, Saphir, Emerals, etc. the high priced Magistrals of Coral, and
Pearl, made worse by their preparatious, or rather destroyed thereby in their
Virtue, as also Unicorns Horn, and Bezoar, all which are now rarely used alone,
but in the received Compositions; He may also spare the charges of leaf-gold,
for guilding Pots, Glasses, Pills, Electuaries, Boles, etc. which serves only
to raise the Bill.

He may teach the Patients facile and easy Remedies, as to make a Clyster,
apply Blisters, or Medicines to the feet, where they are needful, etc. and in
many Cases may cure by well ordering his Patient only, without any Remedies at
all, or but very few, being free to act for the Patients Health, without the
grumbling of the Apothecary; and many other ways he may daily meet with, very
advantageous to the Patient.

He will have little use of Conserves, Syrups, Lohocks, etc. a greater part
whereof Sugar makes up, which does more hurt to most persons, then the other
ingredients do good.

As for Infusions and Decoctions, he will find by experiment, how much liquor,
or Mensiruum will suffice to extract the full virtue of the ingredients, and
what are helps, or hindrances thereunto, and thereby neither suffer loss in
the quantity, or quality of them.

He will discover the inefficacy of many of the Syrups and other Medicines in
the Shops, made of such ingredients, the qualities whereof, what with boiling,
what with the great quantity of Sugar necessary to keep them, are either made
useless, or opposite to the ends they are proposed for. Especially in such
Plants, Seeds, and Flowers, which consist of fine volatile parts, and even in
drying and pounding, or the least boiling exhale and evaporate, and therefore
in the common way of ordering them, lose their whole virtue or most of their
efficacy, and alter in their properties. From which by several methods known to
some Physicians, very generous and singular Medicines may be produced.

He need not use so large Compositions consisting of such confused and contrary
ingredients, and will find good reason to lay aside those unintelligible and
unreasonable Compositions of Mithridate, and Treacle, and the so much magnified
Treacle-water, and will substitute better in their places, of smaller charge,
and less trouble; and this all Physicians I have conversed with, and the
College it self, by their Book published for the common good, in the year
before the Plague, and all those Physicians in this City, who make or intend to
make their own Medicines, do confess.

But here Apothecaries open wide, and cry out that the Physicians are great
Cheats, and envious persons, for continuing such flat Medicines, and not
recommending to the World, or rather their Shops, our greater secrets. The
answer is easy, that the Medicines in our Pharmacopaea, are the best of any
other Pharmacopaea in the World, both for their goodness, and well preparing of
them, whether they be Chemical, or Galenical; and therefore the same scandal
will ly on all Pharmacopaea's whatsoever. Secondly, I say that within these few
last experimental years, the practical part of Physic has been much improved
(as well as Anatomy) especially by such as have put their hands to work; and
therefore till such improvement, this could not be well amended. Furthermore,
in making new Dispensatories, a full consent must be had, and 'twere not fit to
move where the motion were not like to take place, for though private men
invent new ways of compounding and preparing, and using their own invented
Medicines, yet 'twill require a long time to make them publicly known, and
brought into common use, and till that be done it is not possible to have them
brought into a common Dispensatory; besides, no man would make a motion for
such a reformation, unless he were well furnished with specificks, and then
'twill be required of him to expose them to the whole World, which how
incongruous it will be, every man may easily conceive; hereto add, that the
Apothecaries think themselves able enough by this present Dispensatory, to
out-beard Physicians, and do publicly profess (as has been said) that they
understand the practice of Physic as well as they; how much more would they
have said so, if they had been made Masters of these secrets? And here I shall
admonish those of my own Faculty, who have devoted their Studies, Labors, and
Purses, for the improvement of their Art, to consider, that as natural things
have their bounds and limits, and that there is no new Creation of them, and
besides, that these things have their bounds also of improvement, beyond which
it is impossible for man to go; and that by a good method and industry, that end
may be attained; (though at present I must confess, no Art is more capable of
enlargement then ours:) I say let all consider, and they will find, what a vast
encouragement they have to improve their knowledge so far, that they shall not
only be able to leave mankind destitute of no remedy Nature did ever produce;
but also restore and setle those Honors ignorant men would usurp, upon the
Learned Professors of this Science; and I see no reason why Physicians should
communicate their secrets to such persons, who will make use of them, to the
ruin of the Inventors, which is indeed a failer of trust, for when a Physician
writes his Bill, he trusts the Apothecary only with making the Medicine for a
particular occasion, and not to make use of it as his own when he pleases for
his own profit, and the Inventor have no further benefit by it, then perhaps
one single advantage.

Lastly, When Dispensatories were first made, the Apothecaries were really
Physicians Servants, and wholly at their command, not in the least intrenching
on their business, and the rates of Medicines were reasonable; which
superiority over them still continues only in their prescriptions, the forms
whereof are always commanding to take this and that, and to mix them, etc. but
within these few last years they have set up for themselves, and advanced the
rates beyond all reason; and to be sure, the more we teach them by our Books,
the more they will trangress in both.

He may receive encouragement from what he discovers, that is more then
ordinarily useful, whereas by writing Bills, he soon communicates to the
ignorant and lazy, who will neither spend time nor money to advance the Art,
but while the one is at work to his great charge, loss of time, much pains and
trouble, the others seek by petty tricks and Arts to gain a name, and profit
from the industrious. Nay some Mountebanks have been set up by purchasing
receipts of the Apothecary or his Servants. And one of them told me, he set up
a Quack by selling and commending to him a Medicine he had long kept in his
Shop and could not otherwise put off, and that by degrees he made him a famous
practiser among the ignorant and poor people. An Act quite contrary to the
interest of the Company.

Hence also will arise an emulation amongst Physicians, who shall exceed each
other in noble remedies, and from thence a full and happy improvement of
whatsoever God has created for the recovery of man's health impaired; for from
the Physician alone the advancement of Physic is to be expected. How many
simples of unknown properties have been brought into use, to the great comfort
of the sick? and many more may be, as also many preparations, both simple and
compound, both in the Galenical, and Chemical practice, and by this means the
Art will be advanced to its just dignity, now much diminished, dishonored, and
near to be lost by the intrusion of ignorant persons.

Greater respect will be given to such Physicians, as being the immediate
instruments of life and health, who will derive unto themselves that which is
now given to the Apothecaries, which proceeds chiefly from fear lest they
should do the Patient hurt; and so their honor will be doubled, which every
Physician looks principally at; but the Apothecary being not so far concerned,
looks chiefly at his own profit, and regards not the Patients charge. For the
greater the Patients charge, the greater must needs be the Apothecaries gain;
whereas on the contrary, it is the Physicians Interest to cure the Patient with
the greatest ease.

He may proceed on safely and securely in his well experienced Medicines,
having before him not only what he has prescribed for the same Patient, but
for all others in the like Case, and thereby keep in memory what he would have
forgot, if his Bill had remained on the Apothecaries File; viz. the Medicines
and their success. By means whereof Physicians do not advance their knowledge so
far as they might; for how is it possible they should remember the particulars
of their Bills writ some days before? and therefore know not how to proceed so
well. But the Apothecaries having before them the whole series of Medicines,
brag they can do more then the Physicians, and by this means insinuate the same
opinion into people.

The Physician will be consulted in the beginning of Diseases, to the safety
and little expense of the Patient, who will not go first to the Apothecary, who
practices on him till the Case is desperate, and then calls in a Physician
when it is too late; and if he dies, the Physician must carry away the disgrace
alone; but if he recover, the Apothecary, if he be so minded, by some trick
will share with him in the honor: and by this resort of people to the
Apothecaries in beginning of Diseases, we meet with few Cases of easy Cure,
but are chiefly made use of in dangerous Diseases, or those of short period, or
such as are accompanied with great pains and torments, to our great and
continual anxiety.

The Physicians experience hereby as it is surer, so 'twill be greater.

He will make use of no Medicines but the choicest, and when they are in their
full vigor, and such as are durable, and after once or twice Trial of them,
will seldom fail in his expected success; which cannot be certainly had without
some trial. For though a man buy the choicest ingredients, viz. Sena, which may
appear to the Senses very good, yet he cannot positively say, how well, nor yet
what quantity of it will work, till he has made use of it. But afterward he
may confidently apply the whole parcel he has bought to his purpose. The like
may be instanced in a crop of Wheat or Barley, which the skillfullest
Husbandman cannot tell how they will yield for Bread, or Malt, till he has
used them. Now how is it possible that a Physician can with any certainty make
use of several Shops, since there is so great difference in the ingredients?
and it is certain the same Medicine made by several Apothecaries, shall differ
much in color, smell, and taste, and consequently effect too; which cannot
proceed from any other cause then the difference of the ingredients themselves,
or by omitting some ingredients, or by substituting one thing for another; or
by distinct ways of preparing them. The same also may be said of Compositions,
much more of Chemical Medicines so much sophisticated, and of so much danger
and hazard, if not well prepared, which he cannot discover till he has seen
the effect of them, unless it be such as he makes himself, nor those neither
till he has made some trial of them.

He will much enlarge Materia Medica, Chemistry and Pharmacy, and discover the
grounds of them, and wherein the efficacy of remedies lies, and thereby lay
open a whole Ocean for new discoveries, and by the by observe many useful
products and Phenomenon of Nature, to the great improvement of his Art, and
sound Natural Philosophy, which are not taken notice of by Apothecaries, and
their Servants; for all which they have neither will nor skill.

As to the improvement of Medicines, this may be added, by the experimenting
Physician, that in distilled waters he will consider and find which of them
will afford any virtue, which only phlegm equivalent but to Conduit-water,
which of them will keep long, and in perfection, which soon or in what time
decay, and spend them accordingly, and in compound distilled waters, will find
cause to lay aside many simples as nothing conducing, or rather weakening the
efficacy of the Medicine designed; whereby much charge and trouble will be
spared, and better compositions be made.

He will gain and keep to himself Patients, who have diseases they are
unwilling should be known by Apothecaries and their Boys, and all such as have
a mind to turn over their File.

The Patient will have better opinion of the Medicines, and confidence in the
use of them, and the Physician be more satisfied in his Conscience, and better
assured of the success.

He will gain reputation to his Art, by restoring it to its first institution
and practice, by the Founders and Heroes of Physic.

It Is convenient to adjoin here the old way of educating young men into the
practice of Physic, and surely the safer for the Patients health; and I could
wish 'twere restored to its former usage, which was this. The Senior Physician
carried his Son, or such as he intended to succeed him in his practice, along
with him when he visited his Patients, discovering, and discoursing with them
the disease, cause, method of cure, and what remedies were fit to be applied to
the present Case, and to try them what they would do in that or the like Case.
And when his occasions would not permit him to visit himself, he then sent one
of his Scholars to inform him of the condition of the sick person, and the
effect of his Medicines; and also when the said Scholars had leisure, they were
employed to help to gather, prepare, and make, or oversee the compounding of
Medicines. And such Scholars they called filii Artis, sons of Art. Some of the
Professors in Foreign parts practice the most of this to this very day, with
such Gentlemen as travel thither to study Physic, confirming their reading with
experience.

By constantly practiced Medicines he will find out a better method of Cure,
and may hereby arrive at the true causes of diseases.

He will observe what Medicines by precipitation or other ways, alter, destroy,
or weaken one another, whereby of good ingredients singly used, a bad
Composition may be made, and therefore fail in the success expected. Many more
things might be here added, which a skillful observer, and versed in the way to
make experiments (no easy matter) will daily find, and at present I do not so
much as give hints of them, but shall hereafter, as occasion and opportunity
require*

He will have more scope to be charitable to the poor, and more civil and
obliging to his friends, by curing them gratis, of at small charges.

He need not trouble himself with ways of concealing the use of his Medicines,
by setting down no directions in his Bill, but giving them to the Patient,
which the Apothecary soon learns; nor with giving some of his own Medicines at
a pinch, which if they succeed not, to be sure the Apothecaries will cry down
in all places, but will conceal all eminently good successes, as
disadvantageous to themselves; nor by placing their Arcana's in the Shops of
those Apothecaries they commonly make use of; nor by recommending their
Patients to such Apothecaries they entrust their secrets with. For then great
complaints are made that the Physicians carry away their Customers, and take
away their livelihood, affirming they are willing to fetch them from the
prescribing Doctors Apothecaries. To which I answer, that they do fetch them,
but perhaps not always; since I have heard them often say, these secrets were
but the Medicines of the London Dispensatory disguised under new names, to the
discredit of the Physicians that prescribed them. And I well remember some of
them have neglected to fetch from my house, not far from their own, some of my
preparations, though they had them gratis, for the fetching; whereby the
Patients have suffered, and thought I neglected them, 'till they were rectified
by another Visit. Nay one of them told me, he had rather die with his own
Shop-Medicines, then be cured with my Magistrals: much more would he have said
of Patients, manifestly preferring his own profit before their lives; a most
Unchristian saying!

One singular advantage such a Physician will have, that the slanders of the
Apothecaries will appear to be malicious, as being raised against such as act
contrary to their profit.

By this means Physicians will unite against the common Enemy, will contribute
mutual assistance, and communicate more freely to one another their practice
and remedies; and also the frauds and unlawful practices of the Apothecaries,
will conceal the counsels, and act whatsoever may tend to the advance of their
Art; and Patients also will discover the Apothecaries censures, and practices
against the Physicians and their prescriptions.

Hereby that great interest will decay Apothecaries have in Families for their
petty officiousnesses (which Physicians not to displease them have put them
upon) these will be taught Nurses, and the assistants, and which are by some of
these as well, certainly more diligently performed then by the Apothecaries.

Hereby the filii Artis, or younger Physicians, will sooner come into a better
and more settled practice, and not be beholden to Apothecaries to bring them
Patients wherewith they often upbraid them, and glory amongst themselves and to
other persons, that they introduced such and such a Physician.

Hereby Surgeons will be restored to some of their employment now usurped by
the Apothecaries, as leting of blood, applying Leeches, Plasters,
Cupping-Glasses, Syringing and Salivation, wraping up bodies in Cere-Cloaths,
etc. which indeed do more properly belong to them then to the Apothecaries;
hereby also happily many occasions of quarrel betwixt Physicians and the
Apothecaries will cease, each party acting according to his own way.

By this means Pseudochymists, and other Mountebanks mouths and revilings will
be stopped, only exclaiming for this, that Physicians make not their own
Medicines. But since the publication of these papers I am informed that the
said Pseudochymists and Mountebanks rail against me, this Book, and the way
propounded, as much as the Apothecaries, though before equal Enemies each to
others. So that they have fulfilled the Proverb, of like to like. And no wonder
since hereby their Kingdom of darkness is brought to light, and they are
obliged to oppose it, as the Copper-Smiths were to revile St. Paul for speaking
against the Idol of Diana of the Ephesians, whereby their trade was lost.

And as for the reasonableness of it, that the Physician ought to support
himself by all lawful ways and means, and to have praeeminence above those
ignorant persons that incroach upon his profession, it is confessed by all that
have considered the great charge, study, and labor, before he can arrive at
any benefit from it; for he must take the chargeable degrees of Batchellor, and
Master of Arts, Batchellor of Physic, and after 14 years standing, the degree
of Doctor; besides his bare expenses for his maintenance in the University,
Charges in Anatomies, knowledge of natural things; Travels abroad, Chemistry,
and Experiments; his Library, Habit, his more free way of living in a suitable
house, and Attendants, greater Taxes, etc. insomuch that a Doctor of Physic
spends more before he comes to practice, then will set up perhaps a dozen
Apothecaries in a way of livelihood; and besides, great sums of money before he
can put himself in a fitting Equipage: whereas on the contrary, many young men
before their time of Apprenticeship is out, provide well for themselves by
Quacking; and certainly the Study of Physic, and consequently the knowledge of
Nature, must bid farewell to the Universities, if Shops be permitted to make
practisers, for such the people will soon create Doctors, which title the
Apothecary takes upon him, though he understand not the reason of the name, to
the great shame of the Universities, and Faculty, when ignorant people shall
give, and they challenge the same title for nothing, attained by the Physician
at a great rate and long study, the vulgar taking Practiser and Doctor to
signify the same thing. And which no persons of knowledge and education do,
and perhaps most other persons give them in way of Jeering.

From the handsome support of Physicians these benefits will accrue to the
public, that thereby the honor all Nations yield to the English Physicians
will be kept up, who in the late times, when the reputation of the Nation was
well near forfeited abroad, the Physicians then in being, most whereof are now
living, and Members of the College, maintained the credit, for learning and
value, of this Kingdom, and since his Majesty's happy return, some of them have
kept up the honor of the Faculty; which manifestly appears by the great esteem
Foreigners have of their Books, by often printing them, and translating into
Latin what has been published in English, though they are no where so
depressed as in England.

A second benefit to the public is, that men of competent Estates will breed
up their Sons in the Art of Physic, giving them such education as is necessary,
and will not vouchsafe to place them out to Apothecaries, though now adays want
of learning and degrees are adjudged as needful a qualification for the
exercise of Physic, as formerly 'twas for Preaching, and the Shops fit to
supply both.

I will conclude this part of my discourse with this observation; that the Laws
of England in all their Acts of Parliament, have granted the practice of Physic
to Physicians and them alone, and in no clause thereof put in any restraint at
all upon them, but every where, either new privileges, or a confirmation of
the old, have been granted, by the said powers. Whereas on the contrary, the
Law supposes cheats in the Apothecaries Shops, and therefore impowers our
Censors to destroy and burn what they find bad and corrupt.

The next thing to be treated of, shall be the ways of Apothecaries creeping
into practice, and their unfitness thereunto. As to the first, heretofore when
they were Members of the Company of Grocers, and dispersed in place, as well as
in counsel, they then were wholly subordinate to the Physicians, only keeping in
their Shops, and faithfully making the prescriptions they received from the
Physician, and when made, sending them to the Patient by their men (as they
still continue to do in Foreign Countries) and not committing the preparation
to raw Boys, or Apprentices, which is the true interest of the Patient they
should do here likewise. But in process of time, Physicians in acute diseases
having taught them somewhat, sent them to visit their Patients, to give them
the best account they could of the estate of their health, and effect of their
Medicines. And of later years some Physicians took them along with them in
their Visits, whereby they acquired a little smattering of diseases, by which
means, and their continual officiousness, they insinuated themselves into
Families, and by applying (right or wrong) the terms of Art they had learned
from the Physicians, they made people believe they had acquired some skill in
the Art, and afterward began to venture a little at practice, and but until
these 10 years last past kept themselves within some bounds and limits; but
since that time have daily more and more incroached upon our Profession, being
assisted by a greater familiarity of conversation with younger Physicians. And
in the Plague time they took upon them the whole Practice of Physic, which ever
since they have continued, being much helped also therein by the dispersing of
Physicians into places unknown to their Patients, by the Fire, but above all by
the burning of the College, by means whereof their Government and view of their
Shops have been omitted, insomuch that now they are past all restraint, having
insinuated and (as they think) rooted themselves by the aforesaid Artifices, so
that there remains now no other real remedy but that proposed.

Now here I shall take occasion in a short digression, to discourse briefly the
reason, why in all Ages there have been so many pretenders to Physic, and why
some of them have got reputation in the World. One has been mentioned before,
viz. the great charges sick men are put to, caused by the separation of the
Physician from the Apothecary. But the principal reason is, the want of
knowledge in most persons, both of the materials used, and the grounds for
which they are applied. Insomuch that there are but few that can judge, and
distinguish rightly of either, and no wonder therefore that in their reasonings
they commit more absurd mistakes, or Paralogisms then in any other Art
whatsoever, and censure Physicians by the success alone. Which my Lord Verulam
accounts the great unhappiness both of the Statesman and the Physician, both
being alike censured by those that know not the bottom and rise of their
Actions and Counsels. For how can any man in either make a sound Judgment
without a full knowledge of the business it self, and of all the circumstances
thereunto belonging; nor in Physic without the concurrent knowledge of the sick
man's habit, disease, cause, remedies, and many other particulars necessary to
make a clear judgment upon the success? Yet notwithstanding, many will censure
and grumble at the actions of ^he Statesmen, though their proceedings have
been never so wise, and prudent, and oft-times from muttering and whispering,
fall to downright distaste, and mutiny against their Superiors. So that the
good success, in State Affairs, of rash and imprudent undertakers, have been
extolled and preferred before the wary, and prudent management, and guidance of
the soberest and wisest Statesmen. The same likewise happens between the bold
Empiric, and learned Physician. But in this way of censuring, the Statesman
has this advantage above the Physician, that it is possible he may meet with a
series of Business so circumstantiated, as seldom or never to miscarry,
especially having a greater power over subordinate persons then Physicians
have. But the irreversible statute of Heaven forbids us to expect a constant
recovery of our Patients, for it is appointed, that all men must die. It Is
sufficient therefore for us, to employ those remedies God has given to the
Sons of men, to the utmost virtue the Creator has endowed them withal: since
his eternal decree has limited their efficacy from making man immortal. Now
since (if men judge by the success alone) it cannot be otherwise, but that the
most learned Physician, and most sottish Empiric must be thought equal in
skill, by those that are not able to make a right judgment and difference
betwixt them on other principles. Hence it comes to pass, that where some
ignorant person has cured accidentally a slight disease, and a Physician has
a Patient dye of an irrecoverable Case, here the Empiric shall be applauded,
and the Physician decryed. Nay many will say the disease is the same in both,
whereas we daily see most gross mistakes in such opinions, when the Cases
differ totally in their Nature, agreeing in one sign only common to both the
Cases proposed, nay to many other also. Furthermore, if a Patient die under an
Empirics hand, the friends willingly conceal their Names, lest some discredit
should befall them for using such worthless practisers; but if under the hands
of a known Physician, he shall be sure to be named, and sometimes his
attendance falsely fathered on him, when Mountebanks only have been employed:
but to besure if an Empirie has first been made use of, and afterward an able
Physician called in (when all opportunity of doing good was past) and the
Patient die, the Mountebank has never been mentioned, but the Physician perhaps
condemned, though he has done whatsoever could have been thought on, rational
in that Case.

Add to the former reasons, the bold and confident brags, and promises of
Empirics, that they have cured worse diseases, and will in few hours free them
from their maladies, especially where sober Physicians have pronounced
doubtfully of the event. No wonder that these pleasing promises to persons in
danger and distress bring them into employment even with a rejection of the
former sober Physician.

Besides, a foolish opinion prevails with some ignorant persons, that they will
deal only with such as will undertake the Cure, (that is) contract with them
for a sum of money, one half whereof to be paid in hand, and the other the
Cure being done, and so are usually cheated of one half of their money; and
such people will have nothing to do with such Physicians as will not undertake
them in this sense.

Another Stratagem is, to give strange and hard names to their Medicines, such
as are Pilulae radiis Solis extractae, and in English is no more then Pills
dried to that consistence by the Sunbeams, which ignorant people have thought
were made of the Sun Beams. Others commend their Extract of the Soul of the
Heathen Gods. One sets up with a receipt received from Van Helmonts own hands;
Another has received from a Jew the shining of Moses Face; nay I have heard a
Pseudochymist blasphemously brag, he saw in the making of a grand Elixir, the
Quintessence of the Trinity in Unity, and infinite other pitiful captivations
of silly people, to be seen on every Gate and Post of this City; such as are
the Spirit of the Salt of the World, Panchymagogon, and other ten-footed Greek
names, and some other Mongrel non-sensical ones compounded of several
Languages; promising certain, speedy, and concealed Cure of incurable Diseases.

And no less ridiculous and absurd to considering persons are, their cantings
of themselves, wherewith they no less befool, amuse, and beguile the people; as
that by long prayer, and seeking of God, they have had many secrets revealed to
them from Heaven. Another by long Travels through Hungary, Poland, etc. has
attained great secrets from Kings and Emperors. Another a Gentleman lately
come from Oxford, or Cambridg, Cures the Pox, Running of the Reins, etc. in
Capital Letters, at all which what sober man cannot but laugh? Yet such as
these are inducements to many to resort to them; moreover some of them are
Astrologers, Physiognomers, Fortunetellers, Professors of Palmistry and such
other vain Arts, much applauded by the weaker sort of people.

Besides, the former they have their Emissaries, Scouts, and Setters up and
down, to cry up the skill and feigned Cures done by them, Nurses, Good-fellows,
Midwives, etc. to make up the cry and full noise.

Now it being natural to most people to admire what they understand not, and
for Admiration to infer Love, and Love Praise, and Praise the use especially of
such things as are set off with high and lofty expressions, it necessarily
follows that such persons will cry up, and make use of, those that by these
means captivate their understandings, especially their credits being engaged
also; but above all, if they proceed from meaner persons, of whom they are most
credulous, having in suspicion wisermen, believing the former are not able, and
that the wiser are able; and therefore will deceive them. All which appears in
some with us cried up above any Physician that ever was in England, though for
pitiful, dangerous, nay sometimes mortal Medicines, whereby great sums of money
have been gained in a short time. I shall instance first in Lockyers Pills made
of Antimony, discovered to be so by some of my Colleagues, and my self, at the
first selling of them. A Medicine as ill made as any of that Mineral, and no
Physician though meanly versed in Chemistry, but could have excelled it. Yet so
great a Vogue this Pill had for some time, that infinite people resorted to
him, and purchased them for their lives, both for themselves, and Families, and
(as I have heard) for their posterities too. Though a common Chimney in a
little time would have made enough of it to have served the whole Nation for
some years to come, and that at very small charges. But Experience, the Tutor
of too many, has in a short time brought these Pills into a dis-use, if not a
total Oblivion, even amongst the vulgar.

A second cried up Medicine was Mathews's Pills, made of Opium (to which the
virtue of the whole Composition must be attributed) of white Hellebor Roots,
and Oil of Turpentine, whereto some add Salt of Tartar, which will puzzle the
most knowing Naturalist to declare why these should be thus jumbled together;
unless to obscure the Opium. It Is indeed a very cunning Composition, for by
giving rest and ease it may easily decoy people into the use of them, though by
long taking of them, diseases become far more uncurable then they are in their
own Nature.

A third Universal Medicine was Hughes's Powder, sold by him at 10 s. the
Grain, and 3 l. 10 s. the Dose, made doubtless of Gold and Quicksilver. The
taste and weight of it manifestly discover the former to be an ingredient into
it, and the effect, viz. Salivation proves the latter to be part of the
compound. Besides I have made of these two dissolved, and digested in their
peculiar Menstruums, in no long space of time, a Medicine that had the same
effect with his, and in the same Dose; and having a View of his Cabinet left
after his Death, containing a large quantity of the said Powder (being all he
left behind him) there was found crude Gold, and Quicksilver in the same
Cabinet. Now these three Notorious Universal Medicines were put to sale by most
ignorant persons. Add hereunto the forementioned Mr. De-laun's Pill, whereof I
shall say nothing, being mentioned under the Name of the Pilulae ex duobus, in
the London Dispensatory, though some make them of the Extract of Coloquintida.
The last of any Fame with us, were Dr. Goddard's Drops, a good Medicine, but
not so universal, and superlative as he would have made the World believe, and
was nothing else but what some Physicians many years since enjoyed. I well
remember that in the late troubles, a Person then in great Authority, having
cried up this above all the Medicines in the World, a round wager was offered,
that the Doctor should not distinguish his own from two others that should be
brought him, both which were but Spirit of Hartshorn. But the wager would not
be accepted of. Furthermore, that this Medicine of his was Spirit of
Hartshorn, some relations plainly argue; One whereof was the following.

A certain person in Norfolk having sent for as much as came to a 11 l. and
dying upon the 2 d. dose of it, and by accident most part of the remainder
being spilt; there comes in a friend to the House, of some skill, who supposing
it to be Spirit of Hartshorn, told the Widow he would endeavor to gain back
the money for her. And thereupon went to a Chemist, and bought as much of the
said Spirit, as would make up the quantity purchased of Dr. Goddard, who after
Trial of it by smell, and taste, acknowledged it to be his, and honestly paid
back the sum 'twas first sold for; which I think few of the Mountebanks do.
Sure I am that a Quack sold 21 Pills for 20 l. whereof the Patient took 4 at
two doses, to the great hazard of his life, who then repairing to me for my
advice, I by Trial of one of them sound them to be Mercurial, and wished him to
return them back, but the Quack would not give him 10 s. for the 16 remaining.

The inference and sum of what has been said, is to show briefly by what
Artifices people are deceived in their Healths, and Purses, and how easily the
ignorant are couzened, and such practices used, that Physicians, men of honesty
and repute, would be ashamed to own, and must by using them in a short time be
ruined and discredited. And such Cheats as these, the College of Physicians are
bound by the Laws of the Land to decry, and punish (though by so doing it has
often incurred the censure and clamor of the vulgar) Besides the Statute of the
14 th. and 15 th. of Henry the Eighth injoyns us to it, declaring that it is
good for the Commonwealth of this Realm, and therefore expedient, and
necessary to provide that no person of the College of Physicians (for all
practisers then were of the said body) be suffered to exercise, and practice
Physic, but only those persons that be profound, sad, and discreet, groundly
learned, and deeply studied in Physic. Now certain it is, that none of the said
body did or dare use any of the forementioned frauds and deceits, but will
constantly endeavor (since it is impossible but there will be Cheatees;
(according to the old Proverb, Populus vult decipi, The People will be
deceived) to abridge the number of the Cheaters, who answer to the former part
of the Proverb, Decipiatur, Let them be couzened.

I shall end this discourse by returning from my digression to the
Apothecaries, who may and do use some of the tricks beforementioned, and shall
here briefly recite some great advantages they have, and make use of above
Physicians. One is, that they live in this City 7 or 8 years as Apprentices, as
also by their retail Trade, and by living in open Shops, by frequent converse
with their fellow Citizens, whether in Commerce or Offices, by many friendly
and Neighbourly mutual kindnesses and actions, wherein they spend their whole
lives, and are never diverted by studies, and ingenuity from their proposed way
of gain, by all which means they get into a fixed familiarity and good opinion
with their Neighbors, and a large acquaintance in the World. Now for their
skill, besides what has been beforementioned, and common to them with the
Mountebank, viz. Vapouring and braging of their skill, and decrying Physicians,
by talking above the Capacity of those they converse with, who therefore take
all they say to be authentic, though never so absurd, and trivial, and many
times to set off themselves they will venture to speak Latin commonly as false
as the matter, although some of them at Coffee-Houses, and in other mixed
Companies, by venturing so boldly have been met with and baffled, and made to
depart thence with shame and discredit enough, which their friends and
acquaintance take little notice of. Add hereunto their exposing to view their
Compositions of Treacle, Mithridate, Diascordium and Alkermes, which all their
friends, and neighbors one time of another must see; (being set off by some
very curiously) and seeing cannot but admire the great charge, art, and labor
of the Apothecary, and perhaps hear his learned Lecture upon them, whereby they
imply their great skill, knowledge in the virtues of these ingredients, and
consequently an ability to practice with them; all which are below the dignity
of a Physician; and therefore a long time is necessary for him to gain
acquaintance, wanting the forementioned opportunities the Apothecaries enjoy.
Lastly, Their painted Pots and Glasses, with false Titles on them, more win the
vulgar then a Physicians Library of far greater value.

As to their incapacity for Practice, it is manifest by their education, and
ignorance of all those things which are required in an able Physician, viz. the
knowledge of Arts and Languages; by the former whereof men learn the way and
rules of observing, and improvements to be made thereon; by the latter, what
the learned searchers of Nature have in all Ages taken notice of, necessary,
and little enough in an Art so difficult as that of Physic. They are wholly
ignorant also of all Philosophy, and the very Elements of the Art, and
therefore unskillful in knowing diseases; and more surely their causes, whereto
respect is to be had, as well as to the diseases, to which, fit remedies are to
be applied. For want of Anatomy know neither the part affected, nor how it is
affected; much less any thing of Chirurgical directions. And through their
ignorance in Philosophy, and Arts, they have not skill enough to advise a diet
suitable to diseases, a thing most necessary, as well in curing diseases as in
preserving of health, and which requires a great insight into the nature of
things; nor the true grounds and reasons of compounding, practicing their way
rather by rote then by rule; with better reason may a Brick-layer or Carpenter
pretend to be a Mathematical, or a Common Fiddler to be a Music Reader in the
Universities, or Gresham-College, since both these have the practical part of
those Sciences, which Apothecaries have not in Physic, in the least measure.

And to conceal their mis-actings, they generally do all by word of mouth, and
not enter their prescriptions into their Books, being happily ashamed any knowing
men should discover their sins of omission, as dangerous many times in point of
life and health, as those of their commission. Whereas Physicians Bills are on
the File, or registered in Order in their own Books, which is their
justification from all misrepresentations.

Again, they sufficiently confess their ignorance, by calling in Physicians
when their own, or any of their relations healths are concerned, and the same
all people acknowledge, when they are in distress and danger. And very few
understanding persons, and none that are learned and knowing, will trust them
at all. But I shall refer the Reader to the forementioned Writer against the
Apothecaries, viz. Dr. Daniel Coxe, who permitted me to name him here; by whom
this and many other things here but briefly touched, are judiciously handled,
and more largely.

And as for their skill in practice, we daily see their gross errors and
omissions, being called where they have given Medicines. I shall instance only
in one that happened at the writing hereof; viz. that an Apothecary gave strong
Purging Pills on the Fit day of a gentle Quartan Ague, which turned it into a
violent Fever, to the great hazard of the Patients life.

And at how easy rates they practice, many of their Bills brought and
complained of to our College, (in some whereof I have seen Fees set down for
Visits) witness, wherein upon a slight disease 5 l. has been demanded for four
days practice. And I have heard one of them brag, that he commonly had from 20
to 100 l. besides presents, for cure of a Clap (as they call it) which might
have been more speedily and securely performed for a manifold lesser sum.

I now come to answer some slight objections; as first, that Physicians are
unskillful in the Art of making Medicines; but sure those that thus object
cannot deny them that ability which Ladies, and almost all ordinary women have;
viz. of distilling of waters of all sorts, making of Syrups, Conserves,
Preserves, Powders, Trochises, Electuaries (and what not) and as many think,
more cleanly and neatly then the Apothecaries; and some of them Ointments, and
Plasters, in which two lies their main skill. Some whereof, to those that
understand not the way of dissolution of bodies, and the nature of their
mixture may be difficult. Yet this defect they may supply by lessening the
number of ingredients, and may perform more with 2, or 3 Simples, then with the
larger Compositions, as it is manifest in the use of Galbanum alone, now used
and found better then Emplastrum Hystericum, consisting of 21 ingredients.

And though as matters now stand, Physicians have not the honor to be counted
superior to Apothecaries in their Art, yet every one knows that they alone are
the prescribers and directors of the Apothecaries in what they know, and are
able to puzzle them in infinite things that concern their Trade, besides in
Chemical preparations, whereof most of them are totally ignorant; and should
Physicians withdraw themselves from their conversation, few pretenders to
Physic would appear more unskillful then they, neither knowing how to deal with
a new Simple, nor a new disease. And for all their pretenses of skill in Drugs,
it is most certain that the State makes Physicians, not Apothecaries, Judges of
them; and the Statute of Henry the VIII. appoints the College Censors upon
Oath, not the Apothecaries, to judge, and condemn false and sophisticated
Medicines.

A second objection wherewith they flatter themselves, is, that the great
expense of time in preparing Medicines will keep Physicians from this course. I
answer, that the Physician needs not spend much more then half an hour in a
day, one with another, on this work, and may faster dispense them then the
Apothecaries to Hospitals, who in an afternoon can provide for 100, nay
sometimes 200 sick men, and carry them to the Hospital, and dispose them to
each single person, which takes up much time, which the Physicians Servants
need not be put to.

A third objection is, that this course, which before 'twas put in practice
they derided, now used is railed at, will undo them. I answer, that if needs,
one or the other must be ruined, it is more reasonable that the Apothecary
should suffer then the Physician, because the one acts but his duty, and for
the public good, but the other are transgressors of the Law, and act above the
Sphere of their skill, and do many prejudices to the precious lives, and
healths of men; and the rather because it is in their own power to prevent this
mischief, by stinting the number of their Servants (as it is in foreign parts,
and in England also, in very many if not most other Trades. Nay our State
allows but a set number of Printers) for they acknowledge themselves, that the
exceeding increase of their number must necessarily in a short time bring them
all to shifting and beggary, and a greater want of skill then what they now
pretend to. But to answer this Objection more fully, I affirm Apothecaries have
made and do make use of several other ways of subsistence; besides their bare
trades (none of which Physicians can use) viz. some of them in this City as
well as in the Country, sell Grocery-wares, and by both together, gain Estates.
Secondly, They barter in Drugs and other Commodities, selling them amongst
themselves, and to other Tradesmen. Furthermore, they are now building a
Laboratory to make all sorts of Chemical Medicines, intending to supply the
whole Nation with them, which must necessarily undo all the Chemists in London;
and whether in time they will not distill Strong Water, etc. (an easy thing
for them to undertake) and by this means to ruin the Corporation of Distillers
of Strong Water, I leave to the said Company to conceive as they please.
However, this I have heard several of them say, that they resolve to buy all
sorts of Drugs, and make a Magazine of them, as well as of the greater
Compositions, at their own Hall; and to sell them to the Members of their
Company, whereby the Trade of the Druggist, must be much lessened, if not
totally over-thrown. So little regard have they of any other employment but of
their own, yet all these things they may do without any offense against the
Laws of the Land. Why then should they, who have so many ways of subsistence,
envy, and usurp unlawfully over the single and lawful way granted Physicians
for their livelihood? Or why should they repine, and revile them for advancing
their Art, the public health and profit, and for maintaining their profession
by their Pens, and actings against themselves, who are the first aggressors in
this division? Which I profess to be the sole end of these present papers, and
heartily wish they may thrive and prosper as long as they conform themselves to
the Laws of Honesty, Reason, and of the Land. Besides, why may not the
Plaisterer more reasonably pretend the same to the Painter, and many other
Trades against one another, as the Brick-layer to the Stone-Cutter, etc. that
they understand the Trade, and that truly too, and that they cannot subsist
without this incroachment? And why should not Surgeons keep open
Apothecaries Shops? but that the same Law limits those Tradesmen, as well as
prohibits the Apothecary from the practice of Physic. And surely the Law and
State have no consideration of those persons subsistence, who conform not to
them; and why should we have of those, subordinate to us, who against all good
Conscience take away from us all that is our due, and continually traduce and
slander us very untruly and designingly?

The last objection (and a strange one) is, that in this private way of giving
Medicines, Physicians may poison their Patients. But this is easily retorted
upon the Apothecaries, who may themselves or their Servants do the like, as
it is known in the poisoning of Sir Thomas Overbury; besides, since it cannot be
otherwise, but that the Patient must trust somebody, it is better to trust one
then many; and if one, better him whose education will teach him better
Morality, (and who has given his Faith (equivalent to an Oath) twice to the
Body of the College; viz. once at his admission as Candidate, and a second time
at his admission as Fellow; whereby he promises in these words, That he shall
give nothing to cause miscarriage, or to destroy, or hinder Conception, nor
Poisons (for of such, good Medicines may be made) to an evil purpose; nay that
he shall not even teach them where there is any suspicion of ill using of them.
Which promise is nothing else but the Oath proposed by Hippoc. to Physicians,
in the entrance to his Books) then such as want these qualifications; and this
seems to be the reason why our Common Law makes it Felony, for any person to
have any one die under his hand, unless he were a lawful Physician. More noble
and generous was the opinion of Alexander the Great, concerning his Physician,
who confidently drank off that Medicine which cured him, though he was before
informed by some friend that 'twas poisoned. Neither can History it self to my
knowledge produce any example, that ever any such foolish Villainy was acted;
Though doubtless many lives might have been saved if the Apothecaries would
have complied with the College, in their proposed Orders for selling Rats-bane.

In the next place I shall recite some few of their devices against those
Physicians in particular that make their own Medicines, as to tell the Patient
that is averse to Chemical Medicines, that the Doctor is Chemical, and that
because for sooth he makes his own Medicines; but to those that affect
Chemical, that the Doctor is but a Galenist, and uses only dull and
ineffectual remedies, as best suits to the sick man's Palate. A second is, that
if this Physician be called into a Patient, the Apothecary will pretend present
danger, and in his absence call in another, or pretend he is abroad when he is
not, or else that the Case requires the counsel of two Physicians; and what
other devices they use, I have not well learned.

Now briefly follow some small Scandals they cast upon the said Physicians, as
first that they do it for want of practice; the falsity whereof is known by
those few that do act this way already, and shortly 'twill be more apparent,
when many more of good practice, singular parts and honesty will do the like,
and certainly nothing but lazyness, ignorance, or want of will to do the utmost
good they are able for the sick, can hinder them from so doing, except age,
infirmity of body, or want of convenience. But suppose it is so as they alledg,
doubtless every man may and ought to use all lawful means for his own
subsistence; and do not our adversaries say they are enforced to it, affirming
that unless they give Medicines of themselves, their acquaintance will go to
another Apothecary who will do it, though one of their Company told me, they
had power by their Charter to restrain practice? Whence (if true) it clearly
follows that the whole Company allows it.

But those Physicians, that for the reasons above, cannot nor will not take
this course, are to be admonished, to do here as the Physicians did in France,
for the good of people, viz. to tell their Patients the prices of Medicines,
and to write their Bills in English, that thereby the Patients may not pay too
un reasonable for them.

I now conclude, having performed this ungrateful task with as much brevity,
mildness of Spirit, and language, as the business would permit (and what the
prudent Statutes of our College require of each of their members, that we shall
by all honest and lawful ways and means prosecute all illiterate Mountebanks
and Impostors, etc. and is no more then the Laws and Charters granted to us
allow, and what we twice faithfully promise (as much an Oath as we can give)
viz. at our admission as Candidate and as Fellow) being obliged to another work
of greater difficulty, and concern, long since promised, having been too long
diverted with sitting my self for my intended practice, and several other
unavoidable Occasions.

Postscript.
REader,
There intervening so small a space from the publication of the first Edition
of these Papers to this second; I thought to have added nothing to it, but to
have put it out only more correct, as the Title intimates; but since some
Sheets were printed off, I have had the opportunity to be informed of some
exceptions taken to them, which being but few, I shall give the Objectors full
satisfaction in. Though one answer might serve for all; viz. that an Apothecary
in the presence of two Physicians, said, that he had told me of all these
Cheats, and indeed they are so common, that whosoever shall be conversant with
them, may observe most of these to be a great part of their discourse. The
First exception against Myrtle-leafs, that they were not showed the Censors for
Sena, a Binder for a Purger; the time I have forgot; the Censors then were, Sir
George Ent, Dr. Goddard, Dr. King, and my Self; the places, Tut-hillstreet, and
some Shops in King Street; Mr. Shellberry being then Master of the Company.
Secondly, As for Mushrooms rubbed over with Chalk for Agaric; this was found by
the Censors in the Oid-Baily, at the Shop of one now dead, and therefore I
shall say no further of it, it being taken notice of by Mr. Evelyn, as is
intimated before. p. 8. A Third is Diascordium made of Honey and Bole-Armeniac,
this was discovered in a Shop at the end of Drury Lane near Holborn, concluded
to be so by Sir George Ent, My Self, and Mr. Richardson then Master of the
Company, and the rest of the Censors and Wardens, easily to be remembered, and
was by them taken away to their Hall; a pound whereof I had, and by dissolution
found it to be no otherwise; what the Apothecaries did with the large Pot of
the remainder I know not. Besides these, I have heard no exception to the whole
concerning frauds.

Now since the Cheaters with the Cheatees, most insist on the objection of
Poison; I add to what has been formerly said, that Poisons are not necessarily
to be given in Medicines alone, but may be given in Broaths, Beer, or any other
thing taken into the Body, and that without the consultation or knowledge of any
Physician, and surely if any one had a mind to Poison his Relations (an Action
abominable to the English Nation) he would rather Act privately himself, having
many opportunities offered to him, rather then by communicating it to others,
make himself obnoxious to their discovery. But if he should communicate to
others, it is more probable he would communicate it to meaner, and more
Mercenary persons, as Apothecaries and Nurses, at a smaller rate and with more
security, then reveal such secrets to Physicians, Men of Honor, and Honesty.
Furthermore, if any man's life be suspected to be taken away with Poison, and by
opening the body it should appear so (and without which it cannot well appear)
the Physician is doubtless as liable to the Law as any other person whatsoever.
So that the Patient has as much moral security from this mischief, as possibly
can be had, or wished in humane affairs. Nay suppose the Physician might be so
corrupted (as to take away his Patients life) he might effect it without the
least suspicion; either by neglecting, or omitting what was necessary, or by
giving him unproper Medicines, for which he could be accused of ignorance or
error only; besides, if he had a mind to poison, he as well as others,
assistants of Visitors, might do it securely enough, by conveying into a
singular Cordial, or any Medicine made by the Shops, and often taken by the
Patient before with good success, a mortal dose without any knowledge or surmise
of any such horrid practice. Add hereunto what an able Surgeon suggested,
that Apothecaries taking upon them the wrapping up, and Embalming of Bodies
(whereby they gain more money then by several years practice upon them; for
their embalming amounts to very great sums) may upon better reason be suspected
of poisoning then any other persons whatsoever conversant among the sick; since
both a particular interest and convenience of concealing may induce them to it.
Lastly, did this Objection carry any weight in it, then neither Physicians,
Surgeons, Apothecaries, Nurses, nor Friends, might administer to the sick;
because all these, as well as Physicians, may clandestinely poison their
Relations. And therefore that an Objection should be raised by such persons
that have more opportunities and advantage (in a thing never proved to be done,
because it is possible only) to hinder so manifest and public a profit as has
been proved; appears to be very weak and absurd.

And having done with the Objections made to others, and to my self also by
some of the Company, with whom I have conversed, who huff'd exceedingly at my
first discourse with them, but departed (seemingly at least) well satisfied, I
am sure fully and without reply answered, and with addition of many other
Cheats besides, which I shall not here mention for the reasons above specified:
I shall here transcribe one gratulatory Letter amongst many sent me by a Divine
well known in Physic, being very comprehensive of most I have said, to the end
the Universities and all learned men may see what is like to become of one of
the three of their noble professions: The words of the Letter are these.

"Your design all ingenious persons approve highly, to whom I have communicated
it. It Is frequent with a Master Apothecary that has served but 2, or 3 years,
nay some scarce one, to take Apprentices for as little, or less time, with a
little more money then ordinarily; and presently they assume the Title of
Doctors, though they understand no more then only to write to a wholesale
Apothecary in your City. And truly their couzenages here in the Country do
exceed those in the City. For I have known 2 s. 6 d. taken for a little Plaster
of Galbanum, and it is usual to make one pectoral Syrup serve for all; as
having occasion to enquire for Syrup of Jujubs, one of them ingenuously
confessed (not knowing what Jujubs were) that he used one pectoral Syrup for
all, a little varying the color sometimes, and this a peculiar receipt of his
own, something differing from any in the Dispensatory."

As for their opposition also in the Country, take this one Example. An eminent
Physician of Gloucester by reason of the Apothecaries Frauds, etc. betook
himself to make his own Medicines, taking for his Servant one that was not a
Freeman of the said City. Who in his Masters absence, and contrary to his
command, sold to an Apothecary a Medicine not to be had, or at least pretended
not to be had in the Town, for a most urgent and necessary use; whereupon the
Apothecaries conspiring together, exhibited a complaint to the Mayor and Court
of Aldermen, requiring of them, that the said Physician (who was a Freeman, and
had lately born the Office of Mayor) might be dis-franchised. Which being not
granted them, they set the whole City into such disorder, that they refused to
attend the Mayor on a Solemn day (as their Custom is, and are bound to do) with
their Flags from their Town Hall to the Church, which the prudence of the
Magistrates for the present qualified. This relation I had from the then Mayor
my Kinsman, in the presence of a London Apothecary.

Next as to the Lies and Scandals of my self, I shall take notice only of those
that concern practice (the rest being but generally false and non-sensical
revilings.) One is, that they most untruly entitle me to have been Physician to
the Lady Anderson, and many others which I never saw or heard of; and that I
soon dispatched them. Another wherewith they make great noise, is, of one Mr.
Staples in Covent Garden, whom they say also I dispatched in few days. The true
relation whereof was this. An able Physician of the College had him in hand for
the Jaundice, about two Months before I was called, whereupon we consulted and
writ a note to the Apothecary; a week after the consultation I was sent for,
and desired to take care of him alone; he was then, besides the Jaundice,
troubled with continual Torments in his Bowels, which were as hard as a Board
(as they say) his Stomach gone, his nights restless, a vehement Cough joined
with a Hectic Fever, having long before had an ill Habit of Body. In this Case
I found him, and in a Months time or thereabouts, I cured his Jaundice,
relieved his Torments, removed the hardness of his Bowels, mitigated his Cough,
but the Hectic Fever continuing he declined; at length another Physician was
called in, who can witness the truth of what was done, and upon the whole we
had good reason to think his Liver to be Apostemated. After which consultation
he had no more of me, telling me he would rely on Kitchen Physic, and after
that I never saw him. Now this being the only relation I have heard in this
kind, I have been the larger to recite it, that thereby the Reader may take an
estimate of their dealing with me in the like reports. The like or worse, some
of them have said of other Physicians, which perhaps hereafter shall be more
fully related with all the Circumstances.

As for their malicious anger, and disadvantageous to themselves, take this one
example; I having prescribed a Plaster for the Head, an Apothecary would not
make it, because prescribed by me; and I have been informed that many of them
agreed they would make nothing for such Physicians as made their own Medicines;
a poor and pitiful revenge, to their own loss and discredit.

Another Scandal is, the fewness of my Medicines. It Is true my Closet is not
open to every bodies Eye, nor have I so many and large Pots and Glasses, or
filled with as good as nothing, or the same Medicine, in several with different
Titles, neither are any of mine gilded to make a show with; yet I dare offer
to view with the best of their Shops, for number of good and really useful
Medicines fit to answer presently any Physicians intentions, for internal
remedies. And this will be attested by some of my learned Colleagues, who have
seen and perused them. Whereas the Shops contain only some general Medicines,
whereof few single Physicians make use of one quarter in their practice, and
upon most particular cases are compelled to prescribe what is not readily
dispensed in the Shops. Others infinuate my seldom change of Medicines. To
which I answer, that where all circumstances are the same, and a good success
follows; I neither do, nor will much vary, the easiest thing in the World to be
done, both to color and taste. For such changes (necessary to be used in
Shop-practice) without manifest reason, clog a Patients Purse and Stomach, may
not suit with the Patients Disease nor Constitution. And doubtless every
Physician writes at first what he conceives most fit, and proper in the Case
proposed; and if this agrees fully to his expectation, runs some hazard in the
alteration, which he is necessitated to do in the Shop-way, for many reasons
beforementioned. Besides, who scruples to take the Medicinal Waters of Epsom,
Barnet, and Tunbridge, many weeks together? or who refuses a constant
unaltered Diet-Drink for some Months, or Years together? And do not
Apothecaries in all Diseases of the Lungs, fly to their pectoral decoction for
all persons, and for the same person at all times, unless perhaps with the
addition of a little China to it?

Some Patients of the middle rank have by these and such like Artifices been
drawn from me, but have soon returned, being undeceived by the fulsomness,
charge, and the non-success of the Shops.

Now these things I have here published to this end alone, that both Physician
and Patient may take notice of them; the former to neglect and slight such poor
Calumnies, and the other to avoid the inconveniences thence arising.

The care I had not to injure any particular person, by naming him in my first
Edition, or this (although I had so many witnesses of credit, as appears by the
Postscript, to justify any thing they can object against) makes me hope they
will leave off their personal animosities, or redress their Crimes, their
Vanity of threatening me with 20000 l. Actions, and affrighting my publishing
this, together with my further proceedings, by their intended assaults and
batteries; which make them appear so ridiculous, that I smile at the first, and
pardon the last, wishing them to consider seriously how the expectation some
have of what they can say for themselves, together with the necessity that
obliges them to it (if possible) were enough one would think, besides their
many large brags of a speedy and full answer (which they have a long time
buzzed about the Town as a present remedy in this exigence) this I say were
enough to make any man conclude them guilty, but it is hoped this Edition will
either work in them an amendment, or bury their confident presumptions, leaving
no man a belief of their innocence. If their promised answer be any thing else
but Libelling, or a Ballad without rhyme or reason, stuffed with falsities and
revilings, such as was only given to Dr. Coxe's Book; I shall return it a
speedy and full answer, and with an addition of far greater Frauds and Abuses,
if they therein desire it.

Feb. 20 69/70. Hatton-Garden.
Page 35. l. 6. read Physician, page 67. l. 12. read then to trust.

FINIS.

