PLEADINGS, In some remarkable Cases, Before the Supreme Courts of SCOTLAND,
Since the Year, 1661.

To which, the Decisions are subjoined.

Cicero in Brut.

Nulla res tantum ad been dicendum prodest, quantum scriptio.

EDINBURGH, Printed by George Swintoun,James Glen, and Thomas Brown: ANNO DOM.
1673.



THE AUTHORS REFLECTIONS Upon these PLEADINGS.
FEw men can expect praise by Writing in this Age, wherein every man almost
does think himself roo'd of that praise which is given to others, and wherein
he is thought to want wit, who will allow others to have any. Former Ages
railed against such as wrote ill, but ours against such as write well; they
were sometimes so unjust, as not to reward merit; but we are so malicious as to
persecute it: Thus we can neither want new Books, nor deserve them; And it has
been well observed, that it would seem now, that none but mad men write or
censure.

This I say, not to regrate my own fate, which has been kind to my Writings
beyond my merit and expectation; and though it had not, yet I am secure, by
want of that merit which can raise envy: But I say it to regrate, that this
should have stopped so many ingenious and learned men in our Profession, from
illuminating our Law, and from informing our Countrymen. The Laws of other
Nations are oppressed, but ours is starved. This made me adventure to write these
few sheets, and I wish that censure which is so much feared by others, might
blunt all its edge upon me; and that I might, like that noble Roman, by leaping
into this gulf, secure my Country against this Plague.

This way of writing has been very happy amongst Strangers, and was not minded
hitherto by us, and what way of writing is preferable to that, which has been
successful, and yet is new? But my design in choosing this way of writing, was
to inform strangers as to our way of Bleading in Scotland, to form to my self a
Style, and to give me an easiness in pleading; for since that is my daily
Employment, it should be my greatest care, Nihil tantum ad been dicendum
prodest, quantum scriptio, says Cicero, the greatest Master of that Art. I
had, by pleading whilst I was yet very young, wrapped my self into errors; which
could not be reformed in the crowd and noise of business, and therefore I
resolved to employ some serious and solitary hours for my own recovery; and
that I might obliege my self to the greater exactness, I resolved to print
what I wrote, hoping, that thus the fear of censure would over awe my
laziness: By printing them, I likewise design to know my enemies, and my
faults, such as censure maliciously will inform me of the one, and such as
censure justly will instruct me in the other.

I designed at first, to have printed many more, but I thereafter considered,
that if these pleased not, they were too many, and if they did please, it was
easy to add: and I resolve to correct in the last, what shall be found to be
justly censurable in the first.

In three of those pleadings, (viz 2. 3. 7.) I have mingled with my own
Arguments, the Arguments of such as pleaded with me; In the rest, I have used
only my own; those three I wrote to be Patterns, because they were not
particularly mine; those which are particularly my own, I wrote for my own
divertisement, and if they bear any proportion to their fellows, they may not
only satisfy the World to which they go, but (which is it may be harder) the
Author from whom they came.

I have been often asked two contrary questions; one was, How I diverted my self,
during all our six vacant Months? and by others, How my Employment gave me
leisure to write? To answer both at once, I conceive that a man in two
afternoons of each vacant week, may write twice more then ever I sent to the
Press; and he must be very busy, who has not these to spare.

When I was too young, to write in my own Profession, my love to my Country
tempted me to write Moral Philosophy, and to adventure on a Play and Poem; but
now that I find, that our Contrymen could be happy enough in these, if their
inclinations were not less then their ablities, I have abandoned those
Employments, and the spring of my Age being past, it is fit those Blossoms
should ripen into Fruit. I promised formerly, never to appear in print, save in
my own Employment; to which promise I have, these five years last by past, been
very faithful; and this being my first Essay in it, some allowance is due to a
beginner.

I must confess, that many in this Kingdom could have exceeded my poor
endeavors, but it were unreasonable for any man, to refuse to fight for his
Country, because another could fight better. And I rather conclude, that
others need not be discouraged, though I meet with no applause; whereas, if any
be allowed me, their greater Parts may expect a greater measure of Fame; and as
I have been very kind to all my Countrey-mens Productions, so I shall be
extremely pleased to see my self outdone in my Countries service. I designed
to let Strangers know how we plead in Scotland, and therefore it was not fit,
that I should have used here the English Language. I love to speak as I think,
and to write as I speak.

No man should be vain, because he can injure the merit of a Book; for the
meanest Rogue may burn a City, or kill a Hero; whereas he could never have
built the one, nor equalled the other. And I confess, that an ordinary Wit may
discover faults in a better Author then I pretend to be: For the Writer being
intent upon all, cannot lay out all that industry upon every line, which
amalicious Critic can; who (like the Wasp) fastens still upon the sore: But a
greater Wit then they said, Ubi plurima nitent in carmine, non ego Paucis
Offender maculis --
Malice likewise and observation can easilier fix upon a printed Pleading, then
upon what flies away from a current Speaker: And a Discourse, animated by the
voice and action of a graceful and sprightly Orator, will supply very much of
that force and beauty, which a cold and indifferent Reader will require in what
comes from the Press.

I am not concerned in the reception of this Book, my cares end with the
printing: and thoughts in an Innocent breast, are as secure as men are, when
storms grumble and roar about the strong Castle where they are lodged. Few ever
displeased, and none ever pleased all. Such as censure too severely those
sheets, are either of my own Profession, or not; those who are not, may fear to
be thought ignorant; those who are, to be thought emulous. But having now
confined all my recreations to my own Employment, if I cannot please others, I
will at least improve my self. But it would ^bate very much the passion of
Authors and Critics, of Advocats and Clients, if all would seriously weigh my
beloved Verse, Hi motus animorum, atque haec certamina tanta,
Pulveris exigui jactu compressa quiescent.


The CONTENTS.
WHat Eloquence is fit for the Bar. An Essay. Page. 1 A Pleading translated out
of French, to inform such as understand not that Language, of the way of
Pleading there. 20 The Authors Answer to the former Pleading, there being no
Answer to it extant in the French, (with additions, page penult.) 26 How far a
man may use his own, though to the prejudice of his neighbors. 34 Whether a
Clause prohibiting to sell, will prejudge Creditors. 40 Whether Tax'd-wards be
liable to Recognition. 52 How far the Borrower in commodato aestimato, is
liable, if the thing be lost, vi majore. 62 How Fury, and lucid Intervals may
be proved. 69 In what case a Sentence may be reduced, by a Reprobator of the
depositions of the Witnesses whereupon the Sentence was founded, and by what
probation Sentences may be reprobated. 78 How far a Disposition, made by a man,
in favors of his Lady, of his whole Estate, is reduceable, as done in lecto
aegritudinis. 91 How far restitutions by way of Justice, are prejudged by Acts
of Indemnity. 104 How far a person unjustly forfeited and restored, may repeat
Annual-rents from the Intrometters. 113 Whether Ships taken after they have
carried Contraband goods, can be declared Prize, (with additions, page last.)
120 Whether it be free to all the Lieges to trade with Foreigners, or if this
Privilege be only competent to Burghs-royal. 131 Whether a Novo Damus secures
against preceding Casualities. 144 Whether a Contract entered into by a Minor,
who averred himself to be Major, and swore never to reduce, be revocable. 153
Against Forfeitures in absence. 164 Whether passive compliance in public
Rebellions, be punishable as Treason. 172 For Maevia, accused of Witchcraft.
185 For Titius, accused before the Secret Council for beating his Wife. 198 How
far Minors may be punished for crimes. 2. Whether Accomplices may be pursued
before the principal Party be found guilty. 3. Whether Socius criminis may be
received awitnesse in Riots and lesser Crimes. 207 An Answer to some Reasons
printed in England, against the overture of bringing into that Kingdom, such
Registers as are used in Scotland. 221
ERRATA.
Page 3. lin. 21. for Silogistice, read Sylogistice. page 8. lin. 17. for
i^terta, read i^certa. Page ibid. lin, 27. for animated by gain, read animated
by conscience, page 9. lin. 14. for effectation, read affectation. page ibid.
lin. ibid. dele the word all. Page 25. lin. 5. read (...) mere mommeries. page
46. lin. 4. for lib. c, read lib. eodem. page 47. lin. 10. read not ^ailzies.
Page ibid. lin. 20. for petitus, read penitus. page 65. lin. 5. read fortui^^s.
page 75. lin. 23. for quem, read quam. page 96. lin. 10. for effect, read,
affect. page 109. lin. 20. for ressamen, read residuam. page 122. lin. 30. read
must not be lawful. page 151. for by the Donator for Gifts of E^cheats and
Non-entries, did take place according to the latter, Read of Gifts of Escheat
and non-entries, which were restricted according to the latter. page 174. lin.
17. for againg, read against. Page 187. lin. 15. read so cruel a revenge.

Read still violated, for violat; confiscated, for confiscat; necessary, for
necessar; ordinary, for ordinar, and the like.

What Eloquence is fit for the Bar. AN ESSAY.
ELoquence is that Art, by which the Orator at once convinces, and pleases his
hearers; and by which he gains same, and obedience. Monarchs govern our
Estates, but the Orator governs our Wills, and Inclinations; the Soldier may
conquer our Lands, but the Orator our Reason; and whilst these owe their empire
to multitudes of men, and accidents, he does alone share in the glory of his
conquest. Amongst all such who stand Rivals for this great honor, the Advocat
seems to have the fairest pretentions; for a Courtiour may by Eloquence, charm
a Lady, he may raily, and say nothing with a Bon grace: a Preacher may in his
retirement, sorm a Discourse, which after much premeditation, meets with no
opposition; but the Advocat must upon Subjects infinitely various, make present
replies to what he did not expect. We come to Church convinced of every thing
our Preacher is to say, we are the converts of his Theme, and not of his
Discourse: but at the Bar, Justice does oftimes side so equally, that a
thousand times the hearers do confess themselves still convinced by the last
speaker. What can the world bestow above what it allows the Advocat, as the
reward of his noble pains? What is so desirable, as to be a Sanctuary to such
as are afflicted, to pull the innocent from the claws of his accuser, to gain
bread for the hungry, and to bring the guilty to a scaffold? What is so noble
as to be depended upon by such as are in prosperity (for Client and Depender,
are the same in all Languages) to be complemented by such as are beautiful,
and admired by such as are learned? And if he design to flatter his vanity,
would it not charm him to see a crowded audience, stand in a profound silence,
with countenances which do mark longing, and reverence, to see every man look
with amazement upon his neighbor, and all upon the speaker; whilst he makes
his learned Judges, bow under the weight of his well expressed Arguments; and
when the Discourse is ended, to have all who see him salute him with respect as
he passes by, and the City choose him for the subject of their kind discourses?

Some Divines and Philosophers have oftimes proved so injust to the Law it
self, as to think it too dull and flat a Science to afford such subtle
reflections, as could be the foundation of an accurat Debate: To whom I design
modestly to return no other answer, then that men cannot judge well what they
do not thoroughly understand. Thus common eyes discover no difference betwixt
the stars, though to judicious and learned persons, they appear in their
distinct classes: I wish they would consider, how much the actions of men
differ, how many circumstances attend every one of these, and how they are
varied by these circumstances; if 24 Letters can by their several conjunctions,
make up such a swarm of words, certainly thousands of Statutes, Customs, and
Cases, must afford much room for new and subtle conclusions; especially since
these have been subtiliz'd and cultivat for many ages, by the finest Spirits of
the world, who have been drawn to prefer this to all other employments, and to
refine themselves to all imaginable hight in it, by the joint hopes of glory,
applause, preferment, money and emulation: -- Stimulos dedit aemulavirtus.


I doubt not but there are many, who will think that Eloquence is not allowable
at the Bar, since those who are to be convinced there, are old and reverend
Judges, whose severe Judgments are not to be moved by a pleasing discourse, but
by solid reason, old Age being little taken with those flourishes, which it
cannot practice: and that though where passions are to be excited, as they are
by the Pulpit, and Theater, or where Statesmen endeavor to reclaim a mutinous
multitude, There, Eloquence is not only allowable, but necessary (Eloquence
being the true key of the passions) yet, since no passions are allowed in
judging, and the object of that excellent Science, being truth, and not humor,
Eloquence should not be allowed in discourses there: And I imagine it will be
objected to me, that at the first institution of our Senate, It was appointed by
an Act of Sederunt, That all Argunning (which term was used in that Age for
arguing) should be Silogistice, and not Rhetorice.

To which my answer is, that Eloquence does not only consist in trops, figures,
and such extrinsick ornaments, whereby our fancy is more gratified, then our
judgment, and our discourse is rather painted then strengthened; but when I
mean that an Advocat should be eloquent, I design thereby, that he should know
how to enliven his Discourse with expressions suitable to the Subject he
treats; that he should choose terms that are significant, and which seem full
of the thing which they are to express, and so lodge his reasons handsomely;
though when his Subject looses him from the strict terms of a Statute, or
Authority, and that he is to debate upon probable Theams, to enquire into
public utility, or to enforce or answer presumptive Arguments, he may use a
more florid and elegant Style: his great design is to conciliat favor to his
Clients Cause; and sure, caeteris paribus, even the learned and most severe
Judges, love to be handsomely informed, and he must be very just, who is not
somewhat bribed by charming expressions. But that the greatest part, of Judges
are taken with that bait, is most undeniable; and as in Marriages we find, that
even those who desire rich Portions, are yet pleased to have a beautiful
Mistress, and the severest man alive will be content to abate somewhat of the
Portion to gratify his fancy; So, I am sure that a Papinian or Ulpian, would,
when the scales seem to stand even, incline to that side upon which Eloquence
stands. Eloquence raises the attention of a Judge, and makes him follow the
speaker closely, so that nothing which he says in favor of his Client passes
unregarded; whereas another may say what is very reasonable, and which if it
were notic'd, might weigh much; and yet the Judge who is not allured to hear
attentively, may easily miss it.

I may likewayes add, that Eloquence thaws (like the Sun) the speaker himself,
who when he is warm and pleased, will thereby have his invention stirred up,
and his memory and all his faculties opened; by which many excellent and
apposite reasons may be suggested to him; as we see the Earth (when warmed)
casts up many new and profitable fruits and herbs, as well as flowers; whereas,
we may daily observe, that a stiff and cold pleader does omit oftimes, even
what he knows. By the same Eloquence also, the hearers being warmed and thawed
have their Judgments thereby opened, and do receive more easily impressions
of what is spoke; and I conceive Eloquence the fitter for Advocats, that others
think it should be banished as that which may bryb and corrupt Judges: and
methinks it should be pardoned some little dangerousness that way, since it
pleases so much another; nor can I think but that Providence has ordained it
for the Bar, to soften, and sweeten humors, which would else by constant
sticking at mere Law, become too rigid and severe; and to divert and ease the
Spirits both of Judges, and Advocats, which are too much upon the rack, and
bended for the service of their Country.

As to our Act of Sederunt, which appointed, that all pleading should be
sylogistice, I need not reflect upon the ignorance of those times, which was
very excuseable amongst us, since it did at that time blind even Italy and
France, who do now smile with pity upon the customs and productions of their
contrymen in that Age: but I conceive, that our Session having been at first
constitute of an equal number of Churchmen and Laics, and the President being
an Ecclesiastic, these Churchmen having the advantage of Learning and
Authority, did form that Act of Sederunt according to their own breeding, by
which they were tied in their Theology-schools to debate by Syllogismes; but
after-ages having found this upon experience to be very unfit and pedantick,
they did not only suffer that Act to run in desuetude, but allowed of this
auguster and more splendid manner of debating, which is now used. And therefore
I conclude, that not only is that way not warranted by the Authority of that
Act, but that it has the less preference because of that Act; for, if that Act
had not been made, we might have been induced to believe that such a way might
take; but now since experience has reformed us from it, and since even the
Authority of a Statute could not maintain it, we must think it was not fit nor
suitable, as indeed it is not, if we consider these few remarks.

All Sciences have an expression which is suitable to them; the Mathematics
require demonstration, and discover themselves to the eye: Medicine, and
natural Philosophy require experiments; Logic, Metaphysick (and alas now
Theology) must wrestle by syllogismes; but the Law argues by a discourse, free,
and unconfined, like those who debate from its principles. It is the nature of
a syllogism to have the subsumption in the second proposition; but in
pleading, the matter of fact must come first, for it stands in the state of the
case, and therefore though it be proper for Lybells (which are but a Sylogisme)
yet it suits not with a Defense: and it were very ridiculous, and impossible,
to wrap up a long story, many circumstances, presumptions and probabilities in
a syllogism; and oftimes there are many defenses propon'd and joined together.
The most ordinar and most allowed way of arguing in Law is by similies,
instances and parallels, and it is improper to drive those into syllogismes:
but he will best confute this way of arguing by Syllogismes, who will sit down
and plead any of the causes I have set down in a Syllogistick way, which if any
man do, I shall renounce pleading, except he take syllogistick debating in a
very large sense; As for instance, in Kenedies case, the pursuer behooved to
say, He who is guilty of forging Writes, should be hanged; but so it is,
Kennedy has done so; ergo, The Defender behoved to deny the minor, and then the
pursuer behooved to say, he who is burdened with such and such presumptions, is
guilty of falsehood; but Kennedy is guilty of these; and there he behooved to
insist upon all the indirect Articles or Presumptions: but how should the
Defender answer all these by a distinguo? or if this way were introduced, how
little would this shorten Debates? and are any creatures alive so litigious as
some Divines, and Philosophers, who debate only by Syllogismes? and so little
do Syllogismes contribute to clear a Debate, that both in their Schools, and
Books, such as use Syllogismes must leave that way, and enlarge themselves by
discourses, when the debate grows warm, and intricat.

Every man in pleading, gratifies his own genious, and some of all kind find
equal success, and applause; but it has been often debated, whether pointed and
short pleading, wherein the Speaker singles out a point, and presses it, or
full and opulent pleading, wherein the Speaker omitts nothing which may prove
advantageous, be preferable: each side has its examples, and patrons.

The full and copious way pleases me; for I not only find that to have been
used by Demosthenes, and Cicero, but Plinius assures us, that it was used by
Caesar and Pompey. At first no man was stinted amongst the Romans in his
pleading, and when they were confined by Pompey, qui primus fraena imposuit
Eloquentiae, the pursuer was allowed two hours, and the defender three; but
this being found thereafter too narrow; Celicius did allow the pursuer six
hours, and the defender nine: Nor can a Pleader be interrupted in France
(where pleading is in its greatest perfection) though he speak three full
days; and if it be a fault, it is peccatum felicis ingenij, the error of great
Wits, whereas short pleading is common to such as pretend to be great Spirits,
and to such as really are mere dunses. Such as use to say much can contract
their discourses, but few who are used to say little, could say much, though
they were willing; and copious pleading is called ordinarily a fault, by such
as have not the wit to commit that crime themselves. We see that in nature, the
largest bodies are ordinarily strongest, the largest fruits most desired; and
many strokes do best drive in the wedge. Nature has produced many things for
mere ornaments; and God has in his Scriptures, used Eloquence and Rhetoric on
many occasions. But there are two Arguments which have determined me to this
choice, the first is, that a short Pleader may leave things unclear, and so
wrong his Client; whereas a full Pleader can only burden too much his hearers,
and so wrong only himself. A narrow, and starved discourse, is like those
slender and small costed bodies, which allow not sufficient room for the noble
parts to exercise their functions, Non enim amputata oration, and abscissa,
Sedlata, magnifica, excelsa, tonat, fulgurat et omnia evertit. The next is,
that even where there is but one Judge, it is uncertain which of all the
Arguments will convince him, but where there are many, as with us, it is very
well known to such as discourse in private with them, upon what has been
pleaded, that some fix upon one argument, some upon another: the best Lawyers
differ often in opinion upon debatable points, and it is great vanity for any
Pleader to think, that he can certainly know what will take, and what not; this
was really not an Appologie for my error, but the motive of my choice, and I
find it to have been formerly used by Plinius the younger, (the greatest
Pleader of his Age, and whose Epistles do of all other books best inform us how
to plead) this great man in his 20 Epistle tells us, that Regulus said to him,
Tu omnia quae in causa putas exequenda, ego jugulum statim video, hunc premo,
respondi, posse fieri, ut genu esset, aut tibia, ubi ille jugulum putaret, at
ego qui jugulum perspicere non possum omnia pertento. But I will not with him
add, Neque enim minus imperspicua, interta fallaciaque sunt judicum ingenia;
Quam tempestatum, terrarumque adjiciam quod me docuit usus, Magister Egregius,
aliud alios movet, varia sunt hominum Judicia, variae voluntates, inde qui
eandem causam simul audierunt, interdum idem, saepe diversum, sed ex diversis
animi motibus sentiunt, Our College of Justice is but one body, in which the
Senators are the judicative faculty, and the Advocats the inventive; and as the
judgment is too rash, when it concludes before the invention has represented
to it all that can be said pro, and con, even so Judges should not decide till
the Advocat (who is animated by gain, applause, and custom to find out, all can
be said) do first lay open all the reasons, and inconveniences which he has in
his retirements prepared: from which also I conclude, that seeing the Advocats
are in place of the invention, that those Advocats who have the fertilest
nvention, are most fitted for that excellent employment.

When I prefer copious pleading, I design not to commend such as are full, but
of Tautologies, and Repetitions, who more Periods, then Arguments, and who,
providing they find many words, care not much how to choose them. I love a
discourse which is beautiful, but not painted; rich but not luxurious;
harmonious but not canting. I am not for many Replies, Duplyes, and Triplyes,
but for one, or two strong, full and clear discourses, and to lengthen those,
by streaching out those unnecessar plyes into one just measure. Nor do I love
long pleading in the Utter-house, where new decisions are not to be made, but
where the old should be followed; and where the multitude of attenders do
require a speedy dispatch, and in the Inner-house it is only to be practiced
where the cause is new, and fertile, and when the Judges desire a full
information; for it is most unfit to vex an unwilling Judge, who will think all
that he loves not to hear, mere effectation, and vanity: but envy must not want
its objections, and where it finds not a fault, it makes one out of the next
virtue; when a man pleads fully, it terms that luxuriency, and when he pleads
shortly, it will have that pass for ignorance, or laziness: and so
inconsistent are backbite^s not only with the truth, but in what themselves
invent, that I have heard one and the same Pleader, blamed for a too luxurient
Pleader by some, and for a lazy Pleader by others, because in the Inner-house
he used the full allowance, and in the Utter-house he thought it impertinent to
make speeches, where a short Defense is only necessary; for either the point
there is clear, as ordinarily it is, and then it is absurd to enforce a
principle; or it is dubious, and then he gets the Lords answer, and may be full
in his information; and why should pains be taken to vex a Lord with debate who
is not to decide?

Far be it from me to prescribe magisterially, a form of pleading to others,
but I love to tell freely my own opinion, and if others did so too, we should
shortly, from comparing Notes, come to know what method were most allowable.

In pleading amongst the Ancients, and yet amongst the French, there was still
a Preface, and Epilogue. Amongst them, he who spoke first, endeavored to
establish his own opinion, and to anticipat what he thought might be urged by
his Adversars; but with us the Pursuer relates only the cause, which he is only
allowed to adorn with a pertinent representation of such circumstances, as may
best, either astruct the justice of his own pursuit, or obviat unnecessary
objections in his Opponent, but without mentioning any thing pro, or con, in
jure. Andyet I have heard the case so prudently stated, as that thereby the
Defender was precluded from many Defenses he designed to propone; for amongst
able Pleaders, most of what is debated, arises from a difference rather in
fact, then Law; and it is a great affront for one to plead, in Law, a long
discourse, which the other will grant to be all true, when the discourse is
ended: And yet I have heard some concede all was said, and seem to difference
the present case from the case pleaded, when indeed there was none, but when
this was done merely to evite a discourse which could not be answered. After
the pursuer has stated his pursuit, and enlarged himself upon all the
favorable circumstances which we call the merits of the cause, the defender
propones his defense, but urges it little, till he know if it be contraverted;
but if the relevancy of the Defense be contraverted by the Replyer, in a full
discourse, then the Duplyer makes a sull answer, and ordinarily these terminat
the debate, and after that the discourses become too thin and subtle, and the
Judges weary, albeit some causes because of their intricacy, or of new
emergents, require more returns.

In these Replies, or Duplyes, our custom allows a short Preface upon solemn
occasions, in which the rule seems to be, that these Prefaces should not be too
general and such as are applicable to any Debate; as when the speaker excuses
his own weakness or recommends justice to the Judges, or such common places;
but it should run upon some general principle, which though it be not a
concluding Argument, yet tends much to clear that which is the subject of the
Debate: as in the French pleading I have translated, the Pleader being to
enforce that a civil death purifies the condition, Si sine liberis decesserit,
he begins with a Preface, which shows, that the Law has a great empire over
nature, and plyes its events to its civil designs; whereas I being to plead
the contrair, I do insist to clear in general, that matters of fact, escape
the regulation of Law, and that Law is tied to observe nature.

The Discourse it self does consist of these Arguments, whereby the Defender
maintains his Defense, or of these Answers by which the pursuer elids those
Arguments; and to range them appositly into their own places (so that such
Arguments as have contingency, may be set together) is a mark of a clear, and
distinct wit: and when Arguments are so ranged, each of them adds strength to
another, and they look like men well marshaled into distinct troops; whereas
Arguments straggling out of that place where they ought to have been placed,
seem unpleasant, and irregular, and will hardly be expected where they are; for
instance, in pleading against the Viscount of Stormont, all the Arguments which
can be pressed, are either such as endeavor to prove, that the clause of
Stormonts Infeftment is contrary to the nature of Dominium or Commerce, and
after that the Pleader had past first Dominium, and then Commerce, to return to
those Arguments, which arise from the nature of Dominium, were irregular; for
that were to return to show what he had forgot. And from this I conclude in
reason, that all Arguments founded upon that same general principle, should be
pleaded together, and in the ordering of these generals, I would choose to
begin with those which clear best either matter of fact, or which tend most to
illuminat the subject of the discourse; and thus the controversy in Stormonts
case, being, whether the Proprietor of tailzied Lands, may alienat these Lands
if he be prohibit to alienat by the first Disponer, or at least if they may be
comprys'd from him; the first class of Arguments to be urged, should be these
which tend to prove, that this Prohibition is inconsistent with the nature of
Dominium, and Propriety, for these clear best the nature of Propriety which is
the chief subject of the debate.

He who answers, uses with us, to repeat the Arguments which he is to answer
all with one breath; before he begin to make distinct answers to them; and this
proceeds as I conceive, from the Aristotelick way of arguing in the Schools,
wherein he who maintains the Thesis proposed, must repeat the Argument, before
he answer it: this method I love not, for it consumes unnecessarily much time,
and sure it wearies Judges to hear the same Argument twice, yea thrice,
repeated; for first, the enforcer does repeat them, then the answerer does
repeat them, both generally at the entry of his discourse; and thereafter he
must repeat each Argument when he is to make a special answer; and I should
think it much more natural to repeat and answer each Argument a part,
ordinarily the answerer follows in his answers the method of the proponer; yet
sometimes he chooses rather to class the arguments as he pleases, and to
answer accordingly. If the Defender design to answer the Arguments brought
against his Defense, and to add new ones to astruct the reasonableness of his
pursuit, he uses first to urge his own Arguments, and then to answer what is
alleged for the Defender.

Whether the strongest, or weakest Arguments or Answers should be first
insisted on, was much debated amongst ancient Orators; some thought the weakest
should be first urged, because the Judges were then freshest, and might
possibly by weariness slight what was delayed: others thought fit to leave with
the Judges the strongest Arguments, that they might be fresh with them when
they were to decide: this I think is arbitrary, and they are but weak Judges,
who do not weigh all equally; but I think it advisable for a young Pleader, to
urge the strongest Arguments first, that he may thereby conciliat favor to
himself, and raise the attention of his Judges, and in all cases where the
cause seems unfavourable the strongest Arguments are first to be used, for the
same reason, and there seems little reason to leave the strongest Arguments
last, if the Cause be not presently to be decided: but where many Answers are
to be made to one Argument, the weakest is ordinarily first made and as it were
overlye, but the strongest is reserved last, because it is most to be insisted
upon: and I think it most natural to urge the weakest Arguments first, because
our discourse should like our selves, and like our studies, grow from strength,
to strength, and from less to more, but sometimes one Argument grows from
another, and then there is no place to doubt, and always the most mysterious
Argument is to be left last, because it is to be presumed, that then the cause
is best understood, and mysterious Arguments come to be most in season, when
Judges have fully mastered the case.

The Epilogue with us is ordinarily, In respect whereof the Defense ought to be
admitted, or repelled, etc. But in some solemn cases, the Pleader may
recapitulat shortly his strongest Arguments, or may urge the favor and merits
of the Cause; and I should love to press this merit rather here then in the
preface; for favor is but an accessory of Justice, and the consequent should
not preceed its cause.

Action, was of old one of the chief ornaments of Speech, under which was
comprehended, gesture, and voice, all which were accomodated to the Orators
design, when they spoke to multitudes of ignorant people, to whom, tears or
ejaculations pleaded more, then reason did; for that they understood better, as
more obvious to that sense by which they were governed: but now the world is
become too wise to be taken by the eyes, albeit I confess these add grace,
though not force.

With us, action is possibly too violent, which I ascribe both to the violent
temper of our Nation, prefervidum Scotorum ingenium, and to the way of our
debate, for Fire sparkles ordinarily from the collision of two bodies, one
against another, some debate for interest only, some for honor, but Advocats
for both; yet hardly can he raise passion in others, who shows it not himself;
and all men presume, that he who is very serious, and earnest to convince
others, is the convert of his own Argument. I confess, that passion does
disorder very much the kindled speaker, and that he can hardly clear well his
discourse who is himself perturb'd, and we know the design of an angry man no
more, then we can see clearly the bottom of troubled waters: and therefore it
were very advisable, that hot and choleric spirits, should calm themselves
before they adventure to enter upon a serious debate; but such as are bashful
are the better to be warmed, and to loose prudently, a little of their
indiscreet modesty; melancholic persons likewayes who are ready to loose
themselves in their wandering thoughts, need to be a little fretted, for
thereby they become intent, and finding themselves somewhat piqu'd, they are
gathered into their subject. He who fears to be interrupted, will ordinarily
stammer, for he will be more busy in thinking upon the being interrupted, then
upon what he is to say; and there, passion does well also, seeing then he
considers nothing but what he is speaking.

Railing, is of all other qualities, the worst in a Pleader, for it makes men
judge that his cause needs it, when he rails against his adverse Client, and
that he finds himself worsted, when he rails against his adverse Advocat: but
some times he is obliged to found upon matters of fact, which though they have
much of reflection in them, yet are necessar truths; and sometime the Law by
which he pleads, obleidges him to terms, which may seem rude to strangers, and
in both these cases, not to be severe, were prevarication; though I have known
Advocats very innocently condemned for calling the late times Rebellion, and
such as were forfeited Traitors, though in that they spoke their art, and were
not obliged to speak their thoughts: and there are few Clients, who when they
loose the Cause do not discharge a great part of their fury, upon these
Advocats by whom they conceived themselves overthrown.

Too subtle speading convinces few, because few understand it, and it is
applauded by few, because few can reach to the practice of it; and in young men
it may be interpret to be but affectation, or notionalnesse, though in such as
have by long practice established their own reputation, it gains glory. Many
citations also are to be avoided by all in pleading (though they are necessar
in writing) especially in young men, for in these they are thought but common
place-wit; and yet young men do most use that way, because they think thereby
to supply their own want of authority; and because they know notmany parallel
cases, and are not yet so intimatly acquaint with their subject, as to draw
Arguments out of its retired intrails. Many parentheses are to be avoided, for
they interrupt the thread of the discourse, and make it knotty, and mysterious,
though these weeds grow ordinarily in the richest soil; and are the effects of
a luxuriant invention. Frequent repetition of the ordinar compellations, such
as my Lord Chancellor, or my Lord President, are to be likewayes shunned.

Before I propose what Phrase, or Style is fit for a Pleader, it is fit to tell
that the two usual styles known by distinct names, are the Laconick or short
sententious Style, and the Asiatick, or profuse and copious Style; the first
was used by the old Roman Legislators, as is clear by reading the Digests; but
when the Empire was transferred to Constantinople in Asia, the Empire changed
its Style with its Seat; and we find that Profluvium asiaticum in the Codex,
and Novels. Yet all the Grecian and Roman Pleaders, even in their purity, used
a full copious Style, as is clear by Demosthenes, Cicero, and others, and
though Legislators or Judges should use the Laconick, yea the other must still
reign at the Bar. A Barrister likewayes should rather study not to want words
then to stick at the choosing fine ones, and the generality of hearers are more
displeased at a gap, or breach in a discourse, then can be recompensed by a
multitude of these fine words or sentences which occasioned these gaps, whilst
the speaker waited for these delicat words which he found after that stop; and
as I have known many admired for a fluent speaking of pitiful stuff, so I
have known others loose the reputation of Orators by studying in their greener
years too much finenesse; and I would advise my friends who begin to speak,
first to study fluency, and when they are arrived at a consistency there, they
may easily refine the large stock they have laid together.

Many who are not friends to the Bar, inveigh much at the canting terms which
they say is used there; but these do not consider, that every Science has its
particular terms, and it were pedantry to substitute others in their place; and
as a man looks ridiculously in a woman's habit, or a woman when attired like a
man; a Soldier under a Gown, or a Churchman in buff; So it is as ridiculous
to hear a Member of Parliament or a Councellor speak of affairs in terms of
hunting, as it is for a Lawyer to speak in his terms of other things; and I
laugh as much to hear Gentlemen speak in their canting terms of hunting,
hauking, dancing, as they can do to hear me speak in the idiom of my Trade:
and to speak like a Gentleman at the Bar, is to speak like a pedant; pedantry
being nothing, but a transplanting of terms from what they were fit for, to
that to which they are most unfit, and I love equally ill, to hear civil Law
spoke to in the terms of a Stile-book, or accidental Latin, (as is most
ordinar) as to hear the genuin words of our Municipal Law, forced to express
the phrases of the Civil Law and Doctors.

It may seem a paradox to others, but to me it appears undeniable, that the
Scottish idiom of the British Tongue is more fit for pleading, then either the
English idiom, or the French Tongue; for certainly a Pleader must use a brisk,
smart, and quick way of speaking, whereas the English who are a grave Nation,
use a too slow and grave pronunciation, and the French a too soft and effeminat
one. And therefore, I think the English is fit for harranguing, the French for
complementing, but the Scots for pleading. Our pronunciation, is like our
selves, fiery, abrupt, sprightly, and bold; Their greatest wits being employed
at Court, have indeed enricht very much their Language as to conversation, but
all ours bending themselves to study the Law, the chief Science in repute with
us, has much smoothed our Language, as to pleading: and when I compare our Law
with the Law of England, I perceive that our Law favors more pleading then
theirs does, for their Statutes and Decisions are so full and authoritative,
that, scarce any Case admits pleading, but (like a Hare killed in the seat) it
is immediately surprys'd by a Decision, or Statute. Nor can I enough admire, why
some of the wanton English, undervalue so much our idiom, since that of our
Gentry differs little from theirs, nor do our commons speak so rudely, as these
of Yorkshire: as to the words wherein the difference lies, ours are for the
most part, old French words, borrowed during the old League betwixt our
Nations, as Cannel, for Cinnamon; and servit, for Napkin; and a thousand of the
like stamp; and if the French Tongue be at least equal to the English, I see
not why ours should be worse then it. Sometimes also our fiery temper has made
us for have, express several words into one, as stour, for dust in motion;
sturdy, for an extraordinar giddiness, etc. But generally, words significant ex
instituto, and therefore, one word is hardly better then another; their
Language is invented by Courtiers and may be softer, but ours by learned men,
and men of business, and so must be more massy and significant: and for our
pronunciation, beside what I said formerly of its being more fitted to the
complexion of our people, then the English accent is; I cannot but remember
them, that the Scots are thought the Nation under Heaven, who do with most ease
learn to pronounce best, the French, Spanish, and other Foreign Languages, and
all Nations acknowledge that they speak the Latin with the most intelligible
accent, for which no other reason can be given, but that our accent is natural,
and has nothing, at least little in it that is peculiar. I say not this to
asperse the English, they are a Nation I honor, but to reprove the petulancy,
and malice of some amongst them who think they do their Country good service,
when they reproach ours. -- Nec sua dona quisque recuset.


I know that Eloquence is thought to have declined from Cicero's time, and it
has so indeed, if with pedants, we make Cicero the Standart, for nothing can be
straighter then its square; but I conceive that the world does like particular
men, grow wiser and learneder, as it grows old; but of all things Eloquence
should improve most, because of all things it rypens most by practice;
experience discovers daily more, and more of the humor of such whom we are to
convince; and the better we know them, we can convince them the easier. By
experience also we learn to know, what forms, and sounds please most, and every
Pleader and Orator adds some new inventions to that of the last Age, and if one
being added to twenty make twenty a greater number, then the Eloquence of this
Age, being added to that of the former, must make this Age more eloquent then
the last. But I know such as envy the Orators of the present Age, do still
endeavor to mortify them, by admiring such as are dead, who in their time met
with the same measure; death also removes men from being our rivals, and so
from being envied by us; yet we should remember, that even Cicero, and
Demosthenes did complain of the same in their Age, though they far exceeded
their predecessors.

Some may think that the Eloquence of Rome, and others behooved to be higher
then ours, because the multitude were in these Commonwealths absolutely
governed by it, and the greatness of their reward for Eloquence, exceeding
ours, their Eloquence behooved to do so too. But I am formally contrary, for
since our Judges are wiser, and more learned then the commons, there must go
more art to convictions now, then was requisite then, and though we have not
Kings, nor Commonwealths to defend, as those ostimes had, who pleaded in the
Roman Senate; yet we may show as much Eloquence upon lesser occasions, as one
may cut finer figures upon Steel, then upon Gold; it is the intricacy of the
case, and not the greatness of the pryze, which makes the value of the
pleading, and generous Spirits are more animated by difficulty, then gain. We
have also more Laws, Parallels, and Citations to beautify our discourse, then
they had, and want none of their topics; so that though our spirits did not
equal theirs, yet in our pleadings we could not but exceed them. Nor do I value
much the opinion of those, who think the Spirits of such as lived in
Commonwealths were greater, because freer then ours, who live under
Monarchies, and being sub^ects to none, they had greater confidence then we can
have. This is but a fancy, invented by such as live under that form of
Government: but I have not seen any Switzer, or Hollander, so Eloquent as the
English, or French; and it enlivens me more to see Kings, and Courts, then to
see these busy, and mechanic Nations: nor can I think any spirit can excel
much in any one thing, where equality is designed, and where all such as offer
to rise above the vulgar, are carefully deprest, and sunk down to a level, as
they are under Commonwealths.

For my own part, I pretend to no bays; but shall think my self happy, in
wanting, as the fame, so the envy which attends Eloquence: and I think my own
imperfections sufficiently repaid by fate, in that it has reserved me for an
Age, wherein I heard, and daily hear, my Colleagues plead so charmingly, that my
pleasure does equal their honor.

A Pleading translated out of French, to inform such as understand not that
Language of the way of Pleading there.
An Estate in Land being dispon'd to a Woman, and another being substitute, in
case she should die without children of her own body; She being condemned for
incest, and burnt only in Effigy, the question is, Whether by that civil
death, the condition be purified, as well as if she were naturally dead, and if
the person substitute has by that civil death, right to the Estate, without
waiting for her natural death.
In favors of the person thus substitute, it was Pleaded.
ALbeit matters of Fact do depend entirely upon Nature, and cannot submit
themselves to the authority of politic Laws, Eaquae sunt facti, nulla
constitutione infecta fieri possunt; yet Law considers them only in so far as
they are necessar and useful for humane Society, and upon that account forces
this Maxim to suffer many exceptions. Thus bonae fidei possessor, is per
actionem publicianam, made to have right by an imaginary and fictitious
possession, to that which he never really possessed. Jus postliminii, makes us
believe him who is a prisoner of War, never to have been taken prisoner. And
Lex Cornelia does presume, that these who did test whilst they were captives,
did dye in the City to which they belonged, though they dyed really abroad in
their captivity. All which instances prove, that the Law does not subject it
self blindly to Nature, but that it can ply matters of Fact to its own designs,
and can by an innocent cheat, adjust them to public utility and advantage.

This foundation being thus established, let us examine this condition (if she
dye without children) and let us try if it be so bound up to a matter of Fact,
as that it cannot submit it self to the just and politic fictions of the Law.

It is certain, that albeit all Conditions be ordinarily mere matters of Fact,
yet this Condition which depends entirely upon the intention of the Testator,
must owe its form to his will; and seeing he did fix his first desires and
designs upon this Woman and her Heirs, and did call the person substitute for
whom I plead, but in the third place, not to suspend and differr his
liberality, but to obliege my Client to wait, because she and her Heirs did
preceed them in the order of his inclinations: therefore, when Death or Fortune
do state her and her Heirs in such a condition, that neither of them can expect
the succession, there is no doubt but his will does immediately transport the
effects of his liberality to the person substitute, since the persons who
should preceed them, are by the Law removed out of the way. Nor was it the
intention of the Testator to enrich the Fisk any more, then if he had adjected
a Condition relating nothing to the purpose, Veluti, si Navis ex Asia venerit.
From this likewayes it follows, that as succession is one of the ways whereby
we acquire in Law civil Rights which depend upon the Law, and which the Law
does not allow to any but to its own Citizens, Qui habent Testamenti factionem
passivam; So this condition, Si sine Liberis decesserit, is not so entirely and
absolutely a matter of Fact, but that Law and Fact are therein mixed together;
and therefore, albeit the death of the first Heir without Children, is
regularly understood according to the proper and natural signification of
natural Death, yet Lawyers have extended this to civil Death, and have purified
the condition by deportation and other kinds of civil Death. As is clear, l. ex
facto, 17. ex facto, ff: ad senatusc. trebel. Ex facto tractatum memini,
rogaverat quaedam mulier filium suum, ut si sine liberis decessisset
restitueret haereditatem fratri suo, is postea deportatus, in insulam liberos
susceperat; quaerebatur igitur, an fidei commissi conditio deficisset, nos
igitur hoc dicemus, conceptos quidem ante deportationem, licet postea edantur
efficere, ut conditio deficiat: post deportationem vero susceptos, quasi ab
alio, non prodesse, maxim cum etiam bona cum sua quodammodo causa fisco sint
vindicanda.

This woman is condemned to be burned and strangled, she had no Children, and
can expect no divorce; her flight has not only banished her out of the Kingdom,
but that sentence that has revenged her crime on her memory, and picture, has
rendered her servam penae, the unfortunat prey of an unfamous Gibbet; How can
she then but be repute dead, seeing she is expunged out of the number of
Subjects? and how can that Law which has execute and killed her, belie so far
its own Authority as to believe her alive, after it has taken so much pains to
make us believe she is dead? and after her civil death, how can it conserve for
her a faculty of bearing Children, which may fulfill a civil condition? I
confess that deportation is not still compared to natural death, and that the
liberty which a banished man carry's with him to a foreign Country, does
preserve for him all the advantages of the Law of Nations, Ita ut ea quae juris
civilis sunt, non habeat, quae vero juris gentium sunt habeat, l. 17. ff. de
penis. But on the contrary, since the being a slave devests man of his
humanity, and ranks him amongst beasts, l. 2.. 2. ff. ad l. aquil. the Law can
no more consider him, but as a piece of movables, living and animated, as a
reasonable tool belonging to his Master; So that having no head, nor will, but
his Masters, therefore if the Law allow him to fulfill any condition, that is
upon his Masters consideration, and not his own. A person condemned is the
slave of his punishment, Servus penae, magis enim penae quam fisci servus est,
l. 12. ff. de jure fisci: and therefore, the Law reputes him dead, since that
Gibbet to which it ties him can communicate nothing to him, but a cruel death,
and consequently he can fulfill no condition, l. 17.. Si quis rogatus ad
senatusctrebel. Si quis rogatus fuerit filiis suis, vel cui ex his voluerit
restituere haereditatem Papinianus, l. 8. responsorum etiam deportato ei
tribuit eligendi facultatem; cui liber factus fidei commissum restitui velit,
sed si servus penae fuerit constitutus, nullo ante concepto filio, jam parere
conditioni non poterit decessisseque sine Liberis videtur; sed cum decedit
electionem illam quam Papinianus deportato dedit, huic dari non opportet.

Law imitats Nature, and uses the same authority over a man, as he is sociable,
that Nature exercises over him, as he is natural: And hence it is, that the Law
governs and ^egulats Societies for its own advantage, and as it can beget
Children, and people Families by Adoptions; So by the same power it can cut off
unnecessary members from Families by exhereditations, and can kill them by
condemnatory sentences, Servus penae in omni jure, vere ac semper similis est
mortuo: Cujac. obser. l. 3. cap. 10. Law then may justly bury a Criminal in the
unfamous sepulcher of a cruel servitude, which takes from him his civil life
with his liberty, and can tie him to a long death and excessive torment, which
may draw out his torture to a very long continuance, and make him, as Petronius
speaks, pass but for the pitiful vision, and horrid shadow of his own person.

We must then confess, that that Sentence which confiscats his Body and Goods,
does at the same time confiscat his Person and Liberty. It is the Sentence
which kills him, and his natural death following thereafter does but execute
that Sentence; and as we say, that a Robber has killed a Passenger when he gave
him the mortal wounds, though he did not then dye, Tunc occidisti cum
vulnerabas, l. si ita ff. ad l. aquil. So by the same reason, the Judge does
kill a Criminal the very moment that he pronounces the Sentence, and he truly
dies by the Sentence, and not by the Execution, l. 29. ff. de pen. Qui ultimo
supplicio damnantur statim and civitatem, and libertatem perdunt, itaque
prae-occupat hic casus mortem, and nonnunquam longum tempus occupat, quod
accidit in personis eorum, qui ad bestias damnantur, saepe etiam adeo servari
solent post damnationem, ut ex his in alios quaestio habeatur. And as the
authority of the Law may beget a Citizen before his birth, and receive a
Posthume into the Commonwealth before he come out of the womb, Post humus pro
nato habetur: So its Empire may take away the life a long time before a man
die. It may preveen his death, and chase him out of the world before death
overtake him, which is likewayes confirmed per l. si quis 6.. Sed and si quis
ff. de injust. sed and si quis fuerit capite damnatus, vel ad bestias, vel ad
gladium; vel alia pena quae vitam adimit, testamentum ejus irritum fiet,
non-tunc cum consumptus est, sed cum sententiam passus est, nam penae servus
efficitur. Let us now see if this way of reasoning drawn from the Roman
customs, can be brought home to our French Practique.

Lawyers who designed to found the principles of their true Philosophy, upon
maxims, real, solid, and constant, were too clear-sighted to force their Laws
to discharge their revenge upon an Image, and an Apparition, to take the shadow
for the Body, and in supposing the name of a Criminal for his person, thereby
to challenge their Judges of want of power and precipitancy; and therefore they
did not allow, that a person who is absent should be condemned, and that the
Law should in vain spend its thunder upon those whom it could not reach: l. 1.
ff. de requirend: reis. Since then the Law of the Romans, could not condemn
capitally a Criminal who was contumacious, it was easy to them to believe that
a prisoner who was present and fettered, did instantly receive that death to
which he was condemned. But since our Statutes ordain a painted and imaginary
execution, either our Statutes and Customs must confess their weakness, and
quite these as a mere mumries, or else they must necessarily obliege us to
believe these appearances to be realities, and essay to verify these civil
lies, in forcing us to believe that these painted executions are real; that the
originals of those infamous pictures are no more alive, and that res judicata
pro veritate habetur.

If the power of a Roman Praetor was sufficient to beget a child in spite of
truth, and nature it self, Plane si denuntiante muliere, negaverit ex se esse
pregnantem, tametsi custodes non miserit, non evitabit quominus quaeratur, an
ex eo mulier pregnans sit, quae causa si fuerit acta apud Judicem, and
pronuntiaverit cum de hoc agetur, quod ex eo pregnans fuerit nec ne in ea causa
esse ut agnoscere debeat, sive filius non fuit sive fuit, esse suum, l. 1.:
ult. ff. de agnosc. liber. or may force a Mother to disown her Child, which is
really hers; Sive contra pronuntiatum fuerit, non fore suum, quamvis suus
fuerit, placet enim ejus rei Judicem jus facere, l. seq. ff. eod. By much more
reason, may a general Law and Custom universally received, force subjects so
far to obey their Judges, as to believe that a woman strangled and burnt has
lost her life upon the scaffold, where she has been so publicly and tragically
executed.

It is then more just to presume, that this Woman who is condemned is dead
without Children, and that her execution has purified the condition, then that
the pursuer should attend her death, should search out her wandering person,
which lurks under so much shame, and pursue her in her flight and banishment
through Countries, which are either unknown, or in enmity with ours; and
therefore I conclude, that it is most just to put the pursuer in possession of
the Estate.

I have essayed thus to answer the former Pleading, because there is no Answer
to it extant in the French, and because such Cases may with us frequently
occurr.
THe greatest glory of Art is, that it can imitate Nature; and every thing
which forces Nature, is hated by men, as folly and affectation; but amongst all
those Arts which follow Nature, Law is the chief, for it being the chief
product of Reason, it endeavors most to resemble Nature, Reason and Nature
being in man the same thing varied under diverse expressions, and Reason being
man's Nature. And thence it is, that the Law plyes all its constitutions to the
several degrees of Nature, and observes it exactly before it begin to form a
Statute relating to it, Propter naturam statuitur aliter, quam statueretur
alias, gl. ad. l. Julianus, ff. si quis omissa causa; though it appoints that
consent should obleidge, yet it excepts Minors, because of the frailty of their
Nature; though it appoints murder to infer death, yet it pardons such as are
Idiots, or furious; it does in dubious cases prefer that interpretation which
is most suitable to the nature of the thing contraverted, it presumes illud
inesse, quod ex natura rei inesse debet: and it has very well ordained, that ea
quae dari impossibilia sunt, vel quae in rerum natura non sunt, pro non
adjectis habentur, l. 135. ff. de reg. jur. Since then there is nothing so
unnatural as to force us to believe, that a person who is really alive, is
truly dead, and that the Children which a woman may bring forth shall not be
her Children; I see not with what appearance of success the Substitutes can in
this case aspire to the succession now craved. Nature has a fixed being, and
men know what it determines by consulting their own breasts, and think
themselves happy under the protection of what is sure, and determined; but if
it were allowed that Law might vary, and that Lawyers might invent such
fictions as these, and by them impose upon others, who not being of their
profession could not follow all their subtilties, and windings; then Law should
become a burden, and be esteemed an illusion. And I imagine I hear those
amongst whom this woman lives, laugh at this discourse, which would force them
to believe that she is dead; and I am sure that any country-clown may refute
it, by presenting the woman, as one refuted a wise Philosopher, who maintained,
That there was no motion, without any other Argument, then by walking up and
down.

The question then being, whether the condition, si sine liberis decesserit, is
purified by a civil death, and if immediately after she is burnt in effigy, she
can be said, sine liberis decessisse, so that the person substitute may
immediately succeed, and exclude any Children she shall thereafter bear, or if
the Substitute must attend her natural death.

That the Substitute cannot succeed immediately after her being burnt, but that
any future children would seclude him, so that a natural only, and not a civil
death, purifies the condition, is contended by these reasons; First, the
question being, Whether this condition, si sine liberis decesserit, respects
natural, or civil death; we must interpret the word death, so as that we follow
the more genuine and natural signification; and I am sure, the ordinary and
genuine interpretation of death, is a natural and not a civil death. 2. If we
look to the meaning of the Disponer, which is the next rule to be (...) in the
interpretation of dubious and equivocal words, we will find, that it is hardly
imaginable, that the Disponer dreamed of a civil death; and it is most certain,
that any man, especially who was not a Lawyer, would never have figured a civil
death; nor is it denied, for fictio is men's Legis, non disponentis. But how
unsuitable were it to natural equity and the principles of Law, that the will
of the Disponer should not regulat what is dispon'd? or why should the Law
dispose upon what it did not bestow? 3. Words are to be explained in a
Disponers Will, as the Disponer would probably have explained them himself, if
the meaning had been contraverted at the time of making the Disposition; But so
it is, that if it had been proposed to the Disponer, whether the Children of
the woman institute should be cut off, in case their Mother should commit a
crime? It is probable that he would not have punished poor Infants, for a guilt
to which they were not accessory; and the Law was never more generous, then
when it said, Non competere beneficium inofficiosi testamenti post-humis, cum
exhaeredationis causam comittere nequeant, nec debent alieno odio praegravari,
l. 33.. 1. C. de inoff. test. Nor is it imaginable, that the Testator would
have taken from them what he designed, because they sell, without their own
guilt, in a condition, which made that which was but liberality to become
charity: and since he designed this for their Mother and them, to supply their
wants, it is not imaginable he would have taken it from them, when their wants
were greatest. The Children would likewise still continue to be nearer to the
Disponer, then the Substitute, Nam jur a sanguinis nullo jure civili adimi
possunt; and since the blood-relation gave at first the rise to that
nomination, it is probable, that the effect would not be taken away whilst the
cause continued. 4. If she can have Children after her being burnt in effigy,
she cannot be said decessisse sine Liberis, upon her being burnt in effigy;
but I subsume that she may have Children, and such too as the Law would
acknowledge to be Children: for by the 22. Nov. cap. 8. Marriage is declared
still to subsist, notwithstanding of any interveening criminal sentence, for
though by the old Law, condemned persons pro nullis habebantur, and so the
Marriage was dissolved, yet by that excellent Constitution this was abrogat, Si
enim ex decreto judiciali, in metallum aliquis, aut vir, aut mulier, dari
jussus esset, servitus quidem erat and ab antiquis Legislatoribus sancita and
ex supplicio illata, separabatur vero matrimonium, supplicio possidente
damnatum, sibique servientem. Nos autem hoc remittimus, and nullum ab initio
been natorum ex supplicio permittimus fieri servum, neque enim mutamus nos
formam liberam in servilem statum, maneat igitur Matrimonium hoc nihil tali
decreto laesum. Since then her husband continued to be so still, and that the
Law would acknowledge the Children to be hers, would not the Law contradict it
self, if it should say that she died without Children, and yet should
acknowledge that these were her Children? 5. Post-humus pro jam nato habetur,
ubi de ejus commodo agitur; and therefore, by the same reason of justice and
equity, the Law should be so far from presuming, that there can be no Children
born after the mother is condemned, that if she shall bear any, it should
rather presume them to be already born, to the end they may not be prejudged of
the succession which would be otherwise due to them; and if posthumus habetur
pro jam nato, ubi agitur de ejus commodo, much more should he be presumed
natus, ubi agitur de damno vitando; for we are much more favorable in damno
vitando, quam lucro captando. 6. By the Roman Law, auth bona damnatorum, C. de
bon. prescript. the Goods of condemned persons were not confiscat in prejudice
of the ascendents, or descendents, to the third degree, except only in the case
of lese-majestie. If then the crime be not able to seclude Children, it follows
necessarily, that Children quo ad their succession, are in the same case as if
the crime had not been committed, and if the Mother had committed no crime,
here there had been no place either for the Substitute, or for this question.
It is just that delict a s^^s debent (...) authors; and that since punishment
is only justified by the preceding guilt, that the punishment should not
exceed the guilt, and that the right designed for the Children by the first
Disponer, should not be taken away from them by the Mothers fault: this were
also to add affliction to the afflicted, to make poor Infants loose with their
Mother, their patrimony, and to impoverish them most, at an occasion, when to
give them were charity.

I confess that Law sometimes does recede from Nature, and invents pretty
fictions, as in the cases proposed of jus postliminij, adoptionis, and Legis
Corneliae; but it does so, very sparingly; nor are these fictions ever allowed,
except where they are introduced by an express Law; for the Law thought it not
reasonable to allow every Judge or Lawyer a liberty to coin his own caprice
into a fiction, lest so, unreasonable fictions might be introduced, and lest
the people might be ignorant of what they were to follow. Since then the
pursuer founds his strongest Argument upon this as a privileged fiction, he
must instruct that this fiction is founded upon express Law, and even in these
fictions, Law neyer inverts Nature, but rather seconds it, and it makes not
Nature bow to these, but these to Nature; and amongst many other instances,
this is clear by adoptions, wherein the younger cannot adopt the elder, because
it were against Nature says the Law, that the younger should be father to the
elder, Inst. de adopt.. 4. Minorem natu majorem non posse adoptare placet,
adoptio enim naturam imitatur, and pro monstro est, ut major sit filius quam
pater. And I may by the same reason say, that it were monstrous to imagine,
that she who may really labor in childbirth, and who really may give suck
cannot bring forth a child, but is dead; and that the Law should not own as
children, these whom the Church owns as such. And in these fictions which are
allowed, we will find upon exact inquiry, that Law has not designed to overturn
Nature, but only has made bold by these fictions to dispense with some of its
own solemnities, as is clear by the Law Cornelia, wherein the Romans did by
that legal fiction imagine, that he who died in prison amongst the enemies in a
Foreign Country, died at Rome, and at freedom, merely that they might by that
fiction render valid the Testament of him who was a prisoner, for the honor of
their Commonwealth; and whose Testament could not have subsisted without this
fiction, seeing none but a free citizen could amongst them make a Testament.
Since then there is no need of such a fiction as this, and since there is no
express Law introducing it specifically in this case, there is no reason that
it should be allowed to take away the benefit of the Disposition from the
person Substitute, which it gave not. Nihil tam natural (says the Law) quam
eo genere quidque dissolvere quo colligatum est, l. 35. ff. de reg. jur. Since
then the Children owe not their succession here to the civil Law, but to the
will of the Disponer, the Law should not by its fictions, take away what was
not at first the effect of its liberality.

In the cases where the Law allow's fictions, it allow's them only for to
strengthen natural equity, and not to overturn it, and by the definition given
of it, it is said to be indubitatae falsitatis pro veritate assumptio, in casu
possibili, and ex justa causa proveniens, ad inducendum juris effectum equitati
naturali non repugnantem. Jason. ad l. si is ff. de usu-cap: Upon which
definition no subsumption can be founded here, for not only is not this in casu
possibili, because it is impossible, that a person can be both dead and alive
at once, and that Children should be, and not be, Verum est, neque pacta, neque
stipulationes, factum posse tollere, quod vero impossible est, neque pacto,
neque stipulatione potest comprehendi, l. 32. ff. de reg. jur. But it is also
repugnant to justice and equity, that the Estate destinat by the Disponer to
his blood-relations should be taken from them, and given otherwise then he
would have bestowed it himself; and though the Law does sometimes in favors of
Children, obliege us to believe, that the Child that is in the Mothers womb is
born, there is some foundation for imposing that upon us, since there is a
Child extant though not born; yet it never uses that liberty in punishing poor
Infants, and to condemn them before it can know them, or that they have
transgressed.

In answer to the second class of Arguments, I do confess, that it is true,
that all Civil Rights should perish by a criminal Sentence, and that in sensu
civili, pro nullo habebatur damnatus; but it is as true, that ea quae sunt
juris naturalis were not thereby taken away, quod attinet ad jus civil, servi
pro nullis habentur, non tamen et jure naturali, quia quod ad jus natural
attinet omnes homines aequales sunt, l. 32. ff. de reg. jur. But so it is, that
to bear Children is in her no effect of the Civil Law, but of the Law of
Nature, and the Children to be procreat by her, will be her Children by the Law
of Nature; so that since she can bear Children, she can yet fulfill the
condition of the institution; nor can she be debarred from that by being serva
penae, at least her Children cannot, seeing they are not condemned by her
Sentence: condemnatory Sentences take only from the person condemned what may
belong to the fisk, for it substitutes the fisk in place of the person
condemned, but it takes not from him what cannot belong to the fisk. Ea sola
deportationis sententia aufert, quae ad fiscum perveniunt; But so it is, that
it was never designed, that the fisk should succeed in place of the person to
whom the Disposition was made, as is acknowledged by the Substitute who now
craves preference; and if the fisk would be preferred to the woman's Children,
much more would he be preferred to their Substitutes, who succed only to them.
And the reason of the decision, l. ex. facto. ff. ad. sc. trebel. is not
founded in odium of the Children, but of the fisk, Maxim cum etiam bona, cum
sua causa fisco sunt vindicanda. But the solid answer to that, and all these
other Laws, is, that by the old Roman Law, damnatus erat servus penae, and
servus penae parere conditioni non p^terat, and pro nullo habebatur; and
therefore, by that Law, parere conditioni non poterat, as is clear by the Law
cited: but Justinian did abrogat that amongst many other unreasonable fictions,
and by nov. 22. cap. 8. this servitus penae is clearly abrogated, and therefore
since the foundation of the decision is taken away, the decision can now no
longer take place, and by all the Laws in Christendom, those servitudes are now
abrogated; and our blessed Savior has by his coming to the world, set mankind
at liberty in all respects, and we can be slaves to nothing now, but to our
vices. Nor does the Law look upon a person condemned, as a dead person, in all
respects, which is the third great foundation of all that is pleaded against my
Client; for it allows her to propone her just defenses, and it would punish
him who killed her upon a private revenge; it would acknowledge her Children to
be lawful, and until she be really dead, her husband could not marry another:
for though the Law, to deterr men from committing crimes, does oftimes raise
its terrors by civil fictions, yet it is the nature of these civil fictions,
that they cannot be strech't de persona in personam; though then it will not
allow such to be thought still alive who are struck with it is Thunder, yet this
fiction reaches only to the offender, in so far as concerns her civil
capacities, and the punishment of her guilt; and therefore seeing the blood is
not tainted by this Sentence, she not being here condemned for treason, which
is the only crime that taints the blood, her Children, though born after the
Sentence, would still succeed to her, and since they would be acknowledged to
be her Children, she cannot be said decessisse sine Liberis: which is the
condition upon which the Substitute craves to be preferred.

The Parliament of Burgundy found, that a natural death could only purify this
condition, Si sine liberis decesserit.

For Haining, against the Fishers upon Tweed.
FIRST PLEADING. How far a man may use his own, though to the prejudice of his
neighbors.
HAining being prejudged by a Lake which overflowed his Ground, and which by
its nearness to his House, did, as is ordinar for standing Waters, impair very
much the health of his Family: He did therefore open the said Lake, whose
Waters being received by Whitticker, did at last run with Whitticker into
Tweed. The Fishers upon that River, pretending that the Water which came from
that Lake, did kill their Salmond, and occasion their leaving the River, do
crave that Haining may be ordained to close up that passage. This being the
state of the Case, it was alleged for Haining,

That since men had receded from that first community, which seemed to be
established amongst them by Nature, the Law made it its great task, to secure
every man in the free and absolute exercise of his Property, and did allow him
to use his own as he thought fit, and whatever did lessen this power and
liberty, is by the common Law termed a servitude, or slavery: nor can a
servitude be imposed upon a man without his own consent, and suitably to this
principle, every man may raise his own house as high as he pleases, though he
should thereby obscure the lights of his neighbors house: or if I should
abstract from my neighbors Ponds, that Water which formerly run into them from
my Lands, the Law does not think him prejudged, nor me obliged to prefer his
convenience to my own inclinations, as is clear by l. 26. ff. de damno infect.
For as that Law very well observes, He is not prejudged who looses a benefit
which flowed from him who was no way tied to bestow it, l. 26. ff. de dam.
infect. Proculus ait, Cum quis jure quid in suo faceret quamvis promisisset
damni infecti vicino, non tamen eum teneri ea stipulatione: veluti si juxta mea
adificia habeas aedificia, eaque jure tuo altius tollas, aut si in vicino tuo
agro cuniculo, vel fossa aquam meam avoces. Quamvis enim and hic aquam mihi
abducas, and illic luminibus officias, tamen ex ea stipulatione actionem mihi
non competere: scil. quia non debeat videri is damnum facere, qui eo veluti
lucro quo adhuc utebatur, prohibetur: multumque interesse utrum damnum quis
faciat, an lucro, quod adhuc faciebat, uti prohibeatur. And if I dig a Well in
my own house, which may cut off those passages whereby Water was conveyed to my
neighbors Well, one of the greatest Lawyers has upon this case, resolved, that
my neighbor will not prevail against me; For, says he, no man can be said to
be wronged by what I do upon my own ground, for in that I use but my own right;
l. 24. 12. ff. cod. In domo mea puteum aperio quo aperto venae putei tui
praecisae sunt, an tenear? Ait Trebatius, Me non teneri damni infecti, neque
enim existimari operis mei vitio damnum tibi dari, in ear, in qua jure meo
usus sum: where the gloss observes, that in suo quod quisque fecerit, in damnum
vicini id non animo nocendi facere presumitur. And if by a Wall or Fence upon
my Land, the Water was kept from overflowing my neighbors Land, I may throw
down my own Fence, though my neighbors Land be thereby overflowed, l. 17. ff.
de aqua pluvia; And therefore, seeing the ground does belong to Haining, and
that the Fishers of Tweed have no servitude upon him, he may use his own as he
pleases, especially seeing he does not immediately send his Water into Tweed, but
into another Rivolet, which carries it very far before it does disgorge there.
So that if the Fishers upon Tweed did prevail against Haining, they might
likewise prevail against all, from whose ground any Moss-water runs into Tweed,
though at fifty miles distance; and they may forbid all the Towns from which
any water runs into Tweed, to throw in any excrements, or any water employed in
Dying, lest it prejudge their Salmond-fishing; whereas, Alteri prodesse, ad
liberalitatem, non ad justitiam pertinet.

It is (my Lords) referred to your consideration, that public Rivers have been
very wisely by providence, spread up and down the world, to be easy, and
natural Vehicles for conveying away to the Sea, (that great receptacle of all
things that are unnecessar) excrements, and other noxious things, which would
otherwise have very much prejudged mankind; and that they may the better
perform this office, Providence has bestowed upon Rivers, a purifying and
cleansing quality, so that after a little time, and a very short course, all
that is thrown in there, does happily loose their noxius nature, which is washed
off by the streams by which they are carried.

Rivers are natures highways by Water, and we may as well forbid to carry any
thing which smells ill, upon our highways by land, as we may forbid to throw
in stinking Waters into our Rivers. The proper use of Rivers is, that they
should be portable, and fit for navigation, or for transporting things from on
place into another; and Salmond-fishing is but an accidental casuality, and
therefore the only interdicts, or prohibitions propon'd by the Law, relating to
public Rivers are, Ne quid in flumine ripave ejus fiat, quo pejus navigetur,
tit. 12. lib. 43. and, ut in flumine publico navigare liceat, tit. 14. ff. eod.
lib. But in Rivers that are not navigable, the Law has forbidden nothing, but
that their course and natural current be not altered, Ne quid in flumine
publico fiat, quo aliter fluat aqua, atque uti priore estate fluxit, tit. 13.
ibidem. So that since the Law does not forbid the throwing in any thing into
public Rivers, It does allow it; for it is free for every man to do what the
Law does not prohibit, and if upon such capricius suggestions, as these, men
were to be restrained from using their own, no man should ever adventure to
drain his Land, to open Coal-sinks, or Lead-mines, or to seek out any Minerals
whatsoever, whose waters are of all other the most pestilentious, because after
he had bestowed a great deal of expense, he might be forced to desist, for
satisfying the jealousy, or imagination of melancholy, or avaritious
neighbors. And if this pursuit find a favorable hearing, malice and envy will
make use of it, as a fair occasion whereby to disturb all successful, and
thriving undertakers. But your Lordships may see, that the world, both learned
and unlearned, have hitherto believed, that such a pursuit as this would not be
sustained, in that though interest and malice did prompt men to such pursutes,
yet not one such as this has ever been intented, for ought I could ever read,
save once at Grenoble, where an Advocat did pursue a Smith to transport his
Forge from the Chief-street, because it did by its noise disturb not only him,
but the people who frequented that street; from which pursuit the Smith was
absolved, as Expilly observes in his Pleading.

Yet, my Lords, the Fishers upon Tweed want not some apparent reasons which
give color to the pursuit; and it is urged for them, that no man is so Master
of his own, but that the Commonwealth has still an interest with him in it,
and Law being invented to protect the interest of Societies, as well as to
secure the property of private persons, therefore though every private man
inclines to satisfy his own humor, and advantage, in the use of what is his
own, yet it is the interest of the Commonwealth, that he do not abuse his own
property; and therefore it is, that the Law does interdict prodigalls; nor will
the Law suffer that a man use his own in emulationem alterius,. l. 3. ff. de.
oper. pub. and a man is said to do any thing in emulationem alterius, when
others looses more by what is done, then the Proprietar can gain: As in this
case, though quilibet potest facere in suo, yet non potest immittere in
alienum, which is their case; and all the Arguments brought for Haining do not
meet, seeing they only prove, that a man may use what is his own as he pleases,
ubi nihil immittit in alienum; as is clear by the instances given, of throwing
down his own Wall, or the digging up a Well in his own Land, which differs very
much from our case, wherein Haining does pour in his poysenous Water into the
River of Tweed.

That men are restrained for the good of the Commonwealth in the use of their
own property, is very clear from many instances in our Law, as men are
discharged by Acts of Parliament to burn Mures, to kill Smolts; the way and
manner of fishing upon Lochleven is prescribed to the Heretors, by Act of
Parliament, and men are forbidden to steep lint by public Acts likewayes.
Likeas, the common Law will not suffer men so to use Water running through
their own Land, as that they may thereby prejudge Milns belonging to their
neighbors, which use to go by that Water, and whatever may be alleged in
favors of any innovation in running Waters, yet Lakes being appointed by
Nature, seem to have from Nature a fixed being; nor should they be opened to
the prejudice of others, contrary to their Nature.

These objections may, (my Lords) be thus satisfied. To the first, it is
answered, that the only two restrictions put upon men in the free exercise of
their own, are, ne in alterius emulationem fiat, vel materiam seditionis
prebeat, as is clear by the foresaid, l. 3. ff. de oper. pub. neither of which
can be subsumed in this case. And when the Law considers what is done in
emulationem alterius, it acknowledges, illud non factum esse in emulationem
alterius, quod factum est principaliter ut agenti profit, and non ut alteri
noceat, l. fluminum 5. ffin. ff. de dam. infect. and the gloss formerly cited
upon that Law determines, that Animus nocendi is not presumed, if any other
cause can be assigned: and in this case, Haining can ascribe his opening this
Lake, to the prejudice it did to his Land, and to his Health, whereas it cannot
be alleged, that he ever expressed any malice against the fishers upon Tweed,
many of whom are his own Relations. As to the instances given, wherein the Law
does restrict the free use of Property, the Principle is not denied, but it is
misapplied. For the Law only bounds the Proprietars power in some cases,
wherein his loss may be otherwise supplied; as in Mureburn, and killing of
Smolts at such a season of the year, and in steeping Lint in running Waters,
which may be as commodiously done in standing Pooles; but these Pursuers crave
this Lake to be stopped at all times, nor is there an apparent Reason here as
there, this Pursuit being sounded only upon a conjectural prejudice, and in
these cases, the Prohibition is made necessar by the generality, and frequency
of Occurrences, and yet though so circumstantiated, there is still a public
Law necessar. And when a public Law discharges the free exercise of Property,
it ordains him in whose favors the Prohibition is, to refound his Expenses who
is prohibited: Nor is the Commonwealth here prejudged so much by this, as it
would be by the contrare, for thereby all Coal-heughs, Lead-mines, and the
winning of other Minerals would be discharged; whereas it is uncertain if this
water chaseth away the Salmond, which are at best but a casuality, and which
will go but from Tweed to other Rivers in Scotland, for they cannot stay in the
Sea. Salmond-fishing is but an accident to Rivers, but there being the common
porters is their natural use. Thus (my Lords) you see that we contend for what
is natural to Rivers, they for what is but casual; we are founded upon the
nature and privilege of Property, they upon mere conjectures.

The Lords inclined to sustain Hainings Defense; but before answer, they
granted Commission for examining upon the place, what prejudice was done.

For the Viscount of Stormont, against the Creditors of the Earl of Annandail.
SECOND PLEADING. Whether a Clause prohibiting to sell, will prejudge Creditors.
THe deceast Viscount of Stormont, having by his Majesty's favor, and his own
industry, acquired the Lordship of Scoon, he did tailie the same to Mungo
Viscount of Stormont, and the Heirs-male of his body; which failing, to John
Earl of Annandail, and the Heirs-male of his body; which failing, to Andrew
Lord Balvaird, and the Heirs-male of his body; and to prepetnat his own memory,
as the reward of his industry, he did cause insert this Provision in the
Charter and Seasine, viz. That it should not be lawful to the said Mungo, to
dispone, or wodset any of the said Lands so tailied, or to do any deed whereby
the said Lands might be evicted or apprised from them, without the consent of
all the persons contained in that Tailzie, or their Heirs; which if they
contraveened, that they should, ipso facto, loose all Right or Title to the
said Lands, and the Right should accress to the next Heir.

The late Earl of Annandail, having very profusely and unnecessarily, spent not
only his own Estate, but likewayes contracted debts, for which the Lordship of
Scoon is apprised, this Viscount of Stormont, as immediate Heir of tailzie,
craves that it may be declared, that the Right to the said Lordship of Scoon is
devolved upon him by the forsaid contravention, and that he should enjoy the
said Estate, free from any debts contracted by the Earl of Annandail.

Though this pursuit appears clearly to be founded upon the express will of the
first Disponer, who as he might not have disponed, so might have qualified his
Disposition with any conditions he thought fit; and albeit such clauses as
these tend effectually to preserve illustrious families, yet the Creditors of
the late Earl of Annandail do allege, that though this his contracting of debt
may furnish action against the Earl of Annandails Heirs, for any prejudice they
can sustain by his contraveening the foresaid Provision, and though by virtue
of this Pactum de non alienando, all the persons in the tailzie were bound up
from selling the said Lands; yet no paction, nor provision could annull debts,
which were bona fide lent by them, to a person who stood in the Fee. Which
Defense they urge by many specious reasons; as first, That there is nothing so
contrary to the Nature of Domintum, and Property, as that he who is Proprietar
should not have the free exercise of his Right and Property, which free
exercise consists in the liberty to alienat, and to make use of what is his
own, for defraying his just debt, and answering his necessar occasions; and
they pretend, that it were most absurd and inconvenient, that a person should
be raised to the title and dignity of a Nobleman, and should be confessed by the
Law, to have an absolute right to an Estate, and yet that though he were
captive in the Turkish Galleys, he should not be able to raise money for
redeeming himself from that bondage; and which seems yet more repugnant to the
inclination, and interest of the Disponer, that if a Fine were imposed with
assurance, that if the Fine were not paid, the Estate should forfeit, yet the
Proprietar behoved idly to stand, and see the Estate sink. And though an
advantageous occasion offered of buying his own Superiority, his multers, or
any such advantage; yet the Heir of tailzie could not raise money for that use,
nay nor for alimenting himself, if the Rents perished by war, or other
accidents. This is to have, and not to have an Estate, a paralitick Property,
and an useless Right. To allow, that such a Clause in a Charter, might annull
all the debts contracted by him to whom it is granted, were to destroy and
ruin Commerce, which is the very soul of a Commonwealth, and which by how
much it is encumbered by unexpected Clauses, is by so much impared and burdened.
Commerce does oftimes require speedier returns, and dispatch, then can allow a
serious consideration, of all the securities and evidents of those, with whom
we deal; neither are these always ready to be produced, nor does the Law in
what relates to Commerce, consider all that a Lender may do for securing
himself, but what is ordinarily done; and it is most certain, that the most
exact men do not enquire into the securities of those with whom they contract
in lending money; and though something may be pleaded in favors of ordinary
clauses, which either Law, Customs, or Decisions have allowed, yet it were
extraordinarily prejudicial to Commerce, to make a man forfeit his sum, because
he did not guard against pactum de non contrabendo debitum, a paction as
unsuitable to the nature of Propriety, as unusal in this Kingdom: and though
the Legislators do in some places allow such pactions as these, as is clear in
Lege Majoratus in Spain, yet they are made tolerable there, because being
introduced by a public Law, they are universally known, and he who contracts
with persons so prohibited there, forfeits his sum, because he neglects a
public Law, and not because he contemns the private prohibition of a Disponer.
Nor are such pactions as these to be so severely observed, as necessar for
preserving Noble Families, and so fit for our Kingdom, which subsists by these;
for if the nature of Propriety were to be altered, in so high a measure, as it
is by this paction, it could in justice only be altered by a public Law,
wherein the Estates of Parliament (who are with us only Judges of what is
convenient for the Nation in general) might declare, that it were fit to turn
such a paction as this into a Law: and since for so many Ages, the Parliament
has not thought this fit, nor have private families ever introduced any such
pactions till now, we must either judge, that these are not fit for private
families, or that those understood not their own interest.

As to strict Law, whereupon this pursuit is only founded, the Creditors do
represent, that though Lawyers have allowed pactum de non alienando, yet they
have extended it no further, then to annull Dispositions made contrary thereto;
but they never stretched it so far, as to annull all Debts contracted by the
person prohibited to dispone, l. ea Lege, C. de condict. ob. cause. dat. 2.
Though they allowed these prohibitions, quando inductae erant a Lege, a Judice,
aut a Testatore per ultimam voluntatem; yet they did not allow so much favor
to Prohibitions, which are only founded super pactis viventium, as is clear by
Craig. l. primo diages. 15. Omnes terrae, (inquit ille) in Feudum dari possunt,
nisi quae a Lege, Judice, aut Testatore in ultima voluntate dari prohibentur.
3. Lawyers do not allow, that such Prohibitions as these, though resolutively
conceived, should absolutely annull all alienations made by the person
prohibited, except the Prohibiter reserve some Dominium and Property to himself
in the thing dispon'd, by virtue of which reservation, he has power to quarrel
all deeds done, and the person to whom he dispones is because of that
reservation, not so absolutely in the Fee, or Property, as that his Disposition
should be unquarrellable; as is clear by Bartol. and Baldus, both ad l.
Sancimus. Cod. de reb. alien. non alienand. where they conclude, quod si is cui
promissum est, de non alienando reservavit sibi jus aliquod in re, hypothecae,
vel dominij, impeditur translatio, aliter non, and etiamsi pactum adhibitum sit
in ipsa traditione, and cum pacto resolutivo, tamen non impedit dominij
translationem, sed illo casu alienans tenetur tantum ad interesse. And
therefore, seeing the Disponer reserved no right to himself, but that the late
Earl of Annandail was fully in the Fee, It were against the principles even of
strict Law, that debts contracted by him should be annulled, as contrary to the
Prohibition. 4. When a person is prohibited to alienat, that Prohibition is
still restricted to voluntar and unnecessar alienations, the design of the
Disponer being to curb such of his successors, as should be luxurious, but not
to bind them up when frugal, in occasions that are necessary and advantageous;
and the Law is content to own such pactions, in odium of such as have fed the
luxury, or preyed upon the simplicity of those with whom they contracted,
without any design to vex Commerce, or to preclude those successors from being
relieved in their honorable and necessar occasions. Prohibita alienatione,
tantum voluntariae prohibitae censentur, non vero necessariae, necessitas enim
Legem non patitur, as Reiters observes, tract. de alien. cap. 6. sec. 4. which
may be further clear, per l. 5. ff. de pet. haered. and l. 69.. 1. ff. de
legate. 2. And suitably to this, though in our Law Ward-lands recognize if they
be voluntarily dispon'd without the consent of the Superior, yet he is allowed
to sell the less half of his Lands without the Superiors consent, which is
allowed by the Law to relieve his necessities; and though he cannot voluntarily
alienat the greater half, yet all the Few may be apprysed from him by his
creditors, for satisfaction of his just debt. And therefore, seeing the late
Earl of Annandail was known to be a judicious person, and to have lived very
soberly, and that these debts can be instructed to have been contracted for
relieving him out of the necessities unto which he was thrown by the iniquity
of the times, and his constant adhereing to his Majesty; It is by these
Creditors pretended, that these debts cannot be annulled, as contrary to that
prohibition, which they neither did, nor were obliged to know. And since our
Law has thought, that Inhibitions and Interdictions should be published, and
registrat for putting the subjects in mala fide, It can never allow, that such
clauses as these which are neither published, nor registrat, should produce the
same effect.

To these Arguments, they add, that God Almighty has oftimes testified his
displeasure against such Clauses, whereby, his Providence is insolently bounded
by vain man, who endeavors to build himself a Babel against Heaven; and by
which Clauses likewise, man will endeavor to perpetuat his own memory here,
and call his Land to all Ages by his own Name, against the express advice which
the Scripture gives.

I do confess, (my Lords) that those specious pretenses, especially when pressed
with so much zeal, and eloquence, may make impressions upon such as are not
intimatly acquaint with the principles of Law; but I hope, where we have such
Judges as your Lordships, there can be little hazard from such objections: but
before I endeavor to satisfy these, I crave leave to lay out before your
Lordships, those grounds whereupon my Client founds his pursuit.

It is an uncontraverted, and first principle of Law, that quilibet est
Dominus, and arbiter rei suae, and therefore may dispose upon his own as he
thinks fit; nor can any thing less then a Law bound the exercise of this Power;
and every man being Judge of his own convenience, Lawyers do very properly term
the conditions adjected by a disponer, leges contractus, and the Feudalists
call the conditions under which a Few is dispon'd, leges feudi; feuda (says
Zasius) a pactis contra naturam suam sunt transmutata, pacto praegravante
naturam feudi: and albeit our Law has deferred very much to equity, and to the
principles of the civil Law; yet private transactions betwixt parties, are not
to be limited by those: But pactions are to be observed amongst them in their
full extent, as is ordained with us by an Act of Sederunt, 1573. Law may be
receded from by private Pactions; and therefore, much more must private Pactions
bind where they are contrary to no express Law: and since pactum in refamiliari
aequipollet juri publico, Reg. Maj. lib. 3. cap. 10. and lib. c. cap. 31. It
necessarily follows, that as a Law or Decision might have established their
pactions, de non alienando, and non contrahendo debitum, which is acknowledged
by the Creditors themselves, that a condition insert in a Charter may do the
same as effectually: and if the pretense of public Equity and Commerce, might
alter the destination of a Disponer, or mutual pactions of private Persons, what
uncertainty would this occasion in Humane Affairs? or who could be secure,
that the Transaction he made, should hold? For there are few men who do not
differ in their conceptions about Public Commerce; this were to unhinge all
private Pactions, which persons had at first suited to their own necessities,
and inclinations, and to make Judges who should be tied to a fixed rule,
unrestrained arbiters, over the affairs and fortunes of the people: for they
might, almost in all cases, recede from private transactions, upon pretext that
they are contrary to public good, equity, or commerce. But if any conditions
adjected by Disponers are to be observed, surely those which are adjected in a
free gift and donation are most to be observed; and it is certainly contrary to
reason, that he who needs not dispone his own Land except he please, may not
dispone it as he pleases.

As the Law has been very tender of the interests of all Proprietars, so of
all others, it has been most tender of those rights, whereby men have declared
how their will should be obeyed, and their memory perpetuated after their
death. Law designing thereby at once to encourage men to be frugal, because
they may know that what they have gained by their industry, shall be disposed
of according to their will; and to comfort men against death, because they may
know that their will shall be as exactly execute, as if they themselves were
still alive, Uti quisque de re sua legassit, it a jus esto. The Law in all
Contracts, considers most, what was the design of the contracters, and when any
thing is dispon'd for a particular cause, when that cause fails, the
disposition falls as causa data, causa non sequuta, and si ea lege donavi,
defectus causae impulsivae resolutionem contractus inducit, quia ea lege donavi
cum alias non essem donaturus, l. cum te. c. de pact. inter empt.

That such pactions as these are very lawful, and ordinary, is clear both from
the civil, and feudal Law. For by the civil Law, though there were tailzies,
yet the Romans had their fideicommissa, which did very much resemble them, and
by which the Person cujus fidei res erat commissa, could neither dispone nor
impignorat; and if he did dispone or impignorat, that person in whose favor
the fidei commissum was granted, might not only pursue the disponer for damnage
and interest, but might likewise annull what was done contrary to the trust, as
is clear, l. fin. cod. de reb. alien. non alienand. Sancimus, sive lex
alienationem inhibuerit, sive testator, hoc fecerit, sive pactio contrahentium
hoc admiserit, non solum dominii alienationem, vel mancipiorum manumissionem
esse prohibendam, sed etiam usus fructus dationem, vel hypothecam, vel pignoris
nexum petitus prohiberi; similique modo, and servitutes minime imponi, nec
emphytenseos contractum, nisi in his tantummodo casibus, in quibus
constitutionum auctorit as vel testatoris voluntas, vel pactionum tenor qui
alienationem interdixit, aliquid tale fieri permiserit.

These Clauses, De non alienando, and non contrahendo debitum, are most
allowable by the Feudal Law, where such Tailzies are called Feuda Gentilitia,
and Feuda ex pacti Providentia; yea, and by the Feudal Law, it was not in the
power of him to whom it was first disponed, to alienat or affect the Few,
either in prejudice of the Superior, or of him who was next to succeed: and
what is more ordinar with us, then such obligations in Contracts of Marriage?
Sir Thomas Hope is of opinion, that a Right granted to a man and his Heirs,
secluding Assignayes, could not be comprised by a Creditor; and sure that
exclusion is not so valid, as a Clause irritant and resolutive, which is actus
maxim explicitus and geminatus.

From these Principles, there do arise very natural answers to the alledgeances
proponed for the Defenders; for whereas it is contended, that such restraints
as these are inconsistent with Property, It is answered, that there is nothing
more ordinar then to qualify Propriety, as appears clearly by the nature
fidei-commissi, pacti gentilitii, and very many other instances; and even in
our Law, Ward-lands cannot be disponed upon without the consent of the
Superior; and it is more contrary to the nature of Property and Dominium, that
a man cannot dispone upon what is absolutely his own, under what restrictions
and qualifications he pleases, then that he who has only a qualified Dominium,
should be in a capacity to dispone absolutely, upon what was not absolutely his
own. That Maxim whereupon we found, that quilibet est moderator and arbiter rei
suae, has no exception expressed in it; whereas the definition of Dominium
insisted upon by them, which is, that it is Jus de re sua libere disponendi,
has an exception adjected to it, which is, nisi quis Lege prohibeatur; under
which word Lex, the Doctors always comprehend pactum, and to prevent all
mistake, some do expressly say, nisi quis Lege vel pacto prohibeatur: So that in
vain do they found upon the nature of Dominium, since the very definition of it
does contradict what is alleged.

To the second difficulty, bearing that these Clauses are destructive of
Commerce; It is answered, that the liberty of disponing upon our own, as we
think fit, does more nearly concern us, then the liberty of Commerce;
especially in this Kingdom, which stands more by ancient Families, then by
Merchants; and therefore seeing these Clauses tend necessarily to perpetuat
Families, and the other does only tend to the better being of Trade, we ought
to prefer the pursuit to the defense. And to what purpose shall we gain an
Estate by Commerce, when we cannot secure it by such clauses? Nor are these
clauses destructive of Commerce, as is alleged, more then Inhibitions or
Interdictions, and it is easier to read a Charter, then to try the Registers;
and England and Spain, which are more interested in Commerce then we, have by
allowing such Clauses, evidently declared, that they think them not absolutely
inconsistent with Commerce. But the truth is, real Rights are not the
foundation of Commerce; for Commerce is maintained upon the stock of personal
Trust, and the main thing which Traffiquers rely upon, is the personal Trust
which is amongst them, and not the consideration of any real Rights.

I do not conceive my self obliged to take much notice of the Creditors being
in bona fide to contract with the Earl of Annandail; for if Annandail had no
power to burden that Estate, their bona fides could not give it him; nor could
a Creditor apprise from him that to which he had no right, no more then I can
comprise one man's Estate, for another man's Debt: and if Annandail had only
given a Back-bond, declaring that the Estate was only in his person by way of
trust, the Creditors could not have apprised it for their Debt, though they
might likewayes have alleged that they were in bona fide to lend. For, the Law
considers only bona fides, where those who alleged the bona fides, did exact
diligence, which these Creditors cannot allege; for if these Creditors did not
at all call for Annandails Rights to Scoon, they cannot be said to have laid
out their money in contemplation of those Rights, but in contemplation of his
other Estate, or upon the account of a personal Trust; or if they did call for
those Rights, they might have very clearly seen his Prohibition, and
consequenly would have been secured against lending upon the faith of this
Estate.

Whereas it is urged, that such Prohibitions as these, are only allowed, when
they are introduced by Testament, by a Law, or by a Judge; but not when they
are introduced by Contracts or Dispositions inter vivos, It is answered, that
if it be allowable the one way, it should be the other; for the design is
rather more deliberat in a Disposition, then in a Latter-will: for the one uses
to be an act of health, and the other of sickness, and the one is as contrary
to Commerce as the other is: and if any weight be laid upon the favor allowed
by the Law to ultima voluntas, upon the accout of consoling the Testator in
obeying what he designs, this favor is equally communicable to both, for in
both there is a Designation made of the way and manner of succession, in which
a dying man is as much concerned, when he makes a Designation by a Disposition,
as when he makes it by a Testament; and therefore, Les substitutions
contractuelles ont les mesmes. Effects en France, que les Testamentaires, dans
la prohibition d'aliener, as Lowet observes, tit. 5. number. 9. and for which he
cites many decisions; and where he observes very judiciously, that the reason
why the Roman Law did not allow these Substitutions, and Prohibitions in
Contracts, as it did in Testaments, was, because Testaments was the only way
amongst them of disponing upon Estates, and of making Substitutions, and
fidei-commissa; to make which was not allowed by Contracts, quia auferebant
testandi liberam facultatem, which subtilty is not now allowed in this Age: for
on the contrary, Tailzies and Contracts of Marriage, are now the ordinary ways
of disponing Estates, and if men might alter such destinations of Contracts,
such as do contract with them would be in a hard condition.

Nor is there more weight in that part of the alledgeance, which bears, that
those Prohibitions do only annull deeds done in favors of him who has reserved
some Right in his own person; for Tailzies with such Prohibitions, do imply a
reservation in favors of those who are to succeed, and the Tailzie is in that
case but a Right of Trust to the behoof of the Family; and the Provision in
their favors is equipollent to a reservation. The design of both is the same,
and therefore they should both operat the same effect.

Discourage not, (my Lords) such as love to be frugal, because they hope their
Estate may remain with their Posterity; encourage not such as resolve to shake
loose, by their Prodigality, what was established by their wise Predecessors:
By favoring the Creditors Defenses, you will but gratify the prodigality of
Heirs, or the laziness of Creditors; whereas, by sustaining my Clients pursuit,
you will secure us as to our own pactions, and as to your decisions; you will
perpetuat Noble Families, and bound the Luxury of such as are to succeed.

The Lords sustained the Pursuit, and repelled the Defenses propon'd for the
Oreditors.

For the Lady Carnagie and her Lord, against the Lord Cranburn.
THIRD PLEADING. Whether Tax'd-wards be liable to Recognition.
My Lord Chancellor,
THe late Earl of Dirletoun having no Children, besides two Daughters, and
having an Estate consisting of Lands in Scotland and England, did very
judiciously at first resolve to marry one of them in Scotland, and the other in
England; and in pursuance of this design, he bestowed Elizabeth the eldest,
upon William Earl of Lanerick, Secretary of Scotland, Brother to Duke
Hamiltoun, but which was more, a person admired for his heroic Virtues, and
whose Alliance was courted at any rate, by the most eminent Families of both
Kingdoms. The younger of these Daughters, named Diana, was matched thereafter
to the Lord Cranburn; and as the Earl of Lanerick could not but have justly
expected all, or at least the far greatest share of that Estate, So the Lord
Cranburn could scarce have expected thereafter any thing above an ordinar
Portion: Yet, such is the capriciousness of old men, that the Earl of Dirletoun
did, in anno, 1649. by the impressions of some who were inveterat enemies to
the Family of Hamiltoun, dispone the Lands of Innerweek, Fenton, etc. failing
Heirs-male of his own body, to James Cecil his Grandchild, and the Heirs-male
of his body.

His Majesty finding, that the said Estate was most illegally dispon'd to James
Cecil, without His consent as Superior, they holding Ward of Him, and that he
had thereby defrauded the just expectations of so worthy a person as the Earl
of Lanerick, and so the Lands recognized by the said Disposition, did gift the
said Lands to the Lord Bargeny, for the behoof of the Earl of Lanerick; upon
which Gift of Recognition, there is now a Declarator pursued by the Lady
Carnagie, eldest Daughter to the said Earl of Lanerick, who thereafter became
Duke of Hamiltoun, wherein she craves, that it may be declared by you, that she
has the only Right to these Lands.

There are very many Defenses propon'd for the Lord Cranburn, which I shall
endeavor thus to satisfy.

The first is, Recognition has only place in feudo recto and proprio, whereas
these Lands hold Tax'd-ward, in which manner of holding, all the casualities
are taxed to a very inconsiderable sum, which sum is designed to be the only
advantage that shall accress to the Superior: and the reason why Ward lands
recognize when they are sold without the Superiors consent, is, because the
Superior having so great interest in the Lands which hold by simple Ward, as
to have the Ward and Marriage of the Vassal, the Law did therefore obliege him
not to alienat that Land, without the Superiors consent; which reason cease,
where the Ward is taxed, the Superiors interest becoming very inconsiderable
by the Tax: nor can it be imagined, but that the Superior, having dispensed
with the great casualities of Ward and Marriage, has consequently dispensed
with the said restraint, Cui datur majus, datur minus, praesertim ubi minus
inhaeret majori and est ejus accessorium.

For satisfying which difficulties, your Lordships will be pleased to consider,
that our Law appoints all Ward-lands to recognize, if sold without the
Superiors consent, and makes no distinction betwixt simple and tax'd-ward; the
general is founded upon express Law, and there is no express warrant for
excepting tax'd-ward. 2. Seeing these Lands could not have been fold before they
were taxed, by what warrant can they be sold since they were taxed? Seeing
though the casualities of Ward and Marriage were taxed, and thereby these
casualities expressly remitted, except in so far as they are taxed; yet there is
no power granted to sell, without the Superiors consent: Nor is that
privilege remitted by the Superior, Et fendum alteratum in una qualitate, non
intelligitur alteratum in aliis and actus agentium non operantur ultra
concessa. 3. The power of selling without the consent of the Superior, is
different from the casualities of Ward and Marriage, which are here only taxed;
for Fewholdings are oft-times burdened with this restraint, and this restraint
was of old taken off expressly by warrands under the Quarter-seal, without
taxing the other casualities; So that this privilege differs from these, and
the one cannot be comprehended under the other.

The second Defense is, that by the Feudal Law, Recognition ob alienationem
feudi est crimen, and delictum feudale, against which error, etiam probabilis
ignorantia excusat; as is clear, lib. 2. tit. 31. The words are, Quod enim
dicitur alinatione feudum aperiri domino, intelligendum est cum a scientibus
alienatum est beneficium, which are the words of the said Law: whereupon,
Socinus, reg. 153. though he do give it as a rule, that Emphyteuta rem
emphyteuticam vendens a jure suo regulariter cadit, conform to the civil Law,
l. ffinal. C. de jure emphyteutico, he subjoyns these words, Fallit ubi
emphyteuta venderet ignorans rem esse emphyteuticam; and accordingly, Craig, de
recognitione, lib. 3. diages. 3. and in the case of disclamation, lib 3.
diages. 5. lays down for an undoubted principle, that ignorantia crassa
excusat feudalia delicta. And here, the subject of the question is not in jure,
and in thesi, whether Ward-lands should recognosce; but in facto, and
hypothesi, his Right being of the nature, and in the terms foresaid, he might
dispone without hazard, as to which, an error in him, who was an illiterat man
was very excusable, especially having consulted Peritiores, and having been
assured by very eminent Lawyers, that there was no hazard in disponing those
Lands, without the Superiors consent, they holding Tax'd-ward, which was
sufficient to have defended him in feudo amittendo.

To which it is answered, that ignorance of the Law excuses no man; and the
case having been at best dubious, the Vassal should not have hazarded upon what
the Law might construct to be a disowning of his Superior; and since every man
is obliged to know the nature of his own Few, the Law does presume, that every
man does know it, Nam quod inesse debet, inesse presumitur; and therefore,
Craig does very well conclude, page 344. tit. de recognitione, that
ignorantiam, pretendens vix audiendus est, cum sit crassa ignorantia, feudi sui
conditionem ignorare: and though he observes there, that excusabitur, qui
feudum suum non militare credidit, cum militare est; yet, that cannot be
extended to this case, wherein the Vassal certainly knew that his Few held
Ward: and though the Law sometimes does excuse a Vassal, who had reason to
doubt the condition of his own Few, because of some mysterious Clause, or
because he was a singular Successor, and had not recovered the Writes of the
Few as to which he transgressed, or was necessitate to do the deed, for which
he was challenged, by poverty, or such other occasions; yet, that in the
general, ignorance did not excuse delicta feudalia, is very clear by the
opinion of the learnedest Feudalists, Laur. Silv. de. feud. recog. quest. 60.
praepos. in cap. 1.. praeterea de prohib. feud. alienat. And in our Law, it was
never found, that ignorance did defend against recognition, the falling of an
escheit, disclamation, etc. And if the Superior were oblieg'd to prove the
Vassals knowledge, it were impossible ever he could prevail in any pursuit;
knowledge being a latent act of the mind, which can never be proven but by
oath; and to refer knowledge to the oath of the Vassal, were not only to
frustrate the Superior, but to tempt the Vassal to commit perjury; and albeit
the Feudal Law did allow the Vassal to purge his guilt, by deponing in some
cases upon his design, yet that was only allowed in cases where the external
act was of its own nature indifferent, such as the speaking of contumelious
words, that were to receive their genuine interpretation from the design of the
speaker; and that did never take place in clear acts, such as this is, wherein
the Vassal has sold his Few without the consent of the Superior.

The third Defense was, that where there is no contempt, there can be no
recognition; But so it is, that as the presumption of contempt is taken off by
the constant tenor of the Earl of Dirletouns respect for his Master, the King;
So the Disposition is given to be holden of the King, and that implies as much,
as if it had been expressly provided, that the alienation should be null, if the
Superior should not consent and confirm the same; and such an express
Provision should have certainly, in the opinion of all Feudalists, defended
against recognitions.

To this it is answered, first, That the clause, si Dominus meus consenserit,
does not defend against recognition, though expressed, verbis geminatis, and
pregnantibus; and unless it be resolutively conceived, bearing that it shall
not be valid alias, nec alio modo, and although all these cautions be adhibit,
yet many Feudalists are clear, that this will not defend against Recognition,
where the person to whom the Few is disponed attains to possession, as Cranburn
here did; for they think, that in that case it is but protestatio contraria
facto, and plus valet, quod agitur quam quod simulate concipitur: and if this
were sustained to defend against recognition, no Few should ever recognize, for
the Vassal should still defraud his Superior of any advantage, by inserting a
clause si dominus consenserit; upon which considerations, your Lordships
predecessors have, by a decision the 16. of February, 1631. found, that Lands
may recognize notwithstanding of this condition. 2. The disponing of Lands to
be holden of the Superior, is not equivalent to the clause, si Dominus
consenserit; for the disponing Lands to be holden of the Superior, prov^nit
non ex facto vassali, sed ex natura feudi, and ex stilo; all Fews being given
in Scotland, to be holden either of the Superior or the Disponer, a me, vel de
me, as shall best please the receiver; So that the disponing the Lands to be
holden of the Superior, does not show any clear design the Vassal had to
require the Superiors consent, and consequently cannot defend against
Recognition.

To fortify this point, it is urged by the Defender, that where there is no
prejudice to the Superior, there can be no recognition; and there is no
prejudice to the Superior in this case, seeing the Superiors prejudice is
either upon the account, that the Vassal redditur pauperior, or that the
disponing without the Superiors consent obtiudes upon the Superior a stranger
ex al ena familia and inimica; whereas in this case, the Disponer was not
pauperior, having reserved his own liferent, and in effect, the Be it self,
and power to burden the same, and contract debt, and alter the tailzie, and
dispose of the Estate notwithstanding of the same; and the Lord Cranburn cannot
be said to be a stranger, being descended of the Earl himself, and being his
Grandchild.

To this it is answered, that in Law, all such persons as are not alioqui
successuri, sunt extranei ex tenore investiturae, and by two express decisions
related by P. Spotswood and Hope, it was found, that Dispositions made to the
Brother or Grandchild did infer Recognition, though they were likewayes ex
familia, Nec licet (says Craig, page 345.) Vassalo anum ex liberis suis
eligere, sed vel naturae, vel juris ordo sequendus, vel domini electioni res
est permittenda.

The fourth alledgeance was, that only perfecta translatio domini, can infer
Recognition; whereas the Sasine here is null, because it is given to be holden
of the Superior, and Sasines of that nature are intrinsically null, quo ad
omnes effectus, except the Superior confirm the same.

To this it is answered, that si vassalus fecit omne quod in se erat, to
alienat the Few without the consent of the Superior, that alienation will
infer Recognition, though the alienation was null otherwise, as is clear by
Craig, page 344. Quod si traditionem Vassalus fecerit, ea tamen sit invalida
and nulla exempli causa si chartam dederit, de fundi alienatione tenendam de
domino Superiore, quam Sasina sequatur. Et dominus Superior neque
confirmaverit, neque ratam habuerit, videtur hanc alienationem nihil periculi
secum trahere, cum conditionalis videatur and sub hac condition contracta, si
dominus ratam habuerit, aut confirmaverit, quae conditio, cum non evenit and
alienatio nulla sit ex defectu consensus Superioris, and paria sunt in jure
omnino non fieri, and non jure fieri; sed profecto in hoc casu puto etiam
feudum domino aperiri, nam quandocunque vassalus id omne fecit and exequutus
est, quod in se erat, licet factum illud de jure non teneat, tamen quatenus in
se est, domini mutationem se velle testificatus est fidemque fregit: in hoc
etiam casu a feudo cadet, licet alienatio nulla sit. Suitable to which, Baldus
has very well observed, that licet alienatio sit nulla, ob vitium litigiosi
feudum tamen fit caducum, quia in prohibitis non requiritur juris effectus,
quod enim prohibitum est effectum sortiri nequit; and if only effectual
alienations could infer recognition, it could never be inferred; for all
alienations, to which the Superior does not consent, are null, and by the Act
of Parliament, 1633. all Seasines of Ward-lands granted to be holden Few, are
declared null, and yet are declared to be the ground of recognition. And
whereas it is alleged, that Craig, page 344. relates the case betwixt
Mackenzie and Bain, In which it was found, that Lands did not recognize,
because not registrat within forty days. It is answered, That there the
Vassal non fecit omne quod in se erat, not having registrat the Sasine
timeously, and so the tradition was complete; nor did the person to whom it was
disponed possess in the case cited, the Land disponed, as Cranburn did in
this: and by the opinion of Rosenthal, capite. 9. conclus. 4. Feudum (inquit
ille) absque domini consensu aperitur etiamsi alienatio ex alia aliqua causa
forte omissa solennitate legis aut statuti, aut simili, esset nulla modo
possessio vera and actu tradita sit nam doctores in hac materia considerant
prejudicium ipsius domini magis in traditione reiquam in alienatione. Vide
Curtium, Jun. de feudis, page 4. number. 85.

Whereas it is alleged, that the Sasine is null, as given upon a general
Letter of Attorney out of the Chancellary, nor are general Mandats sufficient
in prejudicialibus, and that this Sasine was given to a Minor, who was
extremely laes'd. To both these, the former answers are oppon'd, wherein I have
endeavored to prove, that the alienation may be null, and yet may infer
recognition; our Law considers not Minority, as to casualities competent to the
Superior, as is clear in the cases of Non-entry and Rebellion: and since the
Act of the Disponer, is that which only infers recognition, it imports not what
the condition of the Person was to whom it was granted.

It is also pretended, that the Sasine is null, as being actus legittimus qui
non recipit aiem, nec conditionem, l. 77. ff. de regjuris; for since executione
actus statim perficitur, its inconsistent that actus should be perfectus, and
exequutus, and yet should be suspended upon a condition, as this Sasine is,
which bears, failing Heirs-male of the Earl of Dirletouns body.

To this its answered, that this Sasine cannot be called actus legittimus, that
being ordinarily a term appropriat to judicial Acts, whereas there is nothing
more ordinar then that Sasines should be conditional, as we see in Sasines,
given upon warrandise Lands, and in Sasines following upon Wodsets; nor is it
denied that Sasines may bear resolutive conditions, and if so, why not other
conditions, these being of all others most severe? Nor have any Lawyers written
upon this subject, who have not divided Sasines in puram and conditionatam.

The fifth alledgeance was, that there can be no recognition where the Vassal
had power to dispone, and the Earl of Dirletoun had by his Charter, power to
dispone; for these Lands are disponed in his Charter haeredibus and assignatis,
which implies potestatem alienandi, which the Defenders learned Advoc^^s do
found upon tit. 48. lib. 2. feud. Si quis enim ea lege alicui feudum dederit ut
ipse, and sui haeredes, and quibus dederint habeant qui sic accepit poterit
vendere, vel alienare sine consensu Domini; for which likewayes they cite
Craig, dicta. diag. 3. Clarus, Hottoman and other Feudalists.

To this it is answered, that this general clause haeredibus and assignatis, is
only mere style, and the word assignatis is used here improperly, as it is used
in Bonds, in which a man binds himself, his He^^s and Assignayes, whereas it is
impossible for a man to bind his Assignayes. Argumentum a stilo is not still
probative, especially in this Age, wherein styles are become too laxe, and in
our eldest styles, there is a luxuriancy, which deserves rather to be
corrected, then allowed; thus Inhibitions forbid us to alienat Movables, and
single Escheits give right to Reversions, albeit our Law reprobats our style in
both these; and this clause was not designed to import a liberty to alienat,
for else there could be no recognition in Scotland, seeing all Charters bear that
clause, and such as have that clause have oftimes been found to recognize, and
generales clausulae non extenduntur ad illicitum: and that by the Feudal Law,
the word Assignatis is not equivalent to quibus dederit, is clear; seeing the
Feudalists use no such term as assignati; and in our Law haeredibus legittimis,
and assignatis, must not be interpreted as if it were equivalent to quibus
dederit, but to that clause used by Doctors, quibus legittime dederit; and all
Feudalists are positive, that the clause quibus legittime dederit, implies
necessarily that the Superiors consent is still necessar.

Likeas, Generalis clausula non extenditur ad prohibita ubi fieri potest
congrua interpretatio; But so it is, that the word assignati may be understood
of Comprisers, or of such to whom the Vassal should dispone the lesser half of
the Few: So that when a Few is granted haeredibus, and assignatis, it is
lawful for Creditors to comprise that Few, or for the Vassal to dispone any
part thereof, not extending to the half; but that Clause can never import, that
it should be lawful for him to dispone the whole, without the Superiors
consent, that being an interpretation which the parties themselves never
designed; and privileges which are inherent in the nature of a Few, (as this
is) are never understood to be discharged, except where they are discharged
expressly.

The Defender, my Lords, has told you, that he propones all these Defenses
jointly, which may discover to you, how frail his own Advocats judge these
Defenses to be: Arguments which are weak, being joined, may by their mutual
assistance plead pity, but they can never astruct the proponers Right, no more
then many ciphers can make a number, nor many uncertainties a certainty: This
is a shift which Eloquence, not Law, has invented, and may prevail with
Arbiters, but should seldom convince Judges.

The Lords found, that these Lands, though holding only Taxtward, did
recognize; and repelled also all the other Defenses.

For Alexander Carmichael, against the Town of Aberbrothock.
FOURTH PLEADING. How far the Borrower in commodato estimato, is liable, if the
thing be lost, vi majore.
WHen the Town of Dundee was so fortified, that its inhabitants had reason to
expect security to the Ships which lay under their walls, either by way of
defense, or capitulation; the Town of Arbroth did crave the lend of some
Cannons from Alexander Carmichael: but because the said Alexander, as a Burgess
in Dundee, might have expected from the foresaid Garrison, or from his being
able to sail his armed Ship where he pleased, perfect security to his Guns, he
therefore refused to lend the same, till Patrick Wallace and other private
Burgesses of Arbroth should estimat the Guns, and oblidge themselves to
re-deliver the said Guns free from all skaith, harm, or danger, or else to pay
the sum of 500. l. as the price agreed upon: and that in respect he foresaw,
that the Guns were not only liable to great danger, ex sua natura, but
likewayes because Arbroth was a naked Town, wanting walls, men, and skill; and
albeit the Town of Arbroth did owe to the said Guns the resistance they made
to Cromwels Ships in three several attaques, wherein if they had wanted Guns,
there Town had been burnt, yet so unjust are the said Patrick Wallace, and
others, that when the foresaid liquid sum is charged for, they suspend upon
this reason, viz. that this Contract is commodatum, and commodatarius non
praestat casus fortuitos: But so it is, they subsume, that these Guns were lost
casu fortuito, in so far as the Defenders endeavored to carry them to Dundee;
but being beat in by Cromwels Ships, they were forced to bury them in sands,
out of which they were raised and taken by those enemies.

To which it was answered, that though in commodato simplici, commodatarius non
praest^t casus fortuitos, yet in commodato estimato, it is otherwise, which is
most clear from l. 5.. 3. ff. commodato, the words whereof are, Et si forte res
aestimata data sit, omne periculum praestandum ab eo, qui aestimationem se
praestaturum receperit; which holds not only in commodato, but in all other
Contracts, where any thing is estimat, as is clear in the general, by l. 1.. 1.
ff. de estimatoria, Estimatio autem periculum facit ejus qui suscepit, aut
igitur rem ipsam incorruptam debet reddere, aut estimationem de qua convenit:
Many instances of which general may be given in several Contracts, but it shall
satisfy me to name Dos estimata, wherein it is very clear, that the valuing of
things delivered, did obliege the receiver to re-deliver either the thing
valued or its price, though the thing valued did perish casu fortuito, as is
clear, l. 10. ff. de jur. dot. Plerumque (inquit Ulpianus) interest viri res
non esse estimatas, ideo ne periculum earum ad cum pertineat maxim si animalia
in dotem acceperit, vel vestem qua mulier utitur, eveniet enim si estimata sint
and mulier attrivit ut nihilominus maritus earum estimationem praestet: which
is also most clear, l. 10.. 6. ff. de jur. dot. And if at any time the Law
relax any thing of this alleged severity, in favors of him who receives the
thing valued, It is upon the account that the thing valued was delivered for
the use and advantage, not of him who received it, but of him by whom it was
entrusted; as if in our case, my Clients had entreated the Citizens of Arbroth
to receive their Guns, and had valued them at the delivery; the Law in that
case, would not have burdened the receivers with the loss, where they gave no
occasion to the lend; but in the case where the thing valued was lent at the
desire of the Citizens of Arbroth, and for their advantage, without any
possible advantage for the lenders, in that case, which is our present case,
the Law does in express words tie the receivers to re-deliver either the thing
lent, or the estimation, l. 17.. 1. ff. de estimatoria; Si Margarita tibi
estimata dedero ut eadem mihi adferes, aut pretium eorum, deinde haec perierint
ante venditionem, cujus periculum sit? Et ait Labeo quod and Pomponius
scripsit, si quidem ego te venditorem rogavi meum esse periculum, si tu me
tuum, si neuter nostrum sed duntaxat consensimus teneri te hactenus ut dolum
and culpam mihi praestes. Nor can this be well doubted, if we consider the
nature of estimation or valuing, and the design of these who enter into such
contracts, by their estimating the thing lent.

All Lawyers and others are of the opinion, that commodatum becomes by
estimation, anomolum and irregulare, and the estimation were to no purpose if
it did not bind the receiver of the lend to more then what would follow, ex
natura commodati simplicis; and therefore, seeing commodatarius was here liable
ex culpa levissima from the nature of the contract, because the Lend was given
only for the advantage of the Lender: It must necessarily be inferred, that the
Receiver of an Lend that is valued and esteemed must be further liable, else
there would be no difference betwixt a thing lent simply, and lent after it is
valued, and consequently, the valuing before lending should operat nothing; so
that seeing in an ordinar Lend, the Receiver would be liable in culpam
levissimam, the Receiver must be liable in casus fortuitos, where the thing
lent is estimat before lend^ng, there being no case ultra culpam levissimam
praeter casus fortuitos. 2. The lender did secure himself by a Bond and the
foresaid Obligation, to restore the price, if the thing lent were not free of
skaith, hurt or damnage. 3. If there was any thing ambiguous in this case, yet
the clause behoved to be extended, ad casus fortuitus, and that must be thought
to be the meaning of the parties from the following rules, whereby ambiguous
Contracts are to be interpret, viz. First, a write is always to be interpret
against the Subscriber, who should impute to himself, that he did not clear
what he intended, and it were unreasonable that his obscurity should be a snare
to another person, scriptura semper est interpretanda contra proferentem. 2.
That in reason should be constitute to be the meaning of the write, which if it
had been treated of, had certainly been condescended to by all parties: But so
it is, that if at the time of the lending of the said Guns, the Lender had
refused to lend them upon any other terms, then that he should have been
secured against all events; It is not to be imagined, that the Borrowers would
have hazarded their Lives and Fortunes, and the honor both of their Country
and Town, for the hazard of 500 pound; and it is as improbable, that the
Lenders would have given the Guns, they being stated under all the
Circumstances above narrated. 3. It may appear both from the circumstance of
time, and the nature of the thing lent, that they foresaw the risk these lent
Guns were like to run; for none but Idiots would not have foreseen the same:
and it were against reason to think, that a man would secure himself against an
open and seen hazard, especially being to lend them to persons who behooved to
buy others, if they had not got the lend of those, and who would have bought
these Guns, if the lender would have sold them, and if they had been sold, the
buyers had run all risks.

To this it was replied, that first commodatum estimatum was only so called,
when the lender did estimate the thing lent, and did take the commodatarius
only obliged to restore not the thing lent simply, but either the thing or
value, at the option of the receiver, as was clear, because the receiver might
have oppon'd compensation against the lender, when he was pursuing for the
thing lent, or might make use of the thing lent as he pleased, which was not
our case; because the receivers of the Guns could not have retained the same,
or have rejected compensation against the Lender, though the lend had been
damnified; but it was in the option of the Lender to have called either for the
Guns, or the estimation, and this estimation and value was agreed upon, to the
end that the value might be repeated, if the Guns were lost through negligence,
or deterioration, but not if they were lost vi majore, or casu fortuito. 2. By
the express words of the Bond, the value is only to be restored in case the
Guns be damnified, but there is no provision made against their being lost, nor
can that be presumed to be the meaning of the Parties, because ille presumitur
sensus verborum qui est rei gerendae aptior, and casus fortuitus is very
contrary to the nature of commodatum. 3. This is not only casus fortuitus, but
insolitus, to which no contract is ever extended, and this case of the Cannons
being taken out of the Sands, could never have been foreseen, seeing it is
absolutely extrinsick, both to the use of Cannons, and to the ordinar hazards
of Cannons; and it was unusual and ominous for a Scots man to provide against
their being overrun by the Usurpers. 4. These Guns had been lost, if the
lender had retained them, seeing the Usurpers, after the taking in of Dundee,
made prize of all their Ships and Guns.

To which it was duplied, that the former Law was oppon'd, bearing that the
receiver commodati estimati in general suscipit omne periculum, and that is
properly commodatum estimatum ubi intervenit taxatio pretii: and though there
may be such a commodatum estimatum as is mentioned in the reply, yet, that omne
commodatum estimatum is of that nature is denied, and seeing the answer is
founded upon an express and general Law, it cannot be taken away but by a Law
as express, clearing, that there is no commodatm estimatum but in the case
instanced in the reply. Likeas the Interpreters, and particularly Faber, ad h.
l. give instances of commodatum estimatum, in the case where the thing estimat
is to be restored, and estmatio in general produces that effect of transferring
the hazard as will appear, per l. 1. (...). 1. ff. de estimatoria; by which it
is likewayes clear, that if the thing it self be not given back, the estimation
must be delivered, and that the estimation extends not only ad deteriorationem,
sed etiam ad interitum. Likeas in the general, estimatio is called a kind of
vendition, as is clear by Calvin, in his Lexicon upon that word, and the
citations there adduced; and in venditions, the receiver undergoeth all hazard,
and therefore he should run the same hazard in commodato estimato. As to the
second, It is answered, that he who is obliged to deliver any thing free from
all hurt and damnage, is much more obliged to deliver back the thing it self,
for it is probable, that he who guarded against the less danger, would guard
against the greater.

Whereas it is alleged, that this must be the meaning of the parties, the
former rules are oppon'd, and it is added, that this case could never be called
casus insolitus, nor fortuitus, in respect that is casus fortuitus which the
skillfulest or wisest man could not foresee; but so it is, every wise or
prudent man might have, and could not but foresee this; and the brokard rei
gerendae aptior is only extended to regular Contracts, but not to irregular
Contracts as this is, wherein it is confessed, by both parties, that they
intended to transgress the ordinar rules and nature of commodatum estimatum,
and to wrest the nature of this Contract to their particular case; and
certainly, sensus aptior rei gerendae at that time was, that the lender, who
might have secured his own Guns, and who was not obliged to lend them, did
design to secure himself against all hazards, when he caused estimat his Guns;
else, why should he have caused estimat them? And to the third, where it is
alleged, that the raising of Guns out of sand is not the hazard which Guns
ordinarily run; It is answered, that the burying and sinking of Cannons is very
ordinar; but it being foreseen in general, that these Guns might perish by the
Usurpers, and in that quarrel, that was sufficient, though every particular
circumstance was not foreseen: for if the Guns had been stolen away by night,
or had been taken in the return, certainly the receiver would have been liable;
and yet that is not a more ordinar way of lossing Guns, then this now instanced.

To the fourth, bearing, that those Cannons had been lost however; It is
answered, that the charger is not obliged to debate what hazard they would
have run, he having secured himself by a Bond, as said is, and that might be
as well alleged in venditions, and yet none ever alleged, that the buyer did
not run all hazards of the thing bought, and was not obliged to pay the price,
because the seller would have lost the thing sold, if it had remained with him:
but the truth is, the Skipper, nor no Burgess of Dundee wants any of those Guns
which were aboard in their Ships at that time; and it is probable, that though
the Ship and Goods had been taken from this pursuer, he had none to blame but
these Defenders, who by borrowing his Goods, dissabled him to venture to Sea
with his Ship: nor can it be imagined, that the burying of Goods in presence of
the whole Town, and leaving their Carriages open to the Usurpers, was exact
diligence; nor did ever the receivers, after the Guns were taken away, either
inform the chargers that they might do diligence, or make application to the
Usurpers for restitution, as Dundee, St. Johnstoun, Crail, and other Towns did;
and wherein they prevailed so, that these Defenders are not only liable ad
casus fortuitus ex natura commodati estimati, but for not doing exact
diligence, ex natura commodati proprii.

The Lords found, that the Borrowers were not liable to pay the price, since
the Cannons were lost casu fortuito, and vi majore.

For Sir Thomas Stewart of Gairntully, against Sir William Stewart of
Innernytie.
FIFTH PLEADING. How Fury and lucid Intervals may be proven.
THe deceast Sir William Stewart, finding his Daughter Jean fit enough to
marry, did provide her to a Portion of twenty thousand Merks; in which, though
he substitute Sir William her Brother and others, yet your Lordships did, by a
solemn decision find, that she remained still in the Fee, and might have
disponed, notwithstanding of the quality of the substitution, and therefore you
did sustain a Right and Assignation made by her in favors of Sir Thomas her
Brother.

Sir William resolving rather to hazard the honor of his Family and Sister,
then the loss of the Sum; did at last allege, that the Assignation was not
valid, seeing his said Sister was furious, both before and after the granting of
that Right: whereas Sir Thomas, in maintenance both of his Sisters honor, and
of the Right made by her to him, did contend, that she had dilucid Intervals,
and at the time when the Disposition was granted, she was sanae mentis; for
proving of which, mutual probation was allowed to both Parties, and the
Testimonies having been published, It is now alleged for Sir William, that
albeit your Lordships had found that his Sister was in Fee, when the case was
at first debated, without relation to the condition in which she was when she
made the said Right; yet, though the Substitution was found by your Lordships
not to be a sufficient ground to take from her the power of disponing, it
behoved at least to qualify the said power, as that she should not be allowed
to dispone upon that sum expressly against the Fathers destination, except she
were proven to be a person of an entirely sound judgment; and it behoved to be
thought, that the Father perceiving the frailty of her wit and spirit, did only
design she should have an aliment during her life, but that after her decease,
the sum provided should descend to the person substitute by himself. 2.
Furiosity is a disease which so disorders the judgment, that those who labor
under it are in Law accounted unfit to make any Right, or to adhibit any
consent; and fury being once proven, is still presumed to continue: So that it
being proven that this Gentlewoman was once furious, in so far as she tore her
Clothes, and did beat them who attended her, it must be presumed that this fury
did continue, except this were taken off by a most pregnant probation, wherein
she could be proven, not only to have done acts of folly during the time that
she was about the completing of that Right, but that she had for a long time,
both before and after, enjoyed not only adumbratam quietem, but an entire
soundness of judgment, neither tainted with, nor clouded by that fury, which
did formerly incapacitat her to make the Right that is now quarreled. For all
Lawyers, and particularly Zaccke^s, do distinguish betwixt a madness, which
has only remissionem, sed-non intermissionem, where simplicity continues when
the fury ceases, and that fury which does sometime totally recede: In the first
of which they require, that the persons quorum furor est intervallatus, do not
only actus sapienti convenientes, sed etiam actus sapientis, and that they show
not only a present madness, but that they testify by a long tract of
continued recipiscence, a sagacity, which proves that they are fully returned
to the vigor of their judgment, and which is able to take off the presumption
which lies against them, that semel suribundus, semper furibundus prasumitur.
Whereas, in the case here contraverted, its proved, that the said Jean was at
best of a very weak judgment, never able to converse with others, nor to
administrate her own affairs; and at the time she made the Disposition, there
is nothing proven which could have demonstrate her to have been in such a lucid
interval, as might have sustained the act she was then doing, she having
discoursed to no man at that time, nor so much as read the Disposition, which
no wise person would have omitted, and having contradicted her Fathers express
will, without gratifying any of her other Relations.

But before any distinct answer can be returned to the former representation,
your Lordships will be pleased to consider, that the two greatest privileges
of mankind are, that by Nature he is a reasonable Creature, and that by Law he
may freely dispone upon what is his own; Whereas, this unnatural Brother,
designs to rob his Sisters memory of both these allowances, and by denying her
every thing that is fit for a reasonable Creature, burdens himself to prove her
a Brute. Somewhat is due to the modesty of her Sex, more to the being dead,
(that great Sanctuary against all malice) but most of all is due to the name of
a Sister; and therefore, seeing by how much the danger is great, that may result
from the probation, by so much the probation ought to be the more concluding
and pregnant: It does necessarily follow, that the probation to be deduced in
this case, ought to be most conclusive, seeing it tends to take away the
greatest privileges which were competent to the Defunct, either by Law or
Nature. And albeit our Law allows not the depositions of Witnesses, to prove in
cases exceeding one hundred pounds; yet, by this method, Dispositions of the
greatest consequence may be enervat, upon the depositions of Witnesses, and
that just Law not only disappointed, but cheated: and what danger are we
exposed to, when two fellows may, by their assertions, prove us to be mad,
after our death, and thereby disfame our memories, and alter our destinations?
The settlement whereof, is the most serious earthly satisfaction which we have
in that last Agony.

It is very remarkable, that Law puts a difference betwixt fatuity and
furiosity. Fatuous persons, whom we call Idiots, are these who want spirit
enough, tardi, bardi, moriones, maccarones, qui inopia caloris and spirituum
laborant: But furious persons are such, as have too much heat and spirit; and
our Law has placed a distinction betwixt these two; for though neither Idiotry
nor Furiosity can regulariter be proven, otherwise then by the cognition of an
Inquest upon B^ieves raised out of the Chancellary, as is clear by Craig, and
by the 66. Act. 8. P. J. 3. which Inquest must consist of fifteen neighbors,
who knew the person who is alleged to be furious or idiot, and who must call
for that person before them, and examine her; so zealous our Law has been for
our honor, and so jealous of Witnesses. Yet, sometimes it has permitted open
and notorious fury to be proven after the death of the furious person, as in
the case cited; but no instance can be given, wherein Fatuity or Idiotry, was
ever sustained to be proven after the Idiots death: which was most reasonable,
for Idiotry consisting in the want of wit and judgment, which habitude is not
subject to the senses, but must be inferred by conference and consequences,
therefore it should not be sustained upon the depositions of Witnesses simply,
but upon the knowledge of an Inquest, who are in our Law both Judges and
Witnesses, and are in quality and prudence, above Witnesses. And if a person
can count their ten Fingers, they are not accounted Idiots, nor fatuous; for,
fatui sunt (as Zackeus observes) illi tantum qui omni ratiocinatione and
judicio carent. So that this Gentlewoman cannot be proven to have been fatuous,
being now dead; but though she were alive, and that the probation led might be
legally received, yet she cannot upon that probation, be said to be fatuous,
seeing it is proven, that she gave money to buy Necessars, that she came to
Table, went to Church, conversed with Neighbors, and asked for her Friends at
strangers who had seen them, and that she carried her self ordinarily as other
Gentlewomen did, or ought to have done.

Lawyers sometimes speak of imbecillitas and debilitas judicii eorum quae
sensum aliquem habent, licet diminutum; and such are by all Lawyers allowed to
Marry, and make Testaments, etc. as is observed by Gomez. Resol. tom. 1. c. 6.
Grass. in Test^m. quest. 21. and thus it was decided, 27. October. 1627. in
Frizland, as Sand. lib. 2. Def. 2. relates; and this at worst is our case: for
all that can be alleged against this unfortunat Gentlewoman, is, that she was
of a slow and dull humor, as Melancholians are, these hypocondriack vapors
being to their Spirits, what storms are to the Sea, which though they disturb
them for a while, yet cannot they hinder them from returning fully to their
former calm.

Before I come to clear, that she was not furious, your Lordships will be
pleased to know, that furor is defined to be dementia cum ferocia and horrenda
actionum vehementia; Fromanus, de jure furiosorum, p. 6. In Law he is said,
omni intellectu carere, l. 14. ff. de officio, presid. qui nec scire nec
discernere potest, l. 9. ff. de acq. haered. qui caret affectu, l. 7.. 9. quib.
ex cause. in possess. qui caret omni judicio, l. 12.. 2. ff. de judici. And
because prudence is qualitas quae inesse debet, ideo nemo praesumitur furiosus,
sed potius sanae mentis; and two Witnesses, deponing de sana mente, are
preferred and believed more then a hundred who depone upon fury, Menoch. Lib.
6. presumpt. 45.

Lawyers divide fury, in continuum, ubi animus continua mentis agitatione
semper accenditur and interpolatum, seu intervallatum, qui dilucida habet
intervalla, quorum furor habet indicias, and quos morbus non sine laxamento
aggreditur, l. 9. c. qui test. facere poss. and quos furor stimulis suis
variatis vicibus accendit, l. 6. C. de contr. empt. In whom fury is but an
ague: madness is but a disease in the one, but it is the temperament and the
complexion of the other; in the one the judgment is but darkened as by an
eclipse; but in the other, it lies like the Cimmerians under a constant night.
That this was not a continued fury, is clearly proven; for the depositions
bear, that she was only seized with these fits that troubled her, twice or
thrice in a year, and that at other times she had, non solum remissionem, seu
adumbratam quietem, sed etiam intermissionem and recipiscentiam integram, for
they depone, at other times she was as well as Gentlewomen are, or ought to be.

That which is contended then is only, that the lucid intervals are not clearly
proven, at least it is not proven that she at the time of the subscribing that
Assignation, and for a considerable time before and after, was in a lucid
interval; but the contrary will, I hope, appear from these positions.

First, by the probation it will appear, that she was never mad and furious;
for she at no time wanted all sense and judgment, albeit she was at sometimes
oppressed with an overflowing and abounding melancholy, which distemper differs
clearly from madness, as Zackeus observes very well, lib. 2. quest. 9.
Melancholici (says he) sunt timidi and merentes vel ridiculi; Furiosi vero in
perpetuo mo^u audaces, ac praecipites. And it will appear from the probation,
that she went to Table, to the Church, and to all Societies, which is not
allowed to mad people; that in her fits, she did only laugh and sing, and when
she did begin to talk idly, the least sign would have made her recover her
self, which is a clear sign of melancholy, but no ways of madness. And the
Father, who best knew the condition of his own daughter, was so far from
thinking her mad (as is pretended) that he left her a considerable portion,
which implies not only a liberty, but an invitation to Marry: Whereas if he had
thought her mad, doubtless he had only left her an Aliment, but no Portion,
and would have recommended, that she should not Marry; for what Father desires
to have his Family disgraced, by giving out a mad Daughter? And the Physician
also depones, that she was only troubled with a melancholy; which humor,
though when it boils over, will occasion great distempers, yet, that stock of
vapors being spent, the Brain returns, or rather continues, in its natural and
exact temper.

2. The Witnesses who depone can give no such account of their causa scientiae,
as can infer madness, for she being, as they confess, always removed to her
Chamber, when her distemper did show its first twilights, they could not
exactly know that habit of the mind, that is necessar to be known in such
cases; Whereas, the causa scientiae they give is, that they heard her commonly
repute mad: And one depones, that passing by her Chamber Door, he saw her laugh
and sing, and heard her talk idly, which was too transient a way to know the
nature of a distemper, which the Law ordains to be known by conference, and
frequent conversation.

3. Albeit in Law, Semel furiosus semper praesumitur in furore perstitisse, yet
when lucid Intervals are once proven, as is very clearly proven here, Quod
actum erat, potius praesumitur in dilucido intervallo, quem in furore gestum,
si actus ita gestus fuerit, ut nullum stultitiae signum appareat. This Mascard.
gives for a rule, conclus. 826. and there he cites, afflicit. decis. 143.
Jason. ad. l. furiosum, C. qui Testamentum facere possunt; and Covarr. de
sponsal. part 2. cap. 2. And thus the Roman Senate decided of old in Testamento
Tuditani, cited by Val. Max. lib. 7. cap. 8. So that albeit where the Intervals
are not proven, it is requisite, that actus sapientis, and the condition of the
person before and after for a considerable time, be proven, to make the act
appear to be wisely done; yet, where the lucid Interval is proven, actus
sapienti conveniens for the precise time is sufficient, for else the proving
prior lucid Intervals should be unnecessar, seeing though prior lucid Intervals
were not proven, yet it would be sufficient, that the act were actus sapientis,
for that per se is exclusive of madness.

4. The Nottar does assert in the Assignation, that at the time she was of a
sound judgment, upon which certainly he would have depon'd, had he been alive,
so that he is now a proving Witness: and Froman. p. 81. thinks the Nottars
assertion in such a case of great moment. But above all, that which convinces
me is, that Sir Thomas being interrogat upon his oath, whether he believed she
was then of a sound judgment, does depone affirmative, and though this be only
an oath of calumny, yet it is equivalent to an oath of verity, nor do they
differ; Nor could an oath of verity be more express, and so not more proving.

And whereas it is contended, that this Act was of its own nature, rather a
sign of madness, then of prudence; seeing she did not read over the Assignation
which she subscribed, and seeing she obliged her self therein, not to marry
without her Fathers consent, and that she therein altered that destination made
by her Father:

It is answered, that at the time of her subscribing that Paper, she desired
that a Nottar might subscribe for her, because she could not write; and when
the Nottar told her that she behooved to subscribe her self, else the Paper
would be null, she called for it then and subscribed the same, which show that
she could reason and deduce consequences, and that she desired earnestly to
have her Brother Sir Thomas secure of what she did; and albeit women can
(because of there sex and employments) show but little sagacity; yet in this
she discovered actus sapientis, as well as sapienti conveniens. And albeit it
be not proven, that the Paper was not read over, yet since the contrary is not
proven, it must be presumed to have been done, per argumentm a solitis. And
seeing Sir Thomas was the eldest Brother, and had entertained both her and her
Mother, it was most reasonable that she should have left him her Estate, being
the stock of the Family; and she being bred up in a kindness for him by their
Mother, whose choice she was obliged to approve, being then in one Family with
them, and her only Parent. And it was most just, that her eldest Brother coming
in place of her Father, she should have taken his advice in her Marriage: which
advice was not in Law binding, nor would she have fallen from the right of her
Provision, though she had refused his advice; so that in this, she honored her
Brother, and pleased her Mother, without prejudging her self.

Secure then (my Lords) in this precedent, our Names against infamy, and our
Estates against the lubricity of Witnesses, and arbitrariness of Judges; and
give not occasion to Witnesses in one Act, to perjure themselves, and ruin us
and our Posterity: And gratify not the avarice of a Brother, who digs up the
ashes of his defunct Sister, to find that sacrilegious Prey which he hunts
after; but let him see by your sentence, as an earnest of Gods just judgment,
what he deserves who calls his Brother a fool, much more, who for money takes
pains to prove his Sister such.

This Case was submitted to the Lords, and the Sum was divided equally by them,
as Arbiters.

For the Lord of Miltoun, against the Lady Miltoun, November, 1669.
SIXTH PLEADING. In what case a Sentence may be reduced, by a Reprobator of the
depositions of the Witnesses whereupon the Sentence was founded, and by what
probation Sentences may be reprobated.
I Tremble (My Lord) to think, that the Fortunes of the best of His Majesty's
Subjects, should be, by the fatal necessity of our Law, laid open to the malice
and avarice of the meanest, and worst Witnesses: And though we know, there be
thousands who would hazard their own damnation; to satisfy either their
revenge or avarice; yet if any two of these Witnesses, should conspire to
satisfy their designs, either by deponing that which is absolutely false, or
by concealing what is really true, to the ruin of our Lives or Estates, it is
pretended, that our Law has invented no civil remedy. This (my Lord) were to
make the Law authorize the robbing of Innocents, and to suffer no man to
possess his Fortune, longer then two Rascals pleases; Wherefore, it is my
design, to vindicat both our Law, and my own Client, and to show that your
Lordships justice is appointed as a City of refuge, and that you can, by your
Reprobators, defend us against their depositions. But because this subject has
been but very unfrequently and darkly handled amongst us, albeit it have in it
very much both of intricacy and concernment; I hope your Lordships will allow
me so much more of time; and seeing ex facto jus oritur, I shall, to the end the
point of Law may be the better understood, thus open to you the matter of Fact.

The deceast Lord of Miltoun did match himself in a second Marriage to this
Lady, to whom he did, with the greatest part of his Estate, give his chief
House in Jointure; and after his decease, she having married John Maxwell her
present Husband, they did take as much pains to destroy the house, as the Law
oblieges them to take in preserving it: which abuses did put a necessity upon
Sir John Whitefoord my Client, to whom the Estate belongs, as Son and Heir to
the deceast Miltoun, to buy the said Maxwells right, which he had to her
Jointure jure mariti; and after that her Husband and she had received a
sufficient price for it, they did enter upon an unworthy design, of retaining
both the Land and the Price; and in order thereto, it was plotted, that the
Husband Maxwell should go off the the Country, and that this Lady his Wife
should pursue a Divorce against him, as having committed Adultery; During the
dependence of which Process before the Commissars, finding, that the Reduction
of this Right (which fell in consequence of the Reduction of the jus mariti)
was chiefly aimed at, Miltoun offered to appear, and object against the
Witnesses, who were led to prove the Husbands Adultery, and which Witnesses
were persons known to be of very torn and unsound fame, and very liable to all
impressions; but he was not admitted: whereupon he raised Reduction of the
Commissars Decree before your Lordships, upon several reasons; two whereof
were, 1. That the Lady had bribed the Witnesses. 2. That she had suggested to
them what they should depone, instructing them what Faces and Clothes these
Women had; which reasons your Lordships found not competent by way of
Reduction, but by way of Reprobator.

When this Reprobator was, in obedience to your ordinance raised, it was
alleged, that there could be no Reprobator now pursued, since it was not
protested for, at the time when the Witnesses were led; but this was repelled,
both because your Lordships had reserved a Reprobator already, which was
equivalent to a Protestation; and because the grounds of this Reprobator are
but lately emergent, since the receiving of the Witnesses, and were not then
known. And as Durandus, that learned Practitian observes, tit. de reprob.
testium, number. 2. Quod si actor paratus sit jurare, quod ad hoc, ex malitia non
procedit, vel quod post publicationem, didicit id quod nunc objicit, tunc
auditur sine protestatione; and cites for this, cap. presentium extra de test.

The Lady finding her self in hazard to loss both her Jointure and Reputation
by the event of this pursuit, she now alleges, that these grounds of
Reprobator are not relevant, nor receivable; 1. Because when Witnesses are
sworn they are purged of partial counsel, of the receipt or expectation of good
deed; so that this being res hactenus jurata, it cannot be thereafter searched
into by him who referred the same to Oath, and detulit juramentum; nam dum
detulit, transegit. 2. Though the corrupter or suggester may be punished paena
falsi, yet the sentence pronounced upon these depositions, can never be
reduced. 3. If this were allowed, there should be no end of Pleas, sed lites
essent immortales; for the first Witnesses might be reprobated by other
Witnesses, and these by others, and these by others; and sic daretur progressus
in infinitum. 4. Though corruption were receivable, yet it were only probable
by the Oath of him who obtained the Decree.

Before I come to make particular answers to the difficulties proposed, I shall
remember your Lordships in the general, that Probation being defined by Lawyers
to be, fidem facere Iudici, to convince the Judge of what is alleged,
probation by Witnesses is no infallible, but only a presumptive probation; for
it is founded upon no other warrant, then that it is presumable, that two
dis-interested persons will not, by loosing of their own souls, gain any thing
for a third party; so that this kind of probation seems rather to be introduced
by necessity, then choice. And albeit at first, when the fear of a Deity did
sway the World, and before men had absolutely lost their primitive innocence,
and in place of it had learned those cheats and falsehoods, which have grown up
with time; that probation seemed to be very well founded, and two Witnesses
were sufficient in all cases: yet, Lawyers finding infidelity daily to grow,
have accordingly daily lessened their esteem of that proof; so that the civil
Law did begin to require sometimes five, sometimes seven Witnesses: our old
Predecessors established Assizes of fifteen sworn neighbors, who because they
were both Judges and Witnesses, had liberty to allow as much of the deposition
of Witnesses, as they thought fit; and thereafter, upon further experience, it
is statute with us, that no Witnesses can be received in cases above a hundred
pounds: and in Holland, Italy, and several other Countries, the deposition of
Witnesses cannot prove a crime, and are made no further use of, then to subject
to the torture, the person against whom they are led.

Lawyers have likewise, as a further check upon these depositions, even in these
cases when they are necessar, ordained the punishment of perjury to be severe,
ob vindictam publicam, and allowed an action of Reprobator for redressing of
the parties wronged, suitable to the two wrongs which Witnesses comm^t in their
false testimonies; in the one whereof they prejudge the Commonwealth by the
example, and by the other, the private party, in the deposition it self.

Reprobator is by Lawyers defined to be, an action, whereby the Judge rescinds
a former Sentence, because of the falsenesse of the deposition, or because of
the corruption of the Witnesses. And the deposition of every Witness has in it
two parts, viz. Initialia testimoniorum, and dicta testium: Initialia
testimoniorum, are, the previous circumstances premised by the Practique to the
depositions, whereof the chief are, Whether the party be married? of what age
they are? where they dwell? etc. which would be very impertinent interrogators,
if the Law did not intend to make use of these, as marks, whereby to try the
faith and trust of the deponers. There are likewise other interrogators, which,
though they be used as Initialia, yet certainly are essentialia, and grounds of
Reprobator, though the Witnesses do not at all depone upon them; such as,
Whether the party has suggested to them what they should answer? or has
corrupted them? yet, the parties use ordinarily to depone, if they get good
deed, or were instructed. The dicta testium are the body or matter of the
depositions, which relate principally to the thing contraverted; and albeit
some Lawyers dispute, whether the depositions of the Witnesses can be reprobate
quoad dicta testium? because the Witnesses are there contestes, and when two of
them agree in one, to reprobat these were in effect to overturn a formal
probation; yet in initialibus they are not contestes, but every one depones
singly upon what concerns himself, and is likewayes concerned himself in what
he there depones; so that in these, both singularity and interest derogat very
much from the truth of what is depon'd; and in this case, I intend not to
quarrel the dicta testium, but the initialia testimoniorum.

These grounds being laid down, my answer to the first difficulty is, that the
first defense, wherein it is contended, that the Witnesses having been
interrogat, whether they were brybed or instructed? and having denied the same
upon Oath, their depositions cannot be now reprobated, upon the heads of
suggestion or corruption, is most irrelevant, for these reasons; 1. The party
against whom the Witnesses are led, has no time allowed him to enquire what
the Witnesses are, who are to be led, and though he have relevant objections, v
g. if he be informed, that they are instructed or corrupted, he must instantly
verify these objections, else they are not receivable; so that to deny him the
liberty of causing the Judge purge the Witnesses, by their Oath, of any
suspicion, were in effect to take from the party his greatest security; and
sure, no person would desire that purgation, if he thought that he would be
thereby cut off from the benefit of Reprobator. 2. If this were allowed, it
were easy to cut off all Reprobators; for the leader of the Witnesses might
still cause purge them, and oftimes the Judge does it, ex proprio motu; neither
is it marked in the deposition, whether the Witness is purged by the Judge at
the desire of the Pursuer or Defender, but singly, that he being interrogat,
depon'd, etc. So that in this case the person, against whom the Witnesses are
led, should be prejudged without any act of his own. 3. Though a Witness have
purged himself of partial counsel, yet if he depone falsely, he may be pursued
by him, against whom he depon'd, for perjury; Ergo, it is much more competent
to the person, to pursue Reprobator in that case; for Reprobator being but a
civil Action, is far less dangerous. 4. Juramentum purgationis is not
juramentum decisivum, and is taken, as Lawyers say, non ad finalem decisionem,
sed ad majorem cautelam, and being introduced for the advantage of the party
against whom the Witness is led, it were most unjust that it should be
detorted to his prejudice. 5. A Witness who purges himself of partial counsel,
is but unicus testis, and depones upon his own innocence, and consequently does
not prove; and it were most unjust, that he should in that case be better
believed, then two famous Witnesses omni exceptione majores, and who depone
upon his prevarication; and if this privilege were given to an Oath of
purgation, it would tempt men to le(...) debauched Witnesses, and them, when
they are led, to depone arbitrarily; knowing that they can by their own Oath,
clear themselves of any thing that might be objected against them, and that the
Oath which they give, cannot only secure the party for whom they depone, but
themselves against all hazard. And lastly, Lawyers who have treated very
largely of this subject, have made no such distinction as this, but on the
contrair, by doubting only, whether dicta testium can be reprobat, because the
Witnesses there are contestes, as said is; They clearly insinuat, that in all
cases, where the Witnesses are not contestes, their depositions may be reprobat.

To the second defense, wherein it is contended, that the effect of a
Reprobator is not to reduce civilly the Sentence, nam sententia semel lata pro
veritate habetur; but that the only effect of it would be, to punish the
parties corrupters, or the Witnesses corrupted, by a criminal Sentence. To this
it is answered, that the alledgance is contrary to the grounds of all Law, and
to the opinion of all Lawyers. 1. A Reprobator is in their opinion, species
revisionis; as is clear by Farin. Durandus, practica Ferarien. and many others,
and Revisio, in the dialect of Lawyers, is the same thing that Reduction is
with us. 2. Seeing Witnesses wrong both the Commonwealth by the example, and
the private party by the deposition, and since it is very just, that every wrong
should have a suitable remedy, and seeing the prejudice done by the example, is
only remedied by the criminal Action; it is necessar, that the party laes'd
should be assisted by a civil Reduction: and it seems very unjust, that the
Witnesses should be punished criminally, and that it should be acknowledged,
that the party was wronged by the flase witnesses, and that yet the loss
should not be repaired. 3. Per l. 33. ff. de re judicata (which I may call the
fundamental Law of Reprobators) It is clear, that both a civil and a criminal
remedy are granted: the one, in these words, rem severe vindica, and the other,
in these words, in integrum restitue. The Law it self runs thus, Hadrianus
aditus per libellum a Julio tarentino, and judicante eo, falsis testimoniis,
conspiratione adversariorum, testibus paecunia corruptis, religionem judicis
circumventam esse, in integrum causam restituendam; in haec verba rescripsit,
exemplum libelli dati mihi a Julio tarentino, mitti tibi jussi, tu, si tibi
probavaris, conspiratione adversariorum, and testibus paecunia corruptis,
oppressum se, and rem severe vindica; and si quae a Judice, tam malo exemplo
circumscripto judicata sunt, in integrum restitue. Which is likewise confirmed,
per l. si quis c. de adult. Et ita voluerunt Alexander, consil. 148. and Lud.
Bologn. consil. 5. And by our Practique, Sentences have been reduced, and the
Party repon'd, when the depositions whereupon the Sentence proceeded, were
convell'd by a Reprobator: clear instances whereof are to be seen, the 23. of
June, 1633. and 22. of December, 1635. And upon the 5. of March, 1624. in an
action of Reprobator raised against a Divorce, it was found, that the offering
to corrupt one of the Witnesses, was sufficient to reduce the Decree of
Divorce: Whereas, here it is offered to be proven, that both the Witnesses were
corrupted, and if the deposition could not be quarreled in order to a civil
effect, there needed no Reprobator at all; for the criminal action of Perjury
would reach the other effect, and the Lords of Session, before whom Reprobators
are intented, would not be at all Judges competent. 4. This opinion, both of
the Civil and of our Law, is founded upon very just Principles; for the
Sentence being in that case founded upon the depositions, these being removed,
the other should fall in consequence, nam sublata causa, tollitur effectus; and
therefore, Lawyers say, that testes reprobati pro non testibus habentur,
Durand. ibid. and to allow a Decree after Witnesses were reprobat, were in
effect, to allow a Decree without probation. 5. When a Decree is founded upon
a Writ, if that Writ be found false, the Sentence is reduced; as is clear by
the whole Title, Cod. Si falsis instrumenmentis, etc. and therefore, much more
should Decreets be reduced, depending upon the depositions of Witnesses which
are reprobat, there being at least eadem paritas rationis.

As to the third difficulty proposed, which is, that this would progredi in
infinitum, and there should be no end of Plea's, which objection is propon'd by
Abbas, ad cap. proposuisti de probat: It is answered, that this Argument, if it
prove any thing, will p^ove that no perjury should be pursued, nor proven;
because, it is urged in this case, it may be urged there likewise, that these
Witnesses who prove the perjury, may be proven perjured by others, and these by
others; and by the same argument also, we should have no Assizes of Error,
because, if a first Assise may be tried for error, why not that Assise by
another, etc. But this difficulty is easily saved, for Reprobators should not
be sustained in all cases, and it is only remedium extraordinarium ex nobili
officio proveniens, and should only be granted, when the reason of Rep^obator
is found most relevant, and is offered to be proven by Witnesses omni
exceptione majores; and to deny it in that case, were great injustice. As for
instance, if I should offer to prove, that albeit it were proven by two
fellows, that I married Bertha in Paris such a day, whereas I offered me to
prove, that the same day I pleaded before your Lordships in this House, and
which were notour to all your number, were it not unjust to refuse to reduce a
sentence, which were founded upon that first probation?

It is most groundlesly alleged in the last place, that though corruption of
Witnesses were allowed to be reprobated, by an Action of Reprobator intented
before a Decision in the principal Cause; yet no Reprobator could be pursued,
after a Decreit obta^n'd in the principal Cause; for else no singular Successor
could be secure, since his Right might still be reduced or reprobated by
W^tnesses, and so Sentences could be no sufficient security to such as were
assigned to them; as also, post publicata testimonia and sententiam, the losser
of the Cause should still intent Reprobator, knowing what the Witnesses
depon'd; at least the corruption of the Witnesses, should not be then probable
any other way, then by the Oaths of the corrupter himself. To which it is
answered, that Reprobators are in Law allowed, as well post sententiam, quam
durante primo processu, as is clear by Farinacius and others; and there is no
hazard of the publication of the Testimonies, because the question is not,
whether the Testimonies and dicta testium can be reprobated? for that is not
here contended, but whether the initialia can be reprobated, which initialia
use to be interrogat in presence of the Parties, and so there is no hazard of
publication there: nor did ever any Lawyer allege, that corruption was only
probable by the corrupters oath, and this were most unreasonable, as will
appear from these Arguments, 1. Corruption is facti and falls under sense,
and therefore is of its own nature probable by Witnesses. 2. Corruption could
cast or set a Witness, before he were examined, and co Casu would be probable
by Witnesses, why not then after he has depon'd? for by our Law, as by the
Civil, noviter provenientia ad notitiam and emergentia, are receivable and
probable, eodem modo and ordine, as they ought to have been, if they had been
sooner known; and seeing all objections against Witnesses, are only receivable
with us, if they be presently proven, it were unjust not to admit emergent
Objections or Proofs. 3. This were to make Witnesses most licentious and
arbitrary, for the Parties may give, and the Witnesses take bribes, sub spe
impunitatis, if they knew that they could not be found out, but by their own
confession, and in effect this were to allow perjury, and to invite men to it.
4 It is most presumable, that these who have bribed, will perjure, and so their
oaths cannot be believed; and therefore, the Law must either declare, that
corruption is no ground of Reprobator, else that it is probable by other
Witnesses, and media probandi, then the oaths of the bribe^s, or bribed. It was
never denied, but that a Decree obtained by collusion of Advocats or Clerks,
might be reduced, upon full probation of the collusion by the oaths of those
Advocats or Clerks, else any of these by compearing, or omitting a Defense,
might bind one hundred thousand pounds upon any of the Lieges: and since it is
confessed, that the Civil Law and the Doctors do in this case allow probation by
witnesses, I see not why our Law should not admit it. They were as zealous for
the Authority of Sentences, as we are, and Perjury is more frequent now then of
old; and though our Law does not allow probation by Witnesses, in cases above
one hundred pounds, yet that Law was only made to regulate the original
probation of Debts in the first instance, but not the reprobating Sentences.
And it were against reason and justice, that a Decree that was obtained upon
the depositions of Witnesses, should not likewise be quarrelable upon the
depositions of other Witnesses proving corruption, these reprobating Witnesses
being above exception, and such persons as the Judges may think fit to admit,
whose choice will in this case, cut off the hazard of a processus in infinitum:
Seeing it is not probable, that Judges will allow any such persons, as may
endanger the interest of him against whom they are led, this power can be no
where more securely depositat, then in this Illustrious Senate, whose frailty is
much less to be jealous'd, then is that of Witnesses; and though the
constitution of a Debt cannot be proved by Witnesses, where there is no other
probation; yet it follows not, that a Decree founded upon a matter of fact,
and upon the depositions of Witnesses, may not be taken away or reprobated by
other Witnesses: for, though where Debt is lawfully constitute, it cannot be
taken away by Witnesses, yet the case here contraverted is, whether the Debt
was lawfully constitute? and the alledgeances are corruption, alibi and other
matters of fact; and though a Decree has interveen'd, yet that does not so
alter the nature of the thing, as to make it leave to be a matter of fact, and
the defenses emergent, since the Decree and matters of Fact are still probable
by Witnesses.

It is unjust, that what was first purchased by Witnesses, should not be tried
by the depositions of Witnesses, Eum debet sequi incommodum, quem sequitur
commodum; and nihil est tam natural, quam unumquodque eodem modo resolvi, quo
colligatum est. And as when I pursue upon a false Bond, the falsehood of that
Bond is to be tried by Witnesses, our Law does not force the Defender to refer
the truth of the Debt, or of the matters of Fact, to the oath of the Pursuer:
Even so, when a man is pursued upon a Decree, which is obtain*d upon false
grounds or corruption, why should our Law force me to refer the truth to the
Pursuers Oath?

Sure, if ever Reprobator was granted, it ought to be in this case; wherein my
Client offers to prove, that this Lady (whose Sex I am loath to wrong in her
person) did bribe these Witnesses, and instructed them verbatim what they
should depone; this is offered to be proven, not only by their own confession,
but by the deposition of many, who are more numerous, and more famous, though
their own confession proves them to be vaccillant, and faithless Rascals, and
who though they should not be believed in any case, yet ought to be believed as
well in this retraction, as in their first deposition, and who can enervat,
though they cannot astruct, their own testimonies; and this probation ought to
be received, against the deposition of two Villains, who stand condemned by
common fame, which is sufficient to hinder them from being Witnesses omni
exceptione majores, and are condemned by the K^^k-session for keeping
Baudy-houses, wherein they have shak'd off that fear of God, which is the
ground of the Faith we give to Witnesses, and have learned by pimping persons,
to pimp Plea's. I am here in defense of a Marriage, quae est causa maxim
favorabilis, and the dissolution whereof requires a probation per testes omni
exceptione majores; and it is very probable, that a woman who is so impatient
in those holy Bands, and so malicious against her own Husband, as to asperse
him with every thing that may lessen his reputation with your Lordships, would
not spare to have dealt so with the Witnesses, as might best effectuat her
designs, knowing that if she prevailed not, she behoved to return to the
society of a Husband, whom she had so highly disoblieged, to miss the
enjoyment of that Jointure, which she so ardently expected; and to be justly
branded, for having so maliciously and causelessly defamed so sacred a Relation.

The Lords sustained the reasons of Reprobator to be proven by Witnesses, omni
exceptione majores.

For the Lord Balmerinoch, against the Lady Coupar, Feb. 1670.
SEVENTH PLEADING. How far a Disposition, made by a man, in favors of his
Lady, of his whole Estate, is reduceable, as done in lecto aegritudinis.
MY Clients (My Lord Chancellor) this day, are not the Lord Balmerinoch only,
but all such as either may be Heirs, or Husbands; And by how much greater there
Estates are, by so much the more they are concerned in this discourse: wherein
I design to assist them when they are upon deathbed, which is an occasion, at
which not only their wit and memory leave them, but wherein they are often
deserted by all other Friends, besides these who design to prey upon them. And
I am so zealous in this service, that I cannot detain my self any longer, from
opening to you the matter of fact in this Cause, which may be saved by its very
merits, if ever any was.

The case (my Lord) stands thus. The late Lord Cupar had, by his Fathers
kindness, and out of the Estate of the Family, a considerable Fortune bestowed
upon him, and what addition it has received since, is rather the product of so
considerable a stock, then of that Lords industry: so that he having died
without Heirs, this Estate should have returned to the Family, not only by a
legal succession, but by the rules of gratitude. Yet having in a second
Marriage, at the Age of threescore and ten, married a Lady, by whom he got no
great Fortune, she induced him to dispone his whole Estate, Honors and Title
in her favors, and in favors of the Children to be procreat betwixt her and
any other Husband (the first bribe was ever given by a dying Husband, to invite
a Wise to a second Marriage, and though a Brother may raise up seed, yet we
never hear, that a Woman raised up seed to her Husband) of which Disposition,
there is a Reduction raised by the Lord Balmerinoch, who is Nephew to the
Defunct, and should have been his Heir, wherein he quarrels this Disposition,
as made upon Deathbed by the Lord Coupar, after contracting of that sickness,
whereof he died, and as done in prejudice of him as appearand Heir.

My Lord, I know, that Legis est jubere, non suadere, and that omnium quae
fecerunt majores nostri, non est reddenda ratio; yet, this Law, or rather
ancient custom, whereby persons upon deathbed can do nothing in prejudice of
their Heirs, can justify it self equally well, by Reason and Authority.

The reasons inductive of this excellent Law, are first, That after men are
sick, their judgments grow frail with their bodies; and the soul of man wants
not only then, the pure ministry of well-disposed Organs, but is likewise
disordered by the infection of the languishing body; wherefore the Law
observes, lib. 2. Reg. Maj. cap. 18. verse. 9. Quod si quis in infirmitate
positus, quasi ad mortem, terram suam destribuere caeperit, quod in sanitate
facere noluit, praesumitur hoc fecisse ex fervore animi potius, quam ex mentis
deliberatione. Which presumption seems to be very well founded; for it is not
imaginable, that any man who is reasonable, would pull down his own house; and
Nature and Reason being the same thing varied under different expressions, he
who overturns the one, cannot be sound in the other. The second reason is,
because men ordinarily upon Deathbed, being surprised with the approach of
death, and terrified with the prospect of what follows it, do so little value
the affairs of this world, which they begin now to find so little able to repay
their criminal pains and love, that to evite the importunity of such
assistants, as are like Vultures, busy about the Carrion upon such occasions,
they are content to ransom time and quiet, with the careless loss of their
Estate; and who would not buy time then at a dear rate? So that this Law is the
great fence of our sickbed, as well as of our infirm judgments. The third
reason is, the great respect our Law bears to ancient and Noble Families, who
are the corner-stones of the Kingdom, to whose valor, our Law has often owed its
protection, and so could not refuse its to them. And sure, if either the
importunity of Mothers, for their younger Children, or of Wives for themselves,
could be successful, the Heirs would succeed to a heavy and empty Title: and
upon this consideration, the Parliament did lately refuse to allow Parents the
power of providing their younger Children to small Portions, upon Deathbed. I
know also, that some add, as an original reason for this Law, the avarice of
Monks, and Churchmen, who persuaded men to Wodset for themselves rooms in
Heaven, with great Donatives to pious uses; to restrain which excess, Venice
and other Kingdoms have taxt the value of what can be so bestowed. And albeit
the restriction imposed by this Law, may seem destructive of Dominium, which is
jus disponendi, and that by the Law of the 12. Table, Ut rei suae quisque
legassit ita jus esto; So that this seems to want all foundation either in
common, feudal, or the Laws of other Nations. Yet, if we examine, we will find
Dominium is in very many more cases then this, and in more favorable,
restricted by all Laws; and that quaerela inofficiosi Testamenti, is sounded
upon the same reason with this Law; and that by the Laws of Spain and Flanders,
(so great is the favor of Noble Families) Noblemen cannot at any time dispone
their Estates, but must transmit to their Posterity, what ever Lands they got
from their Predecessors. But though no Nation joined with us in this Law, this
should rather induce us to maintain it, as being truly a Scots Law; and we must
be so charitable to our Predecessors, as to believe, that they would not
without very cogent motives, have restricted their own power of disponing, and
have receded from the custom of all other Nations; and we should be as careful
of our fundamental Laws, as the Spainiards are of their private Estates. And of
all persons, against whose importunity the Law should guard us, sure our Wives
are the chief, for they have the nearest, and frequentest accesses, the most
prevailing charms and arguments, and of all creatures women are most
importunat, and are most dangerous when disoblieged; wherefore the Law has
wisely forbidden all Donations betwixt man and wife, fearing in this, mutual
love and hatred, though in modesty, it has only expressed the first. And sure if
this Donation should subsist, every woman would think her self affronted, as
well as impoverished, if she could not elicit a Disposition from her Husband,
of some part of his Estate. And to what condition should a poor man be reduced,
and with what inconveniences urged, when he behoved either to disobliege his
Wife, or ruin his Heir, and to load his Fame or his Estate. So that the Lord
Coupar has in this, prejudged Husbands and Heirs, and has violated and jus
Parentale, and Maritale.

It is alleged for the Lady, that the reason is not relevantly libelled, seeing
we do not condescend upon a formed disease, under which the Lord Coupar
labou^ed the time of the Disposition, and of which disease he thereafter died:
Nor is tenderness and infi^mity sufficient of it self, to m^intain this reason
of Reduction, especially in old men, whose age is a continual infirmity, and
yet is not by Lawyers called a sickness, sickness being a preternatural,
whereas age is a natural infirmity. And this Law being mainly founded upon the
presumption, that these who are upon deathbed, have their Judgments and
Memories so clouded, and disordered by the sickness which presses them, that
they are either altogether disabled from doing affairs, or at least from doing
them judiciously, and according to the rules of reason: therefore such a
disease should be condescended on, as influences the judgment, and incapacitats
the Disponer to understand his own affairs. Whereas it were absurd that old men
who keep the house, should be generally interdicted, merely because they come
not abroad, and are somewhat tender, albeit they be otherwise very ripe and
mature in their judgment, as ordinarily old men are, Nature having bestowed
Prudence upon them, in exchange of that bodily vigor, which remains with those
who are young: and it were unreasonable, that if any Person were a little
tender, and had not occasion thereafter to come abroad, that a Disposition made
by him should ex eo capite be reduced, albeit it cannot be qualified that he
died of that disease. Wherefore our Law having restricted the power of Heretors
so far, that as they cannot dispone their Estate upon Death bed, in prejudice
of their Heirs, it has most justly appointed, that the disease wherewith they
are insected should be condescended upon; to the end it may be known, whether
it could influence the judgment or not, or whether or not the Disponer died of
that disease: and in all the decisions which concern cases of this nature, it
is remarkable, that the disease is still condescended upon. Likeas, by the 18.
cap. lib. 2. Reg. Maj. The reason whereupon this Law is founded, is said to be,
quia tunc posset in modico contingenti ejus haereditatem destribuere, si hoc
permitteretur, ei qui fervore passionis instant is, and memoriam, and rationem
amittit.

To which it is replied, that it is libel'd in the reason of Reduction, that
the Lord Coupa^ Disponer had contracted a sickness, before he had granted the
Disposition, which is all is necessar; And it were most absurd, to th^nk that
the Pursuer should be necessitat to condescend upon a particular disease, and
design it by a Name: For this were to make two Physicians absolutely necessar
in all diseases, since none are presumed to know the Names and Natures of
diseases but they; and there is sometimes such a complication of diseases, and
new diseases do so often creep in amongst mankind, that hardly even a Physician
can design them exactly by a particular Name. And it is very observable, that
when the Name of a disease is condescended upon in any Decisions, it is not by
the Pursuer, but by the Defender, who condescends upon the same, for clearing
either that the disease was not Mortal, or that it did not effect the Brains.
But yet when we consider these decisions, we will find, that if the Person had
been proven to have been once sick, the Disposition is still reduced, though
the disease be not proven to be such as could affect the Brain. Thus a
Disposition was reduced, albeit it was offered to be proven, that the Disponer
was mentis compos, February, 1622. Robertson against Fleeming; and that he did
his affairs, and sat at Table as at other times: nor is it requisite the disease
be morbus sonticus, pen. July, 1635. and 7. July, 1629. The alledgeance of
judicij minime vaccillant is was also repelled, and a provision was not
sustained made to a Child, though the Father had only a Palsy in his side, and
lived 28. Months, July, 1627. And this is most reasonable, because the
soundness of the Judgment being that which is not subjected to the Senses of
Witnesses, they cannot properly cognosce thereupon, and they would in that case
be rather Judges, then Witnesses. For if it were otherwise, Servants who are
the only ord^nar Witnesses that are present, would have it left arbitrary to
them, to make the Disposition valid or not, as they thought fit, and they might
depone very boldly, because without hazard, since in such guessings as these,
they might assume to themselves a very great liberty; and thus though the Law
thought it fit, not to put it in the power of the Heretor, to prejudge his Heir
upon Deathbed, by Dispositions, your Lordships should by your decision, put it
in the power of Servants to prejudge them, by their depositions. And if it were
necessar to prove, that their Judgment was disordered by the sickness, then
this Law had been absolutely unnecessar, for whatever Disposition is made by
any person, whatever condition he be in as to health, yet if he be not sanae
mentis, it is still reduceable; and as unsoundness of judgment without
sickness in that case, were sufficient, so the Law has made sickness without
unsoundness of judgment, to be sufficient in this. For, to the end there might
be nothing arbitrary in this case, where the greatest of the Subjects (such as
are the Nobility) are concerned in their greatest interest, which is the
disposition of their old Heretage; The Law has appointed, that if the person
be once sick who dispon'd, the proving that sickness without any thing else,
shall be sufficient for reducing that deed, except it can be proven, that the
person who granted the Disposition went thereafter to Kirk and Market; to which
none go, till they be entirely recovered, and fit for business, these being
places, wherein sound men are still presumed to be serious, because these
places are not fit for recreation, and so not fit for such as are sick, and
which are acts that falls under sense; and so may be deponed upon by Witnesses,
and are acts exposed to the view of very many: and the Heir cannot be thereby
prejudged, by either the want of Witnesses, or by being tied to the deposition
of domestic, packed Witnesses; for such only are usually admitted to v^sit the
Defunct (and so are only the persons who can be Witnesses) by these, who had
him so much in their power, as to elicite such Dispositions from him.

The Defender (my Lord) finding her self straightened by this debate, joins, to
her former Defense, another, which is, that going to Kirk and Market are not
absolutely necess^r qualifications of health; but it is sufficient if the
Defunct might have gone to either of these, or did equivalent de ^s, whereby it
might have been known that he had recovered his health, for that is the scope
and design why the others are condescended upon; and it were unreasonable, that
the going down a stair within Burgh, and the buying of an Apple at a Crame,
should be a greater sign of health, then the riding of a Journey: so that going
to Kirk and Market may be supplied by equivalent acts; And the Lord Coupar did
equivalent acts, for evidencing that he was in health, at, and after the
granting of the Disposition, in so far as he rose from, and did go to his Bed
at his ordinar times, did come to Table, entertain Strangers, wait upon them
without doors to their Horses, sell his Corns, take in his Accounts, and writ
long Letters all with his own Hand; in which Letters, he show a former design
he had to make that Disposition. Likeas, former Letters can be produced long
prior to his sickness, wherein he showed his design; whereas your Lordships
have by former decisions found, that equipolent acts were sufficient, as in the
case betwixt Sym and Grahame, in anno, 1647. Wherein it was found, that the
writing of the Disposition of a sheet and a half of Paper, all with the
Disponers own hand, was sufficient to sustain the same, and to defend against
the reason of Reduction upon deathbed: and in February, 1668. in the action
Pargillis against Pargillis, it was found, that the riding on Horseback,
though the Disponer was proven to be sick, and that he was supported upon his
Horse, were sufficient qualifications of health; And if the going to Kirk and
Market were still requisite, the Lieges could never be in tuto when a
Disposition is made to them, seeing very many men, who are in perfect health, do
often die suddenly, before they have occasion to go to Kirk and Market, and when
the persons to whom the Dispositions are made, cannot suspect there is any need
of their going there.

But though Kirk and Market were requisite, yet it can be proven that the Lord
Coupar went to both; and albeit he was supported, yet that was only in a piece
of the way, which was rough, and at which he used to be supported at other
times, when he was in health, and was therein supported now, not because of the
sickness, but because of the way.

To which it is replied, 1. That the Law and continual decisions having fixed
upon Kirk and Market, as indicia Sanitatis, no other acts can be sustained as
equivalent; for, where the Law requires solemnities, such as these are,
solennia non possunt per aequipolentia adimplere; thus earth and stone being
required as symbolls in Sasines, three oyesses at Mercat-croces, etc. Acts
equipolent to these would not be sustained; and the Law having appointed that a
Child should be heard cry, to the end Marriage may not be dissolved, though the
woman die within year and day, the Law sustains not that the Child was a lively
Child, or might have cried; for, says that Law, It was fit that some certain
sign should be fixed upon, to prevent the arbitrarinesse of Witnesses: And
seeing it would not be sustained to elide the reply of Kirk and Market, and the
alledgeance of health founded thereupon, that the Defunct was not in health,
though he went not to Kirk and Market; so the reason of Reduction founded upon
sickness, because he went to Kirk and Market, ought not to be elided, by
alleging that the Defender was in health, though he went not to Kirk or
Market; and if equivalent acts were sustained, this Law might be easily eluded,
and the effect of it would become altogether arbitrary. 2. The acts
condescended on, are not equivalent signs of health, to the going to Kirk and
Market; 1. Because these acts of going to Kirk and Market, are fixed upon by a
long tract of decisions, and so are solennia jure recepta; but these other acts
are not such as have been found equivalent by any former decision: but on the
contrar, acts of more adjusted equipolency then these, have been repelled, when
propon'd to take off the reason of Deathbed; and thus in the foresaid
decision, February, 1. 1622. It was alleged that the Disponer was able to go
to Kirk and Market, and that he went about his affairs within doors, and came
to his own Table, as formerly. And though it was alleged upon the penult.
June, 1639. that the granter of that Disposition then quarreled, and which was
made upon most deliberat grounds, was able to manage his own affairs as
formerly, having only a palsy in one arm, which did not affect the judgment.
And the 1. July, 1637. It was alleged, that the Disponer who had granted a
Bond of provision to his own Son, had no disease which could be impedimentum
rebus agendis, and that he lived 28. Months thereafter, and went about his
affairs, yet all these condescensions upon health were repelled, though the
time of surviving were much longer there then here, the case of the granting of
the Disposition much more favorable (and indeed, none can be less then this
Defenders case) and the persons who did dispone, of a much greater consistency
both of health and spirit, then the Lord Couper, who was known to have needed
little sickness, and much less importunity and design, was used in this case,
to make him do acts both irregular, and unwarrantable.

As to the decision, Sym against Grahame, It is answered, that it was proven
there, that the Defunct went upon his own feet to the Apothecaries Shop, and to
his Physicians House, which implies necessarily in Edinburgh, a going through
the Market, whereby the Law is satisfied, and a public act was done, which
might be proven by unsuspect Witnesses. And as to Pargillis case, the
Disposition there, was made in favors of a Grandchild, with whose Mother the
Grandfather had promised the Estate at the contracting of the Marriage, he
having been Party-contracter for her, though that promise was not insert in the
Contract; likeas, the Disponer went to the ground of the Lands unsupported, and
gave the Sasine himself: and albeit he rode to the Market, because he was
Goutish, which is the only disease that was proven, and which is in the opinion
of the Physicians, rather a Pain, then a Disease; yet he went to the Market
unsupported from his Lodging.

3. All these acts condescended on were done at several times, and might have
been very easily done singly, by a person who was sick, and none of them are
such acts as require health both of body and mind, as does the going to Kirk or
Market, nor did they require the coming abroad to open air, which is the severe
trial of health; and all these acts were transacted intra privatos parietes,
and so subject to suggestion, and collusion, the Witnesses being such as were
under the power of the Defender, who did elicit the Disposition, and the
appearand Heir being absent, and very remote, as is ordinar in such cases:
whereas the going to Kirk and Market, are acts wherein the appearand Heir may
hear a conjunct probation, and wherein though the Witnesses to be led for the
Defender, design to prevaricat, yet the fear of being controlled by a multitude,
would hinder them to adventure upon the deponing an untruth.

4. All the acts condescended on seem to be done ex affectata diligentia, and
affectata diligentia pro negligentia habetur, nor can any acts be esteemed
equivalent, except they were such, as clearly evidence, that if he had designed
to have gone to Kirk and Market, he could have done the same; whereas in this
case, when the Defunct designed to go to Kirk or Market unsupported, as Law
requires, he could not perform the same, but behoved to be supported as said
is, by which it clearly appears, he did not any acts that were equ^polent.

To his actual going abroad to the Kirk or Market, I make no answer, since our
Law requires his going unsupported, which cannot be alleged in this case; for
as going to Kirk and Market, is an exception which takes off the reason of
Deathbed, so the being supported elides the exception of going to Kirk and
Market. And so unfavourable have their Reductions always been in our Law, that
the Pursuer offering to prove supported, is preferred to the Defender, who
offers to prove unsupportable, as was found, 27. July, 1629. albeit regulariter
the Defender is preferred to prove his own defense; not needs the Pursuer
debate from what cause the supportation proceeded, for it cannot be known to
Witnesses upon what account he was supported, and that might have proceeded
from infirmity, as well as from the ruggedness of the way: and so this Law
would in its execution and application, return still to be arbitrary, if
Witnesses or Judges might guess at the occasion of the supportation. But
without debate, the Pursuer contends that this privilege of eliding a
Reduction ex capite lecti, being only competent to the going to Kirk and Market
unsupported; he who is supported, gains not the privilege, because he fulfills
not all the qualities, and it is very well known, that the way is ordinary
Calsay, and that the House and Market are not distant three pair, and the Lord
Coupar used ordinarily to walk there unsupported; So that when he took support,
especially at a time when he designed so much to go unsupported, it shows
convincingly, that his infirmity, though not himself, remained still
disobedient to all their designs, and though they could force him to dispone,
yet they could not force him to be sound; and your Lordships may easily judge,
that these who were at so much pains to make this Disposition subsist, were not
wanting to use all endeavors for carrying him over this last difficulty, so
that this support proceeded not from chance, but from necessity.

Seeing then your Lordships have been so rigid observers of the Law, in
prejudice of poor Children, and poor Relicts, who were unprovided, I hope you
will not prostitute it in favors of a stranger who had formerly gotten all the
Defuncts Estate in Jointure: Reward not thus the importunity of Wives, and bryb
not avaritious persons to trouble us at a time, when we shall think all time
too short, to be employed in the service of Him, whom we have so much, and so
often offended; And take not from us in one decision, the protection of the
Law, when our judgments are frail, the quiet of our Souls when we are sick, and
the love of our Successors when we are dead.

The Lords reduced the Disposition.

For the Countess of Forth, etc. against E. C.
EIGHTH PLEADING. How far restitutions by way of Justice, are prejudged by Acts
of Indemnity.
I Might stand in the next degree of guilt, to those who forfeited the Earl of
Bramford, if I thought that his Merit, or your Lordships Loyalty needed, that I
should urge much the favor of his case: He was a person who carried the honor
of our Nation, as far and as high as could be expected, from the happiest
Subject in much better times: for after that his Merit, armed merely by his own
Valor, had raised him to be a General in Sweden, he was chosen General in
England, in a War, wherein all his Nation were suspected, and did there,
actions worthy of our Praise, and their Wonder. But whilst he had refused to
draw a Sword against his Countrymen, even whilst they were Rebels, they
forfeited him, for fighting in a Kingdom, over which they had no jurisdiction,
and forfeited him by His Majesty's Laws, and at the pursuit of His Majesty's
Advocat, when he was hazarding his life for His Majesty, by His own command,
and in His own presence; and the very day after he had gained that Battle for
Him, which if prosecuted according to that brave Generals advice, might have
secured to Him, that just power, which those Rebels were scruing out of His
hands. The Earl of Forth being with His Majesty, restored to his own, his Lady
and Daughter pursue such as intrometted with his Estate, and insist now against
E. C. who for being General to the then Estates, got 40000 pounds out of the
Estate of the Earl of Forth, which was a part of that Sum, which was due to his
Lordship upon an heritable security, by the Earl of Errol and his Cautioners.
In which Debate, if I use terms which may seem indiscreet and zealous, I must
be paroned, since I shall use none but what are forced upon me by that Act of
Parliament by which I plead, since E. C. is a person to whom I wish much
success in every thing, save this Debat, and to whom my respects are above
jealousy.

It is alleged for E. C. that though such as are restored against forfeitures,
by way of justice, may by virtue of their restitution, repeat all that is
extant of their Estate, yet they cannot repeat what money belonged to them; for
money being res fungibilis, and naturally subject to consumption, it passes
from hand to hand, without bearing any impressa, whereby such as intromet with
it, may know how it came, and whose it was: Nor does the nullity of a Title in
the first obtainer, infer repetition of money from such as derive a right from
them, as may be cleared in many instances, for if money had been paid to one,
who obtained an unjust sentence from the late Usurpers, yet they would not be
liable in repetition, after that sentence were revived and declared null.

If one should serve himself Heir unjustly, and as Heir assign a Sum to one of
his Debitors, though his service were thereafter reduced, as unjust, yet could
not his Assignay be obliged to restore what he recovered by virtue of that
Assignation. If the Exchequer should presently gift an Escheat, though the
Escheat, and Horning whereupon it proceeded, were thereafter reduced, yet a sum
paid by virtue of that Gift, when standing, could not be repeated, and if this
Principle were not sustained, all Commerce would be destroyed; and though E. C.
his Title be now ^educ'd, yet it was valid the time of his intromission, which
is sufficient to astruct his bona fides: and Lawye^s, even in introm^ssions
with money, which was at first ^obbed, consider only Vim illam quae intervenit
tempore numerationis; whereas here, though the Est^tes did most unwarrantably
and rapinously forfeit the Earl of Forth, yet his money being brough^ in to the
public T^easure, and confounded with their Ca^h, it ceased to be his, and
became theirs; and therefore, E. C. being Creditor to them, as he might have
taken any Precept justly from them, payable out of their Treasure, So might he
have taken P^ecepts upon his Estate, which ceased to be his: Nor can the Earl
of Forth be said to be a loser by E. C. seeing the Estates for the time would
have brought it in, and converted it to their own use, in which case, Forth
would not have go^ repetition against the persons to whom it were paid.

To these grounds, it is (my Lords) replied ^or the Earl of Forth, that there
is a difference stated in Law, betw^xt restitutions by way o^ Grace, and
restitutions by way o^ Ju^t^ce; in restitutions by way of Grace, the guilt
remains though the punishment be remitted, and the person forfeited is
restored, not to his Innocence, but to his Estate, and therefore he recovers
only what ^s extant of his Estate. But in rest^tutions by way of Justice, the
Sentence forfeiting is declared never to have been a Sentence, and therefore,
it can never be susta^n'd as a Warrant to an^ (...), Sed comparatur juri
postliminii and fingitur nunquam (...) (...), and tantum restituit (...)
quan^um abstuli^ injus^^ia. And (...), not only what is extant, but all that
belonge^ (...) (...) there is resto^ed. But Sentences fo^^e^t^ng may be (...)
(...), as B(...)s obse^ves, (...), d(...)med. (...)* into (...), as though they
were ^njust, yet every p(...)t person was not ob^^ege^ to know the injustice o^
the ^or^eiture: as if a man had been forfeited in a Justice-court for murder
under trust, or a Landed-man for theft; against which sentences, though the
person forfeited were restored, yet it might seem hard, that such as
intrometted by virtue of Warrands or Assignations from the Estate, should be
forced to restore all they received; but others may be forfeited, as the Earl
of Forth was, by virtue of Sentences, which were no sooner pronounced, then
they became Treason, by an execrable inversion, not in the Panel, but in the
Pronouncers, and were not only Treason of their own nature, but behoved to be
acknowledged treasonable by all such as heard of them, and such sure was that
Sentence pronounced against the Earl of Forth; which was against the
fundamental Laws of this and all Nations, and which is declared by the Act of
Parliament restoring him, to have been, at the time it was pronounced, an Act
of Rebellion, and an invasion upon his Majesty's Royal Prerogative.

This being the state of this restitution, It is, my Lords, answered to the
Defense, that it is defective in the aplication of all its parts; For, that
this money was not res fungibilis, appears, because the Law distinguishes all
Estates in mobilia (quae sunt fungibilia) immobilia, and nomina debitorum.
Nomina debitorum are Bonds due to the Creditor, which are of a middle nature,
betwixt movables and immovables, and these fall certainly under restitution by
way of Justice, even according to the Defenders own Principles, for they bear
the n^me and impressa of him to whom they belong, and so the Intrometter is
warned to bewar of them: and that this money craved here to be repeated was
such, is very clear, for it was due upon ^n heretable Bond to the Earl of
Forth, by the Earl of Errol and h^s Cautioners, and came never in, nor was
confounded with the Public Treasure; for E. C. got a Precept upon ^t, before
the Public obtained a Sentence for it, and got a W(...)nd for that specific
sum owing by that Bond to the Earl of Forth, and got payment of it from the
Earl of Forths De(...)s, (...) Debitors to him: so far did just Heaven allow
this have to be its own punishment.

As to the second member of the Defense, which is founded upon his bona fides,
to intromet with the sum for payment of a Debt due to him, (he having been
General at that time) from an Authority then in being; It is replied, that Bona
fides in the Intrometter, does not extinguish and take away the Right of the
true Proprietar, nam quod meum est, sine facto meo a me auferri nequit. And
Lawyers determine, that to denude a man of his Property, there must be some
fact of his, either se obligando, or delinquendo, neither of which can be
alleged in this case; and if the Earl of Forth was never denuded, then
Calendar could have no Right; for, duo non possunt esse domini in solidum unius
and ejusdem rei, which maxim holds still in specibus and nominibus debitorum,
for though sometimes it may fail in numerat money, the dominion whereof is, for
the good of Commerce, sometimes transmitted by simple numeration; yet it never
fails in specibus, seu corporibus: and that money due by Bond, is not of the
nature of pecunia numerata, is clear from l. si certus ff. de legate. 1. And if
a Robber take away may Cloak, and give it to a Stranger, yet I would per rei
vindicationem get it back, notwithstanding of the Defenders bona fides; but
here there was no bona fides, seeing E. C. was oblieg'd to know, that the Earl
of Forth was injustly forfeited, and that the Act of Parliament, against which
there is no disputing, has declared it to have been Treason; and if E. C. were
pursued for opposing His Majesty at that time, or for concurring to the
forfeiting of the Earl of Forth, he could not defend himself otherwise, then
by the Act of Indemnity: Ergo, in the case of restitution of Forths Estate,
which is excepted from the Act of Indemnity, That Warrant proceeding upon
forfeiture, cannot defend him; for how is it imaginable, that his bona fides,
which could not defend him against the loss of his own Estate, shall be able
to defend him against the restoring of Forths, to which he had aliunde no
Right? There is no bona fides, but where it is founded upon a Title, Et ubi non
subest Titulus, ibi non est admittenda bona fides; But so it is, that E. C. his
Title, viz. The forfeiture of the Earl of Forth, is declared by Parliament,
never to have been a Title: But E. C. who was a Member of that Parliament which
forfeited the Earl of Forth, and General of that Army which defended them, is
in the same case, as if two Robbers had taken a Bond from a free Liege, and had
given it to one of their own Society, who was at least a spectator; in which it
is most certain, that the free Liege so robbed, would recover payment from him
who intrometted.

By this unwarrantable intromission with the Earl of Forths money, E. C. became
his Debtor, and the supervenient Act of Indemnity could no more defend E. C.
against this, then it could against his other Debts. Indempnities are designed
to secure against the Princes Pursutes, who gave them, but not to ruin
Innocents, else were these Indempnities, Acts of Injustice, not of Clemency. Si
criminaliter caeptum judicium interventu indulgentiae scriptum est, habes tamen
ressamen indagationem, and potes de fide Scripturae civiliter quaeri, l. 9. C.
ad L. Cornel. de falls. Amnesties are but general Remissions, and so cannot be
stronger as to all crimes, then a particular Remission is as to one: But so it
is, that a particular Remission can only dispense with the Princes Interest;
nor does it cut off the Pursutes of private persons, as the former Law observes
very well; and the Emperor in another Law tells us, Nec in cujusquam injuriam
beneficia tribuere moris nostri est, l. 4. c. de emancip. libero.

From these grounds, your Lordships have an easy and just prospect of the
answers which may be made to the instances adduced; for we are not in the case
of such as obtain Gifts from the present Exchequer, nor Rights from Heirs once
lawfully served: for the jurisdiction whereby these Rights are established, are
not funditus taken away, nor were the singular Successors obliged to know the
Sentences, whereupon their Rights were founded, to have been null, as E. C. was
in this case; nor can this prejudge Commerce, except among such as are obliged
to know the grounds of their Commerce to have been unwarrantable, and Rapines
and Violence sunt extra Commercium, which is so far from being an absurdity,
that it is an advantage; for this may help to stop all Commerce amongst Rebels
and Usurpers, and to loose these cords by which they are tied: and from this, I
beg leave to represent to your Lordships, that by this decision you will do
more to hinder Rebellion, and to encourage Loyalty, then Armies can do; for
since no man will hazard hanging and damnation by Rebellion, without he be
baited to it, by the certain expectation of a Prey; So, if Rebels find, that
they can never be secure of any Prey so obtained, they will certainly neither
be so eager to have such as are Loyal forfeited, nor so desirous to settle upon
themselves, Estates so robbed.

As to that principle, that whatever defect was in the Title here, yet there
was none in the numeration of the money, and defects in the numeration are only
objected against singular Successors; It is answered, that vis est vitium
reale, and afficit rem ipsam licet transierit per mill manus. And this
original sin insects the whole issue, for the States could not transmit a
better Right then they had themselves, nemo potest tribueri alteri plus juris,
quam ipse in se habet: and Plin. lib. 3. epist. 9. informs us, that Caecilius
Classicus having robbed the Province which he commanded, and having paid his
Creditors with the sums extorted, pecuniae quas creditoribus solverat, sunt
revecatae. But though this might be alleged where there remains still some
colorable Title in the Author, and where the singular successor was not
obliged to know the defect, yet in this case it can never be pretended by E.
C. whose Right is funditus taken away, and who was at the time the money was
assigned, or was nume^ at to him, obliged to know that defect in his Right,
which is now the ground of this restitution.

I shall not trouble your Lordships, with answering those objections, founded
upon the Earl of Forths ratifying and homologating his own forfeiture, by
giving in a Petition, 1647. when he was content to accept back his Heretage,
without these sums; for it is known, that Petition was not signed by himself,
nor did he ever appear before those Usurpers; and what was done by his friends,
cannot bind him, especially whilst that Usurpation continued, under which he
first suffered; nor to the Act, 1662. wherein some Intrometters are declared
free, for that Act was only conditional, and upon provision that His Majesty
should pay the Earl of Forths Successors 15000 Pounds Sterling, out of the
Fines, which condition was never purified, and I wish it had, for that was much
better then what is here expected: these grounds are such, upon which none but
such as are ready to drown would fasten: But, my Lords, if I needed to
prepossesse you with what the Parliament designed in this restitution, I might
easily clear, that they designed these Intrometters should be liable; for when
Duke Hamiltoun and the Earl of Errol were absolved as the immediate Debitors, it
is very well known, that they were absolved upon express Provision, that they
should deliver to the Earl of Forths Successors, such Papers as might prove the
int^omission of these Defenders, which had been unnecessar if the Intrometters
had not been liable, and the reason why these Debitors were absolved had been
groundless, if Intrometters had not been liable. But to what purpose should
the Parliament have restored Forth, if they had not designed the Intrometters
should be liable? For the Parliament knew, that there was nothing else, which
could have been reached by this restitution, except these moneys now pursued
for, and so their Justice had proved an a^y and empty Fanfara, bringing nothing
with it but the occasion of certain spending, upon an uncertain expectation: to
avoid all which debate, the Parliament have expressly ordained the first
Debitors to produce these Papers, for proving against these Intrometters, who
are hereby declared liable; which words are so express, that they preclude all
cavil, as well as difficulty.

This being the nature of our Pursuit, and these the answers to any pretended
difficulties, It is humbly recommended to your Lordships, to give a testimony
of your hatred against those violent courses formerly practiced, and to teach
Posterity what such invasions may expect. I know well, that no man has deserved
better of His Majesty, then E. C. has of late; and I hope, that when you have
decided against him, he will heartily acquiesce to your Sentence, as a further
proof of his sincere Loyalty, Nec tollitur peccatum, nisi restituatur oblatum.
I confess, that he did not yield to those impressions, till they had overcome
the whole Nation, and that nothing but the persuasion of his being then
employed in the service of his Conscience and Country, could have withdrawn
him from the service of his Prince: But this can plead no further, then that
his Prince should pardon these escapes, not that he should reward them,
especially to the prejudice of His faithful Friends.

The Lords sustained the Pursuit, and repelled the Defenses.

A Debate in favors of the Earl of Forth, against E. C.
NINTH PLEADING. How far a person unjustly forfeited and restored, may repeat
Annual-rents from the Intrometters.
IF I were not (my Lord Chancellor) very confident of the Justice of my own
Cause, and of your Lordships Learning, as well as Integrity; I should be
somewhat jealous, that the learned discourse you have heard, in favors of my
L. C. might leave some impression. But, my Lord, I think it impossible that
any, beside those unjust Judges who forfeited the Earl of Forth of his
principal Sum, would again forfeit him of his Annual-rents; nor do I imagine,
that even those would have done it, if they had not been distempered by their
own feverish zeal, and that national fury: so that if your Lordships should
follow their example, you should share their guilt, but want their excuse.

It is (my Lord) now alleged, that E. C. is not liable in payment of
Annual-rent to the Earl of Forths Successors, because Money is of its own
nature res sterilis, and in Law bears not naturally Annual-rent; and therefore
an Intromettor, though predo, though male fidei possessor, is not liable for
Annual-rent, for no man is obliged to improve another man's Money: and by the
civil Law, (which was more ready to give Annual-rents then ours) In corporibus
ex quibus fructus naturaliter proveniebant malae fidei possessor, was liable in
fructus productos, but in corporibus quae non producebant fructus de sua
natura, nec predo, nec latro tenebatur in fructus; and though a person who
impropriated public Money was punishable, ratione repetundarum vel ex
residuis, and so was there most unfavorable, of all Intrometters, yet he was
not liable in usuras; nor by our Law are Annual-rents ever due, sed ex lege,
vel ex pacto, neither of which can be alleged in our case; and the Act of
Indemnity has made Intrometters with public Money liable in repetition, and
though their intromission be most unwarrantable, yet are they not made liable
by that Act in Annual-rents. Likeas, though these Moneys due to the Earl of
Forth, did at first bear Annual-rent, yet they being once uplifted, became a
sum lying in Cash, which E. C. was not oblieg'd to re-imploy upon Annual-rents,
and by the Act, 1662. whereby His Majesty was to repay the Earl of Forth, he
was only to be repayed of his principal sum, but not of his Annual-rent.

To which, (my Lord) it is answered for the Earl of Forth, That since your
Lordships have found E. C. his Title to have been unjust, we must debate now
against him tanquam, at least, male fidei possessorem; for the Act of
Parliament has declared this forfeiture an invasion upon His Majesty's
Prerogative, and you have by your Sentence, found it not to be sheltered under
the Act of Indemnity.

Let us therefore, in the first place, consider that the Law never designed to
favor oppressors, nor suffer the innocent to be prejudged; it never designed
that men should enrich themselves by their guilt, and be rewarded for their
violence. And since the fear of punishment is scarcely able to restrain that
wickedness, to which we are naturally prone; it were absurd to highten our
vitiousnesse by rewards; whereas, if malae fidei possessores should not be
liable to repay Annual-rents, they should be enriched by their oppression, and
should be baired to commit violence, and to maintain themselves in it; for they
should be sure lucrari (at least) usuras rei, per vim and injuste ademptae. And
therefore, my Lords, though the Law makes a distinction Etiam in malae fidei
possessore, inter corpora, ex quibus fructus naturaliter proveniunt, and
corpora sterilia? yet, they do not this upon design to favor vicious or
violent Intrometters, but in order to the several ways of taxing the
restoration of the person injured; for, where the Bodies unjustly intrometed
with bear fruits, they ordain the fruits to be restored, but where they bear
not naturally fruits, the Law does not ordain the Intrometters to be free, but
to be liable in damnum and interesse, and in omnem causam; this the Law defines
to be all the advantage could have arisen out of the thing intrometted with:
this being an uncontraverted principle, I humbly conceive, E. C. should be
liable to these Annual-rents acclaimed, and that upon these three
considerations.

First, This Sum intrometted with by E. C. was a sum bearing Annual-rent; and
therefore, Forth being restored by way of Justice, he ought to be put in the
same case he was in before the forfeiture: and if the money were now lying
unuplifted, Forth would be preferred to E. C. quoad these Annual-rents, which
clears, that they were never due to E. C. and if they were not his, he ought to
restore them. The forfeiture is declared to be no Warrant, and so, though E. C.
were in the same condition as a stranger is, who intrometts with another
strangers Money without a Warrant, yet sure he would be liable in Annual-rents,
if he intrometted with a sum bearing Annual-rent; much more then ought he to be
liable, who has intrometted with a sum, which was unjustly and predoinously
intrometted with. For here, E. C. is in the same case, as if a man had broke my
house, and had taken away my Bonds with blank Assignations lying beside me, and
had uplifted for many years, the Annual-rents of these sums; or if a man had,
upon a false token, taken up my moneys which bear Annual-rent; in which cases
it is most undeniable, that the vicious intrometter, would be liable in
re-payment of the Annual-rents; and to invert one of the Defenders own
instances, it is not imaginable, if any should uplift a sum belonging to a
person lately forfeited, and which did bear Annual-rent, that the Exchequer
would not exact Annual-rent from the Intrometter. I might hear urge likewayes,
that a Minors money intrometted with, bears Annual-rent by the civil Law and
ours; and it is most clear, that pinguius succuritur restituto, per modum
justitiae quam minori, as Bossius well observes, tit. de remed, just. number. 3.
and. Jason. ad l. Gallus ff. de liber. and postlim. for, as they are equal, in
that neither did consent to the intromission, so he who is forfeited for his
Country, deserves more favor then a Minor does; and many things are in Law
allowed ob bonum Rei-publicae, but we are not here in the case of corpus
sterile, for money bearing Annual-rent is not corpus ex sua natura sterile, but
habet fructus ex se facillime provenientis; usura est (...) seu partus
pecuniae, and should rather be restored then fructus prediales ought to be, for
in these the Intrometter bestowed his industry, but here Annual-rent does grow
very easily: and that Annual-rent is due, even where it was at first sterilis,
is clear from. quid si l. item veniunt ff. de haered. petit. quid si post
venditam haereditatem hic ipse res venient, fructusque earum, sed si forte
tales fuerunt, quae vel steriles erant, vel tempore periturae and hae
distractae sunt vero pretio, tunc potest petitor eligere ut sibi pretia and
usura praestentur. Upon which Law, the Doctors observe, that malae fidei
possessor tenetur rem ipsam restituere, si extet, vel pretium and usuras, si
non extet: but much more, where money bearing Annual-rent is ^ntrometted with,
for there the proper damnum and interesse is Annual-rent, and our Law calls
Annual-rent the interest of money: So that though the money had been sterile,
yet the vicious Intiometter would have been liable in damnum and interesse, and
the damnage and interest of money is Annual-rent: nor is this money of the
nature of that money, which the Law makes sterilis, for here was an heretable
Bond bearing Annual-rent, nomen debitoris, and which in our Law is not
accounted inter mobilia, and such a Bond pro feudo habetur; nor can it be ever
said, that this heretable Security was lawfully loosed, no requisition having
ever been made.

Another ground I go upon is, That malae fidei possessor; tenetur non solum in
fructus perceptos, sed in percipiendos, l. sed and partus ff. quod metus causa;
Where the Law determines, that when any thing is vi, vel metu taken, partus
ancillarum and fetus pecorum, and fructus restitui, and omnem causam opportet;
nec solum eos qui percepti sunt, verum si plus ego percipere potui and per
metum impeditus sum hoc quoque praestabit. And when Lawyers consider fructus
illos percipiendos qui sunt restituendi a malae fidei possessore, which they
call fructus civiles, they define them with Bartolus, ad l. ex diverso ff. de
rei vindicat. to be vel quos petitor percepisset, si ei possidere licuisset,
vel quos possessor quo alius diligentior non est, percipere potuisset.
According to which Characters (worthy of their wonderful Author) these
Annual-rents are to be restored upon both accounts; for they might have been
uplifted by the Earl of Forth, if this forfeiture and intromission had not
interveen'd, and by E. C. had he continued these Sums for after-years, as in
the beginning, in the Cautioners hands, or if he had re-imployed them in other
hands upon the first terms; and if he, studying either his own gain or
convenience, has inverted the primitive use of Forths money, should either his
gain or humor prejudge Forth? Incuria sua in rebus alienis nocere non debet.
And Copus Parisiensis does excellently observe, that Sicut ille qui culpa desit
possidere pro possessore habetur, ita and ille qui fructus percipere potuit pro
percipiente habetur, Si culpa ua desiit non possidere, what can be more solid,
or plain, though E. C. had not employed them upon Land, whereof he has reaped
the f^uits constantly, since they were so employed? If a man be violently
ejected out of a Miln which was grinding, a Coal-heugh, or Salt pan which was
going, he would certainly be restored, not only to his Coal-heughs or Salt-pan,
but to all that they might have yielded; much more then ought he to be restored
to his Annual-rent, which was a more sure product then these. And whereas it is
pretended, that an Intrometter, though wanting a just Title, is not obliged to
improve the money so intrometted with by him, and so cannot be liable to pay
Annual-rents for it; It is to this answered, that though he be not obliged to
improve them, yet he should be liable, if he altered the natural improvement of
them: this would not be allowable in bonae fidei possessore, much less ought
it to be indulged in malae fidei possessore; and though the Intrometter in
crimine repetundarum, be not liable in usuras, yet he is liable in quadruplum,
which much exceeds these, and would also be liable in usuras, if he intrometted
with public money bearing Annual-rent, which is our case. And whereas it is
pretended, that Annual-rent is in our Law only due, ex Lege, aut ex Pacto; It
is answered, that Annual-rent is here due, and ex Lege, and ex pacto; ex Lege,
because in restitutions ex Justitia, the party ought to be restored in
integrum, cum omni causa, in which Annual-rent is included: and ex Pacto,
because C. has given his Bond to secure the Debitors, as to all damnage or
interest they could sustain.

The third Principle I fix upon is, That E. C. gave his Bond to relieve the
Earl of Kinnoul and Errols Cautioners, of all damnage and interest they could
sustain by paying these moneys to him; and therefore, seeing they are now
absolved by the Parliament, upon express provision, that they should make out
the intromission of such to whom they paid the money; it follows by an
infallible inference, that they are liable to the Earl of Forth for what
damnage he sustained, and he by this Sentence, is surrogat in their vice; and
E. C. having given this Bond, should have always looked upon this money, as
that which he was more ways then one tied to improve, and should have known,
that this Talent was not to have been la^d up.

I will not burden your Lordships, with satisfying the clamours raised against
the rigidity of this Pursuit. It is not craved, that the King would bestow E.
C. his Estate upon Forth, but that Forth should be restored to his own, E. C.
his Life and Fortune being at His Majesty's disposal, as excepted from the Act
of Indemnity: The Ransom craved, is only to restore the Earl of Forths Estate.
We desire not E. C. should be made poor by his crime, and it were unwarrantable
to desire that he should be enriched by it, especially when his being enriched
will necessarily starve them, who had never any requital for their Loyalty,
save this Act of Justice. Forths Lady and Family have been forced to borrow
money at dear rates (as all starving people do) to supply their want of these
Annual-rents, and if they be not restored to these, they are still to be
Beggars, for the Principal will not pay their Debts; and so they must wander
the indigent instances of their Princes unkindnesse, and Countries injustice,
whilst their Oppressors do warmly possess their Estates, as the reward of
their opposition to His Majesty.

Not decided in jure.

For Bartholomew Parkman, against Captain Allan.
TENTH PLEADING. Whether Ships taken after they have carried Contraband-goods,
can be declared Prize.
MY Client is, I confess, (my Lords) taken as an enemy to His Majesty in this
War, but it is by a Privateer,, who makes all rich Ships so; his Ship is
adjudg'd Prize, but it is by the sentence of a Judge, who having the tenth of
all Ships as his share, was too much interested to release her when she was
taken: but our Law being jealous of that Court upon that account, has allowed a
remedy by your justice, against what injustice they could commit; and when we
are concerned with strangers, and to let Foreigners know what Justice our
Country dispenses, it was fit that they should have entrusted the decision to
your illustrious Bench, whose Sentences may convince, if not satisfy, even
such as are loosers by them.

The Sentence adjudging that Ship Prize, is by the Admiral, founded upon these
two grounds, first, that His Majesty has, by His Declaration ordained, that all
Ships which were sailed by his M^jesties enemies the Hollanders, should be
seized upon as Prizes, and this Ship was sailed by Hollanders, at least three
of them were of that Nation. The second ground was, that he carried
Contraband-goods for supplying His Majesty's enemies, viz Stock Fish, and Tar;
and though he was not taken with these Contraband-goods, yet he was taken with
that Salt which was the return of these, having loaded in Salt as the product
of these Goods. My Client has raised a Reduction of this Decree, as injust,
and reclaimes against it upon these reasons.

As to the first reason of Adjudication, bearing, that the Ship was sailed with
three Hollanders, he alleges that the Swede being an Allye, was not oblieg'd
to take notice of the King of Englands Proclamation of War, which is indeed Lex
Belli, quoad his own Subjects, and may warrant them in what they do against the
Hollanders, who are declared enemies; but no Laws made by him can tie Allies,
further then is consented to by express Treaties amongst them: and it were
injust, that because the King of Britain designs to make War with Holland, that
therefore it shall not be free for Swede to use any Hollanders in their
service, especially since without Hollanders, it is impossible to them to
manage their Trade; and were it not injust, that all the Swedes, Spainiards or
others, who had employed the Hollanders before the War to sail their Ships, and
had relied upon their service, should be forced immediately, upon declaring a
War, to lay aside all Trade; and if it were injust for any in Britain to take
prisoner a Hollander, who served a Swede in England, much more injust it is to
take their Ship and themselves as Prize, because they were served at Sea by
Hollanders: Nor is it advantageous for the interest of England, that this
gloss should be put upon the Proclamation, since it is Englands interest, that
the Hollanders should all desert their Country, and serve abroad amongst
Strangers; whereas, by this gloss, they would be forced to stay at home, since
none else could employ them; and this will extremely gratify Holland, who
commands under severe pains, by public Placats, that none of their Subjects,
especially Seamen, should serve abroad.

It is also humbly represented to your Lordships, that some of the three who
are Hollanders are only young Boys, who have no constant domicile, but serve
where they can have employment, and Servants are, by the Laws of Oleroon (which
are now the Lex Rhodia of Europ) accounted inhabitants of that place where they
serve; and we consider not domicilium originis in servis, for they in all
senses, and amongst all Nations, follow the domicile of their Master, else the
power of Masters would be much impaired, and Commerce much entangled. Likeas,
it is fully proven, that these men were not employed upon design by my Client,
but were hired by him upon the death of such as served him when he was in
Denmark and Holland, which necessity is sufficient to defend Subjects, and much
more Allies; nor is it imaginable that a Swede, who is not concerned in the
War, should, if his men die in Holland or Denmark, lie idle there and loss his
Trade, and stay from his Country, because he cannot employ his Majesty's
enemies, nor would England allow this, if they were Allies, and the Swedes only
concerned in the War: and though in a former case, your Lordships adjudg'd a
Ship called the Castle of Riga, because sailed by Hollanders, yet the greatest
part of the Sailers were Hollanders in that case, who might, because of their
number, have commanded the Ship and taken her to Holland, or have with her
fought against His Majesty's Ships, and have made them Prize, when they were
secure. Nor does it follow, that because His Majesty in His Treaty with Spain,
has allowed the Flandrians a liberty to sail with Hollanders, that therefore it
must be regularly lawful to sail with Hollanders; for the design of that was
not so much to allow the Flandrians to sail with Hollanders, as to secure them
against seizures, upon the presumption of their speaking Dutch, because of the
vicinity of their Language, says the Treaty; and if this had not been granted
to the Flandrians, all their ships might have been brought in, upon pretext
that they were sailed with Hollanders.

The second reason of Reduction, upon which my Client craves to rescind that
pretended Adjudication, is, that though he had carried in Stock Fish and Tar to
His Majesty's enemies, yet except he had been taken when he was actually
carrying these Contraband-goods, his being taken with the return of these Goods
was no sufficient ground of seizure, which I shall endeavor to evince by many
reasons; First, That by no Law, Stock Fish nor Tar can be called Contraband,
seeing Contraband-goods are only such as are determined to be such by an express
Treaty, or by the general custom of Nations; neither are Contraband-goods still
the same everywhere, but are by private Treaties with Allies, established to be
such, in respect of such terms as are agreed upon betwixt them; and generally
these are only counted Contraband-goods quoad Allies, which have no use in the
place to which they are carried, but for carrying on, and maintaining the War;
and seeing the reason why Contraband-goods are prohibited, is only that Allies
may not assist in the War against the Confedetats, it is therefore very
consonant to reason, that the Law should only interpret those Goods to be
Contraband, which serve p^operly, and immediately for maintaining the War, and
Tar cannot be called such, seeing it serves more for Peace, then War; and though
an Naval War cannot be carried on without Tar, yet Tar cannot be said to be
Contraband, no more then Cloth, Stuffs, Linning, or such things, can be called
Contraband, seeing a War cannot be carried on without these: and if we look to
the Treaty betwixt the Crowns of Britain and Sweden, we will find, that Tar is
not enumerat in that Article, wherein it is declared what Goods can be
accounted Contraband, and in such special Articles as these, inclusio unius est
exclusio alterius, especially where it appears to be designed by both parties,
that their Subjects should be informed, what should be looked upon as
Contraband; and it was very fit that their Subjects should have been informed
expressly, else that Treaty could but prove a snare; and if we look narrowly
unto the nature of the particulars there enumerat, we will find, that there is
nothing there expressed to be Contraband, but what is only and immediately
useful for the War; and there is no general in all that Article, but only
Instrumenta Bellica, which cannot be extended to Tar, whithout an evident
wresting of the word.

2. Though by an express Article, the carrying in Victuals to enemies be
discharged as Contraband-goods, and that under the word of Comeatus, yet
Victual is only declared to be Contraband, in case it be carried to any of the
enemies Cities when they are besieged, Si Civitas sit obsessa (says Grotius)
which restriction was very reasonable, for then the carrying in that Victual
was the relieving and the maintaining of an enemies Town against the faith of
the League; for there, he who does feed, does defend: and though Pesh. relates,
that the Dantzickers did confiscat, in anno, 1458. sixteen sail of Lubeckers
for carrying Victual to the enemies, yet he forgets to tell whether the enemies
were besieged, but he expressly relates, that there, the carrying in Victual was
expressly prohibited. Neither was there any such considerable quantity of these
Stock Fish carried in here, as might show any design of assisting the
Hollanders by Victuals, seeing it was carried in a very small quantity, and
might have been necessar for the Pursuers own Company; and if they had designed
to have carried these as Commodities, they had carried them in greater
abundance; and Tar is the product of Sweden, and so Commerce in it is necessar
for them.

And whereas it is contended, that the Ship had formerly carried enemies Goods,
and consequently had transgressed that Article of the Treaty, whereby bona
hostiam tuto advehere non licet; It is answered, that if they had been taken
carrying these enemies Goods, the Goods could have been confiscat, but not the
Ship; it being very clear by the Law of all Nations, that it is lawful even
for Allies to fraught their Ships to strangers, in order to civil Commerce, and
that to hinder this liberty, is a breach of the Law of Nations, as is very
clear by the Constitutions of several Nations, printed lately at Venice, where
amongst other Articles, it is determined, Si and navis and merces hostium sint,
fieri ea capientium, si vero navis sit pacem colentium merces autem hostium
(which is our case) cogi posse ab his qui bellum gerant navem ut merces eas in
aliquem portum deferat, qui sit suarum partium ita tamen ut vecturae pretium
nautae solvat. Since then by the Law of Nations, the Skipper behoved to have
had this fraught paid, though he had been taken carrying enemies Goods, it
were against all sense and reason, that his Ship could have been confiscat for
carrying them: and Camden in the year, 1597. tells us, that Pole did, by their
Ambassador complain, that the Law of Nations was violat, in that the English
had in their War with Spain, challenged their Natives for carrying their Goods
to Spain. And Serviens relates a decision, 12. December, 1592. wherein some
Hamburgers were declared free, though they were taken carrying Corns and other
Commodities to Spain, and because they were Allies; for the Parliament of Paris
thought, that Allies deserved better then others.

If we consider the Treaty with Sweden we will find, that Ships carrying
Contraband-goods are only to be seized on, si deprehendantur, which (like all
words in Treaties amongst Princes) must be taken in augustiori sensu; nor suits
it with the generosity of Kings to take little airy advantages of one another,
and to debate like pedantick Formulists, who ensnare one another, in thin
cob-webs, as spiders do flees: but in no sense can these words si
deprehendantur, be extended to the Ships being taken in any former Voyage, for
else they had been superfluous and impertinent, since no Ship can be adjudg'd,
except she be taken in some voyage: the genuine interpretation of words is,
interpretari secundum subjectam materiam; and therefore, since these words are
insert in a Treaty, wherein His Majesty is to indulge favors to the Swedes,
they must be in reason so interpret, as that they may be a favor; and there is
no favor indulged here, if these words be not taxative, and if they declare
not any Ship free, which is not seized carrying Contraband the time of the
seizure.

By our Law it has been very wisely provided, that we should use strangers in
our Admiral Court, as they use us in their Country, Act 24. Ia. 1. Par. 9. And
it is offered to be proven, by the Law of Sweden, Tar is not esteemed
Contraband, nor can Ships be declared Prize, for what they carried in a former
Voyage; and since our Natives would complain of such usage in Sweden, let them
not meet with it in Scotland; which is very suitable to that excellent Title,
in the Digests, Quod quisque juris in alterum statuerit, ut ipse eodem jure
utatur: by the Law also of England, (as Judge Jenkins reports, in a return to
your Lordships Commission) no Ship is confiscated upon this ground.

Be pleased (My Lords) to consider, what great prejudices would arise to Trade,
if Ships might be seized, upon pretext that they carried Contraband in a former
Voyage; for by that allowance, all Ships might be seized upon, since this
pretext might lie against all, and every poor Merchant might be left a prey to
the ravenous Privateers, who might force them to ransom themselves from the
very hazard of a seizure: in which case, whatever were the event of the
confiscation, yet still their time and expense would be lost, and their Secrets
and Papers would be made open; which is so great a prejudice to Merchants, that
by the Rhodian Law, Secreta (...), non licebat introspicere, and
introspicientibus ultimum supplicum irrogabatur.

It was likewise very fit, that the Swede, and all Princes should tie the
Privateers to a probation that fell under sense, and such is the having
Contraband-goods presently aboard, and ubi constare potest de corpore delicti,
and not lay poor Merchants open to the hazard of the testimonies of two rogues,
who being tempted by malice or avarice, might depone falsely, that the Ship
carried Contraband-goods formerly: in which they might the freelier
transgress, because they could not be controlled; whereas no such falsehood is
to be feared, if only actual carrying can confiscat a Ship; since there, the
existence of the Goods precludes all possibility of error or falsehood. Were it
not also very absurd, to seize a Ship which possibly carried Contraband in a
former Voyage, and thereby ruin a great many Merchants who were the present
fraughters of her, and who neither did nor could know what she had carried
formerly? and yet, she being seized, their Voyage would be broke, and their
Fortunes ruined. Or, if another Skipper or Owners had bought her from the first
offender, were it not injust to seize the Ship? and yet the Ship were Prize, if
this opinion could take place; this were to pnnish ignorance, and Commerce
requires more latitude, then such Principles can allow.

It is, I preceive, urged for this opinion, that the Commissions granted now,
and of old, bear expressly a power to take Ships which have carried enemies
Goods; and there is a Commission produced, in Anno, 1628. of this tennor,
together with two decisions of our Admiralty to the same effect, neither of
which are concluding; for Strangers and Allies are not obliegd to take notice
of private Commissions, which are not leges belli promulg^^ae; these may warrant
against damnage and interest, but not against restitution; and as to the
decisions, they are founded upon other grounds also. It is also urged, that the
carrying Contraband being a crime against the Prince or State who make the War,
there is jus quaesitum to them, by the very commission of the crime, though the
Defender be not then actually deprehended; as we see in other crimes, which are
punishable, though the offenders be not actually deprehended: But to this it is
answered, that Princes may otherwise use their own Subjects, then they should
be allowed to use Strangers; the having offended is sufficient in the one case,
but actually offending is necessary in the other, for else our King might at any
time, even after the War, seize upon one of these Ships, because (forsooth)
there was jus once perfect quaesitum to him by the very offense, which is too
absurd a consequence to be allowed: and albeit all that was done in the course
of the War, be ordinarily caveated by the subsequent Treaties, as to the
Nations who were engaged in the War, yet Allies being secured by no such
Treaties, their Subjects might still be liable to seizures, and hazards of this
nature, which were both injust and inconvenient.

Consider that there is a difference betwixt such Allies, as are tied in a
League Offensive and Defensive, and such as only enter in a Treaty for their
own advantage, as Swede has now done: the first are obliged to assist, and
therefore, all correspondence in them were a breach, but in the other it is not
so, and in them that Maxim holds, that cuilibet licet uti jure suo, modo hoc
non fecerit principaliter in aemulationem alterius: though all this traffic
that is alleged were true, yet it clearly appears, that the great design of my
Client, was not to serve the Dutch, but to maintain their own poor families, in
a way which the severest Lawyers could justify. Remember how little Swede is
obliged to Holland, who kept them lately from conquering Denmark; So that it
is improbable they would have served them, upon design to promote their War.
Remember how much our Contrymen were honored lately by their great King,
who preferred two of them to be Generals, and thirty two to be Colonels at
once in his Armies: And I must likewise remember your Lordships, that the
probation in such cases is very suspicious; for there, a man's whole Estate
depends upon two mean fellows, and such two, as are under the impressions of
their enemies, and who may expect at least their liberty as a bribe, and that
their depositions come to us by an Interpreter; so that though he did not
mistake them (as he may) yet the trust resolves at most in his single
assertion, who is but one man, and who by being the ordinary Servant of that
Court, is much to be suspected; and therefore, your Lordships may call for the
Witnesses, declare their persons free, and thereafter examine them.

Let us not be more cruel then the Sea, and more merciless then Storms, and
after that these poor men have escaped those, it were inhumane that they should
shipwreck upon our Laws, which were to them, like hid rocks, upon which there
stood no known Beacon. Figure to your selves (my Lords) how these poor men's
longing Wives, send daily their languishing looks into the Ocean, as they can,
to find them, or how the Creditors, who advanced necessars for their aliment,
expect payment from their return; and how it must prevent the starving of their
poor Babes, whose craving apetites and cries, do probably now astonish their
indigent Mothers; it is those you punish, and not only our appealers: and how
would we use enemies, who had murdered our Countrymen, when we thus use our
Allies. We allege, that this is (my Lords) a case wherein Justice will allow
some respect of persons; and since politic advantages have given their first
form and being to this Law and Proclamation, whereupon this seizure is said to
be founded, consider, I entreat you, how inconvenient it were to disobliege by
a decision, the King of Sewden, whom your Royal Master, who understands best
the advantages of this Crown, has taken pains to obliege by a Treaty, and how
hard were it, if upon your decision, that Prince should be forced to grant
Letters of Marque, or lay an Arrest upon all the Vessels of our Nation trading
there, by which the innocent might be oppressed for the guilty, many might loss
for the gain of few, and the present Unity of the two Crowns might be
dissolved, by a sentence of your Court.

The Lords jointly sustained the Adjudication, notwithstanding of this Debate.

For the Burghs of Regality, against the Burghs-Royal.
ELEVENTH PLEADING. Whether it be free to all the Lieges to Trade with
Foreigners, or if this Privilege be only competent to Burghs-Royal.
May it please your Grace,
SInce freedom, is one of the greatest blessings, and pleasures of mankind,
those Laws which design to abridge or lessen it, must be very unsupportable,
and unfavourable; except they bring other advantages, which in exchange of this
bondage, can either convince our reason, or gratify our interest. But if we
consider the Laws here founded on, whereby it is pretended, that none but the
Indwellers of Burghs-royal can trade with Foreigners, we will find, that these
Laws are so far from being advantageous, either to the Public, or to private
persons, that they are a great bondage on the one, and a great impediment to
the other. The Pursuers who desire to lessen the freedom of Trade, are the
sixth part only of Scotland, who desire to retrench the privileges of the
other five parts, and the privilege wherein they desire to retrench us, is our
freedom, the very words of the privilege they crave are, that we should be
declared unfree-men, and unfree-men imports, Slaves, in all Languages; and in
reality, not to have liberty to export our own Commodities, is to be Slaves to
such as may stop us, for in so far as they may stop us, they are our Masters.

That they are destructive to every man's interest, appears from the restraint
they lay upon his Inclinations, and upon his Property; as to his Inclinations,
they are very much restrained, in so far as though any of the Lieges did never
so ardently desire to trade, and though his breeding, and the situation of the
place where he lived, did favor extremely therein his Inclinations, yet,
except he live constantly in a Burgh-royal, he cannot trade. They lay likewise
a restraint upon his Property, because though the situation of his Estate be
very advantageous for Trading, and his Estate consist in money, yet can he not
employ that money in Trade, which is the natural use of it; and thus in effect,
these acts tend to enslave both our Inclinations and our Estates.

Nor do they less prejudge the public Interest, as will clearly appear by
these considerations; 1. By this privilege, five parts of six in the Kingdom,
are debarred from Trading; whereas it is a known Maxim in all Nations, that the
more Traders, the richer always is the Kingdom; and upon this consideration,
the English and French, have invited all their Gentry to Trade, by declaring,
that Merchandising shall be no derogation from their Nobility and Honor. 2.
The more money be employed upon Trade, and the less upon Annual-rent, the
Kingdom is always the richer, for though private parties may gain by
Annual-rent, yet the public Stock of the Nation is not thereby improved, the
one half gains there from another, but neither from Foreigners; and if all
except Burgesses be debarred from Trade, then the money of five parts of the
Nation must lie idle, or else must be lent to Merchants, which is not ordinar;
and to force us to lend, were unjust. 3. By this, the places in Scotland
fittest for Trading, are kept bound up from using the natural advantages of
their situation, to the great prejudice, of the Nation, as we see in many
instances, and particularly in Lews and Burroughstounesse, to keep which from
being Burghs, the Burghs have spent a great deal of money. 4. This has ruined
many little Towns, who because they were debarred from all privilege of
Trading, were forced to get themselves erected in Burghs-royal, and after that
they were erected, were forced to be at the expenses of keeping Prisons, being
Magistrates, sending Commissioners to Parliaments, making public
Entertainments, and so did ruin themselves without any advantage to the
Country: and by this, the number of Buroughs are so far increased, that it is
a shame to see such mean creatures as some of them, sent to our Conventions and
Parliaments, who, notwithstanding they want both Fortunes and Breeding, yet
must sit as the great Legislators of the Kingdom, and must have a decisive
voice, in what concerns the Lives, Fortunes, and Honor of the greatest Peers
in it. I design not by this to disparage all Buroughs, for most are
represented by most qualified persons; but to tax these Laws, which have forced
many little Towns, either to send none, or to send such as are unfit. 5. All
the Country is ill served, for in some Shires, there are but very mean Burghs,
and in these Burghs, Merchants yet meaner, and if these want Credit, to buy and
carry out our native Commodities, they must lie upon the Owners hands, and the
Country wanting necessar returns, such as Salt, Iron and Timber, must buy from
very remote places. 6. If two or three Merchants in better Towns conspire, not
to buy or sell, but at rates agreed upon amongst themselves, then the poor
Country must be at their devotion, and this were to grant Monopolies, not only
in one place, but in every Shire, not only as to superfluous Commodities, (as
use is, when Monopolies are granted) but as to all, and even the most necessar
Commodities; after this, no man shall dare buy a Skin, Wine or Sugar, but a
Burgess, and which is yet harder, this will furnish a pretext to Burghs to
oppress all such as they envy, under the notion of unfree Traders. 7. His
Majesty's Customs will be thereby much impaired, for the fewer Traders be, the
less will be both exported, and imported, and whatever lessens export and
import, lessens doubly His Majesty's Customs, of the which those are two hands.
8. Other Nations, who understand Trade in its perfection, such as Holland, do
allow all their Subjects to Trade without difference, and it is a Maxim amongst
them, That many hands and many purses, make a rich Trade. And it imports not to
say, that their Commonwealth differs from ours in its Constitutions, and that
they have vent for their Commodities all over Europe, whereas our vent is no
larger then our consumption; for whatever difference be in our fundamental
Constitutions, yet in the matter of Trade, they are still the universal
Standart: and sure, it is the advantage of our Country, even in order to our
consumption, to have the privilege of Trade, in necessar Commodities extended
to all, for the more importers be, we will get our necessar Commodities at a
lower rate, and the more exporters be, our Corns, Fishes, etc. will give the
greater rates, and those are the two great advantages of a Kingdom.

I confess (may it please your Grace) that the erecting of Societies, as to
some Trades, and at sometimes, is necessar, but the ordinar rule extends there,
no further, then that Trading to remote Nations, and in rich Commodities, should
at first have some privileges as to their erections, for else, private Stocks
would not be able to compass it; but even as to these, when the Trade is once
secured, and becomes easy, and managable, then these privileges cease, with
the cause from which they had their origin: and therefore it is, that albeit
Trade with Foreigners seemed at first above the reach of our first Traders,
when to sail to Spain, seemed as har'd as an East India Voyage now does, then
Trade needed some privileges; yet now, when experience and increase of money
has lessened those difficulties, I conceive the privileges should expire. It
is known, that the Bishop of Glasgow gave only his Burgh then liberty to Trade
into the Shire of Argyl, and that the Burgh of Edinburgh had a special
privilege of old, to Trade in the Isles: but that now they need these, will
not be debated even by themselves.

I confess, that all Incorporations in a Commonwealth ought to have different
designs, and different privileges suitable to these designs, as is pretended;
but it can by no clear inference be deduced from this, that the sole liberty of
Trading in all Commodities with Foreigners, should belong to Burghs, but only
that they should have some Staple-goods, wherein they only may Trade. And we
are content to allow them, the exporting and importing of what is superfluous,
such as Wine, Silks, Spyces, etc. let all, even Contrymen, have the export
and import of what is necessar for their own station and employments, let them
export Corns, Cattle, etc. since the having these Commodities signifies nothing
without power to sell them, and the liberty of importing Timber, Iron Salt, and
these other Commodities, without which they cannot live in their own station.
And whereas it is pretended, that they are content we should export the natural
product of our own Country, providing we bring home money only for them, it is
conceived, that this concession destroys what is conceded, for if unfree-men
can only bring home money, then Freemen and Burgesses may easily undersell
them, for few abroad buy them with ready money, and money is the dearest of all
returns; so that these who barter Commodities for what they export, may sell
much sooner, and cheaper, if they bring home nothing in return of what they
export; for export by it self, without import, occasions great loss, and the
advantages of Merchandising is ordinarily in the returns.

Whereas it is contended, that the less diffuse Trade be, it prospers so much
the better, for it may be easier governed according to the just rules. And our
old Law appointed wisely, that none but Worshipful men, and men of
considerable Stocks should Trade abroad, that thereby poor people, by running
over seas, might not by their necessity of selling, or want of skill, low the
prices of what they exported, and buy unskillfully at high rates what they
imported; and that to defend Trade against this dishonor and prejudices,
Guildries were appointed in Burghs to supervise the conduct of Merchants, and
restrain abuses, which Burghs of Regality and Barrony wanted, and so were
liable to many escapes.

To this it is answered, that though at first, these rules were necessary, yet
now when Trade is raised to some consistency, this necessity fails with its
occasions; for there are no where poorer Traders, then within Burghs, to which
ordinarily the meanest and poorest amongst the people retire, when they cannot
live elsewhere, and when they are once settled there, they, because of the easy
conveniences of Trading, do indiscreetly run upon it; whereas, none who live
either in Burgh of Regality, Barrony, or in the Country, will be tempted to
adventure upon Trade, except they have considerable Stocks, and be secure of a
full vent. And without debating what was the design of our Legislators, in
erecting Guildries, yet we now find by experience (which is a much surer guide
then project) that Guildries have conduced so little to advance Trade, that
they tend rather to secure the Monopoly, which they at first procured, and to
establish by mutual compacts, those exorbitant prices for Commodities, which
are now exacted: And if Deaconries amongst Malt-men and others, were
discharged, to prevent combinations, I see not why Guildries, which are but
Deaconries amongst Merchants, should not be discharged for the same reason.

But (may it please your Grace) the great refuge against these convincing
reasons, is, that these might have been urged, in jure constituendo, but not in
jure constituto, for reasoning ends, where Law begins, and omnium quae fecerunt
majores nostri, non est reddenda ratio. But this may, I humbly conceive, be
easily answered, if we consider, 1. That Laws are mortal like their makers, and
they who would bind up their reason to a constant adhering to what was once
made a Statute, behooved to renounce that reason by which they should be
governed, and leave off to be reasonable men, that they might be Lawyers: and
therefore it is, that because Legislators might take an untrue prospect of
future events, Lawyers have determined, that where Laws never grew unto
observance, they did really never become Laws, the being once observed is one
of the greatest essentials of a Law, Statuta usu non recepta, nec observata,
pro non factis reputantur, Voet. de statut. cap. 2. Sect. 12. arg. l. 1.. 9. C.
cad. toll. and alex. consil. 6. vol. 1. And if the not observance of Laws for
ten years after they were made, is in the opinion of Lawyers, sufficient to
repudiat them, much more ought they to be rejected, after they have for many
hundreds of years, languished in a constant contempt; for else they are but like
these idols, of which the Scripture tells us, that they had eyes, and saw not,
ears and heard not, and feet but could not walk: and if we consider these Laws,
we will find, that even Authority of Parliament which can do all things in
Scotland, has not been able to maintain them in those; for these Statutes
oftimes begin, That for as much, as there had been diverse Acts of Parliament,
made in favors of the Royal-Burghs, ordaining they should have the only
benefit of sailing abroad, etc. Yet these Laws have not been in observance,
therefore, etc. as is very clear by the narrative of the 152. Act, 12. Parl. I.
6. and why should the Act have been renewed so often, if the former had been
observed? And if in spite of all these Acts, the Subjects could never be
brought to compliance with them, why should we offer so much violence to our
Native Country, as to force upon them that from which they have so much
aversion? If Acts which have been strengthened by obedience and observation,
may be repelled bydesuetude, and a contrary custom, how much more may
desuetude overcome Acts which are not yet arrived at their due strength, and
perfection? 2. Though these Acts had been once in observance, yet they are now
antiquated by desuetude and non-observance: that desuetude may antiquat and
abrogat Laws, is very clear from reading our Acts of Parliament, of which the
full half are in desuetude, and are only considered now by us as matters of
Antiquity, as Roman Medulls, or old Histories: and particularly, can the
Burghs-royal deny, but most of these Acts limiting their Trade and Government,
are gone in desuetude, as that Officers within Burgh should not be continued
from year to year, I. 3. Par. 5. Act 29. They should not sail in winter, nor
oftener then twice in the year to Flanders, I. 5. Par. 4. Act 30. Nor should
they sail, except they be worshipful men, and have at least three serplaiths
of Wool, or half a Last of Goods, I. 3. Par. 2. Act. 13. I. 2. Par. 14. Act.
168. Frustra opem Legis implorant, qui in Legem peccant: and it were injust,
that they should obliege others to obey, what they will not submit to. And that
the Acts whereupon the privileges now craved, are founded, are gone in
desuetude, appears very convincingly, from the constant practice of all the
corners in the Nation, not by single, or clandestine Acts, but openly, upon all
occasions, and in all places, and ages, even under the neighboring observation
of whole fleeces, and of all their succeeding serieses of Magistrates: Have not
Musselburgh, and Borroughstounnesse near Edinburgh, Hamiltoun near Glasgow, the
greatest Burghs of this Kingdom, exercised this freedom which is now
contraverted? And though they made frequent applications to your Lordships, yet
till now was their never a Decree in foro in their favors, and Decreets in
a^sence, are rather founded upon the omissions of the Defender, then the
justice of the Pursuit. So that it appears clearly, that the Magistrates have
been ashamed to crave, the Judges unwilling to allow, and the people stiffly
refractory from submitting to the privileges here craved to be declared.

To this it is replied for these Burghs-royal, that desuetude cannot abbrogat
Laws under Monarchies, though it could under Commonwealths, Nec potest tacitus
populi consensus abrogare, quod expressus populi consensus non introduxit, l.
32. ff. de. leg. Nam cum ipsae Leges nulla ratione nos teneant quam quod
judicio populi sint receptae, merito and ea quae populus sine ullo scripto
probavit, tenebunt omnes. 2. Though desuetude might abrogat such Laws as
respect only private Rights, yet the people by breaking penal Statutes, cannot
by repeated transgression, secure themselves against Laws made for restraining
their insolences; else by frequent Usury, or attending Conventicles, these
delicts might pass in desuetude, and by the Acts founded upon, the half of the
offenders Goods are declared to belong to His Majesty, and these Laws are in
effect penal Statutes. 3. Where Laws may run in desuetude, it is required, that
the desuetude or contrary consuetude, be founded upon clear and open deeds, and
not upon clandestine or precarious Acts, as in this case, wherein all the Trade
with Foreigners, to which these Burghs-royal or of Barrony can pretend, was
either carried on under the name of free Burgesses, or was tolerated by the
neighboring Burghs-royal. 4. It is requisite, that the consuetude which is
opposed to Law, be judicio contradictorio vallata, which cannot be alleged in
this case, where not only no Decree can be instanced, finding these Laws to be
abrogated, but where there are Decreets produced conform thereto.

To the first of which it is answered, that though those Laws seem to respect a
Commonwealth, yet it is generally received now, that a contrary desuetude may
abrogat even Laws introduced by Monarchs, and that the taciturnity or
connivance of the Prince, is equivalent to a consent. Thus Perez, tit. Quae sit
long. consuet. sunt qui scientiam principis desiderant, quia in illum omnis
potestas condendi juris translata, ego tamen existimo sufficere, ne Princeps
contradicat: and for this he cites, c. 1. de constitut. de 6. where a
consuetude is sustained to abrogat Law, though the Pope (who is a sovereign
Prince in his own Dominions) did not expressly allow it, dummodo sit
rationabilis, and legittime praescripta; and with us, do not our old Laws die
out by desuetude? and do not new consuetudes daily spring up, without any other
warrant, then mere reason, and prescription: but in our case, His Majes^y has
so far allowed this custom, and has so far contributed with it to the
abrogation of these Laws, that he has under his own Royal Hand, granted many
Signatures in favors of Burghs of Regality and Barrony, allowing them to Trade
with Foreigners, and extending their privileges as far as those of
Burghs-royal; which Signatures are passed in His Exchequer, and authorized with
His Seal, which states this consuetude in a very different case from
consuetudes which may abrogat penal Statutes, or such public Laws as are made
against Conventicles; the one His Majesty opposes, in the other He concurrs.
And this likewise answers that other objection, founded upon the
clandestinnesse of these Acts, for what Act can be more public, then these
which pass His Majesty's hand, the public Judicatures, and common Seals; and
as to extrajudicial Acts contrary to the Laws, they have been too many and
universal to be latent; but it is offered to be proven, that Burghs-Royal and
Burghs of Barrony, have been in use openly and avowedly to drive on this Trade,
which they endeavor to maintain. And whereas it is alleged, that
consuetudinis non vilis est authoritas, verum non usque adeo sui valitura
monento, ut aut legem vincat, aut rationem, l. 2. C. quae sit long. consuet. To
this some Lawyers answer, that though it cannot overpower a Law, whilst the
Law stands, yet it can abrogat and make the Law fall, Cont. ad dict. l. and
others interpret so this Law, as that they extend it only to a growing and
unripe consuetude, which cannot indeed abrogat a Law, that has not fully lost
its vigor, as Cujac. and others affirm.

As to the fourth objection, it is answered, that a contrary consuetude can
abrogat a Law, sine judicio contradictorio; for, judicium contradictorium is
not that which abrogats the Law, but only finds that the Law is thereby
abrogat, and it does not strengthen, but declare the consuetude; and the Lords
of Session, by refusing frequently to declare this privilege, have therein
done what was equivalent to a judicium contradictorium; and if this be not
sustained, then the Burghs-Royal may crave, that all the Lieges may be debarred
from tapping Wine, Spices or other things, absolutely necessar for the
accommodation of Travelers; for, the selling of those is as expressly
prohibited by the Laws founded on, as is the trading with Foreigners: Nor is
the consuetude whereby these are abrogat, any otherwise firmata judicio
contradictorio, then this is; and though the Burghs-Royal declare, that they
insist not at this time to have their Privileges quoad these extended, yet
certainly when they have prevailed in the one, they will crave the other. And
what an absurd thing were it, that all Travelers behoved either to lie in
Burghs-Royal, or to want that accommodation which is necessar, or to buy it at
exorbitant rates; and that not so much as a Candle or Penny-point should be
sold, for the convenience of the Country, outwith a Burgh-Royal.

I may likewise represent to your Grace and Lordships, that His Majesty is not
only, because the Author, therefore the absolute Arbiter of this Privilege,
and may dispose upon what he has given; but that likewise by the 26. Act of
the 3. Session of His Majesty's first Par. It is declared, that His Majesty has
the sole Prerogative, of ordering and disposing Trade with Foreigners; and
therefore, since His M^j^sty has granted to all Burghs of Regality, and many
Bu^ghs o^ Barrony, as full liberty in trading with Foreigners, ^s H^ ^^th
granted to any Burghs-Royal, I see not who in Law can dispute this Privledge
with them; at least, how the Burghs-Royal can in gratitude debate the extent of
a Privilege with their Prince, who at first gave it. Nor can these
concessions, in favors of Burghs of Regality and Barrony be alleged to be
subreptitious, as is pretended, since they are not only past in the ordinary
way, but are frequently past, and actus geminatus facit actum censeri non esse
subreptitium; but likewise, after it has been represented to His Majesty from
the Burghs-Royal, and their Agents in Court, that this concession was contrary
to the Privileges granted to them by the Parliament, notwithstanding of all
this, His Majesty's Predecessors and Himself have still continued to grant
these concessions. And that the Burghs of Regality and Barrony have enjoyed
this privilege of Traffic and Merchandising, is very clear by the 29. Act,
11. Par. I. 6. wherein it is declared, That for so much as diverse Burghs of
Barrony and Regality were in use to exerce the Trade and Traffic of
Merchandise; therefore, that Privilege and Freedom shall be continued to them.

It has been often inculcat, that this Privilege granted to the Burghs-Royal,
of the sole Trade with Foreigners, is not the mere effects of His Majesty's
favor, and is not only founded upon the Parliaments concession, but that it is
granted to them, upon the account they pay the sixth part of all the public
Impositions of this Kingdom, which makes their Contributions within Burgh to
rise so high, that if they had not this Privilege to balance that
inconvenience, they would not be able to ease the Country, by paying so great
a proportion: and if Burgesses within Burgh had no special Privilege above
others, they would not live within Burgh; for, it were unreasonable to imagine,
that when they might Trade as well elsewhere as within Burgh, that yet they
would continue to live there, under great Burdens, and without any Privileges.

To this it is answered, that the 111. Act of Parliament, I. 6. Par. 11.
whereby it is declared, That their part of all general Taxations shall extend
to the sixth part allanerly, bears no such quality; nor do the Acts of
Parliament bear any such onerous cause; But the true reason of their bearing
the sixth part of the Kingdoms Burdens, is, because they are intrinsecally the
sixth part of the Kingdom, if we look either to the number, or riches of their
Inhabitants: and if the Burghs-Royal were accounted the sixth part of Scotland,
under the Reign of King James the first, how much more great a proportion are
they able to bear now, when the Burghs are six times more numerous, and each
particular Burgh six times more rich and populous, then they then were? Their
Riches have increased with our Luxury, and the Luxury of our Age does far
exceed what it was in that Kings time; So that since now the Nobility and
Gentry only toil to get money, to buy from Burgesses what they import from
Foreign Countries, I conceive those Burghs may easily bear a sixth of our
burdens, since once a year they get in all our Stock. And to any thinking man,
it may easily appear, that all the money in Scotland does once a year circulat
and pass through the hands of Citizens: for money serves only either to pay our
Annual-rents, or buy us necessars; and that which is paid for Annual-rents, is
by the receivers given out to others, to satisfy their present necessities,
and all is ultimatly employed for Food or Raiment, and little money is bestowed
upon Food or Raiment in Scotland, except only within Burgh.

Since then this Privilege does divide Scotland in two parts, since equity in
it seems to oppose Law, and since both parties pretend to national advantages:
I shall humbly move, that if this illustrious Senate be unwilling to interpose
in so universal a difference, that this Debate should be transmitted by them to
the Parliament which is the full Representative of all the Kingdom, and the
natural Judge of equity and convenience.

The Session referred this Case to the Parliament, who extended this Privilege
to all the Lieges.

For the Earl of Northesk, against my Lord Treasurer-Depute.
TWELFTH PLEADING. Whether a Novo Damus secures against preceding Casualities.
My Lord President,
IT is one of the chief advantages of our Nation, in this Age, that we live
under a Prince, who covets more the hearts of his Subjects, then their Estates;
and who loves rather to see his Laws obeyed, then to have his Advocat prevail:
What measure then can his fisk expect, when in general, all Lawyers have even
under Tyrants delivered, as their opinion, semper contra fiscum in dubio est
respondendum? And since flattery or fear may incline some, to favor the
Princes Interest too much; it is fit, that Judges should be jealous of the^^
own spirits in such cases, and should bend them, rather to the other side, that
they may fix at last in a straightness.

The case proposed is, whether the Novo damus not expressing the casuality of
Marriage specially, but all Casualities in genera^ does by our Law, ^e^end
against the Marriage?

That i^ (...). I press for my Client, upon these grounds F^^st a N(...) (...)
is that, which the Feud^lists, call re^^va^^ feudi, and (...) feudi does
import, liberationem ab om(...) caducitate; nay, the very nature of a
Disposition or Alienation does imply, a liberation from any burden, with which
the Disponer could affect it, else he should alienat and yet retain, give and
not give; and therefore, by the civil Law, he who dispon'd Land, was
interpreted to have dispon'd it tanquam optimum maximum, free from all the
Disponer could lay to its charge.

If any person should dispone his Land to me, and should thereafter crave a
Ward or Marriage, as due out of these Lands tanquam debitum fundi; certainly it
would be an absurd pursuit, and I would be absolved; nay, if a Superior enter
me to my Lands, eo ipso, I am free from all preceding casualities; nor did
ever a Vassal take Discharges at his entry of any former casualities, but his
entry was always judged sufficient; why then should not His Majesty's Vassals
be in the same condition? for since this is clear in other Vassals ex natura
feudi, there being no Statute in their favors, it must be due to all Vassals;
for, a quatenus ad omne valet consequentia; and that which is natural to Few's,
must be inherent in all Few's. The design of a Novo damus is, to secure the
receiver against nullities; the Law thought to set this as a March-stone, and
let not us remove it. The style of a Novo damus in our Law, which is equivalent
to express Law, is very exactly adapted to this design, as may appear by all
its Clauses; for, when His Majesty de novo dat, that Chartor must be equivalent
to an original Disposition; and sure, if these Lands had belonged to His
Majesty, and if he had disponed them, that original Right would secure the
receiver, against all His Majesty could crave out of these Lands, except in so
far, as he did exp^^sly reserve at the making of the Disposition; nor do I see,
(...) reservations of former Rights were necessar in Dispositions, if these
Rights were rese^v'd without them, and if they were not cut off by the
Alienation it self.

But, not only does this Novo damus dispone in favors of my Client, the Land
out of which these casualities are sought, but it dispones them, cum omni jure,
and titulo, interesse and jurisclameo; tam petitorio quam possessorio, quae
nos, aut predicessores, aut successores nostri, habuimus, habemus, vel quovis
modo habere possumus, in, and ad, dictas terras. What can be more express? for
if His Majesty had any claim to, or right in, these Lands, any manner of way,
he here dispones it, and transfers His Right, in, and to my Client; if His
Majesty have any Right at all, it must be vel jus, vel interesse, vel
jurisclameum, and if it be either of those, it is dispon'd: But lest it might
be pretended, that this Clause extended only to secure the Property (which is
not its only effect. as I shall clear hereafter) Therefore, the style of a Novo
damus bears omne jus, non solum quoad aliquam ejus partem, sed and ad omnes
census, firmas, and proficua, ratione wardae, purpresturae, foris facturae, non
introitus, eschetae, etc. vel quocunque alio jure, vel titulo: From which
general Clause, I draw these inferences; first, that this general Clause must
seclude His Majesty, since tantum valet genus quoad omnia, quantum species
quoad specialia, Bald. consil 1. lib. 3. Gemin. consil. 65. and l. si duo ff.
de administ. tut. And therefore, since a special gift of this Marriage would
have secluded the King or His Donator, a general concession must do the same,
especially since this general was designed to secure against all, in respect
particulars could not be remembered; even as we see in general Discharges, or
Renunciations, which are as valid quoad all, as any particular Discharge can
be, as to a special debt or deed; and since this general Discharge of all
former Casualities, is so often repeated, and represented under so many various
terms, which can signify nothing, if they did not express the exuberant will
and inclination of the Prince, to denude himself, and secure his Vassal, aginst
all former Casualities, as well Marriage as others: and this Clause is
equivalent to that Clause spoken of by the Doctors, quovis modo vacet, which
comprehends omnem modum vacandi, and omnes formas excogitabiles renunciationis,
Cap. consil. 14. 2. General Clauses subjoined to specials enumerat, must be
extended at least to all such specialities, as are of the nature of the
specialities enumerat; for, the subjoyning a general to specials, is designed
to supply the not enumeration of other specialities which are homogeneous,
clausula generalis quae sequitur casus speciales enumeratos, extenditur ad
similia specificatis, Socin. consil. 316. But so it is, that the casuality of a
Marriage is of the same nature, with many casualities he especifically expressed,
such as Ward, Non-entry, Escheat, etc. to which the Superior having right in
the same way as he has to Marriages, it is presumed, he would discharge it in
the same way with them. 3. General Gifts must be extended to such particulars,
as probably the Granter would have gifted if they had been expressed; but so it
is, that it is beyond all doubt, but, that His Majesty, if he had been asked,
whether he was content to dispone and gift the Marriage, he would have
consented very freely to gift the Marriage, as well as the other Casualities,
this Marriage must therefore pass under the general; and how can it be
thought, that he who granted all other Casualities, would have refused this? or
what speciality was there in this Casuality, which might have occasioned this
refusal? Nam geineralis clausula idem operatur, quod specialis, ubi non subest
ratio diversitatis, Curt. consil. 19 and upon this ground it is statute, that
general clauses in Remissions, shall be extended to all crimes of less
gravity, then the chief crime which is expressed, Act. 62. I. 4. Par. 6. and if
great crimes can be taken away by general clauses, sure it cannot be denied in
civil Casualities, which are of their own nature easier pardoned, and of less
consequence: and by that Act, it is clear, that the general clause was extended
formerly to all, even greater crimes then the crime specified; and if a Statute
was nece^sar there, it is much more necessar here, else the general clause
cannot be restricted. Sure he who granted the Property, would not stick at a
Casuality, he who granted the greater, would not stick at the lesser; he who
granted so many Casualities, would not stick at one; he who granted all the
others of that same nature, would allow this to pass with its fellows; and he
who granted Ward, which is the cause of Marriage, would not have refused, to
grant the Marriage, which is but an effect and consequent of that Ward: And
this leads me into another Argument, upon which I lay very much weight; His
Majesty has here gifted omnia proficua and devorias quae contigerunt ratione
Wardae; but so it is, that Marriage is a Casuality proficuum and devoria; which
falls by reason of Ward-holding: and so contingit ratione Wardae; for, Ward
here is taken not as a naked Casuality, but as a holding, and therefore it is,
that when by the style of a Novo damus, all Casualities are enumerated,
Marriage only is not specified in the old Signatures, because that casualitiy
was still looked upon, as comprehended under the general, omnia proficua ratione
wardae. Not only do many general terms of this Novo damus secure against this
and all other Casualities, but His Majesty in his concession, expresses all the
ways of transmission, whereby these Casualities could be given by him to his
Vassal, viz. renuntiando, transferendo, and extradonando eadem, cum omni
action and instantia: and in contemplation of this Right, His Majesty has a
considerable composition in Exchequer, which makes this to be not only a Gift,
but a Bargain, not only mere Law, but Equity.

To balance these reasons, it is represented for His Majesty, and his Donator,
that all his Majesty's concessions are gratuitous, and must not be too largely
extended, for what compositions are paid, are rather paid as fees to his
Majesty's Officers and Attenders, then as a price, and these are too low, and
unproportionat, to what is given, to deserve that name. 2. That his Majesty
cannot be prejudged by the negligence of his Officers, and what he passes in
favors of his Vassals, deserve a far other construction, then what is done by
other Superiors; and though general Clauses may carry away Casualities from
them, because it is presumed, that they have leisure to ponder every word, in
any Right they grant, yet His Majesty being loaded with the weighty affairs of
the Nation, cannot vaick to so exact observations; and therefore it was thought
fit, that the negligence of His Officers, nor the importunity of parties,
should not prejudge him. 3. That the gift of a Ward, per se, would not carry
the Casuality of Marriage, if it were not expressed; ergo, Marriage could not be
comprehended, under the Casuality of Ward which is here expressed. 4. That
general Clauses are in many cases but error stili, and are restricted by the
decisions of all our Courts; thus though the style of a Gift of Escheat, does
dispone all movables which the Rebel had, or shall acquire; yet, these Gifts
are restricted by our decisions, to what the Rebel had, the time of his
rebellion, or should acquire within a year after the rebellion: though Gifts of
Ward and Marriage bear, ay and till the entry of the next lawful Heir, yet
these Gifts are restricted to three terms Non-entries, subsequent to the Ward;
and though Gifts granted do bear relief, yet they would not carry a right to
the relief. 5. That the design of a Novo damus is to secure the Property, but
not to transmitt a Right to any Casualities not expressed; and thus the King
might, notwithstanding of a Novo damus crave bygone Few duties; nor would it
debar His Majesty from craving Taxt-wards or Marriages, as was decided in the
case betwixt His Majesty's Advocat, and Pierstoun, where it was found, by the
Exchequer, that Marriage was not comprehended under the Novo damus, because it
was not expressed.

I am not, my Lords, willing to lessen His Majesty's fa^ours to His Subjects,
who were not worthy of them, if they undervalued them; and therefore, I beg
leave rather to magnify them so far, as to think, that they should not be
interpret so narrowly, as to bear a proportion to our deserts, (for the favors
of Princes cannot, like his whom they represent, be merited) but so augustly
and opulently, as may bear a proportion to the greatness of him who dispenses
them, as Clarus and all the Feudalists observe; and if the word can admit a
large interpretation, the grants of Princes ought to have it: So, that since
these general clauses would carry all Casualities in Gifts granted by private
Superiors, much more ought this to be allowed in augustioribus principum
concessionibus, especially in Discharges granted by them of all former
incumberances, which being of the nature of Indempnities, ought like them to be
interpret all possible ways to defend the poor Vassal. Nor do I deny, but the
negligence of His Majesty's Officers should not prejudge His Interest, yet,
Gifts granted cannot be called negligence; for the one is an omission, and the
other a commission; the one is a privation, and the other a positive act; the
design of that Statute was to defend His Majesty against the omission of His
Officers, such as the suffering His Rights to prescrive, or omitting to propone
Defenses for him; and the words of the Act 14. Par. 16.Ja. 6. are, that in the
pursuing or defending any of His Actions or Causes, the negligence of His
Officers omitting any exception, reply, etc. shall not prejudge him. But God
forbid that every Gift granted by His Majesty, and past by his Exchequer, might
be thereafter questioned, because a sufficient composition was not paid, or
that it was not founded upon a sufficient cause; for else, all our Signatures
and Rights might be questioned; this were to unhinge all our Securities, and to
endanger all His Majesty's Officers; but how can what is past His Royal Hand,
be thought to be past by the negligence of His Officers? And how impertinent
were it, for his Officers always to stop what His Majesty commands?

I confess, that the Gift of a Ward per se, would not carry Marriage; but if
His Majesty did grant omnia proficua ratione Wardae contingentia, though in a
single Gift, I think it would give right to the casuality of Marriage; and yet,
that case would not be so strong as ours; for in single Gifts, it is proper to
express Casualities dispon'd, but in a Novo aamus it is otherwise; for the
design there, is by the enumeration of all special Casualities, and by
subjoining a general to these, thereby to secure against all these Casualities.

To what is founded upon the errors, that are in many of our Styles, I need
only answer, that regulariter stilus aequipollet juri, and pro Lege habetur, l.
si quando C de injur. Bart. in l. peritos ff. de excus. tut. And therefore,
though as Laws may be abrogated or restricted, so Styles are subject to the
same frailty; yet, unless it can be made appear, that these Styles are
restricted by the constant current of Decisions, or by some express Laws,
certainly, Style must rule us: Styles are the product of common consent, and
are introduced after much experience, by such as understand; they are to
Lawyers, what the Cart is to Geographers, or the Compass to Seamen; and this
is so far from being convell'd, that it is established by the instances
adduced, by the Donator for Gifts of Escheats and Non-entries, did take place
according to the latter, till they were restricted by express Acts of
Exchequer: and sure these Acts had been needless, if the Style had not been
binding, before these Statutes drawn backwards, but having a future obligation
only, every man knew how to compone or transact for them accordingly.

As to the instance of Reliefs, bygone Few-duties, Taxtduties of Ward and
Marriage (which was Pierstons case) it is clear, that the reason why these
pass not under general Gifts is, because they are liquid, and so cannot be
compon'd for, in Exchequer, as Hope well observes, for these are no
contingencies; and since the Law gives right to any thing in a Signature,
because it is compounded for; therefore, in justice these things cannot be
comprehended in a Signature, which are not compounded for. We have likewise an
express Act of Parliament, appointing that Reliefs should not be compounded
for, which draws out these from the common objection, and states Reliefs in a
case far different from ours.

And though it be much urged, that His Majesty having taxt the casuality of
Ward and Marriage in this Gift, it is most presumable, that He would have
expressed the casuality of Marriage, if he had designed to have transmitted it,
since that casuality was then under consideration: Yet, this is but a remote
conjecture, and must cede to the stronger presumptions urged in the contrair;
and since the Signature is not drawn by His Majesty's order, but by the Vassal,
the presumption ceases; and it is more presumable, that the Vassal would have
expressed this casuality, had he thought it necessar: and whatever might be
urged, if this casuality of Marriage had been expressed, but had been delet; yet
there can be little difficulty, where the Signature was presented without it,
and where the Vassal rested upon the general Clause.

All the Lawyers of our Nation have advised, that this Novo damus did seclude
Marriage, though not e^prest; all the people have esteemed so, and upon that
esteem, they have bought and sold accordingly, Rights carrying such a Novo
damus; So that whatever may be done as to the future, yet since so many have
compon'd with His Majesty for such Gifts, in contemplation they carried all
Casualities, and that so many have given considerable sums to such as had
compon'd for them, upon that consideration; Since this opinion was so old and
universal, and since ignorance in it (if it be an error) was so invincible,
being warranted by the advice of the ablest Lawyers; I cannot see how in Law
quoad preterita it can be otherwise interpret, whatever fate it may have for
the future.

The Lord found, that a Right granted by the King, with a Novo Damus, did not
only secure the Property, but secluded all Casualities that were expressed; but
that it did not defend against Casualities which were not expressed.

For John Johnstoun, againstJames Hamiltoun.
XIII. PLEADING. Whether a Contract entered into by a Minor, who averred
himself to be Major, and swore never to reduce, be revocable.
THe Law might seem a severe Master, if it only imposed upon us what we were to
obey, and exacted from us an entire submission to what it did command: but in
recompense of our submissions, it returns us its protection, it does supply
want of strength in the weak, when they are engaged against the strong; want of
wit in the simple, when they are engaged against the subtle; and want of age
in Minors, who would otherwise be very easily circumveened: it appoints its
Judges to be their Tutors, and whilst such as rely upon their own wit, may be
circumveened, they are by its assistance placed beyond all hazard.

Amongst those other Minors, who daily come to crave from you, the reduction of
what they did in their Minority, none was ever more favorable then my Client,
he being a person, who because of the lowness of his parts, and meannesse of
his breeding, is like to continue very long a Minor. And if sharpness, and
malitia, can in some cases forestal Majority, and almost meet it half way,
certainly want of wit and ordinar sagacity, should extend the privilege of
Minority. The person by whom he is laes'd being his own Kinsman, and one in
whom he confided very much, pleads likewise for a more liberal reparation, and
the same principle which makes murder under trust to be treason, should
likewise make the lesion here to be more easily reparable, and should not only
weaken the Defenses, but should likewise be a sufficient ground to repel such
as were of themselves relevant: and the lesion here, is not one of these small
injuries, but is a great and considerable loss, wherein the Minor has not only
been induced to sell his Land, though the Law appoints, that a Minors Land
should not be sold, but by the Authority of a Judge; but to sell his Fathers
Heretage, transmitted to him by a long series of Ancestors, and to sell it too
without the consent of his Curators, who are the only persons who should defend
and supply his infirmity.

Against these reasons, it is debated for the Defender, that though Minors have
great privileges allowed them in Law, yet many causes may occur, wherein it
were unjust to proportion exactly the prices of what they sell, with the
ordinar prices of what is sold; and the same equity whereupon their privilege
is founded, may make such exactness, not only to appear to be, but really, to
be rigor. As if a Minor should, to free him from the Galleys, obliege himself
to sell Land at an easy purchase, to one of his Contrymen, who were then in
a Foreign Country with him, and from whom he could only expect money, and
which money being to be bestowed upon Merchandise in these Countries, might
produce far greater advantage to the Merchant, then the Land could; which, and
many other instances, may clearly evince, that if Minors had not some way
whereby they might secure such as would contract with them, the Law would
secure them, but as it does prisoners, and which was designed to keep them
free, would take their freedom from them; and therefore, the Law has
introduced, that Minors being in confinio majoritatis, may subjoyn an oath to
their Contracts; which oath is, because of its divine character, and of the
reverence that's due to that great God, who is called upon as witness in it, by
all Christian Lawyers declared to be sufficient to fix and corroborat the
Contract to which it is subjoined. For, the Law of God oblieging every man to
observe what he has sworn, even though to his prejudice, it were unfit that the
Laws of men should be more binding than those. Likeas, by the common Law, l. 1.
c. si adversus venditionem, an oath confirming Vendition is declared binding,
Nullam te esse contraversiam moturum, neque perjurij me auctorem tibi futurum
sperare debuisti. And authent. Sacramenta puberum, does expressly tell us, that
Sacramenta puberum sponte facta, super contradictibus rerum suarum non
retractandis, inviolabiter custodiantur. Which is likewise observed by our Law,
the last of February, 1637. and by a late decision, 10. February, 1672. Mr.
George Wauch contra Bailie of Dunraggat. But not only has this Minor obliged
himself upon oath, not to revocke, but he has likewise declared upon oath in
the same Bond, that he was Major, and Majority being that which cannot be known
by the eye, and there being no liquid and present proof of a Minors age, the
Law should have prejudged Commerce very much, if it had not allowed that a
Minor asserting himself to be a Major, should notwithstanding be restored
against his own declaration: for by this, not only should Minors be disabled
from getting money to do their necessar affairs, but likewise Majors behooved
still to wait till they should get an exact probation of their Age; which
probation is very difficult with us, where there are no certain Registers; and
consequently, Majors might, because the probation of their Majority could not
be presently instructed, be very much prejudged, and sometime the probation of
Age, being that which cannot appear convincingly to the sight; and that being a
case, wherein such as contract with Minors might be cheated, it was very just,
that since the Law designed only to assist Minors that were cheated, that it
should not give the same privilege to such Minors as cheat others, by
asserting themselves to be Majors, l. 2. Si min. se major. dixerit. Si is qui
minorem nunc se esse adseverat, fallaci majoris aetatis mandacio to deceperit,
cum juxta statuta juris, errantibus non etiam fallentibus minoribus
publicajura, subveniant, in integrum restituti non debet. And since Dioclesian,
who was not only no Christian, but a persecuter of them, did bear such respect
to an Oath, what respect ought it to have from Christian Judges, who if they
suffer this Oath to have no effect, are the occasion that the Name of God is
taken in vain?

Minors may be punished for perjury, falsehood, and cheating, and therefore, it
follows necessarily, that they may much more be bound by Oaths; for it were
injust to punish them for perjury, if they understand not perfectly the
strength and efficacy of an Oath, and if they do understand that, there is no
reason to absolve them from it: and if it can bind them to severe and corporal
punishments; it can bind them much more to the performance of civil Contracts.

Nor can it be denied, but that our Law respects so much an Oath; and finds it
so obligator, that deeds done by Women in favors of strangers, stante
matrimonio are null, though ratified by an Oath, as was decided 18. February,
1663. Brisband contra Douglas; at which time, the Lords were of opinion, that
all obligations which are ipso jure null, such as obligations made by Women
stante matrimonio, and by Minors having Tutors and Curators, but without their
consent, are still null, though they be ratified by an Oath: and if this be
true, as is acknowledged, they contend, that there is no reason why all
Contracts entered into by Minors should not be valid, for the obligation of an
Oath lies in the hazard of perjury, and in the religious respect which Lawyers
have to Oaths; and in point of Conscience, what difference is there betwixt
Contracts ipso jure null, or such as are not so? God takes no notice of such
subtle differences, and since the Oath is the same in both, why should it not
produce the same effect? It is the Oath which in this case oblieges, and
therefore, though the Contract were null, yet the Oath still binds, and
subsists, though annexed to an null Contract, even as a null Contract may be
ratified, or homologated. And that Contracts upon Oath, do bind Minors, though
they have Curators, and though they subscribe without their consent, is
maintained by most famous Lawyers, as Andreolus, contravers. 202. Est enim haec
opinio (inquit ille) fundata in religione juramenti, quae semper militat, sive
Minor habeat Curatorem, sive non, and censequenter cum religio juramenti, and
odium perjurii in utroque militat casu, in utroque etiam debet manner effectus.
Other Lawyers assure us, that juramentum Minorem, representat Majorem, and
therefore, since Majors are bound, and Minors swearing are Majors in the
construction and interpretation of Law, Minors swearing should be also tied by
these Contracts. Nay some have said, that juramentum fingit Minorem non habere
Curatorem. Bald and Corn. ad auth. sacramenta pub. And according to the Canon
Law (which Craig says, we follow in what concerns our consciences) juramentum
semper est servandum, quotiescunque potest servari sine dispendio salutis
aeternae.

It is likewise alleged for him, that Minoribus deceptis, non decipientibus
est succurendum; because there, the want of wit, which is the ground of
restitution, ceases; and it were also unjust, that this remedy should be abused
against the design of the Legislator; nor should the Minor have the protection
of that Law, which he has offended: But so it is, that its offered to be proven
here, that the Minor was a person traffiquing upon his own account, and such
cannot be restored, Fortia de restit. min. part. quaest. 23. How dangerous were
it, if such as were Merchants, and common Traders, should be repon'd? for then,
who should Contract with them, or how could innocent people be secured? That
same necessity and public interest, which introduced the privileges of
Minority, has likewise introduced many other privileges in favors of
Commerce; and since it were disadvantageous to debar Minors from Trading, it
were unreasonable to state them in a condition, in which their Trade would be
ineffectual; for who would bargain with them, or bestow trust upon them, if
their transactions could be rescinded upon the pretext of Minority? It is (say
they) to be presumed, that experience and art (learned by them whilst they were
practisers) does supply the imbecility of their greener years, and since by
learning and art, such as are very young do outstrip very far such as are of
riper years, and attain to very much exactness in the subtilest Sciences, why
may not application refine them also to a sufficient consistency in
merchandising, in which there are no such mysterious points? Upon which
account, even our Law has introduced, that Advocats, Nottars, and others in
public Offices, cannot revock what they do in their Minority, as was decided,
19. July. 1636.

If, say they, the Minor was forced to sell his Heretage, it was to redeem his
person from prison, and freedom is preferable to Heretage, because liberty can
please without Heretage, but Heretage signifies nothing to one who wants
liberty; and for this Heretage my Client gave out his money, by which he had
raised himself to a considerable Fortune, and being forced by want of this
money to quite his Trade, he did loose hope of gaining a greater Estate, then
that which the other sold: but this he did to prefer his friend to his hopes,
and so this friendship and relation which the Pursuer would make the foundation
of a Cheat, was indeed the foundation of this favor, and the Law presumes,
that his Cosen would not have cheated him.

Notwithstanding of all which plausible representations, I humbly conceive,
that the Minor my Client ought not to be tied by this Oath; and that what I
debate in his favors may be the better understood, your Lordships will be
pleased to consider, that all civil polished Nations, have in effect resigned
so far their liberty to their Legislators, that these in their Contracts, are
to be ruled by those in their Statutes: and God Almighty is more concerned in
the economy and government of the World, then in the observation of private
Oaths; and therefore, we must consider more the force of a Law, then of an
Oath; and if private Oaths amongst parties could derogat from public Laws, then
the public Laws should be absolutely evacuat, and remain as the empty shadows
of what they ought to have been. And from this I infer, that since the Law has
thought fit to declare all deeds done without the consent of Tutors and
Curators to be null, that no deed done by any Minor having Curators, can bind
him, except he be authorized by their consent.

And from the same principle, I likewise infer, that the former distinction
made in Law, betwixt such deeds as are ipso jure null, and such as are not ipso
jure null, but are only reduceable, is so far reasonable, in relation to this
contraversie, that though deeds that are ipso jure null be not reduceable, if
they be not confirmed by an Oath, yet deeds that are ipso jure null, are
reducable though sworn; for in case the deed be ipso jure null, it is
reprobated by Law, and so is no deed in the construction of Law; and if it be
no deed, it cannot be confirmed by an Oath, for a confirmation presupposes a
pre-existing deed, sed non entis nullae sunt qualitatis nec accidentia; and so
this Oath wants here a basis upon which it can be fixed. 2. It were unfit, that
what the Law has expressly condemned, it should allow others to evite, for it
should thus cheat it self out of its own authority, by such indirect courses,
Et quod direct fieri non licet, nec per ambages fieri licet. In vain were Laws
to be made, if every private man might enervat its force, and evite its sanction
by such subterfuges; this were to invite men to break and scorn Laws, to allow
them to tear off their own yoke, and to place every private man above the
Legislator. For, as Oaths exacted by Magistrates obliege not, when they are
contrair to the Laws of God; so the Oaths of private persons obliege not, when
they are expressly contrair to the Laws of our Rulers, who are gods upon earth.
And as vows are declared null by God himself, if given by a Maid without the
consent of her Father, so should Oaths for the same reason not obliege such as
have Curators, for these are the Parents in Law. 3. No Oath can be vinculum
iniquitatis, the tie of injustice; but so it is, that where a deed is declared
null by the Law, that deed is in so far injust; and to allow a deed that is
injust because it is sworn, were to establish injustice by an Oath, and to put
it in the power of every private person, to alter the nature of things, and to
make that just which is injust. 4. This would disappoint the cares and pains of
the civil Magistrate; for, his design being to secure our posterity, because of
the imbecility of their Judgment, that would be absolutely eluded, and poor
Minors would by that same want of Judgment and sagacity, for which their deeds
are reduceable, be induced to swear, and so the remedy will become effectual,
nam eadem facilitate ju^ant qua contrahunt. And since Minors cannot be obliged
in their Minority, because of their imbecility, Oaths should not bind them,
except it could supply that; and since the Law has given them Curators, it is
just the deeds done by these Minors should not be respected in Law, since the
forms prescribed by Law are not observed, nor the reason satisfied whereon it
is founded. 5. This would open a door to perjury, for such as could not cheat
Minors, because of their less age, would cheat them by their Oaths; and thus,
Oaths which should not be given but upon solemn and extraordinary occasions,
would become cheap, and would be taken in every Alehouse, administrat by every
Nottar or his Servant, and the best of ties would oftimes be used in the most
sinful occasions: and how can such Oaths as these obliege, since they want all
the three qualities of an Oath, and for which, Oaths are declared in Scripture
to be obligator? and these are, that they should be in truth, in judgment, and
in righteousness. I know, that every man may renunce what is his own interest,
but this Maxim holds only where men understand their own interest, but not in
Minors, who want that ripeness of Judgment, by which their Renunciations are
sustained. And that the Oath is obligatory, though not the Contract, is but a
mere quible, for there is no action arising in common Law from an Oath, qua
tale, Bart. ad l. si quis C. de fidejuss. Imol. ad c. cum contingat de
jure-jur. Such an Oath oblieges in Conscience, but not in Law, and though it be
the substance in the one, it is but an accident in the other.

I need not debate here, that the authentic Sacramenta puberum, ascribes only
this cogency to Oaths which are given tactis sacrosanctis evangeliis, which
though it may seem but a solemnity, yet has great force with it, in my opinion;
for solemnities do raise up the attention, and obliege more the swearer to
advert to what he is promising: and if Witnesses and others come to age, need
these advertisments, much more do Minors need them, since they are often
overtaken by inadvertence. And as this caution seems not to have been
unnecessarily adjected by that excellent Law; so Seraphinus and others have
required necessarily, that solemnity in such Oaths as these, antiqui quo major
esset jurisjurandi religio, plerasque adinvenerunt ceremonias, quae jurantibus
terrorem ac formidinem incuterent, Ann. Robert. Page 188. and swearing by
touching somewhat that was sacred, was very old. Virgil.
Tango aras mediosque ignes and numina testor.


Justin. also, l. 22. relates, that Agathocles swore a confederacy with the
Carthaginians, expositis tactisque ignibus cereis: and by all our old Evidents
it is clear, that swearing upon the Bible or Altar, was used in all
extraordinar cases. And for the same reason, Oaths in Writ have been oft-times
little respected by Lawyers, because the Writ is oft-times not read nor
considered, and passes by too transiently to have all the force which a solemn
and judicial Oath deserves, vid. Bart. and l. qui jurasse, ff. de jure-jur. and
fachin. contrav. lib. 3. cap. 8. So that we should either not seek the benefit
of these Laws, else we should make use of the forms and ceremonies which they
prescribe.

As to the assertory Oath, by which the Minor swore that he was Major, it is
answered, that such Oaths ought not to be respected further then as the
above cited Laws declare, which is, that these Oaths ought to be believed,
except the contrair can be proven by Writ, and that the truth and strength of
this probation cannot be taken off, and enervat by Witnesses, for a Writ is a
more binding, and concluding probation then Witnesses, who may be mistaken, or
may be corrupted. Si tamen in instrumento per sacramenti religionem majorem te
esse adseverasti, non ignor are debes, exclusum tibi esse in integrum
restrictions beneficium, nisi palam, and evidenter ex instrumentorum
probatione, per non testium depositiones te fuisse minorem ostenderis. But here
it is offered to be proven, by the Register of the Church-session where my
Client was baptized, that he was Minor the time of the transaction, and by this
your Lordships may see, how dangerous it were to make such Oaths as these
binding, and how easily Minors may be induced, not only to bind, but to damn
themselves, and how little this person deserves, who was the occasion and
sollicitour of the perjury: were not this to baffle that sacred tie, by which
Princes bind their Subjects to a secure obedience, by which Judges obliege men
to reveal the truth, and by which every private man is secure, when he refers
to his adversars Oath, the truth of what is contraverted amongst them. Nor can
the Defender maintain this Contract, as entered into by my Client, who was a
Merchant by his profession, since though that may defend such as Contract with
him, in things relating naturally to his Commerce, yet that should not be
extended to such Contracts as these, wherein my Client is bound to sell his
Heretage at too low a rate, Et quae ex necessitate per modum privilegii
introducuntur, ultra casus necessarios non extenduntur. Lands are not the
subject matter of that traffic which the Law does privilege; but on the
contrar, Lands is not allowed to be sold, without the consent and sentence of a
Judge: nay, and even these qui veniam aetatis a principe obtinuerunt, will be
restored against the prejudice sustained by them in selling their Heretage, l.
3. c. de his qui veniam aetat. albeit no man could impeterare veniam aetatis,
till he was past eighteen, and was proven to be prudent and frugal, l. 2. C.
eod. which is all that can be alleged against this Minor. Nor should our Law
respect much confinium majoritatis, since they have shortened too much the
years of Minority, in making it end at twenty one; whereas, the Romans and
others who were sooner ripe, and more sagacious then we, extended Minority to
twenty five: and since our times are more cheating then theirs, it was fit that
our Minority should have been longer then theirs. But however, both of us
agree, that minorennitas computanda est de momento in momentum.

To conclude then (my Lords) sure that opinion in all contraversies should be
followed, which may do good, and can do no harm; and that is to be reprobated,
which can do harm, and is not necessar toward the doing what is just. But so
it is, that not to restore a Minor in such cases as these, may, and will
necessarily destroy all Minors, who may be overreached, and cannot be repon'd,
because of such Oaths; whereas, such as contract with them, can suffer nothing
by such reductions; for, either the Minors with whom they contract, are laes'd,
and then they will not be restored, and therefore, such as contract with them
cannot be prejudged: but if they can make it appear that they are prejudged, it
will necessarily follow, that the Minor is not laes'd, and so the Contract will
not be liable to reduction; and thus these Oaths will infallibly prove to be
either unnecessar, or unjust.

This Cause came not to a Debate.

Against Forfeitures in absence.
XIV. PLEADING.
My Lord Chancellor,
WE have subjected to our consideration, an Overture, which ought to be
seconded by very convincing arguments, before we pass it into a Law, seeing it
innovats a custom, which is as old as our Kingdom, and older then our positive
Laws. And customs, like men, may be thought to have had excellent
constitutions, when they last long; and this Act, if past, seems to infer the
greatest hazard upon the two highest of our concerns, for such are our Lives
and Fortunes.

The old inviolable custom of Scotland was, that no probation could be led
against absents, either in Treason, or any other Crime, in any Court, save the
Parliament; but the only certification in all criminal Letters, was the being
denunced Fugitives (or out-lawed as the English speak) which custom has
maintained it self for many hundreds of years, by its own reasonableness,
without the necessity of being fenced with any other Authority: and albeit the
Parliament did reserve to themselves, a liberty to proceed against Traitors,
in case of absence, yet they never granted that to any other Court; whereby it
clearly appears, that our Predecessors have thought that power incommunicable
to all such as were not Legislators, that procedure being rather a privileged
transgression, then an execution of the Law. But it is now craved by this Act,
that in case of perduellion, and rising in Arms against the Prince, it shall
be lawful to the Justices to lead probation against absents, and forfeit them
accordingly; which seems to me most inconvenient, for these reasons. 1. Because
the Styles in all Courts are equivalent to fundamentals, and by an express Act
of Parliament with us, Styles are not to be altered: But so it is, there is no
Style in the Justice Court, bearing any other certification against absents,
but the being denunced Fugitives. 2. There was never any Instances of it since
the foundation of the Justice Court, and a negative Practique being so old and
uniform as this, is most binding, especially where all the conveniences,
reasons and advantages which are now pressed, were then obvious; our Predecessors
were sure as Loyal as we, and let us not be more cruel then they were. 3. The
old custom was founded upon most convincing reasons; for when persons are
proceeded against in absence, they want the benefit of exculpation, for proving
those just defenses which are of so great consequence to them, and their
posterity; such as are, That though they were present upon the place, yet they
were taken prisoners, and carried there, and were only going loose upon
parroll, or fell accidentally amongst those Rebels, who had gathered
themselves together, or went there by a command from some of His Majesty's
Officers, for reclaiming those who were in Arms, with many other defenses
which (the party being absent) none can know, and though known, none dare
propone, it being a maxim in our Law, that none dare propone any thing to
defend one, who being pursued for Treason is absent. Another great
disadvantage, under which these will fall who are pursued in absence, will be,
that such witnesses may be received against them, as are liable to just
exceptions, and whom they would decline, if they were present; which objections
likewayes, none know, nor dare propone; and it is likewayes very well known,
that there are many witnesses, who will depone upon suggestion, very many
things which they durst not assert, if they were confronted with the party
against whom they were to depone, being sometimes overawed, and sometimes
through pity driven to speak only truth, when they look upon his countenance
who is to live, or die by their depositions. Upon which account, confrontation
of witnesses and parties has, in the civil Law, been used as a successful
remedy, and in ours the witnesses are ordained to look upon the pannells face
when they depone. And albeit it may seem, that there is little hazard of a
probation, where the case is so notour, as that of rising in Arms; yet, the
mistake lies in this, that though the rising in Arms be notour, it may be it
is not notour who were present, and the persons may be doubtful, though not
the thing it self. A third great inconvenience is, that whereas those who are
present may by interrogators, restrict, or explain, what seemed disadvantageous
in the deposition of such as depone against them, they will by this innovation,
forfeit this advantage amongst other losses. 4. No other Nation receives
concluding probation against absents; many instances whereof might be given,
but I shall satisfy my self with that of Freisland, cited by Sand. lib. 5.
def. 2. Praxis nostra habet ut Criminosus si fuga se substraxerit, ad
instantiam procuratoris generalis citetur, and si praefixa die non comparet,
fiducialiter bona in contumaciae paenam annotantur: which is exactly our
custom; and by the civil Law, Tantum annotabantur bona rei non comparentis, ita
ut si post annum venerit, and satis dederit de stando juri, ea recuperat si
non, bona perdit non tamen de delicto habetur pro confesso, l. 1. and gloss. l.
pen. and fin. ff. de requiren. reis. which Title begins thus, Divi-fratres
rescripserunt ne quis absens puniatur, and hoc jure utimur, ne absentes
damnentur. And Hottoman tells us, that Majestatis crimen in foro apud suum
praetorem, perduellio vero a populo Romano comitiis centuriatis in campo martis
judicabatur; which was much more reasonable, then our present overture, seeing
the greater the crime is, it should be the more solemnly, and slowly judged:
from which procedure of the Romans in Perduellion, it seems our old practique
of judging only absents in the matter of Treason by a Parliament has taken its
origin, for Comitiae centuriae was to them, what a Parliament is to us. I
might here likewayes, allege the authority of Mathaeus, the Learned Civilian
who ever wrote upon that subject, tit. 2. number. 6. whose words are, Denique cum
leges vetant absentem damnari, crimen perduellionis non excipiunt erit igitur
and hic observandum, quod in aliis crimintbus, ut absens requirendus adnotetur,
and bona obsignentur, publicentur denique, si intra annum non responderit. L.
absentem, 5. C. de poems. l. absentem. 6. C. de accusat. l. ult. D. de requir.
vel abs. damn. Nam quanquam Perduellio gravissimum crimen est, videndum tamen
ne in occasionem sevitiae atque calumny habeatur; and page 371. dicit Math.
Falsum esse absentem in hoc crimine posse damnari, nec ullo juris loco excipi
crimen Majestatis. Dicitque supradictam extravagantem Constitutionem, nullam
authoritatem obtinere apud interpretes juris civilis. 5. By the 90. Act. Parl.
11. Ia. 6. It is most justly statute, that all the probation should be led in
presence of the Pannal, and the Assyze, which shows clearly, that our Law has
been always jealous of probation led in absence, and that probation is only to
be led in presence.

This innovation is recommended to us upon these reasons; 1. That these who are
contumacious, and flee from justice, should be in no better condition then
those who appear, and they cannot complain of any of the foresaid
disadvantages, seeing these are occasioned by their own absence and fault. To
which it is answered, that a person who is pursued for Treason may be absent,
not upon the account of any guilt, but because the citation never came to his
knowledge; as if he be at the time abroad in Foreign Countries, where
citations at the Mercatcrosse of Edinburgh, and Peer and shore of Leith (which
is all our Law allows) seldom reach; and sometimes the persons summoned, may
be either sick, or in prison, and not be able to appear, or being liable to
other accusations, or fearing rather the present influence of some enemies,
then their own guilt, dare not. For though Treason, as the most comprehensive
of all other crimes to us, be of all others most abominated, when proven; yet,
of all other crimes, most Innocents are, by either malice or design oftest
ensnared, upon pretext rather, then by the guilt of Treason. For, as Lipsius
observes of the times wherein Tacitus wrote, Fraequentatae tunc temporis
accusationes majestatis, unicum crimen eorum qui crimine vacabant. Tertullian
in his apol. says, non licere indefensos omnino damnari, and a Carolo Magno
institutu est, lib. 7. cap. 145. Ne quis absens in causa capitali damnetur.
Plutarch in Alcibiades life, makes Alcibiades to have given this prudent
answer, to one who challenged him for not appearing to defend himself, Cetera
(inquit) omnia libenter, sed de capite meo, ne matri quidem, ne forte is, pro
albo atrum calculum imprudenter injiciat. Notat. and Liberius Pontifex Romanus
Constantio Imperatori, Judicem non posse, absente reo, de crimine ejus
judicare, nisi aut iniquus Judex sit, aut privato odio saevit. Hist. tripart.
l. 5. cap. 16. Seneca says, lib. 6. de Beneficiis, cap. 38. Quantum existimes
tormentum, etiamsi servatus fuero trepidasse, etiamsi absolutus fuero, causam
dixisse. And as Cicero very well observes, these who are accused before any
Judge for life, consider oftener what that Judge may do, then what in justice he
ought to do, Oratione pro Quintio. And thus we find, that Athanasius and
Chrysostom would not appear at Councils, to which they were cited, albeit they
feared their Judges more then their guilt, Niceph. lib. 8. c. 49. It were
therefore very hard in any of these cases, to forfeit an absent of his
Property, seeing in these, innocence and absence are very compatible. Nor does
His Majesty suffer great loss by this, as is urged; for if he who is pursued
for Treason compear not, he is denunced Fugitive, and by that denunciation, His
Majesty possesses his whole Estate, till he die, or compear; and after death,
he may be forfeit.

The second Argument is, by the 69. Act. Par. 6. Ia. 5. Traitors may be
forfeit after their death, in which case they are absent, and want all the
advantages above related. But to this the answer is, that the Law is so just,
and merciful, that after a person is denunced Fugitive in the case of Treason,
it allows him all the days of his life to purge his contumacy, by appearing
to reclaim his innocence; and it never dispaires of the one, till the other be
elapsed: and when it proceeds against any man to forfeiture after his death, it
ordains the nearest of Kin to be called to exculpat him, by proponing defenses,
or objections against the witnesses, and for doing every thing else which is
usual in such cases, or which might have been done by the Defunct himself,
whereas he who is pursued in his own lifetime, cannot defend after that manner,
as said is. After death likewayes, death it self, which is the greatest half of
the punishment, is over, and there is not so great hazard, as there is in his
case, who is forfeit dureing life, who is by that Sentence (without any
possibility of hearing) execute immediately upon his being apprehended. After
death also, malice, and design ordinarily ceases, so that the errors or
prejudices of either pursuer or witness are not so much to be feared.

The third Argument is, that probation may perish in the mean time, if it
cannot be received till after death. To which it is answered, 1. That this
Argument, aut nihil, aut nimium probat; for, upon this account, Pursutes should
be sustained for all other absents, this prejudice being common to all: But, 2.
It is safer, that a just probation should perish, then that a suspected one
should be received; and this one inconven^ence should not weigh down the many,
which are laid in the balance of the other side. Parliaments are ordinar, and
necessa^y a^t^r public Rebellions, wherein that horrid Crime may receive its
legal, as well as its just punishment; or if they meet not, this may be
otherwise remedied; for, probation may be led ad futuram rei memoriam, though
the party be absent, reserving to him all his other defenses, by which the
Kings right may be preserved, and the Lieges rights not prejudged, and of all
probations, that can least perish, which is to be led in the case of public
rising in Arms.

The fourth Argument is, that the civil Law admits forfeiture in absence, in
the case of Perduellion (for so the common Law names that kind of Treason which
is committed against the Prince, or State) and our Criminal Law being founded
upon the Civil Law, ought in this, as in most other cases, to be squared by it.
To which my answer is, that there is no warrant for that assertion from the Law
of the Romans; for, by that Law, bona tantum annotabantur, as has been said,
in place whereof, banna hodie locum obtinent, which is equivalent to our
Denunciations. But because citations of the Civil Law, would resemble pedantry
too much, I shall recommend to such as doubt this, the 16. verse, 25. Chap. of
the Acts, where Festus, a great Roman Lawyer, sure, (as all their Presidents of
the Provinces were) tells us, That it is not the manner of the Romans to
deliver any man to die, before he who is the accused, have the accuser face to
face, and be heard to defend himself concerning the crime laid against him. I
confess, that forfeiture in absence is allowed per extravag. Henrici septimi
(and it is well called an extravagant Constitution) but that is accounted no
part of the civil Law, and if we follow its model, we ought to allow forfeiture
in absence in all points of Treason, as this does; and even that Constitution
acknowledges, that this was not allowed by the Romans, and if it had, this
Constitution had been unnecessar, as it is now unreasonable. And I remember,
that App. Alex. in his third Book of the civil Wars, relates an eloquent
Harrangue made by Lucius Piso, in favous of Antonius, maintaining, that no
person who is absent could be condemned, though upon probation, which was
accordingly found by the Roman Senate. And though our Parliaments use to
proceed against absents, in case of Treason; yet, that is so seldom, and
solemnly done, that there is little hazard to the Pannals, and every man has
still some friends in so great a number, who may defend him; nor is it probable
that the Parliament, who are the great Curators of the Commonwealth, and who
are so much entrusted by us, as to have reposed upon them the Legislative
Power, will prejudge any private party; remembering it may be their case one
day, which is now the Pannals: and that being a supreme Court, is not stinted
to follow a probation which is suspect, though private Assizers might, for fear
of an Assize of error; which makes a vast difference and disparity of reason.

Let us then (My Lord) consult, the interest of our Posterity, which is a
generous kind of self-defence: for the Italian proverb observes well, that it
is better to live in Countries which are barren, then in Countries where there
are rigid Laws. Let us guard against what is cruel, as we wish what is just;
and let us lawfully be careful now of these our Lives; and Fortunes, of which
we have been too often unnecessarily anxious. God himself would not condemn
Adam, till he heard him, and though he knew the sins of Sodom, and Gomorrah, he
would not pronunce sentence against them, till he went down and saw their
abominations. Let us not then make snares in place of Laws, and whilst we
study only to punish such as are Traitors, let us not hazard the Innocence of
such as are Loyal Subjects.

The learned reasons adduc'd for this Overture, and the opinion of the Session,
prevailed against this Discourse; and the Parliament did ordain, that absents
might be proceeded against in the Justice-court, for public rising in Arms.

For the late Marquess of Argyl, immediately before his Case was advised.
XV. PLEADING. Whether passive compliance in public Rebellions, be punishable
as Treason.
My Lord Chancellor,
I Wish it may be the last misfortune of my Noble Client, that he should be now
abandoned to the patronage of so weak a Pleader as I am, whose unripenesse both
in years and experience, may, and will take from me that confidence, and from
your Lordships that respect, which were requisite in an Affair of this import.
In our former Debate, which is now closed, we contended from the principles of
strict and municipal Law: but here I shall endeavor to persuade your
Lordships, from the principles of equity, reason, convenience and the custom of
Nations; which is the more proper way of Debate before a Parliament, who make
Laws, but are not tied by them, and who in making Laws, consider what is fit
and equitable, and then ordain what shall be Law and Justice; and if your
Lordships consider strict Law in this case, it were in vain for the loyalest
Subjects, who lived in these three Kingdoms during those late confusions and
rebellions, to defend his own actions by that rule: for, since intercommuning
with Traitors, concealing of Treason, and acknowledging their Authority, are by
strict Law, in regular times, undeniable Acts of Treason, I am no more to
debate abstractly my Clients Innocence as to these, for who amongst us did not
share in that guilt? All did pay Sesse, all did raise Summonds in the
Protectors name, we were all forced to be the idle witnesses of their Treasons;
and therefore, I shall only contend, that in such irregular times as these
were, wherein Law it self was banished with our Prince, mere compliance can
amount to no crime in him, and that as to this he lies under no singular guilt;
Especially, seeing His Majesty has, by a Letter under His Royal Hand, declared,
that he will not have His Advocat insist against him, for what was done by him,
or any else, preceding the year, 1651. (in which time he was only an eminent
Actor) having retired himself from all public employments under Cromwels
Usurpation, being known for nothing all that time, but a sufferer, and being
forced by self preservation to do those things for which he is now accused,
which being undenyably acknowledged by all the Nation, cannot but recommend
these few particulars, which I am now to offer for him.

Compliance (as the very word imports) is only a passive connivance, Et
praesupponit crimen in suo esse hactenus constitutum; and in Law, when a
multitude offend (as in our case) the contrivers, and such as were most active,
are, and should only be punished, detrahendum est severitati ubi multorum
hominum strages jacet: and therefore, this Noble Person being acknowledged to
be none of the first plotters, nor having been singular amongst that vast
multitude of complyers, cannot be brought in amongst such as ought to be
punished. For, albeit where many may commit a crime, there the multitude of
offenders should highten the punishment; yet, where the crime is already
committed collectively by a multitude, there the number of offenders takes off
the guilt, and in such cases, none should be punished (says Aflictus) but in
flagranti and recenti crimine (or with rid hand, as our Law terms it) dum durat
crimen, nec sine quorundam nece extingui potest seditio, or where the renewing
of the crime is justly to be feared; for punishments being of their own nature
inflicted, not for what is past (seeing that cannot be remeeded) but for example
in the future, certainly where the rebellion is extinguished, and needs no more
be feared, as in our case, (God be praised) it were cruelty to punish ordinar
complyers. It is remarkable, that in the 13. 14. 15. Acts of the 5. Parliament
of Queen Mary, such Scots-men as did ride with Englishmen, even where her
Majesty's Authority stood in its integrity, are ordained only to be liable for
what skaith they did to Scots men who served the Country, and that they being
charged, to leave assurance with Englishmen, and disobeying, should have no
action againg true Scots-men for any wrong done to them.

If then such lenity was used, and such commiseration extended, to such as were
involved in a public opposition to lawful and standing Authority, and in a
compliance with the English, who were at that time, born and sworn enemies both
to this Crown, and Country; what may such expect as complied only when no
visible Authority was able to protect such, who were forced to comply, not out
of any design to defend Usurpation, but rather out of a design to preserve
themselves for doing His Majesty further service? And as in the Body-natural,
the ordinar rules of Physic take no place, when there is a violent and
universal conflagration of Humors; so the ordinar rules of Law should have as
little place in the Body-politick, when a whole Nation have run themselves
headlong into a common distraction. To which purpose I cannot but represent to
your Lordship, that excellent Law, made in the Reign of Henry the seventh of
England, and with consent of that excellent Prince, wherein it was enacted,
That no Subject should be guilty of Treason, for obeying one who was called
King, though known to be an Usurper, because the people do there not rebel,
but submit.

Necessity may likewise be adduc'd for extenuating this compliance, which is
therefore said to have no Law, because it is punished by none; without
complying at that time, no man could entertain his dear Wife, or sweet
Children, this only kept men from starving, by it only men could preserve their
ancient Estates, and satisfy their Debts, which in honor and conscience they
were bound to pay, and without it, so eminent a Person as the Marquess of
Argyl, and so much eyed by these rebels, could not otherwise secure his life
against the snares were daily laid for it; and so this compliance did in effect
resolve in a self-defence, which inculpata tutela, seeing it can exempt a man
from murder, and these other crimes that are contrair to the Law of Nature, it
should much more defend against the crime of Treason, which is only punished,
because it is destructive to the government of our Superiors, and Statutes of
our Country; and since crimes are only punishable, because they destroy Society
and Commerce, how can this compliance be punished, which was necessar for both
these?

Man's will is naturally so frail, and man because of that frailty so miserable
a creature, that to punish even where his will is straight, were to add
affliction to the afflicted, the want of this will defend mad men against
paricide, and the degrees of this distinguishes slaughter from murder; and in
the Acts of Parliament whereupon the Lybel as to compliance is founded, it is
requisite, that the compliance be voluntar, thus in the 37 Act, 2. Parliament,
Ia. 1. It is statute, that no man will^ully receipt Rebels, and by the 205.
Act, 14. Par. Ia. 6. these who apprehend not such as mis-represent the King,
are as guilty as the Leasing-makers, if it be in their power to apprehend them,
as the Act very well adds. Likeas, by the 144. Act, 12. Par. Ia. 6. The Lieges
are only Prohibited to intercommune with such Traitors as they might crub; for
that Act, as it forbids all Commerce with Rebels, So it commands all the
Subjects to advertise His Majesty of their Residence, and to apprehend them;
whereby it is clear, that this last Act is only to have Vigor, when the
Authority of the Sovereign stands in force, and per argumentum a contrario
sensu, seems to excuse such as submit to Traitors, when there is either nothing
to be advertised, or when Advertisments of that nature, are either imprestable,
or at least unprofitable, as in our late troubles, at which time, the residence
of these Rebels was notour, and all correspondence betwixt the King and His
People, was daily betrayed and intercepted. Consonant to which, is that
excellent Law, l. 2. ff: de Receptatoribus, where it is said, that Ideo
puniuntur receptatores, quia cum apprehendere potuerunt dimiserunt: and Bald.
ad l. delictis, ff. de noxal. act. is most express, that receptans rebels,
non voluntary, sed coacte, quia sunt plures rebels simul: and eos expellere
non potest sine suo periculo, non punitur aliqua paena. Thus likewise in the
Statutes of King William, cap. 7. 2. it is said, Pro posse suo malefactores ad
justitiam adducent, and pro posse suo Justitiarios terrae manu tenebunt. And.
5. it is ordained, Quod magistratus pro posse suo auxiliantes erunt domino
regiad inquirendum malefactores, and ad vindictam de illis capiendam. By all
which it is clear, that not only should compliance be voluntar before it be
criminal, but that likewise it must be a compliance against lawful Authority,
able to protect such as revolt from it. I remember in anno, 1635.James Gordoun
being challenged for corresponding with Alexander Leith, and Nathaniel Gordoun,
declared Traitors for burning the House of Frendraught, they were assoylzied,
because the intercommuning challenged was not lybell'd to have been-voluntar,
and thereafter the Assize who assoilzied them, having been pursued for wilful
error for absolving as said is, they were likewise absolved from that Process
of error, in the which Process, that same argument was urged, but not so strong
in point of fact as in our case; and because the design is that which
differences the actions of men (propositum crimina distinguit) and seeing
designs being the hid acts of the mind, are only guessed at by the concomitant
and exterior circumstances, I shall only entreat your Lordship to consider
these few presumptions, which being joined, may in my apprehension, vindicat
this Noble Person from the design of voluntar compliance. 1. He is descended
from a stock of of Predecessors, whose blood has prescribed by an immemorial
possession, the title of eminent Loyalty, and that same Law which presumes,
that the blood and posterity of Traitors is infected with a desire to revenge
the just death of their Predecessors, and an inclination to propagate their
crimes, does likewise presume Loyalty and a desire to be thankful, in the the
children of such as have received great favors, and performed great services,
to such as have been the Benefactors. 2. These with whom he is said to comply,
were known and avowed enemies to Nobility, had quite exterminated in England,
and begun to exterminat in Scotland, all memory of Nobility, and badges of
Honor; so that in this compliance, he must be thought to have plotted against
his own interest: nor can I see what advantage he could expect from a
Common-weath, which valued, nor preferred none but Soldiers, a Trade, which
suited neither with his breeding, nor years. 3. They were enemies to
Presbyterian Government, of which he has always showed himself so tenacious,
and of all Governments they did most abominat that one, for which he had
exposed himself to so many hazards. 4. That Usurper had never obliged him
neither by reward, nor complement. 5. He was sworn their enemy both in
Parliament and Council, and charity as well as Law, presumes against perjury.
6. He was pursued by them most unjustly, both at Council of War, and elsewhere,
and was known to have been hated extremely by their Commander in chief, for
compliance with whom he is now challenged: By all which it is most improbable,
that his Lordship would have linked himself with that abominable crew of
miscreants, by whom he might loss much, but gain nothing.

His Majesty has recommended this case to be judged by your Lordships, whom He
knew the iniquity of these times did (though without any cordial assent)
involve in the same guilt, and albeit it were a guilt, there will be hardly any
found to cast the first Stone at him; and His Majesty has not delivered him up
to be proceeded against, till by His Act of Indemnity (granted even to such as
were eminently engaged in the contrivance and execution of the most horrid
plots, that were perpetrat against him) He had first cast a copy to your
Lordships of that meek procedure which he allows, and not till he had (even
notwithstanding of their compliance) preferred some to be Councillors, some to
Titles of Honor, and many to employments of great Trust. And were it not
unjust, that he should suffer for acts of Frailty; when the Ringleaders, and
malicious plotters pass unpunished? And were it not unkindness to our Country,
to have it thought that we had Subjects who deserved worse, then Lambert,
Lintil, and others? I shall to all this add, that the guilt charged upon this
Noble Person, is such as was thought prudence in those who were most Loyal, and
this compliance was so customary, and so universal, that it was thought no more
a Crime, then the living in Scotland was Criminal: whereas in Law, qui sequitur
comunem errorem, non delinquit, and consuetudo facit actum de sua nature a
punibilem impunibilem, and excusat a paena ordinaria, and extraordinaria,
Farin, Quest. 85. de pen. temperandis. Custom is a second Nature, and example a
second Law, and he who obeys them, obeys quasi legem naturae, and patriae: and
in all civil Wars and uproars, especially where such have lasted for a
considerable time, as in Portugal, France, Germany, etc. none have been
punished for mingling with the multitude, if they did not pervert them. And if
we consult the Ancients, when justice and equity were not yet oppressed by
interest, and design, we will find, that Julian the Emperor having only
punished the chief rebels, residui omnes abierunt innoxii, quos in certaminum
rabiem necessitas aegerat, non voluntas. And Themistius praises Valens the
Emperor, because non paena dignos existimavit, qui bellum non suaserunt, sed
qui abrepti sunt a morum impetu, and qui succubuerunt ei qui jam rerum potiri
videbatur. And Joseph. lib. 5. tells us, that in such universal rebellions,
Titus used only to punish the ringleaders, unum criminis ducem puniebat
reipsa, multitudinem vero, sola verborum increpatione, seditionum concitatores,
and duces factionum dicuntur, l. 16. ff. quando appell.

It is likewise universally received by the Law of Nations, that such as submit
after universal rebellions, either upon conditions, or who put themselves in
the mercy of their Magistrates, (as Grotius does most wisely observe, lib. 3.
cap. 11.) are still secure, and therefore, since the Marquess did immediately
upon His Majesty's return, go to Court, to attend His Majesty amongst his other
loyal Subjects, judging from the dictats of his own conscience, that he was in
the same case with your Lordships his present Judges, it were strange that he
should fall, when others are in great multitudes pardoned, who fled out of a
consciousness to their own guilt, especially since he offered to prove, that he
testified to many hundreds during His Majesty's absence, a deep sense of that
misfortune, and an absolute aversion from that present Usurpation; and that he
assisted His Majesty's friends, both with money and advice: And who would
think, that in equity he ought to dye, by these whom he wished restored, and
for which restoration, he prayed daily in his Family; and die for complying
with those, whose ruin he begged daily upon his knees? And though he did not
join with some who were Commissionated by His Majesty, yet that proceeded not
in him, more then in others, from any unkindnesse to the Cause which he always
allowed, as can be proved both by themselves and others, but from a persuasion
he had, that such courses as they took, would ruin the design which was
proposed; and any thing he did in opposition to them, was to defend himself and
his poor Country, against injuries, which were designed against him upon
private quarrels, as he still offered to prove. If we consider that same
interest of Nations, for which Treason is punishable, we will find it unfit to
punish ordinar complyers after a tumult is quieted; for if every man that were
involved in the guilt, did think that he were punishable, all would be forced
pertinaciously to continue the rebellion they had begun, and to expect from
success only, that impunity which the Law denied: and thus your Lordships
should make all future rebellions to be both cruel, and perpetual.

I come now to the Probation adduced by His Majesty's Advocat, for proving this
compliance, and in order thereto, I shall lay before your Lordships these
following considerations; 1. That the weaker the Relevancy is, the Probation
should be proportionably the stronger, gravatus in uno, levandus in alio. 2.
That in Criminals, Probation should be very convincing. 3. The more illustrious
the Panel is, the proof should be so much the more pungent, because the Law
presumes Noble Persons less inclined to commit Crimes then others. 4. Where
there is no penury of Witnesses, probation should be so much the clearer,
because the Law presumes that all is known, which can be known: but so it is in
this case, sixty Witnesses have been led (albeit our Law allows only 25 in
Criminals) and a long time has been taken, and many invitations given to all
persons, in all corners, to come and depone, and it is believed by most of
these silly persons, that it will be most acceptable to His Majesty, and may
procure a reward to themselves, that they depone against his Lordship; which
remembers me of these slaves in Juvenal, who at Sejanus fall, invited one
another to offer Indignities to his dead body, Dum jacet in ripa calcemus
Caesaris hostem. 5. The Law requires in these attrocious Crimes, witnesses omni
exceptioni majores, and these are in Law expon'd to be such as the jealoufie of
the greatest enemy needs not suspect; whereas most of all the Witnesses
adduced, are either the servants of such as have been debarred themselves from
witnessing, for fear of partiality, or the Usurpers Soldiers, who have so often
foresworn solemnly their alledgeance to their Prince, that no Judge can rely
upon their depositions; for it is presumable, that semel perjurus, will be
semper perjurus: and albeit His Majesty, by His Indemnity, has veiled their
Crimes, yet He has not taken them away, as is clear, per (...). ffin. C. de
generali abolitione; the excellent words run thus, Indulgentia (Patres
conscripti) quos liberat, not at, nec infamiam criminis toll it, sed paenae
gratiam facit; whence I argue, that infamous persons cannot be Witnesses, but
so it is, that perjured persons (non abstante amnestia and remissione) are
infamous by the foresaid Law; the Criminal Registers likewise tells us, that
one who had been condemned for forging of false Writes, was refused to be
received as a Witness in Frendraughts Process, albeit he had obtained a
Remission; and certainly, Perjury in the crime of Treason (whereof these
Soudiers are guilty) is a more odious Crime, then that of forging of false
Writes. 6. I hope your Lordships will consider, that most of what these
Witnesses have deponed, are Speeches, which the best of men may have forgot,
after so long a time, and in a time when both men and manners have been much
confounded, by the strangeness and number of interveening accidents: most of
these Witnesses have deponed upon that which fell under sense, and so have
acted rather the parts of Judges, then Witnesses. Thus some depones, that the
Marquess's Boats did bring the English up Lochfine, and that they could not
have got up without his assistance, which last part, as it is negative, so is
an act of the judgment, and not the object of any exterior sense, and they
presume they had an order from the Marquess, because else they durst not have
gone, and is not this to imagine, and not to depone? 7. Most of them are
persons, whom the D^ttay acknowledged to have been wronged by the Marquess;
most of these poor persons who have deponed, were to my certain knowledge, so
confounded by appearing before a Parliament, and by interrogators, that they
scarce knew what to answer. 8. Not any two of these numerous Witnesses concur
in their depositions, all vary, and most do clash, and are either Vaccillantes,
or Singulares; neither can the deposition of one Witness, as to one particular
circumstance of a Crime, and the deposition of another as to another, be joined
for making up a clear Probation, for there the Judge is certified of neither of
these circumstances, seeing one Witness is none, whereas proving witnesses
should be contestes; and if a Panel were accused of more Crimes in one Lybel,
the deposition of one Witness to prove one, and of another to prove another of
these Crimes, would not prove the Lybel; so neither can the singular deposition
of two witnesses upon different points, prove one crime. Such spelling is not
lawful in probation, and this is that which the Doctors call singularitas
diversificativa, which in Law hinders conjunction in probationibus, as well as
singularitas obstitativa, Alexand. consil. 13. Hippol. in sua praxi,.
diligenter number. 149. Farin. tract. de oppos. contradicta. testium. 9. The Law
makes a difference, as to the probation betwixt Perduellion, or open Treason,
in which they require most convincing probation, and in conspiracies or occult
crimes, in which the rigor of probation is remitted, because the possibility
of proving is much restricted, in respect of the clandestinesse wherewith such
Conspirations are managed; and therefore, seeing in this case the acts to be
proved were committed publicly, such as joining in open hostility with the
Usurpers, assisting at their Proclamations, levying Forces against His
Majesty's Generals; Certainly the probation should be most illative of what is
alleged, and the provers should be omni exceptione majores. I must tell you my
Lords, that some have been so unjust to you, as to fear, that though the
probation be not concluding, that yet ye will believe, to the great
disadvantage of my Noble Client, the unsure deposition of that as foul, as
wyde-mouthed witness, public brute and common fame, which as it is more
unstable then water, so like water it represents the straightest objects as
crooked to our sense; and that others of you retain still some of the old
prejudices which our civil and intestine discords, did raise in you against
him, during these late troubles: but I hope, generosity and conscience will
easily restrain such unwarrantable principles, in persons who are by Birth, or
Election, worthy to be supreme Judges of the Kingdom of Scotland. It is unmanly
to destroy your enemy unarmed, but unchristian when you represent GOD as
Judges; for then you endeavor to make him a murderer; and in my judgment, he
revenges himself but meanly, who to ruin his enemy, destroys his own Soul,
and tashes his Honor.

My Lords, as Law oblieges you to absolve this noble Person, so your interest
should persuade you to it. What is now intented against him, may be intended
against you; and your Sentence will make that a crime in all complyers, which
was before but an error and a frailty; your Royal Master may with our Savior
then say to you, Thou cruel servant, I will condemn thee out of thine own
mouth: Or, if your Lordships be pardoned, he may say to you as his Master said
to the other, Sure I did pardon thee, why wast thou so cruel to thy fellow
servant? But, not only may this prove a snare to your Lordships, but to your
Posterity. Who in this Kingdom can sleep securely this night, if this Noble
Person be condemned for a compliance, since the Act of Indemnity is not yet
past? And albeit His Majesty's clemency be unparalled, yet it is hard to have
our Lives hung at a may-be, and whilst we have a Sentence-condemnator standing
against us. Phalaris was burnt in his own Bull: and it is remarkable, that he
who first brought in the Maiden, did himself suffer by it.

I do therefore humbly beg, that since this Process was intented upon
Informations given to His Majesty, of the Marquess's being very extraordinarily
active for the Usurpers, that your Lordships would transmit the Process as it
now stands to His Majesty, that thereby he may have a fair occasion to give a
generous testimony of his clemency, that the people may be secured against all
jealousies and fears, and that your Lordships may be rescued from so invidious
a trial.

For Maevia, accused of Witchcraft.
XVI. PLEADING.
I Am not of their opinion, who deny that there are Witches, though I think
them not numerous; and though I believe that some are suffered by providence,
to the end that the being of Spirits may not be denied; Yet I cannot think,
that our Savior, who came to dispossess the devil, who wrought more Miracles
in his own time, upon possessed persons, then upon any else, at whose first
appearances the oracles grew dumb, and all the devils forsook their temples;
and who promised, John 12. that the Princes of this World was now to be cast
out, would yet suffer him to reign like a Sovereign, as our fabulous
representations would now persuade us.

This person for whom I appear, stands endicted as a Witch, upon several
Articles, the first whereof is, that she did lay on a Disease upon A. B. by
using a Charm. 2. That she took it off by another. 3. That it is deponed by two
penitent Witches, that she and they did flee as Doves to the meeting place of
Witches.

As to the imposing or taking off diseases by Charms, I conceive it is
undeniable, that there are many diseases whereof the Cures, as well as the
Causes, are unknown to us; Nature is very subtle in its operations, and we
very ignorant in our inquiries; from the conjuncti^n of which two, arises the
many errors and mistakes, we commit in our reflections upon the productions of
nature: to differ then from one another, because of these errors, is
sufferable, though to be regrated; but to kill one another, because we cannot
comprehend the reason of what each other do, is the effect of a terrible
distraction; and if this were allowed, the most Learned should still be in
greatest danger, because they do oftimes find mysteries which astonish the
ignorant; and this should give occasion to the Learned to forbear deep searches
into natural mysteries, lest they should loss their life in gaining knowledge,
and to persecute one another: for every Physician or Mathematician, who is
emulous of another, but cannot comprehend what his rival does, would immediately
make him pass for a Wizard. It is natural for men to think that to be above
the reach of Nature, which is above theirs. If this principle had taken place
amongst our predecessors, who durst have used the Adamant? For certainly,
nothing looks liker a Charm, or Spell, then to see a Stone draw Iron; and men
are become now so wise, as to laugh at these who burnt a Bishop, for alleging
the World was round, so blind and cruel a thing is ignorance: And if this
principle, of believing nothing whereof we do not see a cause, were admitted,
we may come to doubt, whether the curing of the Kings Evil by the touch of a
Monarch, may not be likewise called charming. This then being generally
premised, to curb the over-forwardnesse of m^nkind,

It is alleged, that the Lybel is not relevant, in so far as it is founded
upon my Clients having threatened to do her neighbor an evil turn, that she
went in to her house, and whispered something into her ear, whereupon she
immediately distracted: for, though threatening, when mischief follows, has
been too much laid weight upon by us, yet the Law has required, that many
particulars should concur, ere this be sustained, as that the person who
threatened did ordinarily use to threaten, and that mischief constantly followed
her threatenings, minae ejus quae Jolita est minas exequi, that these
threatenings appeared rather to be the product of a settled revenge, then of a
boiling and airie choler, which does oftimes, especially in women, occasion
very inconsiderat extravagancies. 2. It is required, that the threatenings were
specific, as if she had promised that she should cause her distract, and the
distraction accordingly followed: but it were too lax, to ascribe every
accident to a general threatening, as is clear by Dallrio, lib. 5. sect. 3.
Lawyers likewise consider, if the occasion of the quarrel was so great, as
might have provockt to so a cruel a revenge as that which was taken; whereas
here the occasion was very mean, not exceeding two pence. And though all these
do concur, yet Farin. Quaest. 5. number. 37. acknowledges, that these are not
sufficient to infer the crime of Witchcraft, but only to load the person
accused with a severe presumption, or to infer an arbitrary punishment; and in
the Process against Katharine Oswald, the 11. of November, 1629. those
threatenings, though the effect followed, were not found sufficient to infer
Witchcraft, but only to be punishable tanquam crimen in suo genere, that is to
say, as an unallowable and scandalous kind of railing.

The second defense against this Article is, that it is not relevant to Lybel,
that the malefice was occasioned by my Client, except it were condescended by
what means it was occasioned; for in Law, when I am said to have produced any
effect, there must be a necessary contingency showed betwixt what I did, and
what followed, for else, the very looking upon her might have been said to have
been a cause, and when si knesses are alleged to have been occasioned by
Witches, the ordinar signs given, are, that the disease be in it self such as
cannot be occasioned by nature, as the vomiting up of nails, glasses, and
other extraordinar things; that the person maleficiat do go in an instant, from
one extremity to another; as from being extremely weak, to be immediately
extremely strong; or use extraordinar motions, which cannot be occasioned by
Nature, as D. Autum. in his discourse of Witchcraft does most learnedly
observe. But so it is, that neither of those can be observed here; for
distraction is a very natural disease, and has oftimes fallen upon a man in an
instant, especially upon an excess of fear; and who knows, but this Woman, who
by her Sex and Humor, is known to be very fearful, might have been so
surprised at my Clients coming into her, after the threatening, that this
excess of fear might have thrown her into that distraction, under which she
now labors; and yet my Client might have had no influence upon her as the
cause, but as the occasion only of this her distemper.

All conclusions in criminal cases should be very clearly inferred, since the
crime is so improbable, and the conclusion so severe. And therefore, Lawyers
are of opinion, that if the inferences be not demonstrative, and undeniable,
conclusio semper debet sequi debiliorem partem, that which but may be, may not
be, and Lawyers do constantly conclude, that we must only conclude that ^n
crimes to have been done, which could not but have been done. And who can say,
that necessarily this was done by her here, which could not but occasion this
Distaction, and therefore, Perkins, cap. 6. does assert, that no malefice can
be a sufficient ground to condemn a Witch, except she either confess, o^ that
it be proven by two famous Witnesses, that she used means that might have
produced that effect. And though where Charms and other means expressly
discharged are used, these unlawful means are by the Judge repute, as if these
means might have been effectual, in odium illiciti, and that the users have
only themselves to blame in that case, who would use these Charms, Spells, and
Incantations, of which the Law is jealous: yet where none of these are used,
but a simple whisper, the effect in that case cannot be said to have flowed
from it, nor does any severe presumption lie against a thing that is ordinar.
And Bodin. lib. 4. concludes, that in capitali judicio ex praesumpti onibus
veneficas non esse condemnandas^, ut si sagae deprehendantur egredientes ex
ovili cum ossibus, bufonibus, vel aliis instrumentis magicis instructae licet
oves statim moriantur. All conclusions must be necessar or presumptive; but so
it is, that this conclusion is not necessar, since all these remedies might
have been used, and yet the user might have been innocent: for, a necessar
conclusion is a qua veritas abesse non p^test; and if this inference be only
presumptive, it is as undeniable, that Witchcraft cannot be inferred from such
a presumptive conclusion, as is clear by Farin. quaest. 36. number. 11. Perkins,
Bodin and others above cited: and if it were otherwise, Judges might condemn
upon guessing or malice, and so more would be in danger to die by injustice,
then by Witchcraft; and may you not as well punish such as stay bleeding by
applying a Stone, or who prevent abortions by gliding the woman with a Belt,
now much in fashon? And therefore it is very remarkable, that by the 73. Act,
9. Par. Queen Mary, Witchcraft, Sorcery, Negromancy, and sicklike arts for
abusing the people, are only forbiden; nor can it be subsumed that any Art, or
exterior thing, whereby people use to be abused, were here used, and therefore
this Article cannot be said to fall under the prohibition of the Act of
Parliament.

The second Article is, that my Client did cure the said person whom she had
formerly distracted, by ^pplying a Plantane leaf to the left side of her head;
and binding a Paper to her Wrest, upon which was write the name of Jesus. Which
being done by her who was an ignorant person, being done to the person who
formerly distracted upon her whisper, and the Cure being perfected in less
time, then Nature uses to take for composing such gerneral and horrid
distempers, might necessarily infer, that this Cure was performed by Witchcraft.

Against which Article, it is alleged, that the conclusion here should
demonstrat, that necessarily this cure was performed by no natural cause,
whereas the mean here used, viz. the applying of a Plantane leaf, is a natural
thing, and may cure in a natural way, it being known that there is nothing so
cold as a Plantane leaf, and so it might have been very fit for curing a
distraction, which is the most malignant and burning of all feverish
distempers. Or who knows, but that this distraction having been occasioned by
the excessive fear she had of my Clients revenge, but that how soon she was
reconciled to her, and that she had by the same strength of fancy which made
her sick, conceived that she would likewise restore her against that sickness,
her distraction might have abaited with her fear? 2. The Lawgivers having
punished crimes, because these crimes are destructive to their Subjects, and
Commonwealth, have for the same reason only punished such indifferent
enchantments, as did either kill men, or ensnare them to unlawful lusts, but
not those Arts, where the health of man and the fruits of the ground were
secured, against diseases and tempests, as is clear, Per l. 4. Cod. de Malef.
and Math. Eorum est scientia punienda, and severissimis merito legibus
vindicanda, qui magicis accincti artibus, aut contra hominum moliti salutem,
aut pudicos ad libidinem delexisse animos detegentur, nullis vero
criminationibus implicanda sunt remedia, humanis quesita corporibus, aut
aggrestibus locis, ne Maturis vindemiis metuerentur imbres, aut ventis
grandinisque lapidatione quaterentur: innocenter adhibita suffragia, quibus
unius cujusque salus, aut existimatio lederetur, sed quorum proficerent actus,
ne divina munera and labores hominum sternerentur. Which Law being a Statute
made by Constantine, who was a Christian Emperor, being conceived in so devote
terms, and insert by Justinian, who was a most Christian Prince, amongst his
own Laws, cannot but be a Law very ^it to be observed in a Christian
Commonwealth. And though it be allegded, that this Constitution was abrogat by
Leo, nov. 65. yet, it is very remarkable, that this Constitution made by Leo,
is not insert in the Basilicks, so that it seems it has been thereafter
abrogated.

It is not probable, that the Devil, who is a constant enemy to mankind, would
employ himself for their advantage; and the Name of Jesus being used, so much
respect ought to be had to it, that the user should not be punished with death,
except it could be clearly proved otherwise, that she had received this Charm
from the Devil; in which case, the Author, and not the thing, occasions the
punishment, or else, if she had been discharged by the Church, or any
Judicatory, to use that Cure, as that which was in it self dangerous; but to
burn a poor ignorant woman, who knew not that to be evil which she used, were
to make ignorance become Witchcraft, and our selves more criminal, then the
person we would condemn. And all these Laws and Citations which can be brought
to prove, that magical Incantations are punishable by death, though employed
for the welfare of mankind, must be interpret so, as to relate only to some
of these unlawful cases above related. And I admire, that those who inveigh so
much against this Constitution of Constantine, have never taken notice, that
these Charms are only allowed, even for the welfare of man and beast, ubi sunt
innocenter adhibita suffragia, where devotion was used, though erroniously, as
in this case. And we know, that a whole Family in Spain pretend to be able to
cure Diseases by the toutch, as being descended from St. Katharine, and are
therefore called, Saludadores; and that another Family in France, who allege
they are descended from St Hubert, do cure such as are bitten by mad Dogs, and
yet neither of these are punished by any Law, since they ascribe their Cures to
Devotion: And there are but few men who have traveled any where, but use some
Charm or other, out of innocence or railery; and to burn these, or the common
people, who think they may follow their example, were an act of great cruelty.
And since the Cross is allowed by the Canonists to be applied to any part of
the body, per c. non licet. 26. quaest. I see not why the Name of Jesus may not
be applied, in the same way: Nor can I think that the Devil would allow the
using of that sacred Name at which he is forced to tremble, and by the very
naming whereof, all Ecclesiastic Histories tell us, that the Devil has been
dispossessed, and therefore, Ghirland. de sortil. number. 23. gives it as a general
rule, that ubi alia nomina ignota ultra Dei nomina inveniuntur, tunc
superstitiosa dici possunt and ita puniri. Cassiodorus relates, that multis
efficax remedium fuit, trina recitatio versiculi, Psalm. 115. dirupisti vincula
mea, etc. and Bartholinus in his Anatomy, defends, that these Verses repeated
with a loud voice in the ear of one affected with the Epilepsie, will cure him,
Gaspar fert mirham, thus Melchior, Balthazar aurum,
Haec tria. qui secum portabit nomina regum,
Solvitur a morbo, Christi pietate caduco.
And though some have disallowed even pious Sentences, or Names, when joined to
superstitious circumstances, as when they are only to be writ upon Parchment,
and cut too in such a figure, or bound by so many threeds only, yet to condemn
the users as Witches, when they are used simply, as here, seems to be the other
extreme.

In things that are abstruse and dubious, the Law should still favor that
which tends to the good of the Commonwealth: yea, and though it sometimes may
punish Charms, when used to the disadvantage of men, though it know them not
certainly to be unlawful; yet, it does not follow, that it should punish that
which may tend to their advantage, except they know it to be certainly
unlawful. And though our Act of Parliament punishes such as seek help by
unlawful means of Sorcerers, or Necromancers, yet they must first be proved
to be Sorcerers, or Necromancers, who make a trade of abusing the people, as
that Statute says, which cannot be drawn at all to a dubious Cure used in one
case, and by the application of natural means; and therefore, though Drummond
was burnt as a Witch, albeit he had never committed any malefice, but had only
cured such as were diseased, yet having in a long habit and tract of time,
abused the people, and used Spells and Incantations, which had no relation at
all to Devotion; and having continued that trade, albeit he was expressly
discharged, his case was very far different from this, and deserved a far more
severe punishment. The same may be likewise answered to the condemnatory
Sentence pronunced against John Burgh, who was convicted of Witchcraft in anno,
1643. for pretending to cure all diseases, by throwing into water an unequal
number of pieces of Money, and sprinkling the patients with the water; so that
it may be justly said, that these died rather for being public cheats and
falsarii, then for being Witches, and venefici. Upon which account ars Pauliana
also is punishable, by which some Cheats pretend to cure diseases, by Spells
and pious Characters, revealed (as they pretend) to S. Paul, when he was
carried up to the third heavens; for, here the foundation makes the cures known
to be cheats.

I might likewise allege here, that it is against the confessed principles of
all Criminal^sts, that una venefica non potest esse ligans and solvens in eodem
morbo, cannot both put on, and take off a disease; for, it seems that the Devil
thinks, that it were too much to bestow such favors upon one of his favorites,
so that he is juster then those, who affect plurality of Benefices; or else he
thinks it would lessen too much the esteem of those faculties, if one could
exerce both; or else it is not probable, that she who had the malice to lay on
the disease, would condescend to serve in the taking it off. But however, I
find much weight has been laid upon this principle, by those who did debate
Margaret Hutchesons Process, and so let it have its weight.

The third Article of my Clients endictment is, that it is deponed by two dying
and penitent Witches; that she flew like a Dove with them to their meeting
places.

This Article seems to me very ridiculous; for I might debate, that the Devil
cannot carry Witches bodily, as Luther, Melanchton, Alciat, Vairus and others
assert, because it is not probable, that God would allow him the permission
constantly to work this miracle, in carrying persons to a public place, where
they join in blaspheming His Name, and scorning His Church. Nor is it proper
either, to the nature of heavy Bodies to flee in the air, nor to Devils who are
spirits, and have no arms, nor other means of carrying their Bodies: but I may
confidently assert, that he cannot transform a woman into the shape of a Dove,
that being impossible; for how can the Soul of Woman inform and actuat the body
of a Dove, these requiring diverse Organs, and administrations; and to believe
such transmutations, is expressly declared Heresy by the Canon Law, and to
deserve excommunication, cap. Episcopi, 26. quaest. 5. and is condemned by St.
Augustine, lib. 18. de civit. Dei, delrio lib. 2. quest. 18. Girland.. 7. and
though the Scripture tells us, that Nebuchadnazor was transformed from a man to
a beast by God, yet it follows not that the Devil has that power; or as some
Divines assert, he did but walk, feed, and cry like a beast, and had brutish
thoughts.

We must then conclude, that these confessions of Witches, who affirm, that
they have been transformed into beasts, is but an illusion of the fancy,
wrought by the Devil upon their melancholy brains, whilst they sleep; and this
we may the rather believe, because it has been often seen, that some of these
confessors were seen to be lying still in the room when they awaked, and told
where, and in what shapes they had traveled many miles: Nor is this illusion
impossible to be effectu^ted by the Devil, who can imitate nature, and corrupt
the humors, since melancholy does ordinarily persuade men, that they are
Wolves (Licanthropi) Dogs, and other Beasts.

Since then these confessions are but the effects of melancholy, it follows
necessarily, that the depositions of these two Witches amounts to no more, but
that they dreamed that my Client was there: and were it not a horrid thing, to
condemn innocent persons upon mere dreams, as is concluded by Frans, Ponzan.
tract, de lamiis. cap. 1. number. 52. Sunt illusae, ergo non est standum ipsorum
confessionibus: confessio enim haec deficit in sui^ principiis, and est contra
naturam, and ita impossibilis. I confess, that such confessions may be a ground
to condemn the confessors, because though they were not actually where they
dreamed, at these meetings, yet it infers that they had a desire to be there,
and consented to the Worship, and believed that transformation to have been in
the Devils power; but all these are but personal guilts in the confessors, and
cannot reach others. And besides this, it is very clear, that the depositions
even of confessing and penitent Witches, are no concluding probation; for they
are sociae criminis, and such are not to be believed, they are infamous
persons, and such ought not to be believed; and they can give no sufficient
causa scientiae and reason of their knowledge, the want of which does in Law
enervat the deposition of a Witness: and with us, the depositions of dying
Witches were repelled, in the case of Alison Jolly, pen. Oct. 1596.

Divines, whose punishments reach no further then Ecclesiastic censure, may
punish not only certain guilt, but scandal; yet Lawyers, being to inflict so
severe a punishment as Bu^ning, and loss of all their moveable Estate, should
not punish but what they know infallibly to be a real guilt, nor should they
punish that guilt, till it be convincingly proved. For, though this woman were
guilty, yet if she be so, she will suffer by the sting of her conscience here,
and will be reserved for a greater fire hereafter, then you can ordain for her;
whereas if she be innocent, your sentence cannot be reformed. And why should
you take pains to augment the number of the Devils servants in the eyes of the
world?

Nor does the Civil Law punish always what Divines condemn; for thus, though
it be murder by the Divine Law to kill a Wife taken in the act of adultery, yet
the Civil Law allows it: and though it be unlawful by that Law to cheat our
Neighbor in buying or selling, yet the Civil Law allows all such bargains,
except the cheat amount to the value of the half. Thus, the one of the Laws
respecting mainly the good of Souls, and the other the good of Commerce, as
they have different ends, so they take different measures; and therefore it is,
that politic Laws, have allowed cures even by suspected means; which principle
is also allowed by Bartol. Salicet. Azo: and others, ad dict. l. 4. and even
according to the principles laid down by Divines, except there were a paction
proved, or confessed, all remedies should rather be ascribed to nature, then to
Witchcraft.

Consider how much fancy does influence ordinar Judges in the trial of this
crime, for none now labor under any extraordinar Disease, but it is instantly
said to come by Witchcraft, and then the next old deformed or envyed woman is
presently charged with it; from this arises a confused noise of her guilt,
called diffamatio by Lawyers, who make it a ground for seizure, upon which she
being apprehended is imprisoned, starved, kept from sleep, and often times
tortured: To free themselves from which, they must confess; and having confessed,
imagine they dare not thereafter retreat. And then Judges allow themselves too
much liberty, in condemning such as are accused of this crime, because they
conclude they cannot be severe enough to the enemies of GOD; and Assisers are
afraid to suffer such to escape as are remitted to them, lest they let loose
an enraged Wizard in their neighborhood. And thus poor Innocents die in
multitudes by an unworthy Martyredom, and Burning comes in fashion; upon which
account I cannot but recommend to your Lordships serious consideration, that
excellent passage of a Learned Lawyer, Baldwinus, ad Item lex Cornelia jnstit:
de publ. ju^. Sed quo gravius, and ab hominis ingenio magis alienum est hoc
malum, co major adhibenda est cautio, ne quis ejus praetextu ab adversariis
temere obruatur, facile enim hic quid vis confingere potest ingeniosa simultas,
ut and multitudinem credulam statim emoviat, and judices irritet adversus eum
quem cum demonibus rem habere mentietur. Ante annos sexaginta, sensit infoelix
nostra patria, magno suo malo, hujusce generis calumniis, magna erat Waldentium
mentio, quos adversarii jactabant nesci^ quid commertii habere cum innumeris
spiritibus, hujus criminis praetextu optimi quique statim opprimebantur,
sedtandem senatus Parisiensis, causa cognita, vidit meras esse sycophantias and
infoelices reos liberavit.

For Titius, accused before the Secret Council for beating his Wife.
XVII. PLEADING.
AS nothing but the last degree of passion could have provockt my Client to
correct this unfortunat Woman, so no creature which does not feel his grief,
can express the reasons, which forced him to it. Nor could the fear of
punishment, if it were not joined with the sense of honor, move him to lay
open before your Lordships, the sad story of these persecutions he has for
seven years suffered, and the dishonorable secrets of his own family, which
during all that time, he has labored to conceal.

Nor can I (my Lords) but regrate, that I should be forced to lead your
reflections into my Clients house, and to show you there a Woman burning, not
with fl^mes of love, but revenge; embracing her Husband, not out of kindness,
but to throw him into the fire; watching him in his sleep, but that she might
even disturb him in his rest; inviting his Friends to her house, but that she
might highten his infamy, in letting them hear her rail against him: and all
this done, not for a day, or under the excuses of passion, but for seven whole
years; nor done so passingly, as that he could entertain any hopes of her
reconciliation to allay his grief; but she begun to torment him the next day
after the Marriage, beating him with her Slipper, so that only his Marriage
wanted its honey-moneth, and so malicious was her humor, that she could not
bridle it for one day. And these affronts were daily continued, most
deliberatly, and owned after all the remonstrances her friends could make for
reclaiming her, at which occasions she used to speak kindly of nothing to him
or them, but her passions, justifying her lying of him as Wit, her railing
against him as Eloquence, her revenge as Justice, and her obdurednesse as
Constancy.

This being the person against whom I am to plead, I am obliged to give your
Lordships some character of him for whom I appear, who was not only born a
Gentleman, but by being a Soldier, has made himself so, and by both these
qualities, has so strong an aversion against beating any Woman, that the great
respect he had for that lovely Sex, made this Pursuer, after ten years intimat
acquaintance, choose him for her Husband; and for seven years, he has not only
suffered, but concealed his wrongs, to that depth, that his hair has by grief
changed its color twice, the strength of nature, and grief, overcoming each
other by their several turns. Nor does he think himself concerned to answer his
Wifes calumnious reproaching him, as having been her Husbands servant; for it
is most true, that after he lost his Estate in his Majesty's service, her first
Husband choos'd him for his Friend, and after his death, she choosed him for a
Husband; which shows, that he had some worthy qualities about him, which were
able to supply that great want, the want of Riches; and is it not clear, that
when Women begin to complain of so sacred a relation, they will make faults
where they cannot find them? and these Wives who would divulge what is true,
would invent what is false.

I confess (my Lords) that there is very much due to that excellent Sex, when
they are, what they ought to be; but our love to Wine, must not hinder us to
call it Vinegar when it corrupts; nor should we flatter Tyrants, because we
love Monarchies. But Judges must look more to Justice, then complement; and
therefore, I must beg pardon to allege for my Client, that he cannot be
punished for beating his Wife, because, The Wife is by Law under the power and
authority of her Husband, which subjection is not only the punishment of her
sin, nor will all this power repair to man, the loss he had by the injury done
him when he got this power; but this power is put in the Husbands hands, for
the good, not only of the Commonwealth, but of the Women themselves: as to the
Common wealth, it was fit, that in every Family the Husband should be empowered
to correct the extravagancies of his Wife, and not to bring them before the
Judge, and in public, this would have divided families, raised public
scandals, and many will be content to receive correction in private, who would
never be reconciled after a public correction. And as to the Women themselves,
it was fit, that she being the weaker Vessel, a creature naturally passionat,
and wanting experience, should therefore be governed by, and subject to, her
Husband; and as the head may resolve to chastise or mortify any part of the
body, when it thinks that Discipline will tend to the general advantage of the
body; So may the Husband, whom the Scripture calls the head of the Wife,
correct the Wife, when that correction may tend to the advantage of the Family.

Let us but look back upon the first ages of the World, and we will find that
the Husband had generally power of life and death over their Wives, even
amongst the best of men, the Romans, and thus Plin. lib. 14. cap. 12. reports,
that Egnatius Mecennius killed his Wife, for having drunk too much Wine, and
that her death was not enquired into, as that which the Law then allowed. And
Caesar tells us, lib. 6. that the Germans in Uxores, sicut in liberos, vitae
necisque potestatem habebant. And till this day, the southern Nations (whose
wits ripen more then ours, as nearer the Sun) have still the same power
continued to them, by which the Women loss little, for it keeps them from
adventuring upon these extravagancies, for which our complementing Nations hate
their Wives, which to a kind Wife, should be worse then death. But if these
Laws think this power of life and death fit for the Husband, it should at least
teach us to bestow upon him the power of correction, for which I only plead;
which power of correction, is by Bonaventur said to be allowed them by the Law
of Nations, 4. sentent. distinct. 37. masuer. tit. de possess.. item maritus.
By the Canon Law, the Wife is declared to be more in the power of the Husband,
then of her Father, can. sicut alterius 7. quaest. 1. and that the Husband may
imprison her, or keep her in the stocks, can placuit. 33. quaest. 2. And if we
consider our Law, we will find, that Husbands have the same power over their
Wives, that a Father has over his Child, c. 131. leg. burg. which Law says,
That he should correct her, as not knowand what she should do, and as a Bairn
within age, seeing she is not at her own liberty. And as the Council would not
hear a Child complaining that his Father had beat him, So neither should they
hear a Wife. We have also an express Statute, 2. Dav. chap. 16. wherein it is
appointed, that no accusation shall be received against a man for having
occasioned the death of his Wife, except it be notoriously known, that he gave
her wounds whereof she dyed; by which it is necessarily employed, that he is not
punishable, nor cannot be accused for any wounds given which were not mortal;
where likewise there is a decision of the said King David, related in
thesete^ms.

In the time of King David, a case happened in this manner; An man of good fame
gave to his Wife, descended of great blood, an blow with his hand, of good zeal
and intention to correct her, and she being angry with her Husband after that
day, would not for no man's request, eat nor drink till she deceased, and
entered in the way of all flesh. The friends of the Woman accused the Husband
for the slaughter of his Wife: And because it was notour and manifest that he
did not slae her, nor gave her no wound of the whilk she died, but gave her an
blow with his hand, to teach and correct her, and also until the time of her
death loved her, and entreated her as a Husband well affectionat to his Wife;
the King pronounced him clean and quit, and thereanent made this Law.

But, I find it is answered by the Wifes Advocats (who can better maintain,
then they could suffer what she has done) that though the Laws of other Ages
and Nations, did, and do allow this power to the Husband; yet, our present
customs, as well as our inclinations, hate that stretched and ungentle power:
and though our Law did allow some power to the Husband for correcting his Wife;
yet, that power could not be extended to defend such violent courses as were
here used, where the Husband did hold her head to the fire till her face was
burnt, and did thereafter beat her with a Slipper. Nor do any Law or Lawyers
allow more then modica coercitio for her correction; but such an excess as
this would be punishable in a Father toward his Child, or in a Master toward
his Servant.

To which answer the poor Husband acquiesces as much as they, and by his
patience and continued kindness, in spite of all these disgraces and
affronts, he has testified more respect then the Law could have commanded. But
since it is acknowledged upon all hands, that the Husband might have corrected
his Wife, and that he is only punishable for having exceeded the just measures
which the Law allows, I shall first relate the matter of fact, and shall then
examine, if he did not proportion the punishment to the injury.

After my Clients Wife had swore she would starve her self, if he would not
renunce all her Estate, he (good man) condescended to her extravagant desire;
but not satisfied with this, she swore she would kill him, if he did not leave
the Country: and finding that he came in at night, she beat him with her
Slipper, but finding he only smiled at this, she came running up to him with a
knife in her hand, whereupon he threatened to hold her head to the fire, if she
would not calm, and so took the knife from her. Notwithstanding of all which,
both kindness, and threats, she did a third time flee in his face, but at
last, fearing his patience might not only prejudge himself, but her, he did
take her and hold her face a little to the fire, but without any defign, save
of terrifying her; but she being strong, and malice supplying what strength her
Sex denied her, wrestled out of his hands, and in wrestling, threw her self
upon the fire, and burnt a little her own face. All which shall be proved by
witnesses, who saw the whole tract of that unhappy bussle, for it was an
aggravation of her guilt, that she used him thus publicly.

This being the state of the case, I hear such as stand behind me swear, had
she been mine, I had drowned her, or starved her, and I conjure your Lordships
to reflect what any man would have done in that case; but I shall only debate,
that this guilt deserved a more severe punishment, then what he inflicted. For,
1. in proportioning the punishment to the guilt, your Lordships will be pleased
to consider, that the Husband never having punished her former extravagancies,
was here to punish at once, all that she had formerly done, and if every
offense deserved correction, ten thousand offenses deserved one that was very
great; and if the Law after it has punished the first two small thefts,
punishes the third with death, and after it has punished breaking yards with
small pecunial mulcts, makes the third capital; may not the hundredth offense
in beating a Husband, and laying snares for his life, deserve all done, where
the former faults were also to be punished? And since no Judge could have
refused to have burnt her in the Cheeck for three such riots, sure the Husband
cannot be punished for punishing a hundredth at the same rate; and I hope your
Lordships will imagine, that a Husband who suffered so many affronts, would not
have been too violent in punishing the last, and that she has her self to
blame, having contemned the warning given her by her Husband, and in giving of
which warning, it clearly appears, that he was master of his passion, and
proceeded both kindly and judiciously; or though he did deserve a punishment,
yet by-past-sufferings, torments and affronts, may do more then satisfy her,
for that one injury, of which she can only complain: and as in ballancing
accounts, so in ballancing mutual crimes, we must not look to the debt and
credit of one day, but considering all that either party can lay to one
another charge, we must at the balance only determine who owes most, and if
that method be followed, then sure your Lordships will find, that as injuries
may be compensed amongst the parties themselves, in so far as concerns their
private interest, so here, my Clients Wife having been more guilty toward him a
thousand times, then he can be said to have been toward her, though this riot
were acknowledged, her interest ceases, and her complaint does become thereby
most unjust.

Though the Law designs to restrain our vices, yet because it cannot root out
our passions, it pitties them; it employes its justice against our crimes, but
its clemency against our passions: and so high did this clemency run in the
Roman Law, that he who in passion killed his Wife, being taken with her
adulterer, was not punished as a murderer, qui impetu tractus doloris
interfecerit: and the reason the Law gives for remitting the crime is, cum
difficillimum sit justum dolorem temperare, l. 38. ff. ad. l. jul. de. dult.
And if any passion deserves pardon, it must in him who has bestowed pardons for
seven years; or if it may plead against any, it must be against her who raised
injustly, the passion of which she complains. Injuries from a Wife are crimes;
and if injuries can justify passion amongst strangers, much more can they do
it in a Husband.

I hope your Lordships will likewise consider, that self-defence is not only a
privilege introduced by Law, but a duty imposed upon us by nature; and without
this, this world were nothing but a scaffold, and every man with whom we
conversed, might prove an executioner. Nor does this self-defence only secure
us when we kill such as would attacque our life, but it secures us likewise
when we chastise such as would stain our honor; for life without honor, is
but as a dead carcass, when the Soul is fled, or a King when he is dethroned.
And since the Law has p(...) lel'd life and honor in every thing, it is most
just, that seeing we may kill such as invad the one, we may at least chastise
such as invad the other; especially seeing these who are here punished, have
only themselves to blame, as the authors and occasions of all those accidents
of which they complain: and therefore, my Lords, I shall entreat you to figure
to your selves, what a man could do, if his Wife should constantly resolve to
spit in his face when he were amongst strangers, or constantly awake him when
he resolved to rest: were it not ridiculous to put the Husband always to
complain to a Judge in those cases? and yet to suffer such injuries to be
unpunished, were not only to make a man miserable, but to force him to an
impertinent clemency, which might breed up his Wife to an insufferable
insolence. And if mean people, (who wanting generosity and virtue, are curbed
by nothing but awe and fear) should come to know that the Council allowed such
an indulgence to Women, and that there were no place for the justest complants
of injured Husbands, what ruptures would this occasion in private Families, what
numerable suits before your Lordships, and how many separations betwixt Husband
and Wife?

Do then, my Lords, by this decision, let the people see, that as virtuous and
deserving Women may expect the highest and purest respects imaginable, so such
as show themselves unworthy of these favors, may expect punishment answerable
to their crimes. Nor is it a small aggravation of their guilt, that they
endeavor as far as in them lies, to draw contempt and disgrace upon that
amiable, and deserving Sex. Thus good Women will be complemented, when they
find they owe not the respect they get to the Law only, but to their own merit,
and unworthy Women will find, they may expect a happier life by taming their
own insolences, and by living in concord with their Husbands, then they can
from their insolent, and outrageous abusing of them.

The Counsel imprisoned the Husband for one night.

For Charles Robertson and his two Sons.
XVIII. PLEADING. How far Minors may be punished for crimes. 2. Whether
Accomplices may be pursued before the principal Party be found guilty. 3. Whether
Socius criminis may be received in Riots and lesser Crimes.
THe crime for which my Clients are accused, is, that in January, 1660. the
said Charles Robertsons Brother and two Sons did convocat the Lieges, and throw
down a house belonging to Elizabeth Rutherford, which they did at their Fathers
desire, or at least, that their Father did ratihabit the same.

Against this Indictment, it is alleged, that the two Sons, the one being of
the age of fourteen, and the other of fifteen, cannot go to the knowledge of an
Inqueist, for throwing down this house, since they offer to prove, that they
were informed by their Uncle, that this house belonged to their Father, and
that it was their Fathers desire they should go along with him to throw it
down; for though Minors may be punished for attrocious crimes, committed
against the Law of Nature, such as Murder, Incest, etc. and to abstain from
which, the youngest conscience does advise: yet, such acts as cannot be known
to be criminal, but by such as understand positive Law, are not punished as
criminal, but in such as are obliged to understand that Law. None will
contravert, that the throwing down such a little house, not exceeding six
pounds Scots of value, and to which, they and all the Country had heard their
Father pretend right, cannot be called a crime against the Law of Nature; and
it is only a crime in positive or municipal Law, when it is done by such, as
are obliged at the time to understand they are doing an injury, and that the
house belongs not to him, at whose command they are throwing it down, and these
Children were not obliged to know this; for since they are not in Law obliged
to understand their own rights, till they be Majors, much less are they
obliged to understand the rights of other men; and in this case the
undestanding the matter of rights, is that only which infers the crime, for if
the Father had right, this had been no crime in him, nor them.

I am sure, there is a great distinction betwixt acts, which are of their own
nature indifferent, such as throwing down of houses, taking men prisoners, etc.
and these which are of their own nature vicious, and criminal, and need no
extrinsick thing to clear that they are so, such as murder, and robbery; the
first does require the knowledge of something that is extrinsick to the act
which is done; nor is the guilt inferred but by reasoning, and judgment, and
therefore that guilt should not fall upon Minors, except they are dolosi, and
are presumed to have done it intentionally and upon design, and how can design
be presumed in these Minors, since the committing this act did not take its
rise from them, but from their Uncle, and Father, and they were to gain nothing
to themselves, immediately by it? nor can it be imagined, why the Law will for
want of understanding, lessen the punishment in the most attrocious crimes,
such as Witchcraft, murder, etc. in such as are thriteen years of age, if it
will not remit absolutely the guilt, in such cases as these, where the guilt
was neither palpable; nor the prejudice great. And if Minors be to be restored
adversus delictum in any case, as is clear they are, they ought to be restored
against this, where the guilt does consist in a punctilio or nicety of Law,
such as, that though the Father had right to the house, yet he could not have
thrown it down by his own authority; a principle which few country men
understand, when they have reached twenty one years, si delictum fuerit
commissum sine dolo potest minor juvari open restitutionis in integrum, etiam ad
hoc ut a totapaena excusetur, Clar. quaest. 60. and Anan. in cap. 1. number. 8. de
delict. puer. Nor can I see a reason why crimes by the unanimous opinion of
Lawyers are said not to be punishable in Minors when they are perpetrat non
committendo, sed omittendo, if it be not because omissions are juris, and fall
not under sense, and proceed from a weakness of the judgment; but yet I think
the former distinction more just, since omissions of what nature requires,
should bind them, but nothing should bind them which proceeds from a weakness
in judgment, since Law allows Minors to have no judgment.

But whatever be alleged against other Minors, yet these having obeyed their
Father, in an act which was of its own nature indifferent, they cannot be
punished for the guilt though he may, for that were to make poor Children
unhappy, in subjecting them to double punishments, for if they obeyed not their
Father, they could not escape their Fathers anger, or if they did obey, they
fall under the Laws revenge. And it were very unjust, that the Law which has
subjected them to the power of their Father, should not secure them when they
obey that power to which it has subjected them. And upon the other hand, it
would lessen much that power which the Law has taken so much pains to
establish in the persons of Fathers, and Masters, over their Children, and
Servants, if it gave them occasion to debate their commands; and though a Son,
or a Servant, are not obliegd to obey their Father or Master, in things
palpably attrocious, and wicked; yet, where the thing commanded is not
necessarily, and intrinsecally unjust, they should either obey there, or no
where; and what a great prejudice were it to the Commonwealth, if a Son or
Servant should refuse to assist, in bringing back Cattle, which others were
driving away, to labor Land, or assist Poindings, or even throw down houses at
their Father, or Masters desire, because they might pretend his right were not
sufficient? and so the Father and Master should be still obliged to give an
account to his Son or Servant, of his right and title upon all occasions, and
his commands, which require oftimes a speedy execution, should be delayed in
the interim. To prevent all which, the Law has for the good of the
Commonwealth, allowed Sons, nor Servants, no will of their own, making them in
effect but the tools and instruments of their Fathers and Masters will, Non
creditur velle qui obsequitur imperio Patris, vel Domini, l. 4. ff. de. reg.
jur. And if the Law allows them to have no will of their own, it cannot punish
them when they obey their Master, for all guilt is only punished, because it is
an effect of the will; and therefore, John Rae was not put to the knowledge of
an Inqueist, as art, and part of theft, because he went only along with his
Father, when he was about twelve years of age, 1. of Januar, 1662. And by the
19. cap. number. 9. stat. Will. the servant is only declared punishable, if he do
not detect his Master, or desert his service: and per. l. lib. homo. ff. ad. l.
aquil. it is expressly decided, that si jussu alterius manu injuriam dedit,
actio legis aquiliae cum eo est qui jussit, si modo jus imperandi habuit, quod
si non habuit, cum eo agendum est qui fecit.

Though Minors may be punished for a guilt, yet they ought not to be indicted
till they attain to the years of Majority, because if they were to be tried in
their less age, they might by want of wit and experience, omit their own just
defenses, and mismannage the debate in which they were engaged, as to which,
our old Law appears to be very clear, R. M. lib. 3. c. 32. lib. 2. cap. 41.
quia dicere vel tacere potest calore juvenili, quod ei nocere potest: Suitable
to which, Skeen does in his Annotations observe a decision, betwixt His
Majesty, and the Abbot of Parbroth, anno, 1312. and l. pen. cod. de author. tut.
and. l. 1. S. occisorum ad S. C. Sillan and cap. 2. de delictis puerorum.
extrav. Since a Minor may be restored against such omissions, or against a
confession omitted by him, quando non potest aliter contra eum probaricrimen,
or may omit to object against Witnesses, it is more just and convenient, that
he should not be tried till he be Major. For, if he be tried, he must be once
punished, and then his being restored is both impossible and improfitable: and
it were very inconsequential for our Law to have so far privileged Minors, as
that they are not obliged to debate super haereditate paterna, and that too
upon these same reasons I here allege, and that it should not much more secure
them against criminal trials in the same minority, where the hazard is greater,
especially where the Commonwealth is not concerned (as here) to have the guilt
immediately brought to open punishment, and where the crime is not attrocious,
reaching no further then private revenge, and a pecuniary punishment. Nor is the
public in this case disappointed of a just revenge; for it can reach the
Father or Uncle, who are alleged to be the principal actors.

For the Father, I allege, that he cannot be pursued, as he who was accessory
to the committing of the crime, in commanding or ratihabiting it, except it
were condescended from what particular acts his ratihabition can be inferred,
whether by words, deeds, concealing, or otherwise; and it is not sufficient to
lybel in the general, that he did ratihabit, no more then a Lybel would be
relevant, bearing, that my Client were guilty of treason, without condescending
how, as is clear by the opinion of all Lawyers, who require, that Lybels should
be special, which is required by them, to the end that the relevancy of the
Lybel may be debated and determined by the Judges, before it go to a trial,
which should be rather done amongst us, then any other Nation, because the
probation is in this Kingdom tried only be an Assize, and these are ordinarily
men who understand not the intricacies of Law; whereas if the particular way
and manner of ratihabition be not condescended on, and discust by the Judges,
it must come to be debated after the probation before the Inqueist; and thus
not only relevancy, and probation, matter of Law, and matter of Fact, but even
the distinct offices of Justices, and Assizers, will be here confounded. As for
instance, if the pursuer should prove, that the Father said that all was well
done, we would be forced to debate before the Assize, that such passing words
as these cannot infer a crime, for else many thousands in a Nation might be
found guilty of crimes to which they had no accession: Or if it were only
alleged, that he received his Sons into his house, it would be likewise
debated, that the receiving of a man's own Sons into his house, cannot infer a
crime in delictis levioribus, though it may be debated to be criminal in
Treason, and more attrocious crimes. Upon which, and many other points, the
Doctors have writ very learnedly, and to debate such points before ignorant
Assizes were very dangerous.

It is likewise alleged for the Father, that he being only pursued as
accessory to this crime committed by his Brother, in so far as he did either
command or ratihabit, it is therefore necessar, that the Brother be first
pursued and discust, it being a rule in all Law, that the principal should be
pleaded and discust, before him who commanded the same to be done, or before
the receipter, as is clear by R. M. lib. 4. cap. 26. entitled, The order for
accusing malefectors for crimes; which agrees likewise with the opinion of the
Civilians, and particularly Clar. quaest. 20. number. 6. whose words are, Scias
etiam quod quandoque proceditur contra aliquem tanquam quod praestiterit
auxilium delicto, debet primo in processu constare principalem deliquisse.
Mars. quaest. 26. gives an example of it just in our case, a Father is pursued
as accessory to his Sons guilt, in which case he alleges the Father could not
be tried, till the Son was first discust; and Alexand. consilio 15. vol. 1.
dicit, quod nisi prius constet de manaatario, procedi non potest contra
mandantem; with which the English Law agrees fully, by which the principal
ought to be attainted by verdict, confession, or by outlawry, before any
judgment can be given against accessories, Bolton cap. 24. number. 38. And
therefore, except the Uncle, who was the principal actor here, were first found
guilty by an Assize, my Client as commander and ratihabiter cannot be punished.

To this it is answered, that the foresaid Law of the Majesty holds only in
theft, but not in other crimes, and that as to all crimes it is abrogat by the
90. Act. 11. Parliament, Ia. 6. by which it is appointed, that all criminal
Lybels shall be relevant, bearing art and part, without making any distinction
betwixt principal and accessories, and the Father is called here as a
principal, having given a warrant, as said is, for else the giving warrant for
doing treasonable deeds, or to commit murders, could not be punishable, though
nothing followed; whereas in all Law, such deeds are criminal in themselves,
and the mandant might be immediately punished.

To which it is replied, that this Maxim holds not only in theft, but in all
other crimes; for as there can be no reason of disparity given to difference
theft from other crimes, as to this point; So the rubric of the former Chapter
4. is general, and in the fourth Verse of that Chapter, it is said generally,
That (...) is manifest, that the commander or receipter shall not be ch^rged to
answer, till the principal Defender be first convicted by an Assise. Which is
likewise quoad all crimes ordained indefinitly by the 29. Act. Stat. David 2.
Nor can it with justice be pretended, that these Laws are abrogated by the
foresaid Statute of King James the sixth, for these reasons; 1. That Act does
not expressly bear an abrogation of the former Laws, and standing Laws cannot be
abrogat by consequences: nor can it be, but if the Parliament had designed to
abrogat so old and fundamental Laws and Customs, they would have expressed their
design, especially since in criminal cases, all Lawyers endeavor to make their
Laws clear and perspicuous. 2. No Laws are interpret to abrogat one another,
except they be inconsistent, so infavourable is abrogation of Laws; and it is
generally received, that Leges in materia diversa sese non tollunt, nec
abrogant: but so it is, that these Laws here founded on, are most consistent
with the Act of King James the sixth, and these two are materiae diversae; for
it is very consistent, that a Libel bearing art and part should be relevant,
and yet that the principal should be first discussed; for though the principal
be first to be discussed, yet, when the accessories are to be accused, it is
sufficient that it be generally libelled against them, that they were art and
part, the one of these regulats only the way of procedure, and ordinem
cognitionis, the other regulats the relevancy, and shows what Lybel shall be
sufficient. Nor was there any thing more designed by that Act, Ia. 6. but that
Lybels in criminal cases should not be cast as irrelevant, as is clear by the
narrative of the Act. And by the civil Law, ordo cognitionis, and accusatio
eorum qui opem auxilium prestiterunt, are alwise accounted different Titles,
and are differently treated; so that these two Laws are very different, and
very inconsistent. 3. If that Law, Ia. 6. had abrogat the former Laws, whereby
it is appointed, that the principal should be discust before the accessories,
then it had followed by* necessar consequence, that these Laws could not have
taken place after that Act; but so it is, that Defenses are daily sustained
upon these Laws, as in the case lately of George Graham, which shows very
convincingly, that they are not abrogated.

The reasons likewise whereupon that Law was founded, ordaining that
accessories should not be pursued before the principal be discussed, are still
in vigor, and are so just and necessar, that it were injust to abrogat a Law
founded upon them; for the Law considered, that if the principal were called,
he might know many defenses, which i^ they were known to these who are alleged
to be accessories, would certainly defend them; as in this case, if the Uncle
were called who threw down the house, it may be he would allege, that he did
not throw down this Cottage, till the accuser had consented, which consent he
possibly has: and this may be necessar in a thousand cases, as if a person
were pursued for having been accessory to the driving away Sheep, or Neat, he
might be convicted, though he were innocent, if the principal were not called,
which principal if he were called, might produce a Disposition from the party,
or a legal Poinding, either of which being produced, would defend both: whereas
upon the other hand, if it were lawful or sufficient to accuse any persons as
accessories, without pursuing the principal, the accuser might collude with the
principal, and suffer him to go unpunished, providing he would keep up the
Defenses and Warrands, and so suffer the innocent accessories to be condemned.

Is it not a principle in Nature, that accessorium debet sequi suum principale?
And does not the Law still require, that prius debet constari de corpore
delicti? And how can a man be pursued for hunding out another to throw down a
house, until it were first known that the house was thrown down? Nor is the
giving an order to throw down a house criminal, though it were proven; except
the house were according to that order thrown down, and that it was thrown down
by virtue of that order, and upon no other account. By all which it clearly
appears, that the throwing down of the house, which is the principal guilt,
must be first tried, before it can be enquired, who gave the command.

The last, and one of the great arguments, I shall use to prove, that the
principal who threw down the house must be first discust, before my Client can
be pannell'd for commanding or ratihabiting, is, that by this method, probation
should be led against absents, contrar to the known principles of our Law, and
by the connivance or ignorance of the accessories, the fame of an absent person
may be wounded, and witnesses suffered to depone, who dared not have deponed if
he had been present; and though that probation led against him in absence would
not be concluding, yet it would leave a stain; and would engage the deponers to
adhere to these prejudicat and false depositions in another Process, to secure
themselves against perjury.

Whereas it is pretended, that sometimes command is a crime, though nothing
follow, It is answered, that where a mandat is of it self criminal, though
nothing follow, as in Treason, there the giver of the mandat must not be
pursued as a Complice, or accessory, but as the principal transgressor; nor
would the King be prejudged (as is alleged) if the principal behoved first to
be discust, because it is pretended, that that principal might abstract
himself, and thereby cut off the public revenge, which would otherwise justly
fall upon the accessories if they could be apprehended. For to this it is
answered, that it is easy for His Majestes Advocat to raise a pursuit against
the principal, and if he compear, to proceed against him, or if he compear not,
he may be denunced fugitive, which is a sufficient discussing of him as a
principal, and will open sufficiently a way to proceed against the Accomplices.

It is likewise alleged, that the witnesses which are offered to be adduced
against my Clients, for proving that they committed this crime, are not testes
habiles, and cannot be admitted, because I offer to prove by their own oath,
that they were at the pulling down of the house, and did actually pull it down,
and so are socii criminis, and consequently are repelled from witnessing, by
the 34. cap. stat. 2. Rob. 1. where there is an enumeration made of those who
cannot be admitted to be witnesses, amongst whom are socii and participes
ejusdem criminis.

To which exception; the accuser answers, that though Socius criminis, cannot
be admitted pro socio, yet he may be admitted contra socium, that he may be
witness against, though not for those who were engaged with him. 2. Though
socius criminis may not be admitted as a witness contra socium, where the
crime in which they were engaged fixes infamy upon the committers, as Treason,
Witchcraft, Murder, etc. yet in Delicts or rather Riots, such as is the casting
down of a house, that tends to infer a pecuniary, and not a capital punishment;
there socii criminis may be received as witnesses; for, the reason why they are
ordinarily repelled, is, because in deponing they confess a crime against
themselves, and se infamant, which reason ceases in Delicts or lesser crimes,
quae non infamant.

It is likewise represented, that it is most clear from Law, that the only
reason why socii criminis are repelled from being witnesses is, because
deponendo se infamant, and so they forfeit the capacity and confidence of
integrity that the Law reposes upon all persons that ought to be believed as
witnesses; by the whole contract of the whole Titles, ff. andC. de testibus.
And by Clar. quaest. 21. number. 8. Dictum socii criminis ad hoc ut fidem faciat,
requiritur, ut sit confirmatum in tormentis, cum enim ex proprio delicto sit
infamis, nec debet admitti pro test sine tortura; and the foresaid Text of the
Majesty, ought as is alleged, to be interpret only so, as to take place ubi
crimen infamat, and that dilicta non infamant is endeavored to be proved by
the Statute of King William, de his qui notantur infamia, where it is said,
that fures, sacrilegii, homicidii. and others, qui sunt irretiti capitalibus
criminibus, repelluntur a testimonio.

(...) witnesses in delicts and riots should not be admitted because they are
socii criminis, no delict (says the pursuer) should ever be proved; for
ordinarily none are present but the committers. And since after their confession
they may be pursued themselves, it is not probable that they will depone
against others falsely, especially when they may be overtaken upon their own
deposition.

To which it is duply'd, that it is a rule in Law, that socius criminis, nec
pro, nec contra socium admitti potest, l. quoniam C. de test. Mascard. conclus.
1418. by which it is clear, that the Law makes no distinction whether he be
adduced, for, or against his Commorads, whether he be adduc'd in crimes, or
delicts; and socius criminis is not only repelled from being a witness,
because he stains his own fame, whilst he depones against his companions, but
because the Law presumes that being himself under the mercy of the pursuer, he
will by an unjust deposition ransom himself from the event of the pursuit, and
therefore the Law casts him as a witness; for the Law is unwilling to use
those who has offended it, and Lawyers have alwise been unwilling to tempt
men, by forcing them to depone upon their own errors, for they judged, that
these who would commit a crime, would easily forswear it. And the Law of the
Majesty formerly cited does repel a testando socios criminis, and infames,
whereas it needed not have expressed both, if it had comprehended the one under
the other, and only repelled socios criminis, because they were infames.

I perceive by Lawyers, that sometimes they allow witnesses in attrocious and
great crimes, whom they would not have admitted to prove crimes of less
consequence, which proceeds both from the hatted they carry to these great
crimes, a part of whose punishment it is that the crime can be easily proved:
but likewise to the end the Commonwealth may be the better secured; whose
great concern it is, that Judges be not too nice and scrupulous in receiving
witnesses against its enemies. Nor did the Law think, that men would be so base
and malicious, as to seek the death of their enemies by a false deposition,
even where possibly revenge would be content to reach their Estates.
Therefore, by the common Law of Nations in attrocious crimes, such as treason,
simonie or sacrilege, socii and participes criminis admittuntur, l. quisquis
C. ad l. jul. majest. glossa in l. ffin. C. de accus. specul. tit. de prob.. 1.
Boer. quaest. 319. and according to our Law it is appointed by an express Act
of Sederunt, anno, 1591. that socii criminis may be witnesses in the cases of
Treason, and Witchcraft; but I do not at all read, that socius criminis is
allowed to be led a witness in delicts, and all the reasons that militat for
the former cause, do militat against this. Nor is it possible to believe, that
the Law which allows socii criminis to be witnesses in great crimes, because
they are great, would likewise allow them to be led witnesses in small crimes,
because they are small; for so the Law would contradict it self, and would
build contrarieties upon the same foundation: and since the foresaid Act, 1591.
allows them to be led witnesses in crimes of Witchcraft, and Treason, they
ought not to be admitted in any other crime, how small so ever, for in
privilegiatis, inclusio unius, est exclusio alterius.

It is very clear, that the Law would not admit the testimony of a partaker of
the crime, to have the force of a presumption, nor to be the ground of an
accusation, Salicet. in l. ffin. C. de accus. nor gives it any credit to his
deposition, though he were otherwise esteemed a most credible person,
probatissimae fidei, Grammat. consil. 21. number. 3. nor does it believe him
though he were deponing against a person suspected to be guilty, Bert. consil.
268. nor does it believe a thousand such witnesses, though they agreed in their
depositions, for all these joined together weigh not one presumption, Mascard.
ibid. number. 8. By all which it may appear very clearly, that the Law which
respects socios criminis so little, does in no case design to receive them in a
criminal Court, what ever may be debated for receiving them in civil Courts,
for proving civil conclusions.

As to the inconvenience adduced, wherein it is contended, that if such
witnesses were not admitted, no crime could be proved; it is answered, that
this Argument would urge Judges to receive socios criminis to be witnesses, as
well in all crimes, as in small crimes; for it is a Brocard commonly received
amongst the Doctors, that quod admittitur ob incommodum, eo magis admittitur,
quo magis urget incommodum; and yet here it is confessed, that they could not be
admitted witnesses in murder, and those greater crimes. But the only natural
conclusion that could be drawn from this inconvenience, is, that socii criminis
should be admitted witnesses in occult crimes, such as conspiracies, but not in
such crimes as this where there could be no penury of witnesses, being alleged
to be committed in open day, in the midst of a Town, and with a convocation. But
to conclude all, I need only say, that my objection against these witnesses is
founded upon an express Law, and therefore it cannot be taken away by this
distinction, except this distinction can be established upon, and maintained by
another Law as express.

The Justices found, that these Minors being puberes, might be tried, and so
found that they should pass to the knowledge of an Inqueist.

2. They found the Father should pass to the knowledge of an Inqueist, as art
and part, though the principal actors were not yet discust.

3. They found, that socius criminis could not be received a witness in any
criminal pursuit, though the punishment could only reach to a pecuniary mulct.

AN ANSWER To some REASONS printed in England, against the overture of bringing
into that Kingdom, such Registers as are used in Scotland.
IN the first Ages of the World, when man had not fallen so entirely as now
from his original innocence, Laws were made rather to govern reasonable men,
then to prevent cheats. But when fraud did begin to grow up with subtilty,
Legislators being warned to guard against future abuses, by these they had seen
committed, did in all places endeavor to reform their people, by reforming
their Laws, and sic ex malis moribus bonae ortae sunt leges; and because wise
men look upon themselves as sprung from the same divine original, therefore
they have still been intent to borrow from one another, what excellent
constitutions they found to have been invented by them. Thus though Scotland
did adopt the Laws of the Romans (called now the civil Law) into the first
place next their own; yet, such esteem has that Kingdom always had for their
neighbors of England, that they have incorporated into the body of their own
Laws, very many English Forms and Statutes. And as some Sciences, Trades and
Inventions flourish more, because more cultivat in one Nation then another,
humane nature allowing no universal excellency, and God designing thus to
gratify every Country that he has created; So Scotland has above all other
Nations, by a serious and long experience, obviated most happily all frauds, by
their public Registers. And though they are not further concerned to recommend
this invention to their neighbors, then in so far as common charity leads
them, yet finding their Registers so much mistaken in a discourse, entitled,
Reasons against registring Reformation, I thought it convenient to represent a
short account and vindication of them. Registers are appointed in Scotland,
either for real Rights (for so we call all Rights and Securities of Land) or
for personal Obligations, by which a man binds his Person, but not his Estate.
Men sell their Land in Scotland, either absolutely, or under reversion; If
absolutely, it must be either to the sellers own Superior, or to a stranger; If
to his Superior of whom he holds his Land, it is transmitted with us by an
Instrument of Resignation in the hands of his Superior, ad perpetuam
remanentiam, whereby the Propriety is consolidated with the Superiority, and
this Instrument must be registrat. But if he sell it to a stranger, then the
acquirer must be seized, and this Sasine must be registrat within sixty days.
Or if a man do not absolutely dispone his Estate, but retain a power to redeem
the same, upon payment of the sum for which it is wodset or morgaged, then the
Paper whereby this power is allowed, is called a Reversion, and it must be
registrat within sixty days also. If any Heretor be suspected by his friends
to be prodigal, or unfit to manage his own affairs, he interdicts himself to
his friends in a Paper, wherein he oblieges himself to do no deed without their
consent: Or, if a Creditor who lent his money to an Heretor, find that Heretor
intends to sell his Estate, without paying him, albeit he did lend his money in
contemplation of that Estate, which the borrower then had; he makes an
application to the supreme Judicature of the Kingdom, called the Lords of the
Session, and from them obtains a warrant to inhibit his Debtor to sell that
Estate, till he be paid, which Interdiction or Inhibition must be first
published at the Mercat Cross where the Lands lie, and then registrated within
forty days.

There are two of these Registers, or public Books, one in the chief Town of
the Shire, and another at Edinburgh, which serves for all the Shires, and in
either of these, all these Sasings, Reversions, Interdictions, and Inhibitions
may be registrated: So that when any man intends to buy Lands, he goes to the
Keepers of these Registers, who keeps a short breviat of these in a book apart,
called the minute Book, (bearing the day when any Inhibition was presented
against such a man, at the instance of such a man) and there he finds for a
Crown, what encumbrances are upon the Estate he intends to buy, and if he find
none, he is secure for ever.

As to personal Bonds, they need not be registrated, but if the Creditor
resolve to secure his Bond against lossing, or if his Debtor refuse to pay his
money, when he calls for it, then he gives in the original, or principal Bond
to the Register, who keeps it still, and gets out an Extract or Copy of it,
collationed by my Lord Registers Servants, and subscribed by himself or his
Depute; for there is a Register for Bonds in every Shire, Town, and
Jurisdiction, as well as at Edinburgh. This Registration has with us the
strength of a judicial Sentence, and warrands the Creditor to charge his
Debtor, to pay under the pain of Horning (or out-lawry) and if he disobey, the
Horning is registrated. And thus every man knows in what condition his Debtor
is, as to his personal Estate, if he begin not to keep his credit; and this
Register serves both for execution and information.

This being the state of the Registers in Scotland, the usefulness of that
institution, may appear from these following reasons.

1. There is nothing discourages men more from being vigilant in their
employments, then when they apprehend that the money which is that product, by
which their pains uses to be rewarded, cannot be secured to their posterity,
for whose advantage they disquiet themselves, and coil so much. And thus the
Commonwealth will be but lazily served, Trade will be starved, and ingenuous
spirits discouraged. Not is it to be imagined how purchasers will be, or are
induced to be at much pains and expenses, to improve their grounds, and adorn
their dwellings; when the loosnesse of their right lays them open to renewed
hazards, nor can they enjoy with pleasure, what they cannot possess with
certainty. And what frail securities have such as are forced to rest upon the
ingenuity of sellers, who of all people are least to be trusted? for such as
sell Lands, are either prodigals, who are too vicious, or distressed persons, who
are ordinarily under too many necessities to be believed.

2. Registers are of all others, the greatest security against the forging of
false Papers; for forgers use to conceal for some time, the papers they forge;
Whereas the necessity of registrating them within such a time, will either
fright the contrivers, from doing what they must expose to the light, or will
at least furnish such as are concerned to have the fraud detected, with means
which may be effectual, seeing it is much easier to expiscat truth whilst the
witnesses are alive, and all circumstances recent, then after that a long
interval of elapsed time has carried away the persons, and obscured the
circumstances, from which truth could have received any light.

3. Purchasers being fully secured by the public faith of Registers, need not
burden the seller with a necessity of finding surety to them for the validity
of the rights sold, which as it resolves still in an personal (and consequently
an unfixt) security, for the buyers, so vexes very much the seller and his
friends.

4. The security, which flows from Registers, cuts off much matter of
pleading, and thereby defends against those feuds and picques, which last ever
after amongst such as are concerned, and keeps Gentlemen at home improving
their Estates, and Merchants and Tradsmen in their Cantors, and Shops,
enriching the Nation.

5. When men are to bestow their Daughters, they are by our Registers,
informed, and assured of the condition of those with whom they deal, and by
their means, men are kept from giving their Daughters and their Fortunes, or a
considerable share thereof, to Bankerupts, and Cheats. Likeas, the Daughters
are by them, secured in their Joyntures, and not exposed after their Husbands
death, to tedious suits of Law, the dependence whereof draws them to public
places, unfit for their Sex, and the event whereof drives them to begging and
misery.

6. By these, the price and value of Land is much raised, for by how much more
the purchase is certain, by so much more it is worth.

7. By these, Heretors who are oppressed by debt, are relieved by the sale of
their Lands, upon which Buyers now adventure freely; whereas, if they were to
rely upon the faith of the Sellers, their Estates might continue unsold, till
the Rent of their money should eat up the Stock.

8. By these, Usury and unfrugal Transactions with Brockers and others, are
much restrained; for if purchases of Lands were not secure, men would rather
choose to hazard their money so, then upon Land.

9. By these, Parents know when their Children, and Kinsmen, when their
Relations debord, and burden their Estates, and are thereby warned to check,
or assist them.

10. By these, Strangers and Foreigners are secured who resolved to match with
us, or to purchase amongst us, for our Registers are equally faithful to all.

11. By these, Commerce is very much secured; for, if a Merchant, or ordinary
transacter refuse to pay his Debts, then his Bond is put in the public
Register, by which the Creditor is secured of payment, and the Debtor is
deterred from owing too much.

12. By these Registers, Papers are secured against fire, loss and accidents,
to which they are exposed whilst they are kept in private hands: Whereas, after
regstration, nothing can destroy them, but what ruins the whole Kingdom, and
even in that case, there is still hope of recovering public Registers, as in
our last revolutions.

In this last place, I must crave leave to wonder, why England has already
taken so much pains to secure against fraudulent cheating of Creditors, and of
Buyers, as is clear from the Statutes cited by the Author, if they intend not
to prosecute that worthy design. But as an evident mark to know whether
Registers be necessary, they may consider, that if any man in England can for a
Crown, know in the space of a day, the condition of these from whom he
purchases, then Registers are not necessary, but if otherwise, they are: If any
Lawyer in England can assure his Client, that the purchase he makes is secure
above all hazard, then Registers are not necessary; but if they cannot, then
Registers are necessary; So that it seems England has done too much already,
or else that they should do more to secure their people. Yet, since I only
design to defend our own Law, and not to impugn theirs, it were impertinent for
me to recommend too zealously, that wherein I am not much concerned.

Against this so just and so necessary a Constitution, founded so strongly upon
reason, and approved so firmly by experience, the Author of the Reasons against
registering Reformation, has put his invention and wit (both which I confess
are very fertile) upon the rack, to find out, and muster up some Arguments,
which owe their number and beauty to the unacquaintednesse of his Countrymen
with the model he impugns, and which the Author has beat out by too much
industry, to a thinness, that is not able to bear the weight he lays upon
them.

His first Argument is founded upon the dangers that arise from innovations,
wherein Legislators are not able to have a full prospect of all inconveniences
which may follow: But to this it may be answered, that the Law of England had
not deserved the honor done it by the Author, nor had it swelled to its
present bulk, if it had not been frequently augmented by new additions. And as
to this project of keeping Registers, England may be wise upon the hazard of
their neighbors, who by being first practizers, have run all the risque, and
taken all the pains which was necessar for accomplishing so great a design.

The second Reason bears, that by Registers, the lowness of the fortunes of
such who suffered for His Majesty, would be discovered, and they thereby
exposed to much rigor from their Creditors: But this I humbly conceive, proves
more the contrary opinion, then that for which it is adduced; for as it were
injust to gratify such as have suffered for His Majesty, with the liberty of
preying upon such as probably lent them, because they were of their principles,
and of devouring poor Widows and Orphans, whose necessities will doubtless
load one day very much, the consciences of such as might have secured their
petty fortunes by the help of the Registers now proposed. And this Argument
presses no more against Registers, then it does against all those laudable and
well-contrived Statutes, which are already invented in England against
fraudulent conveyances, forgeries and impostures; for Registers will not debar
them from courses which are legal and honest.

Whereas it is in the third place urged, that Commerce would be a great
sufferer by Registers, seeing they would lay open the lowness of men's fortunes,
who do now enrich the Kingdom, and themselves too, upon mere credit; and that
they would discover to Foreigners, the low Estate of England at present, and
make every private Estate too well known. It is answered, that all these
inferences are drawn from the Authors unacquaintednesse with what he impungs,
as was formerly observed; for no man is obliged to registrat a Bond, which
oblieges only to pay money; Nor do men registrat such, except where the Debtor
refuses to pay, and so these Registers will not weaken Commerce nor Credit,
seeing Commerce is not immediately concerned in real Estates: and even as to
personal Estates, or Money, no man suffers by Registers or is concerned in
them, but such as have no respect to their credit, and Commerce owes little to
such; whereas upon the other hand, the fear of this will be yet a further tie
upon men to pay punctually, without which Commerce will soon be starved. And by
the Registers, Bankerupts will be soon discovered, whereby honest men who are
the true Nurses of Trade will be much cherished and secured. And by this answer
it appears clearly, that the riches of England, neither personal nor real can
be made known by the Registers; for only the Bonds of Bankerupts are to be
registrated, and though all real Rights must, yet the quota of the real Estate
is not expressed in the papers to be registrated.

After the Author of that Discourse against registering Reformation found, that
so unanswerable advantages arise from Reg^sters, as that they could not be
balanced by the inconveniences which he laid in the other Scale, he is pleased
(which is ordinary for such as cannot prevail by reason) to reflect upon
Scotland, as a poor Country, and against the Scots as an unmercifull people,
and to allege, that their poverty, and feverity introduced those Registers,
and made them necessary with us, but that they would never agree with the rich,
and tenderhearted English; Which reflections deserve rather our pity, then
our answer. Leaving then this womanly way of arguing, as unfit for the Scots,
who study to be Philosophers in their Writings, as well as in their Humors; It
is humbly conceived, that Registers do restrain no man's compassion, for no man
does virtuously indulge his Creditor, but he who knows the lowness of his
condition, which he cannot without Registers; Ignorance is less the mother of
virtue, then of devotion. Registers prejudge only such as are Cheats, and such
deserve little compassion; Nor are our Laws more severe against Debitors who
pay not, than the Laws of England; for both imprison such, and the only weak
side in our Law is, that it allows too much our Judges to suspend the payment
of Debts, and I never heard the English, who live amongst us, complain of any
other defect in our Laws. Our Laws are extracted from the Civil Law, and such
Doctors as writ the Law of Nations; And strangers understand our Law sooner
than any other Law in the World, except their own; And our Captions for
imprisoning Debitors, who refuse to pay, are expressly warranted by that Law of
the Romans; which though it was the best Law in the World, and is universally
acknowledged to be such, yet was more severe then ours. The comparing of
Nations as to their poverty and riches, brings more heat then light; Nor can
any difference betwixt the Nations in these, make any difference as to this
design; or if it does, it may be debated with reason, that Registers are fitter
for a rich, then a poor Nation; for where there are most buyers, and most Land
to be bought, Registers are there most necessary, seeing they were invented to
inform buyers, as to the encumbrances wherein Estates are involved by the
multiplicity of purchasers. Where there is but little Land, and where the
Creditor is poor, there the Creditor may have time, and leisure sufficient, to
watch the small Estate of his Debtor. Our Nation supplies their neighbors
with Corns, and Cattle, Lead, Copper, Timber, Coal, Salt, and many other
necessaries; whereas in exchange of these, it receives only from them Wine,
Spices, Silks, and other superfluities, which as England, no more than
Scotland, has growing within their Countries, so it is probable that both
Nations would live more happily without them: and thus it appears, that
Scotland is not so poor, as these reasons are.

I would here put an end to these observations, if I were not unwilling to
suffer that Gentleman to continue in his error of thinking, that our
registration of Movable Bonds ows its origin to the Caursini, the Popes brokers
in England, and to the Camera Apostolica, under the reign of Henry the third;
for as it is most improbable, that our Nation would borrow so fundamental a
Constitution, from what was practiced in a Nation that was in enmity with them
at that time; so it is no way probable, they would have followed the methods of
the Popes Agents at that time, when they were oppressed by their Master the Popes
endeavoring to subject their Clergy of Scotland, to the Sea of York, and by
these Agents themselves, in such merciless Exactions.

But the truth is, that though the completing of this excellent Constitution,
is an honor due to Scotland; Yet, its first origin is rooted in the Roman
Law; and most Nations of the World do at this day use Registers, which may be
thus cleared.

The Romans, to restrain excessive Donations, appointd them insinuari apud
Judicem, ut obviam iretur fraudibus, which Insinuation was the same with our
Registrations; thereafter they used Regesta, quae vulgo registra, quasi
regestaria dicuntur, illa erant acta tabulae publicae, which were at
Constantinople; and in the Eastern Empire, called (...), as Prat. observes: and
by Vopiscus in Probo, are called Registra. Usus est enim (inquit Vopiscus)
registris, scribarum porticus prophyreticae.

The Romans had likewise public Books, wherein papers were preserved, which
were under the Western Empire called Archiva tabularia and tablina, but under
the Eastern Empire were called Grammatophilacia, ubi instrumenta public
deponuntur, as Ulpianus observes, L. Moris. ff. de paenis, 6.

That other Nations besides Scotland use to preserve their Papers in public
places, and appoint their private Rights to be made public and known by
registering them, appears from Alex. consil. 16. wherein he treats of the
Registers Civitatis Rheg. And by his consil. 23. wherein he treats of the
Registers Civitatis Arimini; And at Rome they use Regestrum supplicationem
apostolicarum; And another Register Literarum Apostolicarum, Castr. consil.
345. But the Registers used by us, have been allowed, and imitated by the
French most exactly; for a Constitution, anno, 1553. made by Hen. 2. provides,
that all Dispositions, Contracts and Obligations exceeding fifty Livres, shall
be registrat; and if it be not registrat, it shall be null, in so far as
concerns third parties; the narrative of which Law, proves the
advantageousnesse of Registers; for it bears, that after all other means have
been essayed, we find that there was none save this of Registers to make our
Subjects live in assurance, to obviat all Debates, and to prevent Cheats: In
which, and these other Constitutions which follow upon it, all the methods used
by us are exactly set down, such as the marking of Registers in every leaf, the
having particular Registers in every inferior Jurisdiction, and the marking of
the principal, or original Papers upon the back; there also the Coppies
collationed are called Extracts. But that in this they imitated us, is clear,
for we had Registers before the year, 1449. because by the twenty seventh Act,
fifth Parl. Ia. 3. Reversions are appointed to be registrated; which Act speaks
of Registers as then in being, and fully established.

I find also, that in the old Hansiatick Maritime Laws, tit. 11. art. 4. it is
provided, that nullus nautarum, ullam silliginem, aut alia bona navi importet,
vel exportet, sine scitu naucleri, and scribae navalis ubi etiam in registro
poni debent. Which I observe to clear, that all Ages and Nations, Traffiquers
by sea, as well as Lawyers by land, have thought Registers advantageous for
Commerce, and a sure fence against Cheats: and if Registers be necessary in
such mean, and transitory occasions, as Loadings and Movables, much more are
they necessary in Lands, which as they are of the greatest importance, so are
of the longest duration.

Since then Registers have been found so advantageous, and that experience has
herein seconded reason, it is humbly conceived, that Scotland is much to be
magnified for their Registers; And that England may, without disparagement,
introduce this new amongst their old Statutes, whereby they cannot be so
properly said to innovat, as to enrich and augment their own Law, Nec pudet ad
meliora transire. But, I know that Nation to be so wise and provident, that if
they understood our Registers, as well as they do their own concern, they would
easily prefer them to those Reasons, which this Gentleman has offered against
them.

FINIS.
Add before the figure 2. lin. penult. Page 27. In answer to the French
Pleading.
And that this condition can only be purified, or satisfied by a natural, and
not by a civil or fictitious death, is clear by very express Laws, as l. 8.
ff. de. cap. dimin: where it is said, Eas obligationes quae' naturalem
praestationem habere intelliguntur, palam est capitis diminutione non perire,
quia civilis ratio naturalia jura corrumpere non potest. Thus Gaius, one of the
best Roman Lawyers has said, that such interpretations does corrupt the Law,
and in effect mix things that are very different, invading the limits of
Nature, and stretching fictions further than they ought to go: and therefore,
such criminal sentences as do not really kill, sed fictione civili caput
diminuunt, are not termed death, but a punishment next to death, deinde proxima
morti paena, damnatio in metallum, l. capitalium, ff. de paenis. This likewise
Papiniam decides, l. 121. ff. de verb. oblig. in Insulam deportato reo
promittendi stipulatio ita concepta cum morieris dari non nisi moriente eo
committitur. And upon the same ground, l. cum pater, hereditatem, ff. de legate.
2. he determines our case expressly, and asserts, that such sentences cannot in
fidei-commissis, be accounted death, haereditatem filius cum moreretur, suis
vel cui ex his voluisset restituere fuerat rogatus, quo interea in insulam
deportato, eligendi facultatem non esse paena peremptam placuit; nec fidei
commissi conditionem, aut mortem filii haeredis existere: With whom agrees,
Paulus l. statius. Cornelia foelici, ff. de jure fisci, Cornelia felici matter
scripta haeres rogata erat restituere hereditatem post mortem suam, cum haeres
scripta condemnata esset, and a fisco omnia bona mulieris occuparentur; dicebat
foelix se ante paenam esse, hoc enim constitutum est, sed si nondum dies fidei
commissi venisset, quia potest ipse mori, vel etiam matter alias res acquirere
repulsus est interim a petitione. Thus we see, that all the Roman Lawyers have
conspired to allow only natural death, to satisfy such conditions as this is;
death is the last of all things, rerum ultima linea, and therefore these
sentences leaving still room to hopes and expectations, cannot be called death,
which with the person cuts off all these. It is thought by the best of men
already, that death comes too soon, why then should we precipitat it, and force
it upon men before its time? And since one death is thought by all a severe
enough punishment, why should we multiply a thing that is but too often too
unwelcome? Death is too serious a hing, to be counterfei^ed by such ^fictions,
and too severe thing to be quibled upon, by such interpretations.

Add to page 124. lin. 20. at these words, after victual was expressly
prohibited.
I find, that by the Roman Law, l. 2. C. que res export. non deb. it is
declared unlawful to carry or sell Arms to the enemies of Rome; but though in
Law, all that is not forbidden is allowed, and that there be there a full
enumeration of what should not be carried into enemies, yet Corn is not at all
specified. And by the Canon Law, all such as supply Turks, and the other
Enemies of Christian Religion, with Guns, Swords, and aliis metallorum
generibus, and instrumentis bellicis, are an thematiz'd; yet, there is no
execration pronunced against such as supply them with Victuals: and though to
carry Wine or Oil to Barbarians was punishable by the Roman Law, l. 1. C. e^d.
Ne quidem gustus causa, aut usus commerciorum, least the delicacies of the
Italian Fruits should have tempted those to invade it, yet, that Law did not at
all reach their Allies, nay, nor did it so much as prohibit even in Subjects,
the sending Corn to Enemies who were not Barbarians: So that what ever may be
alleged against Allies, who buy Corns to carry into Enemies; yet it seems most
unjust that the Swedes, who carry in only their own product, either Corn, or
stock fish to sell them, should be proceeded against as enemies upon that
account, and at this rate, Sweden could no where sell their Corn, nor other
native Commodities, for they can only vent them either in Holland, France,
England, or Denmark, and all those being now ingadged in this War, the poor
Swedes behoved to loss all their own Rents, and want all these necessaries with
which they can only be supplied from the product of these, and here the Swedes
cannot be so properly said to supply the Hollanders, as to entertain
themselves, and His Majesty would sooner starve thus His Allies, then His
Enemies. And though Princes may impose these hard terms upon their own
Subjects, yet it were hard they could tie their Allies to the same terms: which
makes me believe, that the decisions related by Boer, decis. 178. and by
Christinaens, decis. 64. wherein they relate, that the exportation of Corns in
time of War is a sufficient reason for confiscating both Ship and Goods,
Frumenta, Vina and Olea, existente prohibitione ad exteros, praesertim
inimicos, exportare non licet, Christian. ibid. for exportation being only
prohibited, it can only extend to Subjects; for none can export properly, but
they; for Allies cannot be said to export when they trade, for to export is to
carry out of the place where the prohibition was made.

I confess, that the carrying in Corns to Holland may seem a greater supply to
them, then it would be to any other Nation, because their Country cannot
supply them with its native product; yet, since they have the ^bine, the Me^z,
and other Rivers open to them, in which His M^jesties Ships cannot stop their
Commerce, they will be abundantly supplied with Corns, though Sweden could be
bound up by this Treaty from supplying them: So that His Majesty will prejudge
thus His Allies the Swedes, in their Commerce, without wronging his enemies, as
to Corn or other Provision.

And to clear, that the Comeatus here prohibited, is only Corn carried in to
Cities besieged, or to Armies of the Enemies, but that our Allies are not
absolutely prohibited to carry Corns to any who are in enmity with us; your
Lordships will be pleased to consider, that Comeatus signifies properly, a
liberty granted to Soldiers to go and return salvum conductum, as is most
clear by the whole Title, C. de commeatu. And though some have taken the word
thereafter in a translatitious sense, pro cibariis and alimoniis exercitus, yet
to extend that to all Corn carried in by way of Commerce to an Enemies
Country; seems very hard; Especially where it is not carried in alimoniae sed
commercii ergo, and though Corn as the staff of life; be sometimes specially
prohibited, yet that should not be extended to Stock Fish and other less
necessary provisions: and though it were extended to these, yet the carrying so
small a quantity could no more be esteemed a contravention of the Treaty, then
the carrying a little money (without which there can be no Trade) could be
esteemed a breach of that part of the Treaty, whereby pecunia or money is
ordained not to be carried; Si quis ab initio sui usus causa exportaverit,
postea vero quia non indigeret partem vendidit legem non offendit, Ludovic.
conclus. 25. circa modum usus tunc praesumitur cum modico quantitas vendita
est, Tuld. tit. C. quae res export, number. 6. From which I conclude, that the
prohibition of carrying in Money, or Victuals, can only reach those who carry
them in great quantities, or to besieged Cities, or Armies, or principally for
the advantage of the Enemies, and for strengthening them in War against His
Majesty; for since to restrain this, is the only design of the Treaty, the
words in the Treaty should be interpreted suitably to this design: and thus
this poor Ship can only be condemned for its original sin, having carried
Contraband in the former Voyage.


