THE METHOD OF CHEMICAL PHILOSOPHY AND Physic.

BEING A brief INTRODUCTION to the one, AND A true DISCOVERY of the other.

Namely, of Diseases, Their Qualities, Causes, Symptoms, And Certain Cures.


The like never before extant in English.

LONDON Printed by J. G. for Nath: Brook, at the Angel in Cornhill. 1664.

The Preface.
ALthough I might have retained to my proper use this excellent Tractate; yet,
considering that Veritatem celare, est Aurum sepelire, and convinced with
charity and commiseration of so many diseased, left as desperate; and with
desire of directing those that seek the splendour of powerful Physic; I could
no longer withhold it from public view; not doubting its kind reception from
all that prefer native truth, before fucated error (which needs so many
volumes to cloak its deformities;) but confident of their acknowledgment that
herein I have rightly improved my Talent, as indeed I have endeavored, for the
good, not so much of my self, as of many; divulging, not only the kernel of
Physical Philosophy, and a Treasure for health, but even many Chemical Arcanaes
also openly demonstrated, and friendly tendered; to all which to add their due
praise, would too much swell a Preface, and too little satisfy the Reader,
when the work it self does so briefly, so apertly, so completely demonstrate
it, that to speak it here, were but to hold a Candle to the Sun, or to hand
thee a Torch in the clearest Noon day.

Farewell therefore, and with me implore the donor of every good gift, to give
thee understanding of the truth, to the glory of his great name, and the
utility of thy infirm neighbor.

Amara licet VERITAS
Non amarescit CHARITAS. (...)
Books Printed for Nath. Brook, at the Angel in Cornhill.
Excellent Tracts in Divinity, Controversies, Sermons, etc.
Catholic History, collected and gathered out of Scripture, Councils, and
ancient Fathers; in answer to Dr. Vanes Lost Sheep returned home: by Edward
Chesenhale, Esquire Bishop Morton on the Sacrament. Grand Sacrilege of the Church
of Rome, in taking away the sacred Cup from the Laity at the Lords Table: by
Daniel Featley. Quakers Cause at second hearing, being a full Answer to their
Tenets. Re-assertion of Grace, Vindiciae Evangelii, or Vindication of the
Gospel: a Reply to Mr. Anthony Burges's Vindiciae Legis, and to Mr. Rutherford:
by Rob. Town. Anabaptists anatomized and silenced, or a Dispute with Mr. Tombs
by Mr. J. Cragg, where all may receive clear satisfaction. A Cabinet-Jewel,
wherein is Man's misery and Gods mercy set forth, in eight Sermons; with an
Appendix concerning Tyches, and expediency of Marriage in public Assemblies:
by the same Author Mr. J. Cragg. A Glimpse of Divine Light* being an
Explication of some passages exhibited to the Commissioners at Whitehall, for
Approbation of publ^que Preachers, against J. Harrison of Land-Chappel,
Lancashire. The zealous Magistrate, a Sermon: by T. Threscot. New Jerusalem, in
a Sermon for the Society of Astrologers, in the Year 1651. Divinity no enemy to
Astrology, a Sermon for the Society of Astrologers in the year 1653. by Dr.
Tho. Swaddling. Britannia Rediviva, a Sermon before the Judges, Aug. 1648. by J.
Shaw Minister of Hull. The Princess Royal, in a Sermon before the Judges, March
24. by J. Shaw. Judgment set, and Books* opened, Religion tried whether it be
of God or man, in several Sermons: by J. Webster. Quarto. Isreal's Redemption,
or the Prophetical History of our Saviors Kingdom upon earth: by K. Manton.
The cause and cure of Ignorance, Error, and Profaneness; or a more hopeful
way to grace and salvation: by R. Young, Octavo, A Bridle for the times,
tending to still the murmuring, to settle the wavering, to stay the wandering,
and to strengthen the fainting: by J. Brinsley of Yarmouth. Comforts against
the fear of death, wherein are discovered several evidences of the work of
grace: by J. Collins of Norwich. Jacobs Seed, or the excellency of seeking God
by prayer: by Jer. Buroughs. The sum of Practical Divinity, or the grounds
of Religion in a Catechistical way: by Mr. Christopher Love, late Minister of
the Gospel; an useful piece. Heaven and Earth shaken, a Treatise showing how
Kings and Princes, and all other Governments, are changed: by J. Davis Minister
in Dover. The Treasure of the Soul, wherein we are taught by dying to sin, to
attain to the perfect love of God. A Treatise of Contentation, sit for these
sad and troublesome times: by J Hall Bishop of Norwich; where all may receive
full satisfaction. Select thoughts, or choice helps for a pious spirit,
beholding* the excellency of her Lord Jesus: by J. Hall B. of N. The holy Order
or Fraternity of Mourners in Sion; to which is added, Songs in the night, or
cheerfulness under afflictions: by J. Hall Bishop of Norwich. The Celestial
Lamp, enlightening every distressed soul from the depth of everlasting darkness:
by T. Fetiplace. The Moderate Baptist in two parts; showing the Scripture* way
for the administering of the Sacrament of Baptism, discovering the old error of
Original sin in Babes: by W. Brittin. Dr. Martin Luther's Treatise of Liberty
of Christians; an useful Treatise for the stating Controversies so much
disputed in these times about this great point. The Key of Knowledge, a little
book by way of Questions and Answers, intended for the use of all degrees of
Christians, especially for the Saints of Religious Families: by old Mr. John
Jackson that famous Divine. The true Evangelical Temper; a Treatise modestly
and soberly fitted to the present grand concernments of the State and Church:
by old Mr. John Jackson. The Book of Conscience opened and read by the same
Author. The so much desired and learned Commentary on the whole 15 Psalm, by
that Reverend and Eminent Divine, Mr. Christopher Cartwright, Minister of the
Gospel in York; to which is affixed a brief account of the Author's Life and
Work, by R. Bolton: with Mr. Edward Leighs's Epistle annexed in commendation of
the Work. The Judges Charge, delivered in a Sermon before Mr. Justice Hall, and
Sergeant Crook, Judges of Assize, at St. Mary Overeys in Southwark: by R. Parr,
M. A. Pastor of Camberwell in Surrey: A Sermon worthy perusal of all such
persons as endeavor to be honest and just practitioners in the Law. The Saints
Tombstone, being the Life of that virtuous Gentlewoman Mistress Dorothy Shaw,
late Wife of Mr. John Shaw, Minister of the Gospel at Kingston upon Hull.
Gospel-Revelations in three Treatises, viz. 1. The Nature of God. 2. The
Excellency of Christ. 3. The Excellency of Man's Immortal Soul: by Jer.
Buroughs. The Saints happiness, together with the several steps leading
thereunto, in 41. Lectures on the fifth of Matthew, called the Beatitudes of
Christ: by Jer. Buroughs; being the last Sermons he ever preached, both put
forth by the same testimony that published his former Works. The Iron Rod, a
Prophetical Treatise. A Discourse concerning Liberty of Conscience, in which
are contained Proposals about what liberty in this kind is now politically
expedient to be given, and several reasons to show how much the peace and
welfare is concerned therein, by R. T. No necessity of Reformation of the
bublick Doctrine of the Church of England: by J. Pearson, D. D. An Answer to
Dr. Burges's Word by way of Postscript, in vindication of no necessity of
Reformation of the public Doctrine of the Church of England: by Dr. Pearson.
Dr. Daniel Featly revived, proving that the Protestant Church, and not the
Catholic, is the only visible and true Church; in a Manual preserved from the
hands of the Plunderers, with a succinct history of his life and death:
published by John Featly, Chaplain to His Majesty. The Scotch Covenant
condemned, being a full answer to Mr. Douglas his Sermon, preached at the Kings
Coronation in Scotland, wherein His Sacred Majesty is vindicated; by a Loyal
and Orthodox hand. The Royal Prerogative vindicated, in the converted Recusants
convinced by Scripture, Reasons, Fathers, and Councils, that the Oath of
Abjuration compared with those of Allegiance and Supremacy, contains nothing
but what may be taken by every pious Christian, and lawful subjects; with
diverse other things annexed in relation to the Kings Supremacy: by J. Cragg; a
learned piece. A Manual of Miscellaneous Meditations, Apothegms, Observations,
Characters, and Essays; worthy the consideration of all: by R. R. Christ's
gracious intention for peace and mercy toward sinners, in a Sermon at St.
Paul's before the Lord Major, and Aldermen: by R. Parr, Minister at Camberwell
in Surrey. (...), or God made Man; a Tract proving the Nativity of our Savior
to be on the 25. of December: by the learned J. Seldom. The Works of that
Reverend Prelate Joseph Hall, late Bishop of Norwich, collected into one
Volume, being the third Tome, in Folio. The sinners Remembrancer, or a serious
warning to the wicked to prevent their destruction, and hasten their
reformation: to which is added Christ's gracious intention for peace and mercy
toward sinners: by Rich. Parr, D. D. Rector of Bermondsey in Southwark. Divine
Meditations upon the Grand and Lesser Festivals, commanded to be observed in
the Church of England by Act of Parliament; whereunto is subjoyned, A
Meditation upon the Murder of King Charles the first on Jan. 30 1648. and a
Commemoration of the Martyrdom of the late William Land, Archbishop of
Canterbury, by Edmund Gayton. The Reformed Presbyterian; humbly offering to the
consideration of all pious and peaceable spirits, several Arguments for
Obedience to the Act of Uniformity; as the way to Unity, and endeavoring to
demonstrate by clear inferences from Scripture, etc. from the writings of Mr.
Paul Bains, Mr. Hildersham, Mr. Baxter, Mr. Robert Bolton, and other learned
Divines, that there is nothing required by the Act of Uniformity, that is
forbidden by the Law of God: by R. Littler. Observations Censures, and
Confutations of notorious Errors in Mr. Hobs's Leviathan, and other his Books;
to which are annexed Occasional Animadversions on some writings of the
Socinians, and such Heretics of the same opinions with him: by William Lucy,
Bishop of S. Davis. A Tract worth the perusal of all learned men, in which the
Church of England is defended.
Admirable and learned Treatises of Occult Sciences in Philosophy, Magic,
Astrology, Geomancy, Chemistry, Physiognomy, and Chiromancy.
Magic and Astrology vindicated: by H. Warren. Lux Veritatis, Judicial
Astrology vindicated, and Demonology confuted: by W. Ramsey, Gent. An
Introduction to the Teutonick Philosophy, being a determination of the Original
of the Soul: by C. Hotham Fellow of Peter-house in Cambridge. Cornelius Agrippa
his fourth Book of Occult Philosophy, or Geomancy; Magical Elements of Peter de
Abano, the nature of spirits; made English by R. Turner. Paracelsus Occult
Philosophy, of the mysteries of Nature, and his secret Alchimy. An Astrological
Discourse, with Mathematical Demonstrations; proving the influence of the
Planets and fixed Stars upon, Elementary Bodies: by Sir Christ. Heydon,
Merlinus Anglicus Junior, The English Merlin revived, or a Prediction upon the
affairs of Christendom, for the year 1644* by W. Lilly. England's Prophetical
Merlin, foretelling to all Nations of Europe, till 1663. the actions depending
upon the Influences of the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, 1642. by W.
Lilly. The Worlds Catastrophe, or Europes many mutations, until 1666. by W.
Lilly. An Astrological Prediction of the Occurrences in England, part in the
years 1648, 1649, 1650. by W. Lilly. Annus tenebrosus, or the dark Year; or
Astrological Judgments upon two Lunary Eclipses, and one admirable Eclipse of
the Sun in England. An easy and familiar way, whereby to judge the effects
depending on Eclipses: by W. Lilly. Supernatural Sights and Apparitions seen in
London, June 50. 1644* by W. Lilly: as also all his Works in one Volume.
Catastrophe Magnatum, an Ephemerides for the Year 1652. by N. Culpepper.
Teratologia, or a discovery of Gods Wonders, manifested by bloody rain and
waters: by J. S. Chiromancy, or the art of divining, by the Lines engraven in
the hand of man by Dame Nature, in 198. Genitures; with a learned Discourse of
the soul of the world, by G. Wharton, Esquire The admired Piece of Physiognomy,
Chiromancy, Metoposcopy, the symmetrical proportion, and signal moles of the
body, the Interpretation of Dreams; to which is added the Art of Memory
illustrated with Figures: by R. Sanders, Folio. The no less exquisite then
admirable Work, Theatrum Chemmicum Britannicum, containing several Poetical
pieces of our famous English Philosophers, who have written Hermetick mysteries
in their own ancient Languages; faithfully collected in one Volume, with
Annotations thereon: by the indefatigable industry of Elias Ashmole, Esquire
illustrated with Figures. The way to Bliss, in three Books; a very learned
Treatise of the Philosophers-stone, made public by Elias Ashmole, Esquire Themis
Aurea, the Laws of the Fraternity of the Rosy Cross, in which the occult
secrets of their Philosophical Notions are brought to light: written by Count
Mayerus, and now Englished by T. H. Natures Secrets, or the admirable and
wonderful History of the generation of Meteors, describing the temperatures of
the Elements, the heighths, magnitudes, and influences of the Stars, the causes
of Comets, Earthquakes, Deluges, Epidemical Diseases, and Prodigies of
precedent times; with presages of the Weather, and descriptions of the
Weather-glass: by T. Wilsford. Blagrave's admirable Ephemerides for the Years
1659, and 1660. Euclids Elements in fifteen Books in English, completed by Mr.
Barrow of Cambridge.
Excellent Treatises in the Mathematics, Geometry, of Arithmetic, Surveying,
and other Arts or Mechanics.
THe incomparable Treatise of Tactomet^ia, seu Tetagmenometria, or the Geometry
of Regulars, practically proposed after a new and most expedious manner;
together with the Natural or Vulgar, by way of mensural Comparison, and in the
Solids, not only in respect of magnitude or dimension, but also of gravity or
ponderosity, according to any metal assigned; together with useful experiments
of measures and weights, observations on Gauging, useful for those that are
practiced in the Art Metrical: by T. Wybard. Tectonicon, showing the exact
measuring of all manner of Lands, Squares, Timber, Stone, Steeples, Pillars,
Globes, as also the making and use of the Carpenters Rule, fit to be known by
all Surveyors, Land-meters, Joyners, Carpenters, and Masons: by D. Diggs. The
unparalled work for ease and expedition, entitled, the exact Surveyor, or
the whole art of surveying Land, showing how to plot all manner of Grounds,
whether small Enclosures, Champain, Plain, Wood*lands, or Mountains, by the
plain table; as also how to find the Area, or content of any Land, to protect,
reduce, or divide the same; as also to take the plot or chart, to make a Map of
any manor, whether according to Rathburn, or any other eminent Surveyors
method; a Book excellently useful for those that sell, purchase, or are
otherwise employed about buildings: by J. Air. The golden treatise of
Arithmetic, natural and artificial, or Decimals, the theory and practice
united in a sympathetical proportion betwixt Lines and Numbers, in their
quantities and qualities; as in respect of form, figure, magnitude and
affection, demonstrated by Geometry, illustrated by Calculations, and confirmed
with variety of examples in every species; made compendious and easy for
Merchants, Citizens, Seamen, Accomptants, etc. by Thomas Wilfsord, Corrector of
the last Edition of Record. Semigraphy, or the Art of short-writing, as it has
been proved by many hundreds in the City of London, and other places, by them
practiced and acknowledged to be the easiest, exactest, and swiftest method;
the meanest capacity by the help of this book with few hours practice may
attain to a perfection in this Art: by J. Rich Author and teacher thereof,
dwelling in Swithins Lane in London. Milk for Children, a plain and easy
Method teaching to Read and Write, useful for Schools and Families: by J.
Thomas, D. D. The Painting of the Ancients, the History of the beginning,
progress, and consummating of the practices of that noble Art of Painting: by
F. Junius. The Conveyance of Light, or the complete Clerk and Scriveners Guide,
being an exact Draught of all Presidents and Assurances now in use: Likewise
the forms of all Bills, Answers, and Pleadings in Chancery, as they were penned
by diverse learned Judges, eminent Lawyers, and great Conveyancers, both ancient
and modern; whereunto is added a Concordance from K. Richard the third to this
present time. The so well* entertained Work, the new World of English Words, or
a general Dictio^ary, containing the Terms, Etymologies, Definitions, and
perfect Interpretations of the proper significations of hard English words,
throughout the Arts and Sciences, liberal or mechanic; as also other subjects
that are useful or appertain to the Language of our Nation. A Work very
necessary for strangers as well as our own Countrymen, for all persons that
would rightly understand what they discourse or read: collected and published
by E. P. The modern Assurancer, the Clerk's Directory, containing the practick
part of the Law, in the exact forms and draughts of all manner of Presidents
for Bargains and Sales, Grants, Feoffments, Bonds, Bills, Conditions,
Covenants, Joyntures, Indentures, to lead the uses of Fines and Recoveries,
with good Proviso's and Covenants to stand seized, Charter-parties for Ships,
Leases, Releases, Surrenders, etc. and all other Instruments and Assurances now
in use: intended or all young students and practisers of the Law, by John Hern.
The Perfect Conveyancer, or several select and choice Presidents such as have
not formerly been printed; collected by four several Sages of the Law, viz. Sir
Edward Henden, Will* Noy, Robert Mason, and Henry Fleetwood. Moor's Arithmetic,
the second Edition, much refined, and diligently cleared from the former
mistakes of the Press; a work containing the whole Art of Arithmetic, as well
in numbers as species, together with many Additions by the Author, is come
forth an excellent piece. Likewise Exercitatio Eleiptica Nova, or a new
Mathematical Contemplation on the Oval Figure called the Eleipsis, together
with the two first Books of Mydorgius, his Conicks analyz'd and made so plain,
that the Doctrine of Conical Sections may be easily understood; a Work much
desired, and never before published in the English Tongue: by Jonas Moor,
Surveyor General of the great Level of the Fenns. The Scales of Commerce and
Trade, the mystery revealed as to traffic with a Debtor and Creditor, for
Merchants Accounts, after the Italian way and easiest method; as also a
treatise of Architecture, and a computation as to all the charges of building:
by T. Wilsford, Gent.
Excellent and approved Treatises in Physic, Surgery, and other more
familiar Experiments in Cookery, Preserving, etc.
CVlpeper's Semiatica Vranica, his Astrological Judgment of Diseases from the
decumbiture of the sick, much enlarged; the way and manner of finding out the
change and end of the Disease; also whether the sick be likely to live or die,
and the time when recovery or death is to be expected, according to the
judgment of Hippocrates and Hermes Trismegistus; to which is added Mr.
Culpepers Censure of Urines. Culpeper's last Legacy left to his Wise for the
public good, being the choicest and most profitable of those secrets in
Physic and Surgery, which whilst he lived were locked up in his breast, and
resolved never to be published till after his death. Culpeper's School of
Physic, or the experimental practice of the whole Art, so reduced either into
Aphorisms, or choice and tried Receipts, that the freeborn students of the
three Kingdoms may in this method find perfect ways for the operation of such
medicines, so Astrologically prescribed, as that they may themselves be
competent Judges of the Cures of their Patients: by N. C. The expert Doctors
Dispensatory, the whole Art of Physic restored to practice, with a survey of
most Dispensatories extant; a Work for the plainness and method not to be
paralleled by any; with a Preface of Mr. Nich. Culpeper's to the Reader in its
commendation: by P. Morellus, Physician to the King of France. The Yorkshire
Spaw, or the virtue and use of that Water in curing of desperate Diseases, with
directions and rules necessary to be considered by all that repair thither.
Medicina Magica tamen Physica, Magical but Natural Physic, containing the
general Cures of Infirmities and Diseases belonging to the bodies of men, as
also to other Animals or domestic Creature, by way of Transplantation, with a
description of the most excellent Cordial out of Gold: by Sam. Boulton of
Salop. Helmont disguised, or the vulgar errors of impartial and unskilful
practisers of Physic confuted, more especially as they concern the Cures of
Fevers, the Stone, the Plague, and some other Diseases, by way of Dialogue, in
which the chief Rarities of Physic are admirably discoursed: by J. T. J.
Tredescant's Rarities, with the varieties of his Gardens, published by himself.
Arts master* piece, or the beautifying part of Physic; whereby all defects of
Nature of both sexes are amended, age renewed, youth continued, and all
imperfections fairly remedied: by B. T. Dr. of Ph. fitted for the Ladies. An
Elenchus of Opinions concerning the cure of the Small Pox, and French Pest: by
T. Whitaker, Physician to his Majesty. Gregorius Horsly, Operum medicorum and
Institutiones medicas, in tres Tomos, Folio. William Clows his Chirurgical
Observations for those that are burned with the flames of Gunpowder, as also of
the curing of wounds, and Lues venerea. The work of that famous Surgeon Mr.
John Banister, concerning Tumors, Wounds, Ulcers, etc. being a storehouse of
all sorts of medicines belonging to the Surgeons use. The Art of Simpling,
an introduction to the knowledge of gathering of Plants, wherein the
definitions, divisions, places, descriptions, differences, names, virtues,
times of gathering, temperatures of them, are compendiously discoursed of; also
a discovery of the lesser world: by W. Coals. Adam in Eden, or Nature's
Paradise; the History of Plants, Herbs, and Flowers, with their several
original names, the places where they grow, their descriptions and kinds,
their times of flourishing and decreasing; as also their several signatures,
anatomical appropriations, and particular physical virtues, with necessary
observations on the seasons of planting and gathering of our English Plants. A
Work admirably useful for Apothecaries, Surgeons, and other ingenious
persons, who may in this Herbal find comprised all the English physical
Simples, that Gerard or Parkinson in their two voluminous Herbals have
discoursed of; even so as to be on emergent occasions their own Physicians, the
Ingredients being to be had in their own Fields and Gardens: published for the
general good, by W. Coals. The Queens Closet opened, incomparable secrets in
Physic, Chirurge^y, Preserving, Candying, and Cookery; as they were presented
to the Queen by the most experienced persons of our times; many whereof were
honored with her own practice. The perfect Cook, a right method in the Art of
Cookery, whether for Pastry or a la mode Kickshaws, with fifty five ways of
dressing Eggs: by M. M. The accomplished Cook, the mystery of the whole Art of
Cookery, revealed in a more easy and perfect method then has been published
in any Language; expert and ready ways for the dressing of Flesh, Fowl, and
Fish, the raising of Pastes, the best directions for all manner of Kickshaws,
and the most poinant Sauces, with the terms of Carving and sewing, the Bills of
Fare, and exact account of all Dishes for the season, with other a la mode
Curiosities, together with the lively Illustrations of such necessary figures
as are referred to practice: approved by the many years experience, and careful
industry of Robert May, in the time of his attendance on several persons of
Honor.
Elegant Treatises in Humanity, History, description of Countries, Romances and
Poetry.
OEdipus, or the Resolver of the secrets of Love and other natural Problems, by
way of Question and Answer. The admirable and most impartial History of New
England, of the first Plantation there in the year 1628. brought down to these
times; all the material passages performed there, exactly related. America
painted to the Life, the History of the Conquest, and first original
undertaking of the advancement of Plantations in those parts, with an exact
Map: by F. Gorges, Esquire The tears of the Indians, the History of the most bloody
and most cruel proceedings of the Spaniards in the Islands of Hispaniola, Cuba,
Jamaica, Mexico, Peru, and other places of the West Indies; in which to the
life are discovered the Tyrannies of the Spaniards, as also the justness of our
War so successfully managed against them. The illustrious Shepherdess. The
imperious Brother, written originally in Spanish by that incomparable Wit* Don
John Perez de Montalbans, translated at the request of the Marchioness of
Dorchester, and the Countess of Strafford: by E. P. The History of the Golden
Ass, as also the Love of Cupid and his Mistress Psyche: by L. Apuleius,
translated into English. The Unfortunate Mother, a tragedy: by T. N. The
Rebellion, a Comedy: by R. Rawlins. The Tragedy of Messalina the insatiate
Roman Empress: by N. Richards. The Floating Island: a Trage^comedy acted before
the King by the students of Christ Church in Oxon, by that renowned Wit, W.
Strode; the songs were set by Mr. Henry Laws. Harvey's Divine Poems, the
History of Balaam, of Jonah, and of St. John the Evangelist. Fons Lachrymarum,
or a Fountain of tears, the Lamentations of the Prophet Jeremiah in Verse; with
an Elegy on Sir Charles Lucas: by J. Quarles. Nocturnal Lucubrations, with
other witty Epigrams and Epitaphs: by R. Chamberlain. The admirable ingenious
Satyr against Hypocrites. Wit restored, in several select Poems, not formerly
published by Sir John Menis* and Mr. Smith, with others. Sportive Wit, and
Muses merriment, a new spring of Drollery, Jovial Fancy, etc. Wits Interpreter,
the English Parnassus, or a sure Guide to those admirable accomplishments that
complete the English Gentry in the most acceptable qualifications of discourse
or writing. An art of Logic, accurate Complements, Fancies; Devices,
Experiments, Poems, Poetical Fictions, and a la mode Letters: by J. C. the
second Edition; to which is added these several Courtly Games, viz. Ombre,
Piquet, Chess, Gleek, and Cribbidge, etc. Wit and Drollery, with other jovial
Poems, with new additions: by Sir J. M. M. L. M. S. W D. the second Edition.
The Mysteries of Love and Eloquence, or the Arts of Wooing and Complementing,
as they are managed in the Spring Garden, Hide Park, the New Exchange, and
other eminent places: A work in which is drawn to the life the deportments of
the most accomplished persons; the mode of their Courtly* entertainments,
treatment of their Ladies at Balls, their accustomed Sports, Drolls, and
Fancies; the witchcrafts of their persuasive Language in their approaches, or
other more secret dispatches: by E. P. Naps upon Parnassus, a sleepy Muse ^ipt
and pinched, though not awaked: such Voluntary and Jovial Copies of Verses, as
were lately received from some of the Wits in the Universities in a Frolic;
dedicated to Gondibert's Mistress by Captain Jones and others. Whereunto is
added, for the demonstration of the Authors Prosaick Excellencies, his Epistle
to one of the Universities, with the Answer; together with two Satirical
Characters of his own, of a Temporizer, and an Antiquary, with marginal notes
by a Friend to the Reader. J. Cleaveland Revived, Poems, Orations, Epistles,
and other of his Genuine Incomparable Pieces: a second Impression, with many
Additions. The Exquisite Letters of Mr. Robert Loveday, the late admired
Translatour of the Volums of the same Romance Cleopatra, for the perpetuating
his memory, published by his dear Brother Mr. A. L. A new English Grammar,
prescribing certain rules for Foreigners to learn English; as also a new
method to learn the Spanish and Portugal Tongue; fitted for all that desire to
know the Ling: by James Howel. Englands Worthies, select Lives of 47. most
eminent Persons from Constantine the Great, to the late times: by W.
Winstanley, Gent. The Proceedings of the High Court of Justice against the late
King Charles, with his Speech upon the Scaffold, and other proceedings, Jan.
30. 1648. The Character of Spain, or Epitomy of their Virtues and Vices. The
Character of Italy, or the Italian anatomized by an English Surgeon. The
Character of France, to which is added Gallus Castratus, or an Answer to a
Pamphlet called, The Character of England; as also a fresh Whip for the
Monsieur, in answer to his Letter: the second Edition. Historia Plantarum, in
2. Books, by Abrah. Crawley; an ingenious Poem in Latin. Pharamond, or the
History of France, a new Romance, by the Author of Cassandra and Cleopatra. in
folio. The Trial of the pretended German Princess. King Charles the First his
Meditations in 24o. With his Majesty's Reasons against the High Court of
Justice: Also the Papers that passed betwixt his Majesty and Mr. Alex.
Hinderson. Fit to be used by all persons in private Families. 6d* price. Rules
and orders anciently used against engrossing of Corn. The general doctrine of
Equations reduced to Precepts. Rules and Directions for young Divines. 12. Mr.
Jer. Rich's poems, writ in a fit of sickness. A Looking* Glass for Saints and
Sinners; an Exposition on St. John: by Samuel Smith, Author of David's
Repentance and great Assize. The Complete Midwife's Practice enlarged, in the
most weighty and high concernments of the Birth of man, containing a perfect
Directory, or Rules for Midwives and Nurses; as also a Guide for Women in their
Conception, bearing, and nursing of Children, from the experience of our
English, viz. Sir Theodore Mayern, Dr. Chamberlain, Mr. Nich. Culpepers, and
others of foreign Nations: with instructions of the Queen of France's Midwife
to her Daughter, a little before her death, touching the practice of the said
Art: The third Edition enlarged, with the addition of Sir Theodore Mayern's
rare Secrets in Midwifrey, with the approbation of sundry the most knowing
Professors of Midwifery now living in the City of London, and other places,
viz. R. G. J. D. M. S. T. B. W. C. M. H. Practitioners of the said Art: With a
further* discovery of those Secrets kept close in the breast of Mr. Nich.
Culpeper, and other English Writers, never made public till now. A Work so
plain, that the weakest capacity may easily attain the knowledge of the whole
Art, illustrated with several Cuts in Brass. Parsons Law, or a view of
Advowsons, wherein is contained the Rights of the Patrons, Ordinaries, and
Incumbents to Advowsons of Churches, collected out of the whole body of the
Common Law: by William Hughs, Esquire. The Woman's Counselor, or the Feminine
Physician, modestly treating of such occult accidents and secret Diseases
incident to that Sex. Dictionarum minus, a compendious Dictionary,
English-Latine, and Latine*English, wherein the Classical Words of both
Languages are rendered: by Christopher Wase, M. A. Master of the Free School in
Tunbridge. Fax nova Linguae Latinae, a new Torch to the Latin Tongue, so
enlightened, that besides the easy understanding of* all Classical Authors,
there is also laid open a ready way to write and speak Latin well and
elegantly; being very useful for Gentlemen, Lawyers, and young Clerks; either
for Englishmen that desire to better their knowledge in the Latin Tongue, or
for strangers to learn and speak English; with the several Judgments of many
learned Scholars on the whole Work. The British Physician, or the nature and
virtues of English Plants; exactly describing such Plants as grow naturally in
our Land, with their several names, natures, places, times when to gather them,
their applications, temperatures, virtues, and Physical uses; and also of all
such foreign Herbs, Roots, and Plants as are brought hither, or useful in
Physic or Surgery with us; by means whereof people may gather their own
Physic under every hedge, which is most effectual for their health; for what
Climate soever is subject to any particular Disease, in the same place there
grows a Cure. Rareties, or the incomparable Curiosities in secret writing, both
as well by Waters as Ciphers, explained and made familiar to the meanest
capacity; by which Ministers of State may manage the Intrigues of Court, and
grand Concerns of Princes, the Ladies communicate their Amors, and every
ordinary person (only capable of legible writing) may order his private
affairs with all imaginable safety and secrefie* Published to promote the
public, to delight the ingenious, and encourage the industrious; by G. B.
Gent. The History of the Turkish Wars in Hungary, Transylvania, Austria,
Silesia, and other Provinces of the German Empire from the first invasion of
Amurath the second, Anno 1432. to this present year 1664. To which is prefixed
a short discourse of the State and Government of the said Provinces. The Method
of Chemical Philosophy and Physic; being a brief Introduction to the one, and
a true discovery of the other; namely of Diseases, their Qualities, Causes,
Symptoms, and certain Cures: the like never before extant in English.
Several sorts of Plays.
Thracian Wonder. Spanish Gypsy. Gammer Gurtons Needle. The merry Milk-maid.
The Wedding, quarto: by Mr. Shirley* The humorous Lieutenant. Beggars Bush.
Loves Mistress. The scornful Lady. Imperiale.
FINIS.
An Introduction to Chemick Philosophy and Physic.
HOw hard and high a point it is to handle (what shall I say? to unfold and
show naked to the sight) the Living and Vital Philosophy, it is hence manifest,
that (as far as I know) it has not by any man been undertaken. The ancient
Philosophers and wise Old-men have involved and enwrapped the mysteries of
Secrets and Vital Philosophy in shadowed Sentences; and they delivered it over
upon the same condition that they received it: as we may see in the Epistle of
Plato which he writ to Dionysius, in which we read it thus written; You say
that Nature is not sufficiently demonstrated and explained unto you, which is
the chief thing; therefore it is to be entreated upon, but yet by aenigms and
obscure sentences; so that if any shall happen to the table by Sea or Land,
which shall read these but not understand them, what shall they do but rest
amazed the five years silence of Pythagoras? What did Sphinx among the
Egyptians but contend that Aenigms and Mysteries were to be taught and
promulged in a mystical sense? Concerning the more profound Philosophers and
Physicians, which have used a more divine original of their Art; as also
Physicians, which have used a better proceeding in their Cures; they also have
handled the Principles and Grounds of the Art, and left Commentaries full of
riddles and obscurities.

Thus from the forenamed Philosophers and others it is evident, that the way of
approaching unto the provinces of Vital Philosophy has not been manifest. For
the Instructors and Masters gave precepts of Philosophy un*to their Scholars,
which were obliged unto them by their faith and perpetual gratitude, and such
as were sworn unto them; which preceps are as yet to be illustrated and
expounded with much diligence. Furthermore, the Scholars gave their oaths that
they would imitate the steps of the precepts of their fathers, and that they
would not profane nor deflower the virginity of Nature by temerity or
rashness, which has been kept from the beginning of the world.

For the excellency and utility of this Philosophy, it is so great that none
can open and unlock the doors of Nature which are shut and locked, much less can
he enter into the inmost closets of Nature, which knows not and thoroughly
sees the nature of this undefiled Virgin. What can Philosophers perform, or
what can Physicians, or what can Chemists, unless they kiss this Virgin with a
sweet kiss?

This Virgin might have come forth into the conspect of her Lover more trim and
decked, but she (like unto a chaste Virgin which abhors frizling and
painting) had rather offer her self untrimmed at the first, by so diligent
negligence, hoping that though she were seen bare and naked, yet she might
provoke wonderful love.

PART I.
CHAP. I. The assigned Star of the Ancients.
IN that I am about to unfold and explain the sacred and ancient Philosophy,
which is collected forth of the Philosophy of the Academicks and Peripateticks,
I have thought it meet to set before your eyes the Opinions of the ancient
Philosophers concerning the nature of things, and that in brief to repeat that
whereby it may appear now far Vital Philosophy has excelled and surpassed the
rude and corpulent Philosophy. Which things being understood and thoroughly
viewed, it will be convenient to descend to the fountains of things. All the
precepts of ancient Philosophers which concerned the knowledge of Natural
things, have been hidden and concealed of them under feigned and dark shadows
and fables: for all those things which divine Plato, and after him Aristotle,
have writ concerning the World and nature of things; as also whatsoever
Empedocles or Parmenides, or Pythagoras have brought into the light, all those
precepts have been the precepts of those which writ ancient fables; from whose
precepts every one has so much profited, as he could attain unto by the
faculty of his Wit.

Their precepts did signify that the World was created of God, and that it
consists of one universal and common matter. Wherefore they held there was but
one World, and not many; and that Time was caused from the motion of the
Heaven; and that the Heavens, while they were moved, did effect a musical
harmony by reason of the magnitude of their bodies; and that the eternal Matter
of the Heaven existed, and that the Elements were obnoxious to corruption and
transmutations, according to their parts. Whenas yet the whole substance is so
created of him, that it might be eternal. All these are conserved from
corruption by the Soul of the World or Divine power.

They al^o did express by fables that the Earth was unmovable, and that all
other things were moved with perpetual motions, and that the parts of the
Elements mutually amongst themselves were generated and corrupted by the heat
and cold of the Heaven, and that there were made more frequent mutations of all
these about the Earth. They also did lay open by fables the generation of Hail,
Rain and Thunder, and other Meteors, which are caused by the Sun from Vapors
elevated upwards. And also they expressed how Living creatures and Plants were
generated by the commixtion and corruption of the Elements; of all which the
Sun is the efficient cause by his moderate heat. Again, they affirmed that all
the living bodies should die which were composed of many principles or
beginnings, because every compounded body is at length to be resolved into his
principles.

Now at length we come to explain the nature of Plants and Fruits.

They in their fables declared that the seasons of Time were profitable to them
when the Fruits and Plants are fit to gather strength and yield fruit.

Lastly, the generation of all things, whether it be by corruption of life, or
conjunction of Male and Female, it is governed and helped by the temperature of
the Heaven, both in procreating and conserving, or bringing them up: for from
that temperature there arises an appetite and desire of procreating.

Again, they have entreated of the Changes and Virtues of the Moon whose humor
is expedient in the Full Moon to those that bring forth, and for the increase
of Plants, and the conservation of living things which are bred. And they said
that the principal author of this power was the Sun; which therefore the
Physicians thought to be a skilful governor of Health and Diseases: for seeing
the mediocrity and temperature, and the grievousness and magnitude of the Heat
is caused by it, this power is not undeservedly attributed to the Sun. They
judged the Sun to be the ministrant cause of God, by which all things are made
and generated; seeing that he by this mixeth the Elements, from whose
commixtions all things are generated.

This was their Philosophy, which is no other vise explained than in the sense
of Fables.

CHAP. II. Of the Philosophy of Hermes and Hippocrates.
TRue Philosophy is the breathing of God, and a Divine Illustration which is
pla^e in the power and reason of no man, but wholly depends on the good
blessing of God. Whereupon no man ought to wonder or admire that there be so
few, scarce one of a thousand, which attains it, seeing it is the gift of God,
yea, and that a perfect gift descending from the Father of lights, wisdom and
truth. Assuredly that the decree of God may stand firm and unviolated, God has
not imparted this Philosophy to any man without labor, watchings, study: for
God still works mediately and by hands, at all times unto all Nations.
Furthermore, we must study and learn in Gods school very diligently.

Plato being allured by the wonderful study, sweetness and desire of
Philosophy, went into Egypt, that he might thoroughly learn Philosophy of the
Priests, and that he might attain the true and sound knowledge thereof. After
this he coming into Brachmana, and there he saw Jarcha the chief of the
Philosophers of India, sitting in a golden seat, and he heard him reason
concerning the motion of the Heaven and the Stars, and the nature of sublunary
things. Not to trouble you with many; the true Monarch of true Philosophy and
Physic, namely Paracelsus, remained captive with the Egyptians certain years,
that he might be instructed by them, from whom he received so many excellent
Medicines.

Seeing there is but one only true Philosophy, and the unity thereof is from
the unity of the subject; therefore it is meet that one subject of the whole
Philosophy should be determined.

The subject is the inward and essential form of everything The Subject of
Philosophy.
existing in the superior and inferior Globe, whose essence and properties
constitute whole Philosophy, namely Astronomy, Physics, and Alchymy.

The Astronomers and Magicians have called it The invisible Sun. Philosophers
and Physicians called it The First Matter. Physick-chemists called it The
simple Radix or Root of Minerals, as most learned Geberus witnesses in the
third book Rei Metallicae. I am sure that many now-adays do love and esteem
this sound Philosophy; I am also sure that many do reject and despise it as
vain and unprofitable: but we must exclaim with Fabius, O happy concealed
Sciences and good Arts, if that only Masters and skilful Artists judge well of
you* Those which profess this Philosophy (if it please God) are to be marked
with the marks of Deceit, Sottishness and Infamy by the excellent Philosophers.
If that it can be no otherwise, then we must tolerate it; for the envy of
others should not fright and terrify us from our province: For truly to be
derided of those wicked ones, which are ignorant of the mysteries of God, and
the secrets of Nature, it is nothing else than to be praised; but on the
contrary, to please such is to be dispraised.

CHAP. III. Of the Essential Form.
VIrgil writ well in the first book of his Georgi^ks, The man is happy which
can attain to the knowledge of the Causes of things; for this knowledge is the
most difficult of all, and cannot be attained but by long use; for it is very
difficult and remote from our Senses, and wholly arises from the inspect and
knowledge of Nature and Essence. But because that all Knowledge proceeds from
the Causes, and then we are said to know a thing whenas we know it from the
fountain of Causes, as Aristotle writes perspicuously in the 2. chap.
Analyticor. posterior. where he defines that to Know absolutely is to Know by
the Causes, by which every thing has being. None can open and enter in at the
gates of Minerva the Goddess of Wisdom, much less can he approach unto her
queenly throne, and attain the glorious and delectable aspect of this Queen,
which is not instructed with accurate and exquisite knowledge of these Causes.
No man shall be able to steal away the golden Apples of the three daughters of
Atlas in the Garden of Tantalus, whiles the Dragon watches, but when he
sleeps. Wherefore seeing the knowledge of the Causes is so necessary in the
first place, the universal internal principle or Beginning offers the
consideration of it unto us; whose contemplation being neglected and not
thoroughly seen into, many and great Philosophers have cast themselves head long
into diverse labyrinths of Sophisms; but assuredly he which will bestow his
study in Philesophy, must aim at the real Being, as one which saileth and
aims at the pole star; and he must never suffer it to pass out of his mind;
which we describe thus:

The Interior and Essential Form is a Vital Principle or Beginning, containing
in it all the Causes of the proper kind, by which it frames the Body for it
self; and it does (as it were) forth of her bosom draw forth Colors, Tasters,
Qualities, Magnitude, Figures, and other signatures which are convenient and
agreeable for their functions and purposes. This is the Sphere of the
Pythagoreans diffused equally through all the parts of the World and the
Elements, which is infinite and whole within the body, and whole without; whose
Center is every where, and Circumference no where; which if we shall weigh more
profoundly in our judgments, the images of heavenly knowledge will more nighly
be beholden, and the works of God in these shadows, and his majesty in these
images, (that is, in the Vital principle) will be acknowledged. This is the
sweet and noble Intelligence which is to be converted to the aspect of the
Divine Sun.

CHAP. IV. Of the First Matter. Whether the First Matter be the same with the
Essential Form.
THe Peripateticks call the First Matter the Subject from which every natural
body is generated by it self, and not by accident, and into which at last it is
resolved. So they explain the first Subject, though all mixed bodies arise from
the Elements, notwith landing all these Elements have so nething preexistent,
namely the First Matter, for which and by which they are obnoxious to manifold
transmutations. And whenas the Form of the body vanishes away, and is
corrupted, notwith ^anding the Essence of it remains the same, forthwith
receiving another form. Furthermore, they call the First Matter the first
subject of Generation; therefore they conclude that things must return and be
resolved at the last into the same matter. But this is not to be understood
that they must be resolved immediately into it, but that every Corruption must
necessarily at length be terminated in the First Matter. How strange these be
from the First Matter of the Philosophers, it shall be manifest if that we
recall the things forenamed unto our due consideration.

The Peripateticks have signified nothing else by these Arguments than a rude
principle and vile mass, from which the Elements were created; which the Greeks
call (...), concerning which Ovid writes in the first book of Metamorphosis,
they made it the common receptacle, place and matrix of all Forms; because
nothing can rceive Forms unto it, unless it be a corporeal substance. In like
manner they affirmed that the destruction or corruption of one Form was the
cause of generation of another Form in the matter by the virtue of Privation.
But our First Matter does bring forms to all natural things, and it sustains
them, not materially, but effectively and formally. There does not any
destruction or corruption happen unto our First Matte^, neither is it altered
either by necessity or nature, seeing it is indivisible, as Hippocrates
witnesses. From hence it appears that they lest the true First Matter of the
Philosophers unsearcht and untoucht, which the Creator infused into that first
Mass, (by his incomprehensible wisdom and wonderful Decree) by the power of the
Word and his Spi i^ which moved upon the waters; seeing that this Matter is not
subject unto the judgment of sense and common notions of the mind, it is
invisible and naked, and does not enter into the company of mortal men; but it
has vestures (the princi^ples of Bodies and the Elements) by which it keeps it
self from the sight of impious and sottish men. These vestures of the Elements
have bewitched the eyes of Aristotle and Galen, and many other Philosophers;
for they supposed that they apprehended the interior and essential form of the
Creature, and as it were held the kernel in their hands, whenas they attained
but unto the barks, husks, and foul nature of the superficial Elements.

Nevertheless invisible things may be made visible, whenas their vestures be
put off, and hid things may be made manifest. This Matter is naked Diana
without any vesture, which does not easily show it self, or put off the
garments with which it is covered of God, unless they be put off by the subtle
and skilful art of Sepaperations. That First true Matter of the Philosophers,
though invisible and spiritual, yet it abides and remains with us, and it is
very often presented to the sense of the Wise by the help and benefit of the
bonds and nigh bodies (that is, the beginnings) from which it cannot be
separated, but by these and in these it exercises the operations. But the
vestures may be put off; these principles (that is, the Elements) may be
separated from their beginnings. Divine Plato pursued this First Matter by a
certain excellent motion of the mind, and he entitled it by the name of an Idea
in his Timeus, where we read it thus written; It is meet that we confess that
this Matter is spiritual, which is the same still without beginning: that is,
which is compounded of no preexistent matter; and it is without corruption,
that is, which is resolved into no other matter, which receives nothing from
others, neither does it proceed to another, which cannot be perceived by Sight
or any other sense, though Understanding does apprehend it as it were by
accident. There is another Matter of the same name, and like unto it, but yet
it may be perceived by sense; and it is generated, and it is ever in motion; as
also it is in place: whereupon afterward it does as it were vanish. This is
comprehensible by opinion and sense. In like manner Plato did affirm universal
Ideae or Notions, and an universal beginning, from which new forms might be
produced, though the forms of all do perish.

But here some may object, wherefore we do attribute the force of an efficient
and a formal cause to the same thing; for whatsoever has the force of an
efficient cause, has not the force of a formal as an immanent effect. We
answer, that though the notion of an efficient cause be attributed to the First
Matter as an interior form, yet sometimes the form receives the notion of an
efficient cause, as Aristotle witnesses Acroasi Physica, where he says, that
the form is the efficient cause of the natural operations and actions. But if
some shall as yet gainsay and urge the argument more, we will answer to this,
that we place the causes in the First Matter, and not the First Matter in the
causes. It is more meet to apply the names to the things, than the things to
the names. Even as mechanical Artists have certain material Rules which they do
not use but altogether straight, but sometimes they use those which are
somewhat crookt, by reason of the matter of which they are about to frame
material workmanship, often they are constrained to use a Rule somewhat crookt;
of which figure was the Rule of Lesbia which Aristotle relates in the 10. chap.
of his Ethics, which Rule was made of Lead, that it might be bended according
to the figure or shape of the stones. So that still it is not convenient to
accommodate the Matter to the Rule, but sometimes the Rule to the Matter, as
Zabarella affirms. After the same manner we must make a treatise of the Matter
in a more sound Philosophy, by reason of the singularity, preeminence, and
majesty of the same; that it may appear clearly (as it were at midday) we will
examine what difference is betwixt the First Matter of the Philosophers and the
Peripateticks.

The Peripateticks affirm that the First Matter was formless, and had an
aptitude to receive any form of a natural body.

But the more secret Philosophers, which have peirced into the inmost closet of
Nature, they confess that the First Matter contains all forms in it, and that
all forms of all natural bodies are deduced forth of the bosom of it as forth
of a rich storehouse; and that it communicates life to all lifeless things,
and actions, and faculties. Therefore seeing the case stands thus, it is not
pertinent to the First Matter to receive forms, which needs none, for it
possesses the actions; but rather it belongs to the Elements, which are in the
place of the Second matter. This the Philosophers call the Secundary Cause,
because it is requisite for the form; as for the end they call it the Cause,
sine qua non, because without it nothing can be made. The Philosophers call it
a being in power, in the doctrine of the causes or principles; because that
afterward it is diduced and brought to perfection and act by the agent. But
our First Matter and interior form does inform, perfect and determine this
matter or secundary cause; whereupon it is called the Informing Act, and
Perfection. This form does constitute and determine the Second Matter in a
certain proper degree of being, so that it gives unto it essence and actual
existence. From hence it is called the Constitutive and Specifical Essence, for
it separates and distinguishes one thing from another primarily and
essentially; hereupon it is called the Difference. But that I may contract the
sails, for I will dispatch in few words. The Peripateticks call the First
Matter a mere passive principle or beginning, and they annex a reason, because
it suffers and subjecteth it self to be prepared and informed, no otherwise
than if Wax should be informed and figured, sometime with the shape of a Dog,
sometime of a Lion. Which description agrees to the simple, common and
absolute Elements, and not unto the First Matter of the Philosophers, seeing
that our First Matter respects the Compound actively, and not passively.

Therefore the reasons being collected and alleged, The Elements are vestiments
of the Principles, the Principles are the vestiments of the First Matter or
Form.
we affirm that the First Matter of the Philosophers is the interior form, the
beginning of life, the fountain of motion and actions, the author of
fruitfulness, the governor of generations, transplantations, and of all
natural actions, by whose means and benefit the repugnant and contrary Elements
are united by the concordant law of Mixtion. Again, the said Elements being
corrupted and destroyed at the finished times, nevertheless there remains in
this Matter the beginning of life, the root and form of the thing, in such
power that it excels the common qualities of the Elements.

CHAP. V. Of the Native or Inbred Heat.
THose which are little conversant in Philosophy, and cannot as yet apprehend
the unaccustomed manner of speaking of the Philosophers, they altogether
contend about the Name; if that the name of the thing be suppressed, forthwith
they suppose that the thing it self is quite overthrown. For the removing of
this opinion, all those are to be inferred which make something for the
perspicuity and facility of the excellent and noble thing. Amongst the rest
first of all Inbred and Native Heat offers it self unto our consideration, as
also Spirits, and first-begot Humidity, and Nature, which are of a more lofty
consideration. It is a constant and ratified sentence amongst the Philosophers,
that all living things live because of the heat included in it: and by the
benefit of it they attract aliment and do perfect it, and therewith are
nourished and augmented, and do procreate their like. Furthermore, living
creatures by the benefit of this heat are affected with sense and motion; and
by how much these works or creatures are more perfect, by so much they have a
more abundant force and substance of this heat. The living bodies of this
inferior Globe are divided into three orders, Animals, Vegetables, and
Minerals; though many have denied life to be in any Mineral, notwithstanding
they have shown manifest signs of life unto those which have more diligently
searched their workhouses or mines. Wherefore Aristotle has truly delivered
that life is contained by heat, and that neither Animals nor Plants could live
without heat. Again, he defining Death he opposed not cold as a contrary to
heat, but extinction, which is a privation of heat. To which also Hippocrates
ascribes all the actions of the whole Animals: he also affirmed that all and
most diverse faculties are absolved and perfected by the benefit of this heat
at fit seasons and places.

Philosophers searching the nature of this heat, they have fallen into strange
errors in that they did not distinguish the ethereal and celestial heat from
the elementary heat which is in all things, rising from the mixtion and
temperature of the Elements; but this is fruitless and void, or a companion or
adjunct-embassadour of the thing compound. But the natural or vital heat is
altogether alienated from the conditions of the Elements; whereupon they called
it Celestial and altogether Divine. Again, any man may easily distinguish and
discern the vital heat from the elementary heat in Plants and cold animals, as
in the Poppy, the Lettuce, the Mandrake, and the Serpent, which being exceeding
cold in their temperature, it is certain that they do not live by this, but by
sole vital spirits and heat. Again, they brought it into controversy whether
heat, which is the worker of life, be a substance or an accident. Lastly, after
much contention of words they concluded it to be an accident, but yet
altogether celestial and divine, as the light or the heat of the Sun is, and
every other virtue or power conveyed from the Heavens unto the prepared body.
They also affirm, that that nature or form which consists in the matter, by the
mediation of the spirits or heat to be altogether one substance, and that
wholly celestial and divine, not participating at all of the Elements. The
later is beaten upon and vulgar amongst the more secret Philosophers, but they
have not received the first. But because Philosophers do entreat of vital heat,
they do not consider it as an accident, but they comprehend together the
inbred spirits and the radical matter; that is, the native humidity in which
the heat is seated, under the name and appellation of heat; for truly every
thing may be found forth by it self.

The cause of this error is because they have not known the original of forms;
which thing we will demonstrate and explain more amply and copiously in the
Chapter Of the original and differences of Forms. The The diverse* names of
Vital Heat.
more profound Philosophers have called this Vital Heat the Internal Sun, the
Internal Element, and the Mineral Sun, in which all the grounds of Nature are
contained. Arnoldus de Villa nova, in his book of Conserving youth and
deferring old age, the third chap. he consirmeth it in express words, saying,
That which has not an equal, is the Mineral Sun. And wise men have compared
the prepared body to the natural heat and sound youth; for which similitude the
wise men have used to call this heat by the name of an Animal; for vital
Sulphur and radical humidity is the storehouse of all Nature, for by the only
power of it all the cures of all diseases may be accomplished. Galen being
adduced by the notable and wonderful power of the actions, in the second book
of his Art unto Glauco, he calls the native Heat the Substance of the
faculties and virtues; which thing he doubted much in another place concerning
the substance of Nature and the Soul. Aristotle, in the second book of the
Generations of Animals, the third chap. ascribes all the faculties of all
natural things to this vital heat in these words, There is something in the
sense of all things which causes the seed to be fruitful; namely that which is
called vital heat; not fire, for it is not any such faculty, but the spirit
which is contained in the seed or foamy body, and the nature which is in that
spirit in proportion is correspondent to the element of Stars. Plato, which
came nigher to the shut gates of Nature, called this heat or spirit the Defense
of the form; which heat is incident in Animals and Plants from the original. He
also writes, that from this universal spirit of the World, which alone
consociates and conjoyns the soul to the World, and contains the virtues, that
it was thereby caused and conserved; for it comprehends the The Seed of every
thing, and the power of Procreating.
seminal reasons and hidden proprieties of all Procreants; it fills all, and
it is diffused through all, and it is propagated into all Animals, Plants and
Metalls; and these as it were of the green wind of Sulphur.

Concerning the native or first-begor Humidity, there First-begot Humidity.
is required an accurate distinction of the Humors in every natural body, for
the attaining of the true knowledge thereof; seeing that there is one humor
Elementary, another Alimentary, another Native or first-begot; and that there
is much difference of them. For the Elementary and Alimentary humidity do
differ much from the Native and first begot humidity in the substance, essence
and nature. The Elementary humidity is a waterish humor, by which (as it were
with glue) the dissentient and repugnant Earthly parts of the body do cohere
and are united; and this is common to all things which are generated by the
commixtion of the concreated Elements.

The Alimentary is that which is attracted spiritually The spirit are ^o (...)
ed for di^^erence or distinction from vapors or mists, which are called
spirits.
of the mechanical Spirits existing in the parts of the body, and is exhibited
or communicated to the body for nourishment or aliment; which humidity all
Individual things, namely Vegetables and Minerals, both greater and less, which
lie occult in the Center of the earth, attract, until they come to the
predestined limit or term of their continuance. Afterward the Planet
cease Every nutrition or nourishment is spiritual, or it is made by the
spirits. From hence is the dewish moistening of the Microcosm.
and forsakes the compound, as the Philosophers affirm; in these the Spirit
ought neither to serve for sense or motion.

The Native or Inbred moisture (which is also called the Vital moisture) is
called of the Philosophers the quintessence which may be extracted from all
living roots. There inhereth a matter representing Oil, which is the subject of
Heat and Spirits; it is also indissolvable, from which natural spirits and
vital heat flows as forth of a seminary, and perfuseth the whole living body,
from which also the strength and firmness of the parts arise.

This fat humor which is very like Oil, is not fat with Of the Microcosm.
which we see many parts of the body covered; but it is other fat very much
different and aerie, which flies the sight of the eye, nevertheless it may be
distinguished by art and industry; and this is the Original both of spirits,
and inbred and Native heat. It is also the first substance, which they call the
First-begotten moisture, for it is the first, and common to all living things
in which the spirit perfused with heat primarily and by it self consists, so
that neither of them can endure long without the help and virtue of this
humor: for there is such an agreeable conspiring harmony and continual
affinity amongst them; so that they work mutually, neither can any of them
effect any thing being destitute and deprived of the help of the rest.

The Radical matter is as it were the Original and nourishment of the Heat, for
the heat is sustained by the benefit of it. This Heat is as the principal
efficient cause, the Humidity is subjected to the heat in the place of the
matter, and suffers more, from which we may at the first behold as it were in
a glass, that the Native heat is the Radical moisture perfused every where with
inbred spirits and heat.

And this is the whole substance of the sounder Galenists (as they call them)
of the which we have sufficiently spoke. Now it follows that we handle of
Nature.

CHAP. VI. Of Nature.
PLutarch a grave and learned man says, that the knowledge of truth is so
amiable and delectable, that our very being and act of living was given unto us
for the knowledge of the truth. Seeing therefore that it is elsewhere firm and
stable, but especially in Philosophy it is judged to be ratified, firm,
constant and stable; therefore (I say) it is to be weighed more deeply in our
judgments, lest that we be thought only to follow the shadow of Nature, the
image of light being left behind our backs: and also lest that the inquisition
of truth being posthibited, we do fall into errors which cannot be avoided,
and so make our selves unwotthy of our life and office. Certainly if we
consider Aristotle's Philosophy, and the difference of the Nature of things, and
examine this well in a Philosophical balance, Aristotelians will seem unto us
to be like Children which hold nuts in their hands, but yet they are ever busy
about the shells, and never taste the kernel. First, we will bring the
definition of Nature into light, that it may thoroughly be understood of us.

Nature is the beginning of motion and of rest, in that Aristotle in the second
Book of Physical auscultations* cap. 1. Josephus Michaelis in his Chemical
apolygy. p. 21. The Nature of every thing is nothing but the Commandment of
God, by which all things are that they are, and do that they are commanded to
do. At his b^ck the Elements observe the prescribed Law, and the Heaven and
Earth do obev. The substance and essence of Nature is inbred heat.
thing in which it is primarily and by it self, and not by accident.

What does he mean by this definition of Nature? for it makes nothing for the
knowledge of the very substance of Nature. For though thou say unto me that
Nature is the beginning of motion, or that which moves all things:
nevertheless it remains as yet unexplained and defined what the substance of
Nature, and what the essence of the Movent is, from whence all actions proceed
which are comprehended under Motion. But these are the subtilties of the
Peripateticks, by which they bring counterfeits unto others: but let us let
them pass lest we be thought to contend with shades and ghosts; and let us
convert our speech to those which have searched forth the very essence of
Nature, and have contemplated the very truth thereof, and have as it were
handled it in their hands, and seen it with their eyes; with whom we profess
that the substance and essence of Nature is Native and Inbred heat, which
before we have described. It has conformed and augmented Animals, Vegetables
and Minerals from the beginning, and as it were nourish the cause of all
natural effects. Therefore Nature, as likewise inbred heat comprehends three
things, namely Radical moisture, Spirits, and Heat. All these ate generated of
one seed, and at one generation. This is that Nature in which the seminary
causes of things are secretly contained. In which the Philosophy of the
Platonicks triumphs.

Aristotle and Galen and their Sectators which writ the precepts of Natural
Philosophy, doubted not that there was a certain Nature with us, and that well
known, and that which all conclude to be the vulgar principle of Philosophy,
which neither ought nor can be demonstrated, which only we comprehend in mind
and understanding. Galen brings Hippocrates to confirm this in the ninth Book
of the Opinions of Hippocrates and Plato. Hippocrates durst not affirm what the
substance of Nature is in the conforming and governing of us, and that it was
the workman and cause of us. But Galen durst in his Book of Diet, where he
says, that Fire Hippocrates understands by the name of Fire, Nature it self.
can move all things generally, and that Water can nourish all things, and that
these two things are sufficient for all things and for themselves; but neither
of them separately is sufficient for it self or others; in which words he
manifestly declares the essence of Nature and the substance thereof; in that he
signified Nature by the name of Fire, which moves all things universally; He
calls the essence and substance of Nature Water, which nourishes all things
wholly: for it is received from the more profound Philosophers, that all
natural bodies are nourished by this natural Balsam, though not pure but mixed
with diverse impurities; so all nutriments are spiritual and humid after the
similitude of seeds, which in the beginnings of generations must be spiritual
and humid. But he expresses his mind more plainly by much in these words,
These two are sufficient both for all others and for themselves, but separately
they are neither sufficient for themselves or others. What means he almost by
this divine Oracle? but that these two Fire and Water, that is, Nature and
Essence to constitute all natural things, from which they have their name. But
separately they are neither sufficient for themselves nor others; that is,
neither Fire without Water, nor Water without Fire, or otherwise neither Nature
without Essence, nor Essence or substance without Nature can subsist. And this
is that which the Philosophers call the hot and humid temperament of all
things; Namely, to continue in their state, though (perchance) that one thing
amongst the rest do prolong the life for many years: So that many have supposed
that it was not able to continue or consist, seeing that continually without
intermission of time, the humor is consumed by the force of the Heat; so that
in a short time the Heat remains single in the place of the hot and moist
temperament, and at last it is brought to a hot and dry temperament; Again, the
humor being consumed and wasted, and the Heat being destitute of aliment, by
little and little it fades away, and dryness altogether succeeds; and also the
heat being dis-jected and cast forth of it, and diffused abroad very much, it
begins to decay and corupt; and so the dry and cold matter is left which is
held to be the last of all. For the vital spirits whose force is fiery, do
consume nutriments and aliments hourly; so that there is need of continual
restitution, mixtion and composition; therefore it is most truly said of
Hippocrates, I find (says he) that we are nourished from those things of which
we consist, and that by them generation and nutrition is continued. From hence
Aliment is named of Paracelsus seed, because in all aliments there is the
Balsam of the animal. Whether does Gaeln make Hippocrates the chief in his
folly or no? Let us (I pray you) pardon Galen, for he is ignorant of the
Spagirical art, and has never attained unto the secrets of Hippocrates,
whereby it is come to pass that he has left the Essence of Nature untouched
and uncomprehended. As likewise he was ignorant of the forms of things, and
therefore he could not obtain the forms of things from their bodies.

For the confirmation of this, namely, that Hippocrates understood by the name
of Fire Nature it self, we may bring the testimonies of other Philosophers,
lest that we be thought to depend on the authority and judgment of one man
alone; though that the testimony of Hippocrates, being an excellent
Philosopher, might abundantly suffice us. Paracelsus also in his book writ of
the Generation of Natural things, so also in his book de Electro, he calls
the Soul or Nature by the name of Fire; with whom Fernelius Alanus consents in
his Sayings which he has consecrated to posterity, he calls Nature by the
name of Fire, of Wisdom. Alexander a Suchten calls Nature by the name of
Living Fire. Raimundus Lullius calls Nature the Living Fire of Nature; so
also he calls Living Fire by the name of Nature. Geber the Prince of
Philosophers calls this Fire of Nature the Incombustible Sulphur. Paracelsus in
his first book of the Secrets of Creation calls this Fire by the name of
Middle Nature; and forthwith in the same place he annexeth some few things, and
calls it the Nature of Viridity or Greenness; for this is the blessed and happy
Greenness which makes all things bud. This is the Green Lion of the
Physicochemists, to the which Paracelsus ascribes all the cures of all diseases
in his book de tincturaphysicorum. The ancient Author in the Apocalypse of the
Spirit of the secret world, amongst the rest he affirms this celestial spirit
(the Heaven) to exist in a waterish body more than perfect and clarified: he
affirms this to be the inferious Heaven, whose sparkle is the Alcool of wine,
which is spirit, water, and fire. This is that which is so much commended of
Paracelsus in his writings; as also of other great Philosophers of notable wits
affirming thus, The Fire and Azoth are sufficient for thee; which are the great
mysteries of Nature, as Paracelsus speaks in his Archidoxes.

In this place I have communicated and opened the gates of Nature by these
which are said very benignly; I might also bring more without envy, but that it
is a caution in the laws of Philosophy, That there be some tedious things left
for the Scholars. Concerning the cited place of Hippocrates, Hippocrates
explains himself in his first book de diaeta, which may fully certify what he
means by the name of Fire; for (says he) either Fire has distinguished (in
the generation of Man) three circuits diverse in faculties, yet conspiring both
in vardly and outwardly by a mutual society, which have circuits in the
cavities, which are workhouses of the humors. That is, in the Bowels which
serve for nutrition.
They relate the power, motion and maturity of the Moon; but those which
absolve the resolutions outwardly, where the more solid members consist, do
imitate the properties of the Stars, which do consist in the midst, that is, in
the heart; they contain the nature of most forcible fire, which is present
without and within through all the parts, and has dominion over them all; and
it in secret silence is not perceived by sight nor feeling. In this fire, that
is in the Stars, the soul of this middle revolution, understanding, prudence,
augmentation, motion, diminution, transmutation, sleep, watchings, are secretly
contained. The spirits being there mechanical workers, are ascending spiritual
bodies, and they are the immediate instruments of the actions, and have roots.
In the same book he has described the faculties and sciences of this Divine
Nature. Hippocrates says that Nature is the governor of men; this causes the
attractions of the elements, the mixtions of the parts, dispensations,
conspi^ations of those which agree, the expulsion of those which disagree. This
is that which expells, which attracts, which gives and receives, and which
proportionateth less things for less places, but greater things for greater
places; and this it does by altered and well-tempered mixtion. Furthermore,
Orpheus calls Nature (as it were) a thing adorned with the Laws of the Fates:
which word Hippocrates uses, for there is a Law or Reason grounded in the
essence of Nature, and it is that essence which impells, moves and governs all
things; and, because it is in bred, it perfects the decrees more sorcibly.
Because of the diverse in comprehensible gifts of Nature, Hippocrates said that
Nature was (...), that is, taught or instructed of none. This is the Light of
Nature: this is the Predestination of Paracelsus, in which he deservedly
glories that he knew it wholly and perfectly.

I say, this Nature is the Vegetable secret of Nature, the vigor or efficacy
of the name, the fruitful virtue of the light, which is of a perfect body, the
bright force of Sulphur, the hidden virtue of the Heaven, the most pure la^p,
the fire of truth which cannot be attained, the ensigns of a living form, the
flower of Nature, the house of tincture, and the noble branch.

CHAP. VII. Of the Soul. What the Soul is, and the substance of it.
ALL living bodies, inasmuch as they live, whether they be contained in the
bosom of the Elements, and live obscurely, or they live manifestly, (I say, all
these) are compounded of three parts, namely Soul* S^irit, and Body. The Body
and Spirit may in some sort be sought forth by sense; but the Soul and the
essence of it, seeing it flies sense, is obsecurely and too darkly known; for
it is no obvious or easy thing to attain thereunto. Wherefore the
understanding must apprehend it from the operations, functions and effects
arising from thence, conspicuous and objected unto the sense, even as every
occult cause is to be enquired and sought forth. These are Aristotelical and
Galenical opinions taken from the same ground. They endeavor to proportionate
the anatomy of Troy by Geometrical partitions and figures, but in vain. Thus
they define the Soul. The Soul is the beginning and cause of the functions of a
living body. Or the Soul is the perfection of an Organical body. Seeing that
every living body is forthwith an Organical body, every thing that gives it
life and causes the vital actions, is to be judged to be the Soul, which is the
perfection of the whole.

Furthermore, seeing that they can no other way know the essence, they leaving
the obscurity of essence do pass unto the proper functions of it, which are
more manifest, and they attain knowledge from the differences of the Soul; so
they define the Soul to be life as from the proper functions of it; and from
the differences of life they make certain kinds of the Soul, and so they
comprehend in their mind three differences of living things, namely, Natural,
Sensitive and Intelligent: because that some bodies do live by the benefit of
sole Nature, others have Sense, others are induced with Reason and
Understanding; as if Sense and Reason were not as well natural, and have their
foundations in the very essence of Nature; which thing Hippocrates expresses
manifestly by a luculent testimony in his first Book de diata.

And these differences of living things are not to be ascribed to their
functions, faculties, sciences, gifts and interior signatures, but rather to
the Essence of the Soul. Here you may see the calamity of Aristotle and Galen,
which are fallen, and do cast themselves headlong into very foul and
unfortunate errors by their subtilty; for they do attribute that to the
faculties and functions of the Soul, which are to be attributed to the very
Essence. But they may say that that which is natural in Plants is a Soul, from
which we say that Plants are animated though they be not animals; and that
Sensitive faculty which governs and directs brute Beasts is also a Soul, which
does not only make them animated, but also animals. Lastly, there is none which
will say that the Intellective faculty of man is not a Soul. These Souls are so
severed and distracted that neither the Intelligent Soul of Man is a Sensitive
Soul, nor the Sensitive Soul of a Beast is a Natural Soul. So that Man is not
Beast, nor Beast is a Plant, otherwise there would be great confusion of the
kinds and natures of things. To whom I answer with Hippocrates, Of what kind
the sciences and gifts of the natural spirits of the Soul, of the hot Fire,
are, there are such like signatures or sealings expressed in the bodies, and the
whole ornature or comeliness of the whole body is contained in the anatomy,
that is, in the Soul, for the Soul is the cause or beginning of the organical
body, for from this the body is caused; by the virtue and power of it, the
elements and principles are mixed, augmented and changed from spiritual into
bodies having their figures, magnitude, colors and such paintings (that is)
signatures agreeable to the Soul, which make much for the absolving of the
pre-ordinated functions and offices. Hippocrates does illustrate the unity of
the Soul by an excellent testimony in his Book de diaeta, says he, Male and
Female may consist together, and each one constitute other; and he adds this
reason, because the same Soul is in all living bodies, but the body of them all
do differ. Therefore the Soul is the like as well in a greater as a less (that
is) in an infant as one come to years; for it is not altered neither by Nature
or Necessity; but the body is never the same either by Nature or Necessity. Now
it is separated from all, otherwise it were commix'd. Here he calls the Soul
the Root and the vital beginning, because this thing is common to both Sexes in
all kinds of animals, therefore they may consist together.

Again, the Male and Female are rooted in the same root and mutually propagate
themselves; for the Souls which are vital beginnings, and the radical tinctures
of things, are stable and perpetual, not subjected to mixtion; therefore they
persist the same and altogether like themselves, The natural description of the
Soul.
whether they be in less Individual things (that is) in weaker and unfirmer, or
in greater (that is) in more stronger and firmer.

The unity of the Soul being thus demonstrated, I call the Soul Vitalspirits,
the Chorionium of Paracelsus, the Powers of Hippocrates, Spiritual and Vital
powers, Tinctures, Vital qualities, which being dispersed through the whole
anatomy of the living body, nevertheless they are concentred and united in the
more principal parts, which communicate true essence to the body. The Essence
of this Soul though it be obscure and unknown of Aristotle and Gallen,
nevertheless it is perspicuous and manifest enough to us; for by the industry
of the workman it is subjected to the eye, which we call the Native liquor, the
Radical moisture, the mystery, the mean of the Soul, the golden vigor of the
Soul, the flowr of the Soul, and the efficacy of the spirit in the elements,
which we call Jupiter in heaven, Juno in the air, Neptune in the water, and in
each of the parts of these the Ancients have called it by diverse names of the
Gods.

PART II.
CHAP. I. Of the Original of Forms.
THe most have supposed Heaven to be the Father of all things which are
generated upon Earth, and the Earth to be the Mother. They called the Heaven
the Father, because the Water falling from thence supplies the place of Seed;
they call the Earth the Mother, because it receives it after the manner of a
Mother, and brings forth. For the same cause we find the Moon called of many
after Mankind, because it is affirmed to have the Dominion over the humors,
and does perform a manly work in the administration thereof. Which thing
Tertullian and Cornelius Severus profess, which Charisius cites, the Epithete
of Phoebus being adduced from the Male kind, he says,

Now the fiery Stars did shine in the Heaven ( O Phoebus the succeeder) with
thy Brothers Horses. In the secrets of the Hebrews which they call
Cabalistical, all the virtues of the Stars and the heavenly images are received
and contained in the body of the Moon, from which afterward the species of
things, fruits, animal, sand all new things which are in power to be generated
by the several elements are immitted into the inferior matter and genital
seed. Aristotle and other which imitate him deduce the forms and first
substances of all things from heaven. Galen derived the specifical form or
essential property of every thing from a certain congress, mixtion and
temperature of the elements. These are the famous doubts which obscure very
much the knowledge of natural things, from this fountain there is derived an
overthrow which has corrupted all Philosophy, and begot obscurity and
transplantation by the Laws, and confuse administration of mixtion.

In whose steps must we now insist? whom shall we trust? shall we trust ancient
Writers, as Aristotle and Galen? Unto these Aristotelians methinks I hear Moses
speak, who many years before the history of the created World, following the
Eternal God, and instructed in all kind of things, said, that God had put a
natural power or virtue in the created heaven which should be unto us for signs
and seasons, and that he filled the World with all kind of living things, which
things being mortal, lest that their continuance and kind should decay, he gave
a foreseeing divine virtue (in his Wisdom) to seeds, whereby by propagation
they might conserve unto all ages the living herb and fruitfuful tree; likewise
he commanded the fruit and the seed every one in his kind to bring forth and
multiply, to conserve their kind. Therefore they are worthily to be laughed at,
which ascribe the Original of forms not only to the Sun and Moon, but also to
the position of other Stars; for how shall Vegetables receive the Original of
forms from the Stars, which were created before the Stars were formed? for he
has had dominion over the Whales of the Sea, and all kind of fishes, birds,
beasts, and man, that they by their multiplying might fill the World. So the
chief workman of all things while he framed all by the word and breath of his
mouth, he inspired procreative virtues, by which the wonderful continuation and
order of things might be conserved: Therefore farewell Aristotle, farewell Galen,
and all those which do not agree with the sacred Scripture, and those which
hear not Moses the Interpreter of the living Philosophy. We do not say as
Zarabella would have, That the Heaven is the universal efficient cause of the
generation and corruption of all things in this inferior world; but they are
all vegetant in the seed, which are seen to flow and reflow by the course of
generation and corruption; (that is) to be made or to decay. So that the form
of every thing arises freely and naturally, and it is native, natural, and
happens not outwardly. It is not deduced from Heaven, nor it rises not from
the commixtion of the Elements, nor it is not derived from the momentany
position of the Stars in regard of the inferior nature: But that soul is in
man, and that diversely. These are the Opinions of Paracelsus, not straying from
the sacred Scripture, nigh unto the decrees of the Platonicks, with whom
Hippocrates agrees altogether in his book de diaeta. Notwithstanding I do not
deny the superior and inferior conspiration, consent, and conflux; which
thing Hermes would seem to have signified in these words, It is true without
falsehood, it is certain and most true that, that below is as that above, and
that above is as that below. Scaliger the most subtle of Philosophers says,
that the inferior forms are sustained by the superior, and the superior are
not destitute of the benignity of the inferior.

CHAP. II. Of the difference of Lives, and the varieties of Baulms in the
Macrocosm.
FOr the solid and exquisite knowledge of Nature three things are especially
required: First, the nature of the Soul, the essence of this hot fire, and the
substance is to be enquired after with chief study and diligence, from whence
the forms of things arise, and to what end they tend by their absolute
preordinance: which manner of Doctrine we have hitherto imit^ted, that we may
suppose it to be altogether absolute and perfect. Secondly, though all living
things by the unity of their life do imitate their beginnings, their examples;
yet we must consider whether there be any differences and degrees of their
Lives, as of the vital Baulm. Thirdly, how we may come to the vital fountains
of Nature, by what proportion and by what means, and by what mechanical process
it may best be fitted for man's use and necessity. The perfect knowledge of
these three, if that it concur in any, it constitutes and makes a true
Philosopher.

Concerning the other, which necessarily is required in a Philosopher, namely
the differences and degrees of Lives, as also of Baulm. The difference of Life
(as the Philosophers speak) consists in this, that some live manifestly, some
occultly and hiddenly. Again, in natural things Life is either corporeal or
spiritual: The spiritual is apprehended to be in all Animals. It is decreed by
the wonderful mystery of Nature, that all the kinds of things should excel by
a divinity of their actions, because it was meet that many instruments of their
actions should actually be manifested: for the solid and similar firm matter of
Baulm could not admit such actions. For all the actions arise from the spirits
in the living body; and for the diverse tincture, impression and confluence
which they receive in diverse places they produce diverse actions. So that if
they occupy the movable parts, then they cause motion; if the sensible parts,
then they cause sense; in other places, the concoctions and separations of the
excrements, distributions of the nutriments, and nutritions shall be governed
and ordered thereby. Here they admit the memorable tinctures of formidity, and
the necessary preparations to be begot.

We have above said, that the Vital spirits in Animals, Cap. 6. de Natura.
by reason of their force of operation, consume the animal Baulm hourly: and
therefore there is need of daily instauration, mixtion and replenishing to
propagate and produce life. From these we understand that the stable life in
Animals has not admitted the matter of Baulm; wherefore it is not subject to
the will of Artists. These are confirmed of Paracelsus in his Archidoxes; for
he said, that neither the Quintessence or the true Balm can be derived or
deduced from the company or bodies of Animals. Those Medicines which are made
from Animals, as from their flesh, blood, morrow, or fat, ought to be referred
unto the order of the Vegetables, from which they are nourished and are begot.

The Corporeal life is in all things lurking and lying hid in the center of the
Elements. Those which do live obscurely, are those which do manifest either no
differences of the Sex, or else hidden, which are not distracted with the
variety of sensible and movable operaions and offices: and therefore they
exhibit a matter subject to the wills of the Artists, which administer in the
Hermaphroditical nature of the Baulm the mere generations and transplantations
of the Because the foundation is in one root, the Sex is Male and Female.
Muffetus in his Apologetical Dialogue of the Chemical Medicines, fol. 28, 29,
30. The twofold life of things.
thing generated or bred. Of which kind are Minerals, Metalls, Stones,
Vegetables, in which the Vital spirit or the soul has made as it were a
constant and durable wedlock with the bodies, but yet not with the external,
crass, and compounded bodies, which are obvious to the sense; but with the
internal and spiritual bodies, in which bodies which are subjected to the
workmen the powers of Hippocrates are vegetant and forcible; and the Chirone^a
of Paracelsus, in which the virtues of Colors and Tastes, yea the Colors and
Tastes themselves, are immediately rooted and grounded.

And this is the First Matter of Minerals, Metalls, and Stones, and Vegetables,
diffused through the whole body, in which the mechanical powerful Spirits of
every kind of all anatomy do live hidden, and therein are privily contained.

CHAP. III. Of the Beginnings of Bodies, and their Original Differences and
Properties.
PHilosophers do greatly dissent in the handling of the Principles, and every
one almost led by his own Opinion does bring his own beginnings. Some do
consist in Reason only, and are not grounded in Nature, they admit no
demonstrations from the light of Nature. Those which hold these imaginary
beginnings, are conversed in the Knowledge and Inquisition of the Essential
Causes; they are drawn by a blind and a terminary endeavor upward and
downward, they admit a dissolute and futile or vain confusion of things,
wavering this way and that way without sinews and joints; they stick in all
things as if they were but beginners, they hold nothing which is ratified,
nothing that is comprehended, and nothing that is fixed and sure: But they ever
stand in that place, and in doubt, from which they may be moved with a light
moment, which daily Experience, not only in Philosophy, but also in Physics,
does testify and approve. But according to these fine Philosophers and
Physicians if it please God, some beginnings are of Philosophy, some of
Physic; and where the Philosopher ends there the Physician begins.
Aristole, the chief of the Peripatetical Family or Sect, made three beginnings
of Nature, two Essential as he calls them, Namely, the Matter, and the Form,
and one Accidental, namely, Privation, which beginnings seeing they do alone
comprehend them in mind, and abstract them from the very Essence of the thing,
and do not explain what the Matter of a natural thing is; nevertheless they
would be thought to explain and lay open the Knowledge of the Matter. Let me
define them. The Matter is, of which a thing is made. The Form is, by which a
thing is made. Privation is, the absence of the Form.


But yet it remains unexplained altogether what the true, real, and essential
beginnings of Nature are. All the Spagirical Philosophers have made a Matter,
and confessed there was a Form, and that a new Form was forthwith induced, the
old being abolished and deprived; where closely the necessity of Privation is
included. But while they imagine of these in their mind, they consider the true
subjects of Nature. Wherefore whosoever is instructed with these imaginary
beginnings, will never come to the Bath of Diana, wherefore he need not fear
the punishments of Acteon.

Galen held that the Elements adorned with their Qualities were the Foundations
of Nature.

Hermes ter maximus the Father of the Phlosophers, taught that all things were
generated of three things; he explains the terminary number, calling them
Spirit, Soul, and Body, though he does not expressly show what he means by
Spirit, Soul, and Body, yet our Paracelsus has so expounded them no less
artificially than naturaly in his Book de Naturarerum. The Spirit is Mercury,
the Soul is Sulphur, the Body is Salt. The mean betwixt the Spirit and the Body
(of which Hermes speaks) is the Soul; so that the mean betwixt Mercury and Salt
is Sulphur, which unites, conjoyns, and couples diverse things, and compounds
them into one substance of a Body. Now we will seek forth the Original
differences and properties of these three; these are they which have wearied
and astonished the Wits of many Philosophers, our beginnings of our Paracelsus
have true Foundations in Nature, Sulphur, Salt, and Mercury, are the issues and
offspring of the Seeds. In the first framing of creatures it was needful that
the Seeds should have their Foundations in others, seeing they were gone from
the Fountain of Unity. If the images of the Seeds, (that is) the Seeds
themselves should be dispersed; it was also convenient for the images of the
Elements, (that is) for the beginnings to imitate Nature. So the Essence,
Existence, Life, and Act of all things are the Elements, (that is) the Seeds
which are beginnings, but yet not common or general beginnings. For the more
full understanding of this thing, in the first place the difference of Bodies
is to be observed. Some Bodies are more nigh their beginnings, namely, the
Seeds and Vital beginnings. Others have gone further from them, as the mixed
Elements. Those which are more nigh by reason of the likeness of their Nature
are called Heavenly Bodies, Spiritual, and Vital, and constant Vegetable
Bodies, in which the constant property of every body is apprehended. These are
called of Paracelsus Mercury, Sulphur, and Salt. Not that they are altogether
like to the vulgar Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury in Substance; but in Essence,
Actions, and Properties; and as much as those perfect individuals in their kind
do differ amongst themselves, so much do these Vital beginnings differ in
Essence, Actions, and Properties. Those which are more remote from the Seeds,
are called Earthly, Crass, Mixed, Dead, and Unfixt Bodies; these are the common
Elements commixed with the beginnings, which do exhibit or propound before our
senses one similar substance of the Bodies by the virtue of mixtion.

The beginnings which we name first of the two are formal and natural Bodies,
but yet spiritual, they are Spirits yet corporeal; so that in some sort they
are means betwixt the corporeal and incorporeal Nature. The latter are bonds of
visible and invisible things, of temporal and eternal, corruptible and
incorruptible, of superior and inferior; therefore they ought to manifest the
properties of the superior and inferior Nature. So that they purely and
exquisitely do not represent the conditions of either of them. He which knows
not these bonds has not learned the power of life, because he has only
exercised the anatomy of death. Aristotle and Galen coupled death and life
together, and they would have attributed things belonging to dead things
without qualities to the living things, they both labored for one end.
Furthermore, in these spirits and spiritual Bodies, the properties of all
natural actions do bear sway, and all separations, digestions, and concoctions
in Nature are absolved and perfected by the benefit of Salt, Sulphur, and
Mercury, and not by the benefit or ministry of Heat and Humidity. The
temperament of all the parts are not integrated or compounded from the mixtion
of Heat, Cold, and Dryness, but from the mixtion of Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury
amongst themselves, and with the Elements, which agree in the Sciences and
Predestinations of the foresaid beginnings and root or ground. And this is the
temperament of Nature, Nature it self, and the towardness or good disposition
of things produced from the Sciences and Signatures of the beginnings; for the
properties of the actions which; are contemplated and beheld in the natural
parts, as of Attraction, Retention, Separation, Digestion, and Evacuation, we
deprehend them to be in the anatomy of Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury; even as the
Sulphur of the Loadstone attracteth iron and worn Amber attracteth straw;
oftentimes also we deprehend it to be in outward things. And though these three
beginnings of Bodies seem to have their forces united in Nature, yet they
reserve the properties without hurt and confusion. The office and property of
Salt is to congeal Bodies and to make them solid and firm; from hence is the
hardness of the Adamant, and the solidness of Gold, which Aristotle and Galen
ascribe to Cold.

The office of Sulphur is, being of a fat and clammy substance, to temperate
the foresaid congelation with a benign commixtion, lest that the mechanical
Spirits being bound and girded with the solidness and commixt proportion of
Salt should commit unjust losses of their actions and offices.

The office of Mercury is, to repair and cherish by continual moistning those
which hasten unto dryness and age, and to make the mixtion of them to be of a
sluid and moveable substance; for this necessity Mercury is adjoined to Salt
and Sulphur, but more sparingly and in a less measure, in the Vital beginning
the Elements are in the Vital sulphur, the First Matter, and the Balm; and
these three Bodies Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury. (that is) the Balm makes and
compounds the Domestical principles or beginnings like unto themselves from the
Elements, so that it requires the common and latter Elements as external
Vestments.

These three by whose ministry or benefit all things are connext and do
conspire together, are the Bonds of the corporeal continuity of all Bodies.
Sometimes Hippocrates designs these spiritual Bodies by the name of the Soul,
as when he says that the Soul of Man is united to the Soul, and that by a
Physical liberty. Those three beginnings of Bodies in which the faculty of
every beginning does manifestly show it self are adorned of Philosophers by the
name of Spirits. These means in Nature and mean Bonds, (that is) the three
beginnings of Bodies seeing they agree most highly with the Architectonical
spirits and roots, or seminary beginnings of things, they are named of
Philosophers by the name of the First Matter.

Now follows the tractate of the Causes and Cures of Diseases. The general and
special Explication of all Diseases Astral and Material, or of all Elementated
and Hereditary Diseases from the Book of Nature, the Book of Philosophical and
Physical truth, with the Opinions of Ancient Writers added, as Hippocrates,
Galen, and Celsus and others.

In the particular curing of Diseases, it is handled of the mysteries of Cures,
of the brevity of the Signs, of the secrets of the Remedies. And first the old
Precepts of Galen and of others are brought, and afterward it is demonstrated
by the Experience of Paracelsus, Thurniserus, and of Excellent new Writers and
Philosophers, and the Medicines for all the Diseases from anatomy and the
signed art, as well simple Remedies as compound by showing the work.

Man the Microcosmus or little World out of the Macrocosm or great World,
contains in him the anatomy of health and sanity.

In Man are threefold Diseases: Namely
1 From Fire and Air. Which two Elements generate and infect the Spirit of man,
from whence there are Diseases in man which they call Epidemical or Astral
Diseases. 2 From Water and Earth These two Elements cause the Tartar, and the
^tone, and all Tarta^ous Diseases which ^^^ many in man. 3 From the seed of
Parents, and they contain in them 4 courses. 1 The 4 courses of the Elements,
from whence all sharp Diseases arise. 2 The 7 courses of the Planets, from
whence the Chronical Diseases arise, which ensure as long as the couse of the
Planet. 3 4 courses of the humors, from whence are Salts, and that of diverse
Tastes. 4 Courses of the qualities from whence the complexions are.

The Microcosmus man has not been only created according to the Macrocosm, but
also made subject to Diseases and Death, as in the book of Theophrastus of the
Astral Diseases, so also of the Invisible Diseases; as also of the falling
Sickness, as also of the Meteors, and that part is called Astronomy, read the
books of Theophrastus of the Tartareous Diseases. The old Physicians have writ
nothing of these things, neither knew they any thing of them, if they knew any
thing it was not much.

Saturn Has Dominion in the Milt Jupiter Has Dominion in the Liver Mars Has
Dominion in the Gall Sol Has Dominion in the Heart Venus Has Dominion in the
Reins Mercury Has Dominion in the Lungs Luna Has Dominion in the Brain
Blood Phlegm Choler Melancholy
Is

Savory Sweet Bitter Sour
Salt.

The Galenists call the Salts, Humors, when as they are Salts and of diverse
Tastes and qualities.

Of these Galen writ. Hot and moist Cold and moist Hot and dry Cold and dry

But Theophrastus from the light of Nature found forth that all beginnings
consist in Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury. In these three the substance of all
creatures consists, and is conserved to the Predestined term or limit, as
Paracelsus in his book de tribus Principiis, and in his book Paramid.
Philosoph. de quatuor Elementis, which four Ements do arise from three
beginnings.

Of Generation, Mixtion, and Transplantation.
The solid and firm ground of Nature being laid, and the truth and Nature of
the Principles being found and established and confirmed, and the original
differences and degrees of Forms being set down, we come to the engendring of
Diseases. And first it is needful to prepose the Generation of natural things
and the Laws and grounds of mixtion and Transplantation. And then we will show
whether the beginnings of generation be spiritual or corporeal. Again, it is
behoveful to consider whether Animals, Minerals, and Vegetables are generated
after the same manner, for those that know not the Laws and Foundations of
Generations, Mixtions, and Transplantations, and those which do not consider
the Powers and Virtues and Courses of the Spirits, they persist in a great
Error, that bodies are only of bodies. Ve^ily they cannot tell how to free
themselves in the Inquisition of Diseases which are from the bodies, from
whence it comes to pass that many proclaim diverse Diseases to be incurable.

Concerning the Foundation or ground of Generation. Three things are required
necessary to the administration of every Generation. First, the Elements, and
Matrices. Secondly, Seeds, Stars, First Matter or Soul. Thirdly, the beginnings
of bodies. All which, though diverse, yet they are contained in the least
portion of the matter, which is altogether similar, as appears by the
testimony of the sense; and so they command us to worship the Divinity of
Nature; neither are they confusedly or rashly comprehended, but they are
instructed with a Vital and most forcible Power or Virtue, and with an
infallible science. It will bring much light to our contemplations if we
explain the offices of these. There are more common offices of the Elements,
the Matrices or Receptacles, and they obtain the name of the matter, they are
the offices of the seeds, the first matter or stars. Furthermore, they are
called fruitful, because they are the Bonds of visible and invisible things,
and because they contain in them the Laws of Motions, the Predestination of
Times, and the Laws of Generations, Mixtions, and Transplantations, as in the
efficient agent cause, from which all actions proceed. The beginnings of bodies
are destinated to properties and actions, and they bear sway with the wonderful
Power or Virtue of the qualities or properties. These are the Laws of the
Generation of natural things, that the seeds and stars do come forth of the
Fountains and Deeps and dark places into light, and out of the Iliadum into the
Worlds anatomy, the Principles of the Bodies being constituted and assumed at
defined and set times, and by the renovation of the Individuals and production
of bodies, conserve the property of the spirits. This renovation of bodies is a
Generation whose Foundation confists in the seed.

In this Lithurgy and action of seeds and stars, visible things are made and
generated from invisible things, corporeal things from incorporeal things, by
the virtue and power of the immortal and vital science, bearing sway in Nature,
which science he handles above in the sixth Chapter of his Philosophy. We said
that it was the light of Nature, and the predestination of Paracelsus. By the
power and work of it the Elements are made thus and thus, (that is) either
Mineral, or Vegetable, or Animal Elements, for there is in Nature a Vegetable,
Mineral, and an Animal Earth, and there is a Vegetable, Mineral, and Animal
Water, the like of the Air and of the Fire. And by it the beginnings of the
bodies agreeable to the offices of the seeds and stars are extant and come
forth. So colors, smells, tastes, heat, cold, moistness, dryness, quantity,
number, confirmation, all vital qualities and other signatures do proceed in
the mechanical process of Generation. Because no Generation can be perfected
without Mixtion, we will forthwith entreat of it.

Mixtion is the Instrument of the seed proceeding unto Generation, by whose
ministry the Elements and the beginnings of bodies which agree with the seeds,
and domestical things, as Animals united to Animals, Minerals to Minerals,
Vegetables to Vegetables, so emulate the unity of the seeds which are their
examples.

The foundation of Mixtion is the vital beginning, instructed with an effective
science; the form, the idaea, the seed, the star, by whose power and infallible
science, divine offices of mixtion are administered. This is that especial star
or seed which we have demonstrated to be the Foundation or ground of all
Generations.

The Term or bound and subjects of mixtions, are the Elements and beginnings of
bodies produced from aliments by virtue and science of the mechanical spirits,
for the mixtion is made, when bodies are constituted of incorporeal things, but
yet altogether spiritual bodies, The Laws of mixtion are three ways considered.
The first, is the mixtion of the Elements amongst themselves. The second, is
the mixtion of the Elements with the principles or beginnings. The third, is
the mixtion of the principles amongst themselves, and of all them together; for
if they ought to exhibit one similar substance of a body unto the senses, then
there ought to be three beginnings, and each one mixed. Again, the manner of
Mixtion is threefold, for either a perfect is mixed with a perfect, or a
corruptible or impure with a corruptible, or a perfect with a corruptible.

The mixtion happens far otherwise, if a perfect be mixed with a perfect,
(that is) a pure with a pure, than if an impure or corruptible be mixed with an
impure or pure; for the beginnings, elements, and foundations of bodies are
twofold, they are either perfect, or the first, (that is) the immediate
receptacles of the seeds, which are the nighest to the seeds, as are the
beginnings of bodies, or they are corruptible or superadded, (that is) which
are more remote from the seeds and the stars, as are the Elements which bear
the name of a Matter; how much therefore the subjects of mixtion differ amongst
themselves, so much the unions, terms, or limits and continuance do differ; for
pure permixt with pure things (that is) which are more remote from the impurity
of the Elements, have a longer time of digestion, and comem later to their
dissolution, as are Gold, Siver, precious Stones, which are mere individual
principles altogether perfect and separated from the external impurities of the
Elements. The impure hasten quickly to corruption, some of them sooner some
later, according to the analogy and proportion of the subjects. The Elements
and beginnings of Animals have times of their continuance very much distinct
from the Elements and principles of Minerals and Vegetables, and these Minerals
and Vegetables do differ much from the procreations of the superior Globe,
(that is) from the fruits of the superior Elements. We will handle more
largely of corruptible things, Foundations, Elements, and Beginnings, and of
the mixtion of them with Pure in the Generation of Diseases, for they contain
the anatomy of Diseases and Death. Seeing therefore there be diverse manners of
Generations by reason of the Elements and Seeds, so that in some the
differences of the Sex is altogether neglected, as in Minerals and Metals. In
some the Rudiments or beginnings of the sex do appear obscurely, as in
Vegetables. In some they appear manifestly by a perfect separation of the
Individuals, and their properties expressed, as in Animals.

These manners of Generations being rightly explained, do make much for the
right understanding of the Generation of Diseases, we will explain all in
order, beginning with the Minerals.

In the Generation of Minerals, (which is very hard to be understood of those
which cannot apprehend the unaccustomed phrases of Philosophers) first there is
to be observed the connection of those things which are required to Generation.
There is a twofold connection; the first of principles and principles, the
second of principles with elements.

Secondly, we must observe that this Generation of Minerals is of Consanguinity
with Nature; for there is no Generation neither of Vegetables nor Animals so
nigh the Fountains of Nature, neither do approach so nigh the Fountains of
Unity, as the Generation of Minerals; though some Minerals have their admixt
impurities; for Minerals are the Offspring and Issue of the seeds, the
Offspring and Children of the stars and seeds lying hidden in the Element of
Water, which Issue have all the gifts of their Parents, the sciences,
signatures, and properties thereof by an hereditary right, and they possess
them inviolated; furthermore, the Minerals have most effective Balm, and they
possess almost a solid and homogeneous Matter, and they have peirced the Vital
principle, (that is) the whole substance of the Matter, and proportionated it
unto themselves. So the star or seed in this kind of Minerals has perfected
some perfect Individuals, not only according to their substance, but according
to the virtues of Nature, which being adorned and fenced in with the abundance
and purity of Balm, they are not deprived of their strength in many years,
neither are they corrupted with any external injuries, for example; Mercury, of
which Paracelsus speaks, is a perpetual Moon, neither can it be corrupted by
any violence or injury, by reason of the firmness and perfection of the Balm
existing in the Mercury; Mercury is called the Renewer and Restorer of man's
body. So also the Antimony (of all the Waters) is the best Cordial, in which so
great power and virtue of Balm is occultly contained, so that it is able to
cure all desperate and deplored Diseases, as well sharp Diseases as Chronical.
What shall I say of Vitriol? which alone is able to cure the fourth part of all
Diseases, and to root out altogether all Tartareous Diseases. I let pass
Sulphur endued with infinite properties, and Sal-niter which helps and cures
the greatest Diseases beyond our expectation, so also I let pass Sol and Luna,
Margarits and Corals and other Individuals of this kind.

The Minerals demonstrate their Vital qualities with such a virtue of their
actions, and they demonstrate the differences of the Vital qualities, that is,
of the first qualities from which all actions proceed, from them Paracelsus
fetches seeds which are Vigent and bear sway in the Treasures of the Elements,
for to administer the Worlds province, and that they might come forth into
aspect, they do unite with the Spirits, but yet with such Spirits as of which
bodies may be constituted and compounded. And this Wedlock or Union is the
connection of the seeds and principles. Afterward when as they have found forth
fit Matrices and Receptacles (for every Element brings forth the Fruits, not
in his own proper place, but in a strange or unusual place) they admit rather
the company of visible bodies, than of compound and mixed bodies.

Then the Elements constitute not the common bodies, but the bodies proper unto
the Minerals. In like manner the principles of bodies, (that is) Mineral
Sulphur, Mineral Salt, and Mineral Mercury, do constitute Mineral Fire, and
Mineral Air, Earth, and Water, and this is the union or connection of the
Elements and Principles. These being absolved and perfected they produce all
Congelations, Colors, Signatures which are Vegetive in the seeds, stars, or
Vital principles thereof, and they demonstrate Metals or Minerals very nigh
unto Metals.

In our Astral Philosophy, it it said that there is a corporeal Second part
cap. 2.
life in all things which lie hidden in the Center of the Elements, which life
is subject to the wills of workmen by wonderful Providence and Wisdom of God.
For the mechanical Spirits or Soul has made a firm and constant union or
connection with the body, but yet not with the external Crasse and last bodies
which are altogether unvalid and unfirm, but with the internal aed s^iritu^l
bodies which are destinated unto properties. Furthermore, those which have
their Roots fixed in the Center of the Elements live obscurely, be cause they
are not distracted with the offices and varieties of actions, neither serve
they for sense and motion. But those which live obscurely have a common
Hermophrodites seed agreeing with many Spirits, (that is) the Nature of all
things living obscurely, and lying hidden in the Center of the Elements is so
framed that they participate something of all kinds of their kind, and for the
Harmony, Society and Constellation of their Nature they most easily conspire.
These things are illustrated and made more plain by examples. Alexander a
Suchlen in a certain Quer^itanui against Anon p. ^4.
Treatise of Antimony writes that he found in one Root of Antimony, not only
three united principles (the Roots of Minerals) but also Gold, Silver, Mars,
Jupiter, Saturn, except Venus, So from Venus and Mars Vitriol is drawn by art,
from Metal Mineral is drawn and contraiwise.

This is that which Severinus Davus page 124 says, by the great power of
Nature we have wondered and admired in the seed of the Minerals not only the
unexpressed variety of the Sex, but also the united principles of the
Individuals and Spirits in one and the same seed.

These are the mysteries and secrets and wonderful things of God placed in the
Majesty of Nature. Let these suffice concerning the Generation of the Element
of Water. Now we proceed to the Generation of the Element of Earth, and we will
entreat of Vegetables. All Vegetables are those which have Roots fixed and
fastened into the Earth, and are sustained by a Vegetive Soul: Furthermore,
Plato called the Plants Animated or Vegetables. There are especial differences
of Generations, in regard of the Elements and of the seeds. The seeds and stars
are ever the same in Nature, Virtue and Essence, but the Elements differ much
amongst themselves in subtileness and moveableness, as the Element of Water is
more subtle and moveable than the Earth, so the fruits and things generated
from it are more subtle, moveable, valid or firm and more excellent, than the
fruits or things begot from the Earth. From hence it is that the seeds of
Vegetables have a clammy, soft, crass body in respect of the Minerals and
Animals, whose seeds are more spiritual and subtle bodies.

Concerning the manner of Generation of Vegetables, those which proceed of
their own accord without man's industry have almost the same manner of their
Generation with the Minerals; for the seeds of Vegetables rise forth of the
Matrix of the Earth, and at first unite with the Spirits, and so constitute
their principles. Vegetable Salt, Vegetable Sulphur, begot Vegetable Mercury,
Vegetable Water, and Vegetable Fire, Earth, and Air. But this is to be observed
which is most worthy to be noted, that the fruits or effects of every Element
retain and reserve the properties, nature, and conditions of the Matrix in
which they lie hidden from the beginning, and they never depose them. So
Paracelsus in his third book 2 Chap. of degrees, brought this difference, he
made the fruits or the effects of the Earth to be of the first degree, the
fruits of the Air to be of the second, the fruits of the Water to be of the
third, to the fruits of the Fire he ascribes the fourth degree, where he
adjoyneth these words; he labors in vain whosoever he be which would get the
quintessence out of Earthly things, which is like to that which is got forth of
Air. In like manner that quintessence which is from the Air cannot be compared
to that which is brought forth of the Water; upon this Sentence so it is to be
judged of the fourth Element Concerning the extracting of the quintessence
forth of the herb Chelondine, it is not that thou labor to attain the
quintessence of Gold by the quintessence of Chelondine, though there be more
secret in Balmemint, Chelondine and Valerian, than in the rest, only so far
proceeds the degree that the secret may excel in many parts; so that in every
degree one Element exists higher than another; wherefore it is to be observed
in things made of Earth, whether the Chelondine excel the Balmmint, and whether
the Balmmint excel the Valerian; so likewise it is to be judged of the three
other Elements.

The spontaney or free Generation of the Vegetables comes nighest unto Nature,
and is almost like the Generation of Minerals, excepting that the seed of the
Minerals according to their Plantation are not subjected to the wills of men,
neither do they conserve perpetuity (as the Vegetables) by propagation of
Individuals.

The seeds of Vegetables are twofold. The Astral seeds which are only subject
to Nature. Secondly, Mineral seeds which are subject to the sense and will of
man, as of Barley, Wheat, Oats, and other pulse which spring not but by
Industry and good Husbandry.

In Plants there be diverse manners of propagation, but in Minerals at least
there is but one manner, and it is spontaney, or of free accord, caused by no
labor of man. Some Vegetables are propagated by man's Industry and Husbandry,
by material seeds or grains, either round, or three cornered, or long, etc.
Some Vegetables are propagated by Graffs, as Vines, some by Branches or Boughs,
as Willows, very many from Roots pulled up. There are diverse times of the
springing and rising of these seeds whether astral or material. Some spring in
Summer, some in the Spring, some in Autumn, some in the beginnning, middle, or
end of the Spring, or Summer, or Autumn, some spring in Cancer, or in Libra, or
in Virgo, or in Leo, and then come forth^nto the sight or aspect of men.

He will admire the confluence of Nature, which marketh the springing and
budding of Plants at the rising and setting of certain Stars. There are also
certain fit places required in the Generation of Vegetables, as the Poplar
tree, and the Willow, and Arsmart love the Waters, the Trifoil, Ragwort, the
Coslip and Melilot, the Origan and the herb Groundpinn love the mountains; of
which Virgil in his 1 book of his Georgicks writes thus, here will good Corn
rise, there will Grapes spring plenteously; and in another place good Apples
will grow and flourishing Grass. And again in the second of his Georgicks, he
says, every ground cannot bring forth all fruits. The Willows spring at the
waters side, the Alder-trees in the foggy Fens, the barren wild Ash-trees grow
on stony mountains, the Sea shores are most pleasant with Mirtles, our
Ladygloves affect hillocks, the Yew-tree loves the Northwind and cold of the
Air; and he adds the cause in the second of his Georgicks, for surely it is
only Nature.

This is by reason of the temperament and friendly conspiration of superior
and inferior things, for the seeds having an inbred knowledge do all
Fructify as Seasons, and in their places; for the constitution of the air is
otherwise about the waters or floods, than in the valleys, in which the
Sunbeams by their great power cannot pierce and temperate the turbulent and
crasse air. The constitution of the air about little mountains is diverse from
that about great mountains, for the conspiration of the superior and inferior
things is chiefly to be considered in the Generations of the inferior Globe,
if that the prevarications of the confluences, and the dearth of Corn bring
great defect. There are three especial differences of Generations in this
inferior Globe of Minerals, Vegetables, and Animals.

In the Element of Water four kinds of fruits appear, Salts, Minerals, Gemms,
and Stones, by one name called Minerals.

There are only two kinds of fruits from the Element of Earth, Plants, and
Trees, called Vegetables, which being explained we will descend to the
Generation of Animals. The vital principle of the Nature of Animals is grounded
in a certain Radical matter, namely, in animal Balsam, in Suphur and vital
Liquor, which two, namely, the vital Principle or native Heat, and radical
moisture or first-begot moisture, have made a constant and firm Wedlock or
Union, as we have demonstrated in our Philosophy, de calore native.

This first matter of Animals, though in spiritual subtileness it excel the
Balsam of Vegetables and Minerals, neither is it grounded in a matter subject
to the wills and judgment of man, nevertheless it has most effective tinctures
in it, in which as though in mechanical spirits the knowledge of the anatomy of
all the parts of the animal are secretly contained, for the least dram of the
seed contains the anatomy of the whole kind; because the mechanical spirits and
Principles of the bodies are taken from the Dimensions and Straitness of
bodies, (that is) the First matter or stars of animals is not subjected to
Geometrical Demonstrations. Here the Aristotelians contend that this seminal
matter is only contained in the anatomy of the Testicles.

Hippocrates says that seed is derived from the most strong and forcible Root
of the whole animal; he testifies it by this note, because so little matter
being evacuated there are made very great mutations and great loss of the
strength in the body.

There is nothing in the body more strong than the animal Balsam or vital
Sulphur. Hereupon Paracelsus in his book de sagaci Philosophia, calls this
Radical matter the quintessence of Lmibicagaster.

From hence the Philosophers called the seed of Animals the viridity of Nature,
and the flowr of strength; though we deny not but that the crude and imperfect
matter, which is in place for a covering wherewith the mechanical spirits and
principles of Generation are invested, is perfected and digested and brought
unto maturity by the perfecting of the members of Generation, otherwise
Generation were frustrate and in vain, not by the inconstancy of the mechanical
spirits and vital principle, but by the imperfection and debility of the
bodies. This is the true original of seed, and the Nature in Animals. From
these it appears that the seed, the Animal Balsam, is not only contained in
the Testicles or Brain, or Sperm of the marrow, but that it is diffused through
the whole body, (that is) through the whole anatomy of the Animal, and it is
the vital Liquor, the Radical matter, the First matter; for these virtues and
faculties which have flown forth of the whole body, especially out of the
principal parts, together with the spirits, do inhere and remain in that matter
of the seed, being prepared and perfected in the Testicles, and are as it were
the mistresses or workers of procreation.

Aristotle contends by many reasons that he might show that women neither have
seed, nor do emit or send forth any in the Venereal act. But the contrary may
be taught, especially by this reason, because women have Testicles and Vessels
for seed, all which if Nature did not make them in vain (as it makes nothing in
vain) have likewise a faculty of generating seed attributed them, which is the
cause thereof. The truth of this matter is proved by the testimony of sense;
for it is seen in women which have longer refrained from coiture, that their
seed would flow about the Vessels being cut, as well as in men, but in the
Testicles there is a more crass and perfect seed, because women will confess
that by dreams their seed is sent forth with no less pleasure than in coiture.
In widows and those which have longer abstained from Venery, by dreams and by
tickling of the privities abundant and crass seed will burst forth. This is not
only confirmed by the whole testimony of the senses, but humane nature does
abundantly confirm this unto those which know it. From hennce it is collected,
that the seed of woman concurs unto Generation, because a woman afflicted or
pained with the falling Sickness, Stone, or Gout in the Legs, brings forth
Children affected with those Hereditary Diseases. Lastly, because the Child is
very often like the Mother, which things the Mothers blood cannot effect, but
the seed which is diffused from her. Furthermore, neither the seed of the man,
nor of the woman can effect any thing by it self, being solitary, in a perfect
Generation, but the conflux and true mixtion of both seeds are required unto
perfect Generation, for the mixtion being frustrate Generation decays. The
motion of Generation in perfect animals, in which there is a perfect
distinction of the Sex of male and female, is a wise and provident Nature of
things inciting and stirring them up sometime to the propagation of Generation,
lest that the whole kind should decay, and it has injected or put lust as a
prick into them both from the heat of the seed, and it has given a
pleasantness or wonderful desire of coiture unto the privities, that they might
bring their seed into one, otherwise they would be altogether unprofitable,
which concurring and rightly conspiring the seed of the male and the female
received in the womb are mixed with a mutual embracing, for spiritual things are
agreeable and do conspire and arise from one and the same Root, and they have
the same gifts: for like do congratulate and delight to be with like, and
domestical things, with domestical things having the same faculties, or
sciences, and signatures. After that they be mixed the womb contains them most
closely, and hides them in her bosoms, holding it so closely on every side
that it suffers no space to be empty within; and also it contracts and girds in
it self, and does so straiten or compress and shut the mouth of it, (that is)
it does so much rejoice in the friendly guest received, so that it will not
open at all. But the mouth of the neck of the womb, namely, the outward mouth,
sometimes lies open unto the privities. The womb has two mouths, which thing
Cribatius demonstrates 23 Aphorism and 6 book, for the seeds being permixt and
conceived in the womb, there is the same force and the same nature in them
both. And because the mechanical spirits and Radical tinctures have brought
with them the abundant store of vital heat, as the motion of these spirits
shall forthwith appear, though it be obscure, so the offices of the heart and
arteries will forthwith appear, and by their vital pulse attract aerie and
spiritual aliment through the hidden ways or passages according unto the
science and power of the mechanical spirits, for all things do appear unto
Nature as Hippocrates witnesses. Furthermore, the more small or pure and hot
parts of the seed, and those which more participate of spirits; or spiritual
tinctures do fly inwardly into the midst of the whole mass, but the more Crass
or Earthly parts of the seed, do compass and go about those spiritual spirits,
from which the mechanical spirits do produce the membranes which wrap the Child.

These are the first Rudiments or Grounds of Generation of Animals. But here
Galen, Fernel, and other Aristotelians contend with Hippocrates, and contradict
him, in that in his book de locis in homine, he compared the nature of the seed
to a simple uniform circle, in which any man can neither find beginning or end,
and that so far forth as it pertains to the varieties of corporeal parts
subsisting in act in the seed. But surely the Aristotelians say this spirit
having faculties and being the instrument of Nature frams three Jewels like
pellucide drops of water in the midst of the animal, which make immediately for
themselves certain Rudiments and beginnings of the three principal members,
Heart, Liver, and Brain. They have not considered and marked the mechanical
Lythargy of Generation, and the artificious administration of the seed, neither
have they understood the power of science from which all things arise. But they
have feigned corporeal Rudiments or beginnings of the parts in the seed, and
especially of the principal members, which being separated by the heat, at
length they manifest and demonstrate members whose beginnings they had
obtained. Hippocrates in his book de locis in homine, in the beginning has
Confirmed and Established this his Opinion, saying, that he found nothing in
the body to which he might ascribe beginning or ending, for if he described a
circle, who can find beginning or ending? Furthermore, seeing the nature of the
seed is altogether spiritual and has such nutriment with it unto the matrices,
we ought to imagine that there be dissimilar parts in the seed, so that the
body of the Brain should be one, and the body of the Heart another, and the
body of the Liver another, but we must think that this multitude of parts in
the progress of time rose from the same seed, and not from the mass or
multitude of bodies, but from the variety of the gifts, means, powers, and
faculties in which the mechanical spirits excel. The faculty of the mechanical
spirits is so great, that if they had the science or faculty of the Heart, they
would make and conform a heart from the attracted aliment, if of the Brain,
they would make a Brain, if they had the faculty of the Liver, from the same
aliment they would make a Liver, flesh, veins, bones, sinews, arteries, eyes,
ears, and all members which are needful for the constitution of an Animal and
this they would do in a right order and at set times. That is theperfect
science of the seeds and stars, full of power, which (they say) bear sway in
Nature, and all creatures confess the same. In this science all signatures as
well interior as exterior of the whole animal are contained. This is the
light of Nature, and the Predestination so often reiterated of Paracelsus. But
now afterward all the parts of the whole Animal shall be dissolved and
separated in a legitimous and convenient order, more solid and abundant aliment
is required, neither do hidden passages suffice.

Again, the membranes waxing crass and thick daily, in which the Child is
wrapped, forthwith in these membra^es, veins, and arteries are framed by the
Navel, which are fastened to the womb, and subminister and convey spirits and
aliments unto the Child, until every part be conformed and wholly perfected
and consummated.

The Aliment attracted is spiritual, even as all Vegetables and Minerals are
nourished with most subtle spirits, in which there is animal Balm agreeable to
man's Nature. Hereupon aliment of Paracelsus is called seed; with which that of
Hippocrates agrees, We are nourished of the same from which we consist. In this
animal Balm are the Elements, and the three beginnings of bodies, Salt,
Sulphur, and Mercury, as we have demonstrated in our Philosophy. But here a
most gross untruth of the Galenists offers it self unto our consideration,
namely, that they say that the young one is nourished with Menstruum in the
mothers womb, which is the greatest poison upon Earth, when as Aristotle says
in his third book de historia animalium, cap. 19. that that blood which flows
forth at set circuits in women is a kind of viciated and corrupted blood, for
by the benefit and work of Nature, (especially the Moon decreasing) is
separated from the purer blood. This Menstruum flowing forth, if a fresh Vine
be touched therewith it decays altogether, Fruits touched therewith are made
barren, Plants die, Herbs and Grass in Gardens wither. If a pregnant tread upon
the Menstruums of another woman, or if she be sprinkled with it, she has an
untimely Birth. It altogether takes away the hope of conceiving from those
women which have not conceived already. The breath and vapors which come from
the mouths of women purged of their Menstruums obscure and darken glasses, and
brightness of Ivory. Mercury or Quicksilver which commonly is put in looking
glasses with tinn, attracts through the glass poisonful Menstruum, and the
glass is not hurt, which appears if that the Quicksilver be shaved off the
spot will appear no more in the glass. Gress. Furthermore, if this blood be
tasted of a dog he becomes mad. This Menstruum torments men with grievous
pains, for it brings the falling sickness, the falling of the hairs, and the
Elephantiasis, therefore it was counted amongst the most grievous poisons by
the Ancient; hereupon it comes to pass, that in the woman in which it is
suppressed that it flow not forth at the appointed and ordinary time; unto her,
which it should be proper and benign, it brings diverse incommodities and
Diseases, Namely, obstructions of the bowels, pining, the cancer, the falling
sickness, and very many more mortal Diseases. Seeing therefore that the
annoiance and discommodity of it is so great, and the violence is so
pestiferous, who will be so mad or sottish to affirm that the young one has
nourishment from it in the womb? yea All nourishment is caused by Spirits, but
yet by such as of which bodies may be produced, which appears in things which
increase, where the Spirits are resolved into the bodies, that there may be
made increase.
then she is wont to conceive best in the womb when she is cleansed and purged
from this filthy flux, and when the blood is pure where with the young shall be
nourished, as likewise when the womb is cleansed. And though in the other time
the vicious and pure are collected the other, and do increase together, for it is
mixed with the other pure and profitable blood; yet notwithstanding the young is
not sustained, nor lives thereby, neither does it attract it for nourishment,
but only the sweet and most pure blood as far as it is able, but after the
young is come to perfection and complement, and stands in need of more
abundant food, and suffers not the spirits any longer to be included (all
the bonds being burst) it comes forth into the light of the World.

The Galenists ascribe the distinction of the Sex to the qualities by this
reason, if that the seed of the Parents excel very much in heat and dryness
man will be procreated; on the contrary, if cold and moistness domineer woman
will be procreated. But profess both the Sexes to be contained in one Root and
vital Principle; the mixtions and tinctures superadded man's strength may
degenerate into woman's weakness and facility of bringing forth, so that woman
is nothing else but a Transplanted man, not as Aristotle affirmed, that she was
a monster rising from Transplantation. But we profess that this Transplantation
is necessary and administered by the Laws of Nature, wherefore this
Transplantation is not to be ascribed to heat or cold, but to the superadded
tinctures of mixtion, which superadded tinctures we will largely explain in the
differences of Transplantations. And these concerning the Generation of perfect
animals which have obtained strong and powerful seed, which will endure for an
age, howsoever it be agitated and tossed with diverse mutations of
Transplantation. But here we had almost forgot the subtilty of the Galenists,
which say that the young in the womb has the faculty of sense about the 36
day. I marvel who of them has peirced into the secret Closets of Nature? or
who of them has observed at what time the young one receives sense in the
womb? If that they say they found it by anatomy, it is false, for the young can
live no longer when the mother dies. If they object and say that the mothers
observed it, I ask of them by what means, and how? Certainly, if they had
understood the sciences and powers of the seeds, they would never have alleged
and brought in such old wives Fables. But that which Hippocrates professes
that the male his bones being strengthened and made somewhat harder moves in the
third month, but the woman in the fourth, we likewise grant this, for the
pregnant may observe the first leaping of the Child, and perceives it as the
tickling of a fly.

Imperfect animals are those which generate without a manifest putting forth of
seed, as Eels, Frogs, and almost all insected animals by their mutual
embracings do send forth the flowr of Balm into the Matrices and Receptacles
for Generation wherein all things are absolved and perfected which are needful
and necessary to Generation. Again, they profuse or pour forth a fruitful seed
which is crass and clammy resisting external injuries, which seed is stirred up
and compelled to work by the benefit of the heat of the Sun, and then it
constitutes the Elements, and adjoyneth such like Principles of bodies, and
perfects the offices of mixtion, which things being perfected it absolveth and
finisheth the Generation correspondent to the science of the mechanical
spirits. In the procreation of fishes, when as the female has laid down her
Eggs, the male comes and sprinkles his seed upon the Eggs, and how many soever
have been sprinkled with his seed take life, the rest which are frustrate and
destitute of the heat of the male do pine away and corrupt. There is the same
reason of the Generation of birds which bring forth Eggs in the place of seed,
and then they keep them warm by their heat, and so bring forth young birds. The
Generation by putrefaction which the Philosophers call the Generation from seed
and from putrefaction, differs from this manner of Generation.

The Generation by putrefaction is of that kind which the Generation of mice
and bees is, which Paracelsus calls Generation ex cagastro; so worms are
generated in cheese and hornets in the excrements of horses. But concerning
those animals which do make congress and generate with animals of diverse kinds,
as the Horse and the Ass, the Wolf and the Dog, we will handle of them in the
difference of Transplantations.

This Generation of Animals differs from the Generation of Vegetables, because
the seeds of animals neither do voluntarily rise out of the Earth, nor are
submitted by the industry and labor of man, but the seeds having attained a
fit matrix they proceed unto the Generation of perfect Animals, where they
perfect the animals complementally.

The Laws and Foundations of Generations and Mixtions being demonstrated, and
the spiritual beginnings of Generations being explained, and also the manners
and differences of the Generations of Vegetables, Minerals, and Animals, being
adduced and inferred, it remains that we handle of Transplantation superadded
to Generation, which happens to all the orders of Generation; for those which
put the light of Generation and Transplantation before things unknown in
Philosophy and the art of Medicines, the difference being rightly understood,
they prepare for us not any passage and entrance unto any vulgar Philosophy and
art of Medicine insisting in qualities, but unto Philosophy grounded on the
Laws of Nature. Certainly none can understand the death of things, and the
dissolution of the Soul from the Body, which knows not thoroughly this
difference, and if he know not the death of things and the dissolution of the
Soul from the Body, that Physician will never attain unto the preparations of
medicines; for how shall he separate things from life, which has neither known
life nor death, and attributes the functions of life unto dead things? what
shall I say of the knowledge of Diseases? Those which absolve this difference
by qualities will never see how death comes to life, or how by the Laws of
Nature the dissolution of the Soul and Body happens.

But that we may come to the matter, we say that Transplantation is a symptom
of Generation, but this is not to be understood in general of every
Transplantation but in particular: for Transplantation is considered
Transplantation is twofold.
two ways; for either it is subject to the will of man, or it depends of Nature
alone.

That which is subject to the industry and labor of man is perfected either by
seed or cutting. In this Transplantation whether it be effected by material
seeds or incision, two things are to be considered, Times and Place.

It is behoveful to observe times in the Transplantation which is to be
perfected by the ministry of hands, because there are defined and set Periods
in which the force of the seminal flowr appears in Plants and Vegetables, for
unless the flourishing and vigor of the flowr were transplanted by the time
all labor were frustrate and Generation were in vain. So some material seeds
of Plants have their flourishings and vigor of the seminal flowr in the
beginning of the Spring, some in the midst, some in the end, some in Summer,
some in Autumn. There is the same reason of trees, which also have diverse times
of their flourishing and seminal vigor of the matter, as the Quince-tree and
the Damsin-trees are transplanted very seasonably after Winter, the
Cherry-trees and Almond-trees about Winter, Mulberrytrees before the Springs
Equinoctial.

It is also convenient that there be places fit for the Transplantations done
by man's labor, for except these subjects of man's Transplantations shall find a
fit matrix, the Transplantation will be frustrate and in vain, whether it be
done by incision or by seed. Therefore it is behoveful to observe such places
in our Transplantations as Nature affects, and in which places Nature will
bring forth freely and planteously fruits of this or that kind; for every
ground does not bring forth all fruits, some fruits Spring pleasantly in funny
places, some in shadowed places, which Nature he observes thus, such like and
such Plants being transplanted, our Ladiesgloves love little, Hillocks, the
Poplar, the Willows, and Arsemart love the Waters, and Mercuries Fingers and
Melilot as we have explained in the Generation of Vegetables. We will apply
this first Generation of Transplantation fitly in the difference of the
Generation of Diseases.

The other kind of Transplantation is that which proceeds from Nature alone, or
it is that which is caused by the more effective tinctures of the Elements,
neither is it subject to man's sense. For the right understanding of this
Transplantation, it is behoveful to explain the roots or tinctures of things
which help both for Generation and Transplantation, though the roots or
effective tinctures, the efficient causes of Transplantations, have not been
explained at any time of any Philosopher, but they have adumbrated or
over-shadowed them by figures, metaphors, and allegories. And these tinctures
are twofold, either perfect and first, or else corruptible and superadded.

The perfect and first Roots of things are Stars, Seeds, Roots of
Transplantations, and of the Philosophers they are called the tinctures of the
Elements. The seeds or roots of Transplantation show the cause of death and
dissolution. The seeds or stars of Generation are explained both in Philosophy
and in the difference of the Generation of natural things; now we will handle
of the Stars, Seeds, and Roots of Transplantation. For we say that every
Generation by the superadded Transplantation is removed and displaced from the
degree of dignity, whereby the Seeds, Stars, and Roots of Generation are less
able to manifest their gifts and inbred sciences; for every transplanted
Generation, (that is) Transplantation of spirits, does not change unto the
better, but unto worse; and the properties and gifts of every transplanted
Generation, (namely of the spirits) are much weakened by the superadded
impressions and concurring Stars of Transplantation. The tinctures of the
Elements, Stars, Seeds, and Roots of Transplantation or Impressions which cause
Transplantation, are the Being or Essence of poison, which especially is found
forth and appears in Minerals, as in Arsenick, Sulphur, Vitriol, Mercury,
Antimony, and in Saturn. In Vegetables as the Nettle, Woolf-bane, Hemlock, and
the Poppy. But it is circumspectly to be observed, that Transplantation in
regard of the tinctures is twofold namely, the universal and the particular.

The universal Transplantation is that which extends together unto all natural
things by Gods curse, for there is nothing free from Transplantation in the
whole Nature of things, but it has impurities admixt and adjoined unto the
veins, guests, and tinctures of the Elements, and unto the Stars, Seeds, and
Roots of Transplantation; for the Stars themselves (as Job witnesses) are not
free from this Transplantation; neither Gold, Silver, or Gemms are excepted
from this Transplantation though they seem to carry an anatomy of soundness or
purity. Paracelsus (in Chirurgiamajore 2 Book cap. 8. of his 3 Tractate) says,
that Gold by his Nature has Realgar, or being of poison, which is separated
from her by Antimony; for if that Gold wanted Realgar or poison (as Paracelsus
speaks) the Spagirical Philosophers would not so strictly command that before
the preparation of potable Gold that the body of Gold should be separated from
poison and impurities. So amongst Vegetables every body has poison, and those
which be called alimental of Physicians. That Vegetable which cannot be rightly
separated neither by artificial or natural concoction of the Ventricle, is the
cause of many most grievous Diseases. Whereupon with Paracelsus and other true
Physicians this being of poison is celebrated to be almost the most noble
amongst other beings of Diseases. Of which being of poison, and more common
cause of Diseases we will more largely handle in the differences concerning the
Generation of Diseases. This general Transplantation contains in it a spiritual
Transplantation in regard of the tinctures which bear sway in all the Elements.

The spiritual Transplantation is twofold. The first is the Transplantation of
Individuals. The second is of the kinds.

The Transplantation of the Individuals is in which the utmost Signatures are
only changed, as Colors, Smells, Tastes, Magnitude, Figure, etc. yet this
transplantation is not to be read so, that it be not made with the superadded
tinctures of the Elements, but by Seeds, Stars, and Roots of the same kind, as
Vegetables with Vegetables, Minerals with Minerals, etc. Seeing there be many
seeds in Vegetables, in which the Sciences and predestnated gifts of many
Individuals are conjoined, which by the judgment of the sense do seem to differ
in some sort in kind, it is no marvel if that they pass into new Familes by a
light moment; Severinus p. 141. as if Watercresses be transplanted into Mint,
Rape into Radish, the herb Imperatoria into Angelica. This Transplantation is
neither to be ascribed to the tinctures of the Elements, nor being of Poison,
but to the Star, Seed, or Root of Mint, Radish, Angelica, and to the Roots of
Watercresses, Rape, and the herb Imperatoria, by the perfect mixtion of the
Individuals superadded. In this Transplantation the power of the Root, and his
family or kind, remains, and shows certain signs, though it be very much
changed.

The Generation of Gemms is a Transplantation of this kind, which are produced
from the first and common Root of Metalls, the Stars, Seeds, or Roots
superadded and concurring. So from the Roots of Lead the Adamant is
transplanted, from the Roots of Gold is the Saphirus transplanted, from the
Roots of Copper is the Smaragdus transplanted, from the Roots of Iron is Berill
transplanted, etc. Those which are spoke of the Stars, Seeds, and Roots of
Transplantation, namely, those which manifest the anatomy of death and
dissolution, are not to be understood of the Transplantation of the
Individuals, but of the general Transplantation and of the kinds; nevertheless
the general Transplantation is also to be referred unto the Transplantation of
Individuals; for no natural body (or which is produced of four Elements) wants
impurities or being of poison. The Transplantation of perfect animals pertains
also unto this Transplantation of Individuals, for it is above said that a
woman is a transplanted man: for in the Generation of perfect animals, if the
Star, Seed, and tincture of the Menstruum concur, and be endued with a strong
power, all the seed shall be adorned with properties and parts in the
Menstruum. If that the Star or Seed of the Male shall domineer it produces the
Male, and man's Members. But here an Inquisition may be made, how it comes to
pass how Hermophradites are generated, having both Male and Female members. The
answer is, that if the Stars and Seeds of the Male as well as of the Menstruum
shall be equal in virtue, in the mechanical process of Generation
Hermophradites are generated; for that seed or star does sometime predominate,
and has the nature of the one; forthwith it abounds with propension to beget
man, forthwith to beget woman.

That Transplantation which rises from the congress of animals of diverse kinds
is often barren, neither can there be a natural Transplantation unless their
seeds conspire with exceeding great Society and Consent, for animals do
difficultly admit Transplantation, which are separated by the perfect
distinction of the Sex. Hither is referred the Generation of Minerals, which
has (as a Companion of Generation) Transplantation adjoined nigh the nature of
an Hermophradite with Balm. The Fruits of the superior Globe are also
obnoxious to this Transplantation, and that if they be perfected at the same
time, and have conspired by the Society of the beams, as Snow and Rain, and
there are made Transplantations of the bodies of the Fruits, namely the
qualities of the bodies being altered by violence, frequency, abundance, and
diuturnity.

The Transplantation of the kind is where not only the external signatures, but
also the internal are changed, and thereby the Root and First Matter. This
Transplantation proceeds from most valid and effective tinctures, and only
adheres to the Individuals of things, (that is) to the beginnings of bodies.
Again, it has possessed the very Root of the thing, so that there is no further
hope that these first Transplantations may be mended. The tinctures of the
Elements are proper unto this Transplantation, and it differs in nothing from
the general Transplantation of things, but that the Transplantation of the kind
may be caused by more valid and effective tinctures of the Elements, but the
general Transplantation is caused by more light tinctures.

The Transplantation of the kind and mutation of the Root appears in the Tare
and in the Darnel, in which Transplantation the Root of the Wheat is
transplanted by the tinctures of the Elements into a calamitous chance. Hither
pertains Antimony and Anarchisite, Sol and Luna. It is to be observed, that
those tinctures of the Elements are not altogether disagreeable from the thing
to whom they are superadded, but in some sort they conspire with them, though
they endeavor for dissolution, and make diverse deceits against life; for if
they had not some affinity with the Roots, Stars, and First Matter of things,
they could not be mixed, and so the Counsel and intent, not only of Generation,
but also of Transplantation shall be anihilated and frustrate.

A true and Philosophical Explanation of all Diseases, both Astral and
Material, Acute and Chronical.
CHAP. I. Of the Beginnings of Diseases.
GAlen and his imitators have made the grounds of Philosophy to be the Elements
and Qualities adjoined unto them, and the Principles of the art of Physic to
be the Humors. These grounds and principles being laid of Philosophy and
Physics, they make an easy compendious way unto the top of them without any
labor and sweat. But yet concerning the Spirits of Diseases both Galen and his
Sectators are silent. The power and force of which rise immediately The
Reciprocal Nature of the Spirits is to be noted for the Material Diseases, for
Bodies are produced from Spirits* and again Bodies are resolved into Spirits,
and the Beginnings of Material Diseases are spiritual, (that is) vaporous which
afterward end in Coagulation, which in the curing is to be reduced into the
First Matter, (that is) into a vaporous substance.
from Spirits, Winds, and Vapors, as Hippocrates testifies in his book de
flatibus, where he professes that all Diseases as well Astral as Material,
Acute as Chronical rise from Spirits, Winds, and Vapors. Here we must have
respect unto the Philosophy in which we have distinguished the University of
things into two Globes, the Superior and the Inferior. The superior contains
the Fire and the Air; The inferior contains the Water and the Earth. The
Properties of the Elements being considered, we may more easily search forth
the Nature and Properties of the Spirits: for the Seeds and Stars of all the
Elements do somewhat imitate the Nature and Poperties of their Matrix.

If first we consider the Fire we shall deprehend the most forcible impressions
of the Element of Heaven, as also most vehement impressions of the Element of
Heaven, as also most vehement impressions in regard of the power of operation
unless they be tempered with the confluence of more benign and less violent
Elements. Water temperates the Element of Fire, the next unto it ^^ Air, and
the Earth has the lowest place.

CHAP. II. Of the Spirits and Stars of the Elements.
THe Elements are twofold; Spiritual, as Fire and Air, and Corporal, as Water
and Earth. Of these all natural things are compounded, and are resolved into
them again; and from these they do not only receive life and being, but also
they receive nourishment from them for the conservation of life; wherefore it
is truly said of Hippocrates, We are nourished by the same of which we are
compounded, though not actually yet potentially: for all our aliment which we
receive from the Elements is conveyed to the mechanical spirits of our bodies,
by which it is transmutated into the substance of our Balsam.

Nutriment is twofold by reason of the Elements; Spiritual and Corporal. The
Fire and the Air do yield us spiritual nourishment; The Water and the Earth
yield us Corporal. This nutriment, whether it be spiritual or corporal,
contains in it three Principles and animal Balsam: for the bodies of all the
Elements consist of Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury.

Our first-begot spirit, or inbred heat, or vital Balsam uses this spiritual
aliment, and it requires the resolutions and fruits of the Celestial and Aerie
seeds, which are conjoined by great necessity; and this spirit does not only
receive alteration and refrigeration from this aliment, but Substance, Body,
and Nutriment, yet such as is agreeable unto it.

In the Doctrine of Transplantation we have demonstrated that in all the
Elements and first pure seeds of things there are permixt and implanted
tinctures, or roots, or stars, the Authors of Transplantations, which induce
and bring the anatomy of Diseases and Death into the Commonwealth of life;
whatsoever therefore receives and sucketh life and aliments from the Elements,
does therewith receive Diseases, for all aliments are seeds, but yet permixt
with impurities.

From these we collect that there are four stars or spirits of Health in the
Elements, so also stars or spirits of Diseases lurk and are closely contained
in the Elements. And these are in the Macrocosm. In the Microcosin also there
are four stars of Health, and four of Diseases. Paracelsus lib. 1. Param. de
origin Morb. cap. 369 ex tribus primis cap. 2.

CHAP. III. Of the visible Stars of the Firmament.
COncerning that which the Astrologers say, that the good and bad fortune of
men does depend on the fortunate or malignant aspect or position of the stars,
we will not stand on it, neither do we reject or approve of their fictions and
writings concerning Nativities, or of the fore-deeming Astrology in this place,
Seeing we consider the nature as well of fixed stars as of erring stars, and by
what means they cherish and conserve these inferior bodies, and how they bring
and endeavor corruption and destruction to the resolved stars and spirits of
the Diseases.

The stars of the Firmament which are the most perfect bodies, and are
represented by a visible form, are contained in the other Elements in virtue
and vital power: for we see the Golden chain of Homer and the Society of the
invisible nature with the visible, and we deprehend it in the conspiration of
the stars as well of Health as of Diseases.

In the superior Globe we see the Fire of the Heathen, Baths or Waters hot by
Nature, and we find the same poperties in the stars of the Heaven or Firmament,
and they are by so much more forcible by how much there is the greater
difference of these Elements.

In the inferior Globe we see Crystal and stones to be cold by Nature,
likewise we see some visible stars having the same property. The Loadstone has
an attractive faculty, the like attractive faculty is in many stars by
influences.

These operations of the stars are not to be ascribed to the Heat or Cold of
the stars, but they are contained in the faculties and sciences of their
principles of which they consist. Concerning the offices of the visible stars,
they are created of God for signs and seasons, that they may make day and
night, and that they may distinguish the times, not that they confer any thing
to the heat, pulchritude, nature, and properties of Man, or fruits of the Earth
or Water, as many Astrologers do trisle, but that the Sun and the Stars should
be as instruments of digestion, even as our material Fire and our Vulcan: for
without the visible stars we cannot live, seeing that the heat and cold and
digestion and maturity of natural things, which we use in our Meat and Drink
are caused from them.

The more principle visible stars are seven, Sol, Luna, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars,
Venus, Mercury, so likewise there are seven orders of the fixed stars, of which
every one is referred to a principal star, so that some stars are Saturnine,
some Jovial, some Martial, some Mercurial, some Solar, some Venereal, some
Lunar, which at the accomplished and decreed times do either produce many
fruits of Soundness or of Diseases.

CHAP. IV. Of the Being of Stars.
A Being is a thing or substance which has power to govern, change, and affect
our bodies. Paracelsus in param. de entibus Morb. he reckons five kinds of
these Beings. 1. The Being of the Star. 2. The Being of Poison. 3. The B^ing of
Nature. 4. The Being of Spirits, (that is) of Enchanters. 5. The Being of God.
These five Beings are five Originals or Causes of Diseases, of which Causes
every one has full and perfect power of procreating all Diseases; so that
according to the Beings or Causes, there are five kinds of the Plague, five
kinds of the Dropsy, five of the Jaundies, five kinds of Fevers, and so of
every Disease there are five kinds, and not one kind of every Disease as
Physicians have fasly persuaded themselves hitherto, seeing that every Being is
able to engender all the Diseases; and as in the inferior Globe of Water and
Earth we see the fruits which generate the Stone, the Tartar, the Sand, the
Gout, the Pining, and the Dropsy; so in the superior Globe some stars have
the same Properties and corrupting tinctures, and seeds of Diseases, and are
able to produce all Diseases; which thing Hermes Trismegistus the Father of the
first sacred Philosophy testifies, when as he says, It is true and no lie, it
is certain and most true, that that which is below is as that which is above,
and that which is above is as that which is below. This saying of Hermes is not
only to be understood of the Conspiration and Harmony, or Conflux and Consent
of the First and uncorrupted Matter, or of the stars of Generation in both the
Globes, but also of the Conspiration of the superadded tinctures and stars of
Transplantation.

The Holy Ghost confirms this Hermes his concord of the superior and inferior
things, and as well of the first perfect Nature as of the corruptible and
superadded Nature, by John in the Apocalyp. where it is writ, that Apoc. ^.
the star of Wormwood fell upon the Waters, and made the Waters bitter for the
Destruction of man.

Furthermore, this star and other like in properties are The Transplantation of
Water and Earth.
deprehended to be in the superior sphere and ^^ars of the Firmament. So also
the properties of Arsenick, Colocynthis, Devils Milk, and Scammony, and all the
properties of things and of superadded tinctures (according to the sentence of
Hermes, and Doctrine of the holy Ghost) are found to be in the superior Globe
and visible stars, which properties are hidden in the bodies of the inferior
Globe. We were ever happy Astronomers, Philosophers, and Physicians, if we knew
that concordance of Hermes, then we could truly interpret that which God spoke
by Moses, That they were for signs, which thing we see with half shut eyes,
these Concordances being not known.

Certainly many Physicians do neither believe nor do grant that from the stars
of the four Elements, as from universal causes of all Diseases as well
spiritual as material, acute as chronical, all Diseases do rise, seeing that
the stars are such clear, beautiful, and lucid bodies which do absolve and
finish a certain Course.

From hence it appears that they only read the Writings of the Heathen, and
that they have lost the great book of Nature, and the book of Philosophy, and
art of Physic, and that they have not read the Bible, from which as from a
Fountain all Wisdom flows; for if they had read the Bible with judgment they
would have found it in express words writ in Job, that the stars before God are
not pure, but contaminated with impurities and tinctures superadded; wherefore
as the Earth for the fall and prevarication of the first man was Cursed and
filled with thorns and briers, even so the superior bodies the like
spiritually, which the inferiors receive corporally, which Hermes and all real
Astrologers confirmed by Experience, do affirm.

CHAP. V. Of the Being of Poison in the Visible Stars.
SEeing that in the visible stars of the Firmament there are found not only
the form of the Wheat, but of Darnel, and not only the Nature and Properties of
Gold and Silver, Balmmint and Rose, but of Arsenick, Woofsbane, and Poppy, it
follows necessarily, that the Being of Poison is contained in the Being of the
stars, though it differ from the being of poison in the inferior bodies,
because it is in the stars spiritually, but in the inferior bodies corporally:
for Paracelsus in his book de ente Astr. cap. 9. writes, that there do not more
poisons exist in the Earth than do in the stars, when as he says, all the kinds
of poisons which the fruits of the inferior Globe of the Earth and Water do
show unto us, are likewise contained the stars of the Firmament. And
furthermore he says of those exalted stars poisoned with impurities and
resolved seeds, that they can produce all Diseases which these inferior bodies
by the being of their poison can produce; for the original and cause of all
Diseases is the being of poison, and all Diseases are generated from poison.
Wherefore Physicians persuade themselves that all Diseases as well spiritual as
corporal have their original and beginning from the spiritual or corporal being
of poison. The being of poison is rightly distinguished for the difference of
the superior and inferior bodies into the spiritual in regard of the
superior and corporal in regard of the inferior bodies.

We have said in our Philosophy, that no Element does bring forth fruits in his
own proper place, but in a strange place, and that the fruits of the Firmament
were absolved and perfected in the Air; for as the fruits of Sanity flowing
from the Firmament are absolved in the Air, so also the stars of the Firmament
do lay down the fruits of Diseases and Death in the bosom of the air, that
there they may attain the predestined term and perfection. But seeing that
the necessity of the air is so great to all living creatures that they cannot
want it for a moment, It comes to pass, that not only brute Animals do attract
corrupt and infected air by breathing, but also men; for the aliment of the
Microcosm as of the superior Globe is altogether invisible and spiritual.
Hippocrates in his book de flatibus, shows the unresistible necessity of this
aliment. The necessity of breathing is so great to all mortal creatures, that
though man abstain from all other things, so that he neither eat, nor drink,
yet he may live two or three days or more: but if any man have the passages
stopped by which breath enters into the body, he dies in less than a moment of
an hour. Again, men may cease from other labors, but there is no rest or
ceasing from breathing granted to any. Paracelsus in his book de ente Astror.
cap. 7. calls the Air a great Mystery, but yet for some analogy or similitude,
for by the air he understands the stars of the air which give life unto all
things. And it is truly said of Paracelsus in the same Treatise, cap. 7. that
all bodies and Elements are preserved by the air; but not by the air alone, but
by seeds and stars; for all aliments and nutriments are seeds, but mixed with
impurities. Neither is the air alone as far as it is an Element infected with
poisonsome properties, but that great Mystery from the resolution of the
poisonful tinctures is Transplanted and transmutated, which gives aliment to
the vital Balm. So that this aliment being received, and the great Mystery
being Transplanted and transmutated, the animal and vital Balm is also
infected, whereupon follows the Transplantation of the body into a calamitous
chance. Although this aliment be invisible and want external signatures (by
which they make differences of the aliments of the inferior Globe) as Taste,
Solidness, Crasness, Tenuity, Clamminess, Heat, Easy or Hard Digestion; yet it
is not destitute of the interior signatures; for the spirits and resolutions
of fruits of the superior Globe are neither sweet nor sour, bitter nor sharp,
white nor black, and very often admit or receive stinking smells. In this
aliment four qualities as the qualities or faculties of some poisons exist and
triumph, which neither by taste nor smell, or any manifest qualities show and
manifest their occult qualities. But pernicious resolutions are only
deprehended and known from the affects.

CHAP. VI. Of the differences of Stars, namely, of the Benign, the Mean, and
the Extreme hurtful.
IF the inferior bodies be as the superior, which is confirmed by the
Testimony of the Holy Ghost and of Hermes, then all the stars in the Firmament
do contain in them the anatomy of Diseases and Death; but many are found forth
whose resolutions are wholesome; for in the inferior Globe Nature has set
before our eyes Gold, Silver, Gemms, Balmmint, Roses, Violets, Betony, Wheat,
Barley, Wine, Milk, withal which Nature refreshes the vital spirits
continually as with food and aliment. Again, we see the herbs and medicamental
simple bodies, Lettice, Cassia, Rheubarb, Polypody or Oakfern, Vinegar,
Agarick, the herb Trinity, Arsemart, Cuckowpitle, and others of that kind.
Lastly, some do show poison manifestly, as Arsenick, Wolfbane, Poppy, Hemlock,
Antimony, Vittiol, Mercury, Scammony, Devils Milk, Colocynth, all which resist
man's Nature, and intend present death.

As the inferior Globle yields unto us three Orders of all fruits of the Earth
and Water common to things and kinds, namely, that some are wholesome unto men
and necessary for life, as is said of Wheat and Wine; Some are indifferent and
mean, as is said of Cassia, of Lettice, Polypody, and Rheubarb; Some are
altogether contrary to man's Nature, as Arsenick, Hemlock, Woolfbane: Even so we
distinguish all the stars in the visible Heaven into three Orders. First, some
stars have the anatomy of Soundness, whose resolutions are necessary for the
health of Animals, and they have also the sincere conditions of Nutriment;
neither is there any poisonful property found in them by sense or effect. These
stars answer in the inferior Globe to Gold, Silver, Gemms, Balmmint, Rose,
Wheat, Wine, Milk. Secondly, some stars have tinctures and medicamental
properties, but yet lighter admixt in their exaltations and their resolutions
which rise at the several times of the year, and are frequent. These stars in
the inferior Globe agree with Lettice, Cassia, Cuckowpintle, Arsemart,
Agarick, and others of this kind. Thirdly, some stars in the resolutions of the
seeds show the poisonful properties of Arsenick, Auripigmentum, Sulphur,
Woolfbane, Libberdsbane, by manifest testimonies of the effects. These stars in
the inferior sphere have these nigh and of affinity with them; namely,
Mercury, Antimony, Arsenick, Sulphur, Woolfbane, Scammony, Ellebor, the herb
Devils Milk, Colocynth, etc.

From these it is manifest that natural things and fruits of the Elements, as
well of the superior as of the inferior sphere, are divided into three
Orders. Into those which are benign and friendly unto man's Nature, and into
those which are indifferent and mean, and lastly, into those which are extreme
hurtful and bring present death and destruction, as all fruits of aliments and
resolutions of seeds whether they be alimentary, or medicamentary, or extreme
hurtful.

CHAP. VII. Of the differences of Stars, of which some Benign some Malicious.
THough it be not our purpose to handle of the differences of stars in this
place, and to explain their Nature and properties in particular, Seeing that it
belongs rather to Astronomy and Astrology, notwithstanding seeing that this
knowledge of stars in this Doctrine is especially required, we will briefly say
somewhat of it.

The first of all we must consider which Planets are benign, which are
malicious and hurtful, and this of erring stars.

Concerning the fixed stars, we have distributed them into seven Orders, cap. 1.
of this Treatise, and that in regard of the Planets and dominant stars to whom
the fixed stars do (as it were) serve and imitate the Nature of their dominant
Planets.

That the benignity and clemency, as on the contrary, the malignity of the
Planets might be made manifest, we have divided the erring Stars or Planets
into two kinds, The clement or benign, and the malignant.

The benign or clement Planets are the Sun, Jupiter, Venus, Mercurius, The
malicious or malignant are Mars and Saturn, The indifferent Planet is the Moon.

After the same manner the signs of the Zodiac are to be explained, which the
Planets or erring Stars illustrate and illuminate, and for the Nature of the
guests, the Houses or Guesthouses are made friendly or malignant.
Notwithstanding for the most part they show and exercise their malice in their
proper houses, as Saturn in Aquarius, Capricorn and Libra, which is the house
of exaltation. So Mars in Aries, Scorpio and in Capricorn, which is the house
of exaltation. It is to be observed, that there are four triplicities of the
Stars in the Zodiac, and there are three signs attributed to every Planet,
which are endued either with good or malignant qualities by reason of the
quality of their Planet.

Again, those signs in the Zodiac are twofold in regard of the Elements. Some
are fiery and aerie; Some watery and earthly. Saturn has a triplicity in the
fiery and aerie signs; Mars in the watery and earthly signs; so that Saturn and
Mars are thought to comprehend the whole necessity of things by their
malignity; for the Moon and Venus (which otherwise are numbered amongst the
benign and mild Planets) when they are in the ends of Saturn or Mars, they are
made partakers of their malignity, so that they are deprived of their good and
friendly Nature unto men, and take upon them the unfriendly Nature and
malignant to their inseriours, for these signs which are very much Saturnal,
and too much Martial, are hurtful and unfriendly spirits naturally to the
spirit; so that we say the Signs or Planets are unfortunate, and contrary to
man's Nature by Saturn or Mars, unless they be in their Houses or Kingdoms (that
is) either when they are there, or have their Aspect thither either in Opposite
or Quadrate. We call the Opposite Aspect that which is betwixt those which are
distant very far amongst themselves. We call the Quadrate Aspect that when as
one is distant from another the fourth part of the Heaven, (that is) it is
distant the third space of the signs, and then the confluence does somewhat
mitigate the malice of Mars; so Jupiter does temperate the malignity of Saturn,
and bruises his poisonful glass. The Aspect of Saturn or Mars unto the Moon
exists every where ill and malignant. And thus much of the Nature, Property,
and Difference of the erring stars. Now concerning the fixed stars, and
especially the signs. All are not endued with poisonful and malignant
properties manifestly, but use and experience has observed four, namely,
Piscis, Aquarius, Scorpio, and Cancer, these are also malignant, Pleiades,
Hyades, the Constellations of Pisces, which represent stupefactive,
somniferous, Poppies, and the Mandrakes tinctures, as also the Sulphurous and
Vitriol tinctures. In like manner Boots and Vrsae have the poisonful
properties of Aquarius, so also of Scorpio and Cancer. The Satu^nine and
Martial stars obtain the poisonful properties (but more forcible and grievous)
of Au^ipigmental spirits, Arsenick, Armonial, and Sulphureal spirits.

The revolutions or circular motions of these stars are made with great
Eclipses and Conjunctions. Hippocrates lib. Epidem. has described the
unseasonable and intemperate revolutions of the stars in many words and
circumstances, who in this place is to be read of us.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Astral Impression.
IN the sixth Chapter we have divided all the stars into three Orders, in
regard of the inferior bodies, namely, benign and mild, mean, and extreme
noxious and hurtful. In the seventh Chap. we have divided the sta^s considered
by themselves into two Orders, and we have comprehended the indifferent and
mean under the benign and mild stars by reason of the general Transplantation
which happens equally to all created things of the superior and inferior
Globe. In the precedent Chap. concerning the spiritual Transplantation of the
stars, we have handled and demonstrated which stars did excel others in malice
and malignity, whose beginnings and resolutions are first of all to be
considered: for all Diseases which the inferior Globe generates may likewise
be produced of the superior. In the inferior Globe and fruits of the Elements
of Water and Earth, we can eschew and fly those things which are extreme
hurtful and noxious, as far as they are known to us. But we can no way fly the
Astral impression and infected Air, but without discerning we attract as well
the hurtful and infected air, as the wholesome, by inspiration and inward
breathing, and we use it for necessity* seeing it is invisible and destitute of
exterior signatures. Furthermore, when the Constellation, Influence, or Astral
impression arises from the course of the stars, or unlucky and unfortunate
placing and contrary motion thereof, or from the Aspects of the Planets, as
also the Malevolent and malignant stars have made resolutions of the fruits in
the air, and have imitated the aliment of the superior Globe in their
signatures, according unto the poisonful properties of the stars; and when the
material stars rise with the poisonful properties of Arsenick, or when
Arsenicks properties or Realgar of the Planets are begot by the malignant and
unfortunate positure or conjunction, then the plague is caused. But when the
properties of Saturn, Ellebor, Colocynth, Scammony, and Devils Milk, have
dominion in the air, they produce the dissolute Disease, and the Dysentety; for
whatsoever the beams of the stars touch, that they change altogether, and indue
the nutriment of the superior Globe with poisonful properties, which men
attract by breathing. And this is the engendring of the Plague, Dysentery,
Out-raging, Madness, Epilepsie, Gout, and of all Astral Diseases; for there is
the same reason of the indifferent or mean stars, which produce lighter
Diseases, as Fevers, Rheums, Horrors, Disuria, Pandiculation, Sloth,
Drowsiness, difficulties of breathing.

CHAP. IX. Of the Anatomy of Astral Diseases.
THus far we have demonstrated that all Astral Diseases rise from the being of
poison. But perchance some will object, feeing that the being of poison is
attracted spiritually by inspiring, wherefore is not the whole body but some
part, and not the heart but some other more principal Members transmutated? It
is answered by the common sentence of Philosophers, that Nature rejoices for
Nature, and Nature receives that Nature which it meets with; verily in man all
the properties and stars of the Heaven and Earth are contained, and for this
cause man is called a Microcosm, though they show the contrary; but yet he is
so by reason of the like effects, as Libavius could not deny; for there are not
only bad properties in man but good, as the form of Darnel lies closely in the
seed of the Wheat. Therefore like do congratulate with like, and good
properties do ever yield to the more strong, when as bad are superadded, as the
form of Wheat yields and grants the Empire to bad properties, the tinctures
of the Lilly being superadded. These Transplantations are frequent in the
Generation and in the Curing of Diseases. But certainly when the temperature of
the bad properties and not of the first or second qualities (of which, Galen,
distemperature rises) excels, and receives more nutriment from inordinate
and bad diet, or from the influence of the stars, the natural actions of the
Members are hurt, weakened, hindered, or altogether extinguished, from whence it
is a true saying, As many Members as many Deaths. When a Physician helps
diseased Nature by the like Remedies fetched from the signed art and anatomy,
the temperature of the bad properties is expelled, and the Empire and Dominion
of Nature is restored.

And this is the true and proper Theory of the Generation and Cure of Diseases.
That we may return unto our purpose, and propound more clearly the anatomy of
astral Diseases, we will demonstrate this anatomy by an example of the
Dysentery.

The poison of the Dysentery is of the Nature of the fiery impression, and the
intestines of man have the same properties. Furthermore, the intestines receive
that p^^son, and so it is conjoined and united with the (...) and malignant
properties, which lie closely in the (...) stance of the intestines, as the
form of the Darnel in the Wheat; which properties of the intestines being
malignant and strengthened in the Period of Evacuations expel Nature, until
that after the avoiding and ejection of all the Excrements and Humors the
faculties be excoriated, and so they expel and eject the blood, little pieces
of flesh, yea the very substance of the intestines.

So likewise the Brain has his stars, which if they be rightly tempered in the
Macrocosm, the Brain i^ also well: but if they infect the air by Diseaseful
resolutions, the Brain admits the same malignant properties, and receives them
unto the Vein as unwelcome guests; which is not to be understood only of the
Brain, but of the Heart, Liver, Reins, Lungs, Milt, and Gall. This is the
anatomy of the Places and the Planets which first of all are to be observed and
understood of a Physician. Of which Paracelsus in the 4. Chap. de duplici
anatomia. This I count the chief and especial thing in a Physician, that he
rightly understand the confluence of anatomy, and by what means Places and
Diseases do agree amongst themselves, not that it ought to be done without the
exterior anatomy of the Macrocosm, but rather that it be deduced by the same
influence.

CHAP. X. Of the Natural Being.
THe Microcosm being created from the Macrocosm, and according to the
Macrocosm, contains in him four Elements, Heaven and Earth, Air and Water, he
contains in him four Earths, four Fires, four Airs, four Waters. But he does
not alone contain the Elements which a^e the Matrices and Nurses of things, but
all the fruits and things begot of the Elements* and not only the Elements and
their fruits, but all the stars of all the Elements, which are fourfold (as
well of Health as of Diseases) according to the number of the Elements, namely,
Fiery, Aerie, VVatery, and Earthly stars, as in the second Chap. in Respectu
Generationis and Transplantationis. If this be true, which no wise man will
deny, then the Firmament of both the Globes, For all things are in all things*
for there is in Nature Earthly Fire, Air, and Water; again there is Heavenly
Earth, Air, and Water. The natural Being is the Firmament of the Microcosm, it
becomes the Being of a Disease as far as there chance errors in the Firmament
of the Microcosm.
the Planets, and all the Stars as well fixed as erratical are contained in man.
Some things chance often in the Astronomy of the greater World, as
Conjunctions, Eclipses, Oppositions, which Prognosticate great Evils; so also
great Eclipses, Conjunctions, and Aspects chance in the Astronomy of the
Microcosm or little World, and in the Transplantations of times, and
Prevarications of the confluences, by reason that the Laws of Harmony and
Conspiration are corrupted in the Firmament of the Microcosm, so that there
necessarily follows Barrenness, want of natural Moisture, Pining and many other
hurts and evils.

CHAP. XI. How much the Firmament of the Macrocosm and the Microcosm diff^rs.
A Man is a Microcosm, and the most perfect creatu^e of all creatures, he has
the East in his Mouth, the West in his Fundament, the South in his Navel, the
North in his Back. And as there are four Cardinal winds in the greater World,
so there are four Cardinal winds in the less World in these parts. The Bladder
in the Microcosm is the VVestern Sea into which all slouds flow, and in which
they are consumed, and in which the superfluous Salt is resolved* The hollow
Vein in the Backbone is a Mediterrane Sea in the Microcosm, Though it go
invisibly through the whole Body, yet it is grounded in the Vital or Animal
Heat and Spirit.
namely of winds. The Concordance and Division of the Elements mixtly is
perspicuous in the Microcosm. The Element of Fire appears in his eyes. The air
is in the whole body, which air is the spirit of the Arteries. The Element of
Water appears in the Conduits, that is, in the Veins of the whole body. The
Element of Earth is flesh with the bones, which is every way compassed with
watery Rivers. But wherefore has it seemed good to premit or put before the
Elements and agreeable beginnings of man's Nature, and those which were unknown?
but that the way might more easily ly open to the unknown things; for in these
Elements the seeds and Celestial stars Aerie, Earthly, and VVatery, are
cherished and nourished, which at decreed and appointed times b^ing forth
fruits, either Messengers of Health or Diseases. In these also all the Planets
work, namely, the Sun, Moon, Mars, Saturn, Mercury, Jupiter, and likewise, the
Saturnine, Jovial, Martial, Venereal, Mercuria, Solar and Lunar stars, not
bodily, but spiritually. The spirits absolve and perfect all the course in man's
Astronomy and not bodies; from these arise new Changes, Exaltations,
Conjunctions, Oppositions, Eclipses, and the Affections of man's Astronomy.

In the Macrocosm some stars beget Thunder, Lightnings, Hail, Rain, Heat, Cold,
and Dryness. Those in the Microcosm generate spiritually Fevers, Epilepsies,
Dropsies, Rheums, Paralysis, Apoplexies: so the Heart and Sun, the Moon and the
Brain, Mercury and the Lungs, Jupiter and the Liver, Saturn and the Spleen,
Mars and the Gall, are compared amongst themselves, not according to their
bodies, but according to their spirits; not according to the Elements, but
according to the Stars. Therefore what actions soever are ab^olved and
perfected in the Macrocosm by bodies, those are perfected in the Firmament of
the Microcosm by spirits and vital powers.

CHAP. XII. How Errors do chance to man's Astronomy, and how from the Being of
Nature may be produced the Being of Diseases, or Being of Poison.
PAracelsus in his Paragr. sub titulo Astronomiae, fol. 50. says, that there
is one Heaven, one course of Stars, and one Man; and that Heaven is Man; and
Man is Heaven, all Men one Heaven, and Heaven only one Man, according to the
Cabalistical science; all men are one man, all anatomies one anatomy, all the
diseases of all men are the diseases only of one man: these are true in all
parts of the World, in Arabia, Europe, Italy, and Germany; for we have laid the
firm and solid grounds of our art not upon the sand, but upon the living stone.
Whosoever would have the title of a Physician, and challenges the title of
Physic, he ought to get the accurate and exquisite knowledge of this Heaven.
But what is the knowledge of this Heaven? but the knowledge of this Star;
therefore who so has obtained the knowledge of Heaven and the Star, he has
deserved the true triumph of his name (that is) of a Physician. Heaven is
internal and external, the Physician considers the internal, the Astronomer and
the Astrologer the external.

The internal heaven is one in essence, but diverse in kind; for the Spirit of
God which h^th separated the Light from the Darkness, and he which h^th created
Heaven and Earth with his Almighty word, has made in man as well the superior
as the infe^iour Firmament* yet the analogy of them both was res^rved. The
inferior Heaven or Firmament is corporal, which produces the fruits of the
Water in the bosom of the Earth. Another is the Liquor of life conserving the
body from corru^tion and de^^ruction.

The superior Heaven works in the Microcosm not by substance, not by the
body, but by spirit, virtue, and vital power, as it is said in the 11. Chap.
Nevertheless the superior Heaven is nourished and conserved by the infe^iour,
for the great Heaven or vital mechanical spirits consume this Firmament or the
inferior Heaven continually; therefore there is need of restitution, mixtion,
and composition. It is most truly said of Hippocrates, that conservation is
continued by nutrition; for they are called the greater after a Philosophical
manner, which excel in more forcible impressions and tinctures; and they are
called the less or weaker which yield in the mixtion and conspiration of the
beams, and grant the separations, alterations, and transmutations of their
parts to the disposing and wills of the more potent and strong. The fecundity
and fruitfulness of whole Nature is Established and Confirmed by the mutual
conspiration of both the Firmaments or Heavens, and by their familiarity and
nutrition; by the reciprocal course of the impressions, the knot or bond of
health is conserved, the Laws of these being corrupted, barrenness, defects and
most grievous diseases do follow in man's Nature.

Some things were see in the Worlds Astronomy, as the rising of Stars at
certain seasons defend and conserve the wholsomeness of the year for the
seasonable resolutions of fruits, forthwith the stars of Rain bringing more
commodiously resolution are required. Sometimes the stars of winds, sometimes
of serenity and clearness, sometimes of heat, sometime the stars of cold, snow,
frost, dew, sometime of the West winds, and the stars of the genital deflux
are desired, And in the Terrestrial Astronomy, sometimes Roses, sometimes
Violets, sometimes Daffodiles, do spring and flourish; sometime Pulse, sometime
Vines, Trees, and all Plants observe their Periods unless the causes of
sterility and diseases preve^t.

So in man's Astronomy the stars of the superior Globe, the vital spirits of
the Heart and Brain are moistened kindly of the seeds with showers, serenity,
heat, and by the fruitful falling of dew and VVestwinds, and by such like
fruits of the inferior Elements, which being absent and wanting, defect of
Radical humor pining and barrenness does happen. Both of these stars do
endeavor by the abound^nce of aliments to restore the melting and decayed
parts, and to recover the sick hastening unto rottenness.

Again, the inferior stars bring forth Roses, Violets, Balmmint, Valerian,
Vines, Fruits, Gold, Silver, Rubines, Sa^ hires, continually from aliments,
unless the cause of sterility shall prevent, not that they demonstrate the
external signatures in man, for they have lost their outmost Vestures by
Transplantation, but because they produce like properties in the spiritual
bodies of man's anatomy, from which the superior stars receive nutriments, and
all of them are made fit for their offices and actions; for transplanted
Generation (as abovesaid) becomes worse and not better, and it is hindered,
whereby the Roots of Generation may less be able to explain their gifts and
native sciences, for the spirits of Transplantations are more strong and
vigorous than of the inbred. But how shall the inferior stars bring forth
fruits of soundness and health out of the aliments, if that the temperature of
the bad properties excel, and if the bowels of nourishing be faint and weak,
whereby they may he less able to separate the pure from the impure, and the
unfirm from the firm? Certainly if the inferior Heaven be destroyed and
co^ru^ted, of necessity the superior Heaven must be corrupted, for how will it
give that which it takes not, or how will it give that which it has not?

From hence it is that the superior Heaven endeavors dissolution, seeing that
the strength is consumed, and it is destitute of nutriment; for we have said
that the Transplantations of times, what shall I say of times? but the
prevarications of fruits and the confluences may bring such evils and infinite
calamities, yea lastly Death it self into man's Commonweal; so from the Being of
Nature proceeds the Being of Poison and Diseases.

CHAP. XIII. Of Curing of Astral Diseases of the Greater and Lesser World.
Which rise from the ^irmament of the Ma^rocosm, which rise from the Firmament
of the Microcosm.
THere is required for the preservation of Astral Diseases, first an evacuation
of impurities by convenient Remedies, for there lie diverse seeds oftentimes of
Diseases in the filthy impurities; and if such impressions be contained in the
body, the astral are more easily admitted when as the blood shall be impure,
that impurity is not to be removed by the cutting of the Vein, but it is to be
expelled by Diaphoretical Veins fetched from Physical anatomy, not that one
exhibition or giving will suffice for preservation, but every week one Dosis of
Diaphoreticks is to be taken by reason of the time.

In the Curing of the Epidemical Diseases, first it is to be respected unto the
being of Poison, and labor must be taken especially that the Poison be
abolished and taken away speedily without deliberation by convenient Remedies.

No better and more excellent method of curing astral Di^eases can be invented
of expelling the being of Poison, than that which is made by swear. In this
Cure the chief Remedies are Diaphoretical or sudoriferous Medicines which expel
the being of Poison by sweat luckily, and take away and disperse the mists and
poisoned spirits of the blood, especially diaphoretical or sweating Medicines
are to be given, which are fetched from Astronomy and the signed art, until
that all the Poison be abolished.

In the curing of these Diseases the Galenists are mad with reason, which make
purgations of the belly obstinately, when as no body is present with the being
of Poison but spirits, for in astral Diseases astral and spiritual Concerning
this look into the following Treatise, cap. 16. at the end de Cura Phthisea.
Remedies are to be given. In the Curing of the Diseases which have their
beginnings and originals from the Firmament of the Microcosm, first of all a
Physician must know and understand Transplantation, which in Philosophy is
called Regeneration or begetting again; for example, if some be sick with the
Hectic in Phthisis under the Empire or Dominion of Saturn, In the Curing of
this Disease we must labor with all diligence to transplant Saturn into Venus,
wherefore the most perfect Cure of Antimony is seen in the Hectic and
Malignant are to be tempered with the Benign.
Phthis^s because it transplants Saturn into Venus. These are the Mysteries of
Cures, the secrets of Remedies, and the brevities of Manifestations. So all the
Stars in the Microcosm may be transplanted and made friendly unto man's Nature
by the secrets of Remedies and Mysteries of Cures; so all deplored and
desperate diseases are abolished by this Philosophical Transplantation, as the
Leprosy, the Leprie and all kinds of the Leprie. There are the proceedings of
many by which Transplantation or Regenerating is perfected, is comprehended in
the preparations of Antimony.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Being of Poison.
THus far have we handled of the Astronomy of the greater and less World, and
of the stars, of diseases of the Element of Heaven, and the Air, and also of
the Cu^ing of astral diseases. Now it is convenient that we descend to the
Philosophy and diseases of the inferior Globe, namely of the Element of Earth
and Water.

All the fruits and effects of the Element of Earth and ^ram. in Apolog. re^^t.
fol. 10.
Water have poison admixt, not only medicamental, and extreme hurtful and
noxious, but those which are called of Physicians alimental. Wherefore seeing
we take aliments for the preservation and nourishing of our bodies, we also
receive poison mixed with our aliment; but if all be rightly administered in the
frame of the Ventricle, this poison by the admixtion of more benign and
wholesome meats being tempered, resolved and separated, is thereby expelled, or
else this poison remains in the anatomy of the belly, and is the cause of many
most grievous diseases; for the governor and faculty of the Ventricle, if it
have strength and power of working, it separates the pure from the impure, and
changes the pure into a tincture, and gives the tincture to the body for
norishment for the conservation of life of the great Heaven in the little
World, but when this Spagyrian or Separatour does not rightly execute his
Functions, and that the poison is separated from the aliment, neither by
natural nor artificial concoction of the Ventricle, it comes to pass that the
poison and the aliment conspire, and after All the kinds of Poison are in the
Tartar.
the conspiration follows putrefaction and digestion, after digestion comes
corruption, which is the breeder of all diseases.

CHAP. XV. What the Being of Poison is.
THe being of Poison which is in all aliments is an excrementitious and
Tartareous impurity, which has not an expulsive virtue, but rather a
constipating Alumish and astringent faculty.

After that the stomach has received, eaten and ingested meats, it separates
the pure from the impure. The pure nutriment is, if that the Ventricle be
strong the pure aliment passes to the members for nutriment, the impure is
evacuated by stool. If the Ventricle be weak it sends the impure unto the
Liver, and there separation is made; if that the Liver be strong it separates
well and sends the excrementitious matter together with the Urine; if there be
a good separation it is well, if not, the excrementitious and stony matter
remains and is coagulated into a sand which is called a Tartar. The original
and Fountain of this evil must be diligently observed, from whence many
diseases of the great inferior Globe do rise. The original and Fountain of
them is the stomach, which has the properties of three beginnings flowing
together with the spirits of the foresaid Alumish constipating and sour
Tartareous filth and excrements.

Therefore the other Causes concurring by which the actions or lythargy of the
faculties of man's body are commonly hindered as things taken, done and
outwardly happening, (that is) which chance outwardly and are able to hurt the
spirits, as Baths, Falling, Confusion, Venus, Separations, and Expulsions in a
preposterous use of the Tartareous dregs being in the Ventricle and Intestines,
and the stinking Sulphur or man's dung being consumed and separately evacu^ted
the excrementitious impurity gets opportunity and seats it self in the
Ventricle and Intestines which Sev. calls those the Spirits of nature.
roots being set the spirits (which bear sway and have vigor in the natural
These he calls the Spirits of the thing.
anatomy of the Intestines, and seat themselves in the filthy excrements)
produce and cause the obstruction and constipating of the belly, and endeavor
the continuity and retention of the excrements. These roots being first laid in
the continual nourishing they will receive excrements though that so manifest
error do not chance afterward in the diet until that at the accomplished time
they show Paroxisms the Companions of Generations; so the mechanical spirits of
the stomach being corrupt and stained by Alumish and stiptick tinctures they
are made unfit for all natural motions, alterations, separations, and
digestions, and resolutions, so that they absolve and perfect the Functions of
concoctions very slowly, and hence it is that crudeness, belching,
inflammations, heaviness, sloth, drowsiness after meat and the intollerance of
hunger. Sev. p. 342. says that this evil and such like arise because of the
vitiated lithargy, and likewise the other reservacles (that is) emunctory or
avoiding instruments serving for nourishing, being vitiated and corrupted,
separations and digestions are corrupted by little and little, and
transplanted, as Paracelsus speaks in his Treatise de ente Veneni.

CHAP. XV. What the Tartar is, which are the kinds, and which are Excrements.
IT is said that the being of Poison of the inferior Amongst the rest read the
most excellent Treatise of Paracelsus de Morbis ex Tataro. Tom* 4. operis,
concerning these Tartareal Diseases and the Causes and Cures.
Globe is a Tartar, and it comprehends under it 4. kinds. The stone, the sand,
the lump, and the glue or slime.

This Tartar is an excrement of natural things coagulated by his spirits in man.

Excrements are twofold, first the excrement of man, secondly, of natural
things.

The excrement of man is an impure and stinking Sulphur, which is avoided by
the belly, and it is named the dregs of the belly.

The excrement of natural things is an excrementitious Severinus in hi^ Bc^k de
tribus Principiis cap. 2.
and tartareous matter, of Paracelsus it is called the Salt of the thing, which
is not expelled unless it be admixt with impure and stinking Sulphur; it is
coagulated into the stone, sand, lump, or slime.

The faculty of the Ventricle is not able to separate this excrement of natural
things, seeing it does stick more deeply in the aliments, but is conveyed to
the more subtle mechanical spirits, namely, of the Mesaraical Veins, Liver,
Reins, Bladder, and Intestines. If the mechanical spirits of the members shall
strongly separate that excrement of natural things then the lithargy of the
body shall every where be sound: but seeing errors happen in the separation,
and that it is not exquisite, a vaporous substance is distributed through the
whole body together with the aliment, and finds place not only in the blood and
flesh, but also in the marrow and other places where it makes his abode.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Excrements of the first three.
IT is often said that all aliments are seeds, but yet permixt with impurities.
These seeds are contained in three Beginnings which have their excrements, for
in Sulphur there is a fat and smoaky excrement, in Salt a foul Earth, in
Mercury there is phlegm. Hereupon diverse diseases are begot in man's body for
the diversity of places if they be not rightly separated by the mechanical
spirits of the bowels serving for nourishment, nor be expelled by the emunctory
or avoiding and accustomed places. Seeing therefore such like impurities of the
three principles flow in the body, because they have not a conspiration in the
body, but expel the vital Sulphurs from their Globes unless they be stronger
and overcome the inbred spirits, so the inbred spirits do yield and give
place to the strange tinctures and impurities, being destitute of the favor
and cherishing of their places they err, because they are unknown guests and
sind not place in their Inn.

These are the properties of the Elements or Sulphurs, (that is) of the nature
of the mechanical spirits of the superior Firmament of the spirits of the
Heart and Brain that they cannot suffer or abide any strange or disagreeable
thing in their places, but expel all by their united forces and virtue. But if
so be the tinctures of impurity find a firm Union with the mechanical spirits
of the Ventricle, and the mixtion cease in a fruitful Transplantation, and the
governing of the in bred Balm cease, and the proper Functions be neglected,
they bring forth and cause continually the diseased fruits of Transplantation,
neither can such affections be expelled by any industry either of Nature or
inbred Balm, unless by the means and Ministry of art external Balm helps the
internal, for the spirits of Transplantations are more strong workers than the
inbred.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the twofold Tartar, namely, of Meat and Drink, and what the
difference of it is, and how much it differs in the Cure.
IN the 1. place is to be observed that there be two kinds of Tartar, one from
Meat, the other rises from Drink.

That Tartar which rises from Meat is The Tartars of Meat and Drink are
distinguished in places, for the Tartar of Meat for the most part is begot in
the anatomy and place of the Ventricle and Intestines* the Tartar of Drink is
begot where the separation of the Alimont is from the Urine (that is) in the
Mesentery and Urete^s, etc.
more easy to be cured. That which rises from Drink is very hard to be cured.
But there be many Meats taken which while they nourish they receive the place
of drink, so there be drinks which while they quench thirst are in the place or
stead of meats; from these one Generation of Tartar rises, not two kinds,
though from the commixtion of meat and drink Generation be caused, yet from
that commixtion only one kind arises, which afterward is separated and divided
into his kinds* and keeps the Nature of a Tartar, either of that which is
commonly begot by meat, or that which is begot by drink.

Concerning the Tartar of meat, this is to be noted, that every excrement of
the Ventricle passes through the Intestines, in which passage it stays somewhat
longer, and also that Tartar which in the good separation is mixed with impure
and stinking Sulphur, makes a constant union, and ever adheres with the spirits
of the Intestines, and then it produces infinite diseases, almost all the kinds
of the Cholick, the pains of the superior and inferior Ventricle, the
obstructions of the Belly, and the dissolved diseases, as Dyarrhaea,
Dysenteria, and Lienteria. And these of the Tartar of meat; for the more full
understanding of it read the 15. Chap. We will handle now of the Tartar of
Drink.

Urine is first separated from nutriment, without the limits or place of the
Ventricle, which is thus to be understood; the Liver attracteth nutriment, and
in that attraction Urine is separated from nutriment in the Mesaraical veins;
when as yet it passes crude through those passages it obstructeth the
Mesaraical veins and pores and other passages through which it passes; from
whence many obstructions and prickings arise, which are ascribed to the blood
but falsely. Oftentimes it comes to pass that for the abundance and reserving of
Tartar (the Mesaraical veins being obstructed) nutriment cannot pass unto the
Liver, so that it comes to pass that the nutriment remains in the stomach, and
then follow Vomiting, loathing of Meats, the blasting of the body by a Planet,
being a kind of the Phthisis, the paroxism of the stone which comes by cold and
heat, as in the Plague, Pleurisis, and such like diseases; from hence the
Erysipellas for the most part has his original. The same is the Generation of
the Tartar from Urine in the Liver, for Urine is nothing but a resolved Salt,
so that the Liver is made the fountain of many diseases, which is a noble and
excellent member, yea almost serving all the parts of the body, so that if it
suffer any thing, all the members have a compassion, and also suffer and are
brought into consent; hereupon is the Dropsy, the Fever, and the Erysipellas.
Some fruits of trees, as Pears, are brought forth and produced in May, but they
are ripe at the soone^ in Autumn; so also the Tartar has times of Generation
and Beginning, and also of maturity. So in the Ureters or urinary passages
going from the Liver to the Bladder more sharp, hard, and strong Tartars are
begot than are begot in the Ventricle, Mesaraical Veins and Liver, for in those
passages it is perfected, which as yet was crude and undigested in the Liver,
and when as it is perfected and digested it produces a more subtle Tartar and
more grievous diseases, and more difficult to be cured, for subtileness is the
Author of power, Mark well Michale ll. in Apolog. Chymica fol. 67. In the cure
of the Tartar we must recur unto those things which by their property and
subtilteness, do not only dissolve the coagulated Tartar, but also hinder the
very coagulation, so also the Tartar must be cured by reducing, fol. 71.

The cure of the said Tartar is, that it be dissolved and brought into the
First Matter, and after this manner it is expelled.

There is no more excellent preservative against the Tartar than the frequent
use of Butter and Oil of Olives, by this means it cannot easily cleave and
stick to the parts. Quercitanus de med. prisc. fol. 327.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Tartar in the more principal Members.
THe Tartar is begot in the more principal Members, not of the Tartar of Urine,
or of the excrement of the Ventricle, but from accidental and strange excrement
which breeds in that place; though it arise from meat, yet is it not begot of
excrements. All the parts and members of the body stand in need of continual
nourishment and conserving, for every part of the body properly has a
Ventricle which separates the impure and superadded tinctures from nutriment.
The Ventricle properly so called or Oeconomical Ventricle of the whole body
separates the impure from the pure, and communicates aliment to the whole body,
and all his parts. That general separation of the Ventricle does nor susfice
the parts to be nourished, but there is a particular separation, so that every
Ventricle of every part may perfect the nutriment more, and separate it more
exquisitely. That impurity which is separated is also excrement, and has
diverse emunctory places, as the Lungs by spittle, the Brain by the nostrils,
the Spleen by the Veins, or by the Ventricle properly so called, the Reins cast
forth excrement by Urine, the Heart by breathing forth of that mass and
fuliginous or misty matter. From this excrement of the principal members a
Tartar is begot, and as the excrements of the principal members are most
subtle, so also the Tartar is most subtle, and in all things is like as well
to the nutriment as the excrement; for the body of Tartar which is carried with
the nutriment unto the principal members is volatile, and has a vaporous
substance. And this is to be noted of us, that the mechanical spirits of the
members do differ much amongst themselves. As the mechanical spirits of the
members differ much amongst themselves, the mechanical spirits of the Liver
differ from the mechanical spirits of the Ventricle, the mechanical spirit of
the Heart or Brain differs much from the mechanical spirit of the Liver in
subtileness and power; furthermore, the volatile excrements of the members fly
the mechanical spirits of the Ventricle and Liver, and are conveyed to more
subtle and potent spirits, though the Tartar be little in the principal
members; yet in power it is great.

CHAP. XX. Of the Tartar of the Lungs, Brain, Heart, Gall and Spleen.
THe Arteries are the Ventricle of the Lungs, in which the nutriment of the
Lungs is perfected, and the pure is separated from the impure, which separation
the Ventricle properly so called cannot perfect, but it is proper to the Lungs,
wherefore excrements are found in the pipes of the Lungs, which differ
manifestly from the excrements of the other parts, in which the Tartar is
closely contained; for the Tartar ought to be cast forth with the excrement of
the Lungs, otherwise it is separated from the excrement, and sticks in the
pipes of the Lungs. This Tartar surpasses the Tartar of the Intestines, and
that which is contained in the passages of the Urine in subtileness, because it
is transmutated from volatility and spirituality into a Corporeal substance.
The office of the Lungs was to attract Air and Spirit, and to make convenient
spirit for the arteries, and to communicate it unto them for nourishment; when
as the Tartar sticks in the pipes, the Lungs are hindered, whereby they are
less able to undergo their Functions as they should, from hence many Diseases
are generated, as the Asthma, the Cough, the impediment of Breathing or
difficulty of Breathing, the Hectic Fever, and the Phthisis, and other
Diseases, from which Tartar all the Diseases of the Lungs are generated.

The Brain has a proper Ventricle in which the mechanical spirits are, which
are the Authors of Attraction^, Retentions, Separations, Coagulations,
Digestions, Di^tributions, and Expulsions. As the Ventricle proper^y so called
is the Corrupter and Destroyer of all Diseases, in that it does not rightly
execute his Functions, so the imbecility of the Ventricles is the cause of many
most grievous Diseases, of which ancient Write^s never make mention.
Furthermore it is a great thing to know the spirit from whence all the actions
of the Ventricles proceed. If the spirit be infirm, the members also being
infirm, corrupt and perish. When the nutriment is conveyed to the Ventricle of
the Brain, the mechanical spirits of the Brain separate the pure from the
impure, and give the pure to the Brain for nourishment, but expel the impure
through the emunctory places, as the nostrils; so without the Brain in the
place of the Ventricle Tartar is begot, from whence rises the Frenzy,
Out-raging Madness, and other kinds of Madness, which Diseases the old Writers
have ascribed to blood and other humors. The Generation of the Stone and the
Sand in the Reins is the same.

The Heart attracteth his own nutriment and separates the impure from the pure,
the excrement is that in which the Tartar lies hidden. The Heart lies hidden in
his case from which it expells excrement. The nutriment of the Heart is the
most subtle, the excrement is like to a drop of clear water. Now then the
Tartar being coagulated by the spirit of Salt in the case of the Heart,
forthwith the Tartar is begot, from which Generation of Tartar many Diseases
are begot, as the Cardialgi^, the trembling of the Heart, and other Diseases
which the Galenists do badly ascribe to the humors of melancholy and choler.

In the Gall also as in other excrements the Tartar of humors is found, as
likewise the matter of Stones; if it be se^arated and not expelled the Tartar
is begot in the Ga^l from the which Compressions Vomitings, Cholick Passions
and Suffusions of the Gall are caused. In the cure of these Diseases it is to
be respected especially unto the Tartar and little Stones, that by dissolution
they be reduced into their First Matter, and be consumed, not unto yellow or
c^lfish choler; for all the Diseases of the Gall almost are generated from
Tartar. The Tartar or little Stones in the Gall expel the choler and cast it
forth into the Ventricle or Intestines, sometime into the Liver, from whence
arise the kinds of the Jaundies; for every Jaundies which is not removed by
medicaments appropriated and convenient got and made from Vegetables, has a
familiarity and similitude with the Tartar; and unless the Tartar be dissolved
and reduced to his matter, all health is dispersed. The paroxism of the Stone
causes Contractures, Putrefactions, Cholick Passions; so also the paroxism of
the Tartar or Stone in the Bladder brings with it the Jaundies of the Gall,
Cholick Passions, Contractures, Compressions, the Vomitings of the
Heart Strings, and weakness and imbecility of the Ventricle.

So in the Spleen or place of the Ventricle there is begot a Tartar which
begets Opilations or Obs^uctions, and the Quartan, for this reason the
Galenists say that the Quartan is incurable, because they know not the Tartar,
but they say that the cause of it is melancholy or adust choler, and they
endeavor in vain to expel it through the Belly, the Tartar remaining.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Tartar of the Blood, Flesh, and Marrow.
THere are Ventricles in the Blood, Flesh and Marrow, and all the parts of the
body which are nourished; where there is a Ventricle, there is a fire of
digestion and a separation of pure from impure; where there is a separation of
impureness from the pure substance, there is also excrement; and where there is
excrement, there is also Tartar either alone or else commixt with other
excrements; for through the whole anatomy of the body, and in all the parts of
it excrement is two ways considered, it is either Sulphur or it is Salt, for
in every aliment three things are be considered, Mercury which is nutriment,
Sulphur which is avoided and expelled through the Belly, and Salt which is
expelled by Urine.

As those excrements first in the Ventricle are coporal, so the excrements of
the other parts are volatile and spiritual; for after the separation of the
Ventricle, s^iritual and volatile excrements coagulate in all the parts of the
body.

It is an established and confirmed sentence of all Philosophers, that the
nature of bodies and spirits is reciprocal, that bodies are resolved into
spirits, and spirits are transmutated into bodies; furthermore, Flesh, Blood,
and Marrow have their Ventricle, and Digestion, Separation, Excrement and
Tartar. Nature expells the excrement of blood by sweat, it expells the
excrements of the Flesh by Urine, from whence the Urine of Blood is, as
Paracelsus.

The dryness of the bones consumes the excrement of Marrow, whatsoever
remains comes and is conveyed unto the ligaments and concavities of the bones.

The nutriments of Blood, Flesh, and Marrow are altogether spiritual and
invisible, but the excrements are visible, and yet they are the most subtle of
all the parts in the body.

In the attraction of nutriment of Blood, the excrement and Tartar was also
spiritual and invisible, as in the distilled and circulated spirit of Wine, but
yet it separates both the volatile and spiritual excrement in that they are
excrements, whether Sulphur or Salt, by a most exquisite digestion of the
blood; therefore the Tartar of the blood is subtle, but it is coagulated by
the spirit of Salt, and is resolved and reduced by the same.

There is a twofold Tartar of the blood, flesh and marrow, either coagulated or
resolved. The Tartar is begot of the Element of Water whether it be from meat
and drink, and therefore obnoxious to coagulation and resolution, when the
excrement of Tartar is not expelled forth of the veins, it becomes like to a
corn of sand, or like to the grain Rice; so also without the veins and pores
such like grains of Tartar are begot though they incline more to resolution,
notwithstanding if they remain longer under the power of the spirit of Salt,
they increase into a corporeal coagulation. The filth or phlegm of blood is the
excrement of it, if that filth be more crass and be not evacuated by sweat, the
Tartar makes an union with it or the Sulphur, and when this is come to pass the
Tartar is no more generated, but dung and excrement, in which Tartar lies
hidden; from hence mixed diseases are engendered: for the excrement of Nature,
namely Sulphur, putrefies, from whose putrefaction arises the continual rotten
Fever and other inflammations. This is to be noted, that the excrement of
blood, viz. Sulphur, being commixt with Tartar is expelled by sweat, but if for
the weakness and debility of the spirits or Ventricle of blood only the Sulphur
be expelled, but the Salt or Tartar which is the other kind of excrement
remain, whether resolved or coagulated, and brings infinite diseases with it.
The blood in the greater World is nothing else but Wood, but there are infinite
kinds of Wood, therefore there are infinite kinds of blood, and as there are
diverse fruits of Trees, so diverse diseases of blood exist, as he speaks in
Paragra. de Philosophia, page 27. In another place he says that the blood is
the Element of Water in the Microcosm. How many fruits of the Element of Water
are found to be in the Macrocosm, so many diseases are found to be in the blood
of the Microcosm.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Tartar of the Flesh.
THe liquor of the flesh is the Ventricle of the flesh, in which the excrements
are separated from the liquor of the flesh and from the nourishment of it. If
the separation be exquisite the excrements are carried unto the veins and pores
of the bladder, and are expelled together with the Urine; but when two
excrements concur, namely, of the flesh or of his liquor and nutriment, then
the Stone is begot in the bladder and the reins; it is called the Generation of
the Stone from the Urine of blood, and such little stones are begot, not only
in the bladder and reins, but also in other parts of the body, from whence
oftentimes arise obstructions and diverse chronical diseases in the hips, loins,
sides, and other parts. These are the most vehement kinds of Tartar or the
Stone. The Stones which rise from blood are greater and harder, and have more
invasions of the fit than those which rise from Urine simply so called.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Tartar of the Marrow.
THe liquor of the Marrow is the Ventricle of the Marrow, this liquor is
fatness, but the liquor of the flesh is a thin water, the Ventricle of the
Marrow has a fire of digestion for the necessary use of life, it can both
digest and perfect for it self. In other parts, and in the Ventricles the
excrement and Tartar is separated from the nutriment, and so likewise in the
Ventricle of the Marrow. The Tartar of this Ventricle is not in a coagulated
form, but in a resolved form, because the fatness hinders as in the 18. Chap.
for the same cause is said that butter hinders the Generation of the Tartar,
whereby it may not be so easily coagulated.

Though this Tartar be resolved, nevertheless it produces The Symptoms which
follow the Paroxism of the Tartar. Fat Ulcers from the Tartar of Marrow.
many and diverse Tartareous diseases, which they are wont to call doloriferous
fluxes, and every Arthetica and Sciatica which is not a perfect Gout rises from
this Tartareous liquor which is seated in the joints, sinews, and junctures or
ligaments, which b^ings with it the symptoms of the Stone.

He which can cure the Stone may cure this disease, Par^^^l. 3* Param. de morb.
origina ex Tar^^r^* Tract. 5.
but if not, he can never attain unto the perfect curing of it.

The liquor of the Marrow of the sound is sound when the excrements are
consumed by the dryness of the bones, and do not fall into strange places,
junctures, flesh, and ligaments; but when they pass over the set limits of
their place, they produce diverse diseases, the Podagra, the Chiragra, the
Genugra, the Sciatica, and the pains of the joints.

There is a Ventricle and fire of digestion in the glewish matter of the joints
of ^ans body, the fire separates the excrement and Tartar from the nutriment.
The glue is a most excellent member induced with a most exquisite sense, which
of all members can suffer the least. The Tartareous excrement of it is twofold,
namely, coagulated and dissolved. In the beginning of separation before the
spirit of Salt come, it appears in the substance of the liquor, but after the
spirit of Salt comes, it is coagulated into a solid substance, from which the
Podagra, Chiragra, and Genugra are begot.

The Medicine which reduces, resolves, and consumes the Tartar, cures and
removes the Podagra, and his kinds; and he which cannot reduce, resolve, and
transmute the Tartar, cannot remove the Podagra.

The Cholick ^ises from the Tartar of the Intestines, Theophrast. Tom. 5. prob.
207. The Stone of Paracelsus is called a Tartar of the bladder, so also the
Urine is called a resolved Salt. p. 208. Eodem loco.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Essence of Seed.
WE insisting in the steps of Paracelsus hitherto have explained the three
Beings of Diseases, the Being of Stars, the Being of Nature, and the Being of
Poison; though Paracelsus makes five Beings of Diseases, yet seeing three only
have natural causes, and admit explication, the other two, (namely, 1. the
magical being which is opposed directly against a Christian man, 2. and the
real being which is an unsearchable secret) are left unexplained of us, seeing
that these three being explained suffice any Physician.

Perchance some may wonder wherefore we have not made mention in the general
explication of Diseases, of the three principles to the which Paracelsus
ascribes all the causes of diseases. I answer, that Paracelsus in his book 1.
and 2. Param. writes that all diseases consist in three beginnings, in Salt,
Sulphur, and Mercury, but it is not simply to be understood; but in his 1. book
de origin Morb. ex tribus substantiis in the end of the 2. Chap. he expresses
his mind, saying, that every disease is to be conferred with man through all
his parts, and he proceeds, that this is the ground of the knowledge of
diseases, if a disease must be conferred with man according unto his accident
or proper and essential adjuncts, for so the four Elements, the three
Principles, or three Substances, the four Stars, four Earths, four Waters, four
Airs, four Fires, and all the conditions and properties of man are
comprehended, without which no disease can be. In the greater World we see the
sublimation of Mercury, in which there are three beginnings essentially, for an
individual by it self is absolute. In the less World such a digestion is wont
to be made from too much Fire of digestion. This sublimed Mercury is the
greatest poison in the Microcosm, begets the Epilepsie or Falling sickness. But
none will persuade himself that this Mercury alone is a beginning, but an
individual, in which not one but three beginnings concur. Paracelsus oftentimes
calls it Mercurial Salt of Vitriol, in which he comprehends all those which we
have brought; sometimes he calls it the Epilepsie which is from sublimed
Mercury. He speaks truly and Philosophically, not as of a beginning, but as of
an individual, in which Mercury notwithstanding predominates. So it is called
(...), the disease of Mercury, the disease of Sulphur, and the disease of Salt.

But that we may proceed to the being of Seed, we must call in mind that there
are impurities and tinctures adjoined to every kind and worldly root which
endeavor death and dissolution, and for this cause all things are obnoxious to
death and corruption. Again, that there are impurities and tinctures superadded
to the individuals and beginnings which are usual unto mankind for lust and
intemperance, of which we set down the being of Seed, for in them oftentimes
the roots of the principles are so polluted, that by propagation the
impressions of impurities are conserved unto the third or fourth Generation,
which impressions of impurities we call hereditary diseases in Generations; for
diseases are brought unto man after a threefold manner, either 1. And these
Diseases are called accidentary and acquisitiv^ Diseases, v^z. by
Ttansplantation from outward things.
by the hurt of the aliments, 2. by the hurt of external impressions, 3. These
are called proper Diseases because we have them from the first original, being
got of the viclous seed of the Parents.
by the hereditary seed of the Parents; for the seeds of diseases which happen
unto us by the hurt of the aliments, or noxious resolutions of the elements may
turn into hereditary diseases, in as much as they yet exist in the First
Matter. But when the seeds of diseases have happned unto us either by the hurt
of aliments or by the hurt of external impressions, and are come to their last
matter, and have admitted a corporeal coagulation or transmutation there never
chance hereditary, because only the First Matters concur in man's composition,
and all the seeds of man are spiritual; from hence it comes to pass that those
which have not the Gout are begot of those which Sev. p. 221.
have the Gout, and those which have the Falling Sickness are begot of those
which have it not, from those which have the Stone are begot those which have
not the Stone. But when the seeds of the diseases do concur with the seeds of
the Parents in the First Matter whatsoever it be they cause hereditary
diseases, and from hence it is that those which have the Gout are begot of
those which have it not, so those which have the Epilepsie or the Stone are
begot of those which have not the Epilepsie or Stone, unless the Mothers seed
be altogether disagreeable and repugnant, for the seed of the Male and Female
commix and become one seed, therefore when their seeds have conspired and
conjoined with the properties and seeds of the diseases, they generate one
polluted with hereditary diseases, but if the seeds of the Male and Female be
disagreeable in regard of the impurities and seeds of diseases, the strange and
unnatural principles of diseases are separated in the womb by the power and
virtue of natural Balm, for they do not agree with the First Matter, but with
the individuals and principles of man's nature and anatomy, which is made
manifest from hence, because they come unto diverse differences of ages, as
sometime the hereditary diseases happen to end at the fourth Offspring,
sometime at the sixth, sometime at the tenth. The Roots therefore being spent
and consumed, those which have not the Gout are begot of those which have the
Gout, and those which have not the Epilepsie are begot of those which have it,
of Madmen and Melancholic From Lepers Lepers are still begot. The cause of it
in Sev. p. 222.
are begot those which are not Mad and Melancholic.

Concerning that we said that the diseases from the being of seed of the
Parents contain in them the four courses of the Elements, Planets, Humors and
Qualities, these four courses are but one course, for in every disease these
four concur. First, all diseases are elementated and have their beginnings.
Secondly, all diseases are from the Planets by reason of their places, for all
diseases whether they rise by the hurt of the aliments or hurt of the external
impressions, or being of the seed of the Parents, either are Solar, Lunar,
Saturnine, Martial, Venerial, Mercurial or Jovial. Three Salts concur in every
disease, for from three principles all diseases are generated and not from one;
four qualities are found to be in all diseases, for the diseases are either hot
or cold, moist or dry.

PART III.
CHAP. I. Of the unity of the Stars of Generation and Transplantation, and of
the Curing of Diseases.
THe Stars of Generation are fourfold in regard of the Elements, for every
Element has his Star, vital principle and agent form which produces diverse
effects which differ in exterior form, but are like and every way
correspondent in the interior form. Though there are four of these Stars and
some diversity of Generation, yea the greatest difference of the fruits may be
beholden in the Elements, yet if we examine the matter more deeply, we shall
find the unity of the Stars and the golden Chain of Homer of the whole World,
for the inferior bodies are as the superior are, and the superior are as the
inferior are, Hermes and the Holy Ghost bearing witness; because the Heaven
conspires with the Earth, and the Earth with the Heaven in all things, who will
deny the unity of Nature, and the Society of the invisible Nature with the
visible? wherefore we profess that all the Stars of the Elements are only one
Star which have been united from the beginning in the fountain of unity;
concerning that they produce diverse effects in diverse places, we do not ascribe
it to the diversity of the stars, but to their Sciences, Gifts and interior
Signatures.

In the general explication of diseases we have mentioned three kinds of Beings
of Diseases; The Being of Stars, the Being of Nature, and the Being of Poison;
but wherefore are there these three Beings? for there is but one only star of
Transplantation, and there is only one Nature which suffers, yet not Nature
it self but the receptacle and container of it; whether do more affect than are
affected? not so, but as in the Macrocosm there is a great difference of the
Generation and the Transplantation of fruits to be observed, so also in the
Microcosm the Generation and Transplantation of diseases is to be observed, for
there is the same reason, concordance, conspiration and unity of the stars of
Transplantation and Generation. And from hence rises the Off spring o^ Issue of
contrariety, oppugnance and discordance, from hence also rises Hatred and Love,
for there is nothing in the whole World which is not connext with very many
things by a natural bond, and also repugns and is contrary to many other; for
surely all things are conjoined and agree, and are linckt together by an
Herculean knot, and all things disagree with a deadly hatred; from whence it
comes to pass that like things are cured by like things, and contraries are
Remedies for contraries; because things which agree do communicate their
virtues and help, so likewise contraries expel their contraries; which things
being so, and the unity of stars in the World being celebrated, it makes one
cure of all diseases, being divided into kinds, Astral or Spiritual, Material
or Corporal. Paracelsus in his book de morb. ament. says, that in Astral or
Spiritual diseases, Astral and Spiritual Remedies are required; for whatsoever
are required for a cure are contained in the power of the spirits. The star of
Transplantation produces Diseases. The star of Generation cures them.
Every disease is twofold, Spiritual and Corporal, so the Physician ought to
administer a material or spiritual Medicine. In the impressions of the stars or
astral diseases, howsoever it must be administered, we will refer the three
Beings of diseases to the one star of Transplantation, to whom we apply the
star of Generation as a true and perfect cure.

CHAP. II. Of the Causes of the Pain of the Head, and the true Cure of it.
HOw difficult and intricate the explication of diseases is, the Family of
Privations of the Aristotelians does manifest and declare, and the natural
defects of the Platonicks granting and yielding diseases unto infiniteness, as
it were by the Quintessence, Nature and Properties, as if vain names were in
the subjects; for the hidden and occult seeds of diseases have obtained hidden
and unknown Transplantations and Generations which are not subject to sense nor
decrees of discourse. Though it be so hard and difficult to explain the seeds
and Generation and Transplantation of diseases, nevertheless we being urged and
pricked by the compulsions of virtue and verity, as also by the magnanimous and
courageous mind of Hippocrates and Paracelsus, for we will insist in the paths
of more sincere Philosophers, and enter into the explication of diseases, and
that with better success, because we have explained hitherto the great book of
Nature (God still helping us) and we have seen more works of the Spagirical art
by the Ministry or help of Fire, therefore we will descend from the Head to
the Foot, and thoroughly view and search into the whole Microcosm, according to
his parts and places.

All the affections of the Head which use has observed, are partly symptoms,
partly diseases; we divide these affections into three Orders in regard of the
affected place or seat. Some affections possess the Membranes of the Head,
some the Substance of the Brain, some the Passages, some possess the Pipes
thereof. The Membranes of the Head are the thin film enwrapping the Brain and
the Pericrany, in which pains are caused, for that they have exquisite sense.
The dolours of the Head are twofold in respect of their efficient causes, for
the dolor or pain is either caused from external causes or internal causes.

The pain of the Head from external causes, as too much labor, or heat of the
Sun, or from the cold distemperature of the Heaven, or from Gluttoning, Venery,
grievous Smells, and smiting of the Head. The pain which rises from these
causes is a weak and fainting pain, without a fixed and vital impression.

The pain of the Head rising from internal causes, or from fixed and vital
impression proceeds either from blood, or resolution, or obstruction. Parcel.
in his 10. book Parag. de capitis adversitatibus internis. The blood produces
the pain of the Head by accidental digestion (that is) by the bubling sorth of
the spirits, or wandering of the first three causes. In this pain caused from
blood let the Head vein be cut and the pain cease, and a true cure is made
thereof; but if the condition of the sick cannot abide the cutting of the vein,
administer unto him Narcotical moistures, of which kind are the liquor of
Corals, Rose, the ever-living Root of the Nightshade, Margarites and such like,
and they are given too within essentially, or else applied outwardly in the
manner of a Plaster.

The resolution of the vapors or Tartareous spirits beget the pain of the
Head, namely, when the mouth of it is not shut by reason of the weakness of the
Ventricle, and then the vapors ascend, or the spirits of the Tartareous Salt
smite unto the Membranes and the Brain, from hence is the pain, as also the
doloriferous fluxions and distillations.

In the cure of this disease the cause is first to be removed, the Tartar being
resolved in the Ventricle is reduced, expelled and consumed by oil or spirit of
Vitriol, which is sweet like to a smell, and has a sweet sowreness, also the
sour spirit of Sulphur. The opilation or obstruction of the more principal
bowels causes the Headache. Paracelsus in his second book Tract. 3. de Tartaro
fol. 330. when there is not digestion made in the Reins, and the attractive
virtue has not which it may attract, then the Reins generate nutriment from
the Liver; but if the Liver be obstructed, the Reins attract nutriment through
the Backbone from the Head; and first pains are caused in the hinder part of
the Head, afterward in the Hemicrany, sometime it possesses the whole Head;
therefore in the Hemicrany and every pain of the Head the only cure is, that
the Reins be first cured, and that the obstruction of the Liver be taken away
that the Reins may have nutriment, which is not only to be understood of the
Reins, but of other principal Members. Here the sour water of Mercury bears
sway, and the spirits of Vitriol and the spirits of Tartar. In the pain from
the Reins, there is pain felt about the Reins, if the pain be from the Liver,
there is a pain felt in the Liver, if it be from the Ventricle, there is a pain
in the Ventricle, if it be from the Matrix then the Mat^ix feels a pain, if
from the Spleen, the pain will be in the right side, viz. in the place of the
Spleen are begot the Cephalia, the Hemicrania, and the Cephalalgia from the
Tartar of the Head lying hidden in the glue, which It is then a (...) and (...)
is known when as there is no obstruction of the bowels, nor bubling forth of
blood, nor resolution of the Ven^^icle; hereupon is the usual pain of the Head
very o^^^n affecting men for a light occasion for many (...).

(...) Cephalia affects the whole Head or the greatest (...) o^ it.

The Hemicrania affects only the one part and it begins by the beating of the
Temples.

The Chephalalgie comprehends both the kinds, as ^^mp ^he Cephalalgy is a pain
which man feels in the Membranes and sinewed parts of the Brain-pan.
also every disease whether it be from Fevers or the heat of the Sun, or from
Drunkenness, or from some other evident cause.

In the curing of the pains of the Head there are to be administered medicines
which put away pain by Sleep, or Narcotical medicines, which smooth and do (as
it were) make the pain sleep. In the raging pains of the Head the too much good
blood is to be let forth of the forehead, or receive the oil of Musk and the
oil of Camphora, of each six drops, give it in Wine or in Ale in the morning or
at night; this is a secret against the raging pains of the Head. Take the Fish
Cancer, bruise it, strain forth the juice, make it into ointment, apply it unto
the Temples. Theophrast. Paracel. in his book de vermibus Chap. 11. against the
daily pain of the Head. Take the leaves of Penniroyal, and Polypody, and Sena,
Vervin, and Anise, of each ij. of Ginger iiij, let them be pulverized and
mixed. Again, receive the spirits of Wine whereby the essence may sooner be
extracted forth of Origanum, Hysop, and the slowrs of Camomil, pour it upon the
Powder, let them be digested, and afterward distilled through the Alembeck with
a gentle fire; Administer 4. or 7. drops of this being extracted in a
convenient liquor. Theophrastus Paracelsus in his cures which he left writ with
his own hand, one had this Headache (as he writes) and his Head was purged by
the Nostrils, by infusing juice of the herb Hoggsbread by an instrument called
Rhinechites or instrument for the Nostrils, as also by a quill. In the same
place he writes that one had a vehement Headache for the space of a year, and
he was made whole only by opening of the crany of the Head; and by the same
means the tumor of the Brain may be cured by administering therewith the oil of
Salt in the water of Basil. Another Cure* There was a certain Barber of a City
in Germany who was tormented with a very grievous Headache, I gave the oil of
Marjoram that he might smell, and I put a drop of it in both the ears.

He brings the oil of Anise for the pain of the Head, the external oil of sweet
Cane, the essence of Cloves, or the tincture of the oriental Saffron, a drop of
which must be mixed with liquor, Broth, or Wine. The distilled oil of Amber
helps the Headache if it be taken with the water of Linden tree; the oil of
Vitriol, and the spirit o^ it, the oil of Corals are also very beneficial.

In the curing of the Headache there must a rega^d be had of the belly, for if
it be obstructed all medicine will be in vain. Furthermore if it be constipated
it is to be solicited with a suppository.

CHAP. III. Of the Diseases which annoy the substance of the Brain, and first
of the Frenzy.
THe depraved Function of the principal faculty of the Soul, which is seated in
the substance of the Brain as in his proper closet, is Sottishness, which is
called in Greek (...) and (...), which is an abalienation of the mind. those
which are troubled with it Sottishness is a defect of Reason, when man is
depraved only in the use of Reason.
either think strange things, such like as are either no where, or else are
much otherwise; those which are sick with it (as Hippocrates says) almost feel
no pain. There are three orders of Sottish men, some do do^e only in
cogitation, as Melancholic men, which walking think in their mind that they
see things which are not so. Others in words, as Phrentick men, which babble
many things immodestly, confusedly, and without judgment. Others in their work,
as Out-raging men, which accomplish their words with deeds. Fernelius says,
that the cause is a humor or an exceeding hot vapor effused into the
substance of the Brain and his Ventricles, by whose impulse and agitation the
mind is reduced unto some false and feigned things. Some Sottishness is with a
Fever, some without a Fever; That which is with a Fever is the Frenzy or
Doting. Of Hippocrates, Galen, The Frenzy is a great and continual
Sottishness joined with a Fever.
Aeginetas, Trallianus, and other Greek Writers, it is called (...), which does
not only hurt the Head but the Mind, which they call (...), which is also
(...), and (...), that is, understanding and discourse, as Galen asfirmeth. The
Galenists say that the Frenzy is begot when yellow choler ascends to the
Brain and inflames the Membranes, as happens in sharp Fevers. Paracelsus lib.
10. Parag. de affectibus cap. 1. Parag. 3. says that the Mania, the Frenzy,
and the kinds of Madness and other most grievous diseases are got from
obstruction: In his 1. book Chap. 3. de viribus membrorum, he writes that the
Frenzy and Out-raging madness are generated from the obstruction of the
spirit of life, namely, when the passages by which the spirit of life passes to
the Brain are obstructed, then there rises a putrefaction in the Brain and
continues to an ulcetation; from the putrefaction rises an inflammation, and
when as the passage of the spirit is suffocated then it shakes the whole body
with the fit of a Fever. In the second book Parag. de morb. Vermium, Parag. 2.
worms breed in the principal members, only except the Reins, Salt predominates
in the Reins in which consist the Balm of life which expels all Rottenness.
by reason of the Urine; for in the anatomy of the Brain there is a worm found
which has almost eaten the thin film of the Brain, from whence the Frenzy is
begot; lib. 2. Param. de origin morbor. he says that the Mania and the
Frenzy are begot by the sublimation of Mercury. But how do these agree? These
are to be reconciled, viz. from the sublimation of Mercury, and from the
multitnde of vapors ascending, there is begot an obstruction, and from the
obstruction the oppilation of the spirit of life, and from this obstruction
rises the Mania and the Frenzy, so that Paracel. sometimes names the remote
cause, sometime the immediate cause of a disease; in his 3. book Parag. de
origin morborum ex tartaro tract. 4. he writes that a Tartar is begot without
the substance of the Brain in the Ventricle, from which the Frenzy, the
Mania, and other kinds of madness arise, which is an oppilation of the spirit
of life from Tartar.

The cure of the Frenzy. In the tract 3. Parag. de Alchymia fol. 74.
Paracelsus writes that the more gri^vous Apoplexy, Paralysis, Lethargy,
Falling Sickness, the Mania, the Frenzy, and the melancholy cannot be taken
away, by the decoctions of the Apothecaries. Bartholomeus Anglus, lib. 16. cap.
96. writes, that the most excellent cure of the Frenzy is that sleeping
medicines be administered to the patient; afterward the obstruction is to be
removed, and the Brain is to be comforted and strengthened. Joannes Montanus in
his Treatise de terrasigillata says, that that Earth is a very present cure
against all raging diseases of the Head. Paracelsus in his Cures writes, that a
German Prince was Frentick, and he administered for the grievousness of the
Fever five grains of Laudanum, and therewith the Fever was expelled and he
sleeped six whole hours. The grains of the oil of Pearls, and the herb Sena
administered in his proper liquor, extinguishes the inflammation of the Brain.
The strengthening of the Brain is made by the green liquor of Silver, the secret
of Vitriol, the oil of Bread, the liquor of Sapphire, the liquor of Musk, the
balm of Sulphur, the water of Silver. The tincture of oriental Saffron being
applied about the Nostrils or Temples, will help the Frentick or Sottish men.
Bartholomeus extols and commends the essence of Topaze, lib. 16. cap. 96. The
Urine of the Frentick which is of a pale color fore-shews and Prognosticates
death, green Urine with a green circle shows the most present danger of death.

The said green Liquor of Silver (being an Excellent Medicine for all
Infirmities of the Brain) is thus prepared.
pure Silver, dissolve it in Aqua fortis, and precipitate it with Salt water,
then dulcifie the Calx with hot common water (the more the better) till it be
fully free from the Salt taste; which being done, mix it well with flowrs of
Sulphur; then reve^berate it under a Muffel to a vrey subtle Calx, upon which
put a high rectified Spirit of Wine Tartarized, and set them to digest in
Balaneo month, then distill off the Spirit of Wine and return it on again;
which work of Cohobation must be reiterated seven times, and then have you your
foresaid Calx in a Liquor, which you must set in Balneo again to digest a
month, then will it become a pure green juice most prevalent in all affects of
the Brain, much conducing against the Stone in Reins and Bladder, and very
succesful in all hot Fevers.

CHAP. IV. Of Out-raging Madness.
WHen black Choler is begot by the adustion of melancholy, or blood, or yellow
choler, then the Mania invadeth and possesses, which comes often unto the
melancholy waxing hot. This black humor as likewise melancholy is collected,
sometimes in the films of the heart, sometime in the whole body, sometime in
the head alone; when this humor is hot it causes horrible and Out-raging
doting, but if it pu^rifie Of the Causes, Differences, and Cure of the Mania.
Cap. 1. Of the Treatise of Diseases of Madmen. The Mania is a great
Sottishness without a Fever.
it brings a Fever, but if it only boil vehemently then it causes a solitary
Out-raging madness without a Fever, and also it adjoyneth the signs.

The Mania is of us called a furor or Out-raging madness which immitateth the
doting of the melancholic neither in thought, word, or deed, but yet with
brawling, chiding, and shouting, as likewise the man possessed with it is of a
terrible look. Again, the Mania does impel and possess the patients with a
greater violence and trouble and perturbation of the mind, so that they invade
men immodestly and fiercely like wild beasts with their teeth, n^ils, and
hands. The signs and proper adjuncts of those which are Out-raging are
demonstrated by experience. The cause in which all the Galenists insist and
agree of shall be manifested by Paracelsus whether it be true or false. The
Mania according unto Paracelsus is twofold. The one which invadeth a sound man,
and it is a disease, the other is a symptom of a disease, as in the Plague and
Fevers. Paracelsus in his book de morbis amentum writes in the second Chap.
that the Mania rises from three principles or beginnings, and in the same Chap.
he divides the Mania into two kinds. The one is that which rises from pain,
when as a vapor remains in the Head, the other rises from sublimation, and is
coagulated in the Head. In the Cure we must respect these two causes, viz. that
the vapors from pain be consumed and dissipated, and that that be resolved and
reduced which is coagulated of sublimation.

The Mania has his original either from Blood, Veins, Ventricle, Intestines,
Reins, Liver, Spirit of Urine, and the Lungs, de morb. amentium, cap. 2. It
cannot be sufficiently known where the mine and procreant cause of the Mania
is, for it is an astral disease. The true cause of Mania is in what part of the
body soever Mercury lies hid, and is reverberated into slime, and is dissolved
in very strong water, which being dissolved is mixed with the spirit of life and
inflames it: there is such a subtileness in this strong water, that it will not
bide in the bottom but rises up unto the top. The extreme acrimony of that
humor appears from sneesing, which provoking quality rises from the greatest
acretion, which comes to pass if any receive in at his Nostrils the smell of
the spirits of Aqua fortis, Salt, and Vitriol. This reverberation of Mercury
proceeds from too much heat, as for example. If the spirit of Salt be mixed with
the spirit of life it is of such a subtilty and power, that as soon as it comes
to the Brain it causes the Mania and extreme madness.

The Cure of the Mania is twofold, the one which refrigerates and coagulates
the faulting matter; The other which altogether disperses and consumes the
matter of which it is generated. The refrigeration and coagulation of the
matter faulting is caused by the curing of the Falling Sickness. Receive of the
oil of Camphora. of the oil of Musk. mix them, and administer them at every
time.

This medicine is most excellent in the cure of the Mania, for it does
wonderfully coagulace the matter of the Mania, and it extinguisheth the heat of
the body and the boiling of the blood, and it alters the matter, as cold
changes Water into Air. This oil may be applied outwardly about the Templ^s and
Forehead. Also these remove the Out-raging madness by a secret specifical
virtue. The quintessence of Silver, the quintessence of Lead, the quintessence
of Iron, the quintessence of Quicksilver, the dissolving of Crystal and Coral;
so also the appropriate extraction of Camphora, the extraction of Gold. The
medicines which remove the hurtful matter of the Mania, are these, which may be
applied either outwardly or inwardly. Chief sleeping medicines, the
quintessence of Mandragora, of Opiates, of the Poppy, Henbane. The chief Cure
of the Mania consists in Laudanum prepared with Pearl, lib. 2. cap. 4. he
sets down a secret of Salt Peter which so strengthens the Brain, that
neither turning of the Head, nor the Frenzy, nor Mania can hurt it. By that
Salt Peter he understands in that place distilled Salt Peter with the Spirit of
Wine alcosiated and rectified. Again, let it be circulated until it be made
spiritual, volatile, and essential, which essence is to be administered with
cla^ied Wine. Pythopaeus says that he cured some which were Out-raging mad with
the spirit of Lead. Read Theophrastus Tom. 7. fol. 186. he understands by Gilla
Salt Peter.

The said Laudanum prepared with Pearl.
old Opium 4. cut it in thin slices, put them in a Pewter dish, so that they
touch not one another; then put that dish with the Opium into an Oven, as soon
as the bread is drawn out; when it is so dry that you may crumble it between
your fingers, take it out; then make it to powder, and put upon it good
distilled Vinegar in a glass which keep in Balneo a fortnight; then decant the
clear from the thick and filter it through a brown paper, that being done,
distill off the Vinegar in gentle Balneo, till the Opium remain thick as Honey.
of that thick extract s. and add thereto Salt of Pearl and Salt of Coral ana i.
Tincturae Ambergrece 12. drops, and of Tincture of good Saffron (made with
spirit of Wine) i. and stir them all together with a stick, then keep it in a
Silver or Pewter box for your use; make it so dry as you may make Pills of it.

Dose from gran. 2. to 3. or 4. at most.

CHAP. V. Of Melancholy. It is a Sowerness.
THe other kind of Sottishness without a Fever is melancholy, He is
melancholic in whom sowrness excels. Melancholy is a great Sottishness
accompanied with Fear and Sorrow.
which is caused (according to the Galenists) of black and putrified humors
and vapors, occupying the seat of the mind. That humor is generated when
yellow choler or choler degenerates into black choler. Sometime the humor
consists in the milt, sometime in the nigh parts, sometime in the head alone,
sometime it is esfused into the veins and the whole body. Hereupon melancholy
is threesold; that which is of the fore-^art of the belly, the primary, and
that which is caused by the hurt of the whole body.

The Hypocondriack melancholy is called also the sl^tulent melancholy, and it
is caused when black choler comes unto the seventh Traverse or Diaphragma,
from which a black and obscure vapor is conveyed into the seat of the mind.
The primary melancholy is, when the Brain is prima^ily affected either with a
peculiar hurt, or by the hurt of the whole body; from hence we may understand
that melancholy wearies without affecting the Heart-roots; which is caused by
the hurt of the whole body. They call this Melancholy, Solitary, Out-raging
madness, but yet falsely; for melancholy is not the cause of Out-raging madness,
but the spirit of life infected with the poison of Mercury, of which Paracelsus
writes cap. 4 de morb. Amentium tractat. 1. and cap. 5. that there are four
kinds of melancholy men, according unto the four complexions as they call them.
If these complexions beget Sottishness, the cause is, because they expel and
drive away their spirit for their too much abundance. But what are the spirits
of the humors or complexions? a snarp, bitter, or sour, or sweet taste. But
what is the taste? that which has a great power, as Hippocrates Of the
contracted Members* Tract. 1. c. 4. Melanchol^ has his seat in the whole body.
s^eaks. What is that that has the great power? Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury;
for in them all the powers as well of Health as Diseases are contained; so the
spirit or taste of every humor containing in it the three first powers as well
of sanity as of diseases may produce melancholy, in as much as such poison
commixt with the spirit of life is more languid and faint. In this disease the
spirit of Salt predominates, for it is a Chronical and fixed disease. In the
cited Chap. Paracelsus says that melancholy and madness are oftentimes caused
by Meat and Drink, Cups hurt Men and also Women. Melancholic men are
oftentimes sorrowful and sad, and fly the company and sight of men. Others
suppose that they must not be spoke unto, but that they must live all their
days in quietness and taciturnity. The cure of melancholy; the Galenists
(which say that melancholy is the cause of the disease of sadness, when as it
is only the name of a disease) they endeavor to cure this disease by
contraries. Melancholy is (say they) cold and dry, therefore it is to be
removed with hot and moist things; wherefore in that they endeavor to cure it
they administer these hot medicines, Diambra, Mithridates, Diamargarita, the
hot elect. Plorisanoticon, so also the conserve of Borage, of Buglosse, and of
Sorrel; so also Diaboriginatum, Diabuglossatum, and the confection and
compounding of dulcis diamascus; though these are not to be contemned, for in
some sort they refresh the vital spirits, but yet they do not remove the
disease, but as much as in them lies, and as far as they can exercise their
virtues not yet reduced unto perfection, they strengthen Nature. The decree and
opinion of Paracelsus will ever be firm and constant, that melancholy or
heaviness cannot be removed by the decoctions of Apothecaries.

In the curing of melancholy the specifical virtues of the secrets are to be
considered. The specifical virtue which expels melancholy is in the flowrs of
Antimony, for by the flowrs of Antimony those are freed which have been bound in
chains for some months. The flowrs of Antimony are administered in a little
quantity of Theriaca in the morning twice, or thrice, or four times, by reason
of the contumacy of the disease. In the fifth Chapter of Paracelsus de morbis
amentium. The quintessence of Antimony is a perfect cure of madness, so in the
sixth Chapter, The oil of Antimony preserves from all the kinds of madness. The
tincture or magistery of Saffron expels sadness, desperation, and melancholy,
for Saffron is the chief medicine for melancholy, for when as any begins to
despair it does wonderfully refresh the prostrated spirits. It is a general
deoppilative* or unobstruct of the vital spirit, and it is the chief joy of the
heart. The Armenial stone, and also the Jazal stone being prepared are more
commodiously administered by much. The Confection of Alchermes which is
commended of all Physicians removes Madness and Melancholic Affections, for it
strengthens the spirits and expels all poison. The essence of Silver cures all
melancholy affections. The essence of Ellebor administered, It is very expedient
against all the affects of melancholy. The Smaragdus not only drunk, but if
hanged about the neck it removes all melancholy affects. The essence of Thime,
Epithime, and Origanum take away melancholy. Paracelsus tract 3. de generatione
hominis Chap. 5. ascribes hereditary foolishness and madness to the
unproportionable form of the Brain and bad conformation He sets down the
cause of it, viz. The immature seed of undigested liquor of life: for he which
has a vicious liquor cannot profuse good seed, for the body of the seed is
pu^rid and such like are generated thereof.
thereof. Foolishness and Madness do not rise from the seeds, but in as much as
some hurts are left from Generation from which many diseases of the figures and
cavities descend. He that would know more kinds of madness let him read
Paracelsus de morbis acutis amentium, these kinds which we have explained are
more common, but the other are more rare.

Confection of Alchermes (much better than the ordinary one) make thus.
white Sugar Candid 6, spirit of Salt well rectified half an ounce, and as much
pure water as will make the Sugar like thick a syrup; then add to those half an
ounce of purple Calx of Gold (which has been first solved in Aqua fortis, then
precipated with Tin or Spilter and well edulcorated and dried) lastly to all
the former ingredients, add also one ounce of pure Pearl in subtle powder, and
one dram of good Ambergreece; so have you a far more excellent Confection than
the common one wherein the Gold is used in its metalline form, and so has no
effect in the medicine; but here by reason of it subtle preparation it renders
the medicine abundantly more cordial, more effectual.

CHAP. VI. Of the Lethargy.
THe Lethargy is a torpor or drowsiness, and almost an unresistible necessity
of sleeping, according unto The Lethargy is almost an unresistible necessity to
sleep.
Celsus lib. 2. cap. 10. and 20. The Galenists say that the cause of this
disease is a cold and slegmy humor, which in great abundance is effused into
the substance and Ventricles of the brain. The kinds of it are the Catophora,
the Coma, and the Carus.

The Catophora is a profound and deep sleep.

The Coma, Catoche, or Catalepsis, is a stupour while one wakes, whereupon
Physicians The Catalepsie is a prefernatural affect of the Head whereby man is
deprived of all motion suddenly as if he were congealed.
call it a waking dream, by which the affected both waketh and sleeps
together, which sometimes rises from too much drinking of Wine, as Galen
affirms in his 3. book Chap. 5. de temperameutis.

The Carus is such a profound and deep sleep, so that the sick does neither
feel the The Carus is a dead sleep out of which man is not easily wakened
without often and loud calling upon, and beating of his body.
pulling off the hairs, nor beating nor pricking of the body.

Paracelsus in his 2. book de vita longa Chap. 2. de gutta says, that the
lethargy is a kind of gutta (that is) of the Apoplexy, for the Apoplexy is
begot of ill-digested sublimated Mercury; if that the genus of the Lethargy,
then the species; though the sublimation be not so vehement in the lethargy and
other kinds of the Apoplexy, as in the Apoplexy it self. ^n another place he
says, that the Lethargy is generated from too much moisture of the brain,
which being dried and abolished the effect is removed; when it is to be dried
and exsiccated the 1. book of preparations teaches us, tract. 4. fol. 42.

The Cure of the Lethargy. It is to be removed, and Nature is to be
corroborated and strengthened. Paracelsus in Parag. de Alchymia says, that the
lethargy is not to be cured by ordinary decoctions, for it is a Mineral
disease, and therefore it is to be cured by Minerals. Paracelsus in his cures
relates that a certain man after a Fever fell into a deep sleep, so that he
felt not if any pricked him, neither would he open his eyes or speak any thing,
he had the lethargy, and I cured it with the oil of Vitriol; so also there was
a woman waking which was affected with the lethargies sleep, so that her eyes
were still shut, and hardly would open them if she were called upon, neither
could any understand what she spoke, neither did she rightly answer. I restored
her to her health by the oil of Vitriol alone.

The chief Medicine of all in Curing this Disease is Antimony; for in this one
all the ways of curing are found, for it takes away the cause altogether, and
strengthens Nature by a specifical virtue wherein it excels. Some drops of the
oil of Vitriol administered with Marjoram water avails much.

In this part the spirit of Vitriol is much better and more excellent. In the
volability of Vitriol there is a secret of corroboration of the spirits of the
brain and heart. Bartholomeus cures the lethargy with Sulphur, lib. 16. Chap.
94. so also lib. 7. Cap. 7. affirms that this is a most excellent Dosis in the
Falling Sickness. of Opium Theb. i. of Cinnamom. iij. of Musk and Ambergrece
ana. 6 gr. of the seeds of both the Poppies i. of Mandragora i. of the juice of
Henbane i. of Mastick iij. let them be pulverized, mix them and make a mass of
them with the juice of Pomcitrons, put them in the rine of the Pomcitron, and
shut it with the bark, afterward put it in dough, bake it as bread, when the
bread is backed let them be taken forth and bruised, and put in i. of the
secret of Vitriol. Read Theophrastus Paracelsus de morbis Amentium tract. 2.
Cap. 1.

A precious Medicine of Antimony in a Red Oil prepare thus.
pure Regulus of Antimony, grind it to subtle powder, put it in a Cucurbit, and
by degrees pour on good Aqua Regis (prepared with Salt) so dissolve the
Antimony, and when it will dissolve no more decant it, and on the remaining
part undissolved pour fresh Aqua Regis, and so do till all the Antimony be
dissolved, then let it all stand unmoved, and the Antimony will settle to the
bottom of the glass in white powder; from which decant all the water, and with
sweet water made hot edulcorate the white powder and dry it; that being done,
put the white dry powder in an Iron box, stop it well with a scrue that no air
may enter, and keep it five days in good heat, then take it out, and you shall
find the white powder become red; from which extract a red tincture with pure
distilled Vinegar, which abstract again, then remains behind a pure tincture
of Antimony, upon which put pure Spirit of Wine, digest together in Balneo,
then distill by retort, so will you have a bloud-red Oil, which may well be
termed a great Arcanum in medicine, which being most prevalent, not only in the
foresaid disease, but in many others likewise.

CHAP. VII. Of the Falling Sickness and his kinds.
THe Falling Sickness is a disease inherent in the body, not corporally, but an
The Epilepsie or Fallingsickness is a preternatural affect of the Head, by
which the whole body for a certain time is convulst with the hurt of sense and
reason.
astral disease. It is an Elementary disease, not a complexionate disease, it
is a spiritual disease, not a natural disease. The species or kinds of the
Falling Sickness are all the kinds of the Epilepsie, the suffocation of the
matrix without his place, the swounding with his kinds, viz. the returning
deliquium and the swounding not returning, the Vertigo or turning of the The
Vertigo is a preternatural affect of the Head whereby all things seem to turn
about.
head. The Vertigo rises from the obstruction of the principal bowels.
Paracelsus lib. 3. de caducis para. 2. The Vertigo is a kind of the
Falling Sickness. The cure of the Vertigo is the same with the
Falling Sickness. The cause of dizziness is the spirit of Sulphur ascending
from the inferior Heaven unto the Firmament (that is) unto the Head in which
it is resolved, it being resolved produces the Vertigo, the Pulse of the heart,
and the Nightmare Sublimed Mercuty causes the paroxisin of the Apoplectick and
the Epileptick by his fame. The paroxism dures until the Mercury be consumed.
(which is a sperm of some Salt begot from imagination besides Nature) the
ectasis. Paracelsus lib. 3. Parag. de morbis caducis Parag. 30. Therefore we
must know that the most of the Mercurial diseases are kinds of Mercury, and as
many kinds as there are of Mercury, so many kinds there are of a disease; for
the Falling-sicknes is not caused from Complexions, Qualities, Thurneus says
that the cause of the disease is in the blood.
or Humors, as the vain Galenists have taught. Fernelius the most Learned
amongst the Galenists in his 2. book Chap. 22. de abditarum rerum causis,
writes that the Falling Sickness of what kind soever it be, is generated from
the being of poison; so also in his book de Sev. p. 315. says that the root of
the Epilepsie is Mercurial Vitriol.
partium morbis, he acknowledges that besides the abundance of humor there
must needs be a poisonful, offensive, and grievous quality in the substance of
the brain which is the cause of the Epilepsie, which as often as it is agitated
and contends to enter into the brain, it as it were ^miting, and the brain
resisting and oppugning, by their oppugnance and fighting the Epilepsie is
caused. This man amongst all the Galenists of this age came the nighest to the
knowledge of the cause of the Epilepsie. In another place Paracelsus writes
that the matter of the Falling Sickness is stupefactive and biting Sulphur,
existing in the Microcosm, which (like unto smoke) by boiling caused from the
stars, hurts the brain. Paracel. de morbis amentium, tract. 1. cap. 1.


The original of the Falling Sickness is fivefold in regard of their places
forth of which it first proceeds and arises, from the brain, heart, liver,
intestines, or from the four external members. Fernelius makes three
differences of the Epilepsie, one is assigned from the Brain, another is of the
Ventricle, the 3. is that which is caused by the consent of every other part.
Galen brought in a twofold Epilepsie, by it self, and by consent. But certainly
it is one and the same disease proceeding from the same Beginning, Root, and
Seed. They cause the nources and conservants, and the difference of the sick;
they alter the signatures of the symptoms by their vehemence, celerity,
frequencie, duration, and such like; for the Falling Sickness of the
Intestines, Diaphragma, Teeth, Hands, Feet, Testicles, Marrow, and Throat do
differ much amongst themselves.

I say, that the Falling Sickness of the glue and blood differ much from that
of the Ventricle and Diaphragma by reason of their places and matrices, in
which the cause of the disease consists, and where it emulates the nature,
properties, subtilty, and power of the matrix. Again, according unto Paracelsus
de caducis Parag. 3. fol. 339. 340. The Falling Sickness is fourfold according
unto the four Elements, for the differences of the fourfold Falling Sickness
are taken from the diversity of the pains and fits. We must here recur unto the
beginnings of Philosophy.

As in the Macrocosm the Element of Fire is most forcible, so in the Microcosm
the fit of the Falling Sickness from the fiery star is most vehement, for it
consists of more forcible and potent seeds, by whoseresolution it is wont to
possess the vital Elements of the whole body in a moment like a thunderbolt.
The paroxism of the Falling sickness from the Air is most mild and gentle; so
also there are four degrees of the Falling Sickness in the Microcosm, as in the
Philosophy of the Macrocosm we have set down four degrees of the Elements. The
Falling Sickness from the star of the Earth obtains the first degree. The
Falling Sickness from the star of the Air obtains the second degree. The
Falling Sickness from the star of Water obtains the third degree. The Falling
sickness from the star of Fire obtains the fourth degree.

After this manner the specifical Remedies of the Falling Sickness are divided
into four degrees, as we will say in our cure and his kinds.

The Falling Sickness and such like diseases which are infamous and notable in
destruction and difference of paroxisms or symptoms have twofold particular
indications; for some Remedies especially respect the paroxisms, some respect
the roots or grounds thereof; the cooling of the boiling spirits, girding,
pricking, and binding, etc. especially respect the paroxisms, but the
resolution of the Epilepsies tincture (that is) the consumption and abolishing
of the seed of the root respects the roots themselves, etc. These indications
admit easy mixtions and may be absolved by the same remedy. Therefore we have
distributed the remedies or medicaments into two orders. I he one respect the
paroxism, the other respect the roots or grounds thereof. Lastly, we adjoyn
medicaments which do not only respect the paroxism of the Epilepsie, but also
the very roots.

The true opiate Laudanum of Paracelsus respects the paroxism, and constringes,
mitigates, releases, and binds the boiling spirits, of which iij or more grains
are administered with the spirits of Vitriol and essence of Camphora. The
essence of Manna and man's blood respects the root it self, of which there is to
be administered in the full moon unto the Epileptick every month, for it
mitigates it and expels it. A perpetual remedy of it is the essence of man's
scull with the water of the flowr of Linden in the paroxism, and before the
paroxism a spoonful of Selondines water for the first dosis. The extract of
Elaterium. The Azure stone, and the Armenian stone prepared with the water of
Balmmint and Bugloss. The essence of black Ellebor. Theophrast. says, in the
beginning of this disease if any have 3. 4. 5. or 6. paroxisms and no more, two
drops of the oil of Vitriol, two drops of the oil of Pearls administered in Aqua
vitae do altogether remove and expel this disease. Theophrast. says, that he
has approved this by deed. The Philosophers stone, and the Mercury of Gold or
Silver removes this disease. Paracel. in tinctura Physicorum, says, that the
oil of Silver (of which there must be taken ij. or iiij. drops with the water
of Betony and Sage and Balmmint) dissolves, consumes, and removes the root of
the Falling Sickness. The Smaragdus not only drunk, but if it be hanged about
the neck, it wars and expels the Falling Sickness as an enemy. Read Theophrast.
lib. 3. Parag. so also in his book de signis Zodiaci, a little after his
Preface he says, that in the center of the Scull of a A German cured his Son
with such a bone of the Falling Sickness.
strangled man there is a bone found of a triangular figure, it is not found in
all Sculs but in some. This bone being pulverized and administered in the
appropriated water, removes and takes away the Falling Sickness though man has
been troubled with it for twenty years.

The Galenists administer Atomatical medicines, and Muscatum, Diacastorium,
Diamoschatum Dulce, Elplerisarcaticon, Hieralogodion, and Oleum Benedictum.
Phrisius in speculo medicinali, and Ruffus in Autidotario commends syrup of
Stecados. Phrisius in speculo, fol. 67. administers Magna Therica, and Sage,
pillulae faetidae. The Galenists say that conserves or conduits and also
Trochisses, and Eclegmata respect and cure the head and other cold
distemperatures of the sinews of the head; so also the flowrs of Rosemary and
of Galingale and of Marigold, with Betony and Briony, administered in the
morning and evening of the quantity of a Walnut. Sometime Aromatical powders
are mixed with Sugar or appropriated syrup, which mixture they call a
confection. But certainly it is well said of some of more sincere Philosophy,
that the Galenists flatter and palliate the diseases, but they do not cure
them, which the experience of the cure of the Falling Sickness does testify;
for if crude and imperfect medicaments effect nothing in the curing of the
Falling Sickness, then the sick are neglected of those false Physicians as if
they were incurable; for the cure of the Falling Sickness is not in Sage,
Marigold, and Marjorum. It is no wonder that they believe not the original of
the Falling Sickness when as they cannot see it with their sense.

The Remedies of the Falling Sickness are twofold, Coporal and Spiritual; some
are good for the younger sort only, some for old men, some for maids, some for
old Women, some cure by coldness (not by that external quality, but by the
Narcotical and coagulative virtue,) some cure by their specifical virtue, some
by their sleeping power and virtue. The oil of Amber is good for Infants and
the younger sort, one drop of it being administered in the water of Fennel unto
the Infants; so also the water of Selondine is most excellent for the younger
sort, and Infants, being anointed upon their nostrils, as the oil of Amber^is,
likewise it is good for them to receive ij. drops of the oil of Corals, and one
drop of Aurum potabile at the first dosis, at the second dosis two drops, at
the third dosis three drops, at the fourth dosis four drops, it is a most
strong thing, therefore it is to be given with judgment. Let three drops of the
oil of Amber be administered in the liquor of the water of the Lillies of the
Valleys unto the younger which are about 18. or 19. years of age. Let there be
taken also yellow oil from the smoke of Oaks, and let ij. drops be administered
to the more aged in the water of the Lillies of the Valleys, and they will take
away and remove the Falling sickness.

The remedies of the Falling Sickness are fourfold in The 16. Chap. below d^
morbis pulmonum.
regard of the four Elements. The most grievous fiery Falling Sickness is cured
by the essence of Antimony. Paracel. in Laboryntho, fol. 222. The destroyer of
the Microcosm takes unto it Realgar (that is) the being of poison, and
threatens death unto him by infection. The conserver of the Microcosm takes
unto it the slowrs of Antimony and overcomes the destroyer; if so be they be
conferred with the internal Balm of man's Nature, they are the chief and
especial virtues against all the kinds of poison. The aerie Falling Sickness is
also expelled by the secret of Selondine. The aerie Fallingsickness is cured by
Therini^tis (which is a kind of Manna) and there is the same signature of it
and the Plantain. The essence of crystal and the Misledine of the Oak cure the
watery Falling Sickness. The Fallingsickness from the stars of the Earth is
cured by the seed extracted of Piony and Poppy. The universal remedies are
potable Gold, quintessence of Gold, the magistery of Pearls, the tincture of
Corals, the magi^^ery of Antimony, external Sulphur. Reverberated Mercury, the
oil and plegm of Roman Vitriol called the Hungarian Vitriol, and the water of
crude Tartar, of the oil and plegm of Vitriol, in water or wine in the morning
or at night; for the consuming of the paroxism, you may read more in the book
de morbis amentium, sub cura caduci in Paracel. tract 2. cap. 1. The compound
Indications. of Camphora, the shaving of an Elks hoof, of the scul of man, of
Unicorns horn, of all the kinds of Saunders, of each of these. of Corals, of
Oaks misledine, of the grains of peony, of each ij. let all be pulverized most
small, and let them be put into a pound of the secret of Vitriol, let them be
digested for a month, and afterward administer them. Muffetus in dialog.
apolog. fol. 45. Joannes Crato, after many dimications with the Chemists was
wont to call native Lead the Loadstone. Michael in Apol. fol. 167. natural
Cinnaber, and not factitious is the chief secret unto the Epileptick.

The green Spirit of Vitriol (which cures all sorts of Falling Sickness) is
thus prepared.
blue Hungarian Vitriol, distill the fleam from it, and when the Spirit
begins to ascend, change the Receiver and receive the Spirit by it self if
you will; or rather distill off only the fleam.

Then take fresh Vitriol, and distill all its fleam as before; so do with more
fresh Vitriol until you have store of the fleam.

then pure fresh Vitriol, and dissolve it in all the said fleam that you
distilled; and being well dissolved, put it in a very high glass with an
Alembeck upon it, and a receiver well luted unto it; then in ashes distill the
green S^i^it.

But be sure that your glass be high, and tapering (a Bolt head is best) so
that at very end it be so narrow, as the smallest head (that is made) may but
go on, else the fleam will come over with the spirit, and so weaken it, and
lessen its effect.

This spirit being carefully distilled will be like a spirit of wine; and you
may administer of it a spoonful at a time, for any Falling Sickness, which it
cures with much ease and safety.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Glewish moisture.
THe glewish matter is a glue of his part from which it proceeds, from that
part there rises a pain and paroxism, the radical matter from which the actions
proceed being separated and forsaking the member, as the Apoplexy or Paralysis.

The Apoplexy is when as this glewish moisture forsakes The Apoplexy is a
preternatural affect of the head, whereby the whole body is suddenly deprived
of sense and motion with the hinderance of breathing.
a principal member.

The Paralysis is when it forsakes the less principal member, as sinews,
muscles, eyes, ears, hands, arms, sides, and feet.

The glue of the body is a nutriment of his member, What the glue is.
and a conservation of the retentive and motive virtue from the faculties of
the digestive virtue. This glue has an attractive, retentive, and motive
virtue; for example, whatsoever the Reins attract, the glue attracteth (that
is) the inferior heaven, the root and very essence of life, called of
Fernelius the implanted spirits, for the body and substance of the reins
attract nothing; those which follow are included in a Parenthesis; for it is
said in Philosophy, that the actions do not proceed from the parts and bodies,
but from the faculties inherent in the parts; when the glue is separated from
some part, then presently it causes an insensibleness and a privation of
motion, from whence there rises either an Apoplexy or Paralysis, for in the
glue there is a sensitive and motive faculty, and not in the members. The kinds
of diseases from the defect of it are the Apoplexy, and the Paralysis of the
tongue and the members, etc. The lethargy and the torture of the mouth.
Paracelsus de pest. tract. 3. cap. 1. says, that the gutta is begot of Martial
poison; so likewise de gutta part 4. fol. 154. says, that the gutta ^ises from
the conjunction of the stars, and poison from the disjunction. The poison is
accended from the fire of the Microcosm. In the same Treatise he says, that
plegm is only an excrement of the brain, but the Apoplexy is not an excrement
but a most subtle thing from the stars of the Firmament; so in the same place,
fol. 148. The gutta in the Microcosm is a lightning in the Macrocosm, for as
the lightning melts Iron, the substance or body of the Iron yet remaining, so
the gutta melts the brain (not corporally but spiritually, for it depriveth
it of all sense and motion) and also the heart and lungs, as when wax is melted
by fire, and compact into a mass, the parts remaining whole. It smites from
the crown of the head the exterior members, hands and feer, and it burns and
consumes the sensitive and motive faculty thereof; so when it smites the
tongue, there follows a privation of speech, yet the substance of the tongue
remains, but not the essence thereof; for the essence thereof is a spiritual
Paralysis, which manifestly demonstrates the spiritual and astral essence of
the disease whiles that the spirits do work against the spirits; when the
lightning of the Microcosm smites the Lungs there follows a suffocation. The
Lungs do not want an attractive, sensitive, and motive faculty; so man is
suffocated of the smoke of the lightning which we more often see to The
lightning of Salt and Sulphur consists of two contraries, it is accended from
the water of the Macrocosm corporally, but from the water of the Microcosm
spiritually, for the heaven in the Microcosm is spiritual.
be in the Macrocosm; so when it smites the brain, it melts the brain, and
deprives it of all sense and motion, and then the danger of death is certain.
And thus concerning the Heart, Liver, and Eyes, Chap. 6. de origin morb. ex
tribus substantiis lib. 1. paramir. also the 3. book paramir. de origin
morbor. aurium ex Mercurio, tract. 6. fol. 186. The Apoplexy What the Apoplexy
is properly.
ought not to be called an Apoplexy but from the fundament of the medicine.
Cachymical and sublimated Mercury (as Auripigmentum) is the cause of it. But
how can Mercury be the cause of the Apoplexy, when as Paracel. says that it is
a kind of gutta; but the cause of gutta is a lightning, the cause of the
lightning is Sulphur and Salt as two contraries in the Academy of Nature by a
favor and Patronizing of the community thereof. The Apoplexy rises from seed,
or one or four Elements, or from fire and water, and sulphur, salt, and
mercury; many things are here united which sense cannot discern, as are the
seminal roots of bodies called principles and elements in which all things are
conserved.

The sign of the Apoplexy is froth, and a suffocation Signs.
with a contraction. The signs of the Paralysis are the The difference of the
Apoplexy and Paralysis.
alteration of a member and a stupefaction of a part. The difference of the
Apoplexy and Paralysis is this. The Apoplexy respects the principal members and
whole body. The Paralysis does not hurt the principal members, but only the
four exterior members and less principal parts, as hands and feet.

The Apoplexy for the most part possesses the left side and vicinity of the
heart, for which I can find no other reason than because the extreme poison
fights against the chief virtue and most strong fire of the heart, as
Hippocrates witnesses; when a lightning of the Microcosm Paracol. defens. lib.
3. parag. 7* de gutta. The sign of the Apoplexy from the brain. The sign of the
Apoplexy from the heart.
smites one of the more principal members, it is hardly to be cured and
restored, for it is almost an incurable chronical disease. Hippocrates
affirms, lib. 2. Aphoris. 42. that a strong Apoplexy can no ways be cured,
but a weak one may easily be cured; for the heaven of the Microcosm is
destroyed, and all the concordance and harmony is violated. But when it smites
the less principal members, then the disease (though by Nature chronical) is
curable. In the cure of the Apoplexy mundificative and clarificative medicines
which mundifie and clarify the balm, the spirits, and all the Elements, are to
be administered.

The cure of the Apoplexy is twofold, internal and The Cure.
external. The internal cure is that which is made by strengthening medicines;
The external is perfected by balms.

The internal cure is made by the essence of Gold, Pearls, Antimony, Gemms,
Corals, Stones, the oil of the Crany with the spirit of Vitriol in the water of
the Lillies of the Valleys, by the Mercury of Gold and aurified spirits of
Vitriol, by the oil of Silver, the oil of Sulphur, and the oil of Sulphur and
the balm of Sulphur.

The external cure is made by the balm of Bevers stones, and of the Marigold,
of the Lillies of the Valleys, Serpentine, Elenum, and Amber. Paracelsus in his
cures writes that he restored one having the Paralysis only by essence of
Antimony: A mystery in the Apoplexy is the solution of Pearls or oil of Pearls.
If any be deprived of his speech, pour five or six drops upon the tongue, and
the power of speech will be restored, so that he may speak by this means. He
cured many having the Apoplexy. He said that the magistery of Pearls was to be
administered to the apoplectick in the very paroxism without any delay, he cured
many by this means, external remedies being applied. a little piece of the
fresh Bevers stone, and put it upon his tongue or under his tongue, and as soon
as the stone is hot, the sick will be able to speak. The Galenists give the
same medicines in the Apoplexy and Falling Sickness.

A preservation from the Apoplexy. Receive equally of each of these, namely, of
Saunders either Citrin or Red, and Sugar, and mix them.

Prepare the true Essence of Gold aforesaid thus.
strong oil of Spanish salt, well rectified by Alembeck, therein dissolve Gold
(which has been well purged by Antimony) being dissolved, pour therein as much
oil of Vitriol; then abstract the oil of Vitriol from it again, then pour on as
before, and draw it off again; thus cohobate it twelve times, every time have a
care that your Gold be not left dry, but somewhat moist; and therefore the
surest way were to perform this work in a boiling Balneo. Having then cohobated
it twelve times (the last time, drawing off the oil of Vitriol and oil of Salt)
pour upon your Gold the best spirit of wine rectified to the highest, and set
it in a Cellar or some cool place, where let it stand for some days, and part
of the Gold will crystalize; take out those Crystals and distill off some of the
water, and set the rest to crystalize as before; so do until all your Gold be
in Crystals, which dry upon clean brown paper in warm air. Take the dry
crystals, make them into subtle powder, and pour upon them good spirit of wine,
then put them for some days to digest in a gentle Balneo, afterward abstract
your spirit of wine by degrees very gently, and the true Essence of Gold will
remain behind like an oil.

CHAP. IX. Of the Spasm.
THough the Spasm be properly a kind of the Falling Sickness, and is referred
of Paracel. (lib. 3. Paragraph. parag. 30.) unto the cure of the
Falling Sickness, notwithstanding seeing it is an insolent The Spasm is a
preteternatual motion, whereby the body is pulled violently and continually
into a preternatural place, either wholly or in part with an impotency of
bending.
and acute symptom and hurt of the sensitive and motive faculty, which is able
to kill man, we will handle briefly of it in this Chapter. De tartarolib. 2.
tract. 2. cap. 1. The spasm is not a disease, but a forerunner of adisease.
Parag. lib. 3. Parag. 3. The cure of the spasm is referred unto the
Falling Sickness. De tartaro lib. 2. tract. 1. cap. 5. and 6. The Tetanus
contracts the members, the spasm extends them. Read Thurnenseriusin Neptuna,
lib. 6. cap. 44. The convulsion is a torpor, therefore The definition of the
Spasm.
the spasm or convulsion is a perpetual voluntary contraction of the sinews and
muscles unto their original. The Galenists say that the cause of the spasm is
contained in the beginning of the Backbone, and it sometime infests and annoys
the whole body, sometime some parts. That which is of the whole body does so
straightly gird it, that it cannot be bended; when the body is crooked forward,
then it is Emprostothonos, when it is crooked backward Emprostothonos.
Opistothonos Tetanus.
then it is Opistothonos, when it is equally bent then it is Tetanus (that is)
a distention a convulsion of the parts; sometime it is in the eye, in the skin
of the forehead, in the root of the tongue, the chin, in the lips, whereupon
the girning laughter is caused; sometime The girning laughtor.
it is in the arm, in the hand and the thigh, and in that sinew or muscle which
is destinated for the motion of the member.

There are many causes of the Convulsion with the The cause of Convulsion.
Galenists, all which Hippocrates reduces unto two. Into evacuation and
repletion. Convulsions are caused from evacuation which arise from a burning
Fever, or from the potion Ellebor, or some other medicaments, or from
immoderate effusion of blood, or from immoderate watchings, or from hunger, or
from immoderate labor. But every Convulsion which rises from phlegm, or
drunkenness, surfeiting, or from the suppressed accustomed evacuations, or from
the intermitted evitation is to be referred unto repletion. They make the
immediate cause of it to be phlegm impinged fast in the sinew. Besides these two
kinds they bring another which they call a flatulent Convulsion. The cause of
it is a clammy and crass vapor implanted in the couples of the sinews; and
here they come at last unto Paracelsus, and explain in some sort the cause of
the Convulsion. Paracelsus in his tract de Cholica writes, that winds are
generated and caused The cause according unto Paracelsus.
from too much meat or drink and crudities, which penetrates through the whole
body, and are exasperated by anger. The spirit of Salt is mixed with the wind
and peirces through all the pores of the body, and enters into the concavities,
joints, glue, and spirits of it. In those places in which it is conservant it
causes a Convulsion or Spasm. The paroxism dures until the wind and spirit of
Salt be consumed. De morbis amentium, tract. 1. cap. 1. de origin
suffocationis intellectus, he says, that the spasm is generated from cold
(that is) from wind and acetosity, (that is) the spirit of Salt, until the wind
and spirit of Salt do vanish; the symptom is to be marked to what diseases the
spasm chances. The spasm concurs Unto what diseases the Spasm happons.
in the Apoplexy of the heart, in the red Jaundies, in the Plague, in Wounds,
in the gutta, in the suffocation of the understanding, in the Falling Sickness,
in the Cholick, and falling disease of the matrix.

The especial indication is to comfort and strengthen The intornal indication
of curing.
the interior members with internal medicaments. Furthermore, the cure of it
is referred of Paracelsus unto the Falling Sickness, to cherish and corroborate
the external members and sinews with calefying medicaments: you may read the
internal cure and medicaments at the end of the Falling Sickness.

The external medicaments are Oils and Balms which are to be applied in the
affected place, as the oil of Euphorbium and the essence of Euphorbium
corrected and inwardly applied and administered; let the dosis be. with a
competent decoction. It is very available against the Paralysis and Spasm, and
it evacuates the phlegm (though clammy, crass, and impinged or fastened in the
sinews or joints) without perturbation. The essence of Castorium*
Bevers stone extracted with the spirit of wine, a drop of which being
administered with the decoction of Rosemary flowrs, Sage, and Betony cures the
trembling Convulsion, and all the hurts of the sinews. Outwardly there may be
applied in the Convulsion Sage and Betony, especially if it be be caused from
evacuation or repletion, and when those things ought to be evacuated which are
contained in the sinews preternaturally. The oil of Turpentine distilled and
applied inwardly and outwardly cures the Convulsion and Spasm, by it the
Backbone may be knit, and the place of the Navel, and also of the affected
place. The essence of temperatory administered cures all the kinds of the spasm,
Emprostothonos, Opistothonos, and Tetanus.

Carrecterius Inherberiosus de 4. gradu Canceri, writes ^ol. 2 and 6.
of the Water-lilly which has red and white flowrs, it being dried in the
Septentrional shade, and being hanged upon the roof of the house or the walls,
he which has the Spasm or Convulsion will be cured in a moment of time. All
simples do perform this which increase in the waters, as the Fern having a very
white root in the waters; use and experience will teach us many remedies out of
the assigned art. Mandragora, Woolfbane, and the inverted Grape perfect this
cure, for under the greatest poison, there lies the most virtue, which is to be
noted well.

Thus prepare the foresaid Essence of Beaver stone.
the right Beaver stone (for the counterfeit are often sold for true ones) make
it into subtle powder, then dissolve it in a pure well rectified spirit of
Salt; then abstract the spirit of Salt from it again, and upon it put the best
and highest spirit of wine, digest them together in Balneo; then decant off the
spirit of wine clear from the feces, and in Balneo distill off all the spirit of
wine, and behind will remain the true essence of the Beaver stone.

CHAP. X. Of the Excrements of the Brain and of Plegm.
DIstillation (with the Greeks Catharros, The Catharr is a preternatural
flowing of plegmatick humors from the Brain to the inferior members.
a Rheum) is a falling down of supervacaneous humors from the head unto the
members. This name is taken generally of the late writers, but the old writers
have only taken it for that rheum which falls unto the jaws; therefore the
cause and matter of pain is the excrement of the head. The descending
distillation has his name from the place, whereupon it is said, if the rheum
flow unto the breast it is called a phlegm, if unto the jaws it is called
branchus, if unto the nostrils it is called corysa. Galen in his 3. book cap.
4. De symptomatum causis. Elsus book 4. Chap. 2. The procatarctical causes of
the flux of the head are too much drinking, sleep at midday, night-watching,
unseasonable studies, The procatarctical cause of the plegm.
especially after meat, for vapors ascend unto the Brain and over charge it
because the mouth of the Ventricle is not yet shut, which vapors are resolved
into humors; whereupon the colors of the rheum are which are called A
suffocative rheum.
suffocative rheums, unto which those for the most part are obnoxious which
watch much. Those rheums oftentimes descend in great abundance unto the jaws
and lungs where they threaten death very often. Fernelius The excrement of the
head is twofold.
distinguishes the excrement of the head into the internal and external. The
internal is that of which we speak, which descends unto the inferior members,
and is collected in the Ventricles of the brain, especially under the skin of
the Crown of the head, where the ends of the veins are which go through the
Face and Temples unto the Head, for as often as these veins do swell with much
excrement and humor, they effuse the relics and superfluities of the aliment
under the skin, which can scarcely evaporate by reason of the thickness and
crasseness of the skin. This is the fountain and fosterer of all external pain;
from hence a distillation flows unto the external parts of the body, as unto
the Eyes, Gumms, Teeth, Neck, Shoulders, Arms, Sides, and Loins, etc. But what
needs many words? here is the fountain of diseases of Galen and Fernelius. He
which remembers those things which we have said concerning the Generation of
Tartar in the parts of the body, Read the 2. Chap. of this tractate of the
causes of the headache, and above Chap. 23. of the Tartar of the marrow, will
laugh at the seutence and opinion of Galen and Fernelius, and he will easily
confute their opinions concerning the external flux. The true cause of the
rheum. Para^^ss


The cause of rheum is resolved Salt, when the corrosive Salt is mixed there
rises pains from it being resolved. The cure. Every indication of cure consists
in this, that The indication.
the head be strengthened, and that the flux and superfluous humidities of the
brain be exiccated. In the mean time a regard must be had of the Ventricle that
it perform his office. These three herbs take away the rheum (that is, the
essences of them) namely, Balmmint, Lunary, and Spurge, do purge and take away
all humidities and flux of the head. Sarcocolla or Gumm of a tree in Persia,
the Eldertree, Anaxardium or tree in India, Garden Saffron, Colloquintida,
Thime, the wild-Vine, Hermodactylus, Pellitory, Euphorbium, Mullein, the
Salgemme, Theophrastus. Read the same 2. book de signis Zodiaci, sub signo
Arietis. These following purge the flux of the head and melancholy, and
indurated blood of the head, namely, Polypody, Ellebor, Fleawort, Cataputia or
Spurge, Tithimalus, or Sea Lettice, Centory and Agarick. If the flux of the
head descend unto the breast, let him use Diacodium, Diapapaver. Phrisius in
his speculum, lib. 2. cap. 14. says, that the composition or electuary, and
the aurea Alexandrina expels and consumes the flux of the head which possesses
the Eyes, Ears, and Gumms. Phrisius in his speculum, the cited book and Chap.
Pliny lib. 25. cap. 8. writes, that these following be very expedient for the
rheumatick, namely usual Plantain, compound Hierapicra with Agarick given at
morning and at night for a dosis. purges the head from the flux, likewise. of
the root of Mechoacum administered purges the blood and flux of the head.
Against the flux of the head and obstructions of the Ventricle, take of
Eyebright and Silexis Montanus and Saffron ana.. of the seeds of Filipendula,
or Dropwort, Fennel-seed ij. of Marjo am, Sorpillus, of Pepper, of the grains
of Paradise ana.. of Sugar ij. let them be pulverized and mixed, and taken in a
draught of Wine or Ale. The herb Bugloss is threefold, the greater, the less,
and the mean* The mean Bugloss has blew flowrs, the less has red flowrs, and
it is a manly kind, if any carry this in his hat or on his head, it is made
very moist, for it attracts the humors very strongly out of the head. These
crude medicaments do somewhat effect, but yet there are far stronger virtues
against the fluxes. The spirit of Vitriol, the spirit of Sulphur, the spirit of
Turpentine, Terra Sigillata, which by their specifical properties consume and
dissipate all the matter of fluxes and distillations. There must be administered
three or four drops of the spirit of Vitriol in a covenient liquor in the
morning or at night, with. of Terra Sigillata for a dosis. Preservatives (as A
preservative against theum.
in all other diseases) do much avail. The chief preservative is the flowrs of
Sulphur, which like fire consume all the superfluous matter left of Nature, and
stir up the natural heat that it may work strongly in the expulsion of the
excrements. But in the preserving much care is to be had of the Ventricle by
comforting medicaments, and such as stir up the native heat, lest that
crudities be left from the heat in the Ventricle, which are the causes of most
grievous diseases. This can be done by no medicament as by the antidotum of
Mithridatum, which must be taken twice or thrice every week, of the quantity of
a pease or two in the morning with a fasting stomach. This medicament consumes
the rheum impinged and seated in the tunicles of the Ventricle, and that which
is left or remains from the crudities; and it strengthens the native heat of
the Ventricle wonderfully. This is also effected by the confection of Ginger.

CHAP. XI. Of the Diseases and Symptoms of the Eyes and their Causes.
THe rheum is the mother of all diseases, Of the pains of the Eyes and their
cure. Read Paracelsus lib. 13. and 14. Parag. The causes of the affections of
the Eyes. The affections of the Eyes are twofold. The internal affections,
and it procreates an ill offspring, for all the affections of the eyes have
their original from the flux, unless they be produced from some manifest cause.
The affections of the eyes are twofold, interior and exterior. The interior
I call which are caused within the fleshy membrane, and have their original
from the inmost seats of the brain. I call the external those which exist
within or without the fleshy membrane. Furthermore, of the internal affections
which hurt this bowel, some exist in the discerning spirits, some in the brain,
some in the optic spirits, some in the crystaline humor. The spirits that
they may see quickly and distinctly, ought to be many and Ethereal, for if
there be many spirits but yet crass, they fee things far off and near, but not
distinctly. This is almost the disease of old men.

Blindness, obscurity, and every imbecility of the sight (whose cause is not
conspicuous Blindness is a privation of sight, caused by reason of the
corruption of the optic spirits.
in the eye) rises from the hurt of the optic sinew or crystaline humor. The
hurt of the optic sinew is obstruction, which is from the influx of more crass
humor, or it is a disruption caused from the external or internal sharp and
corrosive humors.

The peculiar hurt of the Crystaline humor is a removing of it out of his
proper place, either by falling or smiting, by which the eye is vehemently
smitten and hurt. The Glaucoma is a mutation of the crystaline or Glaucoma.
vitreous humor into a gray or brown color. They being hindered by this hurt,
suppose themselves to see through a smoke or mist.

The suffusion is a collection of humor The suffusion is an obscurity of the
horn-like tunicle, caused from the commixtion of crass humor in the
superficies of it nigh the apple.
besides nature either in the pupil or betwixt the third skin of the eye and
the crystaline humor, it falls from the brain through the optic sinews, and
that by little and little, so that it can scarcely be perceived in the
beginning; though sometime the crass and consummated suffusion be collected in
one day; for if the crass humor fall suddenly into the optic sinew, it
suddenly blinds him.

The hurts of the pupil appear manifestly unto the The hurts of the pupil.
sense, and these are Dilatation, Imminution, Divulsion, and Ruption,
Dilatation (whether it be caused at first or rise afterward from some disease)
hurts the sight, so that it causes the spirits to be diffused, and dilated, and
dissipated abroad. The native imminution (because it girdeth, constringeth, and
incrasseth the spirits) makes the sight most quick, but yet it is diseased,
because it has a preternatural cause which makes it worse. The divulsion and
ruption neither occaecates, nor hurts the sight greatly; furthermore, the
humor causes a dilatation in the Grape like tunicle, which also being included
and abounding, it distends and amplifies the little hole which is the pupil.
But wherefore does the dilatation of the pupil follow the hanging forth of the
eye, and the chirrus and Plegm one and Imposthume of the eye. But the Spupil is
diminished and made straiter in the P^hisis and Atrophie of the eye, and as
often as the vitreous humor is consumed for any cause. Also the fourth
Grape-like tunicle being contracted and compressed strai^neth and girdeth in
the pupil; for the same causes and also by violence and hurt of external causes
the divulsion and ruption of the tunicle is caused. These are the inward
affections of the eyes, now we will handle the external, The external
affections.
which possesses the third pannicle or membrane.

The Caligo or mist is an obscure or dark The Nebula is an obscurity of the
third tunicle caused from some subtle vapor or humor occupying part of it.
seeing, caused from the more crass and dense tunicle of the third tunicle.
This defect is seldom from a disease, but frequent from age, whereby a certain
membrane and nails are made crass. The mist is a thin humor sticking in the
third tunicle, whereby one thinks that he saw all things through a mist, a
vapor, or smoke; this humor waxing crass begets at length a white spot in the
eye, for the white is a crass and white humor in the third tunicle, or else
collected and condensed above it; so that it darkneth and dulleth for the most
part the quickness of seeing. These two hurts do increase under the sense, and
often they are caused from the Opthalmia and Epiphora; sometimes they are
caused from a proper clammy humor, which for the pupil is effused by little
spaces, which are betwixt the adherent membrane and third tunicle.

Hallucination or erring is because the Hallucination or pravity of sight is,
when man ^r^eth in seeing, and conceives things otherwise than they are in
themselves.
third tunicle is infected with a strange color, whereby all things without
seem to be tincted, as in the Jaundies and red inflammation.

The Rhexis is a bursting, or cutting, or eating of the third tunicle, from
which the white humor flows first and leaves the eye less by much. The
Ragoides or third skin falls down, and then the falling down of the eye is
caused, which of the Greeks is called (...). The confusion of the eye is diverse
from this, in which the humors are mixed by smiting and are confused without
any eruption. And thus much of the affections of the third tunicle.

The affections of the adherent membrane are these, The Vnguis.
a sinewed hard and white membrane rising from coagulation, extending it self
and covering the pupil of the eye, it rises from an adherent membrane by little
and little in a long time increasing and waxing hard if it be permitted.

Of all the Epiphora and Opthalmia infest and annoy the Epiphora. Ophthalmia.
eyes most often, from which most sharp dolours and many other diseases do
expullulate and arise.

The Epiphora is a small humor caused by the manner The Epiphora is a
proternatural flux of humor unto the Eye.
of tears in the eyes. This humor is somewhere without pain, heat, or redness,
somewhere it is sharp and salt and molestful and hurtful by pain, heat,
acrimony, and redness, from whence issues the exulceration of the eyelids.

The Ophthalmia is an inflammation of The Ophthalmia is a dolorif^rous tumor
of the outmost pannicle accompanied for the most part with the redness of the
eye and profusion of tears.
blood infused from the corners of the eyes into the whole adherent membrane;
by this the small veins swel, and those which were obscure in the white of the
eye are made conspicuous, and whatsoever was white, begins to wax red. Chief
and greatest ardour and pain afflicts him which has often the sharp flux of
tears. It is very much like unto the Epiphora, but they are distant amongst
themselves, because in the Ophthalmia only the white of the eye waxes red; but
in the Epiphora the eyelids do only wax red. There be two hurts of the
Eltropion.
eyelids, the Scab and the Itching. The Eltropion of the eyelid is an
incision whereby the interior red part remains (perchance it runs forth) it
is caused either from some scar or abounding of flesh. The Grando is a Grando.
hard push rising almost in the superior eyelid. The Hordeolum.
Hordeolum is a hot botch almost come unto an Imposthume, bursting forth of the
eyelid. The cure of the flux of the eyes.


For the curing of the flux and pains of the eyes, the medicines are to be
administered which we have mentioned in the cure of the rheum. The spirit of
Vitriol is most deoppilative and unobstructing, for it removes all
obstructions. The spirit of Sulphur consumes all the humors and fluxes of the
head; so also the oil of Silver. Medicines for the most part of Surgeons are
applied outwardly, and the inward are rejected; furthermore, in the curing of
the painful affects of the eyes it brings nothing to pass worthy of
commendation. If the ancient and common proverb have place to cure all diseases
by one collirium, then certainly it will have place here, and this The virtue
of Tutia.
may be very fitly said of Tutia or heavier soil of brass, by which Paracelsus
reports that he cured not only the tumors, tears, and pains of the eyes, but
the extreme pain of the eyelids, and where the growing forth of the flesh had
almost taken the sight, which were thought to be desperate diseases unto those
Physicians, which by their The preparation of Tutia.
profession were called Ophthalmists. The common preparing of Tutia is that a
hot iron be extinguished in hot white wine. Theophrast. does thus apply it;
take prepared Tutia, put it into a linen cloth, after dip it in wine Application
mixed with white marble, and often wash his eyes with it. From Sugar or Salt of
Antimony a precious balm may be made for the Ophthalmia and inflammation of the
eyes, so that it be before dulcorated and prepared. Lithargy, Tutia, the Oar of
Copper and Spodium may be rightly prepared by the spirit of wine or distilled
Vinegar and made so mild and gentle, that they will remove and take away the
spots and growing out of flesh of the eyes without any pain; as likewise they
mitigate the inflammations and most bitter pains thereof.

Crato spoke very familiarly to a certain Physician, The Expement of Crato.
that this was an excellent remedy for the eyes, if that one do bruise the
Lapis calaminaris, and beat it into small powder, and mix it with the melted
marrow of an Ox after the form of a liniment, with which the shut eyes are
anointed, but the flux is to be washed with a sharp lixivium, that itching may
thereby be caused. He that would know more of the affections of the eyes let
him read Ophthalmodulia of George Bartchius.

CHAP. XII. Of the Diseases of the Ears, their Symptoms and their Causes.
THe Parotis is an inflammation which The definition of Parotis. The Plegmone
is a hot, red, and hard tumor unto our feeling, and also gilstering. The Oedoma
is a soft tumor and white, not resisting our touch, but yet leaves a hole.
Sev. p. 285. and 286. The cause of the Parotis. The mechanical process in
Generation. The Parotis is an Imposthum in the root of the right or the left
Ear.
bursteth forth especially in those kernels which are behind the Ears and their
roots. This has all the notes of the inflammation of blood, both the tumor,
redness, heat, and beating pain, but that sometime it comes to pass that it
participates of an oedema. The Galenists ascribe this to the hot humors
flowing together unto that place, but we ascribe it to the spirits of Arsenick,
that such a pestilent inflammation could be caused in the place of the kernels
behind the ears, for we hold it impossible that the hot afflux of humors can
cause such an inflammation; these seeds being resolved they produce the first
vapors invested with the signatures of Fevers; so also there are signatures
closely contained in the superficies of such sulphureal spirits which are
permixt with the vital Elements of humane anatomy, they beget coldness,
horror, and rigor, resolutions and sulphurous vapors follow, which are
inflammable and similar, corrupting, polluting Sev. p. 252.
the Elements with the same signatures, from hence are the alterations of the
pulse, thirst, disdain of meat, loathing, vomiting, restlesness, watching, and
such other incommodities. The symptoms of hearing, as buzzing, sounding, noise
and every depraved hearing The causes of buzzing and singing of the ears.
rise from their motion and agitation of them. Those which supply the place of
inward causes, as they be diverse and diversely impelled, so they produce and
cause diverse sounds. The buzzing of the ears is The buzzing of the ears is a
proternatural sound caused within the cavities of the rocky bone.
caused from a little wind falling down by little and little. The singing of
the ears rises from the interrupted course of it. Sounding rises from more
crass wind bursting forth more plenteously. The cracking is that which rises
from a valid and strong impulse. Furthermore, heavy hearing and deafness rises
either in the brain or in the primary organ of hearing, the windings of the ear
being hurt and Quo^citatius de medicina prisc. fol. 399 and 100.
hindered. The cause which either possesses the brain or primary organ of
hearing is an inflammation or hurt of the humor. Hippocrates said that
deafness was caused Deafness is when a man can hear nothing at all.
from black blood, but there is a more common original of it from crass and
plegmy humor altogether seated and resting. This of all others is wont to make
the senses and their functions sleepy. Heavy hearing and deafness which is
native does not rise from these causes, but from the hurt of conformation,
whereby either the instrument of hearing is wanting, or it attaineth a bad
figure. The true cure of the Parotis is this, first, that the boiling The cure
of Parotis.
and inflamed spirits be extinguished, and natural rest be restored unto them,
and this is to be done by Laudanum opiatum of Paracel. But rather medicaments
are to be given which expel the poison vehemently by sweat, as diaphoretical
Mercury, diaphoretical Gold of life, the flowrs of Antimony, and the spirits of
Tartar, with the addition of Paracelsus. Terra sigillata given with a quantity
of Mithridatum. These diaphoreticks are not once to be given but twice or
thrice or four times, until the poison be expelled, and the sick restored unto
his strength.

Buzzing, singing, cracking, and sounding, are to be The cure of the singing.
cured by the internal medicaments mentioned in the rheum. It is not altogether
safe to put something in the A caution.
ears in the heavy hearing and deafness; sometime this rises from vapors
existing in the instruments of hearing, sometime it rises from humors and
obstruction. If less convenient medicaments be administered, the hurt is
exasperated. If the hurt rise from humors, let there be given unto the patient
three Pills of Hierapicra or bitter confection of Galen, for they extract the
humors from the instruments of hearing, and free the head from them. Artists
have a Silver crooked pipe which they put in the ear and blow through it, if
the patient feel a cold wind, then the deafness does not rise from obstruction.
Crato the Physician takes Carduus Benectictus, and sprinkled it with the water
of a thistle, and caused it to be distilled, and being put into a linen cloth,
he puts it into the ear of the half deaf, whether they have pain or do not
hear, he confesses that he found no medicine more available than this which he
has tried. Some put a drop of the oil of Turpentine in the ears, and they
bring it back again, and by this means they free many from deafness.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Diseases of the Nostrils, their Causes and Symptoms.
THe Nostrils are destinated for the purging of the The Ulcers of the Nostrile.
brain, and these have their diseases. The diseases of the Nostrils consist
either in an Ulcer or growing forth of some flesh in the Nostrils, as also in
all the parts of the body Ulcers rise. But these Ulcers do not rise from the
excrements of the brain and their acrimony (as the ^alenists fable) after this
manner falling down, and so by their acrimony exulcerating the Nostrils. But
the cause of these Ulcers is contained in the blood and veins of the nostrils;
as of all other Ulcers in all the parts the universal cause is Salt, which is
separated from the blood and lurketh in all the veins and all the parts, it is
corrosive, sharp, sour, and bitter. The destruction of Salt (says Paracelsus
de origin and curatione morbor.) it is the cause of Ulcers, there is in this
Salt Arsenicks putrefactive poison. The Ulcers of the Nostrils for the most
part are putrid, from which there falls a filthy Scab, and from which there
runs a stinking excrement.

The Ozena, of Theophrastus de ulceribus The Ozena, Theophrast is an Imposthum:
The Ozena is a putrified and stinking* Ulcer of the Nostrils caused from
corruption of sharp humors flowing from the Brain to the Nostrils.
cap. 59. is called an imposthume, therefore he that has the imposthume smells
ill both to himself and those which are nigh him* as also he is molested with
the contagion of the obscure spirits. Oftentimes daily Ulcers spread abroad
which exceed and putrify the wings of the Nostril, or the place within, or the
tender bones thereof, as also the hole, they eat the palate oftentimes with
great deformity, and especially if they bear the form of Cardinoma, or if they
be produced from the filthy lues Venerea, which is most frequent.

The fresh Ulcers being neglected, oftentimes there Sarcoma.
grows forth a piece of flesh (which is called Sarcoma) of that length that it
hangs forth in the Nostrils, or else the flesh falls unto the jaws, and then it
is called Polypus, for that flesh is like to the flesh of the fish Polypus is a
fleshy, loose, and porous tumor begot in the Nostrils besides Nature.
which (for his many feet) they call Polypus. Galen de compositionibus
pharmacor. lib. 3. cap. 3. so also de tumore praeternaturali, c. 16. Aegineta
lib. 6. cap. 25.

The symptoms of smelling are the diminishing and The symptoms of smelling.
abolishing or deoriving of swelling; for smelling perishes, or is diminished,
the passage of Nostrils or of the bone being, stopped, by which breath and
smells are drawn, and this is done either by the Sarcoma or Polypus, or
inflammation of blood, or heaviness. If none of these signs appear, the cause
of hurt ought not to be referred either to the former Ventricles of the brain,
or unto their couples, in which the sense of smelling is. In these the
abundance of humors or corruption contaminates the sense and the spirits
thereof; sometime about those places imposthumes are caused with no Fever and
less pain, from which being burst, sometime a pure filth is blown forth of the
nose, as also there flows forth filth out of ears full of filth, and that by no
discommodity of health.

The Gravedo is a flegmy distillation into The Gravedo of the Nostrils. The
Corysa or Gravedo is an obstruction of the holy bone in the superior part of
the nose.
the bone A^thmoides and his membranes effused from the parts which are about
the brain or the Ventricles thereof; by it the head waxes heavy, and breathing
is made more difficult; neither can breathing be made except with a wide and
gaping mouth. The voice (as before) sounding has some sound, and is caused in
the Nostrils, in the beginning little, after more gross ^ furthermore, blood
bursts forth of the nostrils, the vein being burst, opened, or eaten, which
ends there.

The Hemorrhagy of the Nostrils is called The Hemorrhagy of the Nostrils. The
Hemorrhagy is a blood bursting forth of the Vessels by the Nostrils.
of Physicians a violence; the veins do not go from the inmost seats of the
brain into the nostrils, but from the mouth and palate, they are sufficiently
detected and large that they may be (as it were) an Emissary or Pipe for the
superfluous blood, for the expelling the Ulcers of the Nostrils.

The Ozena or imposthume is cured by the herb Aristalogy. Of the cure of the
Impo^^. hum.
Pliny lib. 25. cap. 13. Therne^s, lib. 5. cap. 40. cures it with Betony,
Fengreek, Savory, the stalk of Apples and Penniroyal. Those which have these
Ulcers The cutting of a vein.
are cured by the cutting of the head-vein in the chin or end of the nose.
Rulandus says that such Ulcers are best cured by the oil of Lead, and the
sweetness of Mercury, by the water of Mercury, by the oil of Antimony which
Paracelsus describes in his Chirurgia vulner. de corruptis Vulneribus, so also
by the balm of iron, the oil of Auripigmentum, and the oil of wax. Paracelsus
cured the Polypus which is a stink of the nostrils by the oil of Vitriol with
wax. The symptoms of sinelling if that they be not caused from manifest causes
are cured by the medicines for rheum. The pushing forth of blood is diversely
cured. Take shepherds purse, and the herb Polygon a like quantity, let them be
bruised and the juice extracted, one or two drops of this being attracted or
instilled stays the blood. Give in the too abundant flux of the blood four
drops of the oil of iron in a draught of wine, and it forthwith stays the
blood, so the essence of Corals is exceeding good. Thurnens in pisone lib. 4.
cap. 4. cures the flux of blood forth of the nostrils by the water of the stone
Haematites, and of Lapis Judaicus and Bergrota.

CHAP. XIV. Of the hurts of the Mouth and Face, and their Causes.
THe skin which covers the Face (because some of the flesh under it is more
dry) contracteth many Burning pushes.
hurts unusual unto the other parts, of which kind are burning, pushing, or
wheals which smell in the nose and other parts of the face with much
unseemliness. The Galenists affirm the cause to be a small and vicious blood.
But Paracelsus de tribus primis substantiis, cap. 5. says, The cause of them*
that all kinds of pushes are generated from Mercury, and that the disease of
pushes or blisters is caused from the essence of Mercury. Lib. 6. Parag. cap.
3. he says, that the Leprosy rises from blisters. In the same book cap. 4. he
says, that blisters are a sign of the red Leprosy, lib. 2. param. de origin
morbor. ex tribus substantiis, cap. 5. he says, that Salt, namely Mercurial
Salt causes and generates the Alopecia, the Pustula, the Cicatrix, the
Condyloma, or inflammation from blood, the Leprosy, and the Morphaea. In the
same book, cap. 4. he says, that the Blisters, French Pox, and the Leprosy
have their beginning from Mercury. The universal redness dispersed through the
whole face without blisters is of this rank and order, it is called of
Physicians gutta rosacea. Citron color, Pale, White, or any other bad color
is not to be ascribed to the distemperature of the Liver, but to the radical
moisture and Mercury of the Microcosm, which causes like flowrs or colors as
it is in the face, for the color of the face is nothing but the flowr of the
Mercury of the Microcosm. Paracel. de ente Naturae at the end says, that there
is a great number of such deformities; which because they hurt not the
functions of the body, are not amongst diseases, but because they are
altogether preternatural, they are to be accounted symptoms. The teeth are wont
to be diversely affected, sometime they are gag-teeth or hang forth, sometime
they are worn with eating or by violence of some external causes, sometime they
are made black and covered with silthy slime. The teeth shake and are loose by
the hurt of scraping them, by the eating of hot and sweet things, as also by
breathing forth crudities, and by smiting of an external cause, and when the
roots abound with moisture, and their gumms are made looser, then they are
grievously pained, and that almost for the pain which is in the membrane of the
jawbone, or in the sinew of the teeth, or in the flesh of the teeth Thee*
phrastus lib. 12. parag. fol. 16. says, that the pains of the teeth with their
accidents are in the roots of the bone, etc. f. 417. The first cause of the ach
of the teeth is from the sharpness of the Salt. Sometime the gumms The swelling
and growing forth of the Gumms. Aphta are little pushes appearing in the
superficies of the lips.
swell above measure, that almost they cover the teeth, especially in such as
have soft and spongious gumms, and such as live in moist and watery places as
ship-men do. The Aphta are Ulcers not very hollow insinuating it self into
every part of the mouth, palate, gumms, and into the sides of the tongue, and
into the root of it. These are very common to children, but in those come to
age hot vapors cause them rising from the Liver; sometime salt phlegm does
cause them, which flows from the head; these are frequent in Fevers, sometime
they are without Fevers. There are grievous ones observed, of which kind are
observed to be sometime when women's flowrs are suppressed.

The cure. Without controversy it is that these blisters are generated from
impure blood (that is) from Mercurial poison contained in the blood; seeing
that like are cured with like, and contraries with contraries, all the kinds of
blisters are altogether cured by the essence of Mercury. This essence of
Mercury is not so manifest and perspicuous in any metal as in Mercury, and it
is not so excellent and virtuous in any mineral as in Antimony, there is none
more effective in any wood than in Ivory, Ash, lignum sanctum, and Juniper,
there is none more effective in herbs than in the herb Serpents Tongue,
Arsemart, and Serpentine. The same cures gutta rosacea, but if it be inveterate
it can be cured by no external medicaments. The spots of the face and gutta
rosacea are cured in the beginning with maids milk, the description of which is
thus. Take of Lithargy of Silver iij. pulverized, of distilled Vinegar of best
wine lb ss. mix them, strain it through a linen cloth, mix this water with the
water of Salt, let this water be made of. of Salt well powdered. Take also lbss
of rain water, mix them very well, and you shall see that water white like
milk, which is called lac virginis, wash gutta rosecea and the spots of the
face with this milk. Some boil Lithargy with distilled Vinegar, some put to
Ceruse which all are approved. The cure of the bad color in the face consists
in the renovation and restoration of moisture. Read of this cap. 16. de cura
Phthisis. The oil of Amber cures the intolerable pains of the teeth, the
rottenness of the mouth, the Aphta, and the corrupt gumms, it also makes black
teeth white. Gumm from the wild Olive, especially that which is biting, helps
the corroded and corrupt gumms. Bartholomeus Anglu* lib. 17. cap. 14. against
the pains of the teeth, says* anoint the affected part with the oil of St.
Johnswort and lay a hot linen cloth to warm them: If the pain come from
distillations use three or four drops of the spirit of Vitriol in the spirit of
wine, and it consumes and disperses the flux. Again, pour another or two drops
upon the affected tooth, and forthwith the pain ceases. A most present remedy
against the pains of the teeth is, take the seed of Mastick, bruise it, and put
it into a linen cloth, and put it to the teeth, it has a wonderful force and
virtue of extracting clammy and slimy humors, as also of taking away the pains.
Paracels. lib. 12. Parag. 417. in cura dolorum dentium, etc.

CHAP. XV. Of the Diseases, Causes, and Symptoms of the Tongue and Jaws.
THe tongue which is an excellent member The Psellotis is a preternatural
affect, when as man omitteth some Letter or Syllable in pronouncing. Stutting
is when a man cannot join one Syllable with another.
of the body has his diseases, of which some are curable, some incurable.
Those which are almost incurable are the Traplotis, the Psellotis, the
stammering and the stutting, but these are rather hurts than diseases.

In that part of the mouth which is soft and loose, and under the tongue, and
is (as it were) bound unto it with a bond, there is collected the Rana* which
The Rana is a Blister or little piece of flesh under the root of the tongue
caused preternaturally* of crass and clammy humors.
sometimes is like to the phlegmon, oftentimes to the oedema, forth of which
being opened runs a filth like to the white of an egg. Children are wont to be
troubled with this Ulcer, for they get it from sucking. It is like, as also the
Columella, unto taurus. Aetius in his 8. book Chap. 39. says, that the tumor
is in those parts which are under the tongue, but especially of the veins.
Aegineta writes lib. 3. that the Batrachus or* Rana is a tumor like unto an
inflammation bursting forth under the tongue. Concerning these read Alexander
Benedictus, lib. 5. cap. 8, 9, 10, 11, etc. read also Theophrastus de ulceribus
cap. 25. Oftentimes the Jaws swell being filled with a cold distillation, The
tumor of the jaws is when the substance of them is swollen by* reason of some
internal humor or vapor distending them.
and then under the jaw* bone there is a tumor seen and felt within. And this
or some piece sticking in the jaws presses and hinders that the meat, drink, or
spittle cannot be easily swallowed, and that without thirst or burning. But
sometimes an inflammation troubles and pains the jaws which has the name The
inflammation of the jaws is a preternatural tumor of the kernel which hangs
forth at the end of the palate, with the falling of it unto the tongue: it is
called in Greek (...), which is Uva.
of a part. This is like unto a tumor, and brings pain, redness, burning, and
thirst, by reason the matter is so boiled, and the little skin is easily
disrupted; the imposthume being caused filth flows forth into the mouth and
jaws, from hence rises a filthy Ulcer by which the breath is made stinking.
Such an Ulcer rises often (without a phlegmon) from Salt or sharp humor which
eats the soft humors and hot jaws altogether. Sometime from the spots of
contagion, it is The chance of an Uvula
very frequent with lues Venerea. Also the Columella hangs forth of the palate,
and is molestuous, it is more loo^e and long, and comes to the jaws and head of
the stomach, it has a troublesome tickling, so that whosoever is troubled with
it contends in vain to swallow; for he fears lest that he should be strangled
with the violence of it. This hurt is generated when as it is profused and
moistened with much or too much humor. Also the The inflammation of the
Throatpipe.
Throat-pipe sometime is enflamed and swells with a redness and heat or
burning, and it, falling into the jaws loosened with greater difficulty,
provokes the fear of suffocation; when by inflammation the lowest part of it
appe^rs crass, but above thin and black, then it is wont (says Hippocrates) to
be called Uva, for it is like in figure, color, and magnitude unto a
Grapes-stone.

The Angina or Squinancy is an affection, Squinancy. Angina is an Aposthume
begot in the jaws hindering breathing and swallowing of meat. The symptoms of
it.
stopping the highest parts of the throat and weazand through which the
entrance is of meat and drink and breath. In this breathing is very difficult,
as also swallowing, and the drink runs back into the nost^ils, and a bitter
pain possesses the jaws, for the Angina is so called ab argendo, because it
vexes and torments the throat, and stops* the passage of breath; of the Greeks
it is called (...), or (...), that is, an inflammation in the throat or jaws,
(...), that is, from suffocating or strangling, when blackness and adustion
occupies and possesses the tongue. Fuschius says, that it is a kind of a most
cruel and pernicious disease, whereby the jaws are troubled and strangled. Read
the institution, lib. 3. cap. 1. The prunella of Paracels.
Paracelsus calls the Angina prunella in his 2. book de tartaro tract* 2. cap.
5. and thus he defines the prunella. The prunella is a principal passion
existing with a proper The signs.
paroxism in the heat, having his original from Vitriol salt oppugning his
proper place and Nature; it is one of the kinds of the Pleurisy and Plague
with the Vitriol heat. In the explication of this Chap. fol. 311. the signs
are, First, there comes redness in the jaws and tongue, after comes a black
color, Thirdly, as it were falling coals put upon the tongue, and little
wheals or blisters burst forth in the tongue; two or three colors are the true
signs of the prunella. The rest of the signs are as in the Pleurisy and
Plague, Paracelsus de tartaro tractat* 2. cap. 4. The prunella of the Plague
rises from the salt of Arsenick, but tartareous spirits predominate in the
prunella, and constitute and cause the prunella of the Brain, Breast,
Ventricle, Liver, Weazand, and all the parts. The Galenists make the cause of
the angina or prunella to be a choleric or sanguine flux flowing forth of the
throat veins into these members, and it produces the Erysipelas or Phlegmon.
The Fever is an individual Companion or adjunct of the angina or Squincy, and
the prunella is a symptom of the aerie Plague.

The cure of the Rana or Batrachus is that iij. drops of The cure of the Rana.
the spirit or oil of Vitriol be infused into the 16. part of Fountain water,
and that they be well* tempered, dip a feather into this water and wash the
Ulcer (that is) the Rana, or let a gargarism be made* Another, take of the herb
Penniroyal, Otis* anum, Wildmint, (which is a kind of mint) ana i* part, of the
root of Pepperwort and Nettle ana ij. of Flower de Luce, Florentine i. of
Raspatum, and Lignum Guaicum ss. let them be cut and confused together, let
them be boiled in water, and let a Gargarism be made, and anoint it thrice a
day with diameron and robuncum and Honey Roses, add a little Pepper or Salt,
and anoint it oftener. Pains and dolours effect and cause the tumor (being
fallen into the jaws) of the The cure of the tumor of the jaws.
weazand, therefore the cause being taken away, the effect is taken away, but
the cause is removed especially by the spirit and oil of Sulphur which
exsiccates the distillations The cure of the Laxation of the Columell.
wonderfully. The smoke of Amber cures the Laxation of the columel. Penotus in
his Treatise de salibus fol. 233. says, that he which has the Uva or
inflammation of the jaws, let him take Salentine, and burn it in a pot, and use
it with honey and water. Mathiolus against Dioscorides. Alexander Benedictus,
lib 7. cap. 5. and 6. and Gualterus Ruffius in Germanica gorargia, last Chap.
and last part, cap. 29. The Syrup of Jujuba* and Violets ana. mixed together,
cures the hurt jaws; also take the diamorum of prune water and the juice of
roses, and mix them, the mixture being hot let there be made a Gargarism, or
diamorum. with the water of Sage and Prunes* ana ij. and the spirit of wine
mixed with Camphora ss. let them be mixed for a Gargarism. A notable The Ulcers
of the jaws.
water for all the Ulcers of the jaws. Take the half quart of the spirit of
wine, of Camphora, put it in the spirit of wine, let them stand covered
overnight, the next day take one quart of Rhenish wine and put unto them the
powderings of Alume ^iij. of Frankincense, Mastick, and Mirth ana ss. and make
them boil, t^ke them from the ^ire and pour in the spirit of wine with
Camphora, and boil it until the third part be consumed, strain it and keept in
a glass. Paracelsus de tartaro, lib. 2. cap. 5. There is the same cure of the
pru^ella and the Plague. He that will cure the prunella totally, it is
necessary The cure of the prunella.
that first he cure the Fever, for the prunella or Squincy rises from the Fever
in regard of the tongue or jaws. The Fever rises from the opilation of the
Liver, the opilation from the poison of Arsenick. Our general Diaphoreticks
expel this Arsenicks poison altogether, so also our Alexipharmacum or
preservative against poison removes these obstructions and comforts nature, and
so the Fever ceases. The chief medicine is the Laudanum perlatum of Paracelsus
given in the water* of prunes, for it extinguishes the heat of the spirits, but
it does not remove the cause it self; afterward there must a regard be had of
the tongue and jaws. The best medicine for the Squincy is common salt prepared
and dissolved Cure of the Squincy.
in the water of prunes, and let there be made a Gargarism thrice in the day,
in the morning, noon, and night: shave the tongue and wash it with Fountain
water, let the knife be made of Willow wherewith thou shavest the tongue, this
is more often proved in Ungaria. Saluiter is thus prepared. Take Salt Peter,
melt it in a mortar which Goldsmiths use, and put into* it being melted a
little Sul^hur of the magnitude of two pease, by this means it is purged from
impurities and becomes crystaline. Those which have the Squincy let them eschew
baths. Read Phrisius in sp^culo, lib. 2. part. 3. cap. 1. Gual^erus Riffius in
Chirurgia Germ. and last part Chap. 30. Bartholomeus Anglus, lib. 7. cap. 27.
Alexander Benedictus, lib. 7. cap. 15. unto the 27. Read Cataphrastus de
ulceribus, cap. 41. So also take two or three of the fishes Cancer, put them in
a mortar, bruise them, affuse with he distilled Vinegar of wine and Rosewater
mix them and strain them through a cloth and make a Gar^arism. Theophrastus
tractat. 2. de tartaro, cap. 1. says, that the prunella is an inclusion of the
air in the ^iver, therefore when this air has an egress it is pestilent. Take
of prune water, of purged Laudanum, mix them etc. The cure of it is the same
with the cure of the Plague.

CHAP. XVI. Of the hurts of the Lungs, their Symptoms, causes, and Signs.
BY the name of Lungs we understand all the vessels which are in them and the
rough artery. The affections which happen unto the Lungs are the peripneumonia,
obstruction, the imposthume, and such like.

The obstruction is frequent in the Lungs as in other more principal Members or
Bowels. The causes of The causes of the obstruction of the Lungs.
the obstructions in the lungs are diverse. The abundance and clamminess, and
thickness of humors, the Grando, the Stone or liquid and coagulated tartar.
The tartar is the cause of many obstructions, all obstructions are cured by
tartar. The affections which rise from the obstructions of the Lungs are the
Cough, the Asthma, the strangling Rheum, and oftentimes the Phthisis. The
abundance of humors flowing into that only membrane (which compasses the
throat) with pain, and also stopping it, obscures the voice and brings
hoarsness. The too much roughness of the throat or artery (whether it be caused
from smoke, or crying, or cold) causes this hoarsness. But if the distillation
fall into the hollow pipe of the throat, it causes a little cough with a
certain straitning of the provoking acrimony. But if it fall into the breast
and Lungs it causes a great Cough, bursting out from the bottom of the breast.
This comes to pass when Nature endeavors to cast forth any thing which is
molestuous by his acrimony or obstruction The Cough is a preternstural sounding
motion of the Lungs accompanied with the violent blowing.
with a violent blowing and sending forth of breath; even as when any thing
falls into the throat while we eat or drink. But certainly if that which
distills into the Lungs be very small, then it is hardly cast forth by coughing,
but much more hard it is and difficult to cough forth that which is crass and
clammy in the Lungs, neither can it easily be wiped away or removed, or blown
forth by breathing. When the distillation is little and light, then the
symptoms which accompany it are light; but when much and grievous distillation
comes suddenly upon one, then a certain strangling difficulty of breathing
vexes him, and he breaths often swiftly and very vehemently. Furthermore, the
crass and clammy humor which possesses the Lungs and his artery troubles one
The dry Cough.
with a dry cough vehemently, by which any thing is scarcely extended; it
causes the breathing to be difficult, and while one breaths it causes a rattling
or noise in the The cause of the noise in the throat while one breaths. The
cause of the Cough from Paracelsus.
throat, because it ^ops the passages by which breath should go forth. That
which Paracelsus does write does not repugn these that we have said; he says,
that a cough is generated from tartar, by tartar he does not only understand
the sand, hail like matter, and stones, but every crass, slimy, and
excrementitious and clammy matter which at length comes to be tartar. This
crass and clammy humor with the time thickneth and dries more and more,
notwithstanding by the force of heat it comes to be a vitreous or slimy phlegm
or tartar of things. An abundance of it being collected in the pipes of the
Lungs produces the Asthma, The Asthma is a great difficulty of breathing
accompanied with a sound, perceived either inwardly or outwardly in the breast.
The Dysponia is a difficulty of breathing.
to which those are obnoxious which are often troubled with the distillation
and cough, especially old men which have strait Lungs. The beginning of the
Asthma is counted to be Dysponia (that is) a certain difficulty of breathing,
the disease as yet increasing. When the affected cannot breath without a
tatling and noise, then it is called the Asthma. When breathing cannot be made
except The Cough pining and Peripneumonia are Jovial diseases. The Orthopnoia
is a great difficulty of breathing* with the neck strecht forth
the neck be stretched forth, then it is called Orthopnoea.

Here it is to be observed, that the Asthma is not only begot from
distillations, but from the proper tartar of the Lungs, which remains in the
Lungs, separation and expulsion being frustrated, as we have demonstrated in
our general explication of diseases. Fernelius does here agree with Paracelsus,
for he says, that the clammy humor in the Generation of the Asthma does
coagulate into hail, and after into stones, with which we see sometime the
Lungs filled when as they be cut.

The Peripneumonia is an inflammation of The Peripneumonia is a Pleurisy of
the ancient* etc. Sev. p* 250. Quercitanus de medi^ina prisc. fol. 401. 402.
and 403. The Peripneumonia is a hot imposthume begot in the substance of the
Lungs.
the Lungs, whose root and cause are the spirits of Arsenick, Sulphur, and
Auripigmentum, which spirits do not alone in their resolved and liquid form,
but in their vaporous and spiritual form come unto the matrices, therefore they
having attained a confluence in the anatomy of the Lungs, they introduce their
tinctures and seat themselves, and that more strongly and sooner, if they have
stars endued with more potent tinctures, but if the tincture be more debile and
weak, they perfect their work by frequency and assiduity; they absolve
Transplantation, and afterward they fetch aliments from the weaker parts, as
well the nigh as the remote, until they attain unto maturity; from the
nutriments daily attracted they constitute bodies both filthy, excrementitious,
sanguine, coagulated, resolved, ill-smelling, red, black, yellow, of diverse
colors, bitter, sharp, and having such like signatures; therefore the roots
being set, and the bodies constituted, the continual nutrition and fermentation
being digested Sev. p. 250.
they expect the times of maturity and separation, which being instant, there
bursts forth an ebullition of spirits; ^ev. f. 251. 252.
these spirits flying forth they produce the first vapors of Fevers invested
with their signatures which are permixt with the vital Elements of man's
anatomy, and cause coldness, horrors, and rigor. After follows resolutions
and sulphurous inflammable vapors inquinating and tincturing man's Elements
with the same signatures, from whence are the alterations of the pulse, thirst,
disdain of meat, restlesness, watching, dotings, bloody, filthy, and
excrementitious coughing, and from hence the difficulty of breathing arises.
The Galenists make a twofold Peripneumonia, one which rises by it self, the
other which succeeds the Squincy or Pleurifie; also humor is suddenly carried
from the jaws or sides into the Lungs, which does not succeed any other
disease, but has his first original from it self; it is caused from small and
choleric blood coming from the right side of the heart through the arterial
vein very vehemently and abundantly into the lungs, which does not only fill
the lungs, veins, and arteries, but the whole body, and cistends it above
measure, it is also coarctated and putrifies, and causes the inflammation of
the Liver, not that which is collected after the manner of other inflammations,
but that which is effused in the whole bowel.

The Imposthume of the Lungs is a little Imposthume, or a collection of filth
in some part of the Lungs, which the proper membrane does as closely include as
a chest, so that scarcely any filthy matter can be breathed forth into the
heart. This Impostume, which is named Vomica, vomiteth much filth, from whence
it takes his name, viz. a vomendo. It is generated from the poison of Arsenick,
The cause of the imposthume
Iron, and Sulphur, or root of the Plague, which is the cause of filth. The
Galenists say, that the cause of it is a distillation of blood into some part
of the Lungs, following the opening, bursting, or eating of a vein, and there
it putrifies, and by little it is changed into filth, and at last dries, and
makes a receptacle for it self. Surely The signs of an imposthume.
it is a lurking and hidden hurt; for oftentimes it is neither known to the
diseased, nor to the Physician; neither does the diseased lose his functions,
nor thinks that he has such a disease: and he carries the cause of his death
within his bosom.

Those which are thus affected are of somewhat a wan color in their faces, and
their tongues are full of a certain clamminess, especially when they have long
abstained from meat. Many die quickly in a quarter of an hour, in which being
anatomized, there appears no other cause then the sudden disruption and
bursting of the Impostume in the Lungs, from which filth peirces into the
heart, which is the enemy thereof, and perchance extinguishes and overwhelms
the inbred heat. All those which are thus affected (long before the Impostume
burst) have a bloody avoiding out of the Liver, and that with coughing: the
breath also is grievous and stinking, there is a heaviness also of the body, a
light oppression of the breast, and a difficulty of breathing; but the pining
does seldom accompany them, but these signs are common to other affections.
Paracel. lib. 3. param. de origin morbor. ex tartaro tract. 4. fol. 167.
says, that from the tartar of the Lungs there is begot the Astma, the Cough,
difficulty of breathing, the Phthithis, and the Hectical Fever. The Phthithis
or pining is either a consumption of the whole body, or of some part, and it is
either universal or particular. The universal is The universal is without pain.
The particular is with pain and parox. Pining is a preternatural extenuation of
the body caused from the Hectic Fever. The cause of the pining.
that which is effected with the Consumption of the whole body. The particular
is that which is a Consumption of one member alone. The immediate cause of the
universal is Phthithis is an hidden impression of the Sun of the Microcosm;
namely, when the vital and animal spirits are as a destroyer of the Microcosm,
the inferior heaven, that is, the native liquor and moisture preserving the
body from corruption and destruction, which heaven being destroyed, the parts
of the body melt away and pine. The antecedent or remote universal cause of the
Phthisis is the tartar which obstructs Thurnens. in Neptuno. l. 4. cap. 8.
the members serving for nourishing. The being of poison violates the harmony
and consent of the parts, and hinders the stars of the inferior Globe, whereby
they are less able to produce their Roses, Violets, Balmmint, Gold, Silver,
Rubines, Saphires, Valerians, Vines, and Fruits from aliments. So in the
anatomy of health there is a Transplantation into the causes producing
barrenness and diseases; so Gold is changed into Auripigmentum, Balmmint into
Hemlock, the Valerian into Woolfsbane, Wheat into Darnel. This is that which
Paracels. says, in Labyrintho med. fol. 222. The destroyer (native heat) of
the Microcosm takes the Realgar of the Microcosm (that is) the Transplantation
of fruits from tartar (that is) that the anatomy of health is transplanted into
the anatomy of death, and pronounces death and destruction unto him. So the
pining is often caused from the tartar of the mesara^cal veins, because The
signs of the pining of all the parts.
they are altogether obructed by tartar, so that no nutriment or very little
can come to the Liver. Paracels. lib. 3. param. de origin morb. ex tartaro
tract. 4. says, that the Phthisis is begot from the tartar of the Lungs; so is
also the Phthisis of the Brain, Heart, Liver, Reins, Milt, Ventricle, Flesh,
Bones, Veins, Sinews, Joints, the Glue and Marrow. The trembling shows the
phthisis of the heart. The cough and avoiding of filth is the sign Lib. 5.
parag. de marb. f. 1.
of the Phthisis in the Lungs, the multitude of Urine shows the consumption of
the liver and reins, though the cough concur in the Phthisis of the Reins and
Liver. So also inflammations, prickings, and pains of the sides, and the
burning of the gall are a sign of the Ventricle, pain and compression of the
Ventricle, Hardness, and Clifts in the skin, contraction of the sinews,
exsiccation of the blood, pains of the glue of the body, clifts of the skin,
especially about the knees, are the signs of an incurable Phthisis. It is to be
marked, that every principal member which is obstructed more densly and fully
may bring the Consumption of the whole body; for great Eclipses, Conjunctions,
and Aspects happen unto man's Astronomy from the Transplantations of the times
and prevarications of the confluences, therefore the bonds of harmony being
broken and viciated of the superior and inferior heaven, in the Microcosm
there ensues necessarily sterilities and pining. The Galenists make the cause
of the The cause of the Phthisis is twofold according to Galen.
Consumption to be twofold. The one is the vicious and bad constitution of the
Lungs, the other is the humor which eats and gnaweth the bad constitution of
the Lungs; he does not call it the distemperature or distempered constitution,
but a soft tender substance of the Lungs prepared and obnoxious unto
corruption; from hence they gather, that the most have this hurt of the Lungs
from their Birth and from their Parents, with which all at length do pine,
though no distillation or certainly very little is from the brain, or happen
otherwise. But we do not ascribe the cause of hereditary Consumption to the
Lungs, but to the tartar; and we affirm that those which are bred from a
tartareous and pining stock The cause of the hereditary phthisis.
do necessarily pine away as it were by hereditary right and Law. We have seen
this evil assail and infect all those which were of the same stock and Family.

The Asthma, Strangling, Rheum and consumption The cure.
arise from the obstruction of the Lungs. The cause of obstruction is to be
removed, and the hurt part is to be corroborated.

The principal member in the body being obstructed for two or three months,
begins to putrify, from which putrefaction diverse diseases arise: and lastly,
death rushes upon the life of the body, as Paracels. speaks de vita longa.

The Obstructions of all the diseases of the whole body are to be taken away
thus. Administer the spirit of Vitriol (for three or four days in the morning)
in the spirit of Wine. The obstruction being taken away, for three or four days
administer in the morning the spirit of Turpentine, in a convenient liquor; for
it corroborateth and strengthens the weak; corrupted and hurt members, and
restores them which began to putrify. These two spirits being rightly
applied, effect very much in the cure of the Asthma. There is nothing more
profitable than Balm, and the magistery or oil of Sulphur, of which a few drops
must be given in the spirit of wine or water of hysope. Paracelsus lib. de
viribus membror. Cap. 14, etc. says, that the oil of Ash is wonderful in the
Asthma, and difficulty of breathing, if taken every morning. Thurneserus in
Piso. lib. 15. cap. 24. says, that it is cured by the Barberry-tree, the
Laurel-tree, and Diamosion. So also by Diacatholicon, Diacameron, and
Diamargarita. Phrisius in speculo, lib. 2. cap. 14. part. 3. tract. 1, 6, 7. So
also by philonium majus taken in wine. The Spirit of hysop is available in the
Dysponoea. The cure of the Asthma is twofold, one which resolves, the other
which exsiccates. The resolving cure is to be given in the coagulated tartar;
that which dries is to be given in the dry cough which exsiccates (where too
much filth is cast forth by spitting) until the matter be consumed. For
preservation from the Cough and Asthma, in all obstructions and putrifactions
there is no more excellent medicament than the flowers of Sulphur sublimated
seven times every morning. The flowers of Sulphur rightly prepared, mixed with
Sugar in the evening and morning, cure the most vehement Cough. This medicament
expels all obstructions of the bowels, it corroborates the weak venticle, and
softens the hardness of the Milt. Take the root of Azon prepared, and the root
of Galingale, and pimpernel dried and prepared, and the calcinated eyes of
Cancer. Take of the seed of Cresses and Sugar, and make a mixture of all these,
let the dosis be one spoonful in the morning. Josephus Quercitanus (in his
answer to Anbertus p. 18. and 19.) says, that wormwood is an excellent
medicine in all obstructions. Paracelsus (lib. 5. de viribus memb.). says,
that from the obstruction of the spirit of life there arise Fevers, Apostemes,
the Pleurisy, Plague, Jaundies, Ulcers, and all diseases which begin with a
Fevers paroxism; from obstruction putrefaction rises. Galen (in his medicinal
definitions) says, that the peripneumonia is an inflammation of the Lungs,
with a sharp Fever and difficulty of breathing.

Seeing that in inflammations and sharp Fevers the Indication.
greatest poison, namely, of Arsenick, Mars, and Auripigmentum, etc. and that
the very root of the Plague predominates, In the first place labor must be
taken to expel that poison by preservatives against poison and convenient
Diaphoreticks. The spirit of tartar with the addition of Paracelsus, namely the
flowrs of Antimony, by them the obstruction of the spirit of life is removed,
and nature The expulsion of filth.
corroborated; for the expulsion of filth which remains in the Lungs (the
sulphurous spirits being dissipated and consumed) there must be administered
the spirit of Turpentine with the flowrs of Sulphur. The Galenists for the
Peripneumonia give Diapenidium, cold Dragant, Diacalamentha, Diaireos,
Salomonis, Philonium majus, and Trochiskes of Camphora; water of Vitriol and
Coppres are profitable to those which have the peripneumonia. Mercury is very
available and profitable unto the Lungs, for it cures all the diseases thereof.
Theophrast. (de rebus natural alibus cap. 7.) says, that the subtilty of Amoer
and Ambergreece effect the same cure, and there he says that the cure of the
Imposthume is made by the oil of sulphur and the spirits of Vitriol. The cure
of the Consumption contains in it the cure of many diseases. In the true cure
of the Consumption (as well the particular as the universal) there is great
regard to be had of all the principal members; namely, that their tartareous
obstructions, and that the oppilation of the spirit of life be removed, and
then that help be brought unto the consumed nature (that is) to the liquor of
life or radical moisture or inferior heaven, so that the inferior heaven may
be restored and renewed. The obstruction of the members and oppilation of the
spirit of life is removed by the spirit of Vitriol, as it is said in the
beginning. The heaven is restored and renewed by the mystery of Antimony and
the magistery of Pearls. These two indications, viz. the ablation or removal of
obstruction and renovation of the heaven are contained in one root of Antimony,
for the essence of Antimony (or admirable flowr of nature) consumes all the
tartareous matter, and opens all the obstructions by a specifical virtue; in
the next place it begets a new heaven by consuming the contrary by a fiery
force, and by opening the obstructions it renews all nature. Paracelsus calls
this transmutation of nature which bears sway in the tincture of Antimony, by
the name of Transplantation or Philosophical Regeneration, and that truly, for
it transmutates the bad constitution into the best temperature; and as before
in the Generation of the Phthisis there is made a Transplantation from good to
evil, so here in the cure the temperature of the bad properties is transmutated
into the temperature of the best. This cure, viz. Transplantation and
Regeneration is to be used of a Physician in all desperate and deplored
diseases: Namely, in all chronical, acute, and desperate diseases Saturn bears
the Scepter, but Antimony holds Saturn captive, and he gives the Scepter to
Antimony. Read the 13. Chap. in the former Treatise it is said Every disease is
caused by Transplantation, so every cure ought to be made by Transplantation
and Regeneration, etc.

Paracelsus puts the effect for the cause, the Silver of Mercury (that is) the
stars of the inferior Globe which give the Silver of Mercury. Paracel. in lib.
5. in cura phthisis, etc. by the heaven understand the stars which give. There
is an especial virtue for the curing of the phthisis in the liquor of
Margarites, which renews the heaven of the Microcosm, but in removing of
obstructions it does not altogether suffice. Thurnens. (c. 2. and lib. eodem
cap. 9.) commends the oil of Gold, the magistery of Carduus Benedictus, of the
herb Scabious and Betony, he commends the sweet water of lead which is not
colored, nor is not corroding. Read Paracels. Tom. 4. fol. 226. when the
patient by the spirits casts forth blood, set there be administered the spirits
of Turpentine with the flowrs of Sulphur. And this is the true cure of the
phthisis and of acute and chronical diseases.

The said Silver of Mercury is thus prepared.
Quicksilver very well purged with Salt and Vinegar, dissolve it in a well
rectified Aqua fortis, let it settle and the Quicksilver will fall to the
bottom in Crystals, which grind well with oil of the Salt of Tartar (made per
deliquium) then wash away the oil and all sharpness from it; then put thereon
pure distilled Vinegar, and let it stand in gentle heat until the Quicksilver
swim on the top of the Vinegar like leaves of Silver; which take off carefully
by decanting the Vinegar (with that which swimmeth on the top of it) from what
remains in the bottom, filter the decanted Vinegar through a brown paper, and
the Silver leaves of Mercury will remain in the paper; then put the siltred
Vinegar upon the other part of the Quicksilver which remained in the bottom (if
there be not enough of the Vinegar, add some more fresh to it) and proceed as
before, so do till you have all (or most) of your Quicksilver in Silver leaves;
and so is your Silver Mercury prepared.

CHAP. XVII. Of the diseases of the Breast.
ACcording unto the Galenists the Pleurisy is a plegmon of that membrane which
is extended under the ribs. But according unto Paracelsus and the true
Physicians it is called a pleurisy when a sharp Fever suddenly invades with a
cough, and a pricking pain of the side, with the difficulty of breathing. The
The Pleurisy is a hot and painful Imposthume of the membrane within, toward
the cavity of the Breast, compassing the Ribs.
pleurisy is not begot from crass or small and vicious blood, but from the
seeds of Arsenick, Antimony, Sulphur, Vitriol, Auripigmentum, and Woolfsbane,
being exalted extreme and potent, having got a confluence in the tunicle
compassing the ribs. The symptoms are almost those which are in the
peripneumonia, for they rise from one and the same cause. These sometimes are
begot from the influences of the astrals. The stars of Mars, Scorpio, and
Cancer, inquinate and infect the air with griping and biting resolutions, for
such stars abound with the tinctures of Arsenick. Sometime there are pleurisies
of the bastard ribs, not because they seat themselves in the Muscles, and
Flesh, and Liver, Milt, Lungs, and Tunicle compassing the ribs; but because the
spirits which are Authors of pleurisies are obliged by strange unions; for the
radical tinctures of all diseases conspire amongst themselves, and easily admit
mixtions the Authors of Transplantation. The pricking of the sides is caused
either from the obstruction of the Milt and Liver, or from Wind.

The Empyema or suppuration is a collection The Empyema is a preternatural and
copious collection of bad (especially excrementitious) humor in the breast,
especially in the Lungs and Pipes thereof.
of filth in the Receptacle of the breast, in whose deluge or flowing the Lungs
are drowned, it flows thither either because it happens by the Squincy or
peripneumonia, or because more frequently it happens from the pleurisy, the
rest you may read in the Galenists writings. The true cure of the pleurisy is
almost the The true cure of the pleurisy.
same with the true cure of the peripneumonia, for they rise from one root, and
at the least they are distinguished in places. Paracels. cured the pleurisy by
the extraction of blood forth of the interior vein of the elbow of the same
side, and also by administering the spirit of tartar in their drink with the
water of Balmmint, and by anointing the place of their pain outwardly with the
oil of Field mice; furthermore, he affirms that he cured many with Diaphoretick
Mercury. Joannes Montanus says, that terra sigillata (administered in Paracel.
theriaca) will cure this disease; so also Sulphur and Salniter being prepared
cures it. The Empyema is cured by the Empyoma.
oil or spirit of Turpentine, which disposes the faulting matter unto expulsion
of the Empyema. Paracels. in his cures says, that a noble woman had the
Empyema (which is an avoiding of filth) and I cured her with the oil of Sulphur
in the water of the Herb Hogs or Sowbread, Balmmint and Betony. If any feel a
pain or pricking of the side in the lest side about the place of the heart
especially upon night, and if so be the pain do somewhat lessen, then the pain
comes from crass winds, let him take of the seed of Carduus Benedictus in a
convenient liquor, and of the burnt horn of a Heart until the pain vanish.

The said Diaphoretick Mercury prepare thus.
well purged Quicksilver, grind it well with Salt Peter, calcined Vitriol, and
Alume calcined ana. then sublime up the Mercury in a Cucurbite; in the head
will ascend white flowrs which are useless, and therefore to be cast away; by
the sides of the body will stick yellow flowrs, which separate apart, and on
the Caput mort. will lie Mercury sublimed red as Cinaber, which take off
carefully, then grind the said red Mercury, and likewise the yellow, that
stickt on the sides of the body, with fresh Salt Peter, Vitriol, and Alume,
subliming the Mercury as before, so do also the third time.

This being done, take (in the third sublimation) the red Mercury only (which
remained or lay upon the Caput mort.) g^ind it with ana. of flowrs of Sulphur
and Sal Ammoniac (sublimed from calcined Vitriol) being all well ground
together, set them to sublime (in a subliming Urinal) and what sublimeth grind
again with that which remained unsublimed, and sublime as before; which work of
grinding and subliming reiterate five times, then shall you find your Mercury
in the bottom of the Glass of a very deep red color, which is a true
Diaphoretick Mercury of very powerful effects, in extirpating all obnoxious
humors in the body.

Dose is from 6. grains to 12. according to the strength of the Patient.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Affections of the Heart.
THe heart is obnoxious to diseases which partly proceed from the obstruction
of the spirit of life, partly from putrefaction. The diseases which proceed
from obstruction of the spirit of life are palpitation, and a most vicious
dancing thereof. The palpitation The palpitation of the heart is a bad motion
of the heart somewhat like unto dancing.
of the heart is begot from tartar in the coffer or place of the heart; namely,
when the mechanical spirit of the heart does not rightly separate the tartar
which is in all the aliments, or else does not rightly expel the matter
separated, for then the passages of pores of the case of the heart are
obstructed, and the passage of the spirit of life is stopped; from hence is
palpitation, from hence is putrefaction, from hence is destruction, and lastly,
from hence is death. The Lypothymy is properly a disease of the heart, but the
Syncope or swounding is of the The Syncope is a prostrating of the vital virtue
and strength of the whole body. The Lypothymy a is pros^ra^ing of the vital
strength of the whole body caused suddenly, and at once with sweat and danger
of death.
Ventricle being hurt with crude and slegmy humors. Johannes Montanus an
excellent Philosopher and Physician (in his Treatise de terra sigillata)
writes, that the Lypothymy rises from vapors elevated from the Ventricle or
Liver, and from putrefaction and poisonful obstructions, which invading the
heart, cause Lypothymies, palpitations or trembling The Eclipses of the
Microcosm.
of the heart, which stop the breath and brings debility to the members.
Hippocrates lib. 7. Apo. Barthol. Anglus lib. 16. cap. 103. Alexander
Benedictus lib. 10. cap. 10, 11, 12. Read the sign in Galenists. The causes
which the Gnlenists adduce in the Syncope of the heart are for the most part
true; some are false, which any ingenious man may easily distinguish. The cure.
In the curing of the palpitation of the heart, there are to be administered
deoppilatives and unobstructive medicines of the spirit of life, of which sort
are the liquor of Gold, the oil of Margarites and Corals. Michael in his
Apolog. fol. 173. says, that Pearls, or Margarites do especially help the
affects of the heart. So the virtues of Corals (amongst the rest) are
commended, because they bring hilarity and alacrity to the heart, and because
they purify the blood, and restore a heavenly body unto a temperate habit and
absolute mediocrity by a certain virtue and power. The essence of Saffron is
good, for Saffron provokes Urine and amends the color, helps the concoction,
and it is good to the heart. The liquor of Macis, Celandine, and Balmmint, as
also the water of theriaca and all Diaphoreticks, and Alexipharmatical
medicines. The liquor that flows forth of the Cedar-trees has excellent
faculties, removes the affects of the heart. Musk confirm; the cold and
trembling heart, and it helps all the affects of it. Ambergreece being smelt
adds strength to the brain and heart, it helps old men and those which are cold
by nature wonderfully. The spirit of Vitriol being reduced unto sweetness and
some pleasantness of a sweet sowrness is a comfortative secret of the
palpitation of the heart, and the spirits of the heart and brain. Davus fol.
399. The same is effected by the oil of Amber; Diamargaritae calidae, the
confection of sweet Diamoschus, Diambra, Diacameron and El^ct^arium latitiae
expel the palpitation of the heart. Galen says very new conserves of Roses,
Schordion and Theoriaca are profitable in the Syncope and Lypothymy of the
heart. There must be administered comfortative and strengthening medicines, as
Gold, Smaragdus, and Coral. Theophrast. de tribus principiis cap. 10. so also
medicines made of Pearls, Saffron, Balmmint, Macis. Theophrast. lib. 2. de
viribus membror. cap. 1. also Succory, Hysop, and Mint, of which Fuschius
Thurnens. (in Pisone lib. 1. cap. 3.) says, that Penniroyal, red Mint, and
stores trinitatis are profitable; so in the 7. Chap. Fengreek, Betony, false
Ditany, Savory, Withwind, the gumm of a tree in Persia, and Earthsmoke; so also
the herb prunell which is gathered in the beginning of the Spring, also
Aromatica Moschata, Diaboriginata, Diabuglossata, Diambra, and Dianthos
laetitiae. Take of Oleum Benedictum of Galen in wine with a fasting stomach.
Riffius bids take it in his Antidotary; so also Theriaca water, and of
Andromachus; the conserve of Borage, Sorrel, and Bugloss do cure the
palpitation of the heart. Manus Christi, Diamargaritae frigidae, Diacoralli and
Saunders comfort the cold heart; these, cure the dejected strength and Fevers.
Thurnens. etc. Against the straitness and heart-ach, take the essence and
tincture of red Roses, Violets, and Sorrel, with the salt of Crystal and
tinctures of Corals. Quercitanus in his answer ad Anbertum, fol. 21. So there
may be made medicines from Musk, Civit, oil made of Bevers stones and Unicorns
horn, Ivory, the Horn and Bone of the Heart are effective against the heart-ach
and other affects, as are Lemmons, Garden Cresses. The dolours of the heart are
cured by cutting the middle vein. The water of the Carbuncle is a most
excellent comfortative of the heart, half a spoonful of it being taken. So
terra sigillata Stregonensis, the Balsam of sulphur and the spirit of tartar.
Read Theophrastus tract. 3. praeparationum, and in the same place tract. 5.
lib. 1. de signis Zodiaci about the end.

An Excellent Balsam of Sulphur for the Heart and Lungs.
the best yellow Sulphur, grind it small, and sift it through a fine laune
serce or rather (which is better) Take flowrs of Sulphur and put them in a
glass, and pour thereon oil of the Salt of tartar (made by solution per
deliquium) a hand-breadth above it; set it in gentle heat, and in few days the
Sulphur will dissolve red as blood, pour off the solution into a glass, and
upon it sprinkle good distilled Vinegar so much as will make all the Sulphur
precipitate to the bottom of the glass, which it will easily do, and that with
a profound stink; let it well settle, then decant off the oil of tartar, and
dulcifie the Sulphur well; then dry it (not in the Sun or heat but) in a dry
air. Take the dry Sulphur, put it again into a glass, and pour upon it a
Philosophical spirit of wine, let them stand together in gentle heat three
days, in which time the spirit of wine will receive into it the purest part of
the Sulphur (the excellent tincture of Sulphur) decant that extraction, and
distill it with strong heat in sand, so will ascend (with the spirit of wine) a
pleasant odoriferous oil: then in very gentle Balneo separate the spirit of
wine, and the Balsam of Sulphur will remain behind in form of an oil.

Dose is 6* or 8. drops in a spoonful of wine.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Diseases of the Ventricle.
THere is a nutritive virtue in the Ventricle, because from thence nutriment is
derived into the whole body, and it disposes the meat and gives it a nutritive
faculty. The Ventricle is subject and obnoxious to diverse diseases which are
begot by reason the separation and expulsion are frustrate, of which kind are
the pains of the Ventricle, Etosions, Burning, Wind, Inflammations, Fluxes,
Pinings, of which Alexander Benedictus (lib. 11. in his Proem. and in the
Chapters following, and in the 12. book through the whole book) does entreat;
wherefore that the Ventricle be sound, great regard is to be had. Tobias Hess.
The seeds of diseases in the anatomy of the Ventricle are rooted for the most
part in the superficial sulphurous, fetide, and excrementitious impurities,
which for the debility of the inbred Balm and mechanical spirits, by whose
ministry the impurities should be expelled and resolved by the accustomed
ways, they find convenient and fit Receptacles. The seeds of diseases which
are planted and rooted in the Ventricle consist in sulphurous and
excrementitious Of the seeds of diseases of the Ventricle.
impurities, in which two excrements are mixed, namely, of Sulphur and Salt,
which two are in all aliments, and are separated from all nature, being perfect
in virtue and strength. These two excrements unless they be mixed and expelled
together do interpel and interrupt daily the administration of natural actions,
because the strength and virtue of nature is diminished. Therefore when as they
have introduced their roots into the anatomy of the Ventricle, they generate
diseases. If Sulphur be commixt with a tartareous, stiptick, and alumish
excrement The Fever of the Ventricle.
and filth, then Fevers are generated in the Ventricle. Of Paracels. they are
called mitrosulphureous diseases; when as Mucilaginous Salt or Tartar alone
remains in the Ventricle by continual nutrition, at length it produces diverse
symptoms noted by diverse names, but altogether rustical and fantastical. The
rustical are Imbecility, Bradypepsia, vitiated concoction, Bradypepsia is a
weakness of digestion, when as the Ventricle does difficulty and slowly concoct
and turn aliment into chyle.
and crudity. The fantasy has begot the distemperature. These symptoms have
their names from the properties of their roots or causes from which they rise,
but more rightly they are called mucilaginous and sulphurous diseases from the
alumish Vitriol, and cacochymical spirits, or from biruminous and sandy
colors, from the properties of the spirits and such like, the causes of all
symptoms ought to be explained, which are superadded to the foresaid diseases
of the Ventricle.

The mechanical spirits being corrupted, and the tartareous, alumish, and
stiptical tinctures of the Ventricle being inquinated and depraved, they cannot
absolve as they ought, the separation of the pure from the impure, The cause of
slow con^octions.
and they perfect very slow concoctions; but if those tartareous spirits the
authors of Transplantation shall be hotter, and do overcome the inbred spirits
by enmity and malice, then they produce perfect crudities, and keep the
mechanical spirit of the Ventricle bound and captive; and from hence are begot
crudities, inflations, belching, heaviness, sloth, drowsiness, Belching is a
violent* and sounding expulsion of wind existing in the stomach by the
superior part. Nausea or loathing is a frustrate endeavor to vomit. The cause
of cruditees inflations, and belching. Vomiting is a violent expulsion of crass
and palpable matter which molests the stomach by the superior parts. Sev. p.
278. Orexia. Launcing. Cardialgia is a pain of the superior part of the
Ventricle, when as the supreme Orifice of the Ventricle is molested and
offended* Bulimus. ^anina fames. The Bulimia or Dog-like ^^petite is an
insatiable desire to eat. ^he inflammation of the ^entricle, by which disease
^uther died.
loathing, vomiting, and infinite more torments and pains of this kind: When
the tartareous spirits possess the superior part of the Ventricle (namely the
mouth) then there arise the Orexia, the burning, the launcing, and most cruel
dolours by reason of the exquisite sense of the mouth of the Ventricle; from
whence rises the Cardialgia, for the mouth of the Ventricle (...) or stomach,
viz. for the consent of the heart and the mouth of the Ventricle, elsewhere is
called (...) or biting of the heart. The mouth of the Ventricle has a most
exquisite sense, for the many sinews collected there. The Vitriol spirits
oftentimes cause the Bulimia or Wolfish and Dog-like appetite. There are not
only excrementitious mucilaginous and tartareous impurities implanted in the
Ventricle, but Arsenical, Auripigmental, Antimonial, and Inflammatory
impurities find confluence there, which little or not at all differs from the
pleurisy. A most burning Fever, a great tossing of the body and restlesness,
unquenchable thirst, a continual vomiting, a frequent exolution of water,
watching and doting for the most part ensue this Inflammation. As the Phthisis
The Phthisis of the Ventricle.
or Consumption is begot in all other parts of the body, so likewise in the
Ventricle the cause of it is abovementioned. That all things may be made more
manifest and clear, the Generation in the Ventricle is this; when the sides or
plaits in the Ventricle are obducted and covered with tartar, and the passages
and pores of it be obstructed, there follows an oppilation of the spirits of
life, and from the oppilation there insues corruption and putrefaction of the
whole member; from hence is the Consumption of the Ventricle, of which the
whole body has a compassion and feeling, and deplores the destruction most
vehemently, it being destitute of aliment.

The Convulsive Hicket is a motion of the Hicket is a Convulsive and sounding
motion of the Ventricle, for to expel the offensive matter contained in it.
Ventricle which Hippocrates affirmed to be caused either from repletion or
emptiness, like as the Convulsion of the members, from evacuation, as from the
immoderate flux of blood and from immoderate purgation, from repletion, as in
Children and those which are addicted to surfeiting. These are the causes of
the Hicket which are wont to be adduced, besides which, others more grievous do
exist, for oftentimes spirits or malignant and poisonful vapors cause a worse
Hicket, of which kind we have seen in malignant and pestilent Fevers, and in
the inflammation of the Liver, and especially when the figure of it is
straightened, and the heart is overwhelmed with the vehemence and malignity of the
disease.

There is no better remedy for the preservation of the The cure.
Ventricle in these diseases than the virtue and power of the Vitriol of
Copper, so that afterward there be made a liquor and spirit from it, and this
is the hungry acetocity or sowrness of it which excels in so many virtues, that
it will consume all things which are contained in the Ventricle whether they be
tartareous or sulphurous impurities, as also it will comfort and corroborate
the stomach that it may be able to concoct all things, as the Estrich concocts
and digests iron. Concerning this acetosity of Copper, Paracels. writ in his
book de morb. tartareis, Chap. 16. where he distinguishes sour things into
natural things and artificial. The natural sour things are hot baths, and
sowrness. The artificial are extracted from metalls, minerals and ill juices,
and it is the salt of them. The same is effected almost as well in the
preservation as the cure by the spirit of Vitriolum Vngaricum Romanum, of which
Paracels. writes in his book de mineralibus, that it is able to cure all
tartareous diseases. But yet not too much of it must be taken, for nimiety or
too much of any thing is hurtful, and an enemy unto Nature; therefore it must
be taken with discretion, that the mouth of the Ventricle may be shut. Take the
root of corrected Azon, powder of Betony and the sweet Cane burnt into Salt,
let them be powdered and mixed, of which powder let him take after dinner and
supper the quantity of two pease, but let him drink no more. The confection of
Anise (which is for to shut the mouth of the Ventricle) is made with distilled
Vinegar put into it by macerating and then exsiccating the Anise for the space
of 24. hours, and afterward again by macerating and exsiccating it in Vinegar,
and so it must be done thrice; for the dosis there must be given pugillum 1.
after dinner and supper; for the evacuating of the Ventricle there must be
given iiij. grains of the slowrs of Antimony in an Electurary. In the resolving
and consuming of the tartareous and sulphurous matter in the Ventricle,
Antimony is available which purges by Vomit, the Belly of the confection of
Urine. In the griefs of the stomach the preparation of Mastick is good. Take of
Mastick, of the Alcool of wine, of Galingal, distill them through an Alembick;
the dosis must be small to comfort the stomach. The confection of Ginger made of
the Quince-apple, Diacinnamon, Diatrion, Pepperwort, oil of Wormwood, oil of
Mastick, Balsam of Sulphur, the oil of Lawrel-Berries rectified 10. or 12.
drops taken in broth looses, destroys the pain and mixeth with the peccant
matter, etc. The Cardiaca or Cardialgia is cured by the oil and magistery of
Pearls. Barth. Anglus lib. 16. cap. 72. so does the Sapphire stone, in the same
book Chap. 87. waters made of Antimony cure and mitigate this disease, so also
waters made of Salt Peter. Thurnens. in Pisone lib. 5. cap. 25. Of Musk, Civet,
Beavers stone, Unicorns horn, Ivory, the horn and bone of the Heart, there is
made an excellent medicine for the Heart-aches and such other affects. Josephus
Quercitanus in his answer unto Anbertus, page 21. says, that there is the same
cure of the inflammation of the Ventricle, and of the Squincy, or Prunella, or
Pleurisy, etc. The oil of Anise 5. drops administered in wine or other
decoction, and the navel being anointed with it expels the hicket. Read
Phrisius in speculo lib. 2. part. 4. tract. 2. cap. 11. Barth. Anglus lib. 7.
cap. 45. Alexander Benedictus, lib. 12. cap. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. The magistery
of Pearls made with Origanum help the concoction, so the waters or subtilties
of common Salt, Salgemmae, and Salmaris. Thurnens. in Pisone, lib. 4. cap. 7.
The preparation of Salt Gemm, that it may strengthen the digestion in the
stomach and preserve from putrefaction. Take of Salt Peter and common salt
which are fusible, and of Salgemmae ana. of Gallingal, let a powder be made of
them, and the d^sis four grains in the morning with a fasting stomach. Read
Theophrast. lib. 1. de praeparatiombus, tract. 4. Gilliflowrs corroborate the
Ventricle and head, and provoke and stir up the Appetite, they also help the
Liver; so the water of Mint with the spirit of Vitriol.

CHAP. XX. Of the Hurts, Causes, and Signs of the Liver.
OBstruction is very usual unto the Liver, and no The obstruction of the Liver.
bowel is equally unto it troubled with this disease, because vena porta (which
is dispersed through the substance of the Liver into little branches) is
obstructed, as also other branches not less small come from vena cava unto it,
by which all aliment should be transported and conveyed. The obstruction is
caused from tartar which obstructs the veins, and hinders the course of the
blood; it has these marks, heaviness and distension happens to the right
Hypochondrium with an obtuse pain, and then especially when one goes to
exercise presently after meat. The obstruction of the Lungs is twofold, one is
of the veins from whence the Dropsy is, the other is of the substance from
whence the phthisis and inflammation are. The Galenists have left this
difference unexplained, and have used one for the other. Theophrast. lib. 1. de
tartaro tract. 2. cap. 3. fol. 226. when the obstruction is in the Liver, then
man is discoriated and his color is changed in a days space, and from thence
there arises a thirst because the Liver has not moisture by reason of the
oppilation, and that the nutriments cannot pass by the Liver they return and
corrupt, etc. That is, from the obstruction of the Liver and Tongue there
arises a dryness. The tumors in the feet are begot from obstruction, because
when the tartar does lie so long it comes to maturity, and nature works and
expels it to some place in the legs; from hence are the tumors, etc. and there
is much Urine, because the liquor of the Liver is dissolved and the disease
maturates, and the Liver gives it self to be his own liquor, for the expulsive
virtue attracts Urine, therefore it takes that which it finds: so also if the
Messaraical veins be obstructed, the same diseases ensue from the obstinate and
inveterate obstruction. The Schirrus arises, which is a hard humor and
glistering The Schirrus.
without pain unless perchance the affected part be pressed more hardly. The
sense of feeling deprehends this, especially if the abdomen be lean and without
fat, and more easily when the patient is erected, or declined upon the right
side, which (if he lie on his back) cannot be perceived unless it be pressed. The
Schirrus of the Liver hinders the sanguification of it; from hence the matter
of blood is converted into an excrementitious matter, from whence the Dropsy
is.

In the general explication of diseases it is said, that every member has his
Ventricle, in which the nutriment is separated from the impure matter, and the
impure is expelled by the emunctory places, which is twofold, of Sulphur and
Salt; but if they be not expelled, but persist in the Ventricle of every
member, from thence there follows an obstruction of the spirit of life, and
from the obstruction there rises a corruption and putrefaction of a member.
First, tartar dominates; from tarrar alone the chronical diseases are begot.
Secondly, Sulphur predominates; from tartar and Sulphur are begot acute and
inflammatory diseases; but if tartar alone remain and Sulphur be expelled there
ensues a phthisis, pining, and consumption, not only of a member but of the
whole body, by reason the heaven is destroyed; but if the Sulphur and Salt
remain mixed, and Sulphur predominate, then they produce prunella, pleurisies,
and bub^, which is not only to be understood of the Liver, but also of other
members. From hence I find it true, how many members so many deaths; this is
the Generation of the phthisis and inflammation in the Liver. The signs of the
inflammation are the burning and acute Fever, unquenchable thirst, roughness of
the tongue, and from hence a clamminess inhering, at first yellow, then black,
the The signs.
loathing and disdain of meat, sometimes the hicket almost strangling, often
the color defiled with the Jaundies, the vicious vomiting of crass, red, and
turbulent Urine, as also the avoiding of it through the belly. This ground
being laid, the Philosophical and Physical Aphorism remains firm, namely, that
every element does not fructify in his own proper Region and place, but in
another.

If the seeds and blossoms of inflammations be contained Sev. p. 256.
in the blood, as Hippocrates speaks, they swelling with sudden motion
transmit the flowr of present Generation (which is the offspring of the root)
unto the Liver, where they find the places of the three principles in the
Liver, insigned with consentany properties, in which place it will absolve the
differences of ages and terms of Predestinations accompanying by a variable lot
or chance of the signatures. This flowr contains the knowledge of his root and
qualities, it also produces bodies which are hurtful, painful, and pernicious
to man's body or nature, by which calamities or enmity (the veins being eaten or
opened, if they be vicine and conspicuous) it may come to pass that the blood
may flow forth and occupy uncooth places, and the Symorous may be caused by
Coughing, or by Urine, or by the Belly, or by Vomit, or by the Womb, which
(when it comes to pass) by reason of the vehemence and intollerableness of the
disease makes one to expect death; from one root are Fevers and prunella begot.
But how do they differ? I answer, the spirit of life as yet predominates in
Fevers, but in the prunella, by reason of the more potent and dominant seeds,
the spirits of life yield and are convicted; in Fevers the tartar domineers, in
prunella Sulphur.

Atrophia is referred to the phthisis, as the effect to the Atrophia^
cause. The Atrophia is an error or a miscarriage of nutrition, whereby the
body by Atrophia is a preternatural affect whereby the body is not nourished
either in whole or part.
little and little decays and consumes. Therefore every affect of the heart,
especially the Hectic Fever and the exulceration of the Lungs (because they
weaken the vital spirit of all the parts) produce the atrophia. The cachexia
rises from the bad and depraved concoction of the Ventricle, or Liver, the
mechanical spirits being inquinated and depraved by the alumish, tartareous,
and stiptical tinctures. The Cachexia is nothing else but a Cachexia is a bad
and discolored habit of the whole body caused from ill juice. The Dropsy is a
plegmatical cachexia of the body accompanied with the tumor of the members.
beginning of the Dropsy, unless this hurt be soon removed it causes the
Dropsy to be more firmly settled. For the Dropsy with his kinds has his
orignal from weak digestion and from the corrupt hardness and obstructions of
the Liver, from which there insues the depravation and error of nutrition. A
disdain and loathing of meats accompanies the Dropsy, so that first the flesh
pines away, then Tympanites The Tympanites is a Dropsy caused from the
abundance of waterish and crass wind collected within the cavity of the Belly.
Anasarcha is a Dropsy caused from the abundance of flemy humor diffused
through the fleshy members of the whole body. The Ascites is a Dropsy caused
especially from the abundance of waterish humor collected betwixt the
peritonaeum and omentum, by the means of transudation.
succeeds in the place of that which is lost, and brings a copious lentosity or
pliableness, or else the Anasarcha succeeds, which brings much clamminess, or
lastly, Ascites succeeds, which brings as much. These which we have said do not
repugn Paracels. when as he says in his 2. book de tartaro tractat. 2. cap. 6.
That the Dropsy is begot from resolved Salt for for the imbecility of the
mechanical spirits there cannot be made a separation of the Salt from the
nutriment; therefore a vaporous substance is conveyed through all the parts of
the body, and where it flows more often it makes clifts in the skin by the
corrosive virtue. Paracels. in the same place says, that the phthisis and
Hectical Fever are generated from dry Salt, the Dropsy from alumish Salt,
which has a most sharp force of penetrating, because it is made more subtle
by the place of the Liver, and afterward it is strained; for a crass and
incocted matter could not do this. The Salt of Alume causes a blew color. The
Dropsy in the Liver is caused from the Apostem, viz. if pricking be felt in
the right side, not that the air undergoes the Apostem, but because the air and
circumjacent mass effects the Apostem; the Liver is not putrified in death, but
makes cuttings; when it begins to be cut or to have clifts death, follows those
clifts. Lib. 1. param. de origin morbor. ex tribus substantits, and cap. 4.
tract. 3. cap. 6. The Dropsy is a passion in the Liver caused from an alumish
tartar by resolution of the proper nature; so also somewhat black and crass
Urine in the Dropsy signifies the resolution of the principal members or
bowels, so that death is eminent or present. Thurnens. in herbario sol. 49. etc.

First, remove the obstruction of the Liver by resolving Cure.
and consuming the obstructing cause; All the obstructions of the Liver are
removed by the essence of the common Mercury and Antimony. Paracels. l. 2. de
viribus membrorum, cap. 6. So also the spirit of Salt and common Vitriol.
Besides the opening Remedies give, viz. the fat of Yew applied to the Liver hot
in a linen cloth. The essence of Time cures all diseases of the Liver.
Paracels. de rebus naturalibus, cap. 7. sub titulo sulphuris, says, that the
obstructions of the Liver are abolished by these; Take of the syrup of the
roots of cicha in the morning with a fasting stomach, but do not take it at
night, for so the obstructions would be augmented; or take the syrup of the
roots according to Fernelius. Ale with Betony tempered cures the obstructed
Liver. The subtilty of Camphora and Sulphur opens the obstruction of the Liver.
Thurnens. in Pisone, lib. 4. cap. 7. says, that baths open the obstructions.
Read Rulandus and Sheuriterus, where you may see these hot confections remove
the obstructions of the Liver and water betwixt the skin, namely, Dialacca,
Diacurcuma, and Diacatholicum, so also opening and apertive trochiskes, viz.
made of Rheubarb, Liverwort, The essence of Schordion is very good for the
illaffected Liver, lib. 2. de viribus memb. cap. 6.
and Myrrh; by long continuance the Liver begins to putrify, which
putrefaction is cured by the water of the stone Eat-flesh. Thurnens. lib. 4.
cap. 7. The stone cabrates cures the tumors of the Spleen and Liver. Barth.
Anglus, lib. 6. cap. 18. Read Galen de art curativa, lib. 2. cap. 6. Phrisius
in speculo part. 4. lib. 2. tractat. 3. cap. 3. There must be a preparation of
Silver administered to the debilitated and weakened Liver, which Paracelsus
delivers tract. 5. praeparationum, lib. 1. fol 50. Paracels. (lib. 1. param. de
curatione hydropis, and cap. 4. de origin morbor. ex tribus principiis)
teaches, that resolved Salt expels and corroborates nature, namely, that it may
separate the pure from the impure, as also that the resolved Salt in the body
consumes by the virtue of Mercury. In the cure of the Dropsy the oil or
essence of Iron is very effective, for it exsiccates the superfluites of the
body, and opens the obstructions, and corroborates the bowels. Paracels.
cured the Dropsy by the Diaphoretick or Precipitated Gold of life. The oil of
common salt is a secret in the Dropsy, a few drops being taken of it every
morning. Black Hellebor (otherwise dangerous and to be feared) is made very
profitable and for good use by the spirit of wine and oil of Anise, and may be
given safely ^o Children for the Dropsy and all melancholic aff^cts. The Salt
of Antimony given in wine is the great secret of the Dropsy, so also Mercury
being prepared to loosen the essence of Sulphur, the Suphur of Gold (that is)
the spirit of Gold, the tincture of Corals, the liquor of the Cedar, the oil of
Wormwood. Read Theophrastus in his book de tempore. The Philosophers stone
cures all the kinds of the Dropsy. Theophrast. de tinctur a physic. cap. 6.
The oil of Vitriol in the water of Garden Endive, the spirit or quintessence of
Vitriol from Copper in Aqua vitae are effective.

The Ascites is cured by water out of the stone called As^ites.
Eat-flesh, so by the water of Vitriol. Thurnens. in pisone, lib. 7. cap. 7.
and 9. Theophrast. Paracelsus, lib. 4. parag. sub. titulo de undimia, tractat.
5. lib. 1. praeparationum, under the title of de Jove seustanno, says, take of
purged tinn. and of Antimony ij. let them be reverberated for the space of 24.
hours, extract from this matter a tincture, and let the dosis be half a
spoonful.

The Tympanites is cured by waters drawn forth of Tympanites.
Sulphur, Pitch, and Musk, so also by the Barberry-tree, the Bay Tree, and
Diamasonium, the field Mint, and thamarantha. Thurnens. in pisone, lib. 4. cap.
7. lib. 5. cap. 24. 25.

The Anasarca is cured by the essence of Sulphur, Anasarca.
Theophrast. as also by the essence of Corals and oil of Antimony; let the
drink of him that has the Dropsy be well-water mixed with the spirit of
Vitriol, this water exsiccates much the water of him that has the Dropsy. The
secret of Mercury of life cures all the kinds of the Dropsy, being rectified
and compounded in Aqua vitae, and being administered it expels the peccant
matter by sweat. Read Alexander Benedict* lib. 141. through the whole book. So
Barthol. Anglus, lib. 7. cap. 51. (where he writes de sublimatione cheiri seu
antimonii ex nigredine in albedine^^) says, that the sublimation of Antimony
taken in wine of life cures all the affects of the Liver, by freeing it from
putrefaction and corruption, so that it Paracels. de virilus membror. lib. ^.
cap. 6.
may separate the pure from the impure and transmutate the impure chyle, and
make good blood, from which no disease rises: and it renovates and restores the
pure blood by regenerating and transplanting the whole body, and by removing
all filthiness and Leprie. The liquor of Kali or Mercury is a great secret of
the Liver and Dropsy, lib. 2. de viribus membror. cap. 6.

Paracelsus Secret Mercurius vitae ( aforesaid) is thus prepared.
well purged Quicksilver, sublime it from Salt Peter, calcind Vitriol, and
Alume calcind; take of what sublimeth only that which lies on the Caput mort.
(which will be red as Cinaber) sublime that red again by it self; then dissolve
it in an Aqua Regis made with Vitriol, Tartar, and Salarmoniac; being
dissolved, distill off the Aqua Regis from it, and the Mercury remaining
sublime again, so will it be white and crystaline; and is Mercury
Essencificate. Take of that Mercury Essencificate and good Mineral Antimony
ana* grind them well together, and distill the fat oil or Butter of An^imony.

Take all that distilleth, put it in a small glass Cucurbite, and in Balneo
abstract its fleme till the remaining part be thick and crystaline, which put
on a Marble to dissolve per deliquium, being dissolved, abstract again as much
fleme from it in gentle Balneo till it remain like crystal, then set it on a
Marble to dissolve as before; and this work of abstracting the fleme and
dissolving the thick into oil, you must reiterate 4. times.

Then have you Paraces. Secret Mercurius vitae, but not brought to maturity;
and therefore it must be multiplied in virtue with adding a little of its own
Radix, and often repeating the said solution of both together.

He that understands the dignity of this Me ^icine, will be thankful for so
clear a light to its discovery.

CHAP. XXI. Of the diseases in the Receptacles of the Gall.
OBstruction, Stone, Repletion, and emptying do Obstruction.
occu^y and possess the Receptacle of the Gall. The obstruction is either of
the passage through which Choler is conveyed from the Liver, or of that passage
through which Choler is conveyed from the Gall to the Intestines. The
obstruction is from tartar, as the obstruction of other parts, in both the
belly is harder and most gross, the dregs are white, the Urine yellow, and so
crass, that often they begin to be black. The Stone in The Stone.
the cavity of the gall congealeth black, yet smooth, and if it be di^t into
water it will swim. It is conjectured to be of a sulphurous Nature, neither as
those which are conveyed from the Reins or Bladder. The first matter of it lies
in the bottom, and it is attracted by the Gall from the Liver. This stone
causes the effusion of the Choler into the Ventricle, from whence diverse
diseases are got, but not of Choler alone, but the stone or tartar transmits
his flowrs with the Choler unto the Vetricle; so the tartar of the gall is the
cause of the Jaundies, viz. when it emits flowrs with the gall into the whole
body. The spirits of the tartareous flowrs have a corrosive virtue, whereby
they pierce through the pores of the skin and tincture the whole body.
Paracelsus lib. de Icteritia, cap. 1. says, that the Jaundies takes his
Citrine color from the commixtion of The Jaundies is a eachevia or bad habit
of the whole body infecting the skin with a foul color.
threefold Salt, namely, Sal entabicum, Sal vitriolatum, and the liquor of
resolved Sulphur, for when these three commix they cause the original of the
Jaundies and new color, and according unto the subtilty of the hea^, the
disease of them all is transparent or subtle, black or yellow, or white, etc.
and so of the rest of the colors. Et ibidem. The Jaundies comes with a
trembling and heat, and it is not purged, because Minerals are not cured by
purgations. There is no tincture in the Spleen, so that it cannot produce the
Jaundies, neither does it tincture; Jaundies. Black. Citrine.
so that black Jaundies is not from the Spleen. The Citrine Jaundies consists
of Ental, Vitriol, and liquid Sulphur, and black Musk, and dissolved Vitriol
and Sulphur. The green Jaundies is from the six forenamed. Green. Pale.
The pale is from a cut, mercurial liquors, and white Vitriol. Paracels. makes
the Jaundies sevenfold in regard of the seven principal members from whence
many chronical diseases arise. The Jaundies which is from the tartar of the
gall is incurable in regard of the specifical Remedies, seeing the spirits of
tartar which tincture the body are stronger. This disease is mortal when any
has long conflicted with it, and then other symptoms invade. The Jaundies
sometime follows the Plague. Read the tractat of Conradius de febre Hungar.
cap. 26. when the Plague has assailed in any Region and begins to cease, then
in the place of it the Jaundies is wont to succeed. The Jaundies as an Astral
disease becomes an Epidemical di^ease, and they are the Relics of the poison
of the Plague: Therefore who so endeavors to cure the Jaundie, it is necessary
that he prepare (as in the curing of the Plague) with Diaphoreticks and
Alexipharmacal medicines. The liquor of Vitriol is the best medicine to take
away the obstructions of the gall, and so is the oil of colchitar. The oil or
essence of Iron is the proper heaven of the gall, which is able to expel the
contraries from his Globes. Thom. Muffetus in dialogo, fol. 45. Fallopius, and
Hector Nonnius a man of The seed of Henbane is a notable Remedy against anger,
if from it the tincture be caused.
great Experience and Learning, affirm and commend highly the Saffron of Iron
for the curing of the Jaundies, and for the removing of the obstructions of the
Milt.

The effusion of the gall is caused from tartar or stone The effusion of the
gall.
of the gall; let that tartar be dissolved, reduced and consumed, and there is
made the true cure. This resolution, reduction, and consumption is caused by
Antimony or Cheiri, as also by precipitated Mercury; for when the flowrs of
tartar are resolved, Antimony (being of the nature of a confection) expels
surperfluous Choler, from which there arises the Cholick, the Iliack, the
contracture, the trembling, and many other diseases of the Ventricle. Rheubarb,
and flowrs of Antimony taken in wine of life consumes it. Read lib. 2. de
viribus membror. cap. 11. and 12. Paracelsus in his book de Ictericis
professes that the blew Jaundies which is the beginning of the Leprie may be
cured by Antimony, so likewise he cures all the affections of the gall by
Antimony. Lib. 2. de viribus membror. cap. 12. Precipitated Mercury is an
excellent medicament, for these two medicaments of Mercury and Antimony expel
the Jaundies which is incurable in regard of specifical medicaments. The
specifical Remedies are these, Red Mint, Fengreek, Betony, Savory, false
Ditany, Lavender, Spicknard, Diarrhodon Abbatis, flores trinitatis, Gold and
Rheubarb. Phrisius says the interior flesh or substance of Oranges.
Triasantalon is also a specifical Remedy of the Jaundies, which is proved from
the signed art; so also the yellow pellicle or skin taken from the feet or
bellies of chickens, and Succory, and Garden Endive, from the signed art which
the Slei call anguilla^ put it in the forks of the breast or place of the gall,
and it extracts the Jaundies; prescribe also that the patient make his Urine
upon a clean linen cloth, hang in the Sun and dry it, and when he makes water
again, let him make it upon such a cloth and hang in the Sun as before, and so
afterward the clothes become yellow or of a Citrine color, and the patient
begins to wax well, so by the air which is a most subtle Element the Jaundies
is cured. Rebisola (which Paracels. Tom. 7 fol. 371.
is become a cocted and an exactly despumed Urine) is the Salt of the Urine,
and it is the secret in the Jaundies. Centaurea minor or Feverwort, which they
call fell terrae, is counted a secret in the Jaundies; so likewise the essence
of Centory, Almond, and Bitterwort, are counted secrets, etc. The living Spider
hanged about the neck (in a Nutshel) upon the fork of the breast until the
disease be expelled, which is in five or six days space at the death of the
Spider. This specifical is to be applied when the Jaundies is an Epidemical
disease. The Jaundies of the principal members is thus to be known, namely,
when it cannot be cured by the help of purgations. In brief, all diseases which
cannot be helped by the help of purgations, consist of Jaundies, unless certain
and apparent significations of the tartar or the other disease be repugned;
from hence are many chronical diseases. These are signs of all the members,
viz. The color of the face from the Liver.
debilitation, compression of the stomach, heaviness of the shoulders, pain of
the back, pain of the backbone and principal members, loathing, disdain of
meat, defect of sleep, and that at length they become to have the Paralysis;
the cure of this is made by Diaphoreticks of Mercury and Antimony. If one which
has the tartar be put into a bath the pain is quickly expelled by Raperoots.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Diseases of the Milt, and the Causes and Signs of them.
THe more grievous diseases of the Milt The Apostem of the Milt is a tumor
caused from crass and lent humor in the substance of the Milt, besides Nature.
The Schirrus is when the humor thickneth and hardneth in the Milt by reason of
the resolution of humid and small parts by heat. The inflammation is when the
humor boileth in the Milt and so distends the substance of it and makes a
tumor preternaturally.
are the distending tumor, the obstruction, the Schirrhus and inflammation.
Read the Galenists and Symphorianus for the causes of these diseases, etc. The
cure. The liquor of tartar expels all the affects of the Milt. Paracels. lib.
2. de viribus memb. cap. 8. so also the oil of Tamarisk, and the tincture of
Hearts-tongue cure all the affects of the Milt. Those medicaments do also the
same, which resolve, reduce, and consume the tartar, and which open
obstructions. The water of Sulphur and Pitch or Bitumen open obstructions, so
does Ale made with Hearts-tongue. Barthol. Anglus lib. 16. cap. 45. Hot iron if
it be extinguished ofen in wine or milk it makes the wine or milk to cure the
diseases of the Milt and other diseases. The general medicine of the Galenists
against all the affects of the Milt is the root China. Concerning the Liver and
Spleen indurated read Galen de art curativa, lib. 2. cap. 5. Paracelsus de
morb. tartareis, cap. 14. In the tartar all the kinds of poison are, when the
poison of tartar and the flowrs of tartar go forth and disperse, they infect
the vital Elements.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the diseases of the middle of the bowels or Mesenterium of
that part which is called Pancreas.
COncerning the tartar of the Mesaraical veins and the symptoms thereof read
Paracels. lib. 3. paramir. de origin morbor. ex tribus principiis, and parag.
lib. 1. de tartaro tractat. 2. cap. 3. Tartar is begot in all the cavities,
passages and vessels of the whole body, as also in the Mesentery and mesaraical
veins which are conveyed from the Belly to the Liver. Tartar being heapt and
collected by daily nutrition and impression, at length obstructs the veins,
whereby aliment may less be able to attract aliment from the Liver. These veins
being obstructed, the Liver and parts of the body being destitute of aliment,
fall into pining and consumption. But when that tartar sends forth his flowrs
(which are the poison of tartar, for in the tartar all the kinds of poison are
which are endued with malignant qualities) then they infect the vital Elements,
from whence inflammations and other incommodities issue. Fernelius a most
Judicious man writes thus of the mesenterium, and that which is called
pancreas, lib. 6. de partium morbis and symptomatis, cap. 7. I affirm (says
he) and profess, that I have oftentimes marked the causes in these places of
the choler, melancholy, Diarrhaea, dysenteria, cachexia, atrophia, languor of
lingting and erring Fevers, and lastly of occult diseases, by whose expulsion
and removal health is restored. Obscurity has been a cause to many of
ignorance, and why the affects of these parts are pretermitted and not
celebrated in the writs of old writers. The The cure.
tartar in the mesentery and mesaraical veins (which is often the cause of the
phthisis, fever, inflammation, and most grievous diseases as well chronical as
acute) is resolved, reduced and consumed by true precipitated Mercury; so also
the confections of Antimony which works by vomit and stool. Little or nothing
is effected by other medicaments in this case, the inflammation being present
Diaphoreticks and such as corroborate nature and the vital Elements are to be
administered, of which we have often spoken.

The said true precipitated Mercury prepare thus.
pure crude Mercury, dissolve it in good Aquafortis (made with two parts
Vitriol and one part Salt Peter) being all dissolved, distill off all the
Aquafortis (at last with strong fire) and then put fresh Aquafortis upon the
remaining Mercury, which also distill from it again, and so do the third time
with fresh Aquafortis; so will the Mercury remain behind red as Cinaber, upon
which pour a well rectified oil of Vitriol and distill it off strongly again,
then pour it on again and distill it off as before; thus cohobate with the same
oil of Vitriol six times, and after that with good spirit of wine ten times,
then with the distilled water of Bugloss and Borage dulcifie it: Lastly, neal
it red hot in a crucible, and so is the true precipitated Mercury finished.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the diseases of the Intestines and their Causes and Signs.
THe more grievous diseases of the Intestines are the Obstruction, Astriction,
Inflammation, Imposthume and Ulcer. The obstruction interpels and hinders
either the descending of the aliment, or the evacuation of excrements which are
especially functions of the Intestines. The Obstruction of the Intestines
according to Paracelsus is caused from tartar which is generated in Lib. 1. de
tartaro tract. ^^ cap. 2. fol. 224.
the Intestines when the salt of the thing and the salt of Nature are commixt,
and when the excrement^ of the belly stay longer in the Intestines. This
commixtion if it be continual and increased by little and little, by the
efficacy of heat at last it does so incrass that it obstructs the Intestines
altogether, and does (as it were) kill them, and* becomes the cause of occult
and difficult diseases. Fernelius says, we testify that these are true which
(notwithstanding) are not thought probable unto Galen. This tartareous and
styptick matter (being collected long in the cavities of Colon and the blind
gut) sometime congeals into stones which stop the way altogether for the
excrements, and hinders them whereby they may less be able to descend to the
belly; when these hurts are present, the courage and strength fails, and there
is a crudity of the Ventricle, and a slow dejection of the belly, and much wind
do make a noise. The coarctation and straitness of the Intestines is somewhat
like the obstruction, and it is caused by the virtue of those which are
ingested or carried in, whether they be meats or astringent glisters. But this
is frequent from the tumor of the mesenterium or bowels pressing the
Intestines. The inflammation also does happen unto the Intestines, when the
seeds of Arsenick, Sulphur, and Auripigmentam are resolved in them. Then a pain
at first sharp and lancing is begot fixed in the same place. The burning Fever
and frustrate desire of sitting concomitates and accompanies this inflammation.
The imposthume being burst there comes forth at first a filthy and
excrementitious filth, afterward a white and concocted out of the fundament,
and it is either dreggish or somewhat before the dregs in which it is wont to
be cleansed and expelled, and then the pain, fever and other symptoms are
mitigated, and the belly (the obstacle being removed) does freely avoid, yet
there is an Ulcer remaining from the Imposthume and Tenasm. This pain is fixed,
of whose sense the Intestines are debilitated; oftentimes they depose their
load and belch forth sometime a bloody, sometime a purulent filthiness, and
that if it be hollow, because it consists in the humid part, and that which is
easily passed through, it remains long filthy, and scarcely at last is obducted
and covered with a scar; unless heed be taken diligently it almost ends in a
Fistula or Cancer.

He that will resolve the tartar and open the obstruction The cure. Observation.
in the obstruction of the Intestines, must not apply any glister unto the
patient as they most use to do. But apply unto him a hot cloth with the fat of
Yew, and put it upon the place of the belly, afterward give him inwardly the
spirit of Turpentine which resolves the tartar, that the excrements may descend
unto the belly, and that they be evacuated by the accustomed way. The Ulcer
which is wont to concur in the Intestines is cured by vulnerary simples in a
vulnerary potion. These are the simples hyrundinaria, centaurea, and pyrola,
boil them together with wine in a vessel well stopped until the Consumption,
afterward in a vessel full of water.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Symptoms of the Intestines, and their Causes and Signs.
THe Cholick passion is as grievous, as if The Cholick passion is a grievous
and intolerable pain caused in the inferior and crass Intestines with the
constipation of the belly.
one have a stone impressed in the one Ureter, or be boared through with a wimble
in the affected place, as Galen speaks of himself, lib. 2. cap. 5. de locis
affectis. Concerning from whence the kinds of the Cholick read Sev. fol. 240.
According to Theophrast. lib. 1. de tribus principiis, cap. 5. The Cholick is
caused from Salt predominating in the Intestines, and it produces diverse kinds
of the Cholick. One kind when the Salt is resolved, another when it is too much
hardened. So also ^ractat. 4. de origin morbor. ex tartaro, he says, that the
Cholick is begot from the effusion of choler, which is thus to be understood,
when the tartar of the gall sends forth his flowrs, it with the choler produces
the Cholick; so also de tartaro cap. 11. The Cholick and Iliacapassio is a
grievous and intolerable pain caused in the superior and small guts with the
constipation of the belly.
the Iliack are begot from tartar and not from humors. In the Cholick there
are three potent properties of the principles, the acute suddenly penetrates by
his vaporous sowrness infecting the continuated parts. They do not emit and
send forth spirital resolutions endued with the same faculties at the first,
from which the contracture at length arises. Concerning the cause of the
contracture which arises from the Cholick read the book de membror. contract.
tract. 1. cap. 3. Oftentimes there happen contagious impressions (of them which
have the Cholick) unto the Anatomy of the Ventricle, which cause loathing,
vomiting, and other symptoms of the Ventricle. You may read a more full and
perspicuous explication of the Generation of the Cholick in Davus, fol. 238,
239, 240. Concerning the Iliack, Lientery, The Lientery is a flux of the belly
wherewith the meat is forthwith avoided, especially by stool, either crude or
somewhat digested.
or Caeliacal passion, read the Galenists. The cause of the cholick passion is
not crudeness nor the weak concoction of the belly, but the bad distribution of
the chyle, which is caused for the obstruction of the mensenterium, Milt, or
Liver, or the imbecility of the attracting faculty, or for the immoderate
abundance of aliments (especially of unsettled and fugitive fruits) and of
drink. All the superfluous humor being evacuated the flux cease voluntarily,
sometime the same day it began, sometime on the second or third day.
Hippocrates lib. de affectibus, says, that in the Lientery the meats succeed
not putrifacted and liquid, there is no pain, and the body is attenuated.
Concerning this disease read more at large in Galen in Aphoris. Hippocrates
Cem. 6. Sect. 1. and Comment. 4. Sectione 17. Barthol. Anglus, lib. 7. cap. 50.
Phrisius in speculo part. 4. Alexander Benedictus, lib. 20. cap. 7. and 8.
Theophrast. lib. 1. parag. de morbo dissoluto. Theophrastus makes the cause to
be corrupted and resolved Salt, he says, that every loose disease is ruled by
Salt, as the Dysentery, The Diarrhea is a flux of the belly whereby humors
especially excrementitious are avoided immoderately by the stool without
exulceration of the guts. The Dysentery is a flux of the belly whereby bloody
humor is avoided by the stool.
Diarrhaea, and Lientery, therefore the cure must be made by Salts and
Sulphurs, in lib. de tribus principiis, cap. 5. Concerning the Diarrhaea, read
the Galenists. The Colliquation or melting away of the Intestines may be
referred to the Diarrhaea, in which that which proceeds from within seems as it
were perfused with fat or oil; hence it comes to pass that the substance of fat
or flesh, or of solid parts being newly congealed may melt and flow away into
the b^unch by the protracting disease. This kind of flux is very usual unto
those which have the pestilence, fever, and melting causes, the Hectic and
Phthisis, sometime to those that have the atrophia and inflammations of the
bowels. The Dysentery is a difficulty of the belly. Hippocrates seems to take
it not for the Ulceration of the Intestines (as most Physicians do) but for the
bloody flux of the Intestines. Celsus makes the Dysentery simply to be
wringings. Hippocrates de affect. says, this disease is begot when Choler and
Phlegm burden the veins and belly. The blood corrupts, and the corrupted
departs. The Intestine is diseased, gnawed, and exulcerated. This disease
becomes long, laborious, and mortal; if the patient have a strong body he may
be cured, and there is hope of life, but if the belly be melted and altogether
ulcerated, there is no hope of life.

The principal cause of the Dysentery is Gods punishment, which is set down
Levit. 26. and Deuteronomy. 28. God punishing man uses second causes as his
instruments, and infects the air with the properties of Saturn, Arsenick,
Colocynth, and Ellebor, which men attracting by breathing do inquinate and
corrupt the Balsam of life, and their body is transmutated by those corrosives
and purging tinctures; so that the excrements may eject and cast forth the
humid radical nutriment by the superior The bloody dejection of the belly
and inferior members. The bloody dejection of the belly is seldom caused of
the imbecility of the Liver, often from the opened internal Haemorrhoides.

The Lumbrici or worms (especially of all the parts The Lumbricy are great
worms.
of the body) do occupy and corrode the guts. And these worms are of three
kinds, round, broad and long, small and short, concerning which read Galen in
Aphoris. Hippocrat. Comment. 6. Sectione 26. Concerning the Causes and Signs
thereof read the Galenists.

The Cholick and the Iliack differ. 1. The Cholick is The difference of the
Cholick and the Iliack.
in the gut which is called Colon, but the Iliack is in the small gut which is
called Ileon. 2. The Iliack is above the Navel below the Ribs. The Cholick is
below the Navel. 3. The pain of the Iliack is greater than the pain of the
Cholick. 4. The Iliack casts forth excrements and worms by Vomiting, but so
does not the Cholick. Theophrast. says, that the Iliack passion (of which we
speak) in the obstruction of the guts rises from tartar, which sticks in the
small guts.

Mix the fat of Yew with the oil of distilled Chammomum, The Cure of the Iliack.
dip a linen cloth in it and put it upon the affected place, and if the pain
cease not, give somewhat inwardly, and this dissolves the tartar; so also
anoint the affected place with the oil of Juniper and Laurel-berries. Barth.
Anglus, lib. 7. cap. 8. It is cured also by the Salt and oil of common Salt or
Sea Salt or Salgemmae. Thurnens. in pisone, lib. 4. cap. 7. lib. 5. cap. 7.

The Cholick is cured by the spirit of Vitriol three or The cure of the Cholick.
four drops of it being taken in water, or by the Balm of Sulphur or oil of
Turpentine. The Cholick is begot from Salt, therefore it is necessary that man's
Salt and natural Salt of man's body be corrected by the Elemented Salts. All
kinds of stones which are found in the heads of Fishes being bruised and given
in wine mitigate the cholical passion, and bruise the stone which lies fixed in
the Reins. Theophrast. says, that the constipation is to be removed and taken
away by the quintessence of Corals, and it cures the Cholick; so also anoint
the belly with the oil of Chammomum and put upon the round of the belly an hot
ointment and a hot cloth. The water of Quicksilver does altogether expel the
Cholick, it has a sour taste, whose process is thus. Quicksilver is The
preparation of the water (...) Quicksilver.
first reduced into water, then infuse other crude and purged Quicksilver into
half of this water which turns into water and ascends the vessel. Twelve or
thirteen, drops of the spirit of Turpentine administered in the appropriated, or
alone, is a most present Remedy, so is The cure of the Caeliaca*
Laudanum Opiatum. The cure of the Caeliaca is, that the obstruction of the
Milt, Mesenterium, or Liver be taken away with medicaments which resolve the
tartar, and that the attractive virtue be strengthened. For the curing of the
Leintery, let the tartar be expelled with the medicaments mentioned above in
the obstruction. Quercit. de medic. Spagir. praeparat. cap. 3. says, that the
Spagirici extract a most subtle substance our of Iron (especially out of steel)
which they make thinner than the water of the fornance. And they prepare their
crocus Martis, forth of which they make an oil for the Diarrhaea, Lienteria,
and Dysenteria and flux of the Liver, and the corroboration of the Ventricle,
and all the Haemorrhaegies both internal and external, it is a most excellent
medicine and no biting medicine if the conserve of Roses be mixed with it. Read
the cited places. There is a Caution to be annexed, that the flux of the belly
must not be stayed too unseasonably and too suddenly with astringent medicines,
for that is wont to be done (for the most part) with the danger of life. Such
medicaments are to be given which strengthen Nature, that it may expel
contraries, for it has known best the mean and limit of staying or stopping;
neither are purgging medicines to be given, which the Galenists counsel.
Terrasigillata with the common Lemnia put in the drink, and let him still drink
of it (and sometime a piece of Lutum put to) cures the Lyentery, the Diarrhaea,
the Dysentery, and diverse fluxes of the belly. Johannes Montanus says, that he
cured very many with this medicament. The Diarrhaea is cured by the water of
the stone called Eat-flesh, or by terra sigillata, especially by the red
terrasigillata, or Lemnia Austriaca, which is found and dug not far of from
Neustadium. Read Theophrast. lib. 1. parag. Titled de morbo dissoluto, so also
the first tract. lib. 1. praeparationum, and lib. 1. tract. 2. praepar. and
tract. 3.

The general preservative method for the Dysentery is The preservative method.
reconciliation with God, and in the next the air is to be altered with
Laurel-berries and White-ash. Let them take of Lingwort and Pimpernel ana. ss.
of black and white Frankincense. of Citrine and white Amber. of Mastick,
Asedulcis, and Camphora ana.. Let them be pulverized and commixt and insperst
upon to coals. Thirdly, the body is to be purged from impurities, and there
must be a temperate diet. Fourthly, Alexipharmical and Diaphoretick medicines
or pestilential potions are to be administered. One day in the morning let him
take of Alexipharmical Medicines about the quantity of two Pease. The next day
let him take three drops of Diaphoretick or Pestilential potion in a convenient
drink. This preserves from all infections, and strengthens the balsame of
nature.

As soon as any shall feel himself infected let him take The Curative method.
of Alexipharmicum -- the next day -- of the Pestilential potion or our
Diaphoretick; and this every other day, he ought to continue some few days in
taking of the Pestilential potion or Alexipharmicum, until the poison be
altogether expelled. All those have erred exceedingly which have endeavored
according to Galen to cure the Dysentery without antidotons and expulsion of
poison, which experience testifies. After the expulsion of the poison let him
use appropriated curatives prepared Spagirically about the magnitude of a bean,
until the Flux be stencht altogether. Let the younger sort take of it about
the quantity of a pease; If that the sucking babes have this disease let their
nurses take this medicine, as also let the children take it in their milk. The
Curative is extracted from these which follow, viz. from a piece The
description of the Curative.
of Armenian clay, crocus Martis, terrasigillata, strigoum, Corals, Haematites,
Tormentill, Shepherds purse, Plantain, Bittany, the yellow Gallingale,
Mastick, Frankinsense, and red Saunders. Because they have almost lost their
strength, and have sought the Physician too late, they must take the Laudanum
of Paracelsus, to the younger sort five grains must be given, to those which
are come to age, ten grains must be given. This is the most notable medicament,
whereby most dangerous symptoms are cured. Read Paracels. lib. 1. de morbo
dissoluto.

The spirit of Vitriol by his sowerness kills those The Cure of the Worms.
worms, four drops of it in broth, drink or meat; and the flowers of Sulphur,
and Salt of Sulphur, do profit wonderfully. The citrine Stecados boiled in wine
expels all worms out of the belly. The same is wrought by the oil of wormwood
anointed upon the Navel. The oil of bitter Almonds expels worms by bitterness.
Take an oxes gall whole, and put it upon the Navel of the child, and all the
worms will fly out of the body. Take earthworms dried and pulverised in milk or
other liquor, and they will expel all worms through the belly. Theophrast. in
lib. de vermibus Cap. 10. Read the preparation of Tinn, Copper, and Turpentine.
Theophrastus bids us take against the worms, embaulmed ale, and drink it with
wormwood. So also with bruised Juniper it kills the worms. Centoryexpels and
kills all the worms. The flowers of Maudlin decocted in wine make the worms
come forth. The water of the flowers of Peach, and the extract of the flowers
of the Birch being mixed and administered, or every one given by it self expels
the worms. The powder of Tormentel effects the same, Thurnens. lib. 2. Cap. 15.
in Pisone.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the diseases of the Fundament.
THese diseases do happen unto the fundament, viz. Inflammation, Impostume,
Fistula, Rhagades, Scissura, Condyloma, and Haemorrhois. The inflammation is
The inflammation of the fundament.
often wont to be caused in the fundament when the blood sends forth the
flowers of the seed of Arsenick, and deposes the Sulphurous Arsenical seeds in
the flesh. The Impostume remains from the inflammation, which oftener bursts
forth in the cavity of the rectum intestinum, then in the skin, though very
much filth sooner prepares a way in the softer parts. The Impostume being
burst, the Ulcer remains purulent and filthy; and that in a short time
degenerates into the Fistula. The Rhagades rise from the salt of the
Haemorrhoides, yet it is The Rhagades are Clifts or long Cuts of the lips of
the Fundament.
an acute salt, etc. There are long ulcers of the Fundament by which the laps
of the compassing muscle of the straight gut are cut like to those which
dilacerate the under lip, hands and feet. The Condyloma is a tubercle or push
begot The Condyloma or Ficus is a little red tubercle about the circle of the
Fundament, straight in the root, yet broad in the top. The Haemorrhoides are
the Flux of blood forth of the Orifices of those veyns which are opened.
in the side of the Fundament like a Wart, Grape, or Mulberry. The
Haemorrhoides is the opening of the mouth of the veyn which is in the
fundament, from whence the blood flows, as we see at many times of the year. It
is derived (...), vel (...), because the blood flows through it. They call the
Ficus Morsca or Morsica. The Fundament falls down sometime of it self, sometime
by the violence of The falling of the Fundament is a hanging forth of the Gut
of the Fundament without the Orifice of the Fundament.
avoiding, and the compassing muscle of the straight gut is wholly inverted and
turned. The cause is the resolution or looseness of the muscle, caused from the
abundant perfusion of humor, by which reason it is observed that this disease
is usual both to children and those which are come to years.

If any Inflammation happen it is to be cured by Diaphoreticks. The Cure.
If an Ulcer remain from the Impostume (when as it is not rightly cured by
external medicaments) it is to be cured by internal medicaments and potions.
The Rhagades and Condyloma are cured by the oil of Turpentine and Cammomum, and
nointing of Eggs. So also by the Salt of Pellitory brought into liquor.
Paenotus tract. de sale, fol. 241. says, that the Haemorrhois and the blind
and external Ficus or Marsea is cured by the water of Mercury, Thurnens. in
Pisone lib. 4. Cap. 7. So also by the water of Sulphur, Pitch and Musk. So also
by he^bs, as Fengreek, false Ditany, Dodder, and Lunary. So in Pisone lib. 5.
Cap. 2. anoint with the balsome of Sulphur of Rulandus. Paracels. de natura
rerum, lib. 9. not far from the end, says that this disease may be cured by
the oil of Turpentine, Cammomum and eggs. Let it be opened with corrosives (as
other ulcers) but yet with such as do not hurt the straight gut, as are white
Vitriol Atramentum or black pitch. The oil of the Laurel, and oleum Hispanicum
are applied to stir up the internal Haemorrhoids. The brayed Onion is good to
stay the Flux of the Haemorrhoides. Hogs Fennil applied after the manner of an
emplaister, and Rubifolia administered with the nointed fruit of Palm are good
for the same. Read Theophrastus lib. 1. praeparat. tract. 11. The oil of
Corals, and the oil of Iron, have the preheminency in this cure, and they are
true medicaments from anatomy and signed art. In the curing of the falling down
of the fundament astringent Medicines are to be administered. Take of the
Armenian earth prepared, of Mastick, the blossom of the wild Pomegranat,
Capula, Acorn, and Sage, mix them and make a powder, sprinkle this powder upon
a linen cloth, and put it in the fundament, and thereby the ligaments of the
Fundament are strengthened, and the gut Colon which went forth.

The said Oil of Iron is thus prepared.
good spirit of Salt, and as much true spirit of Vitriol; distill them over
together, and look well to your fire, le^t the glass break; in that double
spirit dissolve clean filings of Needles; filter the solution through brown
paper, then put it in a glass Cucurbite, set thereon an Alembick, lute a large
receiver to it, then give fire by degrees, distilling first the fleam; then
(with stronger fire) the Spirits, so long as any will come over; then let it
cool; and in the Alembick, you shall find flowers, which set in a cool and
moist air; and they will dissolve into pure red Oil, which keep for you use.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Diseases of the Reins, their causes and signs.
FEw diseases happen unto the Reyns, viz. Theophrast. lib. de tartaro ^ract. 3.
Cap. 3. fol. 233.
The Inflammation, the Obstruction, the Impostume, and the Ulcer. The
Inflammation of the Reyns according unto more sound philophy, is begot from the
being of poison of Sulphur, Antimony, and Arsenick in other parts of the body,
so likewise in the Reyns. Lithiasis is a general word signifying the Stone of
the reyns and The stony passion is a preternatural straightness in the cavity
and passage of the reyns, caused from the obstructing stone.
of the bladder. According unto the Galenists the stone is begot in five places
of man's body, in the lungs, guts, reyns, bladder, and the jawbone. But
experience witnesses that they are generated in the brain, mesenterium, milt,
liver, ventricle, matrix, joints, and many other places of the body, and this
is confirmed by the industry and diligence of anatomists. Fernelius makes a
more effective De part. morb. and sympt. lib. 6. Cap. 12.
and frequent cause of the stone then the Gallenists, he says, whosoever has
derived the inbred, slimy, and stony constitution from his parents will
scarcely by any means escue the Stone, because this disease is most hereditary;
So that the Stone is procreated in the reyns of many. The Stone of the reyns
according to Paracelsus is generated from the tartar of blood and urine. Read
the book de morbis tartareis, Cap. 13. fol. 304. And of the Mechanical process
of the generation of the stone of the reyns and the bladder. From hence the
substance of the reyns is thrusted forth into an hollow and pulled out, and
divulsing a part of the reyn to which it cleaves without the sense of pain, and
as it were dilacerating or tearing it, it produces a filth which is avoided
with the urine, and makes it crass, turbulent, and somewhat black. The stone of
the bladder, if it be little (not long after) it comes to the head of the
Ureters, from whence it proceeds into the bladder which great violence, and
most intolerable Nephritical pain. If it be somewhat crasser, rough, and
sharp, it sticks longer in the passage, and dilacerates the Ureter with a great
torment, it remains in the capacity by reason of the thickness of it, and
because the passage of the Ureter is not broad enough. The Nephritical pain is
a most cruel torment of the Reyns, or else of the Ureter, which certainly has
an excellent sense. This pain is nothing but a paroxism of the Stone sticking
in the reyns or ureter. This pain is usual and frequent unto many.

The inflammation is cured by the expulsion of poison The Cure.
by Diaphoreticks. The obstruction of the reyns is cured by the subtilty and
secret of Copper. Amongst these secrets the essence of the Vitriol of copper
bears the preeminence, which by great virtue and power opens the obstructions
of the reyns, and expells the enemy very strongly and effectually. The
Nephritical stone brought from nova Hispania, is commended to be effective in
the Nephritis or Stone of the reyns and pain of the Stomach, by an occult and
hidden faculty, if so be it be hanged about the neck. For this cause the
Indians carry it, which has diverse colors. It is affirmed to have such
virtue, that if it be hanged on the arm, and carried about the patient will
forthwith be lightened, and the pain diminished, and the most of the sand and
stone expelled. If any shall make a bracelet of that stone, which he may carry
about with him continually, the patient shall be affected with no pain of the
stone while he carries it so. The same effect is seen in the Nephritical wood
which has most effective virtues in the affects of the reyns, the difficulty
of Urine, in the obstruction of the Liver and Milt, (whether it be decocted, or
drunk in wine) or any commotion of the humors, which is wont almost to follow
other medicines, or any other more exquisite order of the diet, so that it be
moderate, that it do not strangle the admirable medicamental virtues of this
wood. Read Phrissus in speculo part. 4. lib. 4. tract. 4. cap. 2. Barthol.
Anglus lib. 7. cap. 54. Alexander Benedictus lib. 22. Let those which have the
stone in the reyns drink ale, seasoned with Betony, berries of Laurel,
Peniroyal, or Mugwort. So also take the ashes of greater Beans, and pour them
forth into wine, and drink every day of it. This drink is very good for those
which have the Dropsy by reason of the salt of beans it dissolves the tartar
of the reyns. Dialacca, Lithou dribondia, Calamenthum, Diatrion, Pepperwort,
and Diasulphur are effective; 3 drops of the oil of rectified Vitriol given
every morning in the water of Petrosiline, are likewise effective. The spirit
of Vitriol accomplisheth the same. Quercit. de mod. spagir. praeparat. fol. 98.
Many through all Germany and Italy, use the spirit and oil of Vitriol for the
Epilepsie, and the cure of the Stone and Asthma, and that with great profit and
utility; for the stone of the reyns and bladder is nothing but a tartar or salt
of tartar. The spirits of Turpentine or Vitriol administered in the spirit of
wine resolve and expel the stony matter. Lapis rubeus bruiseth the stone; This
rubeus is found almost in all sown sparages, and it is very new, because these
sparages be very rare which want it. Lapis Judaicus which is generated in
Jurie, and Lapis Lynacrius, or the stone which is generated of the urine of the
animal Linx or spotted Beast by the generation of Amber, because as Amber at
the touch attracts chaff, so it attracts the stony matter. Quercitanus in his
answer to Anbertus, fol. 13. etc. says, that the stone of Sporage, adusted
glass moistened with goats blood, the ashes of Cockles, the calcinated stone of
Jurie, and the bone of Cuttlefish, do wonderfully profit the stone of the reyns
or tartar, the reason is, because salt resolves, for salt resolves the stone
and expels it by urine, and fol. 13. says, that amongst the rest of the
medicaments, which cure the stone, reverberated crystal is to be numbered, from
which at length salt is extracted, by whose resolution there is made a most
excellent oil in the moisture for to remove all the obstructions of the bowels,
de spagir. med. praeparat. fol. 111. A specifical remedy, and often proved by
experience for the expelling of the stone of the reyns, which is thus made;
take the little stones which are found in March in the ventricle of an Ox,
with white wine; so also in May, there is found a little stone in the bladder
of the gall of the Ox, which if it be put in wine it gets a Saffron color,
the taste being a little changed, let the patient drink of this being daily
affused or sprinkled with new wine until the stone which is put in the wine be
consumed; by this means it is approved by experience that the stone will be
bruised and diminished; so also the black and red pease is effective, because
the decoction of red pease is very diuretic and wholesome to those which are
troubled with the stone. The black pease cures poisons and bruises the stone.
The seed of the herb Saxifrage and White-plant especially cures the stone of
the reyns. There are some gums which expel the stone, as the gum of Cherry
trees drunk with wine. There are some stones as Lyncurias which heals the
stillicidium or dropping of urine, and being drunk expels the stone. So also
there are some herbs and roots, as Sorrel, Seaholm, Betony, Vervin, Scordion,
Mugwort, the root of Dogs tooth, Sperage, Penniroyal, Five finger grass, the
rozen of the Fir tree, water Nosemart, the root of the lesser Pimpernel, and
the root of the Nettle got in a dry place; so the blood of the Goat breaks the
Adamant, as also the Stone; so also the powder of a Hare, a Hedgesparrow, burnt
glass, the Lark, the stone in the bladder of a Bore, the little bone taken
forth of the hinder joint of the Hare, the bones of the Medlar, Stonecrop, the
gum of plums, Corals, and little stones of the Lobsterfish, and those stones
which are found in the heads of some fishes, the shells of eggs, forth of which
young ones are excluded.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the diseases of the Bladder, Causes and Signs.
THe bladder is more often affected The strong passion of the bladder is
nothing but a straightness caused in the neck of the bladder from an
obstructing stone.
with the Stone, but very seldom with the Inflammation and Impostume, sometime
with the Exulceration. The stone of the bladder is twofold, 1. is in uncoth
parts (that is) that which depends of the excrement of meat and drink, which is
conveyed from the ventricle to the reyns, and from thence to the bladder. The
2. is a tartar, which proceeds from the salt of urine of blood, and it proceeds
from the excrement of tartar or flesh. The stone of the bladder is generated
from the salt of urine by the Element of fire of the Microcosm. The Galenists
affirm the cause of this to be crass and crude juice which flows through the
veyns with the urine into the cavity of the bladder, where it sticks as dregs,
and being dried by the heat of the place it becomes a stone. Fernelius leaving
their opinion says, that he found that Lib. 6. de part. morb. and Sympt. Cap.
13.
every stone contained in the bladder attracts some beginning from the reyns,
from which it falls with a Nephritical pain; if it be greater it sticks a while
in the bladder, and for the most part it persists and stays there, and is
augmented there by the abundance of excrements which stick there until it
become a perfect and confirmed stone. Read the signs of the inflammation,
stone, and exulceration, in the Galenists. Diabetes Diabetes is an immoderate
avoiding of urine, accompanied with great thirst.
(that is) a passing, is a flux of urine, it is so called from (...), (that is)
passing, or flowing. The Diabetes is caused from the tartar of the reyns, when
the reyns are altogether obstructed with tartar, that tartar or coagulated
matter desires moisture, which, when it has attracted it, the mechanical
spirits of things are inquinated and corrupted with tartareous and styptical
tinctures; so that they cannot separate pure things, from impure things, but
they transmit crude matter unto the bladder, and expel urine as an excrement.

The Ischuria is contrary to this, because Ischuria is a preternatural and
involuntary retention of urine with an impotency to piss.
the urine is altogether suppressed, neither is any urine avoided. One cause of
this suppression is astriction or obstruction and Stranguria is a frequent and
painful provocation to piss, with the avoiding of urine by drops.
this proceeds from tartar. The Stranguria is a droping of urine, when as urine
is made by drops; it is sometime with much endeavor, but with no pain,
sometime with a vehement pain, but in vain. That which is made by drops is
called the Ischuria, that which burns and pricks is called Dysuria. The Dysuria
is a difficulty of urine, when Dysuria is a difficult avoiding of urine forth
of the bladder.
as urine is avoided hardly and not without pain. Theophrastus lib. 1. paragr.
writes, that the Dysuria proceeds from the most sharp tartar of the stomach.
The Styptical and most sharp flowers of tartar being resolved in the stomach,
are permixt with the aliments, and conveyed with them unto the bladder.
Michelus in his Chemical Apology fol. 209. says, you Galenists call the
tartareous resolution of the blood, sometime the Exulceration of the reyns,
sometime the Putrefaction of the bladder, sometime the Apostem of the reyns,
sometime the Stone of the bladder, because you see slimy things, bloody, crass,
and stinking evacuated with the urine with great pain. Theoph. in tract. de
tartare and de morbis tartareis Cap. 21. says, that there is not a more
excellent medicine for the consummated stone, then crystal: and these words he
had added, he is happy which can prepare it; this is the preparation; Take of
Crystal of sal Armoniacum, pulverize them, and elevate them after the manner of
the Spagirians, and that seven times, extract Ascali from this elevated and
sublimated crystal, let the dosis (with distilled water) be in the water of
Petrosiline, etc. The salt of tartar, and the oil of tartar which is of a
golden color will effect the same; so also take a little March Hare, and dip
it in Rhenish wine until she be suffocated and dye; then burn the whole
substance of it in a Pipkin, give of this powder -- with a modicum of theriaca
unto the patient before he go into the bath, after he comes out of the bath let
him make water before he eat or drink, and then the patient shall find the
stone resolved wonderfully; he may also take this powder with the water of
Parsley. The Crabfish expels the sand and stone of the bladder and reyns very
effectively, he that uses it often need not fear the stone. Theophrastus lib.
de renib. Cap. 15. burn the blood A most certain experiment.
and the skin of a Hare in an incocted pipkin that they may be bruised to
powder, give a spoonful to the patient in hot water in the morning with a
fasting stomach, the stone being liquified and resolved is avoided with the
urine. We have seen this, and therefore not to be doubted of; he that doubts
let him make an experiment and let him put a most hard stone in hot water, and
a spoonful of his powder, and the stone will presently resolve with an
admirable virtue which is beheld in the powder. So also take the stone cut out
of man's bladder, Theophrast. tract. 2. de morbis ex tartaro, says, bruise it
in a mortar, extract the oil by the Alembicum, as the oil of philosophers, of
which give -- in white wine for the space of 14. days every morning and
evening, and it will dissolve and expel the stone very strongly. Take of
Saxifrage, Fennil, Parsley, Pepper, Smallage, Millet, Gold, and Sperage, in one
spoonful of hot water, and it will bruise the stone within two days. So also of
Lethontrib as Taberna Montanus in his book of Physic, part 2. cap. 17. Some
take Ivy, and mix it with water of Parsley, and give this mixture evening and
morning. If any cannot make water for the stone, let him drink Juniper water.
Read the Archidox of Theophrast. de baccis Juniperi. This is a most approved
medicine against the stone, and all the affects of urine, viz. Disuria,
Stranguria, and Ischuria. Take of Salnitrum, lib. 1. ^let it be burnt in a
melting pot, otherwise the best matter will go out; then put some particles of
Saltpeter by little and little into the red melting pot, so the fierceness of
Saltpeter does not fly away, which otherwise is wont to happen in common
preparations; In the hot earthen pot, Saltpeter is changed into common salt,
let it be dissolved in the spirit of wine, and administered in the bath. So
Saltpeter resolves the salt of tartar and expels it by urine. The sweet
Diaphoretick Mercury cures all ulcerations of the superior ureter, bladder and
yard* The Gonorrhaea is cured by the sweet balsame of tartar; The essence of
Pearls cures the impotence of Venery, in as much as it rises from the solution
of strength or obstruction of the bowels. The tincture, essence, and solution
of Corals effect the same. The Inflammation of the bladder is extinguished by
Alexipharmical and Diaphoretick medicines. Theophrast. in his book de veneno,
says, that the Stranguria and Disuria are cured by the expelling of poison in
the stomach; this is the reason, because the root, Mine, or cause of the
Stranguria and Disuria lie hidden in the ventricle; the root being expelled,
the flower or fruit is removed which it has produced in the stomach, and
transmitted to the bladder. Penotus tract. de Salibus fol. 226. Those which
cannot retain their urine, let them burn the Bladders of Goats, and pulverise
them, and put unto them -- of the Salt of Saint John's wort, which is to be
drunk with wine. The Salt of Antimony is a secret in the Strangury and Disuria.
The urine of the spotted beast congeals into a stone which is called Lincurius
and it cures the dropping of urine; as also if it be drunk it expels the stone
of the bladder. A Potion against the Stranguria, Take of benedictum laxativum
-- of the water of Fennel and Parsley -- mix them, and let them be given to
drink betimes in the morning with a fasting stomach, and it expels the
Strangurie. You may read more in Alexander Benedict. lib. 23. cap. 26. etc. and
page 542. the title is adurinae stillicidia. Phrisius in speculo part. 4. lib.
2. tract. 7. cap. 5. Theophrast. lib. 1. de morbo dissoluto. Cardan lib. 1.
cap. 1. de rebus mirabilibus, says, that Hippocrates administered the juice of
the Beetle for the Strangurie. Ale made with Mallow takes away the obstruction
of the passages of urine. The spirits Vitriol, and almost all salts, even the
subtilties of Saltpeter, common Salt, sal maris and sal gemmae, cure the
affects of the bladder. Thurnens. in Pisone lib. 4. cap. 7. fol. 118. and 119.

CHAP. XXIX. Of the diseases of the Cods, their Causes and Signs.
THe Cods and the Testicles which are contained in them, are both tabefacted
and diseased with the Inflammation, and hard Schirrous tumor, and with all the
kinds of the The Inflammatory Sulphurous and Arsnick Spirits beginning to bud
in the Cods and Testicles, bring forth their flowers agreeable to the root, and
then the Cods are distended with a tumor; there also accompany this tumor
hardness, redness, heat, and a launcing pain, which is sharpened by a light
touch. The Fever for the most accompanies it, and the ill cured Inflammation,
oftentimes it leaves a tumor, the proper heat being extinguished, redness,
heat and pain are removed, only hardness persists and continues, something of
which (for the most part) remains incurable.

The Inflammation of the Cods and Testicles is poysonful, The Cure.
and therefore it is to be expelled by Alexipharmical and Diaphoretick
medicines, as also their concomitating symptoms. The juice of the notable herb
Hernaria being affused with wine stays the descent or falling down of the guts
in the space of nine days, as also the disease is so cured thereby that it will
not invade again. The juice of Enula Campana with the juice of Rue, does very
much avail with those which have the bursting, or falling down of guts,
especially if the rupture or bursting be from wind; so also the subtilties of
common Salt, Sal maris and Sal gemmae, are very effective. The wild Cumin
boiled in wine, and gum put to it, and applied after the manner of a plaster,
does most excellently cure it. The herb Flixwort is a chief secret in the
Rupture. Inwardly in the Rupture of the Navel, take the herb Panax, apply or
lay it on a Dogs skin, and put it upon the Navel, and it will hinder the egress
of the guts. Read Rulandus de thermis page 161. In the tumor of the one
se^^icle, and the pains of the veyns about the Croines, administer two or three
drops of Vitriol in the spirit of wine, the next day in the spirit of
Turpentine after the same manner.

CHAP. XXX. Of the affects of the Womb, their Causes and Signs.
THe Inflammation of the Womb (as of the other parts) proceeds from the being
of poison, whose generation depends of the superior causes. Paracels. in
Chirurg. tract. 4. lib. 3. places the Cancer The Cancer is a hard malignant,
rough and pale tumor possessing and exulcerating some member of the body.
amongst the affects which is not only generated in the breast or Paps of
Women, and Shoulders of Men, but in the ribs, ventricle, arm, feet, matrix, or
in the neck of women's privity, and it is as well begot in men as women from the
Realger of blood, and it is a Mercurical salt of transplantation. The Schirrhus
of the womb is caused from tartar effused through the substance of the womb
there congealed. Paracels. de origin morborum invisibilium, says, that the
Mass is generated from the Image and similitude of the copulation, and that it
is a monster of the imagination. The cure, the root, Fosterer, and Mine of
Inflammation is the same in all the parts, though the vehemence of the symptoms
differ. The same cure. The Ulcer is more easily cured by internal and
specifical medicaments, than external, and that by sweet Diaphoretical Mercury,
the essence of the liquor of the Cedar, and by certain specifical medicaments,
as Selandine, C^ntory, P^iola, Silvatica, and Horsetongue. The Cancer in women's
womb, or neck of her privity, is begot from menstrual poison, viz. when as the
menstruum is suppressed. Wherefore in the cure of the Cancer those are to be
removed which hinder the purgation of the menstruum, that the menstruums may
flow forth according to the prescript of nature, which thing is effected by the
essence of Gold, or (as Paracelsus speaks) the rozen of Gold; it also cures the
Cancer in all the parts both of men and women. The essence of Mercury, and
Coral, the secret of Antimony, and the liquor of the Philosophers effect the
same. The Schirrhus is expelled by the dissolution, expulsion, and consumption
of tartar, and that from Anatomy and signed at. Copper cures all the affects of
the Womb, and the essence of the Vitriol of Copper does the same, for Copper
bears dominion over the womb and privities. Nature it self expels the mass. The
essence of the Vitriol of Copper does cure the Inflammation, as also the
Dropsy most excellently. The essence of common salt, of Sal maris, and Sal
gemmae effects the same. The essence of Mercury cures the Rhagades, the
Condyloma, the Haemorrhoides both in woman's privity and the fundament; they are
also cured by the essence of Sulphur, oil of Cammomil, and oil of Eggs.

The said essence of the Vitriol of Copper is thus prepared.
filings of Copper, put them in a copper vessel, and moisten them well with
strong vinegar, set them in gentle heat, (or in the Sun) till they be dry; then
moisten them again with vinegar and dry them as before; so do four times; let
them be very well dried at the last.

Then with hot water wash away all their green Tincture; filter that green
water; an ^in the paper will remain a yellow earth, (which may be kept for
other uses) the green filtered water coagulate on gentle heat, till it become
thick; and having sufficient quantity of that thick juice, distill it by
degrees of fire, so will ascend a thick substance, sticking to the Alembick,
which then you must take off, and with a stick put it down again into the
Cucurbite, and so you must do as often as it ascends; and when it will rise no
more, but remain in the bottom of the Cucurbite, then let it cool; take it out
and by Retort distill in strong fire (the stronger the better) then will ascend
first a white sour spirit, then a yellow sour spirit, and lastly some blood red
drops, with a white cloud; when no more will come over, then let it cool; take
then all that distilled over, put it in a Cucurbite, and with gentle heat
distill off all the spirit, (make not your fire so strong as to force over any
of the yellow spirit) and a thick substance will remain behind, a blackish red
matter, which extract, with a well rectified spirit of wine, (as often with
fresh spirit, as it tingeth it red) then distill both together by Retort; and
afterward separate the spirit of wine in gentle Balneo; and so have you the
essence of the Vitriol of Copper.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the Symptoms and Causes of the Womb.
PAracels. (lib. 11. paragr. fol. 412) says The superfluous Flux of the
Menstruum is an immoderate and preternatural evackation of menstruous blood
forth of the veins of the Matrix, which brings an hurt to the whole body.
that there are two diseases in the Matrix, viz. Retention and Superfluity; the
menstruum is an excrement of the Matrix, etc. The superfluity of the
menstruum's vacuation is caused from the poison of Mars which is the fountain
and original of The Gonorrhaea is a preternatural and involuntary Flux of seed
forth of they vessels.
all fluxes. The Gonorrhaea is a dissolution or paralysis of the genital
members, Cap. 8. de gutta. It is called the strangling of the womb, the
Suffocation of the Matrix, because it strangles the spirits of the members with
poison lying in the Matrix as in the center and bursting forth. Thurnens. in
herbario fol. 12. says, that it is a species of the Epilepsie, Paracels. fol.
71. and 81. calls it the falling disease of the matrix. You may read more in
Paracels. lib. de amentibus, titled de suffocatione intellectus. So also de
caducis lib. 2. part. ^. de caduco matricis. Paracels. lib. de Icteritia cap.
2. annotat. The precipitation and suffocation The Suffocation of the matrix is
a preternatural ascending of the womb toward the superior parts hindering the
motion of the Diaphragma.
is nothing else than a Jaundise of the Matrix. You may read the cure of them
both in the same place Cap. 3. fol. 353. 354. lib. de caduco 9. de caduco
matricis fol. 416. Paracels. in his archidox sets down the magistery of the
milt of an ox for a specifical medicament The Cure.
of the Matrix, for to provoke the menstruum in the suppression; this (he
faith) is a most excellent medicament. The essence of Corals, the oil of Iron
or potable Iron, have the Pre-eminence in restriction or binding. Paracels.
rehearses in his cures that a certain woman had the Flux of the menstruum very
long, and so abundantly that she often fell into a deliquium animi, and he
cured her with the oil of Vitriol in the water of Plantain, and of Corneola.
The magistery of the Loadstone (from anatomy and the signed art) effects the
same in the Flux of the menstruum, the stellicidium or dropping, and the white
Flux of the womb. The diseases of Mars are those which are perfectly cured by
the spirit of Iron existing in the Loadstone. The specifical medicine is
Arsemart, Shepherds purse put in the shoes, Laudanum Perlatum without the musk
of aramanthis drunk in white wine restrains the abundance of menstruum*
Mathiolus in Dioscordium commends the preparation of Corals for the restraining
of the menstruum and Flux. Read I heophrast. tract. 3. praeparat. lib. 1. tract
2. Trochisks of terra sigillata stay all the Fluxes of blood, as also the
Haemorrhoids, the Gonorrhaea in women is cured in women (as likewise in men) by
the magistery of Pearls from the signed art of the Heaven, for the Margarites
and Pearls are begot from seed; that poisonful matter which follows the lues
Venerea, pertains to the cure of the lues Venerea. The root of Briony which
has boiled in wine is profitable for the strangling of the Matrix. Matthiolus
says, I knew a woman obnoxious almost every day for many years unto the
Strangling of her privity, and she was cured by drinking white wine, in which
the root of Briony had boiled, after she went to bed, and she used this
medicament for a years space, and afterward she felt no annoyance or hurt.
Three drops of the spirit of the Vitriol of Copper taken in liquor is a most
excellent medicament against all the affects of the matrix. So also take Sal
armoniacum and a little more of Saffron, pulverise them, and give it in wine.
It is certain and approved that Hartshorn pulverised, and given in hot wine is
effective and profitable in the Cholick of the Matrix; so also terra sigillata
given with hot wine is very profitable. A specifical remedy of the suffocation
of the Matrix or Strangling of the womb, Take the Fig of the flesh, put
Theophrast. tract. 2. cap. 4.
it upon the coals, and make that a smoke ascend through women's privity unto
the Matrix. Paracels. lib. de Ictero cap. 3. fol. 356. says, that the liquor
of the herb Dogs tongue, and the secret of the water of Balmmint are very
available. Thomas Muffetus (in his Epistle 279. perchance fol. 179.) says,
thou have a singular remedy. Take the mossiness of the Wallnut and dry them,
bruise them into powder, and let there be given of it -- with two drops of the
oil of Amber. I never found any medicine more excellent then this for this
affect. For the falling down of the Matrix, take such a ball as children use to
play with in Medows or gardens, and roll it or cover it with new melted wax,
which has a string fastened to it somewhat strongly, with which ball rowl^d in
wax (after the Matrix is enclosed and thrust in) you must stop the fundament
lest it fall down again; in the next place take Balmmint, Cumin, Mint, Crispa,
the red Mugwort, Wormwood, and red roses, put them together in a bag, and let
them be boiled in distilled Vinegar of wine, and put them hot in the fundament,
administer also the oil of Mir^h, and the spirit of Turpentine drops 4. in the
water Nicotiana or Tabacus.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the Arthritis, Chiragra, Gonagra, and Podagra.
PAracelsus takes Podagra generally for every pain existing in the joints of
the bones, or glue of the The Podagra is a disease which affects the less foot.
body. The Podagra is a disease or being of tartar or a disease of Mineral salt
or sour liquor. Under tartar* all the spirits of salt are comprehended. And as
the nature shall be of common salt, sal gemmae, and sal maris, or sal alcali,
and of the salts of Vinegar, Barbery, and Acacia; So the pains of the Podagra
shall be, and their signs shall vary. The tinctures of salts are sour, bitter,
salt, and sharp, and of the nature of Sulphur, Pearl, Niter, Alume, Medlar,
Nettle, and Arsemart, but amongst these the tincture of Niter and common salt
produce most grievous and sharp pains. The pains of salts of Pearls and Sulphur
are more vehement than those of the spirits of the Alumish nature, and sal
gemmae. Sour, Alumish, Styptical, and Barberizated tinctures are the authors of
coldness and frigidity, The Sulphur and tinctures of the nature of Cuccopintle,
mixed with the spirits of Arsenick do cause redness, heat, inflammations, and
pulses. This is it which Paracels. says, namely, that the Podagra is a
Sulphur ascended and kindled in the glue; also he says, that it is a coldness
kindled in the glue of the body; for Narcotical and cold tinctures (being
kindled with digestion and circulation) present an adulterated Image of heat.
But how do these tinctures of salts come into the Anatomy of the body? two
ways, or by two means, 1. Either by a hereditary means, or from meat and drink.
Seeing that the first matter of tartar is contained in the parent, which (as
yet) is not coagulated, but spiritual and astral, and (as yet) it exists strong
and infects the balm and root of man's nature by vital and forcible impression;
and it comes to pass by hereditary transplantation (that when the first
rudiments or principles of the roots are implanted from the original) that such
Podagraes should arise, because they are fostered in the most vehement and
forcible element. The Podagra is generated from the weak ventricle which
separateth not rightly, and hotter Liver, if the matter of the urine be not
^ightly separated.
The Podagra is generated from meat and drink; for the mechanical spirits of
the ventricle cannot separate all the seeds of diseases from the aliments;
therefore there remains impurities which are conveyed to the glue of the body
after a spiritual and vaporous manner together with the aliments. And not only
impurities tending unto resolution, but also tartareous excrements destined
unto coagulation (the separation being frustrate) produce corporeal, stony,
cloddy, or massy diseases, and diseases of the nature of Tophus and Pitch;
neither is it difficult for the seeds of those diseases (seeing they be
resolved, spiritual, and vaporous, and permixt with the vapors of the
aliments) to pierce every way. Seeing therefore such like seeds are contained
in the Anatomy of the blood, and are resolved and flow with the seeds, and
persist or stay in the glue or balm of the hands and feet, they make some
manifest Sev. p. 271.
marks in their passage before they come unto the matrices, according unto the
analogy or similitude of the spirits and purity of the glue or balm in the
members by which they pass; for if the vehemency of the spirits be very great,
and tinctures very sharp, terminating in an excrementitious coagulation, and if
the balsame or glue of the thighs and arms be infected or corrupted with
consentany impurities, or impurities of the same kind which are agglutinated
about the membranes of the bones, then are felt doloriferous fluxes in those
places, importing a calamity hanging over the suspected or infected parts. The
generation of the contracture is almost alike, which appears in the veterated
Podagras. The resolution of the tartareous spirits sometime vexes the patients
in the Arthritis, which are driven and agitated through all the members upward
and downward.

The cure consists in the cure of the Arthritis. Concerning the cause of the
Arthritis, read Paracels. tract. 2. de malis ex tartaro cap. 2.
The particular cure of it is made with the essence of Walwort, the oil of
Juniper, and the oil of Hartstongue, f. 271. In the cure of the Podagra there
must be made a destruction, The Cure.
abolishing, consumption, and resolution of the tartareous matter, and that by
resolving medicaments. These three viz. dissolving, mitigating, and
corroborating medicaments admit mixtion, and may be absolved and comprised in
one and the same medicament. Paracels. lib. 2. de vita long a cap. 1. says,
that in the beginning all the matter of the Podagra is to be purged with a
perfect and sufficient purgation, and this may be made by the secret of Corals,
whereby the Flux of the Podagra is expelled, so that there is no place left for
this assailing evil. There is such virtue and force in this secret of Coral,
which is from the essence of Gold, that it is impossible to be deprehended of a
Physician, but by purgation. This purgation may be made six or seven ways,
according to the veteratness, hardness, or nature of the Podagra. This Secret
of Coral is nothing else but fixed Diaphoretical Mercury, which emulates the
virtues of Gold. In the pains of the Podagra, anoint the affected place with
the oil of Juniper, and the pain will instantly be removed. Against the Podagra
in the beginning of the disease use the spirit of Vitriol; For I have seen one
troubled with this disease for the space of three years, and he was cured with
this medicament; For it was such a salt as did especially consist of the salt
of Vitriol, and not of all the kinds of Vitriol. The Diaphoretick of Tartar
much avails in the Podagra in a convenient liquor. The Podagra is cured by
the liquor of the Cedar, Theophrast. in lib. de temperte tract. 3. A most
excellent remedy against the Podagra is Armoniacum sublimated seven times, and
made spiritual; let it also be dissolved in wine, and dip a linen cloth in it,
and put it upon the affected place; let it also be given inwardly with wine, or
ale, and let the patient sweat. Antimony, or the mineral Unicorns horn being of
a solid substance and of the nature of a confection eases much and mitigates
the pain of the Podagra by reducing and consuming the peccant matter, which we
have seen in those which have lacked the use of their hands by their taking
this Medicine had use of their hands again. In the pains of the Arthritis
anoint the affected place with the oil of Juniper, and the patient will
forthwith be eased.

The said Armoniacum how to sublime it seven times for the Gout.
the Scoria made with Antimony, Tartar, and Saltpeter (when you make Regulus of
Antimony per se) make a lixivium of it; which filter, and boil to the
consistency of honey; then by degrees of heat bring it to a fixed powder.

Take that powder and grind it well with pure salarmoniack (which has first
been dissolved in distilled water, filtred and coagulated) and being well
ground together, put them to sublime, first will come over a little spirit,
then will the Salarmoniac sublime in flowers; and this you must do seven times;
every time with fresh fixed powder of the Scoria, so have you the right
Armoniack for the Gout; and likewise the spirit (some of which ascends in
every sublimation) which also is very effectual in the same disease.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of the Plague and the Causes thereof.
THe Plague is a singular scourge, affliction, and contagion for the sins of
man; it is of an invisible, spiritual, and astral nature, proceeding from no
The Plague is a burning and contagious fever continually afflicting the
patient and br^nging death unless it be restrained by nature and art.
internal humor, or liquor of man, but immediately from God. It is either
spiritual, as that which comes immediately from God, or natural, when as God
(punishing men) works by second causes, and uses them as his instrument and
rod; For God when he punishes men exercises and uses another works and means.
The Supernatural plague is from God, or else from Satan permissively. The
supernatural plague is a punishment and scourge sent of God, Exodus 9. Levit.
26. Deuteronomy. 28. 1 Chronic. 22. The supernatural plague permissively from Satan,
is when God permits Satan to punish men for sin. This most tyrannous enemy
both of God and man is sorry that he cannot overthrow God and man, as Job
witnesses in his history. Again the plague rises from conjurers, Exodus 7, and
8. of which Christ speaks, Acts. 8. Matthew. 7. The natural plague is twofold,
one is generation from the impression of the Stars; the other is from the
imagination of the Microcosm. The plague of impression proceeds from the
firmament of Heaven, God punishing men by second causes uses the conjunction of
Mars and Saturn, or the Ecclipses of malevolous Stars, as the father which
punishes the son uses the rod. The beams of these stars (being of the nature
of Arsenick, of Sulphur, Mars, Woolfs milk, Woolf bane and Hemlock) infect the
spiritual and corporal nutriment. This is the generation of the plague from the
astral influence. But men infected with the Haemorrhoids and Plague infect the
sound only with their look. But much more many are infected from the look of
women which are affected with the menstruum and Plague. Again the Plague may
come by breath, heat, sweat, smells, dwelling in some place, and by the clothes
of the infected.

The Plague may rise from Imagination. Paracels. de occulta Philosophia, sets
down preservatives in the time of the Plague. It is not disconvenient to change
the air. This changing or mutation must be instituted according to the
Astronomical Science, otherwise any man endeavors to fly in vain. For the
preservation in the lague let him take pestilential drink of Paracels. prepared
truly Spagitically in his bed in the morning, and let him sweat; This medicine
preserves six days from the Plague. The second preservative is calcinated
Sulphur (taken with Mirth and Aloepaticum and Sugar) preserves that day from
all astrall impression. The third preservative, the Zenecthon of Paracels.
hanged about the neck hinders the attractive virtue of the Microcosm. The
fourth, the herb Celandine gathered in the full moon, and carried about, is a
preservative against the poysonful look of women and men. The fifth
preservative; those which are busied about the infected let them hold
Francincense in their mouths, and let the infected hold the roots of Juniper.
The sixth, the essence of the blood of the Heart and stork are most excellent
preservatives. Seventh, the most excellent of all is the Alexipharmacum
spagiricum taken in the morning, about the quantity of the lesser bean with
sugar or any other convenient liquor. A perfume for to fresh and better the
air. Take of Sulphur lbs. of francincense 2. of mirth 1 s. of laser medicum s.
bruise them and mix them. Add unto this powder twice as much of the barks of
berries of Laurel, half the part of Amber, put upon the coals twice or thrice
every day 2. of this powder at every time; this is the best means to refresh
the air; the same may be done by the wood and berries of the Juniper. The
Universal cure of the Plague is made by the spirit of Gold, with Diaphoretical
of life, the essence of Gemms, Hyacinth, Smaragdus, Saphires, Tinctures,
Corals, and of Antimony with Solificatum and Perlatum Laudanum. These mysteries
of nature if they be given in a convenient dosis they will expel the Plague
altogether. The particular Cure. As soon as the infected feels the poison of
the Plague, let those which are come to years take a spoonful of the abovenamed
pestiential potion of Paracels. let the younger sort take two spoonful or more
or less according unto the conditions of the patient, and let him sweat well
four or five hours, when six hours are past, let him take the third dosis,
especially if the pricking has left him; for by the third dosis (God
assisting) all the poison is expelled by sweat; let the patient take three days
following every morning one dosis of the forenamed drink, whereby he may be
corroborated and comforted. The same is effected by the Spagirical
Alexipharmacum, of which let those which are come to years take and that thrice
in 24. hours; let the younger sort take and three days following let him every
morning take a dosis in wine and vinegar of roses, and appropriated water. When
the impostumes burst forth, let there be a plaster laid to made of Figs and
fruits of Alkeck equally of them being bruised together, so forthwith they will
burst forth, for poison attracts poison; when the impostums burst and the
poison peirces unto the heart they are not poison, but are made poison by
reason of the Antipathy, even as all antipathetical things, if they be
conjoined degenerate into poison. The external sign of it is beheld from a line
drawn from the center of the Apostem unto the Heart. Let inverted grapes, if
they be green, be bruised, if dry, then macerate them in wine, or distilled
Vinegar, and let them be put in and taken forth twice or thrice; these grapes
extract poison from men and women which are far gone in the Ague and recover
them again.

This secret and specifical virtue of this simple may worthily make us admire
in regard of the efficacy of it against the symptoms of the Plague; let him use
in the constipation of the belly the extract of Rhubarbarum or Lysimachium; let
the poorer sort drink of the leaves of Lysimachium. Those which have a
Disentery or diarrhaea, joined with the Plague, let them take in the morning,
noon and night of Crocus Martis in the extract of yellow Galingale until the
perfect cure. Those which are exceeding hot, let them take a linen cloth and
dip it in the water of Roses, Vitriol, and juice of Fengreek, and put it to the
pulses, and as soon as it is dried up, let him dip it in again, for it
extinguisheth the most vehement heat. Quercitanus in his answer to Anbertus
fol. 21. there is made a most commendable medicament of the true preparation of
the liquor of the Cedar, for the affects of the Plague.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the Leprie and the causes of it.
PAracels. (lib. 2. paramir. de origin morbor. ex tribus substantiis, Cap. 4.)
says, that the Lepry is begot from exalted and sublimated Mercury by virtue of
the native heat. So in the 5 chap. says, that the The Lepry is an affection of
the skin, that is, a deep and scaly roughness, together with Itching, caused
from melancholy lying under the skin.
Leprosy and the Lepry, and all the kinds of it are caused and generated from
Salt. Lib. 3. paramir. de origin morbor. ex tartaro tract. 5. says, that the
Lepry has a liquor permixt with tartar, whereupon the Paroxisme happens.
Lib. 1. de tartaro, tract. 4. The Lepry is nothing but a putrefaction from
putrefacted seed, because they are not loosened though they should eat of
Ellebore, and this is a principal sign of the Lepry, that they are not moved
with laxatives, and when the urine demonstrates putrefaction by a stink, it is
a sign of the Lepry. But these seem contrary; when they are considered more
accurately there is no dissension or contrariety, for they are derived from one
and the same fountain. The Lepry is generated from the sublimation of Mercury,
even as in sublimation Mercury penetrates through all the pores and most narrow
clifts of the glass: so the liqnor of Mercury, or matter of the Lepry
penetrates through the superior and inferior parts of the body, and appears
in the skin with scales and filthiness. The Lepry is begot of salt, viz. the
destruction which nature expell's outwardly has a tartareous liquor commixed;
for the exulceration of the skin is manifest in the Lepry. The Lepry is
generated from putrefacted Sperm, (that is) from inbred corrupted balsame, from
whence there follows the corruption and putrefaction of the whole body.

There are four Species of the Lepry; the Leonina, the Elephantasia, the
Alopecia, and the Morphea, lib. 2. de vita longa, he makes six Species, viz.
Leonina, The E^ephant* asis or the Leon^^asis is a filthy and contagious
Cachexia, corrupting the whole body, especially Corroding and Deturpating the
face.
Elephantia, Alopecia, Thyra, Morphaea, and the Vndimia, lib. 6. paragr. he
makes four Species of the Lepry according unto the four Elements; as also he
makes seven Leprys of the seven principal members. The divisions and species of
the Lepry, though they seem to differ somewhat amongst themselves, yet they are
all grounded and conspire in one root, but they differ in signs; lib. 6.
paragr. de cura Leprae, he divides the Lepry into two Species, and in the cure
of the Lepry he says, there are two species of the Lepry, viz. r^d and white;
The white Lepry is so called by reason of the white cure; the red is so called
by reason of the red cure. These are the signs of the white Lepry, the white
color of the skin, the stinking breath of the mouth, the hoarsnesse of the
voice, and the dregs of the excrements, are correspondent to the stinking
breath of the mouth. These are the signs of the red Lepry, the ulceration of
the skin, the Serpigo with an itching, and he pu^tula. The cause of the Lepry
(whether white or red) is the destruction of Salt, or balsame in the Microcosm.

The destruction proceeds from the being of poison, from poison also
putrefaction proceeds, from whence all the species of the Lepry are. The old
writers said that The Cure.
the Lepry was incurable, because they knew not the tartar. Paracels. (lib. 3.
paramir. tract 5.) shows the process and means of curing the Lepry, and it is
twofold, 1. is of the preserving from putrefaction; the 2. is of the cure of
the Lepry. Those which pertain unto conservation are the extractions of
Antimony, the essence of blood which is extracted from the heart vein, the
liquor of Pearls and Corals, the specifical of the grains of Juniper, balmmint,
Succory, and Valerian. Part. 5. fol. 273. The flowers of Antimony preserve the
leprous from putrefaction* s. of them being taken once a week. Those which
pertain unto the cure are the virtues of Gold, Minerals, and Manna, Turpentine,
and Silver with his kind. Lib. 2. de vita longa, cap. 3. Every cure of the
Lepry is to be made by the regeneration, as the transmutation of metals. The
regeneration of the white Lepry is to be made by the tincture of Silver, and
the regeneration of the red Lepry is to be effected by Gold, as the Spagirians
speak. In the same chap. we affirm, that the red Lepry may be cured by the
Mercury of Gold, the white may be cured by the Mercury of Silver. Lib. 6.
Archidox. We have seen this in Lead and Antimony (which they call the mine of
it) that they will cure the Lepry, Leprosy, Alopecia, so also all scabs and
scars, Leonina, Elephantia, Thyriasis. The magistery of Lead does not effect
this, Lib. 2. Archidox. de renevatione. The first being of Antimony effects the
same in the regeneration and transmutation of imperfect bodies, which the first
essence of Gold does effect. Furthermore by pains and industry all desperate
and chronical diseases are cured, the Lepry and his kinds, by philosophical
transplantation, which in our Philosophy is called regeneration, of which we
have spoke in the sixth Chapter.

CHAP. XXXV. Of Lues Venerea, and the causes.
THe Lues Venerea is that which is got Lues Venerea, is a poysonful and
contagious cachexia of the body accompanied with a hot distemperature of the
same.
of the Leprous, which in the exaltation of Venery is polluted and infected
with a Whore, because she had the bubo, and because her menstruum began to flow
forth in the time of coition; from which the French Pocks are begot and
proceed, which has invaded all Europe, (especially Germany.) This disease is
very well known to men and women. Paracels. lib. 2. de origin morbor. ex
tribus principiis, cap. 4. says, that the French Pocks is generated from the
sublimation of Mercury, which is altogether poysonful, and penetrates and
exulcerates the skin by a corroding violence. In another place he says, that
it is generated from corrupt blood, and that truly; for the poison of Lues
Venerea presently causes putrefaction; from putrefaction there proceeds the
corrosive being of poison, or the sublimation of Mercury, or the separation of
salt. Concerning the signs of it read more in Paracel. in his book de morbo
Gallico. Read also Julius Palmarius in his seventh book de morbis contagiosis
lib. 1. and 3. de Lue Venerea. The Cure. Paracel. lib. 2. de vita longa, Cap.
8. And in the kinds of Morbus Gallicus you may observe a purgation, a cure, and
an observation; of which these few are to be noted: First purge the infected
with the Pocks, with Xeniotenium (that is) with ^^^^cury prepared for the
French Pocks, whereby the cause of the disease is expelled together with the
peccant matter. The Dosis and the quantity of this medicament is to be observed
in regard of the patient. Furthermore if the Pocks stick on the skin outwardly,
or if the pain of the joints be more grievous, anoint the body with the oil
which is extracted from Realgar, or fixed Arsnick, and the patient will soon be
well and restored. The Mercury of Gold is a most excellent remedy against the
French Pocks. So also common Mercury. Theophrastus in lib. de morb. Gallico and
in his book de principiis cap. 6. So also it is cured by Diaphoretical Gold,
three grains of it being given in Pills. Laudanum Mercuriale does cure it. It
is also cured by the liquor of the Cedar. Theophr. in lib. de temperatur a
tract. 3. It is also cured by the oil of Mercury. Theophrast. de signis Zodiaci
in his preface. It may be cured also by the Philosophers stone, de tinct. phys.
cap. 6. The spirit or yellow oil of Fuligo cures Morbus Gallicus though it were
in the extreme degree.

The said Laudanum Mercuriale which radically cures the French Pocks.
Quicksilver well purged; sublime it from Vitriol, and Salt Peter ana. what
sublimeth red (and lies upon the Caput mort.) grind well with as much sublimed
Alume; then sublime the red Mercury from the Alume; take it out, and sublime it
again by it self; so will it be free from any ill taste. Grind it small, put it
on a bolt-head, and pour thereon a well prepared spirit of wine; digest them 40
days, so will it become an oil: separate the spirit of wine from it in gentle
Balneo, and the remaining Mercury distill in sand, with strong fire; there will
ascend a white juice, which (with that that sticks on the side of the glass)
distill over by force of fire again, then will it be a heavy oily substance,
sweet of cast, a universal medicine in the Plague, and total extirpation of
Morbus Gallicus.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of Fevers and their causes.
WE have demonstrated in the general A Fever is a hot distemperature of man's
body sensibly hurting the actions thereof.
explication of diseases, how impurities, at the first Sulphurous nitrosities
are carried through the whole body by a vaporous substance; for there are such
sulphurous nitrosities to be found abundantly in the aliments which the
separation and expulsion being frustrate at the set time and the flowers of
nitrosul phureous roots, they beget Fevers, h^rrours, heat, rigor, thirst,
headache; such roots are contained in the Anatomy of all the parts of the body,
as intestines, ventricle, veins of the mesenterium liver, milt, reins, glue, or
balm, blood, flesh, and wheresoever there is made separation and digestion, or
the ventricle, which we have demonstrated to be in all these parts. The seed
will still emulate the subtilty of the places, elements, liquor of the Cedar,
and mechanical substances, which is of a sulphurous tincture mixed with Niter.
The seeds of Auripigmentum, Mars, Woolfsbane, produce the Fever. Auripigmental
seeds produce a perfect inflammation with a Fever. The circuits of the
paroxisms of Fevers consist not in kind, but in degrees, because some seeds
are more mature and ripe then others and nigher to resolution; for in the
fermentation of the seeds or resolution of the roots, the circuits are numbered,
and the constant and firm decrees of the time are consummated, which are
inscribed salts. They take their ordained stations either first, second, thiro
or fifth, which being instant (the proportion and continuity of the progress
being conserved) they execute their functions and offices. Therefore after the
first offspring or resolution, the first offic^rs being consumed and spent,
the superficies and tinctures likewise corrupted, if the second be nigh the
superficies continuated, or the tinctures be destined unto the term of maturity
in the space of 24 hours; if they can make the elements and principles of
bodies (which they are united to) fit unto resolution in such a space, they
demonstrate quotidian circuits, tertian, quartan, quintan, sextan, and monthly
circuits of the year; by the same reason the proportions of the circuits shall
be observed, as what like the proportion of the first is unto the second, such
like shall be proportion of the second to the third, and of the fourth to the
fifth, and so forward. Oftentimes the circuits of paroxisms are transplanted by
external impressions, and that is when the tinctures of the interior and more
potent stars have conspired; which conspiring admit equivocal generations,
because the roots of Fevers emitting from thence are Hermophroditical. So the
tertian degenerate into the quartan and quotidian, and the quartan into the
quintan; again the erratical degenerate into the quartan Feavera, nd the
intermitting into the continual, and contra. The Seminal tinctures of the
impurities of Fevers are Homogeneous and Heterogeneous, the Homogeneous are
equally mature, and by continuation of time are conserved in the resolutions of
the fruits, as in the burning Fever, Hectic Fever, Pleurifie, Prunella, and
Plague, and such like diseases. The Heterogeneneous are those which contain the
tinctures which are to be effected by the flourishing of the fruits, some of
them are nigher to maturity, some more remote* from hence it comes to pass that
the mature parts do fiorish for to day, to morrow, or the third day, in which
the lots of the second maturity have happened in the third circuit, which have
begun the third praedestinations and that continually unto the consumption of
all resolutions defined in the resolution of the root.

Paracelss. lib. de tartaro Cap. 1. All the kinds of the The Cure.
Fevers are comprehended in the cure of tartar. So also in the same Chapter,
Every medicine which resolves the tartar, or expell's it, presently cures the
Fever; wherefore in the cure of the Fever there must be made forthwith a
resolution, consumption, destruction and consumption of the nitrous sulphurous
impurities, and that by insensible sweat, transpirations, urine, avoiding of
the belly and vomits. Lib. 2. de vita longa cap. 5. For the removal of the
Fevers, there must first be made a purgation of the Fever, then a specifical
cure, and causal diminution is to be made. The best cure of the Fever is, that
which Paracel. calls Diacelta^esson, and it is Antimony, It resolvs and expells
the sulphurous tinctures by vomit, stool, urine, insensible sweat, and
transpirations; furthermore there must be administered the spirit of Vitriol, in
which the specifical cure consists. The universal cure against all Fevers,
especially quartan, is, salarmoniacum seven times sublimated and made
altogether spirital must be taken hot in a draught of wine or ale, and make the
patient sweat. Let him use this medicament eight days with a fasting stomach in
the morning; it is sour and makes hungry. These following are available
against all Fevers, the quintessences of Opiates of Theophrast. the sweet oil
of Sulphur, the red oil of Vitriol made of Vitriolum Ungaricum and drunk out of
the water of Barley; the Philosophers stone; the less Centory boiled in ale,
and mixed with Sugar by reason of the bitterness, let him take a good draught in
the morning; the flowers of Antimony being fixed in hot wine, and let the
patient be well covered in his bed, and let him sweat; Let him take of the Salt
of wormwood in wine, and let him sweat. The juice of Wormwood mixed with sugar
is a very good remedy against the Fever; the oil of Wormwood, he better salt
of the Succory, and Carduus Benedictus. So also the salt of Gold, and tartar of
Gold, and the spirit of Vitriol are very good. It is be observed in certain
Fevers, especially in the tertian, and in all other Astral, Epidemical,
Mercurial, and Auripigmental diseases, that a vein be not cut; for it has come
to pass, that It is to be observed that ^ vein be not cut in astra^ diseases.
many having these diseases (after the cutting of a vein) have dyed. Yea surely
this is known very well by experience.

The especial and immediate cause of the generation of worms is putrefaction,
though Paracels. seem somewhat to go from this assertion. The Cure, killing and
expelling of worms is deprehended to be in specificals, of which kind are the
essence of black Ellebor, Saint John's wort, the extract of the leaves of the
birch tree, and the salt of Vitriol. So also those which expel putrefaction and
corruption, of which kind are Diaphoreticks, Diaphoretical Mercury, fixed
Mercury, the Diaphoretical Gold of life. These secrets (especially in the more
principal members) kill, resolve, and expel worms.

The Pica has a common root with Pica is a bad appetite of bad things which
are disconvenient for the nourishment of man.
Woolfs hunger, the powers and sciences of the root or star of transplantation
cause the difference betwixt them. The cure of it is contained in the
resolution, consumption, and expulsion of the tartareous and pearlish
tinctures. The resolution and reduction may be effected by a sour and hungry
medicament, and by no help of another, or specifical purgation, or Mercurial
administration.

The Contracture (as we may see in the Cholick and Contracture*
other Contractures) is generated from sour, stiptical, tartareous and pearlish
spirits, which by the sending forth of fruits of flourishing, inquinate, and
corrupt the vital spirit, which penetrates through all the members and body;
for all the more principal and interior members by their virtues expel and
drive away the enemy and strange guest from their globes and centres unto the
less principal and weak parts, and for the most part, to the outwardest parts
of the body which are farthest from the vital fountain, where it seateth it
self, and produces the malice into act. The Cure of the Contracture consists in
resolution, reduction, and expelling of tartareous Vitriol, and Stiptick
spirits. The Indications of the Contracture, as the Paralysis, and the
Appoplexie are found and exist in fixed Diaphoretical Gold of life, in Antimony,
and the essence of Gold; the less principal or potent are, the water of Tartar,
the spirits of Vitriol, the tinctures of Pearls and Corals. Concerning the
cause and difference of the Contracture read the book of Paracels. de membr.
contract. tract. 1. For the cure of the same read the 2. tract, and his book de
morbis tartareis cap. 11. fo. 297. The trembling of the hands is caused from
cold tinctures Trembling.
which fly unto the sinews by reason of conspiration. The cure of it is the
spirit of Turpentine taken inwardly, and the oil of it anointed outwardly. So
also the spirits of Vitriol does cure it.

The Erysipelas is generated from the Erysipelas is a hot, red, little and
deprest tumor caused from small and choleric humor boiling under the skin,
and it is seated in the superficies of the skin.
roots of inflammation existing in the flesh, as also in the more principal
members, which expel those inflammatory seeds with great force and virtue from
their Globes, and expel them from the Center unto the superficies. The true
cure of it is made by Diaphoreticks and expulsion of the poison. It is manifest
that if external medicaments be administered for the Erysipelas, which are less
convenient and wholesome, and expel the poison from the Superficies, unto the
Center, then the patient is in great danger of death, and that he will scarcely
escape.

The Measils and Flowers of the skin, are begot from Measils are many great
moist, and somewhat white pus^les bursting forth in the superficies of the body
with a Fever.
impure blood, especially the menstruum, which has Mercurial seeds which of
themselves vanish away; yet they are expelled by stronger renovating and
restoring medicaments, and are safely cured by them, as are the essence of
Antimony, Diaphoretical and fixed Mercury, Diaphoretical Gold of life, the water
of Pease from the signature, it expels the nature of the Measils unto the
superficies, and cures it by a Diaphoretical faculty wherein it excells.

The Cure of the Rheum flowing unto Rheum is a preternatural deflux of the
phlegmatic humor from the brain to the inferior members.
the members, thighs, and feet, is Mercurial medicaments and Diaphoreticks; as
also the Tartar of Vitriol, Ellebore, the essence of Iron, Corals, Antimony.
Utricus Porta says that it has his original from the remaining excrements of
the most pure blood of the mother wherewith the child is nourished in the
matrix; neither will he grant that the infant is nourished with menstruous
blood. Notwithstanding it is probable, that the spirital aliment wherewith the
child is nourished is somewhat infected with tinctures and spiritals of the
menstruous blood; which may be conjectured from the vaporous substance and
spirituality of these blossoms.

FINIS.
Take notice there is extant an exquisite book, Entitled* The Doctors
Dispensatory, or The whole art of Physic restored to practice, being very
necessary for such as study Chemical Physic.

Also newly made public the divine Services and Anthems usually sung in His
Majesty's Chapel, and in all Cathredals and Collegiate Choirs in England and
Ireland. Both Sold by Nath. Brook, at the Angel in Cornhill.


