A NEW TREATISE OF Natural Philosophy, Freed from the INTRICACIES OF THE
SCHOOLS.

Adorned with many Curious Experiments both Medicinal and Chemical.

AS ALSO With Several Observations useful for the Health of the Body.

LONDON, Printed by R. E. for J. Hindmarsh, at the Golden-Ball over against the
Royal. Exchange in Cornhill. 1687.

LICENSED, October 28. 1686. ROBERT MIDGLEY.

INDEX.
THe First Part of Physic, wherein is treated of the Causes and Principles of
Nature.
CHAP. I. Of the Efficient Cause, and of its Essence and Differences. CHAP. II.
Of the First Cause. CHAP. III. The Perfections of the First Cause. CHAP. IV. Of
Second Causes, and their Actions. CHAP. V. Of Accidental Causes. CHAP. VI. Of
Sympathy, Antipathy, and the Effects depending thereupon. CHAP. VII.
Experiments about Iron and the Loadstone. CHAP. VIII. An Explication of many
other Effects which are commonly attributed to Sympathy. CHAP. IX. Of Portative
Remedies commonly called Amulets, of Quicksilver, Gold, Silver, and Copper.
CHAP. X. Of Natural Phoenomenas, which are attributed to Antipathy. CHAP. XI.
Of Emeticks, Sudorificks, and Specificks. CHAP. XII. Of Poisons, and Toxicks.
CHAP. XIII. Of Sublimate, Arsenick, and other kinds of Poisons, and their
deadly Effects. CHAP. XIV. Of Antidotes. CHAP. XV. Of the true Causes of our
Diseases. CHAP. XVI. Of the Causes of our Health. CHAP. XVII. Of Formal,
Exemplary, and Material Causes. CHAP. XVIII. Of the First Matter. CHAP. XIX. Of
Atoms, and their Nature. CHAP. XX. The Properties, Magnitude, Figure, Weight,
and Motion of Atoms. CHAP. XXI. The Difficulties arising from the Doctrine of
Atoms. CHAP. XXII. Of a Disseminate, Congregate, and Separate Vacuum according
to Gassendus. CHAP. XXIII. Of a Congregate Vacuum, against Aristotle and
Cartesius.
The Second Part of Physic, wherein is treated of the Celestial World, and of
those things which are above Man.
CHAP. I. Of the immense Spaces which are without the Heavens. CHAP. II. Of the
Heavens, and their Nature. CHAP. III. Of Stars, and their Substance. CHAP. IV.
Of the Figures and Magnitude of Stars. CHAP. V. Of the Motion of the Stars.
CHAP. VI. The System of the World according to Ptolomy Examined. CHAP. VII. The
System of the World according to Copernicus Examined. CHAP. VIII. Of the Motion
of the Earth. CHAP. IX. Of the Sun, the true Center and Heart of the World.
CHAP. X. Of the Moon and its Changes. CHAP. XI. Of Planets, Comets, and the
Fixed Stars. CHAP. XII. Of Meteors in the Air. CHAP. XIII. Of Winds, Tempests,
and Whirl-winds. CHAP. XIV. Of Thunder, Lightning, and the Thunderbolt. CHAP.
XV. Of Aurum-Fulminans, which imitates Thunder. CHAP. XVI. Of Hail, Snow,
Frost, etc. CHAP. XVII. Of the Rainbow, Halones, and Parrhelis. CHAP. XVIII. Of
the Air, its Substance and Qualities.
The Third Part of Physic; of those things which are beneath Man, (viz.) of
the Earth, and Terrestrial Things which are called Inanimate.
CHAP. I. Of the Earth and Water in General. CHAP. II. Of Terrestrial Inanimate
Bodies in General. CHAP. III. Of the various Qualities observed in Compound
Bodies. CHAP. IV. Of Special Qualities which arise from the Composition of
Bodies. CHAP. V. Of the Quantity, Weight, and Figure of Compound Bodies. CHAP.
VI. The Difference betwixt Natural, Artificial, and Compound Bodies. CHAP. VII.
Of Metals and their Formation. CHAP. VIII. Of Gold, the King of Metals. CHAP.
IX. Of Silver, Copper, and other imperfect Metals. CHAP. X. Of Lead, Tin, and
Iron. CHAP. XI. Of Quicksilver, Arbor Diana, or the Silver Tree. CHAP. XII. Of
Minerals. CHAP. XIII. Of Salts. CHAP. XIV. Of Subterranean Fires, aend
Earthquakes. CHAP. XV. Of Waters and their Differences. CHAP. XVI. Of the Sea,
its Ebbing and Flowing, and of the Saltness of the Seawater. CHAP. XVII. Of
Springs and Rivers.
The Fourth Part of Physic: Of those things which are in Man, and of Man
himself, as he is a Compound Physical, and Animate Body.
CHAP. I. Of Life in General. CHAP. II. Of the difference of Lives. CHAP. III.
Of the Vegetative Life; common to Man and Plants. CHAP. IV. Of the Nature of
Seeds, and their Propagation. CHAP. V. Of Nutrition, which is common to Plants
and Brutes, as well as Man. CHAP. VI. How and with what Food an Embryo is
nourished in the Womb 'till the time of its Nativity. CHAP. VII. How a Man is
nourished after he is Born. CHAP. VIII. The Sensitive Life of Man and other
Animals. CHAP. IX. Of Seeing, its Organ and Object, (viz.) Light. CHAP. X. How
illustrated Objects are visible. CHAP. XI. Of Hearing, its Organ and Object.
CHAP. XII. Particular Questions about Hearing. CHAP. XIII. Smelling, its Organ
and Object. CHAP. XIV. Of Taste and its Object. CHAP. XV. Of Feeling. CHAP. XVI.
Of Speech, the Pulse, and Breathing of Man. CHAP. XVII. Of the Motion of the
Heart. CHAP. XVIII. Of the irregular motion of the Heart in Animals, and in
Fevers. CHAP. XIX. Of the Circulation of the Blood. CHAP. XX. Of the inward
Senses, and the inferior Appetite. CHAP. XXI. Of Sleep, want of Rest, and
Death. CHAP. XXII. Of the Death of Brutes, Plants and Metals. CHAP. XXIII. Of
the Rational Soul and its Powers.
NATURAL PHILOSOPHY; OR, Natural Science FREED FROM The Intricacies of the
Schools.
THE desire of Knowledge is natural to Man, Curiosity is inseparable from his
Spirit, neither is he ever at rest, until he has attained to the perfect
knowledge of things, that is, until he becomes a Wise Man.

Science is the Knowledge of things by their Causes; therefore there is no Man
Wise, who is ignorant of the Original Principles, and Causes of all things
occurring to him; and since it is impossible for any Man in this Life to attain
to a clear, distinct, and an undubitable knowledge of all things; therefore
there is no Man that is absolutely Wise: Those who have the Reputation of being
Wise and Excellent Philosophers, have obtained that pre-eminence, in regard
they are less ignorant than others.

Sciences differ according to the diversity of Men's Conditions and Professions.
The Noble Man is conversant and wise in the Art of War, the Physician in the
Precepts of Medicine, and the Advocate in matters of Law and Right, but all
these Sciences (nay Theology it self) cannot subsist without Philosophy,
especially, without that part of it, which we call Physic, or natural Science.

The First Part of Physic, wherein is Treated of the Causes and Principles of
Nature.
BY Nature is understood the Universe, composed of Heaven and Earth, and all
that is found between both; this is the Object of Physic, this every natural
Philosopher ought to know; and because this Knowledge cannot be obtained,
without knowing the principles and causes of things, hence it is evident, that
a Natural Philosopher ought to use his utmost endeavor to enquire into the
principles and causes of Nature, and of all things which happen in this World.

I shall not examine here, whether there be any difference betwixt a Cause and
a Principle; for every principle, after its manner, I conceive to be a cause of
that thing whereof it is the principle, and no Man doubts but every cause is a
principle, and that all niceties concerning this matter are altogether useless.

Philosophers do commonly reckon all Causes to be but Five in number; they give
the first place to that which they call the Efficient Cause, which is that
Agent which produces the things that are in Nature; and gives them their
essence and existences: In the next place, they rank the Material Cause, being
that subject, which receives the impression of the efficient and operating
cause. The third is called the Formal Cause, which gives a being to every
thing, as the most Noble and principal part of it. The fourth is called the
Exemplary Cause, according to whose rule the efficient produces its action,
when it operates by Knowledge. The fifth and last is the Final Cause, which is
the end, for whose sake the efficient produces its effect. In this first Part
we shall speak of all things which concern these several Causes, not omitting
any thing which shall be thought necessary to the knowledge of them.

CHAP. I. Of the Efficient Cause, and of its Essence and Differences.
THere is such a relation and connection between the Cause and the Effect, that
we cannot have a true notion of the cause, unless at the same time we have a
conception of the effect; so in general, we say, that a cause is nothing else
but that which gives being to another thing, which is the effect of it; which
way soever it happens, according to the Five Causes before mentioned.

All Philosophers do agree, That of all Causes the Efficient is the most Noble;
because, properly speaking, this alone has Effect, though it be produced after
several ways, as we shall show hereafter.

If the Efficient Cause acts by a power proper to it self, then it is called
the Principal cause; but if only by the force and impression of another, then
it is termed the Instrumental cause: So we distinguish betwixt the Painter, and
the Pencil; though both contribute to the production of the Picture.

Also the Universal Cause, which produces many effects (as the Sun, the Stars,
and the Elements) is distinguished from a Particular Cause, which is
determinate to one effect in particular: Of this kind there are many sublunary
causes acting in this inferior World.

There is also a difference between the Total Cause, which produces its effect
without the help of another, and That Cause which cannot act alone, but only
produces part of the effect.

There are also necessary and free causes, the first acts necessarily and
without choice; as Fire, the Sun, and all created causes, except Men and
Angels, for they act by a Free Will, wherein consists the essence of Liberty.

The Efficient Cause is likewise either Physical, or Moral; the Physical acts
really and immediately, as Fire consuming a House with its Flame; and he that
sets fire to it for that purpose, is the next moral cause; and he who advises
it, is a moral, but a remote cause, of the consequential burning. But if the
Fire happens by chance, and by the imprudence of one that carries a Candle in
his hand, and some sparks fall into the thatch, which takes fire, whereby the
House is burnt; here this Man is only an accidental cause of the Burning.

Lastly, it is rightly distinguished between the First Cause, which is Author
of Nature; and Nature created, under which are comprehended all second causes,
and such are all Creatures.

As to the Efficient Cause whereof we speak, it may be observed, that when it
acts by Knowledge, all the said causes, after their respective manner, do
concur to the production of one and the same effect: As, the Painter drawing
his Picture, is the principal cause, the Pencil the instrumental, the End
proposed by the Painter is the final cause, and the Idea directing, is the
exemplary cause; the form and disposition of the parts of the Piece that is
painted, may be taken for the form of it, the Colors, and the Cloth whereupon
they are laid, may be reckoned the material cause, because they are the
constituent matter of the Work. But if a Limner in his anger throws his Pencil
(as it is reported to have happened to him who had in vain endeavored to
represent to the life a high mettled Horse Foaming at his Mouth) or if a Limner
undesignedly and by chance touches the Picture, which thereby (as it befell the
former in his anger) is made better, the representation more agreeable, the
lines stronger, or more piercing, this would be only an effect of an accidental
cause.

There are some things to be observed in an efficient cause (when it acts)
which are inseparable from it, such as these, the nature of the Agent, the
existence of the cause, the power which makes it act, the intervening act, the
effect which is produced, the subject whereby, into which, and wherein it is
produced; as we shall see in what follows.

CHAP. II. Of the first Cause.
THE existence of the first Cause, or first Princple, is so evident, and so
necessary, that it is like Truth known by it self, and ought not to be supposed
liable to any difficulty; especially amongst Christians, who are illuminated by
the Light of Divine Revelation. And since a Man that submits himself to Faith,
has not thereby renounced the light of Reason, it will not be amiss to confirm
this truth with natural reasons, lest any doubt should remain in Spirits less
tractable.

Which the better to effect, I suppose a Truth so well known, that no Man can
deny, unless he has a mind to be thought ridiculous and infatuated.

This Truth so obvious, that it ought to pass for a Principle, whereupon, as a
sure foundation, the existence of the first cause ought to be built, is
grounded upon our own proper existence; there is nothing so evident, nothing so
certain, than That we are in the World; this truth is confirmed by the
testimony of all our senses; whatsoever we think, whatsoever we say, and
whatsoever we do, will not suffer us to imagine that our existence is an
illusion: Therefore it is certain, and more than evident, that we are in the
World; but that we are in it from our selves, or by our selves, or by casualty
or chance, or by the necessity of being, is absolutely impossible; so that it
is necessary that we are in the World, by the means and assistance of a certain
other Being, who as the Author, was also the free Principle of that essence
which we possess.

This Principle is necessarily either a first or second cause; if the first,
then you shall see that we are agreed, and that the true existence of the first
cause, which some would deny, is rightly built upon the truth of our Being,
which no Man can deny; if we make the cause of our being to be a second cause,
then it must be confessed, that this second cause is produced by a third, and
the third by a fourth, and so in going upwards, as they do in the Genealogies
of ancient and Noble Progenies, at last we find the head of the Family; that
is, the first cause, who by his great Achievements, purchased to himself the
Quality and Title of Nobility, and left those Titles to his Illustrious Family.
It is likewise true, that there is no Family so Illustrious or so Ancient, but
the Genealogy of it terminates in one private person, who gave it both its
Name, and Original, and which was the first Cause of its Nobility; no
certainly, unless we erect a ridiculous and an infinite Genealogy; or, like
the Egyptians who imagined themselves to be older than the Moon, will say that
its Origin is as unknown as the Head of Nilus. In the same manner, after we
have by way of ascent to our Fathers, and Ancestors, examined what kind of
Author we had of our being, whom we may call the first cause of all things
which are in us, we do necessarily find a certain Being which was before all
things, and which is the effect of no other causes, and which is the Cause of
all things which are in the World, and consequentially the first, who is that
God whom we adore.

This demonstration does abundantly convince any Person, who has in him the
least spark of the light of reason: It is ridiculous to say, that we our selves
were the cause of our Being, because from thence it would follow, that we did
exist before we had a being, that we gave our selves that which we were not in
posession of, and that the cause and the effect was one and the same thing,
which is impossible. It is no less an error to affirm, That we are in the
World by Necessity; for if we were so in the World, our existence would never
have had a beginning, and we would have been immutable and independent, and
infinite in every kind of perfection, which is repugnant to experience and
right Reason.

That persuasion of Epicurus and his Followers is no less ridiculous, That the
first Authors of our existence were produced by Chance, or by a fortuitous
occurrence of Attoms. This opinion of it self falls to the ground. Let it be
supposed, that the World was produced by this fortuitous occurrence of Atoms,
yet still the question will be, Whether these Atoms were Created, or Uncreated?
If created, they acknowledge a Cause of their existence, and this cause must
own another, and so ad infinitum; which cannot be maintained; for then the
World would be eternal, and thence to this present time, there would have been
an infinite number of rational Souls in the World: Aristotle who supposed the
eternity of the World, and the immortality of the Soul; yet did deny the
Transmigration of Souls, and would allow nothing in Nature to be actually
infinite; whereby he makes himself guilty of an absurd contradiction.

The same Aristotle stumbles upon another Contradiction, in Relation to the
First Cause; for if the World be Eternal and without a beginning, this Second
Cause is of no use; for the same Reason which proves the World to have a
beginning, proves likewise the existence of the first cause; on the other hand,
the same reason which proves the existence of the first cause, does at the same
time prove, that the World once had a beginning; and does demonstrate that it
was not Eternal.

In the same manner, Epicurus is guilty of an absurd contradiction, when he
says, that Atoms, (which, according to his opinion, he makes to be the causes
of all things) were produced and created by another: But if he says these Atoms
were Uncreated, and that they were Eternal Beings, necessary and independent;
then every Atom must be some Divinity, and that they are both the efficient and
material cause of all things, which is impossible, because the opposition and
relation, which is necessarily betwixt a principle acting, and the subject
whereupon it acts, do imply a necessary distinction.

CHAP. III. The Perfections of the first Cause.
THey who are thoroughly satisfied with the existence of the first cause, must
of necessity attribute to it all the Perfections which are or can be in the
World; that it is not only the most perfect and most noble of causes, but also
it ought to be supposed, that all the effects which it has produced, or is yet
capable of producing, are in its Being in all perfections, and that every one
of them is infinite, and (as it is the first cause) in the unity of its Being;
for it is necessary it should have the perfections of those beings which it
has, or can produce; for otherwise, it would or could communicate that which
it neither has, nor can have.

The first cause would not be absolutely perfect, if it were not eternal; for
so it would have had a beginning, and might have an end, and then it could not
be the first cause, in so much that it derives its existence from that which
was preexistent to it; and by consequence, this cause which we suppose to be
first, would be a second cause, limited in its being and perfections, as in its
duration, and it would seem to have a dependence upon another: Whereas, when we
suppose it to be the first, all others must depend upon it, and be subordinate
to it; whence it follows, that these qualities of the first cause are
inseparable from it, Independence, Eternity, Infinity, and Supreme Authority,
and that we cannot conceive any first cause, but at the same time we
acknowledge the existence of God.

This first Cause, or to say better, this first Being, which is God, must
necessarily have that perfect Unity which admits no multiplication either of
Nature or Perfections. Certainly, if God was not one in his being, but had
several Natures, the number of them ought to be infinite, and that none of
these Beings in particular would be infinite, because when the perfection of
one cannot be the perfection of another, there will not be one to be found but
will stand in need of the perfection of the other, that is, in whom there would
not be requisite that perfection which the other Beings do possess.

I add moreover, That all these supposed Beings would be opposite, independent,
and all Supreme, which is impossible; or that all would be subject to one or
other of them, which is ridiculous; whence it follows, that there is but one
only God, who is one in his existence, incapable of any multiplication, and who
is the Primary and Universal Cause of all things.

The great number, or rather the infinity of perfections, which we apprehend to
be in the First Cause, is not repugnant to the Supreme Unity, because that does
not divide the being; and they are but one and the same thing, though we give
them several Names, and do consider them under several Ideas, which we are
forced to correct, since without that Unity there would be necessarily a
composition of parts, which would be the cause of the whole Compound, and which
would precede its existence, which cannot be the ingredient of that composition
without something else intervening; they might also be divided and separated;
so, by the dissolution of the parts, the compound would cease, which is plainly
inconsistent with that Idea which we have of God, who is simple in his Nature,
Independent, and every way Incorruptible.

The first cause is not only One, and without its like in its Essence, but also
one, sole, and without a second, in that action by which the world was
produced: And for this reason this action is called Creation, supposing nothing
but mere nothing out of which all things were made by the only power of God,
without the help of any other, having either the quality of an Agent or a
Subject.

The world being produced by this first cause, remains subject to the will and
pleasure of it. And in the same manner as it was produced by the sole act of
this first cause, so it is preserved in the same State by the sole influence of
the same cause, who as it did not want any other second cause in the Creation
of the Universe, so neither does it stand in need of any assistance in the
conservation of it.

Being and Nothing are so opposite to one another, that the Philosophers always
had it for a Maxim, That out of nothing nothing could be made; which is to be
understood only in reference to second causes; and not in respect of the first,
whose power is infinite, and who can do what he pleases; this power in the
creation of the Universe was not applied according to the extensiveness of its
activity, because it pleased God to terminate the being, qualities, and number
of second causes, which are created.

The Creation was no necessary action, for the first Cause did not Create the
World but at such a Time, in such a Place, and in such a Manner as seemed good
to it self; so it made all those things with the highest Liberty, there being
no other cause either equal or superior to it self, who was able to compel,
persuade, animate, or incite it to the Creation of the world.

The World it self could not terminate a necessary action, because it could not
be Eternal, for every thing that is of necessity is eternal, neither had it
ever a beginning, nor can it have an end, because it is against the nature of a
created being, which is limited in its qualities and duration, no less than in
its natural Substance.

If the first cause was free in the Creation of the world, thence it follows,
that all things were made by direction of reason and understanding, and by
consequence, according to a certain Idea and Rule: But because the first cause
operates after an independent manner, it could not have the Type of its
production any where else but from it self, neither could it act by a rule
distinct from its own being; so God is not only the efficient, but the
exemplary cause of all things.

For the same reason it may be said, That the first Cause, which is God, is the
final cause of all things, for when he, as an intelligent and free cause,
produced the World, he did propose to himself an end answerable to his Dignity,
that is, himself and his own proper Glory; so that the first cause is
necessarily the ultimate end of all its effects.

CHAP. IV. Of second Causes, and their Actions.
ALL Creatures are called second Causes, because they depend upon the first,
neither do they operate but by the Command and Impression of the first; this
First or Universal Cause does act Uuniversally with particular Causes, but
after a manner agreeing with the Nature of every particular thing, and
according to the power which was given it when it was created; which does not
alter the Nature of the Causes, nor the necessity or Liberty of their actions.

This power of acting, which is granted to second Causes, is not a quality
different from their Nature and Being: So the Power which the Atoms have of
moving themselves, does not differ from the Atoms themselves; the power of
burning or heating does not differ from the Fire to which it is inherent,
unless it be in the manner of our conceiving things, and of speaking of them
according to our conceptions.

So it is of an Action which terminates from the cause to the effect, and which
is nothing else than a certain relation, or an actual subordination, which is
found betwixt the cause and the effect.

This action is never without motion, or to say better, action and motion is
one and the same thing, thence it is that a thing rests when it is without
action, and then it begins to move it self when it begins action; so according
to three ways of acting, there are found in the nature of things three kinds of
motion. The first is made without Sense or Reason, which we may see in Stones,
Metals, Plants, and the Heavens. The second kind of motion is made by sense
and knowledge, as are seen in all living Creatures: The third kind joins Reason
to Sense, as we observe in man acting by Fancy, who proposes an end to
himself, distinguishes between Good and Evil, and has the liberty of
prosecuting the several Objects presented to his view either with love or
hatred.

As an action is not indeed distinct from the cause acting, nor from the effect
which it does produce, so motion does not differ from the thing moved, or from
the thing which moves it, but both of them Is, accordingly as they change their
condition, or cease to rest, which from the Creation was never done, without a
certain local motion of the whole, or some part thereof; so, the notion of rest
is opposite to the notion of mutation and action, as well as motion.

CHAP. V. Of Accidental Causes.
THere are many causes which are called Accidental Causes, for, properly
speaking, they are not true causes; which sort of causes happens four manner of
ways; first, a Musician draws a Picture, not as he is a Musician, but as a
Painter; so that the Art of Painting is the true cause of this work: And as the
Art of Singing contributes nothing here, since it falls out by chance, that the
Art of Singing, and the Art of Painting meet together in this Man, and since
the Art of Singing is no way requisite for the making of the Picture; in this
respect, we may say, that the Musician is only an accidental cause of the
Picture which he has drawn.

Secondly, a remote or indirect cause is called an accidental cause; as when we
say, that the Sun is the cause of darkness, because darkness is occasioned by
the absence of the Sun; Mirth is the cause of Sadness, and Peace arises from
War: As a Man endeavoring to save his Friend, whose Life is in danger, and
thereby unwillingly exposing him to a certain death, is the indirect or
accidental cause of his death: As he, who persuades his Friend to cross the
Seas, whereby he is cast away.

Thirdly, an opposite cause (which produces an effect quite contrary to that
which it ought to produce) is an accidental cause, as it was with the subjects
of such Tyrants as persecuted the Church, and thereby procured Glory to
Martyrs; and as those, who were the death of our Lord Jesus Christ, obtained us
Life, destroyed the Synagogue, built the Church; they fulfilled the Prophecies,
and laid the foundation of the Gospel.

In the fourth and last place, That is an accidental cause which produces a
particular effect not foreseen, and according to the course of Nature
unavoidable; if it has respect to an intelligent cause, and the effect be
agreeable to wish, the Heathens did point at this by the name of Fortune, and
according to their way of speaking, we say such a thing is the effect of
Fortune; as when a Man is digging up the Foundation of a house, and by chance
finds a Treasure; but if the effect be otherwise than prosperous, then it is
misfortune, or the chance of Fortune: As when a Tile falls from the top of a
House upon a Man's Head that is passing by, and Kills him; here the Tile is the
Physical and accidental cause of this Man's death, which was inevitable
according to the course of second causes, having either their free or necessary
motions: These accidental causes gave the Heathens occasion to frame to
themselves a Blind Goddess, which they called Fortune, to whom they did
attribute an unconstant, an uncertain, and a various disposition of good and
evil; to this Man's good, to that Man's prejudice: Of all errors this is not
the least, neither was it entertained by any, but the ignorant and the meaner
sort of People

The wiser sort in that age did aim at a cause of all the effects which happen
in the World, that was less feigned, and more solid; this they would have to be
Fate, and that what without any reason was ordained by this universal and chief
cause was inevitable; so when any great misfortune happened, as the loss of a
Battle, the defeat of an Army, the change of State, the subversion of a Common
Wealth, or the sudden death of some Illustrious Person; all this was ascribed
to Fate; and they did commonly say, Sic erat in Fatis, this was the inevitable
will of Fate; so the Fates would have it: And when any person undertook any
great Enterprise, as it was said of Aeneas, being in search of the Golden
Fleece, (if the Fates call thee) that is, if the Fates favor thee; thou shall
attain thy end.

The great Wits of our Age are almost of the same Opinion, concerning all the
various successes of Prosperity and Adversity, and all things which come to
pass in this Life; as if humane Prudence had been of no use, and Divine
Providence without any care had been idle.

But that we may speak like a Christian Philosopher, supposing the existence of
the First Cause, and having demonstrated that it has all the perfections of
the Chief Cause, since Wisdom and Power are the two inseparable perfections of
the Supreme Being, and indeed so necessary for the conservation and government
of humane affairs; we ought to conclude, that nothing happens in this World,
which is not decreed, foreseen, directed, and perfected, by the wisdom; and
strong hand of some Supreme Cause, which so exactly directs all things, that
they come to pass, according to the end that was proposed in the production of
them, and indeed all those things, by means unknown to humane Wisdom; yet
notwithstanding, in respect of God, who is the first cause, they are certain
and infallible, who established the infallibility of effects, in such manner,
that causes in their motion, should be neither forced, nor too violent: There
is nothing but what God soresees, nothing but what is absolutely inevitable,
and free causes act always freely, in actions which ought to be free.

CHAP. VI. Of Sympathy, and Antipathy, and the effects depending upon them.
THe wonderful effects which we see in Nature, whose true and natural causes
are not easily found out, obliges Philosophers to have recourse to Occult
Causes, and to attribute all these effects to natural Sympathy and Antipathy,
which happens amongst the several Bodies whereof the World is compounded; but
if you press these Philosophers to tell you, and to explain wherein this
Sympathy and Antipathy does consist, they will give you no other reason, but
only tell you, they are done by certain occult and unknown causes, to which
they ascribe all those effects, whose true causes they do not at all know. But
they would do much better, plainly to confess their ignorance and say they know
nothing of the matter.

That we may the better understand what may be said upon a subject so nice and
delicate, and give a reason* of those wonderful effects which are attributed to
Simpathy and Antipathy, without the help of occult causes; in the first place,
I suppose that the difficulty which occurs in explaining an Effect of this
nature, does arise from this; That the Mind is not able to know the truth of
things, but by the Senses, which are the gates through which the Objects enter,
and form their Ideas in our understanding; but because there are abundance of
things which escape our senses, it is no wonder, that it is so hard to give a
reason of things which are so remote from the reach of our senses; as for
example, Iron moves it self, and that by way of local motion, and joins it self
to the Lodestone; we do not see that which draws the Iron to it, though we see
it attracted, but we know not by what ways or means it is done; but if we
explicate this, and such like Effects, by saying they are wrought by Sympathy,
obscure and occult causes, we deceive our selves; for that is only a shelter,
and the true way of hiding our ignorance, which we are loath to discover, for
there is no man in nature so blockish, but after this manner can resolve all
the Phoenomena in the Universe. If it be asked why the Needle turns always to
the North Pole? is it enough to say that there is a Sympathy betwixt this
Needle which is touched with the Lodestone and the Pole, and that the cause of
this Sympathy is obscure, unsearchable, and past finding out: But if this be
the way of Philosophising, I refer it to those who are competent Judges of the
matter.

Therefore that we may give a more ingenuous and solid Reason, in the second
place, I suppose that there are no Bodies but that continually emit certain
subtle particles and imperceptible corpuscles which are dispersed through the
air, and are at sometimes carried at a great distance, unless they justle with
other Bodies in their way. By the help of this principle, we find the reason
why a Dog follows the footsteps of a Hare, or from a heap of a thousand
stones, he readily knows that stone which his Master threw, and picks it out,
and by his command brings it to him. From this dispersion of corpuscles, we
find the reason how the contagion of the Plague, either from the person
infected, or from the wind blowing from that Region, is carried a great way of,
as also the reason that the smell of Rosemary is perceivable at a hundred miles
distance, as Sir Kenelme Digby observes; and likewise the wonderful cure of
persons wounds, which are far distant, by the means of the Sympathetick Powder;
so likewise of the fermentation of Canary Wine, brought into England, which
ferment here at the time of their Vintage, when the Vines in Spain flourish and
are in the budd, and such like.

I suppose farther, that all these small corpuscles do differ as to their
figure and magnitude, and that they are not equally received by this or that
body; so one man is infected with the Plague, in the same place where are many
others untouched. For the same reason, the beams of the Sun do melt Wax, and
not Lead, unless they are collected and united by the help of a Burning-glass,
or the like; and the heat of Fire melts Metals after a very different manner.

Lastly, I suppose that it is somewhat difficult to give a solid and sufficient
reason of all the Experiments which daily occur in the nature of things. Truly
we are surprised with no small admiration, when we see Iron move at the
presence of the Lodestone, and to approach it, as if it were endued with a
kind of sense and knowledge; the Palm Tree of the male kind is barren, unless
the female be planted near it, but if they be separated by a river, they both
lean to one another, as if they would embrace each other. If you strike the
string of a Lute in one corner of a Room, it shall cause the string of another
Lute, tuned to the same height, and placed in an opposite corner, to give a
sound; but not another. The Cock always sings and claps his wings in the same
moment that the Sun ascends above the Horizon; all Effects which we see from
Sympathy afford us matter of admiration, and compel us to acknowledge That
Sympathy to be the Daughter of ignorance.

The same thing may be said of Effects which are attributed to Antipathy, no
less amazing, and no less difficult to be explained; who can without much
difficulty explain the natural aversion that is between the Colewort, and Vine,
so that if it be planted near a Vine, the Vine will give back, and so will the
Golewort on the other side? who can give a Reason that Sheep should shun a Wolf
though unseen? or that a Drum made of sheepsskin, should not sound where there
is in place another Drum made of a Wolfsskin? or that when we are seen by a
Wolf, before we see him, we are hoarse. who can give a reason that the Basilisk
should kill by sight? and other Effects of this kind, which are frequently
observed. But because that Phoenomena of the Lodestone before mentioned, seems
to me to be a matter most worthy of consideration, I shall treat of this
subject in a particular Chapter by it self.

CHAP. VII. Experiments concerning Iron, and the Lodestone.
THe Lodestone is a stone sound in Iron Mines, not much different from the
Nature of Iron, wherefore the particles which proceed from the Lodestone, have
a kind of agreeableness with the pores of Iron, so these small corpuscles going
out of the Lodestone, and meeting with the Iron in the way, do rush into the
pores of it by troops; but because all cannot enter at once, a great many
remain without, and these are as strongly beaten back by the particles of the
Iron which they meet with, as if they were of the number of those corpuscles,
which being at liberty, do return of their own accord, which at length do send
these by a reflective motion to the Load stone whence they first came: hence it
is that Iron is drawn toward the Lodestone, principally by the agitation of
those minute magnetic corpuscles moved in the concavities of the Iron, and
being shaken together by the sundry motion of those corpuscles which are
twisted one within another, those corpuscles which do return, by reflection are
complicated and annexed to those which are in the pores of the Iron, or else
have passed them through, and cannot be returned or moved toward the
Lodestone, unless they draw along with them those corpuscles to which they are
annexed, and which cannot follow, unless by their motion the Iron be carried
with them; so the Iron follows, and is moved toward the Lodestone, except the
Iron be bigger than the Lodestone, for then the corpuscles which proceed from
the Lodestone are not so many, nor by consequence so powerful, as to draw the
Iron, or the impression which they make upon the Iron is not strong enough to
cause a renitency to pass that side by which they ought to be beaten back.

This is the reason that the Lodestone draws no other Body but Iron, because
other Bodies do not return the Atoms, neither are their pores well fitted for
those Magnetic corpuscles.

By the same reason it does appear that the Lodestone ought not to approach to
the Iron, but the Iron to the Lodestone: It may be said, that hard and solid
Bodies, such as Iron is, cannot emit such a great number of corpuscles as other
Bodies, which like the Lodestone, are less solid, and more porous. Also there
may be a reason given why the Lodestone being rubbed with Garlic, or Oil,
does not so easily draw Iron to it, especially if you also rub them with it;
because these strange corpuscles by their Oyliness do hinder the emission of
the corpuscles out of the Lodestone, and also their entrance into the Pores of
the Iron, and do break their elastick force.

We may observe many other Effects of the Lodestone. As for example, That Iron
put upon a Table, is moved by the virtue of this Stone which is placed under
the Table, for it is certain that the spirit, or corpuscles of the Lodestone,
which moves the Iron, penetrates through the vacuity or pores of the Table, as
if by small and invisible threads it had been tied to the Lodestone; it is the
same thing if the Table be of Marble, or Glass, provided it be not greasy, nor
too thick; which proves the porosity of Bodies.

We see another Effect of this Stone in a Needle, which being touched by it,
always turns toward the Pole, we suppose for this reason, because there are
whole Mountains of Load-stones found under the Poles, dispersing their spirits
through the Universal World. Spirits which are entangled with those, which do
adhere to the Magnetic Needle, whose force is lessened, as the Spirits of it
are dissipated; especially if the Compass be set in a place where there are
pieces of Iron, to which the spirits stick, and leave the Needle, which had
taken no greater quantity of them than what was requisite according to its
Capacity.

That which is most wonderful in this Stone is, that we see it draws Iron on
one side, and rejects it on the other, so that it appears in every Lodestone
that there are two Poles of the World; the North Pole attracts Iron, the South
Pole repels it; because the Spirit of the North Pole enters in at the Pores of
the Iron, but the Southern cannot, for it strikes against the Iron, and drives
back too much its Elastick Particles. This Explication presupposes the Being of
Spirits, and Atoms, and their Figures and Motions; and as also, small occult
vacuities which are dispersed through all Bodies, as we shall show hereafter.

CHAP. VIII. An Explication of many other Effects, which we endeavor to
attribute to Sympathy.
I Do not design in this place to show all the Effects which do proceed from
Sympathy, and to give the reason of every one of them in particular; I conceive
such a Labor, besides that it is very difficult, is moreover useless, for an
Explication of one, will serve to explain the rest; therefore instead of all,
it will be sufficient to Explain some few of them.

That which first presents it self to our consideration, is the Sympathetick
Powder, the Sympathetick Wood, and the Sympathetick Ointment, an Amulet, and
the Medalls, which are of the same Nature, which they call Talisman. Sir Kenelm
Digby Reports, that the Sympathetick Powder will cure a wound, when the person
wounded is distant a hundred, nay two hundred Miles, so that the Cloth be
dressed, to which the Matter or Blood sticks which proceeded from the wound;
but principally there must be care taken, that the wound be kept clean, and
that the Cloth be kept in a temperate place, for if it be thrown into a place
which is too warm, it will cause an inflammation in the wound; no solid reason
can be given of this Phenomenon, so wonderful in it self, but that it is by a
continual intercourse of the Spirits proceeding from the Bodies, which by
continual motion, are coming and going, and keeping a tie or bond betwixt the
Bodies, and though our Senses are too gross to perceive them, it does not
therefore follow, that there are not such things; as it appears by the example
of the Spider descending, or ascending, and drawing after him an invisible
Thread which proceeds from his Body; so that he being in one end of the
Chamber, remains firm and fixed to the other end, by the same thread, by which
he bears himself up, and is moved from one part to the other: I confess it is
hard to conceive that there should be a Thread of Communication betwixt the
Wound, and the Blood which issued from it; But that is neither impossible, nor
incomprehensible, though the Phenomenon is not plainly infallible; because this
Thread being broke, or interrupted, the wound cannot be cured, unless we take
again fresh Blood, and excite it by the means of this Powder, whose Spirits do
drive those which are in the Blood, and mixing themselves by the strength of
the Powder, do carry and communicate its virtue to the wound, and that at a
considerable distance, but not indifferently, not at the distance of a hundred
Miles, as it is conmonly believed; it is certain if that were done by Sympathy,
the Effect would be the same, at any distance, neither would it ever deceive us.

I cannot produce any more sensible or just reason to explain the Virtues and
Effects of the Sympathetick Powder, which depend much upon the due preparation
of it; they do not extend themselves so far, nor are they so infallible, as
some would have, for the reasons by us alleged.

The same thing may be said of the Sympathetick Wood, which stops Blood, if a
little of the Blood which runs out of the would be put upon this Wood, where so
soon as that Blood is dried the Flux of the other Blood is stanched, and this
they say is done by Sympathy; but the true reason proceeds from the invisible
adherence whereby both these Bloods are so subtly connected together by the
astringent Virtue of this Wood, and by this Thread of Friendship, composed out
of Atoms variously twisted together, communicates it to the Blood which flows
in great quantity, whereupon this Flux, if it be not too vehement, is stopped.

If this Effect did arise from Sympathy it would never deceive us, because
nothing can oppose Sympathy; but it is not infallible, as experience shows us.

Of all the Effects which hold us in suspense, that which we call the
Divining-Rod is not the least, for it is very strange to see a Rod which is
held fast in the Hand visibly to incline, and bend it self toward that place
where there is any Water or Metal, and more or less as the Water or Metal is
nearer to the Superficies of the Earth, or is more remote from it, and more
deep in the ground; and that which is most stupendous, is that this Rod which
does it, shows no motion, but in the hands of those who have obtained a
particular virtue to this purpose, which distinguishes them from others, though
it cannot be said who gave them this power, nor why this Rod has this motion
in the hands of one Man, and not in another.

Concerning this Subject, the cause of this motion is to be considered, which
cannot be attributed to Sympathy, for Sympathy is a necessary Cause, and then
this motion would be always, and in the hands of every body, which yet we see
is not done. Therefore the most natural Cause is to be enquired into, which I
deduce from these Mineral or Aquatick Spirits, issuing from those places
wherein the Metals or Waters are; which meeting with the Rod, whose Pores are
fitted for them to lay hold on, attracts it by a Perpendicular motion, which is
natural to them, and bends it as it were with a Silken Thread, or a Golden
Chain.

The difficulty is about the hand which holds the Rod, for every hand is not
qualified for this purpose; nor is every Tree fit for it, unless it be Hazel,
or some other of the same quality with it: As to the Hand, it is certain that
the Hands as well as the Men do differ, and that the Spirits proceeding from
them are different, and so it ought not to be looked upon as such a wonder,
that there should be Spirits which retain the Rod, and hinders this motion, and
that they should proceed from the hand of one, and not from the hand of
another; and that every sort of Wood is not fitted to receive the hold of all
Atoms. Of portative remedies, which are called Amulets, I say nothing, but what
experience taught me concerning them; and of the manner how Quicksilver sticks
to Gold, and Silver to Copper, which forces me to write a particular Chapter
concerning them.

CHAP. IX. Experiments concerning Portative Remedies, of Quicksilver, Gold,
Silver, and Copper.
THere are certain Remedies by Physicians called Amulets, which give ease to
Humane Bodies in many Distempers, as long as the Person carries them about him,
as experience teaches us of a Spider shut up in a Nut-shell, and hung about the
Neck, is good to cure all Diseases of the Lungs; the true Nephritick Stone
being carried about one, cures the Stone; a little Bone of the Thigh heals the
Sciatica; Quicksilver, or a Toad hung about the Neck, is a preservative
against the Plague; the Tooth of a Dead Man carried about you shall cure you of
the Toothache; Oak-Moss gathered at a certain time, and an Elkes hoof cure the
Epilepsie: There are such as preserve Children from having the Smallpox, and
others, which being tied to the wrist cure the Tertian, and Semitertian. So
there are many others, whose Effects are ascribed to occult causes, and to the
Sympathy and Antipathy of things.

I do not question the truth of these experiments, because I am certain as to
the greatest part of them, having tried them. Without doubt there are many
others which I do not know of, and which nevertheless others might have seen,
but this I know, that the aforementioned Effect is not infallible, and when it
happens, it is done by the emission of certain Spirits or Atoms proceeding from
those Remedies, and penetrating the Pores of Man's Body, and giving strength to
the Animal Spirits to resist internal Poisons, or resisting the external
Poisons, and fixing and hindering them from hurting those who carry the Amulets;
I shall say nothing of Medals; which are called Talisman, importing good Luck
to those by whom they are carried about them, nor of white Magnets, which
procure the kindness of all People, and the favor of a Mistress: I give little
credit to such things, neither can I easily believe all things which are said
of them; and if Stars ought to have place here, rather than Demons, all is done
by the means of Atoms.

Now I come to that which I am better acquainted with, and of which I can speak
with more certainty, I mean of Experiments concerning Quicksilver and Gold; it
is certain that if any Man has Quicksilver in his Body, or any where about
him, that the Gold-Ring which he has upon his Finger, or which he holds in his
Mouth will turn white, because the Quicksilver sticks to the Gold; and if this
Gold-Ring be thrown into the Fire, the Quicksilver flies and evaporates; and
if the same Ring be again put upon the Finger, or held in the Mouth, it will
still grow white every time, as long as any Quicksilver remains in the Body.

This Phoenomenon is commonly ascribed to a Sympathy which is betwixt
Quicksilver and Gold; as if the Quicksilver should hastily go to the Gold and
embrace it, or that the Gold did draw the Quicksilver to it; but Gold enclosed
in smooth Glass does not turn white, no more does it then when Quicksilver is
enclosed hermetically in a Glass, there is no Sympathy to call it forth thence,
no more than out of a Box or Bladder wherein it is kept: we ought not therefore
to say that it was the Sympathy of these two Metals which was the only cause
by which the one adheres to the other, for though we should grant that there is
a Sympathy, that is, an agreeableness, proportion, and likeness between these
two substances, not in their imaginary qualities, but in the figure of their
Atoms; nevertheless it must be confessed that the attraction of Quicksilver to
Gold, is by an emission of their Spirits and Corpuscles, near after the same
manner as we observed of the Lodestone and Iron.

There is no less a connection betwixt Silver which the Chemists call the Moon,
and Copper, which they call Venus, than there is betwixt Mercury, that is in
their Dialect, Quicksilver, and the Sun, that is Gold. If one Ounce of Silver
be disolved in three Ounces of Aquafortis, made of Nitre and Vitriol, the
Silver is reduced to Water, neither is it ever after seen, and if we would
recover the Silver after such a dissolution, you must take leaves of Copper,
and put them into an Earthen Vessel, and pour upon them one pint of common
Water, then to this Water put the liquor in which the Silver was dissolved, and
it will turn it as white as Milk, and in the space of two or three hours, the
Silver will leave the Aquafortis, and join it self to the Copper in the form
of Curd or white Moss; when the water is clear, throw it all out the silver
sticking to the Copper is dried and reduced to a mealy Powder, and this is
called Calx Lunae, or Silver Calcined.

As to this, we must take notice, that if in stead of Copper, you put in leaves
or pieces of Gold, Silver, Lead or Tin, the Experiment will not answer
expectation; neither will Silver stick to them as well as to Gold, whence we
must necessarily conclude, that there is a certain Sympathy or peculiar
connection between Silver and Copper, as there is betwixt Gold and Quicksilver,
so that we grant, that if the transmutation of Metals be not impossible, no
Metal can be sooner changed into another, than Copper into Silver, and Mercury
into Gold: The difficulty is in knowing the true cause of a Connection or
Affinity which is so remarkable.

It is commonly said to be done by that sympathy or agreeableness which is
between these two Metals. But in saying that, we say nothing, for we must
enquire farther into the cause and foundation of this Sympathy, so that we are
forced to search for another Cause of this Effect, and to say that Silver is
not joined to Copper, but by the means of a certain local motion of the
Particles of the Silver, which are dispersed in this great quantity of water,
and are congregated to join and unite themselves to the Copper; there is no
other cause of this local motion, besides the Spirits and scent of the Copper
which are dispersed through the water, and there meeting with particles of the
Silver which are wandering, separated, and dispersed, are fixed to them by
reason of the conformity of their Pores; when the Corpuscles of the Silver are
loosed, and set at liberty in the water, they leave it and descend, being
forced downwards by the concurring Particles of the Water, and leaving no
vacuity, wherein the Particles of the Silver may be contained, they find the
Atoms of the Copper, emitting themselves like the Odors of Aromatique Bodies,
and mutually entangle one another like little hooks, they go directly toward
the Copper, and falls upon it as it lies in the bottom of the Vessel; this
Explication does imply the Doctrine of Atoms and their figures, weight, and
motions, as it shall appear in following Chapters, after we have discoursed of
Antipathy.

CHAP. X. Of Natural Phenomenon which are attributed to Antipathy.
THere are observed to be many Effects, for which no Reason can be given
without the help of this feigned Antipathy. I Will instance to you some few,
which I shall endeavor to explain.

In the first place occurs the sight of the Basilisk, who kills all whom he
sees, which they say is by Antipathy, which is betwixt it and other Animals.
But it may be said rather that it is done by the emission of certain venomous
Spirits, which penetrate the Eyes of those which were seen by the Basilisk. The
nature of this poison cannot be explained, unless we know before what is said
of Poisons elsewhere. I thought that the deadly Effects proceeding, which we
attribute to Antipathy, did deserve a particular tract by it self, because
Poison kills only by a Contrariety betwixt us and it, so there is nothing more
to be said of these matters, only that we are to discover and declare the
Principle of this Contrariety: Of the Basilisk of whom we speak, I shall only
say that the Spirits issuing out of his enraged Eyes, do kill those Animals
which they meet with, because the Spirits do penetrate them by their subtilty,
and sharp figure, like Needles, which pierces the Heart, as the Poison of
Vipers, and such like, not so accute, nor so deadly, nor so ready in their
effects, as that of the Basilisk. In reference to this matter there are many
things which occur, that are worth consideration. In the first place, it is
certain that the Basilisk is not engendered but in moist, deep, and dark places,
as in the bottom of Wells, where there is nothing but muddy, thick, stinking
Water, as Histories do relate to us, that some have died only by looking into
those Wells, or in going down into them, in order to cleanse them. In the
second place, we do observe, that if you take a Glass and hold it against the
Basilisk's Eyes, those Spirits which issue from his Eyes, reflecting upon the
Glass, are sent back from whence they came, and do kill the Basilisk: It cannot
be said that the Basilisk does hate himself; but it must be said that the
Venomous Spirits, reflecting from the Glass, do conceive a more violent motion,
and do forcibly enter the Eyes of the Basilisk, and do drive back the other
Spirits which are issuing out of, or are extant in, his Eyes, so that they
penetrate his Brain and Heart, and thence occasion his death. In the same
manner, as Vapors do often arise with so great violence from the Hypocondria,
the Mesentery, and the Stomach, into the Head, that they cause an Apoplexy,
Epilepsie, Diziness, or Lethargy, and sometimes they are carried with such
subtilty and violence into the Heart, and presently penetrate it; whereby Men
dye suddenly.

It is also observed, that several Men, and other Animals were killed by a
Basilisk, from the corner of a deep and dark Dungeon where he was ingendered,
and nourished up to the bigness of a Toad, it was contrived that one should
enter into the Dungeon to kill him; care being taken, that he who was to enter
for that purpose, should be covered with a Glass before his Eyes, by whose
interposition the Basilisk might be seen, though he could not see the Person
approaching toward him. By this means, he who entered saw the Basilisk, and
killed him, without receiving any hurt to himself; which without doubt did
proceed from this, that the poisonous Spirits issuing from the Eyes of the
Basilisk, could not pass freely thorough the Glass, but were fixed in the
substance of it, so that they could not hurt the Person who was so covered.

Another Effect which is ascribed to Antipathy, and must be spoken of in this
place; is that which we meet with amongst some Vegetables, as betwixt the
Colewort and the Vine, betwixt whom as we observed before, there is not the
least agreeableness, and that if they be planted near one another, they do
insensibly give back, and lean sidewards, as if they really hated one another,
This effect cannot be ascribed to any thing but to the emission of the
Corpuscles and material Spirits of both of them, which do rush upon one
another, and mutually repel by the irregularity of their figures. This truth
is apparent in the juice of Coleworts, which if taken by a Man when he is
Drunk, he presently comes to himself, and is sober; because the Corpuscles of
the juice of Coleworts do blunt the Corpuscles of the juice of Wine; in the
same manner, we find by experience that Spirit of Opium, or Laudanum, Cures the
Chollick, Head-achs, and all other kind of pains; nay, it eases the Toothache,
and blunts the sharpness of Choler; it Cures the Phrenzy, and procures Sleep;
so there is need of the greatest care in using the Narcotick Medicines, because
it often falls out that the Vital Spirits are so stupefied by them, that they
are deprived of their Motion, which causes a deadly Sleep.

But that we may return to our so much believed Antipathy, which is betwixt the
Colewort and the Vine, I observe, that it has not the above mentioned Effect;
and that neither the Vine nor the Colewort do lean sidewards, if there be Cloth
or Paper set betwixt them; and though the same Antipathy remains, it does so
manifest it self, because the Corpuscles flowing from both sides are stopped in
their way, neither do they pass through the Cloth or Paper; So the truth of
that assigned by us, and the weakness of that Reason which is grounded upon
Antipathy, clearly appears without any further Scrutiny.

There is a Third Effect which is ascribed to Antipathy, and it is observed in
the use of Medicines, as well Internal as External; some whereof are
Catharticks, some Sudorificks, and others Specificks: The External of which we
speak, are those which we carry about us, which by their Antipathy, drive away
the Malign air, and preserves from the Plague, and other Contagions; as
prepared Quicksilver, and a Toad dried and shut up in a Box; this Phenomenon
is not in the least to be ascribed to Antipathy, but to the pestiferous Spirits
or corpuscles, which approaching toward us, do find Subjects apt for their
reception, and are fixed in them, but they do not approach us, at least in such
a quantity as is able to hurt us; which most evidently appears, in that
Prepared Quicksilver, or the Toad, being once replenished with these
Contagious Atoms, become useless, and they ought to be changed and renewed; and
I know by Experience, that Quicksilver prepared white, and shining like an
Adamant, or Polished Silver, and being carried about a Person who is frequent
with Sick People, in time becomes black, so that afterward it is useless to
him that carries it about him, because there are no small Vacuities left to
retain the airy Poisons, unless he renews it by another Preparation, whereby it
may be made as White, Transparent, and as Useful as it was before.

Moreover Quicksilver turns black, more or less, sooner or slower, according
to the proportion of the lesser or greater malignity which is in the air where
he lives, because these Antidotes can never hurt; nay, if rightly prepared,
they do not only withstand the contagious Air, when they hinder its nearer
approach toward us; but as it is evidenced by experience, they do suppress
inward Vapors ascending up into the head, which occasion many of our common
Distempers: It were to be wished that Sacred Persons, and Princes, whose Lives
are so dear unto us, (to the end they might preserve their Health, and not be
any way subject to any danger of this kind,) would carry these Antidotes about
them, and that those who have free access to those Sacred Persons would advise
them to it; and likewise demonstrate the use and virtue of them.

I proceed to Purgative Remedies, This carries off Choler, That Phlegm, Others
Melancholy, and Others do Purge the Blood and all the humors. It is hard very
often to give a reason why Rubarb and the Leaves of Sena do Purge Melancholy;
Jallap and Diagridium purge out Phlegm and waterish humors.

Whether this be done by Sympathy, which attracts the Humors from the several
parts, or by Antipathy which expels and exterminates; but it may be said that
it is done neither way, and that a matter of so small a moment, did not deserve
that strife betwixt the Followers of Galen, and Paracelsus, for their Axioms
concerning contraries against contraries, and like to like, contribute nothing
to the explanation of these Effects; for I take it to be a certain and constant
truth, that every purgative Medicine does comprehend in it certain Spirits or
Corpuscles which are venomous, that is acute, sharpened, pungent and biting, so
that Nature being stirred up by them, and thereby the internal Parts and
Membranes being touched and agitated, the Animal Spirits get together by
troops, in order to assist the part affected, and they draw along with them the
foreign Humors, which are less fixed; and then Nature by the help of these
Spirits does discharge it self, and expel them by their proper ways: But to say
that Rubarb makes choice of exterminating Choler, or the Leaves of Sena of
carrying off Melancholy, is ridiculous. It is true, that after a Purgation
with Rubarb, the waters proceeding from the Body are yellow, and after the use
of Sena, or Cassia, they are black; yet it does not follow from thence, that
This purges Choler, and That Melancholy; they are only the superfluous
humors which are discharged, neither does the Body afford any thing, besides
that which it has; whether Sena or Rubarb be taken, the color of what is
Purged, proceeds from a tincture of these Medicines.

CHAP. XI. Of Emeticks, Sudorificks, and Specificks.
OF all Medicinal Remedies those seem most admirable to me, which are called
Emeticks or Vomitives, which have in them a great deal of Poison, and likewise
abound with Arsenick Spirits; Amongst Minerals, Antimony and Arsenick are of
this kind; so are the Herb Asarum, and other Herbs, amongst Vegetables. It is
evident that all these Simples and Minerals, consisting for the most part of
many sharp and corrosive Corpuscles, do not purge the Body, but by pricking and
irritating of the Membranes, and that some times with such vehemence, that the
Belly and other contiguous parts being Ulcerated thereby, there happens a
breach of the internal continuity, etc. which occasions the death of the Party
who is thus affected. It is apparent, that it ought to be acknowledged for a
certain truth, that these sort of Medicines ought to be used but very seldom,
but if necessity requires the use of them, none but the gentlest are to be
applied; it being taken for a constant truth, that those Persons who use these
Remedies too-often, do never enjoy a perfect Health, and that their Lives are
always short and crazy.

Let us consider an Emetick, and especially Antimony, which being well
prepared, performs wonders: I mean, by a good preparation of it, that it be
freed from a great quantity of its pernicious and poisnous Corpuscles. As to
this, it ought to be prepared by Judicious Artists, for if it be so ordered,
that the Antimony Purges neither upwards nor downwards, and that it retains
only a Sudorisick Virtue; being thus qualified, it is very proper, and very
useful, to purify the Blood, to increase the Animal Spirits, the natural heat,
and radical moisture, for reasons which I shall show hereafter. But if these
Venomous, Arsenick, and corrosive Corpuscles be not separated from the
Antimony, it may prove to have very ill effects, in that it imposes violence
upon Nature: It is not to be administered but by a prudent and most expert hand;
though the substance of it be not taken, but only the Wine wherein it is
infused.

But your crude and Diaphoretick Antimony which the late. Mr. De L'orme called
his Milk of Pearls, is very comfortable to Nature, and may be safely used with
very good success; but to find the Cause of that Effect, the Learned are very
much puzzled. I shall endeavor, according to my Principles, to show the Reason
of this Effect: It is made in this manner, take Crude Antimony, and thereof
make a Starry Regulus, which is all as one if it be not Starry; of this melted
Regulus you are to make a Cup, put Wine into it in the Evening, pour out the
Wine the next Morning, and you will find that it has lost nothing either of
its taste or color; yet notwithstanding, it is very Purgative. That which is to
be admired at, is, that this may be done continually every day, without any
remarkable diminution of the Cup, or loss of its Virtues.

If the Wine loses or receives nothing, as it seems it does not, how then can
it be Purgative, or Emetick, and if the Cup communicates to it either its
substance or Virtue, how then is it possible, that either one or the other is
not in the least diminished? According to our Principles I return this answer;
That the Wine every time it is put into the Cup, does take from thence certain
Corpuscles, or invisible Spirits, wherewith it is impregnated, and That little
is sufficient to give the Wine a Purgative Virtue, and to stir the Membranes of
the Ventricle, and the inward Parts, in order to Evacuate the peccant humors;
which is evident from this, that the Wine according to the proportion of time
it has stood in the Cup, is either more or less Purgative, though the Cup
suffers no sensible diminution in its Substance, yet not withstanding, it is
certain that it will suffer some small diminution in the course of some Years;
which it were worth while to observe.

I have spoken above of a Regulus Starry, and not Starry, that I may let the
Reader see somewhat that is strange in the Confection of Regulus, when it is
well Prepared with Mars, that is, with Iron; there is to be seen a great Star
upon the upper side of it, which has Five Rays, like the Rowel of a Spur: I
confess that in this strange Phoenomenon there is something that is wonderful,
and which is beyond the reach of Humane understanding, especially if we
observe, that this Star is more bright, and its Rays better formed, if the
Regulus be Prepared either Tuesday or Friday, especially if the Sky be clear
and serene; and if it be made between Seven or Eight of the Clock in the
Morning, or Two or three of the Clock in the Afternoon: and that I may build
one Wonderful thing upon another, it is certain, that if in the Preparation of
Regulus, Tin be added with Iron, there will be seen two Stars upon the Regulus,
with their distinct Rays dispersed into one another, and if the Regulus be
driven to the last degree of perfection, the Star disappears, and there is seen
in the room of it a little thin Net, like a Fishers Net: I am so far from
delivering any thing upon the Credit of others, that I set down nothing but
what I my self have done and seen.

Having let you see the manner how it is done; there remains only that I should
give such a Reason of it, as may in some measure satisfy the Readers
understanding; I do not Brag that I am able to do it, for there are few Men
which are rational; I mean who are contented with Reason, nevertheless you
shall have my thoughts of the Matter.

No Man doubts but that Iron represents the Planet Mars, Copper Venus, Gold the
Sun, Silver the Moon, and Tin Jupiter; if the Qualities of these Metals be
compared with those of the Planets, as the Heavens do incessantly influence the
Earth, and the Earth sends back its Corpuscles to the Heavens in the form of
Vapors, in the same manner do the Heavens return them to the Earth in Rain,
and Dew; and though there is a general Commerce between the Heavens and the
Earth, yet no Man will deny, but that there is a certain invisible and
particular Commerce betwixt them; and that we may not speak of things so
general, there is a more special Commerce betwixt the Sun and Gold, and betwixt
the Moon and Silver, Mars and Iron, Venus and Copper; so every Planet has a
special influence upon its Metal, and the Nature of it, by the means of the
invisible Atoms and Corpuscles which proceed from the Body of the Planet, which
plainly appears by all the former instances, and amongst the rest, for that the
day and hour of the Planet, contributes to the formation and perfecting of
either the single or double Star, as we have observed about the Starry Regulus.
These things being supposed, I conceive that while Antimony is Melting with
Iron, there is much Vapor and Smoke arising, and this is most certain, that
the Smoke evaporates in such plenty, that it is troublesome to the Artist, who
is obliged to stand at some distance, if he will have a care of himself: These
Vapors and Smoke do ascend up, which being met with by the Spirit and
Corpuscles of their Planet, do mingle with them, and descend upon the Metal
and penetrate it, because, being melted, it is open.

Therefore these emancipated Spirits do return more pure than they were, and do
so well intermix themselves with the open Metal when it is melted, and that
they draw others to stick unto them, whence the Spirit of the Planets, though
invisible, descending from the Body of the Planets, not being able to enter
into the Regulus when it is removed from the Fire, and begins to cool, are
forced to stick upon the upper and superficial part of the Metal, and there
form the Figure of the Planet or Planets from whence they did proceed, and when
Copper is put to it, there appears a double Star, and this Star is the more
elevated, when the Spirits of the Planets are more copious, which they are at
the day and hour where in the Planet Rules.

All these things agree with experience, for the single or double Star does not
appear till the Metal begins to cool, which requires about the space of an
hour; and this Star is formed by degrees, which is strange, nay, to be wondered
at; whence it appears, that there is an agreeableness between Mars and Iron,
and betwixt Venus and Copper, and that there is an influence of their Planets
upon these two Mettlas by the intervention of their Corpuscles.

As for the Net (which we spoke of) it shows the Conjunction of the Planets of
both Metals, having the Sun in the middle, and I am not able to give any other
reason for it; unless that when the Metals, which are melted with the
Antimony, begin to grow cold, and that when the Star enters into the Body of
the Metal, and disappears, there are still remaining certain Corpuscles of the
Planets of both Metals, which are interwoven in the middle of the Mass, which
makes this Net, whereof the Fables seem to leave us an Idea: We must confess by
the by, that there are certain things in Nature which surpass our
understanding, and that we ought not to imagine with our selves that we are
able to satisfy all the Learned in every thing.

But to go on with this Chapter, I observe likewise, as there are Metals which
rejoice at the Commerce which they have with the influence of some Planets, so
there are parts found in our Body which correspond with Particular Planets; as
the Heart with the Sun, the Brain with the Moon, the Liver with Mars, the
Spleen with Saturn, the Lungs with Jupiter, and the Reins with Venus; so we see
that Gold, which is the Terrestial Sun, is a Sovereign Cordial, or a Medicine
for the Heart, and truly universally for all Bodies, as the Celestial Sun is
for the whole World; as I shall show when I come to discourse of Metals Silver
in the same manner is a Cephalic Medicine, whereof are made wonderful Remedies
for Diseases in the Head; the same may be said of Iron in respect of the Liver,
when it opens its obstructions, and fortifies; Copper affords a Spirit which
wondefully heals the Reins, and also Venerial Distempers. I shall speak
something of every Metal in its proper place, and we shall more plainly see
how every Metal does administer a Specific Remedy for that part which it has
relation to, as experience shows.

As for Sudorificks, I will not speak of them. Medicinally in this place,
neither will I explain the matter whereof those Remedies, so benificial to Man's
Body, are made. It is sufficient for me to speak of them Philosophically; and
it being supposed (which I have not seldom seen) that one only Grain of Powder
plainly insipid, and of the Color of calcined Gold, given in half a Glass of
Wine, does provoke Sweat in abundance from the whole Body from head to foot,
without any violence or alteration: This I have seen, and have done it, and can
do it again at any time when I please. Nothing remains, but that I should give
the Reason of this Phoenomenon, and that we know whether it ought to be
attributed to Sympathy or Antipathy.

I suppose, and I know it very well, that this Powder is compounded of the
Spirit of Gold, and all other Metals reduced into one; so that it ought not to
be admired, that the Atoms of which it is composed should be so penetrating,
that they are carried from the Stomach, through the whole Body, and that in
their passage they fix the most subtle Corpuscles of humors, which pass
through the Pores in the likeness of Vapors, and meeting with the cold outward
air are reduced to the likeness of Dew, which is called Sweat. There are other
Sudorifick Powders, but they are more violent, because they are less subtle,
and less penetrating, and whose Atoms are not so apt to rarifie the Humors,
and to draw them to the extreme parts of the Body with so much facility, and
with so little danger, as that does which we spoke of before

CHAP. XII. Of Poisons, and Toxicks.
THere are several sorts of Poisons and Toxicks; some whereof do come at us
with an infected air, others are communicated to us from Animals, or some
Nutriment. It is not my purpose in this place to show all the differences of
them. It answers my purpose to reduce them to Five, from the occasion of those
things which I ought to speak of, about the Antipathy that is betwixt Poisons
and our Bodies.

Therefore I choose three kinds of Poisons or Toxicks, and I shall endeavor to
explain the manner how they act upon our Bodies with the assistance of that
fictitious Antipathy, the Refuge of Ignorance: The first is the Poison of the
Heart, because it immediately assails this Part; such is the Poison of a Viper,
or the Plague, the breathing of the infectious air draws and conveys the Plague
to the Heart; since we cannot say that the Air is carried into the Heart by a
contrary quality, whence therefore does this arise from Antipathy, or
Repugnancy? And after what manner does the air, which gives life to the Heart,
and matter to the vital Spirits, bring death to it? which sometimes invades it
upon a sudden, when the Poison of the Plague is Violent, but ordinarily a Man
does not dye so suddenly, and the Poison only by the motion of the Heart,
disperses it self through the Veins, and corrupts the whole Mass of Blood, and
Bubo's, and Pustules arising are the marks of it: But when the Poison goes out
by suppuration, the person infected is sooner cured.

It is very hard to say, what Poison is, for if we say it is a contrary
Quality, or Air corrupted, we talk foolishly; we must know wherein that
Corruption does consist; if it be corrupted, it is no longer Air, or if Air be
a corruption, it is a Quality, so that still there remains the same difficulty:
Therefore to use no circumlocution, we say that deadly Poison essentially is
nothing but certain Atoms or Corpuscles, which are very acute, and crooked,
figured like little piercers or small Nails, which penetrates, cuts and divides
the vital parts, and by this motion interrupts the motion of those Spirits
which give life. And that I may explain my Opinion right upon this Subject, I
mention those things concerning Poisons and Atoms, which as far as I know, have
not hitherto been mentioned by any Body, which is, That Poison is nothing else
but certain loose and emancipated Atoms, for many of such Atoms being loosed
and separated from the Body we call Poison.

As to that, we are to observe, that being compounded in that manner which we
are, our conservation does consist in the composition, and as long as that
lasts we live, and so our destruction does proceed from the division and
dissolution of our Bodies, so that Corruption is nothing but a solution of the
Body: This solution does not happen but from emancipated Atoms, who by their
incomprehensible subtilty, do find an intermediant space in the most solid
Bodies, and if these be not speedily driven out and dissipated, or are repelled
by certain aiding Corpuscles, they will occasion Diseases, Griefs, and lastly
Death.

Therefore Poison is not a pestiferous quality, nor is it the Antipathy of the
air, or of any thing, whereby they persecute our Temperament; nor is it
corrupted Air, but they are hard Atoms which are set at liberty, and
emancipated; whence it does appear, how the Plague may be brought to us from
places remote within a short space of time, and how it may lie hid along while
amongst Clothes in Chests; also the Reason is obvious, why Bleeding and
Purgation are not necessary in the Curing of the Plague, and why only Cordials
and Sudorificks are convenient in a Contagion.

The same thing may be said of the Poison of Vipers, which is nothing else but
some Atoms divided and separated from the whole, which entering that part which
is Bit by the Viper, do creep presently through the whole Body, and divide,
separate, and cut it, and at last dissolve and confound it. It is therefare
incredible, that that Poison should proceed from a Great Cold, because there
are Bodies which are much colder, which yet are not Poison; besides that cold
does not so readily, nor from so small a beginning, destroy the whole Natural
constitution of Man's Body.

Therefore I take that to be which wholly destroys us, is to dissolve our Body,
and that nothing can dissolve it but freed and emancipated Atoms, whence
Distempers do derive their Original, and Death, the consequence of it: I say it
follows, that it is impossible but that there is Poison in all our Diseases,
and that we cannot enjoy a full and perfect Health, as long as we have in us
the least Atom of that kind, which I say are emancipated; these are so many
Enemies which we cherish in our Bosom, being the Principles of Division,
Dissolution, and Death.

But some will ask, whence come these emancipated Atoms? who emancipates them?
and after what manner are they found in the Vesicle, which is broke, where the
Viper Bites, or in the Spittle which enters our Flesh by the Biting of this
Creature? I answer, That they are Atoms not firmly complicated, which get
abroad, or they proceed from some dead Body which is dissolved into its first
principles, as it happens with the Plague; some of them get loose, like
Servants who wanting a Master, do seek to be busied and employed in some
business, and as long as they stick to no body they may be called desolate and
depraved Atoms, which are continually moved, drive others, and dissolve them by
their reiterated concussions; so a little Poison does suddenly extend and
disperse it self through the whole Body, because these Atoms by their
emancipation being made Venomous and Pestiferous to Emancipate others, and
confound the whole Body, and in this sense it is most true, what the Physiicans
say, that the corrupt Humors of the Body do degenerate into Poison, because
these moist parts of our Body are more apt to break and divide than the solid
parts of it; they are also the first which begin to be corrupted and divided. I
know not by what instinct of Nature we commonly say when we apprehend any
Distemper, that we are ill Composed, and of a Body that is Crazy and full of
Humors, that is wholly ill Disposed, because in truth the emancipated Atoms do
disturb it, and hinder the Union and Composition of its Parts, wherein the
state of perfect Health does consist.

Some will say that I have handled this Matter after a strange and odd kind of
Method, but if Truth and Reason confirm my Explication, as I hope it does, they
have nothing to say against me, but I speak those things which were never said
before; or that I do not proceed in the same manner, and the same Course in the
Progress of this Philosophical Tract; wherein I will sincerely endeavor to
bind my self up to the Truth, without having any Regard to the Prejudices of
the Schools.

I return to Poisons, and after I have Discoursed of Pestiserous and Viperine
Poison which attacks the Heart, it will be time to say something of those which
immediately invade the Brain, and from thence the Heart, the Center of Life,
before I address my self to either general, or particular Antidotes, which
deserve a particular Chapter by themselves.

Therefore I say according to the common Opinion of Physicians, That there are
Toxicks and Poisons which immediately beset the Heart; as I have said of the
Pestiferous and Viperine poison, and others like them, there are others which
attack the Head, such as the biting of a mad Dog, Opium, Solan, and other
Narcotick and somniferous Simples. There are also Poisons which rush into the
Liver, and corrupt the whole Mass of Blood, as the Venerial poison, and others
of the same kind. Th^s diversity is ascribed to Antipathy, and an Aversion,
whereby Poisons are carried to certain parts of our Body, but the foundation
must be showed, whereupon this Antipathy is built; the water sticks, neither
can any solid reason be given, why the Poison of a mad Dog attacks the head, or
that of the Viper, the Heart; Besides that this Antipathy is not sufficient to
explain the Nature of Poisons, though we may confess, that they have an
aversion to our Nature, because they endeavor the destruction of it, and do
procure the separation and division of our Bodies.

It being supposed (as indeed it is) that a Mad Dog biting a certain part of
our Body, does leave in that part a certain Spittle or Foam, which enters the
wound (for unless there be a Wound, there is no fear of danger) the venomous
Atoms being dissolved and emancipated, and as it were raving mad, do insensibly
and by degrees creep through the parts of the Body, and finding no softer parts
than the substance of the Brain, and by consequence easier to be divided and
destroyed, do produce the dissolution of it; and therefore it must be granted,
that if the Brain could not so easily be dissolved, and that the fluidity of
its substance were not the reason why it so easily receives the impression,
that is the action and motion of the emancipated Atoms; the poison of a mad Dog
would produce but little disturbance in us. It must not be said that that
poison ascends the Head by Sympathy, and ruins it by Antipathy; but according
to our Principles, it ought to be confessed, that the Atoms of the spittle of
the mad Dog, being loosed and emancipated, are as apt to destroy the other
parts as well as the Brain, if the Substance of the brain did not consist of
certain Corpuscles, yielding to these foreign Corpuscles, whereby they enter
into the vacant spaces of them, which having entered in at these little chinks
or fissures, they raise a Tumult and confusion in the Castle.

This truth is evident in slow poisons, which stagnate as well as that whereof
we speak, until the emancipated Atoms of it find out some part, whose Vacuities
give them free entrance, or they meet with some Corpuscles, whose little Hooks
or Angles do either accelerate or retard their motion: For these emancipated
Atoms being not received nor fixed, but by weak Corpuscles, are like a Bird
having only his feet entangled in the Birdlime, endeavors with all his
strength to get himself free, or like a Man, who is to be thrown into Prison,
and is withheld only by one Arm, uses his utmost endeavor to obtain his
liberty; so it is with free and emancipated Atoms, which are partly withheld by
these tender little Hooks, whereof the Brain does consist, whence arises a
furious agitation in the Brain it self, and at length madness; for indeed the
madness is in the Dogs Brain, to which some emancipated Atoms came from abroad,
or from some dead Carrion which the Dog did eat, or from the Air in the
Dog Days, being then too much rarefied, or from too much dryness of the Brain,
proceeding from too much drowth, and these Atoms go forth with the Spittle,
when the Dog bites some part of our Body, and in time produces the same
confusion with that in the Dog.

The third sort of Poison which I promised to speak of, is that of the Venerial
Disease, which sets upon the Liver, and without a prolix declaration of the
external causes which produce it, it will be sufficient for me, if I will
declare in few words, that which is necessary to know, wherein they do consist,
and why Poison is so pernicious, that it corrupts the Liver, and infects the
whole Mass of Blood, and afterward, though slowly, ruins the whole Constitution
of the Body, and the Economy of its constituent Parts.

It is frivolous to say, that the Venerial Disease and its Poison, does consist
in an Antipathy to the Liver, and the Mass of Blood, for the Cause and Nature
of this feigned Antipathy, cannot be assigned. But in my Opinion there is no
difficulty in the matter, for by the common consent of Physicians, this Poison
is nothing else but a malign quality, proceeding from the Vapor raised from
the corruption of the Spermatick Blood, which corruption is occasioned by a
mixture of diverse Seeds. This Principle being supposed, we do reject this
feigned malign Quality, for it cannot be said what it is, or from whence this
malignity arises, but we acknowledge this Vapor, and admit the Corruption of
the Seed, and we say (not mentioning, the malign Quality) that there are
certain Atoms excited by Heat and Motion, which do exhale and free themselves
from the loose and corrupt Blood, and finding the Pores of man's Body, and of
the natural parts to be open and dilated, do creep and insinuate themselves
into them, and in process of time, do penetrate into the Spermatick Vessels,
from thence into the great Veins, and from thence into the great Vessels and
the Liver, being the Trunk of them, which they by dividing do alter, and by
separating do Corrupt, whence, at length there follows a corruption of all the
Blood.

The subtilty and continual motion of these emancipated Atoms, appears from the
Gout, sometimes from the Relics of the Venerial Distemper; for these Atoms do
penetrate into the marrow of the Bones, and fix them above the Articulations,
where they find an allumenous matter, to which they stick: But because these
Venerial and other emancipated Atoms are not fixed, therefore they are moved in
those places where they are, like a Captive fettered in Prison, looking about
him, which way he can most conveniently make his escape; hence it is, that the
pain of the Gout does not cease until these Atoms are discharged, either by
Transpiration, Sweat, or some other Evacuation, or that they are wholly
accumulated by other Bodies, of the same figure; or that they are altogether
stopped in their motion by a condensation of those alluminous matters, whence
the Gout becomes knotty and incurable.

CHAP. XIII. Of Sublimate, Arsenick, and other sorts of Poisons, and the deadly
Effects which proceed from them.
THere are two sorts of Sublimate, the one corrosive, the other sweet. The
first is a most violent Poison: The other is a most excellent Remedy for Worms
in Children; however, it is not without some malignity, and therefore, it is
given but in very small Doses; and as to the first, fortified by the Corrosive
Spirits of Salt and Vitriol, the least quantity of it cannot be administered,
without inconveniency, nay Death it self. In this place we are to enquire,
wherein does that Poison, which is so powerful consist; for as soon as
Sublimate is swallowed down, it produces Ulcers, Blisters, and excoriation in
the Tunicles, or Coats of the Ventricle, they ^re seized with an inflammation,
overrun with a Gangreen; and unless a good Antidote be taken, (as I shall show
hereafter) death it self is the consequence of it; but let us see by what
malignity that Sublimate produces these deadly Effects, and wherein the force
of this Poison does consist.

That we may be able to comprehend this Truth, and discover wherein the
malignity of this Poison does consist; it is to be supposed, That Sublimate is
an artificial Poison, being a Compound of the most subtle Particles of
Quicksilver, Salt and Vitriol, sublimated together, in the form of Crystal or
white Powder, like Sugar: So that the Venomous and Corrosive Sublimate, is made
neither of Quicksilver, Salt, or Vitriol alone, and apart, but there ought to
be the Spirit of Salt and Vitriol to separate the Quicksilver, and that though
before it was fluid like water, is to be reduced into dry Earth; which is done
by reason that these two Spirits do separate the Mercury in the sublimation,
and in some manner kill it, and do penetrate it, as if they were Poison to the
Quicksilver it self, they corrupt it, and force it to change its disposition,
because they divide it, and reduce its Corpuscles into small stings, whence it
is that they are so sharp, penetrating, and Corrosive: Which does not happen,
if the Quicksilver be sublimated by it self; for then it ascends in its own
fluid and gliding Nature, and in this manner it may be taken inward without any
danger, and also when the Sublimate is sublimated with Crude Quicksilver.

This being supposed, I conclude, That Sublimate is a Poison which suddenly
operates in our Body, to the destruction of it, because its Corpuscles are
reduced into Stings, like the Corpuscles of Fire, Salt, and Vitriol, which does
sharpen the Corpuscles of the Quicksilver, wherefore they produce the same
effects in the Body, as Fire or the Caustic Stone swallowed do, for it
presently burns every thing that it touches, and Ulcerates the whole Stomach,
Gullet, and all the Parts through which it passes; because its Corpuscles being
so sharpened, do penetrate and dart through, like flames of Fire; therefore
Antipathy has nothing to do in this place, no more has that feigned Malign
and Occult Quality, as the less learned would fain allege: All that is
observed concerning this Subject, ought to be ascribed to the Disposition,
subtilty, and figure of the Corpuscles, which renders them Corrosive and
burning.

The same thing may be said of Arsenick, except only that Arsenick, is the work
of Nature, and Sublimate that of Art; for in truth, Arsenick is a perfect
Mineral which is found in the Earth, and Sublimate, is prepared by Artists in
sublimatory Vessels.

The Effects of Arsenick, as well the White as the Red, is near the same with
those of the Sublimate, and both of them by right may be ranked amongst the
most prompt and violent Poisons, in respect of the sharp and penetrating
Particles, whereof they do consist. There is nothing which disappoint these
Effects, except proper Antidotes made use of in time, which change this
disposition, and blunt the sharpness of those Corrosive Corpuscles.

Nevertheless, by special preparations, those Venomous Corpuscles may be taken
away, both from the Sublimate, and the Arsenick: And by our fortifying and
changeing of the Compound, a most excellent Remedy, for the health of Man, may
be made of the most pernicious Poison, as the Triacle is made of Vipers Flesh,
which is the best Antidote, as we shall see in the following Chapter.

CHAP. XIV. Of Antidotes.
ART, together with Nature, supplies us with as many sorts of Antidotes, as
there are Poisons: The Viper, no less than the Scorpion, carries its Antidote;
if the Serpent begins to creep out of the Earth, Nature affords us the Leaves
of Ash (which buds at the same time) to heal its bite; the same ground which
bears a Thora, has also near an Anthora, which is its Antidote.

There are also external Antidotes, which do avert the Plague, and preserve the
Body from the Conragion, as we said before, speaking of Amulets, where we did
declare how this may be done, and how the Body may be preserved from every
Malignant Air, without any fictitious Sympathy or Antipathy.

Antidotes are general, and special, or specific; they are general which
resist every Poison; they are particular, which are appropriated only to
certain Poisons. That it may be rightly explained how Antidotes do work upon
Poison, and how they hinder its operation, we must suppose, that all Poisons
and Toxicks, are reducible to two kinds; the first does consist of emancipated
Atoms, which are properly Poisons; under the second, are comprehended Toxicks,
as Sublimate, and the like; and that consists in sharp penetrating, cutting
Particles, such as the Particles of Fire, which Burn, Ulcerate, and Tear the
inward parts of the Person who takes them: These things being supposed, it will
be no hard matter to explain the Nature of Antidotes.

Having made this difference between Poisons and Toxicks, it is certain, that
there are Antidotes against Poisons, and that they are diverse, according to
the diversity of the Toxicks: Hence we see that Triacles, of all the Antidotes
which we have, is most proper, and most specific against the Poison of Vipers,
because Triacle is made of Vipers flesh, and the emancipated Atoms proceeding
from it, finding the Particles of that Flesh, sit to receive them, do adhere to
them, and are imbodied with them, and in this manner losing their motion, they
lay aside their malignity, and remain fixed and quiet, in the same Condition as
they were, before their emancipation, they can no longer offend the Heart, or
effect any Division of it; so it is in the case of Pestilent Poisons, which we
draw as we suck in the Air, wherein, after a great Contagion, these emancipated
Atoms are found, and with whom, they enter into our Bodies.

Triacle, and Cordial Confections, are commonly used; whose Corpuscles are
disposed and figured in such a fashion, as that the Pestiferous Atoms, running
through all the Parts of our Body, are connexed with, and do wholly adhere to
them; whence there is a full and absolute Cure, or partly; which allays the
violence of the Distemper: But without doubt, or contradiction, the true
Antidote of the Plague, is changing of the Air, or correcting of it by good
Scents, which being attracted within us, together with the Air, do attemper and
correct it, and their Corpuscles do check the impatience, and the too-free
motion of the emancipated Atoms.

The Poison of a Mad Dog is very hard to be cured; and as that sort of Madness
is accounted incurable, and is publicly attended with a very deadly and fatal
issue, we are forced to bind those who are infected or suspected, and at length
to smother them between two Feather-beds.

The ordinary Remedy is to send them to the Sea, to throw them into it several
times: Experience teaches us that that kind of Remedy is not altogether
useless, but is to be accounted amongst those which are most safe, though it be
not altogether infallible. The antipathy of the Seawater has no room here,
and it were vain to allege it in the confirmation of this practice: Therefore
I say, that, according to our Principles, the emancipated Atoms proceeding from
the spittle of the mad dog, while they penetrate the substance of the Brain, or
at least begin to penetrate it, or to be turned round its foldings, to enter
into its Cavities, are interrupted in their motion, so that they cannot enter
into the Cavities of it, nay and they are thrown partly out by those struglings
which the Patient must necessarily suffer when he is cast into the Sea: I do
not, nor will not deny, but that there are Atoms or Corpuscles proceeding from
the Froth of the Sea, which entering into the Patients body through the Pores,
made open by the agitation, or by breathing in of the Air, and being
comunicated to the blood, do with their cubicular figures, fix and withstand
the emancipated Atoms which produce the madness or nearly dispose the body to
it: To comprehend in a word all that can be said concerning this matter,
whatsoever can heal or give ease to a Distemper so dangerous, it does it only
by hindering the Motion of those loosed Atoms, or by quite expelling them out of
the body.

The same thing may be said of the third sort of Poison, that is, the Venerial,
which is called the French disease, That also has its general and specific
Antidotes: Quicksilver is commonly used for this business, and that by reason
of that antipathy which is betwixt it and the disease, it is most certainly
held to be the one only Remedy for it: Others use Sudorificks, as Guajacum,
Salsaparilla, or animal or Mineral Bezoar, or the salt of Vipers: Others are
only contented with one Remedy, which is Mercury perfected by Nature, and
radically divided by Art; also the more industrious do use Philosophical water,
prepared from the Beams of the Sun and Moon.

But though we may provide an excellent Remedy against this Distemper;
nevertheless it must be confessed, that it is not radically taken away, but by
the help of those things which expel the Venerial emancipated Atoms, from the
Center to the Circumference, whether it be done by sweat, or by an insensible
transpiration; this does not happen by Antipathy, or some occult quality, but
by the motion of the Particles of the Medicine, which strike against these
miserable Atoms, and drive them out by those most convenient ways, that is, the
Pores of our Body.

Therefore let us proceed to those Antidotes which are opposite to Toxicks, not
by Antipathy, or some occult quality, but by their different figures: Therefore
who will say that Milk has an aversion to Sublimate or Arsenick, though it be
a most speedy Remedy, and that no less than Oil which does resist Poison,
because descending into the Ventricle, and in its passage touching the Gullet
and the orifice of the Ventricle, as well as Milk does lessen the motion of the
Corpuscles of the Poison, and blunts the sharp points and corners of them, and
defends all those Parts. But of all things a Vomit is most useful in this Case,
being assisted with the help of Milk, or Oil Slackning the Tunicles of the
Stomach, and making the Passage more easy: For if a Vomit should be given
without smoothing and besmearing the Passage, the Venom in coming out would
Excoriate all the parts that it touched, by its sharp-pointed, Saw-like, and
Hooked Particles; which are covered by the Particles of Oil or Milk going out
with them, and are so prohibited and hindered from hurting.

In the Conclusion of this Chapter I do observe, that Corrupt Humors in our
Body (as Physicians do affirm to us) do degenerate into Poisons and Toxicks,
but they are silent as to the Reason of this Confusion, and all the manner of
avoiding it. First, they ascribe this Corruption to External Causes, or to
inward Occult and Malign Qualities, or to the excess of certain Qualities, (as
Cold, Hot, Dry, Moist) or to certain unwholesom Diet, and to ill Digestion, or
lastly, to Obstructions, hindering the necessary distribution of them: But truly
it is not demonstrated from thence, that crude and an undigested Diet, or
Corrupt Humors, do degenerate into Poison, therefore the true Cause of this
thing, and the solid Reason of it, must be enquired into.

To this purpose, I do suppose, that the Humors or Nourishment being any
manner of way divided, may be said to be Corrupted, because I acknowledge no
difference between a division and a corruption of a thing; but in a separation
which is not total, there remain some Bodies which are neither Poisons, nor
Toxicks, though they Oppress and Obstruct the Parts, and hinder the intercourse
of the Spirits, as it happens in Phlegm, Melancholy, and Slimy Humors, which
are joined with the Earthy part of the Excrements. Besides these Bodies, there
are other Corpuscles which with their Hooks, Sharp points, and Stings, do
pierce, prick, and penetrate Man's Body, and the Membranes of it, as also the
Veins, Muscles, and Nerves, and do Corrode the Stomach; and in the same manner
with Poison, do occasion Ulcers, Imposthumes, and Pustles. These are those
which the Physicians do call sharp, biting and Chollerick Humors; whereof
(that I may end this Tract concerning Sympathy and Antipathy, and the Actions
depending thereon, and without these Occult Causes assign a true and an
Efficient Cause of all our Distempers) I am compelled to treat in a Chapter by
it self, and in that which follows shall be delivered the General means whereby
the Causes and Roots of all Diseases may be Removed.

CHAP. XV. The True Cause of our Diseases.
THe Effects of our Diseases are pernicious, and have their Origin either from
within or without; the Causes of them sometimes are so obscure, that the
Original of them cannot be discovered; and though we define a Disease to be a
disposition against Nature, or an inordinate Constitution of those Qualities
which are Constituent of a Right Temperature, yet for all this, we are not
Wiser or more Learned than we were before: Therefore after I have Discoursed
Physically of the Causes of our Diseases in General, it will not be amiss to
trace out the Particular Causes of them.

That this Doctrine which may be accounted new, may the better be understood, I
suppose, that we are never subject to any Disease, but whose immediate Cause is
either some Poison or Toxick. 2ly. This Poison consists only in emancipated
Atoms, and Toxicks in loosned Corpuscles. 3ly. These Atoms are not emancipated;
nor these sharp Corpuscles loosned, but in the Corruption of Bodies, 4ly.
Corruption is nothing but a Total or Partial Division and separation of Bodies.
5ly. There is no new Generation by which a new Body is made, but by a precedent
corruption or Division of another Body, which ceases to be in Nature, when one
or more other Bodies possess the Room of it. So when Meat in the Stomach is
turned into Chyle, when the Chyle in the Liver, and the Branches of the Vena
Porta is changed into Blood, and lastly, when the Blood is changed into our
Substance, as Flesh, Muscles, Nerves, and other Parts of our Body, by the last
degree of Concoction, there is necessarily a Corruption of the Meat, which
begins to be divided and separated by Chewing of it in the Mouth, and it is
digested and separated, or Corrupted in the Ventricle: Chyle, to the end it may
be turned into Blood, is altered in the Branches of the Vena Porta, and the
Meseraick Veins; and thence it is wholly and perfectly Digested, that is,
Corrupted, Concocted, and Divided in the Liver, unless that has lost something
of its own Substance. The Blood designed for Flesh, is filtred out of the Veins
into the Arteries, and Circulates until it be sufficiently purged, and freed
from Foreign Bodies, and then it is changed into the Substance of our Body.

This Doctrine being supposed, I say there are made in us Three Principle
Corruptions, which are the Concoctions or Digestions whereof we speak: and I
say moreover, that there are Atoms in every one of them, which are emancipated
and loosed, as likewise Corpuscles, flying and deserting more or less, as the
Digestion is the better performed, that is, as the Pure is more rightly
separated from the Impure.

Therefore it follows, that we cannot be nourished, unless we take together
into our Bodies the Causes and Seeds of many Diseases; It follows likewise,
that these Diseases are diverse, according to the difference of the Corruptions
of the emancipated Atoms, or the loosed Corpuscles, and that these Atoms are
Poisons, and the Corpuscles Toxicks, which do produce Diseases by their violent
Motion, and they labor so with Reiterated Corruptions, that they deprave,
separate, and divide all the Parts of our Body.

Here we may behold the just Cause of the Pains of the Stomach, and of the Wind
Chollick, and also of the Wind proceeding from the first Concoction of our Meat
in the Stomach, these winds are the Corpuscles or the more subtle Parts of
that Corrupted Nourishment; and when the more subtle and sharp Corpuscles are
received into the Body, they do, proportionably to the Nourishment which is
taken, produce most troublesome and dangerous Pains, and vellications, such as
we observe in the Chollick. And if it should happen, that amongst Corpuscles
there should be abundance of emancipated Atoms, they do ordinarily betake
themselves to the Brain, whence do arise Apoplexies, and Lethargies; or if they
penetrate into the Muscles and Nerves, they occasion the Palsy, which
ordinarily follows these bilious Chollicks.

This Indisposition degenerates the Disease into a Vomiting, and Looseness, when
the Wind or the subtle Particles, the loosed Corpuscles, and the emancipated
Atoms are so plentiful, that all the Symmetry of the Humors, the intercourse
of the Natural Spirits, and the whole Anatomy of the Body are overthrown by
them; whence it is conspicuous, what great Confusions, Winds, Vapors, and
little Bodies, and depraved Atoms are capable of producing in our Bodies: And
that I have concluded upon good Reasons, That there is Poison to be found in
all our Diseases; whether we consider them in their Beginning, when we perceive
our selves grieved, indisposed, and to have lost our Appetite; or that we take
a view of them in their progress, when those Winds, those little Bodies or
little Atoms are advanced in the Body, and do work a Division; or lastly, if we
consider the end, when these Poisons and Toxicks, and these Corpuscles being
freed from their Chains, and these emancipated Atoms bear the sway, by the
confusion of the Principal Operations, they are the Cause of Death.

In the second Digestion, which is in the Liver, we find Winds and Vapors,
which are called Flatus's; and sometimes those loose Corpuscles, and also the
emancipated Atoms; these Winds do produce a murmur and Flatus about the Liver,
Spleen, Hypocondria, and the Reins; and the Corpuscles which are lodged there,
do prick and exulcerate the inward ^^rts, and are the Causes of Imposthumes,
which are so hard to be Cured.

Besides the emancipated Atoms Flying, do sometimes ascend up to the Head,
where they beget Vertigo's and Buzzing in the Ears; and also Convulsions by
their vellications in the principal of the Nerves; Thence proceed Epilepsie,
and other Diseases, which have the same malignity; which in the Opinion of all
Men, being not a Quality, is a Poison, that is, the Atoms of the Blood are
emancipated, which are a Poison to the Brain, and especially to the Membranes
and Nerves.

From the same Fountain proceed Shakings, and the duplications of continuant
Fevers, as the Periodick Fits of intermittent Fevers do happen from loosed
Corpuscles and Atoms which are emancipated in the first Digestion in the
Stomach, by reason of a Fermentation which they make. These loosed Bodies are
also the Causes of Swellings in the Feet, Hands, and other Parts; as
Inflammations, Erysipela's, as also Itch and sore Puscles do arise from Atoms
which are emancipated in the last Digestion; as for the Dropsy we may say that
it derives its Original from Atoms which are emancipated in the first and
second Concoction, for they penetrate the substance of the Liver, and render it
unfit to produce a well constituted Blood.

Sudden death is often occasioned by the sudden motion of the flying Atoms,
which escape in the circulation of the Blood; and the emancipated Atoms opening
the heart, and by this passage giving an opportunity to the vital Spirits to
make their escape, is the cause of that present death which follows it.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Causes of our Health.
IF that be true, which I suppose, That all our Diseases do not arise from
Natural Qualities, nor from Antipathy, which is in the nourishment we take; and
that they are nothing else but a confusion, and an inordinate constitution of
the Spirits, humors and parts, and that this confusion does proceed from the
impetuous and disorderly motion of the Winds, Corpuscles and emancipated Atoms,
as I said before: Then it is certain that our health, which consists only in
the just intercourse of the Spirits, and a proportionate mixture of the
humors, does not proceed but from things constituting and preserving this just
temperament, and by the same it is conserved.

As there are many things which destroy Health, so there are also a great
number of those things which restore and confirm it. The things which destroy
it, are those which rarifie the humors, and occasion winds which dissolve
bodies, and do emancipate Atoms: Those which restore it, are such things, or
such remedies, which hinder the division, rarefaction, and dissolution of the
Humors and Parts of our body, or since it happens that necessarily there is a
corruption in every digestion, and a division of the aliment, chyle, and the
blood, as we observed before from the same Principle, it necessarily follows,
that every thing that preserves Health, hinders the alteration of it, and also
restores it, being lost, which drives out of the body these Winds, these
Corpuscles, or these injurious Atoms: And that also which removes these Seeds,
or internal Principles of our Diseases out of our Bodies, does not produce that
Effect by a certain Virtue, or Physical quality, or by a certain Antipathy, as
it is said of Rubarb and Senna, but by motion and action which is made upon
these rarefied bodies, these loosed Corpuseles, or emancipated Atoms,
proceeding from every digestion in the bodies of those which are most healthful.

This Motion is performed either by Purgatives or Emeticks, or by Sudorificks,
the two former of these are fitted to eject those which arise from the first
and second digestion, and Sudorificks do expel Corpuscles or Atoms of the third
digestion, but here is no room to show the differences of these Remedies;
however we must trace out the manner of those Operations.

I said a while that Medicaments do operate only by a vellication of Membranes,
Nerves, and Fibers, and which is produced by sharp Corpuscles flowing from the
Medicines, and sticking to the aforementioned parts, whose motion is
communicated to the subtle Foreign bodies, that is, the Excrements of every
particular digestion, whereby these matters are driven forth the nearest and
most commodious way for evacuation. I Will make an end of this Chapter, with an
Example of a familiar Remedy, by Means whereof every man may preserve his
Health, without either bleeding or Purging; nevertheless, I do allow that
bleeding sometimes is necessary, and very useful to evacuate those emancipated
Atoms or Corpuscles, which are loosed in the veins, from the digestion in the
Liver, especially when they being shut up, and cannot find their way out, they
stick to the Pleura Membrane, and prick and vellicate it, and thereon produce
an inflammation, known by the name of Pleurisy, Therefore in this Distemper,
as also in continual Fevers, Bleeding and Sudorificks are by no means to be
omitted.

The same thing may be said of using Purgative Remedies or Emeticks, to
evacuate earthy Excrements, as phlegm and slimy humors arising from the first
digestion; and also Serosities or Choler, and Melancholy being the Excrements
of the second Concoction, but because the defects of the first Concoction are
not mended or repaired in the second; and the first is more perfect, as the
Ventricle is more pure and more clean, and cleared of that viscous Phlegm which
disturbs its action, and hinders digestion. Without either envy or prejudice, I
do here produce a vulgar Remedy as most useful to preserve or restore Health,
if it be rightly used as it should be, as I have found it by experience,
besides that it manifests the Truth of my Principles, which supposes every
evacuation to be made by motion and vellication of the sharp Corpuscles or
penetrating Atoms.

Therefore I take every morning a Goose Feather; fit and slender, as it is in
its own Nature, I put this gently into my mouth, and I thrust it further to my
jaws, and hold it there for some time, and I draw backwards and forwards, and I
perceive a vellication made by the Feather on my Jaw, Palate, and the other
Parts adjoining, and likewise after this vellication, I do observe that Water,
Phlegm, and viscous humors, being dissolved, do flow in great quantity for the
space of a quarter of an hour; And all this is done without any violence or
danger, hereby I find that the Head is lightsome, and the Stomach freed and
disburthened, and that thereby the Appetite is increased, and that the
Corpuscles which before ascended to the Brain by way of Vapors are evacuated,
incarcerated, or involved in the viscuous humors which are flowing, and
afterward the first digestion is better made; and it is evidenced by
experience, that as the ventricle is less burdned, so our Sleep is longer,
sweeter, and less interrupted: Were it not that I fear to exceed those bounds
which I proposed to my self, I could make many useful Observations upon this
Subject. But I must remember that I do not speak of Medicine, Remedies, Health,
and Diseases, but by chance and occasionally, and it is sufficient, if I oblige
the Public and the Learned with the Doctrine of Atoms, and that I be helpful
to Them as well as to the Sick, by the means of those Remedies which I
discover, and which I freely propose: And though I offer many things which were
neither said, taught, nor writ before; nevertheless I beg the Readers pardon,
for that I add no more to this matter, for I am afraid if I should, to be
tedious to him, and if I have enlarged my self too far, I hope he will forgive
me; it were hard to say less of these things, except a man would say nothing at
all of them, besides that it is grateful to every man to speak and write of
those things which he loves, and are agreeable with his Profession.

CHAP. XVII. Of Formal, Exemplary, and Material Causes.
FOrm and Formal Cause is one and the same thing; and when we say there are two
sorts of Forms, that is only according to our manner of conceiving things. So
we say there are two sorts of Formal Causes, the Substantial and Accidental.

But all these Forms are imaginary, neither do true Philosophers acknowledge
any other Substance to be in Natural Compounds, than Matter, except only in
man; nor any other Form than the disposition of the Parts, because all these
Forms are altogether useless.

Moreover these great Sticklers for Forms, cannot say what they would mean by a
Substantial or Accidental Form, Therefore we do with a great deal of Justice
lay aside these fictitious Forms, as being but Chimeras, and of no use.

The Exemplary Cause may be referred to the formal, because it is the Idea and
inward form of that which we frame in our Spirit; so the formal Cause of a
Picture, is the disposition of its parts, according to the disposition and
ordination which it then had in the Spirit of the Painter. The same may be said
of all rational Agents, which are endued with understanding.

There is no difference be twixt Matter and a Material Cause, and there are two
sorts of material Causes, as well as of matter; That is the First matter, out
of which all bodies are composed, and into which, by an Universal Division,
they may be reduced; the Second, is nothing else but Bodies made of the first,
and upon which the efficient Causes do exercise their activities.

Therefore it is apparent, That there is nothing in the World, but what is a
Compound, and that there is no Compound without matter: It is also certain,
That there is nothing made without an Efficient Cause, which acts upon
Compounds and destroys them, that of them others may be made; because the
matter of the first, serves for the composition of the second; the Matter which
goes to the composition of the first and second, is the first Matter, or
Material Cause of the Compound, and that Matter which serves the Efficient
Cause for a Subject and Patient, is called the Second Matter.

Both of them may be an efficient cause, for Compounds do act upon one another,
as the Elements which drive one another backwards and forwards; that which
drives another is called the Agent, as that which is driven is called the
Patient; and if there be any thing which resists it, and drives back another,
this regress of the motion is called a reaction; so one and the same thing, may
be the Subject and cause of Motion; and that to give and receive, being the
Principle of Agent and Patient, may Be at the same time, but in diverse respects.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the first Matter.
ALL Philosophers do unanimously agree, That there is a first Matter in the
World, which was produced from the beginning, and though it can never be altered
by any Change, yet it is to be seen in all the Generations and Corruptions
which are in Nature; this does suppose, that the first Matter did exist before
the Generation of the Compound wherein it is found, and that it still remains,
and survives the Corruption of it; as fire is made of Chips, the Matter of the
Fire was in the Chips, and it is found partly in the Fire, partly in the Smoke,
and partly also in the Ashes: It is agreed by all Men, That nothing is made out
of nothing, and that there is nothing in Nature, which can be reduced into
nothing, so that the first remains one, and the same in all the Revolutions
which do happen. Therefore in respect of Matter, we may justly say, that there
is nothing new in the World, since the Creation of it, and that this Matter, in
its Nature, is incorruptible, so that to explain the Essence of this first
Matter, is all, and the one only difficulty: If we hearken to Aristotle, he
makes It the Subject of all Forms, and that It is nothing but a passive Power,
or a mere Capacity of producing, and receiving them in its Bosom; He says in
another place, that Matter in it self has neither quality nor quantity, nor
any Essence, beside that which it received from that Form which perfected it:
But this explication gives us no Idea of Matter, neither does it teach us any
thing of the nature of it; on the other hand, according to this Doctrine, we
may say that Matter is something, and we may say at the same time, that it is
nothing; and that it gives that Being to Form, and receives the same from it;
and lastly, that it has distinct parts without any quantity; which seems to be
impossible.

They were more in the right, who said, That the first Matter was nothing else
but the first Elements, into which Compounds by a total dissolution are
reduced, also these Elements ought to be simple, and indivisible, for
otherwise, the first Elements are not such as we suppose them to be: It
follows, from this Doctrine, that neither Water, nor Air, nor Earth, nor Fire,
are the first Elements of things, because they are Compounds: Therefore we must
look out for other Elements, which are simple and indivisible; those things
which the Chemists would fain establish, that is, Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury,
cannot be taken for the First Elements of Bodies, since they are but Compounds
of many other Bodies. I am of the same Opinion concerning Descartes his three
Elements, which he would have to be the principles of things, which is
impossible, because they are divisible.

Therefore we must acknowledge, that only simple and indivisible Atoms, are the
first Matter, and first Principles and Elements whereof Bodies are composed;
Out of these Atoms are Corpuscles made, out of these Corpuscles small Masses,
out of Masses greater parts, and then of these parts greater Bodies, whereof
the Universe does consist; In the same manner, going backward in an analytical
method, the World is divided into great Bodies, those into parts, parts into
small Masses, Masses into Corpuscles, and lastly, these Corpuscles are divided
into Atoms.

CHAP. XIX. Of Atoms and their Nature.
THat we may solidly evince the existency of Atoms, we must suppose, that every
compound may be divided into so many parts, as there are which make the
compound, Therefore division ought necessarily to cease, when there is a
failure of parts to be divided; on the other side, there is no end of it, as
long as there are Particles to be divided; one of the two we must allow; that
is, either that a body cannot be so exactly divided, but that there always
remain divisible parts in infinitum; or, that there are parts after a certain
number of Divisions, which will not admit any further division; Aristotle
stands for the former, but Gassendus and the Ancient Philosophers do defend the
latter and according to this last Doctrine, after all the Divisions are made,
nothing can remain besides Atoms, that is, indivisible Beings, which are the
first Elements of Natural Bodies.

I confess, it is hard to imagine a corporeal thing to be indivisible, because
we see nothing in this World, which is not divisible, but this makes nothing
against Atoms, which are Corporeal, because they compose Bodies, and are
Indivisible, because they are the first, and most simple Elements of Bodies:
Hence arises another difficulty, because it cannot be easily explained; after
what manner a thing that is divisible, is composed of parts which are
indivisible.

Impartial minds do not find so much difficulty in conceiving this matter, as
those do, who follow the prejudices which they have received: First, these Men
who are thus so prepossessed, do not consider, that there are many things which
escape our Senses, and yet are most real. Secondly, they do not consider that
that which composes a Body, is not a compound, as we see that Unity makes
number, though it self be not a number: Letters, whereof Nouns and words are
framed, yet are neither the one nor the other. The drops of Water whereof
Rivers do consist, are not Rivers; so Atoms though they are invisible and
indivisible, yet they compose Bodies which are visible and divisible.

Aristotle and his Followers, do teach us, That a small body, as for Example, a
Millet Seed, is divisible in infinitum, and that it contains an infinite number
of Parts; which being supposed, it may be concluded, that there are as many
parts in the Millet Seed, as there are in the whole Terrestrial Globe: Also
according to this Opinion, we must grant, that a Body cannot be divided into as
many parts, as really it may, and that neither the hither or further end of a
staff can be found, nor that there is a Circle or perfect Piramid, nor that the
parts of a Body can be immediately divided. All which consequences as they are
absolutely necessary, so they are all equally absurd.

Descartes did endeavor to free himself from this difficulty, by saying that
the number of the parts of the Millet-Seed, was neither finite, nor infinite,
but only that they were indefinite: But the evasion is ridiculous, and these
two Philosophers are forced to confess, that every part of the Millet-seed has
its extension, and if their Number be either infinite or indefinite, then their
extensions also will be either infinite or indefinite at the least, which is
absurd to affirm. I add no more, to avoid Scholastic Intricacies and
distinctions.

CHAP. XX. The Properties, Magnitude, Figure, Weight and Motion of Atoms.
AN Atom is a corporeal Being, simple, invisible, and indivisible: Solidity
constitutes its Essence, or essential property, which distinguishes it from
Spirits and Vacuity, which have no power of resisting.

Atoms do necessarily avoid all our Senses, because these are composed of many
distinct and gross parts, whose Object ought to be composed, e're it can be
perceived by the external Organ, which nevertheless does not destroy the truth
and reality of Atoms, because small Corpuscles do escape our Senses, as we
observe in Dust which sticks to our Clothes, and also in the Corpuscles of a
Ring, which is wasted and diminished by time and use, in the Corpuscles of a
Stone, which is made hollow by the drops of Water which fall upon it in diverse
occult parts, in a Mite which cannot be seen without the help of a Microscope,
and lastly, in small Corpuscles, which are seen to move in a Chamber, by the
help of the Sunbeams; that we may omit many others which are smaller, which
without doubt we could see, if our sight was sharper, as I shall mention in my
Animadversions about Experiments of Miscroscopes.

Though Atoms are most subtle and inperceptible, yet they have their particular
extension, magnitude, and figure, from whence their differences do arise; for
the figure of some of them is round, as the Atoms of Water, Oil, and
Quicksilver; others have cubicular figures, such are the Atoms of Seawater;
and others are Pyramidal, as those whereof Nitre does consist; there are some
which have sharp points like needles' as Fire, whence we are to suppose that
there are others variously figured.

This difference is necessary to distinguish Compounds: And as these Atoms, as
to their solidity, or invisibility, and indivisibility (which are their
inseparable Properties) are alike; so also if they did not differ in their
figure and thickness, all bodies would be of the same likeness.

Weight is the Principle of the said Natural Motion, insomuch as it does resist
a violent motion: That I mention here, that we may know whether motion of Atoms
has an internal or an external Principle, or whether Weight be determined only
to one Motion, or that it be indifferently inclined to many: And whether the
motion of Atoms do tend to some Center: And whether it be continuant or
interrupted: And lastly, whether it be perpendicular or horizontal, Parallel or
declined, right or parabolical, or circular.

In order to resolve well this difficulty, I suppose that Atoms may be
considered in a double State, The First State of them is before the Composition
of the bodies which are made of them, which may be called the State of Liberty:
The other is that which they have in the bodies which do consist of them; which
may be termed the State of obligation or servitude.

If Attoms be considered in their First State, their motion is perpetual: So
that an Atom that is loose and freed from any composition, is essentially in
motion, which ought not in the least to be wondered at; for Motion in respect of
a free Atom, is the same that Understanding is in respect of an Angel^ which is
never without knowing, unless his Intellect is bound and clouded.

From this Principle it is evident, That Atoms are in continual motion, unless
they are hindered, or that there is some obstruction in the way, or that there
are other Atoms resisting and repelling of them, or that they find such as will
stick unto them, or that they insinuate themselves into the Atoms of certain
bodies, or or that they enter into some composition, whereby their motion is
stopped.

Nevertheless, Atoms in Compounds are not altogether void of motion, because
they are not so straightly imbodied together, but that they have some motion,
like Vibrations and Palpitations, according to the liberty which is granted
them by the disseminated Vacuities; nay, some of them sometimes do attempt
their escape, especially in porous bodies, which therefore are sooner corrupted
and perish, than other Bodies which are more solid, and more close. It is yet
more evident in living bodies, out of which the animal Spirits, which are but
the bodies of Atoms, and most subtle Corpuscles, are dissipated by
transpiration, whence aliments are necessarily requisite, for to supply the
Spirits of the whole body, which are dissipated by motion and agitation.

This motion of Atoms, or the least Corpuscles, in living bodies, may be
deservedly accounted the Image of their first liberty, and though they do but
seldom enjoy their full liberty, yet they are apt to raise the greatest
commotions, in order to be freed, and to gain their liberty; this is the
origin of many distempers, as in Acute Fevers, the Atoms or Corpuscles of the
boiling blood, or obstructed choler, are carried and driven into the Brain,
where they produce watchfulness, Deliriums, and Phrensies.

According to this Principle, that which we said before may be concluded, That
many Distempers do arise from minute Corpuscles, and emancipated Atoms. For
These being driven forwards by other Atoms, and forced back, do run into the
membranes, Periostiam, Meninges, or intestines, and cause Pains, which they
call the Colic, Headache, Gouts and Rheumatisms; So that this solution of
Corpuscles, and emancipation of Atoms in our Bodies, are much to be feared, and
to prevent this danger, all motions of the body which are too violent, must be
avoided; for these are the external cause of the confusion of the Spirits, and
the emancipation of the Atoms.

The emancipation of Atoms, and also of the small Corpuscles, which are
composed of those Atoms, are to be feared no less in the great than little
World, for the Winds are nothing else but emancipated Atoms, which by their
impetuosity, being driven backwards and forwards, do force all bodies which
they meet with in their way: It is these Atoms which agitate the Air and the
Sea, and cause Earthquakes, and also over-turn all things which resist their
motion: Therefore, the motions of Atoms, are neither equal nor every where
alike, but they do vary according to the diversity of Bodies whereby they are
driven, or as the figures of them are more or less fitted for motion, or
otherwise, according to the proportion of Vacuities, which are dispersed in
bodies; So that some Atoms are moved quicker, and others slower, not because
some are heavier than others, but because they are driven backwards and
forwards, or are stopped by others which do fix them, with the greater or less
violence.

CHAP. XXI. Difficulties arising from the Doctrine of Atoms.
THE first which presents it self, is in relation to the Being and Nature of
Atoms, therefore it is hard to conceive, that an Atom is corporeal and
material, and at the same time, that it is indivisible, or that the same being
indivisible, should at the same time have its grossness and extension; but this
difficulty proceeds from nothing else, but the prejudice of our Senses, which
can conceive no Objects, but as they are divisible and gross, neither can they
give to our Soul, (which is an indivisible being) an Idea of an indivisible
thing.

It is only our Soul which is indivisible, as well as an Atom, is able to
conceive the nature of them, which being elevated above the Senses, can correct
the Errors of them; therefore I say that an Atom is not a body, according to
the Notion which we have of it; that it is a compound Being; but I affirm it to
be a simple Being, and also Corporeal; that is to say, simple, because it is
indivisible; and corporeal, because it has a certain extension, and makes up
the composition of bodies, which, in the total division of them, are reduced
again into Atoms.

There are two other difficulties which do arise from the former, for, if an
Atom be indivisible, after what manner can we propose to our selves, that it
has extension, or how can it be an ingredient in the composition of divisible
bodies? To which it is answered in few words, That extension is according to
the nature of the thing extended, for if the thing extended be divisible, in
the same manner is the extension, and so on the other side; so it is of the
rational Soul, which is possessed of the whole body, and exercises its
operations in all the parts of it, nevertheless it is, like an Atom,
indivisible, and though it be divisible in respect of the space it occupies,
yet it has an internal extension, which is indivisible: It is the same thing
which Divines are forced to say of Angels, and some Philosophers, about their
Physical tumid points.

But some will say, that Atoms are like neither to Souls, Angels, or Physical
Points, because they have parts, and these have none, because that which does
consist of parts is divisible, it follows also that an Atom is divisible. To
this difficulty, I answer with the Divines, That Angels and our Souls, which
are Spirits; and also with Philosophers, that physical Points which are
material, have no real, but only potential parts; that is, an Angel and the
rational Soul, in respect of the operations which they exercise, and the space
which they occupy; and the tumid points, in respect of the space which they
fill up: Indeed an Angel and the Soul have two powers, whereof the one is the
Intellect, the other the Will, which being no more but an indivisible
substance, which are capable of understanding, and willing; yet no Man will
deny but that they, notwithstanding their indivisibility (which at least, is
equal to the indivisibility of an Atom) do fill up a divisible space; as no Man
can doubt, but that an Angel can be at the same time in the four corners of the
Room, and likewise can be in the middle of it, and that it has a foursquare
figure, by communication with the four Angles or Corners, and that it can quit
this, and assume another figure at its pleasure, which cannot be said of tumid
points, and Atoms, which are destitute of Understanding and Will: The rational
Soul being equally indivisible with an Atom, Angel, or point, does wholly
possess a great body, no less than it did then when the body was little;
therefore it does dilate it self without being divided, because in its nature
it is simple and indivisible, and is without distinct parts.

This is the Opinion of Aristotle, and indeed it is the most common Opinion.
But if the Soul were not by its own substance extended through the whole body,
and had its seat only in the Heart, as Empedocles would have it, or in the
Spleen and the Stomach, as Van Helmont places it, or in the Glaudula Pinealis
of the Brain, according to Cartesius, or in the Striate bodies of the Brain,
where the common sense is, or the sense it self, as it is called by way of
excellency, and in the Callous parts, because there it forms the Ideas of
things, and judges of them, and in the cineritious part of the Brain, because
there it performs the functions of the memory, according to the Opinion of
Duncane; It is certain, that all these parts which are taken to be the feat of
the Soul, are divisible, and that they have distinct parts and figures; so the
Soul, as it is indivisible, occupies a space or place which is divisible,
whence I conclude, that the indivisibility does not hinder, but that a
substance may have a certain indivisible extension, but divisible as to the
place which it possesses, or that it may have Angles and figures, in respect of
place, though its substance essentially remain one, simple, and indivisible;
Delugo and his followers, do apply this Doctrine to tumid points; and truly, I
conceive I may take the same liberty to apply it to Atoms; from this Principle,
which is, that an Angel, or the rational Soul, are neither more simple, nor
more indivisible than a material Atom, as we have supposed it, and laid it down
as a Principle.

To these I add, that it is not sufficient that any thing be divisible because
it has Parts, but they ought to be Physically distinct and joined together by
a Physical Union, nor that each of these Parts should be of the same Essence
with the whole Compound whereof they are parts. But it is certain that the
Parts of an Atom are not Physically distinct; for the one could neither be, nor
cease to be without the other, no more than the two Essential Perfections of
Man, that is to be an Animal and Rational Creature: And briefly the Parts of an
Atom are the Parts of a Simple Being, which are in Unity, but not in Union: and
by Consequence really inseparable; which is no hindrance, but that the Mind of
a Man may be able to conceive some kind of interval, and some diversity betwixt
the Parts of an Atom, in the same manner as the Animal and Rational Natures are
represented in a Man, as if they were two Physically distinct things.

Gassendus Reasons from another Principle which is very solid, and built upon
the solidity of Atoms, but upon the insolidity of a Vacuum; he takes an Atom to
be indivisible because it is solid; but that that Solidity and Bodies likewise
are not Divisible, unless by reason of the void spaces which are found in them,
and which do desert the Interval; by which the Body may be divided 'till we
come to those Bodies, which, having no Vacuum within them, can be divided by no
Natural Cause, because a Vacuum having neither solidity, nor any power of
resisting, is the Passive Principle of every Physical Division. By a Vacuum I
understand the intermediate space betwixt the Parts: And as that which has not
a passive Principle of Motion is immovable, so also that which has not a
Passive Principle of Division, is indivisible; And that we may wholly silence
all the Cartesians, I do affirm an Atom to be indivisible, because there is no
interval in it, by which means some Agent may divide it, in the same manner,
that they deny that God is able to remove the Universe, because they say there
is no other place wherein it can be posited; which I would willingly grant
them, if there was no place without the World. It is necessary that they should
agree with Gassendus, if there be no interval in an Atom.

The Question is, If three Atoms be placed together in Order, whether the
middle one does touch the other two which are on both sides of it? This being
supposed, it must have two sides, and two several Faces. I also ask, whether an
Angel being immediately placed betwixt two Angels, together with a third, in a
straight Line of three Foot long, whether one of them be touched by one on this
side, and by the other on the other side? And since there is the same
difficulty, it requires also the same Answer.

But I answer directly, and say, That all these, for Example, square sides of
an Atom and their Faces are not Parts Physically distinct, but only simple
Beings, and Physically Indivisible, as the Philosophers do Teach, that there is
in Man a principle of Sense, and a Principle of Reason; though these two are
but a simple Being, and indivisible like an Atom, and the sole difference does
consist in the respect of their diverse Effects, and of our Spirit, which finds
an interval where really indeed there was none.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Disseminate, Congregate, and Separate Vacuum of Gassendus.
THe Doctrine of a Vacuum is contrary both to the Doctrines of Aristotle, and
Cartesius; the First was of Opinion, that it was impossible that Naturally
there should be a Vacuum, because, says he, the Universal Nature is against
it. The other Ridicules this Fear of Nature, though notwithstanding he teaches
that there can be no such thing as a Vacuum in Nature.

Gassendus on the other side affirms three sorts of Vacuums, the First of which
he calls a Dispersed Vacuum, which he says must necessarily be in all
Bodies, and this Doctrine he endeavors to prove by Motion, which cannot be
done but in a Vacuum: For that truly no Body can be moved in a space that is
taken up by another Body, because there is no penetration of Bodies, and
therefore cannot be moved but in a void space.

The Cartesians do endeavor to elude this difficulty, by saying that there is
a yielding, subtle, and fluid matter, which is not able to resist the Motion
of a solid Body forcing the same. But that this is but a flight evasion, a poor
shift, appears from hence, that this matter is incapable of yielding, unless it
were filled with small empty Pores which are dispersed through, which being
condensed and pressing themselves together, do suffer it to yield, and when it
is condensed so far that there is no Vacuum, it yields no farther, but it
resists Natural Agents, though of great force. So we see air, condensed and
compressed in an Iron Tube does resist a Staff which we endeavor to thrust
into it, therefore air, which is a matter apt to yield, ceases to be so, when
there are no more Vacuums dispersed in it, neither can Bodies enter into it,
without a peneration of the Dimensions: whence it appears, that there is no
such thing as a yielding Matter, and that every Matter in its Nature is equally
solid and resisting.

To this Demonstration I add further, That not so much as a Gnat could in the
least move it self, unless there was a Vacuum in the Air, (which is a matter^
of it self apt to yield,) but that at the same time the Region of the Air, nay
and the Heaven it self must be in motion; because if all things be full of
bodies, the Gnat cannot be moved but by driving the ambient Air, which Air also
drives the next, and that again the next, and so in a right line to Heaven it
self; and if the World according to Cartesius's Doctrine had no bounds, this
motion would have an infinite continuance, which would be a thing both absurd
and ridiculous in the highest degree.

This Philosopher did believe that he was able to elude this Reason, by
supposing this motion not to be in a right-line but Circular; but besides that
the Air is not moved but in that manner that it is driven, and that indeed it
is forced in a right line, but not circularly, as it is supposed it ought to be
moved, it is most certain that this circular motion, by altogether supposing
all Privation of a Vacuum in this Element, is impossible: For if there be no
Vacuum, all things are Full: If Full, the first part of this supposed Circle
cannot be moved, because it finds no place through which it can be moved:
Therefore it ought to remain immovable with all other things, which are in the
Universe, unless there were a Vacuum, through which it might commence its
motion.

Gassendus builds the Truth of these small dispersed Vacuums upon the truth of
the figures of Atoms and their angles, because Angles cannot but leave void
spaces in Bodies, as we see a great many Grains of Corn do leave void spaces in
the Bushel wherein they are contained, and do touch one the other. I confess
that these Vacuums are replenished with Air, but Vacuums which for the same
reason are amongst the smallest parts of the Air or Atoms, can be replenished
with no matter; and if they be replenished with it, I do demand whether the
parts of this subtle matter have figures? which if they have, they cannot be
united and joined together without a Vacuum, which if they have not, neither
have they Extension, nor are they material according to the very Principle of
the Cartesians.

To all that has been said, we may join an Experiment about the rarefaction and
condensation of bodies, and the confirmation of disseminate Vacuums, for
Example, take a Glass-Phial with a long neck, which being well heated, put it
into a Vessel full of Water, so that the end of the neck of the Vial may go a
little way into it, we shall certainly see that the water presently ascends to
a certain height, as the Air in the Vial is condensed, and gives way.

From this Experiment I conclude two things in defense of a Vacuum. Whereof the
first is, That the air is before rarefied in the Vial, and that the parts of it
are more dilated: (But this rarefaction of the air cannot be done but by the
help of the great and more copious Vacuums:) The other is, That the Water could
not ascend in the Vial, unless the air did give way, and was condensed: But air
cannot be condensed, unless the parts of it close nearer together, and that
they could not do without a Vacuum; therefore we must conclude, that air is
condensed by the help of Vacuums, which are partly taken away, and lessened as
well in Quality as in Number; as it happens in a Bushel full of Corn or Salt
when it is moved, by which motion it is not a little condensed; and the Atoms
of Fire beget a dilating Motion to the air in the Glass, but Cold produces a
condensing Motion, and as it is condensed and becomes more gross, the aerie
Atoms do also draw the Water as it were with small hooks, or the external air
lying upon the Water makes it ascend by Reason of the Vacuum which gives place,
or at least does not resist the weight of the Air.

But perhaps they will say that there is no Vacuum in the air, but that many
Particles of subtle matter do go out from the Vial, and give place to the
ascending Water. But this answer gives no manner of satisfaction, because there
is no body to force this subtle Matter, neither is there any way through which
it may pass, as also there is no Cause assigned why the Water is forced
upwards. As to this, we must have recourse to the small empty spaces which are
found in all Bodies, which Bodies are more or less fluid or solid, as they have
more or less of Matter or Renitency, as there is the greater or lesser number
of those Vacuums, whereof we speak, dispersed through them.

CHAP. XXIII. Of a Congregate Vacuum, against Aristotle and Cartesius.
GASSENDUS is not only against these two Philosophers concerning a Dispersed
Vacuum, but also about a Congregate one which is very remarkable, and is to be
found about diverse Compound Bodies. Aristotle who fights for Quality, or
Accidents distinct from Substance, rejects a Vacuum as a thing which Nature can
no ways endure. But Cartesius speaks yet more hardly of it, for he affirms that
the Production of it in the World, does not only exceed the power of Second
Causes, but even of the First Cause it self.

Aristotle endeavors to prove his Doctrine after this manner, to wit, That in
his Opinion a Vacuum would interrupt and hinder the Motion and Action of
Natural Causes: For if indeed Light and Heat be Accidents, the Sun could not
produce either of them in a Vacuum, or through it, though there was never so
little of it in the Air, equal to the least imaginable point; for according to
this Opinion, they are Accidents, and have need of a Subject, which a Vacuum
does not afford them. Descartes Builds upon another Foundation, for he
acknowledges no difference between Extention, and Matter extended; and
therefore he affirms that there is no distance between two Walls, betwixt which
there is no air nor Matter, but that they would fall close together: Which how
ridiculous it is, we shall see by what follows.

I affirm therefore, That Nature does not abhor a Vacuum, nor that it is
impossible that there should be a Vacuum in Nature; for indeed there is no
ground for this imaginary fear, and the Experiment which I bring, will most
solidly demonstrate the Existence of a Vacuum.

This Experiment was made at Clermont by the late Mr. Paschall, a Man well
esteemed by all that knew him, he took a Glass Tube four Foot long, divided
into Inches and Lines, open at one end only, through which being filled with
Quicksilver, and then put into an Earthen Vessel full of Water and
Quicksilver, immediately the Quicksilver that was in the Tube did descend,
and stuck at the height of Twenty five Inches, and Five Lines and a half, and
remained visibly in that State for the space of Five Hours.

This Experiment was afterward made in several places, two or three times, I,
and several persons of Quality and Learning being present, and indeed every
time it did more or less sink down, according to the highness or lowness of the
place where the Experiment was made, without any visible alteration in one and
the same place; I conclude, that the space which remains above the
Quicksilver, is a Vacuum, and that nothing but Light is contained within it,
we must therefore say either that Light is not an accident but a body, which
fills the space, or else that this space is a Vacuum, and that Light is in it
without its subject.

It may be said that the Glass being porous, the Air or some other Body more
subtle, might enter into the Tube, and replenish the space left by the
descending Quicksilver; but that cannot be, because the Quicksilver descends
on a sudden, and the Air could not so suddenly enter in without breaking of the
Glass: But if it did enter, why does not the Quicksilver descend to the very
bottom, but remain suspended at a Certain height?

From this Experiment it appears, That a Vacuum, according to the conception
which Aristotle has left us of it, is not impossible to be in Nature.
Secondly, that the external Air by its weight presses upon the Water and
Quicksilver in the Earthen Vessel, for otherwise all the Quicksilver
contained in the Tube, would fall down to the very bottom. Thirdly, that the
same Air has a greater pressure in Valleys than in Mountains, especially upon
those that are very high, because here it is more subtle and rare, and more
dilated by disseminated Vacuums, whereby its weight is lessened, together with
its strength and resistency.

The Opinion of Cartesius is yet more ridiculous, who affirms, That a Vacuum is
impossible even in respect of the Divine Power; which Opinion is no less
impious than it is rash, for no Man can deny, but that God is able to reduce
into nothing, the Air that is contained in the Vial, and also to hinder any
other body from coming into its place. Descartes says, that this Hypothesis is
impossible, and that if this Air was annihilated, the sides of the Viol would
immediately touch one another, because says he, things betwixt which nothing
interposes, do touch one another; That is true, that when nothing was there,
nothing could be there, or when things come together to be joined; But we
suppose here, that the parts of the Vial remain in their first State, as indeed
they do, if they are not any ways moved, which they do not, God Almighty
hindering; and whosoever denis that God Almighty is able to hinder this Motion,
and this Contiguity; in so supposing is ridiculous and rash, prescribing Limits
to God Almighty's Power.

There is moreover a separate Vacuum, that is, a space beyond the World, which
some do call an Imaginary space, in which God has not indeed produced, but
nevertheless can produce something. Of this we will speak in the Second Part,
which we now Begin.

The Second Part of Physic. In which is Treated of Celestial Things which
happen above Man.
THE World in General is a Theater of the Wonderful things of God, and a
Collection of all things which he has produced, whereof the World is the
Lowest, and least Noble; but the Heaven the most High, and the most Noble; We
do now here propose to speak of this Celestial World, and of all those things
which are above us.

CHAP. I. Of the Immense Spaces which are without the Heavens.
DESCARTES has absolutely concluded that there is no space without the
Heavens, because all are full of Matter, and that the World is not encompassed
about with Bounds and Limits, by way of a Circumference.

Aristotle and his Followers affirm, That the World is bounded by the Exterior
and Unequal part of the Heavens; and beyond that, there are void and imaginary
Spaces, in which there is nothing Real. Gassendus and his Disciples are of the
same Opinion, concerning the Limits and Circumference of the World; but he
denies that there are imaginary Spaces without the Heavens, and he says
indeed, that they are Vacuums, and yet nevertheless that they are real; and
this is it which he calls a Separate Vacuum.

The Opinion of Renatus Descartes is intolerable; because the World is limited
in its being, as well as in its duration, that is to say, by a fluid space, or
by time; it is therefore limited in respect of place, which is a permanent
space which it possesses, even to the Circumference, (that is to the Unequal
Part of the Heaven) otherwise the World would be Infinite, and absolutely
immensurable in its extension; and indeed if the World had not Limits, in
respect of time, or that the instant wherein it begun could not be found out,
it would be Eternal. In like manner, if we acknowledge no end of the World's
extension, we may say it is immensurable: But if the whole World be immense and
indefinite, as Descartes would have it, if it has neither Figure nor Extreme
Parts, it must evidently follow, that it is Infinite, for that which in all its
parts is real, or has any part which we cannot count its last, is absolutely
and actually Infinite in its extension: But if Descartes will play with the
word Indefinite, and say indeed, that the World is Indefinite, because it has
no end in its extension; but yet from thence it does not follow that it is
Infinite. I would ask him to tell me the difference betwixt an Infinite Line,
and an Indefinite one, and also between the immensity of God, and the
Indefiniteness of the World? for if the World is Indefinite, the same thing may
be said of it, that Trismegistus said of God, to wit, that it has neither
Center nor Circumference; whence it follows, that this World Occupies all
Spaces, and that it is immovable, nor can it be moved out of its place, and
that God cannot Create another World without Destroying this, because there is
no Room in which God Almighty might place it. All which Consequences are
inevitable, and the Principle of it more than rash.

The Opinion contrary to the former, which is Gassendus's, and which we
embrace, is more firm and agreeable to Reason; for it teaches That this World
is limited in respect of Place, and that it has both a Circumference as well
as a Center; beyond which there are void Spaces, in which God Almighty could
produce another, or more Worlds, greater, or equal to this of ours wherein we
dwell, if he pleased.

From this most true Opinion it is concluded, That God fills by his Immensity
all infinite Spaces, and that he is really in them, and that He is no ways
limited by the Circumference of the Heavens, and that He can there produce
another World, remote from this of ours; and according to this Hypothesis, this
distance or that interval will have its dimensions, although void and
immaterial, yet mensurable.

From thence it is concluded, That since space is (as indeed it is) immutable
and immovable, it is the proper place of Bodies, actually, or potentially as
they do or do not exist; for if a Body be in it, the space is filled, otherwise
there is a Vacuum, as we suppose, beyond the Heavens where there are no Bodies,
so that I say that the place and extension of Bodies is a permanent space, in
like manner as time the measure of the duration of things is a fluid space.

CHAP. II. Of the Heavens, and their Nature.
ALL that can be said of the Heavens and their Nature, relates to their
Substance, Figure, Number, and Motion.

The Substance of them is the same with that of the Inferior World; for there
are not two sorts of matter essentially distinct, and all Material Bodies are
equally solid and impenetrable; in that the essence of matter consists: And
although there be some kind of difference between Terrestrial and Celestial
Matter, it cannot yet notwithstanding be thence concluded that they are of a
several Nature; because all the diversity proceeds from this, that the Atoms of
the Celestial Matter are more subtle than the Atoms of the Terrestrial
Matter, and more exact, more moveable, and more perfect in respect of their
Figures, and the more perfect Bodies compounded of them, and their Mass better
united, and lastly, the whole Body more complete.

This Doctrine may be illustrated by the Example of Letters, for those which
Compose a Word, and which are accurately delineated and written, do not differ
from those which Compose the same Word, and are ill delineated and written; the
first nevertheless are better, more exact, and more elegantly formed; which
happens, in respect of the same Hand which makes them, according to the
difference of the Pen or Ink, or the Design of the Writer, who makes longer, or
rounder, or after any fashion he pleases. I say therefore, that the Heavens
which declare the Glory of God, differ as much from the Earth, as a Printed
Book from a Manuscript. Atoms like Letters are the same in both, which although
they are of the same Author, do not agree in their Figure and shape, because
Almighty God would have it so, in order to the Fairness and Beauty of the World.

The Figure of the Heavens appears round to us: This Figure is most perfect,
and therefore accounted most fit for Motion, and nothing persuades us to affirm
the contrary; but on the other hand, all things persuades us that the Figure of
the Heavens is round, since it encompasses the Earth which is round. And since
we observe the Stars to have their Nocturnal Risings and Settings, which could
never happen, if the Heavens were not Round.

The Number of the Heavens cannot easily be found out; there are some who say
there are Eleven, others reckon Nine, but the greatest part conclude that there
are only Three; that is to say, the Heaven of the Planets, which they say is
wholly Fluid, in which they swim like Fishes in the Water; the next that
follows according to this Opinion, is the Firmament, altogether Solid, where
all the Fixed Stars are placed like so many Golden Nails, or Diamonds set in
Blue; but the third is the Imperial Heaven, the Seat of the Happy, partly
Solid, and partly Fluid: because the blessed Bodies ought to dwell in a place
where they may move, and freely breath the Air of Paradise. This Opinion seems
the rather to be embraced by me, because it is most consonant to the Holy
Scripture; wherein we read that the Apostle Paul was rapt up into the third
Heaven; whereupon, from thence he testifies that he was lifted up into Paradise.

Lastly, the motion of the Heavens is uncertain: For it is a received Opinion,
that the Heaven of the Planets, or at least the Planets themselves are moved
about the Earth, as also the Firmament with the Fixed Stars. But others teach
us, that the Firmament as well as the Sun is immovable, and the Planets
together with the Earth, as being a Seventh Planet, are wheeled about the Sun.
This we examine in the following Chapter.

CHAP. III. Of the Stars, and their Substance.
AS Metals and Stones are the Ornaments of the Terrestrial World, so are Stars
of the Celestial; some of which are called Fixed Stars, keeping always the
same place; other wandering Stars or Planets, always changing place, and in
their Reciprocal Conjunctions and Oppositions coming nearer, or going further
of; the first are fixed to the Firmament or Starry Heaven, the others to the
Heaven of the Planets.

The Substance of the Fixed Stars and Planets is of the same Matter with the
Heavens, and the Earth, for there are not two first Matters, but there are many
differences to be found amongst the Compounds of the first. Between these
Compounds there are Degrees of Nobility; even as we see upon Earth, that Gold
is more Noble, more perfect, and more precious than Silver, Silver than other
Mettaline Bodies; Rubies, and Diamonds than other Precious Stones. In the same
manner it is in the Heavens, where the Sun which is the most perfect of the
Planets, and each Star has its particular splendor, which does not happen
from the diversity of matter, but from its depuration, which consequentially
arises from its distance from terrestrial and opake Bodies. How many different
Pictures can one and the same Painter make out of the same Colors, only by a
different disposition of them? how many different sorts of Books can there be
made out of the same Syllables and Words by Transposing of them? what then
hinders, but that we may grant the Author of Nature power to make out of so
many Atoms diversely disposed, so many Bodies differing in Elegancy and Clarity,
as are the Stars or Planets? The matter therefore is the same of the Heaven and
the Earth, of the Dirt under our Feet, and the Stars above us. Whereupon a
certain Ancient and Eminent Philosopher said, that the things above are like
the things below: and so on the contrary. And we know very well that Gold, as
Precious and Beautiful as it is, is of the same Matter with Lead, and there is
nothing requisite to the making of Gold, besides the depuration of the Atoms
which are its first Matter.

I do here endeavor to deliver an Idea of the Substance of the Stars, upon an
Experiment grounded upon melted Metals, and yet flowing in the Crusible; for
Gold falling into Aquafortis is like a black Powder, Silver dissolved with the
same Aquafortis, and precipitated by Sea Water, or separated by the means of
Copper Plates, is reduced into a Calx, or White, or Greyish Earth: Tin
calcined, becomes yellow like Oker; likewise Lead Calcined, becomes yellow,
white, black, and red, as we will; Copper is turned into Verdigrease, or into a
yellow and red Powder, and in like manner Iron into a red powder called Crocus
Martis, where by the way it appears how Compound Bodies become different, and
vary, without the change of their first matter, by an only separation and
division of their Parts, Corpuscles, or Atoms.

Yet if you take these Metals so Calcined, each by it self, and put them into
a Crusible in a Melting Furnace, with a strong Fire, this Powder will return
into Metal again, and shine and sparkle in the Fire; you see then that the
same matter is in a threefold different state, for being a solid Body, it is
afterward reduced to a Powder, and then again it is turned into a fluid
matter, melting and sparkling in the Fire.

And this is the thing from whence I frame the Idea, which I promised,
concerning the Fixed Stars and the Planets; for nothing better represents the
Nature of the Sun and its Substance, than Melted Gold flowing in a great
Crusible, nor nothing better represents the Fixed Stars, than the same Gold
melted in lesser Crusibles; there is nothing more like the Moon, than Silver
melting in a Crusible. The same thing may be said of Lead, in respect of
Saturn, and of Tin in respect of Jupiter, and of Copper in respect of the
bright and sparkling Venus: So also Iron melted with the Matter which Fluxes
it, leaves an Idea of the Planet Mars, yet without this Mineral which Fluxes,
it better shows its refulgent redness. So it may be truly said, that the Sun is
like melted Gold, and the Moon like melted Silver; and so of Saturn, and the
rest.

CHAP. IV. Of the Magnitude of the Stars, and their Figures.
SInce the Substance of the Stars is like melted Metal, it may be likewise
concluded, that the same is likewise round, because a melted Metal is always
round, unless it be hindered by the Mould in which it is cast, or by the
Crusible in which it is melting, and since there is nothing that compels Stars
to assume another Figure, than that which is Natural to them, and which is the
most perfect of all Figures, which is most agreeable to the first matter, out
of which they are made by the Author of Nature; we ought to grant that they are
round. As to their Magnitude, Astronomers represent them to be immeasurable,
and they take their Hypothesis from the Rules of the Optics, and from the
experience of those great Optic Tubes; the Invention of which is attributed to
Campanella, but the Restoration and improvement of them to Anthony de Reita, as
appears by his Book Entitled Oculus Enoch and Eliae. The Sun is commonly taken
to be an hundreed and sixty and six times greater than the Earth, and the Earth
to be three times as big as the Moon, and the other Stars are some bigger, and
some lesser; I would not dwell long upon a matter so far above us, especially
when I consider the weakness of all those things which Astronomers tell us
concerning them, and the dissension which is amongst the most Learned about
them.

Epicurus is quite of another Opinion, for he says that the true Magnitude of
the Sun and Stars is not much greater than they appear to us; because, says
this Philosopher, since we see them to have Natural Colors, it follows then,
that we see them in their just Magnitude; and he adds, that we never see
Objects in their true Magnitude, but when we discern their Color, Figure, and
Circumference: He endeavors to prove this his Opinion by the Example of fire,
which we behold truly as it is; greater, or lesser, accordingly as it Flames:
and after this rate, fixed Stars would not be much greater than they appear:
The same thing may be said of the Planets also, because they are less remote
from us than the Fixed stars.

I should not much dislike this Opinion, if it were not rejected by the whole
World, and that the Shades, Paralaxes, and Eclipses evince the contrary.
Therefore we embrace the most received Opinion, and positively affirm, That the
most experienced, with the help of all their Optic Tubes, are not able to
delineate the true and just Magnitude of the Planets, much less of the Fixed
Stars, whose shadow is small, and they a great way distant from the Earth.

CHAP. V. Of the Motion of the Stars.
ARISTOTLE endeavoring to avoid or shun all the difficul(...) which occur in
great plenty, concerning the Motion of the Heavens, thought he was easily able
to explain it, together with its swiftness and regularity by the help of an
Intelligent Mover, sent by God as an Adjutant Form, to move, push on, direct,
and order the Heaven, and each Planet in all their Motion.

This Doctrine seems to be at once both very easy, and very clear; for if
Heaven and the Planets have really a kind of motion, (of which there is no
doubt,) there is nothing more easy than to have recourse to an Angel, who, by
Gods Command, is the mover and directer of it. But we should sooner agree upon
the Point, by having recourse to God, the Author of Nature, and saying, that He
as the first Author has impressed this motion upon the Heaven, and the Stars,
from the beginning of the World, and that he does continually conserve it as
the First Cause, by his general concurrence, without using the Ministry of
Angels to perform it, which would be no more necessary, than to assign a
helping Angel to the motion of Animals, and the Vegitation of Plants, which no
^an will go about to do, unless he deligns to make himself ridiculous.

This Opinion supposes the Earth to be in the Center of the World, immovable,
and that the Heavens are wheeled about this Center upon the two Poles of the
World: The Asserters of this Opinion do affirm, That the Imperial Heaven is
fixed, and immovable, of a round or square Figure, and that the Firmament
observes the motion of the Primum Mobile; and by the impression of it, is
rapidly moved from East to West, together with the Fixed Stars which it
violently carries along with it.

As to the Planetary Heaven, they who affirm it to be Fluid, do also teach us
that the Planets do likewise in this vast space move with the like liberty that
Fish do in the Water, or Birds in the Air, excepting only that the motion of
the Stars is regular, and that of Fish and Birds is not. They who make to be as
many Heavens as there are Planets, or that every Planet has its Orb, are
forced to confess, that either their Heaven is fluid, or if it be solid, that
there are passages and ways through which they are carried; and to explain
these appearances, they are under a necessity of feigning certain Circles which
they call Epicicles, or Excentrix; from whence arises unexplicable confusions;
whilst others say that these Circles are only imaginary.

But they who affirm the Sun to be immovable in the center of the World, who
conclude that the Earth is in its place a Seventh Planet, and has a Motion
round it as well as the rest, and that the Firmament and the Fixed Stars (which
are annexed to it, and implanted in it, and seen with their Orbs to wheel round
over our heads) to be like the Sun, equally immovable; are forced to explain
the motion of the Planets, and find no little difficulty in explicating their
appearances; we will enquire into those which are chiefly built upon truth; by
examining first those two most Famous Systems of the World, I mean that of
Ptolomy and Copernicus.

CHAP. VI. Ptolomy's System of the World Examined.
PTOLOMY and Aristotle with their Followers, affirm the Earth to be in the
Center of the World immovable, encompassed round with Air, which they think is
next environed with Fire; and so in order there are Orbs of the Moon, Mercury,
Venus, the Sun, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, and of the Fixed Stars encompassing one
the other, called the Firmament: then the Ninth Heaven, which they call the
Chrystaline; and lastly, the Primum Mobile, which by its incredible rapidity
carries all the other Heavens with it, from East to West.

This Opinion seems to me to be absurd, because it supposes the Heavens, and
especially the Primum Mobile, to be of an immense Magnitude; so that the Earth
would be but a point in respect of Heaven. Yet Ptolomy will have these immense
Bodies, and vast Machines to be moved round this point of Earth, which seems
little consonant to reason, which dictates to us, that little Bodies are much
more readily moved round greater, than great Bodies round less; and we commonly
say when we are roasting Meat, that the Meat must turn round to the Fire, and
not the Fire turn round it. It is therefore more commodious, and more consonant
to Reason, that the Earth which is only like a point, or a Gnat, should be
moved round the Heavens, than the Heavens should turn round about it. Most
wisely therefore has the Creator of the Universe disposed things in such a
manner, that the Reasons of them are conspicuous every where; that we may say
that God does not only produce Works which are good in their substance; but
also that he has done good unto all that he has made; that is, exactly in
Number, Weight, and Measure.

Besides this General Reason which destroys and over-turns the Opinion of
Ptolomy and Aristotle; we may take another from the incredible rapidity of the
Heavens motion about the Earth; for if their Opinion be true in this
Hypothesis, and according to the reckoning of Astrologers, we must confess that
the distance of the Primum Mobile from the Earth, is above an hundred thousand
Miles; from whence may be computed the greatness of this Heaven, and the manner
of its motion, that it should perform and complete its Circle in the space of
twenty four hours; whereas all People agree in this (viz.) That the Earth
compleats forty Miles in every hour, when in the mean time its Circle is but a
point in respect of the Primum Mobile. We must conclude therefore, that its
swiftness is incomprehensible, and that every one point of its Circumference,
compleats each hour more than forty times an hundred thousand Miles, which is
incredible. To all these I add another difficulty which I have concerning this
Opinion, in explaining the manner, and the little Hooks by which the Primum
Mobile carries the inferior Orbs along with it from East to West; and that the
Heavens and the Planets go to this Pole, but come back from the other, and then
at last return to their first point, by the sole Collibration or Ballancing of
the Ninth Heaven or Chrystalline: To which if we add the solidity of the
Celestial Globes in that manner as Ptolomy has affirmed, then neither
Aristotle nor Tyco Brache with his Epicycles, and Excentricities, will be able
to take away these difficulties, or avoid horrible confusions; lastly, these
Philosophers could not explicate the regular or irregular motion of Commets,
unless by appointing Angels to guide them, which is ridiculous.

CHAP. VII. Copernicus's System of the World Examined.
THis Philosopher, and many other Modern ones have built Systems of the World
after another manner; for they place the Sun in the Center, and will have the
Earth and the other Planets to wheel round it, as we have said heretofore.

This System would be sufficiently enough confirmed by refuting of that which
Ptolomy, Aristotle, and their Followers have framed; but only this likewise
labors under its peculiar difficulties, The first of which is the experience
of our Senses, which seems altogether repugnant to this System, for according
to this Opinion, we must conclude the Heavens which seem to move, as also the
Sun it self, to be immovable; and on the other hand, the Earth to be in
continual motion, which seems to be immovable.

But this prejudice is very uncertain, nor do our senses always so exactly and
infallibly distinguish the motion of Bodies, or Bodies that are in motion, as
experience teaches: That when any one goes on Shipboard, and the Ship sets
Sail, the Shore and the Houses go away from him: For to this Man the Shore
seems to go away from him, though indeed he goes away from the Shore. Which
happens from hence, that the Eye does not discern the motion of the thing which
is moved, when it moves along with it; which happens to a Man at Sea, who does
not at all take notice of the motion of the Ship which is under Sail, because
he himself is carried on by the same motion.

To this Opinion also is opposed the experience of a Stone thrown up into the
Air, and there falling down upon the Head, or before the Feet of him that threw
it; For if the Earth is really wheeled round and moved, while the Stone is
moved, it ought to fall far enough from him who threw it. For we must conclude
that the Earth is not turned round, and by consequence that this System of
Copernicus is false.

To this difficulty Descartes answers, That a Stone must so descend, as if the
Earth was not in the least moved, because both from the same Vortex, and by the
same impression, the Stone as well as the Earth is carried round.

To this very same difficulty Gassendus answers after another manner, saying,
that the Stone falls before the Feet of him that throws it up, because it
receives two motions from the hand of the thrower, (to wit, one Horizontal, and
the other Perpendicular) which since it has received, it ought to keep also,
and to describe a Curve, regular, and parabolical Line; and after this manner
fall down at the feet of him that threw it, if he (viz.) threw it up straight,
and the Wind not contrary to it: Just as we see in a great Bullet tumbled down
from the top of the Mast, falls straight down to the bottom of it, though the
Ship Sails with a very violent Wind.

Lastly, it is objected, against the Doctrine of Copernicus, That if the Earth
be moved about the Sun, it would sometimes be nearer the Firmament and the
Pole, and sometimes farther off; and then that for that reason the fixed Stars,
especially the Pole Star, must sometimes appear bigger, sometimes lesser, which
is contrary to experience.

But they who defend this Opinion, make answer, that the mighty distance which
is betwixt the Earth and the fixed Stars, is the Cause why this difference is
not observed. But indeed, in that manner that I shall explain the motion of the
Earth, this Objection will appear to be of no moment.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Motion of the Earth.
COPERNICUS attributes to the Earth three motions, the first of which is called
Diurnal, by which the Earth is moved about its Axis, as a wheel, from West to
East, when as the Sun seems to be moved from East to West. Another motion is
from one Pole to the other, according to the latitude of the Zodiac, that is,
from one Tropic to another; which motion is called Annual or rather
half-yearly, because the Earth in Six Months time runs through the whole
Latitude of the Ecliptic, and after other Six Months it returns to the same
point from whence it had departed at the beginning of the Year: So it passes
through the same Line twice a Year, to wit, at the time of the Aequinoxes.
Lastly, the third motion is made round the Sun, whereby according to this
Philosopher's Opinion, we are sometimes nearer the fixed Stars, and sometimes
farther off.

There are not wanting some who attribute a fourth motion to these three, which
we call a Libration from East to West, and so on the contrary. But to explain
all the Appearances, the two first would be sufficient, were we not compelled
to take in the other two likewise. The Diurnal Motion of the Earth by which it
is turned and wheeled round its Axis, and which is performed from West to East
in Twenty four hours time, is hard enough to be explained, but here is the
Comfort, that there is no less difficulty found in the Opinion of Aristotle and
Ptolomy about the explaining the Motion of the Heavens which ought to be
performed in the space of four and twenty hours.

Therefore to clear up this difficulty, I suppose, if we should be compelled to
have recourse to an Intelligence, as a Mover sent by God for this purpose: We
have as much reason to assign one for the motion of the Earth, as well as
Aristotle, to assign many for the motion of the Heavens and the Planets.

By the same right we might have run back to the first Cause and its general
Concourse, after the example of Cartesius, who is not ashamed to call in This
to help him in explaining the motion of his Materia Subtilis, and the Vortex
surrounding the Earth; as also of all other Natural Motions, which God, says
this Philosopher, has produced from the beginning, and always preserves
without diminution, but only that this motion does transmigrate from one Body
into another, and as much of it as is lessened in one Body, is increased in
another: This is the Cartesian Opinion. But we are endeavoring to explain this
motion of the Earth by more Natural Reasons.

I say therefore, and suppose that the Sun is immovable in the Center of the
World, and yet notwithstanding, that like a Wheel it turns round about its
proper Center; and this is that motion which is called Circum-Rotation; and by
this motion it disperses on all sides, on every part these Corpuscles which
produce Light and Heat: These Corpuscles compose that great Vortex which is
about the Sun, and which with it is carried round, and moves the Earth which is
placed in the same Vortex with it; like as a Stone is moved by the motion of a
rapid Stream, and this same Vortex carries other Planets along with it,
accordingly as they are more or less immerged in it.

According to this explication, one may fancy the Sun to be like the wheel of a
Clock, which moves that which is next to it another way; for when one Wheel is
moved toward the right, the other which it carries with it, must of necessity
be moved toward the left: So whilst the Sun by its Circum-Rotation is moved
from East to West, the Earth must likewise be moved from West to East.

The other motion of the Earth is that which is called Annual or half-yearly,
and which arises from the Libration of the Solar Body, and of the Vortex which
drives the Earth from the part of the Pole, and makes it daily go a degree
farther; and so the Annual as the Diurnal motion each day declines one degree
only, from a Parallel, from whence arise the vicissitudes of days and Seasons;
But if the Earth returns by the same steps, as I may so say, it happens because
the Sun by its daily Libration drives it on from one part; and then after six
Months assuming an opposite Libration, it draws it back for Three Months, and
for the other three Months which makes up Six, it drives it forwards, so that
the Rotation and the Libration of the Sun makes a double or a triple motion of
the Earth, without the former's changing either its place or its Center.

All that we have hitherto said, according to the mind of these Authors, does
not as yet satisfy a Spirit curious to know the truth. So here are other
difficulties remaining which must be taken away by more sensible and more
Natural Reasons.

First, Though we affirm the Sun to be immovable, and the Earth to be wheeled
round about it; or though we affirm the contrary, there remains nevertheless,
that we give an account not only of each of these motions, but also of the
motions of the other Planets. It is demanded what is the internal or external
Cause of the Earths motion? If it be answered, that the Sun by its Libration is
the Cause of it, as we have said, and as our Opinion is; it remains that we
demonstrate the Cause, whether internal or external, that gives the Sun this
motion: By means of which being librated from one side for Six Months, it is
also librated for as many from the other side; and by this so regular motion,
it sometimes draws the Earth toward it, and sometimes drives it from it, as we
shall see in the following Chapter, what can be said about this Matter.

CHAP. IX. Of the Sun the true Center, and Heart of the World.
THe Sun being placed in the Center of the World, is like the Heart, inspiring
Life into all things, and presiding over all the Works of Nature whatsoever,
even as the Heart in an humane Body is the Principle of its Life and all its
motions; this is that admirable Machine, which without being moved out of its
place, moves the Spirits, Humors, and all the parts, of our Bodies; in like
manner, the immovable Sun by his double motion, shakes and moves the Earth as
well as the rest of the Planets. One only difficulty remains in explaining the
motion of the Heart in the Microcosme, and of the Sun in the Macrocosme: But
being about to treat elsewhere of the Earths motion, we will here only speak
of the Suns motion, which I call a wheeling of it round about the Earth, and
afterward we will speak of its Libration.

Elsewhere, we have said the Sun to be, not only of the same Nature with Gold,
but to be Gold indeed, melted in the Center of the World, and Cupellated by the
Fire of the fixed Stars, which are every where about it: No wonder therefore
that it is wheeled round like melted Gold in a Crusible; and there sparkling,
and purified. That this Hypothesis which will bring no little light to many
things, may be better comprehended, I will bring an Experiment to confirm this
Doctrine, which seems new indeed, but nevertheless it cannot be denied to be
built upon the foundation of indubitable Experience.

I say therefore, that if you take Gold and put it into a great Crusible, with
Lead, Copper, or other Metals; and make a Fire every where round it, these
Metals will be melted together, and compose a sparkling smoking Bath; this
Bath or melted Matter is in perpetual motion, and so soon as the matter is made
hot, it wheels round its Center without intermission. It would be much more
conspicuous if this melted Matter in the Center of the World were equally
distant from all the points of its circumference; for this being supposed, no
man will deny, this melted Matter fixed in the Center of the World, and Fire
being put to it every where, and on all sides, to remain in fashion as in a
Crusible, and to have the same motion of Circum-rotation and Libration which we
attribute to the Sun.

All the Obstacle we meet with at first sight consists in this (to wit) how
this solar melted Matter can remain suspended, not falling down on any part.
Secondly, By means of what Fire it remains always melted. Thirdly, How it comes
to pass that since Gold so soon as it is cupellated or refined, remains in the
Crusible in a fixed Mass, yet the Sun which is like to this Gold, is neither
fixed, nor stands it still immediately, but being wheeled perpetually round its
Center, it continues in motion, and is Librated in the Cupel without any
intermission.

To the first of these difficulties I answer, that we ought not to stand upon
it, because they who place the Earth in the Center of the World, do teach us,
that if a great hole were made through the Earth, even as far as our Antipodes,
and if a Millstone were thrown into it, it would stop in the middle, which is
affirmed to be the Center of the World, and there remain suspended; for to move
forwards either way would be to ascend: The same thing may be said likewife of
Water or other Liquids which would remain suspended. If therefore the Sun be in
the Center of the World, why should it seem a wonder that it should remain
there so suspended, since that may serve him instead of a Cupel?

As to the other difficulty which belongs to the Fire. I answer, that there is
no want of that, because we have the fire of thefix'd Stars encompassing the
Sun every where on all sides, and keeping this same Gold in cohtinual fusion,
as if it were under a great Winters Glove bored through every where with little
holes, as we find in essaying Gold. I do not say with Epicurus that the fixed
Stars are really little holes and apertures by which the empyrial Heaven which
is altogether Fiery, transmits its Ardors; but I affirm, that these are either
little empty holes, or else filled with so many Diamonds, or Chrystals, through
which the heat of the Celestial Flames pass through; or else that they are as
it were so many Carbuncles, or burning Coals. This is sufficient to convince
them of great ignorance, who have affirmed these Celestial Fires to flow from
the solar Globe, and to be borrowed thence; whereas on the contrary, they are
Celestial Fires and Flames, which passing through this great Globe of the
Heavens causes the Gold in the Cupel in the middle of the Universe to be boiled
and wheeled round by an equidistant and equally distributed heat.

I confess as to what belongs to the third difficulty, it is very subtle, and
supposes a very fair Experiment: For in the course of all my curious Labors, I
have wondered how Gold after it had a long while smoaked in the Cupel, and
circulated to expel in smoke all Foreign Bodies mixed with it, does at last
stand still, and remains suddenly fixed in the bottom, and is so condensed,
that it cannot be melted again by the strongest fire, or made to circulate,
unless Lead be added to it either with or without some other Metal; for by the
addition of these Bodies it is at the same time melted, and by the same degree
of Fire, and begins a new to boil, to be librated, and to be turned round as
before: and it will continue so as long as the Lead or other foreign Matter is
in it: From whence we may conclude, that so long as the Sun like melted Gold is
wheeled round its Center, mixed and infected with foreign Corpuscles which it
receives on every si de, as being placed in the Center of the World, and of the
Planets, which like imperfect Metals furnish it with Corpuscles which are
exhaled and are emancipated, and being mixed with it cause it to wheel round,
and supply it with matter for motion, and so long as he returns them back in
the form of smoke, like a Vortex, excepting only those which are digested and
turned into Gold, which he reserves within himself, and does farther digest and
circulate; and when they are sufficiently subtilised and purged, although
involved with grosser fumes does send them forth; which meeting with the Vortex
of the Earth, penetrates into the pores of it, and are changed into Gold,
Silver, or some other Metal; according to their greater or lesser purity, and
according to the various disposition of the Matrixes or Beds wherein they
lodge: So long I say we may conclude, that from these fumes which are sent
toward the Sun from imperfect Bodies, are made a liquid and Mercurial Water,
out of which, in the Bowels of the Earth, Gold and other metals are made.

The experience which we acquire by essaying Gold, (although after a rude
manner, in comparison of it with this great Natural Cupel) shows us this this
truth before our eyes; for I have with pleasure tried, that the fumes arising
from the common Cupels, being collected in an Alembick, are condensed into a
clear viscous, pulverulent, or gritty, and consequently mettalline Water, whose
value the curious may be able to know.

I represent therefore to my self Gold wheeled round in this great Cupel, which
is the Sun it self placed in the middle of the World, and which emitting
subtle fumes, receives other more gross, which it so long and so often
circulates, that they being in the bosom of the Earth, (the matrix of seed,
and only habitable Planet) purified and collected, do there make Gold, Silver,
or other metals. So the Sun is the Father of Metals, and especially of Gold
its Legitimate Offspring; whereas the others are only Bastards, and being
defiled in the Matrix or Womb, they cannot attain to the Dignity of Gold,
unless they are freed from their original impurity.

He then that can tell how to purify and consecrate these solar influences,
which are the fumes of this admirable Cupel, has found out a great secret in
Nature, extremely profitable both for Health, and Wealth. Let me tell you an
Experiment which I did not see, but heard related, by the late Monseigneur
Bezancon, a Gentleman well known in Paris, who professed himself an eyewitness
of it.

He said that when he was Governor of Provence, he saved a Man's Life that was
unjustly Condemned to dye, who in a grateful acknowledgement of it, showed him
a thing wonderful. This Man, said he, took a Vessel, in which put three simple
things, and buried them in the Earth, in a place exposed to the Sunbeams,
(which are the most subtle fumes) and having taken a Concave, Parabolick, or
Burning-Glass, which he placed opposite to the place wherein the Vessel was
put; the Sun Beams being collected and concentred, descended into the Vessel in
troops, in which, at length was found a very clear yellowish, and gritty Water;
which being boiled in a Bolt-head, was brought into a Powder, and afterward
being put into a Crusible with Borax, turned into Gold: This was performed
three several times. From this Experiment we must gather, whether or no the Sun
Beams do supply Water and Flames serving to the production of Gold, which, as I
have said, is the legitimate Son of the Sun, and is in the Earth the Image of
its Father.

But to make an end of this digression, I conclude that the Sun will so long
persevere in its Cupel in continual motion, and Circum-rotation, till these
Planets shall deny it Vapors, for then it would receive no foreign Matter, but
would be thoroughly purged, and so would be wheeled round no more, but would
remain Fixed. The World it self, with its motion and circulation would be at an
end, as well as all Generations, which proceed from this continual circulation,
by which the seminal and Luminous Spirits are dispersed every where throughout
the World.

I add another reflection concerning the Sun's motion, like the motion of Gold
in the Cupel; to wit, that whilst the fire of the superior Stars do without
intermission heat the Body of the Sun, foreign Corpuscles through its Pores
enter into it, nor is it ever at quiet till they go out again; for as much as
the Figures of these Foreign Bodies can by no mean be accommodated to the
figures of the Corpuscles of Gold, for they drive one another backwards and
forwards (and from hence arises the Equilibrium, and agitation of the Atoms of
Gold, which is in motion) and seeing that they cannot have a perpendicular
motion, unless they forsake the rest, they are compelled to turn round like a
Horse in a Mill, which goes on, and thinks he goes? straight forwards, whenas
he continually treads the same steps, in the same Circle: But to do this, there
must be a propulsion on every side; for Gold would not be turned round in the
Cupel, if Fire were only applied to it from beneath, and not from above, and
quite round it; which ought to be well taken notice of.

We will say then that the Sun cannot be moved about its own Center, that is
the Center of the World; unless at the same time it moves the ambient Bodies,
by the assistance of the Corpuscles coming out of its Globe like so many
streams of Light, just as we see Rivers of Water flowing out of the Sea, and
yet the Sea is never the less for this Effusion, no more than the Sun is
lessened by a continual effusion of his Light; because it receives in as much
as it pours out, and these Waters return back to the Sea, as these Corpuscles
of Light do to the Sun, by a continual Circulation.

CHAP. X. Of the Moon and its Changes.
THe Moon is like an Optic Looking-Glass, in which Light and the Corpuscles
flowing from the Sun are concentred and gathered together; from whence for
diverse respects and changes they are sent toward the Earth.

One of the Ancients affirmed the Moon to be a Planet, very near and familiar
to the Earth, it is moved about the Sun, because it is in the solar Vortex by
which it is carried round, and in it three kinds of Motions are observed (viz)
its Annual, Monthly, and Diurnal, from these diverse motions, diverse Aspects, in
respect of the Sun and it do arise, from whence are its various yet constant
appearances.

Its Figure is round, but its Mass is partly solid, partly fluid, like Earth
and Water; its roundness appears at Full and New Mons; without this roundness
we could never see its increase or decrease. Its solidity is the Cause why the
Light of the Sun is from thence reflected to us, even as by reason of its
fluidity, we observe in it obscure parts like Spots, because they do not
reflect the Sun so much as the solid parts do; but if in the Body of the Moon
there are some parts higher than others, in the shape of Mountains or Hills,
the Sun Beams do there produce small shadows, which are observed by the help of
Perspective Glasses.

That it cannot be half so big as the Earth, is proved by Optic Principles,
Shades and Paralaxes; in respect of it self it is always in the full, because
one half of it is continually illustrated by the Sun: But it does not always
appear full to us, but only at the time of its Opposition and Recession from
the Sun, and then also in respect of us it may be Eclipsed; because our Earth
at that time is directly placed between it and the Sun, and by its shadow makes
the Moon more or less obscure, as it is nearer or farther off and as it is more
or less opposite to it. These two opposite points, in which, when the Moon
suffers an Eclipse, those great Lights are found, Astrologers call the Dragons
Head, and Tail. But as the Earth by its interposition is the Cause of the
Moon's Eclipse, so also by the interposition of the Moon betwixt the Sun and
the Earth, is produced an Eclipse of the Sun; which is either greater, or less,
according as the Moon is more or less posited between us and the Sun, or is
nearer or farther from us.

Lunar Eclipses can happen naturally, only in the time of Full Moon; but these
of the Sun, in the time of New Moon. An Eclipse of the Moon may be Total and
Universal. But that of the Sun can never, without a Miracle, be so at the same
time; but this is not a real defect of light in the Body of the Sun, as it is
in the Moon, which is a dark Body, and possesses only a borrowed Light. We may
hear what Astronomical Philosophers and Astronomers say of it.

I told you before that the Sun is like melted Gold, I told you likewise by the
way, that the Moon might be compared to melted Silver; but I think it may be
truly said that its Matter, as to its Circumference, is more like to real
Silver; but be it as it is, it continues in the manner we see it, suspended in
one massy lump, a most subtle Aetherial matter, full of many empty spaces,
being by the Creator shut up in its Circumference, which hinders the Moon
chiefly from changing its place, and from being immerged more deeply in the
Sun's Vortex, whose Atoms are indeed more thick and gross: By reason of its
vacuities there is no fear that it should descend nearer the Sun, or be able to
resist the impression of its Vortex, any more than the Earth, which has plenty
of Pores, Cavities, and empty Spaces, without which it would too much resist
the solar Vortex, and would be able to get nearer its Center, that is, the Sun.
But its empty Cavities hinder that, like Air contained in a Bladder, which
hinders it from sinking to the bottom; and as the hollowness of the Quils of
Birds bear them up in the Air.

The Moon in her daily motion finishes her Course round the Earth in the space
of twenty four hours: or rather the Earth performs its daily motion about the
Sun, and its own proper Center, in twenty four hours time, the Moon being
carried away by the same Solar Vortex with the Earth, is daily retarded some
degrees, whereupon we say it rises every day later and later, until by this
resistance or retrocession in twenty nine or thirty days it has completed its
Monthly motion: And besides this Retrocession it is moved by the Libration of
the Sun from one Tropic to another, and twice in every Month runs through the
Equinoctial Line; after the same manner as the Earth does it twice every Year.
There can be no Annual motion of the Moon, unless about its own proper Center.
But I will wander no further about a matter merely Astrological.

CHAP. XI. Of the Planets, Comets, and Fixed Stars.
SATURN, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury, are Five wandering Stars, called
Planets, of the same Nature with the Sun, but less pure; whose Corpuscles are
sent and driven toward the Body of the Sun; they are likened to diverse melted
Metals, and sparkling in Chrystalline or Adamantine Cr^^bles, and the Fire
melting them, is that of the Sun and the Fixed Stars.

If it be asked why they are not joined with the Sun? I answer, that they
consist of a Matter full of many empty Spaces, and besides that, they daily
disburthen themselves upon the Body of the Sun, and supply it with matter for
depuration and resining: which the Sun sends back to them more subtilised, and
they distill down these seminal and Mettalline Spirits upon the Earth. They are
diversely whirled about by the solar Vortex; after which manner they obtain
diverse motions, as Astronomers teach us. Who affirm the Planets Mars and Venus
to be less than the Earth, and the three others much greater; although
according to their Opinion, the Diameter of the Earth is three thousand five
hundred Miles, but its circumference seven thousand Miles; including the water,
which together with the Earth, make up one Globe.

Comets according to Aristotle are Planets or Stars, produced De Novo, from
Exhalations: By which saying, this Philosopher is compelled to place all Comets
under the Moon, which is found to be an Error, by the experience of a great
many Comets which have appeared above the Moon, and the Sun too; whither
Exhalations from the Earth can never reach: All the time of their continuance
they have a regular motion, for the explication of which, Aristotle could never
assign them an Intelligence to guide them.

Seneca, the Ancients, and Copernicus, teach that Comets have been produced
from the beginning of the World, and the reason why we do not see them so often
as we do the Planets, is because they are elevated too high above us, and since
they have an excentrick motion, according to this Opinion, they sometimes, and
for some continnuance of time appear, that is to say then, when they descend
into the Heaven of the Planets. But all these Opinions are very uncertain.

This is my Opinion, that if the Sun is Gold melted in the Cupel (as I really
believe;) and that from thence Fumes and Vapors arise; it is no hard matter to
conceive that in the Solar Vortex, and in the Corpuscles exhaling from the Sun,
a great part of them are very gross, thick, and inflammable; which taking Fire,
make these Comets we speak of; whose motion is regularly directed by the Vortex
of the Sun; yet nevertheless this does not hinder but that some Comets may be
generated nearer us, from Terrestrial Exhalation.

The fixed Stars are fastened to the Firmament as so many little Suns, they are
as immovable as the Heaven in which they are included; nevertheless like the
Sun they move about their Centres, although this motion be neither useful,
profitable, nor necessary. And so nothing compels us to say that they are
actually moved.

They are all said to be bigger than the Earth, and to be in number 1022; the
Heaven in which they are, is said to be solid, clear, and transparent like Ice;
and this is that Heaven which was made in the midst of the Waters, and which
any one may represent to himself like a great Circle of Water congealed in the
form of Crystal: But according to my foregoing Hypotehsis, I had rather say
that the fixed Stars are like so many round holes or Rings, furnished with so
many large Diamonds or Carbuncles, which serve as a Medium or Vehicle to the
light and heat of the Empyrial Heaven, as we have said already.

CHAP. XII. Of Meteors in the Air.
ARISTOTLE has constituted two sorts of Bodies, to wit, Simple, and Mixed; he
places Meteors under these latter, but he calls them imperfect mixed Bodies,
because he did believe them not to have a substantial form, as perfect Bodies
have, nor to be produced by the ordinary way of Generation.

This Doctrine is contrary to our Principles; for we say that those Meteors
which we see in the Air, are in their kind and condition perfect Bodies not
differing from others, neither in respect of Matter, which is one and the same
to them all, nor in respect of substantial form produced in the formation of
them; for we acknowledge no such forms, but as unprofitable, and Chimerical.
All the difference which we take notice of betwixt them, ought to be taken upon
the account of their formation and different conditions under which one and the
same Matter, that is to say Atoms, do meet together by a disposition of their
parts, by an addition of strange Bodies, by an introduction of Vacuities, and
by a conversion of their Figures. After this manner are formed Clouds, which
are the Meteors of the middle Region of the Air, and which have Water, Air, and
Earth for their Matter; for from the Vapors of Water, and the subtle
particles of Earth, together with the Air with which they are carried up,
Clouds are formed, which are sometimes so thick, that they rob us of the Suns
Light, which happens when more of Earth, than of Air or Water goes into their
composition: On the other hand sometimes they are so subtle, that they can
hardly or not at all be seen by us, which happens when air obtains the chief
place in their composition: for in a word, Clouds are nothing else but a
congregation and mixture of Corpuscles or little Bodies of Earth, Water, and
Air, which are the proximate Matter of them; the Vortex of the Sun, the Motion
of the Earth, and the Winds, are the three concurring Causes of their mixtion
and elevation into the upper Region of the Air.

Other sorts of Meteors are Rains descending from the middle Region of the Air,
and generated from the solution of Clouds; that is to say, when Water, which
has the greatest share in their formation, freeing it self from the particles
of Earth, and parts of Air, thence forward distill as it were by an Alembick,
which happens, because its particles being incrassated by the coldness of the
Air, the water is separated from the Air, and falls down again to the place
from whence it came, in the form of little drops: From this Rain proceeds the
Earths Fruitfulness, for it never descends, but it brings some portion of the
little seminal Bodies flowing along with it. In Rains therefore is contained
Salt, and the Balsom of the Stars, which Basilius Valentinus speaks of, and
from hence all Vegetables bud and increase. The Curious enquirers into Nature
may try whether I speak truth or no, and whether they may not find a Salt as
white as Sugar, if they take away by Distillation the unprofitable parts with
which it is involved.

Dew is almost of the same nature with Rain, only it is more pure, more
subtle, and more fruitful, by reason of the Seasons of the Year which chiefly
enjoy it, (viz.) at the time of the Aequinoxes, when the Sun and the Earth are
nearest to each other, which happens when the Earth passes the Equator;
wherefore at that time it receives and carries along with it a greater number
of solar Corpuscles, depurated by his motion, than Rain, or Dew it self that
falls at other times. Dew falls down in round drops, because its Corpuscles are
round, and its Atoms are of the same Figure with the Sun, whether whole or in
parts.

Dew penetrates the Earth, and moistens those places where there are seldom
Rains: But the Sun's shining Beams presently carry it away along with them into
the Vortex; in the mean time, part of this Salt or Balsom of the Stars
contained in the Dew, remains upon the Herbs and Flowers, where we observe a
kind of Viscousness like Sugar, or Honey; thus Bees gathering this Dew, lade
themselves with it, and make Honey of it: This Dew in the Hot Countries of
Palestine, Egypt, Arabia, and Calabria, is condensed into little Grains which
are called Manna From this same Matter Sugar is made in the Madera-Islands, and
in both the Indies, where it is found enclosed in Reeds. Lastly, after the same
manner Pearls are formed and nourished in Shells. He that studies to know the
wonders of Dew, and the virtue of the Spirits it contains, may extract from
thence admirable secrets for health, but for nothing else that I know of.

CHAP. XIII. Of Winds, Tempests, and Whirl-winds.
WInds are the same thing in the Air, as Billows are in the Sea, or as Floods
are upon Land. And indeed they do sometimes disturb and move the Air so
violently, that the best rooted Trees, and strongest built Houses, are now and
then pulled up by the Roots, and overturned by them: And yet Winds are nothing
but Air agitated, nor Tempests, but Air floods, or violent Agitations of the
Air.

Some Philosophers seek for the Causes of these Agitations of Air, in the
Rarefaction and Condensation of Bodies; and to illustrate this Effect, they
bring an Experiment of Air rarefied, and going out with great force, out of a
large glass Bottle, and of Air condensed in another Phial or Glass, in which
the least opening being made, the external Air breaks in with great Force and
Noise; of both which Experiments, I with others have been an Eyewitness. We
took therefore, a great round Bottle, and placed it in a cold place, and then
covering it with a double Skin made wet, it was placed to a gentle Fire; which
by degrees being thoroughly hot, and the Skin pricked with a Needle, the Air or
Wind broke out from thence with so much violence, that it blew out a Candle two
Paces distant from it, more than once. The same Trial was made with another
Bottle, in which Pease were put, and the Hole shut with the Thumb, which
afterward being taken away, the Air immediately with the Pease, burst out with
so much Violence, that they like Pistol Bullets entered into a Dealboard. A
second Eperiment was likewise made, a Bottle was placed in a hot place, and
well stopped with Leather, which being brought into a cold place and the Skin
pierced through, the external Air for half a quarter of an hours time, rushed
into the Bottle with so much noise and hissing, that it seemed to endanger the
breaking of it.

I confess these Experiments have left us an Idea of Winds and their vehemence,
but there always remains this one difficulty, (to wit) what should be the
Principle of this rarefaction and condensation of the Air; for in the first
Experiment, refrigerated Air is shut up in the Glass Bottle, and dilated with
heat, and then it goes violently out of the little hole that is made; but how
can Cold condense, and Heat rarifie and dilate this Air? Lastly, what is it
that presses it, and forces it with violence to seek its Exit? And as to the
second Experiment, in which rarefied Air is condensed in the Bottle; how being
rarefied, can part of the Glass remain empty? And lastly, from what Cause is
the external Air forced to break in with so much precipitation. All these
things I mention, that it may be seen that these difficulties do not escape me.
As to the first instance, I say that Cold condenses Air, in as much as it makes
the vacuities dispersed through it lesser and more closely shut together; so
that there is ^uch more of matter in refrigerated Air, than in the same made
Hot: But that this Doctrine may be rightly apprehended, we must know in What
Heat and Cold consists; for when Cold condenses the Air and presses it
together, it performs it by its close, solid, heavy, and plain particles, as
shall be treated of elsewhere.

Secondly, Heat rarifies Air by an introduction of its Corpuscles, which are
almost destitute of all solidity, by which the vacuities of the Air are
increased, and enlarged.

Thirdly, the Air rushes forcibly out of the Bottle, because their Corpuscles
are compelled to dilate themselves, which they cannot do; nay, from hence they
break the Glass Bottle, unless a hole be made in the skin. It is true also,
that the Air going out of the hot Bottle is altogether Cold, for they are the
Corpuscles of Cold which go out, and the noise with which they break out
proceeds from the plain figures of the Corpuscles of Cold, which cannot pass
through the little round holes without being entangled together, and dashing one
against another; besides these Corpuscles being plain, they are subtle also
like little Razers; thus in the Winter time we see the hands and feet of such
as are tender hurt with Chops and Cliffs.

To the second Experiment I say, that the Air in the Bottle being rarefied by
the help of Heat, is afterward compressed and condensed by the help of Cold,
passing through the substance of the Glass, and breaking of it if it be not
looked after. Secondly, the cold entering in, drives out or into the sides the
particles of Heat, and the Glass on the part of its Orifice remains without
Air, and the disseminated Vacuities are gathered together into one Vacuum.
Thirdly, the external Air enters with precipitation, because it is pressed
against its Nature by this great Cold; and finding a place where to betake it
self, it possesses it immediately. We must here observe that rarefaction is
never made on the one side, but condensation is made on the other; and so on
the contrary, and this is the first or immediate Cause of Winds, when the Air
is rarefied by heat in subterraneous places, and Caverns of the Earth, and
breaks out with violence, or when it being condensed, other supervenes with
violence rushing toward it

Another Cause of Winds, or rather of Tempests and Storms by Sea and Land, are
the emancipated Atoms of which we have spoke already; and which by justling one
another, more agitate the Air from diverse parts, diversely opposite, from whence
comes the reciprocal meeting and incursion of winds in the Region of the air,
which when they happen near the Earth, they cause fearful and dangerous
Whirl-winds.

This Opinion concerning the emancipation of Atoms, supposes that in the
dissolution of greater Bodies, the lesser Particles and Atoms are emancipated,
and procure themselves liberty, so that enjoying their own power they run
through the Air, and easily and vehemently move it. These emancipated Atoms in
the great World are not only very much to be feared where they use greatest
violence, but also in the little World, where they produce most Diseases, as
are Horrors, Fits of Fevers, and their duplications, Translations to the
Brain. Diliriums or Light-headedness, and Phrensies: To Cure which, Sudorifick
Medicines opening the Pores, and driving out those sharp-pointed Atoms, are
chiefly to be commended.

CHAP. XIV. Of Thunder, Lightning, and the Thunderbolt.
THunder, Lightning, and the Thunderbolt would be more stupendous, were it
not that there is something on Earth, from whence we learn the manner how these
things are done above us.

The first thing which gives us light concerning these three Meteors, is the
shooting off of a Gun, for the Thunderbolt is represented by the Bullet, the
Fire coming out of the Muzzle represents Lightning, and the Report from thence
holds the place of Thunder.

Another thing which gives us a lively and more just Idea of them, is Aurum
Fulminans, which like the Thunderbolt carries its stroke downwards; three
Grains of which, though never so little made hot, takes Fire, and gives a
greater Report than two Ounces of Gunpowder. I will show you its preparation in
the following Chapter, and give you an account of it, and I will endeavor to
Explain how it comes to Thunder, and how the Thunderbolt falls.

Epicurus attributes the falling of the Thunderbolt to the apertures which the
Winds produce in the Clouds, but the Lightning he thinks arises when the
Thunderbolt, by reason of its violent motion in the Air, takes Fire, or, says
this Philosopher, the Flame of the Lightning is excited by the mutual meeting
of Clouds, which are Bodies made hard by vehement Cold; or else that it is
excited by the blowing of Winds, or by the heat of the Stars, which sets on
Fire the Nitrous and Sulphurous Matter collected in the Cavity of the Clouds.

The sound of Thunder may be diverse ways. First, by the revolution of a strange
Body contained in the thickness of the Clouds, and rolled through it, as we see
a solid Body shut up in a Pot, excites a sound and murmuring noise if the Pot
be moved. The same noise may likewise proceed from the breaking or bursting of
the Clouds, as well as it does from the bursting of a blown-Bladder, or Paper
suddenly and forcibly extended, or the Sail of a Ship torn by the violence of
the Winds.

In like manner, this sound may be caused from the mutual meeting together of
hardened Clouds, like that we hear, when pieces or flakes of Ice dash one
against another, either in the River or on the Bank; after the same manner also
Woods indeed stirred by the Winds, the flowings of the Sea interrupted, Linen
and Paper suspended in the Air, by their violent motions excite sounds, like
the sound of Thunder.

We may say besides, that the Thunderbolt being thoroughly lighted, and falling
upon a moist Cloud excites a great noise, such as we hear when red hot Iron is
thrown into Water, or melted Metals into Oil, Urine, Honey, or the Lees of
Wine: where we also find a certain kind of murmur, and at last we percieve so
great a noise or sound, that it threatens the breaking of the Vessel. But this
mighty noise may be ascribed to the vehement separation of the Salt, Nitre, and
Sulphur, which being mixed together are included in the Thunderbolt, and the
Cloud, as Gunpowder is in Guns and Mines. For the violent and sudden
separation of Nitre and Sulphur forcibly seperates all Bodies near them, which
cannot be done without a mighty sound. Therefore that we may the better
comprehend the Nature and wonderful effects of this Meteor, I will make the
following digression concerning Aurum Fulminans.

CHAP. XV. Of Aurum Fulminans, or Gold imitating Thunder.
EXperience shows us upon Earth a much more Natural Image or Representation of
Thunder, than that which is seen in the effects of Gunpowder; and the noise
and disturbance which this Gold when set on fire produces, does so properly
imitate the horrid noise of Thunder; that for this Reason it is called
Aurum-Fulminans. I will here give you its preparation, and I shall endeavor to
give the Reasons of its wonderful effects, and apply them to the production of
Thunder and Lightning.

Take therefore (for Example) one Ounce of calcined Gold, or leaf Gold, or else
Gold dust, and put it into a Bolt head, and pour to it three Ounces of Aqua
Regis, which being done, place it upon hot ashes, and the Gold will dissolve,
and be reduced into Water; to which pour on a sufficient quantity of fair
Water, and after that a few drops of Oil of Tartar, for then that will cause
an ebullition or boiling; which being over, the Gold will fall to the bottom,
in the form of Dust; then afterward pour off the Water that swims a top by
gently stooping the Vessel, and dry the powder in the Air, so have you
Aurum-Fulminans, for it produces all the Effects we told you of.

The Reason why it so soon takes Fire, is taken from the Atoms or Corpuscles of
Nitre, which are in Aqua-Regis, as also of the Sulphur, Vitriol, and Sal
Armoniack of which it is made; these Sulphurous, and Acid, and Volatile Salts
are united together, and the precipitated particles of Gold, (for as much as
the particles of the Salt of Tartar possess their place) dissolve their Union,
and force them to give way and be separated; so that nothing remains in the
Water but a dissolved Salt, part of which adhering to the Atoms of Gold, falls
to the bottom with them, as the increased weight of the Powder evinces: These
same Particles therefore which remain in the Powder, stick to the Gold, so that
Heat penetrating this, and dilateing this Matter, produces a sudden and violent
separation; hence it is that the Spirits of the Volatile Salts being made hot,
rarefied, subtilised, and set on fire, the Gold which before was fixed, being
accompanied with these Spirits, flies away with a Thundering noise, by reason of
the contrariety that is between the alcalous Salt of Tartar, and the acid
Salts, as it happens in Gunpowder, where the Alkali that is in the Charcoal
produces the same Effect as is seen in this Thundering Gold; excepting that the
stroke of the Gold and its explosion is made downwards, by reason of its fixity
and weight.

We see the same in the Thunderbolt, for the stroke is made downwards, the
Flash is seen, and the noise is heard: Besides the Thunderbolt produces
wonderful Effects, such as are consuming of Wine in the Vessel, melting of the
Sword in the Scabbard, the Scabbard and the Vessel being both untouched.

Therefore I conclude, that the stroke of Thunder moves downwards, as well as
Aurum-Fulminans; because these terrestrial Particles predominating, they fix
the Volatile Spirits of the Salts, and precipitate them downwards. The Flash
arises only from the rarefaction and emancipation of the solar and Celestial
Particles therein contained; but the noise in Aurum-Fulminans, as well as in
Thunder, is produced by the violent separation of the more solid and more
fixedly-adhering Particles or Atoms. But Thunder consumes Wine in the Vessel,
the Vessel being unhurt, because it consists of emancipated Atoms, which are
therefore so subtle, that they penetrate the Vessel, subtilise and rarefie the
Wine, and convert it into Atoms, which pass through the Vessel, and fly away
into the Air; but in Aurum-Fulminans the strength of the Volatile Spirits not
being sufficient to raise the Gold on high, it is carried downwards.

The Principle of this wonderful Effect relies upon this Truth, (to wit) that
subtle Bodies are more subtilised, Volatile Bodies more Volatile, and fixed
Bodies rendredmore fixed.

For this Reason, the Powder of projection so called, being cast into melted
Metal that is not fixed, penetrates it, and sixeth it by its own fixity: But
this Experience is not yet found, but is still to be found out; so that no
Experience can be taken from a thing that is not equally as certain and as
common as Aurum-Fulminans, and Gunpowder; which if there be such a Powder, and
it be such as they report it, it is a Miracle, both of Art, and Nature.

CHAP. XVI. Of Hail, Snow, Frost, etc.
HAIL descending from the Clouds, and falling down with violence, is composed
of Drops of Water hardened by Cold, and it falls down with violence, because it
is expelled the Clouds by a strong expression; almost after the same manner as
your smallest Shot are discharged out of a Musket.

Snow is Water congealed in the form of Froth; the slakes of it in its falling
are puffed up, and filled with Air, which makes it very porous and light: it
contains also many terrestrial particles, as appears in dissolving it, it is
white, but may be made black by a sole inversion of its Atoms. There are also
in it many fiery particles, which warm the hands of those that long handle it.

There is another kind of Hail also, which falls in the Spring time, it is like
your smallest Shot, or your Seeds of Coriander: This only differs from Snow in
the purity of its parts, or in as much as it has more Vacuities in it than
there are in Snow; and on the contrary, Snow has more of Air and Fire in it
than this kind of Hail, but both of them are, by the help of Heat disolving
their parts, reduced into Water.

Hoary Frost is Air incrassated by Cold, and congealed upon the boughs of
Trees, upon the Hair of Travelers, and upon the Herbs of the Field; and it is
called white Ice: In this Chrystalline whiteness a bloody redness is included,
which may be extracted out of this Hoary Frost, and which, if it be well
prepared, conduces very much to Health.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Rainbow, Halo, and Pareliae.
THe Rainbow is the most beautiful of all Meteors, and the Miracle of Nature;
it is seen when the Sun either rising or setting darts his Rays upon a Cloud
full of little globular suspended drops of Water, which by diversely breaking
and reflecting the light, produce that diversity of Colors which we observe in
it, which ceases either by a different position of the Cloud, or by the absence
of the Sun.

This Meteor appears like a Beautiful Arch, adorned with all manner of Colors,
which happens for as much as the Sun looks only upon its superficies, and then
when it is rising, or setting, and the Clouds are either in the North, or in
the South.

Some will have these Colors of the Rainbow to be only appearances, and by no
means real; but this is an Error, for there is nothing hinders but that these
may be equally as real as all other, though they are not so lasting.

An Halo is the appearance of a Circle about the Moon, which arises from a
gross and thick Cloud, upon which the Lunar rays fall directly, so that its
middle is made pervious to them, and broke through by them, though the
circumference be not, which is therefore the appearing Circle, and which is not
as it is vulgarly imagined, nigh to the Moon, but it is in the expansion of the
Air, and far remote from the Moon.

Parheliae are counterfeit Suns, formed in the Clouds, either by the reflection
or refraction of his Beams, just as we see them in Water, where sometimes many
Suns are seen, though there was never more than one. We may say likewise, that
the Clouds in respect of us are like those prospective Looking-glasses, which
represent many Images of one thing placed upon a Table, which one thing is only
real, and all the rest imaginary: Yet this does not hinder, but that these
Parheliae may be true Lights, and Suns Painted without Artifice.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Air, its Substance, and Quality.
AIR is that Element out of which the Meteors are formed which we speak of: Its
substance is most subtle, and most fluid, by reason of the Vacuities dispersed
through it. It is nevertheless thicker and heavier in the lowest Region, by
reason of the mixture of Corpuscles coming out of the Earth and Water.

Some think it only a mixture of the little Bodies or particles of Earth and
Water; whereupon the quality of the Air we breathe in, depends upon the Climate
which we inhabit: So that Air is not every where alike wholesome, but very
unwholesome in Moorish and Fenny Grounds, from whence ordinarily gross and
malignant Vapors, thick and putrid Clouds arise, which we take in when we draw
our breaths.

The very same Air we breathe in, and which, when we take our breath, preserves
our Lives by its wholesome gales, is able to bring Death to us, when it comes
laden with sharp particles, which in their passage vellicate the Lungs, and
cause most vehement coughings.

Oftentimes also emancipated, pointed, and penetrating Atoms flow in the Air,
which entering in at the Pores of the Body, disturb its whole Economy or frame:
Others ascending by the Nostrils to the Brain, stick to its membranes, and
produce Pains and Convulsions, and are the Causes of violent Head-achs,
Vertigoes, and Apoplexies: And there are some also which penetrating the Organs
of hearing, cause hummings and noises there, which continue for some time,
because their particles are of a figure fit for adhesion.

The Air most malignant, and most to be feared, is that which is pestilent, by
reason of the Atoms which come out from putrid and corrupt Bodies, as we have
said elsewhere.

The fluidness of the Air does not arise from its not being compounded of solid
and material Atoms, but from its being rare, or loose; and it is rare, because
its parts are far distant from one another: This distance necessarily is space,
this space is again either full or empty; if empty, we have rightly concluded
that there are desseminate Vacuities, if full, it must be material. Let there
be therefore material Atoms, all which mutually touch one another, and all
things will be solid, and there will be nothing fluid in all Nature, unless we
acknowledge dispersed Vacuities, from whence the rareness and fluidness of
Bodies arises, as shall be more fully discoursed of.

The End of the Second Part of Physic.
The Third Part of Physic. Of those Things which are under a Man; (viz.) of
Earth, and things Terrestrial, which are called Inanimate.
HAving discoursed of those Things which are, and happen above us, it is time
now that we speak of those Things also, which are under, or beneath us, as also
of all Things worth taking notice of in the Earth and Water, which constitute
one Globe, which we call Terrestrial. But in this Part we will consider
Terrestrial Things only as they are inanimate, according to the common Opinion.

CHAP. I. Of Earth and Water in general.
THE Earth as has been said, is a Planet habitable, having three Motions: The
First of these is about its own proper Center, which is not the Center of the
World, for the Circle of the Earth is Excentrick: This motion is impressed upon
it by the Solar Vortex, as a greater Wheel carries a less along with it, and
this is called its Diurnal motion. Another is about the Sun, as the Center of
the World, to which it is Concentrical, and requires a Years time to return to
the same point; and this arises likewise from the Solar Vortex, for the Earth,
being driven on by the Flux of the Center of the Universe, cannot be moved
about its proper Center, without sensibly making an Excentrick Circle: And from
this twofold Motion of it arises the other third, (viz.) from one Pole to the
other in the space of one six Months, and returning back again in the space of
six other; which happens, because it can go no farther, nor pass the Tropic,
unless it recedes from the Solar Circle, for here it has only the Latitude of
the Ecliptic. For if it should recede, it must ascend too, for whatsoever
recedes from the Center of the Universe, in respect of that ascends, and so
likewise from its proper Center.

The Earth in all these motions carries the Water along with it, for they both
make but one and the same Globe, which is altogether exact and regular on the
Seas part, but less accurate on the Earth's part, by reason of the Vales and
Mountains. And though it be true that the Earth does not seem to us to be of a
round Figure, yet it is proved by Experience; for that teaches us, that the
last part of the Ship which can be seen by those on shore is the top of the
Mast, and the first Things they on Shipboard see as they approach their Haven,
are the tops of Towers: From whence it may evidently appear, that the Sea is as
it were a Belly, and eminence, which insensibly is lifted up into a convexity,
that so with the Earth it may constitute one entire Globe.

Earth and Water are two immediate Principles of all Compounds which are to be
seen in this lower Region of the World; yet notwithstanding, not they, but
Atoms are the first Elements, as it is said elsewhere: There is moreover a
lesser number of Vacuities in Terrestrial than in Aqueous Bodies; and this is
the Cause that the Earth is more solid, and the Water more fluid, that is to
say, less solid than the Earth.

CHAP. II. Of Terrestrial Inanimate Bodies in general.
THere is nothing Simple, but God, an Angel, the Rational Soul, Atoms, and a
Vacuum. God is essentially Simple in a simplicity of Essence, Power, and Act;
for whatsoever is in him is an act, his Essence is no ways compounded, nor his
Power idle, nor his Action ever interrupted. An Angel is simple in respect of
essence, but his power is not always in act, nor his action (at least the same)
without intermission. The Rational Soul, which is a Spirit laid in pledge, or
at least a Physical Compound with an Organical Body, is simple, because it has
neither Integral, Physical, nor contained parts; but it self is a Physical
Part, saving only that its powers are often idle, and its actions are changed
and interrupted; A Vacuum is simple, for since it is neither a Spirit, nor
Matter, nor any thing else but a capacity of receiving a Body, and it has an
essential emptiness; it cannot be called simple, but for as much as it cannot
suffer composition by reason of its imperfection. Lastly, Atoms are simple,
because they are indivisible, and the first Elements of Bodies, out of which
all compound Bodies are framed.

I acknowledge no other Elements, no other substantial material forms in
Bodies; for they are not only unnecessary, but impossible: Yet it does not
follow from thence, that the diversity which occurs between Bodies constituting
the World, and which are the Compounds of the lower World, is no other than
merely accidental, and not at all essential: for, according to our Principles,
we determine one composition to be substantially distinguished from another, by
Atoms, which are the first Principles of its composition, and essentially by
the manner of composition, that is, by the disposition and ordination of its
Atoms, Corpuscles, and all its parts.

They who conclude that there is no Physical Compound without a substantial
form, think Matter alone with its diverse Figures, and in all its dispositions,
cannot possibly be the Cause of the special Properties which we observe in
every one Body, and that therefore a form distinct from Matter is required to
produce qualities proper to every one compound Body. As for Example, Earth is
in its Nature dry, and Water is cold; which could not happen, unless Earth did
obtain a substantial form, which is dryness; and Water such a one as Cold
requires. This is that form which restores dryness to the Earth, and Cold to
the Water, when they are put out of their Natural State and condition, to wit,
by introducing moisture into the first, and heat into the latter.

This Objection how strong so ever it may seem, is nevertheless but vain; for
we say that neither the moisture of Water, nor the dryness of Earth are
Accidental Qualities; so that this ought to gravel none but those who
acknowledge Accidental Qualities distinct from Matter.

Ours is quite another Opinion, and our Language quite otherwise: For we firmly
conclude, That all Compound Bodies which are in the World, are compounded of
Matter, every thing else being excluded, and that all contingent changes in
them arise from Matter newly added, or taken away, or changing place, or by
some confused Atoms or Corpuscles brought thither from elsewhere; or lastly,
by the more notable parts changing place, or other ways disposed by the Action
of external Agents.

CHAP. III. Of the various Qualities to be observed in Compound Bodies.
THere is a difference betwixt the Qualities of Simple Elements which are
Atoms, and the Qualities of Bodies compounded of them; for the First as well as
Atoms are immutable and incorruptible; the others as well as the compound
Bodies are mutable and fleeting. For indeed Propriety follows the Nature of
that Being of which it is the propriety: So that if Atoms are immutable by
their solidity, the same must be said of their Qualities; but Bodies compounded
of many distinct Parts, are forced to be changed, as often as their parts
change places, or are wholly separated.

That which is corrupted, as well as that which is generated De Novo, is a
Composition; for as corruption is a division of substance, so generation is a
composition of it.

To Explain this Opinion, There is nothing more commodious than the example of
Syllables, and Words: For truly Letters are immutable indeed, and according to
their different place they vary a Syllable or Word without changing their
figure, substance, and essence, remaining always the same, in what state or
disposition soever they are placed; and it is certain that the Twenty four
Letters serve to the composition of all Syllables, Words, Sayings, Discourses,
nay, of all the Books which are Composed in the World. And even as words,
Sayings, Syllables, Discourses, and Books themselves are changed, the Letters
being still the same unvaried; so also the greater and lesser compound Bodies
are changed and corrupted, the Atoms being unchanged, and remaining the same;
nothing new happens to them, unless it be that they are no more the parts of
one compound, but may be of a second, third, and others, successively to the
end of the World. When all Generations, Corruptions, and Motions in things of
Nature shall cease.

Letters are the true Image of Atoms in respect of the compositon or division
of Things: And as the substance, essence, and quality of Words depend upon
Syllables, and Syllables upon Letters and their disposition: So after the same
manner, the substance, essence, and quality of Bodies, arises from Corpuscles
or smaller Bodies, and the diversity of These from Atoms and their various
dispositions.

From these principles may be taken away a question no less agitated, than
unprofitable in the Schools: (viz.) whether in the corruption of Bodies a
reduction or resolution of the compound may be made, even unto the very first
Matter. To this it may be answered, that this reduction is continually made, in
respect of some emancipated Atoms, but not in respect of all Atoms, for the
division is not always so general, as that all the Atoms should be entirely
separated, and the small number of those which fly away is scarce able to be
taken notice of; besides that, they almost all mutually adhere together, or it
is seldom but they meet with others, to which they remain affixed, or with
Bodies into which they enter, or on which they are stayed.

CHAP. IV. Of the special Qualities depending upon the Composition of Bodies.
OUR Doctrine rests upon two general Principles, that is to say, the Doctrine
of Atoms, and of a Vacuum. Atoms are the first Elements of Bodies, because
forsooth, in their universal and radical division and solution they are reduced
into them, and the division can proceed no farther. And a Vacuum is necessary
to the explaining the motion of Bodies, and to the giving a reason of the
diverse and particular qualities of every one compound Body: For there are
Bodies thin and thick, transparent and diaphanous as Air, and Glass; thick and
dark as the Earth; and lastly, dry, and moist, hard, and soft, solid, and fluid.

We will begin with thickness, and thinness, the Parents of so great
difficulties to the Followers of Cartesius, and Aristotle: and I determine one
Body to be more thin than another, when it is endowed either with greater
Vacuities, or with a greater number of them; so Air is thinner than Water, and
on the other hand, Water is thicker than Air, because Air has more and greater
Vacuities than Water; and this is thicker than Air, because this has fewer, and
lesser.

They that reject a Vacuum, and set up a Plenitude, find themselves very much
intricated, when they are compelled to say wherein the thinness and thickness
of Bodies consist? for if they say that either of them is a quality, or
accidental form, brought out of Matter in power, or out of the power of Matter,
they conceive not what they say, nor can they assign the Nature of these
imaginary forms. But if with Cartesius they say, that there is much more of the
Materia Subtilis, or subtle Matter, in thin Bodies, than there is in thick and
condensed Bodies; I would ask them, why this Matter is more subtle and
delicate than all other Matter, for as much as all Matter is equally gross and
solid? But then they will say, that this Matter is highly rarefied. Yet
nevertheless the same difficulty remains still, (viz) how it comes to be more
rarefied? They will say that it arises from this, that its parts are not so
much compressed, therefore they will be at a greater distance from one another:
For that Cause there are Vacuities, and Intervals: For unless they be granted,
the parts are alike compressed in That, as well as in condensed Matter. If they
are alike compressed, than they are not more remote from one another; and
lastly, if they be not more remote from one another, they are no more rarefied,
and so this subtle Matter will be no less gross than any other.

We therefore explain the thickness and thinness of Bodies in a more easy
Method than these Philosophers, and the reason which we give of them is more
clear and more Natural than theirs: It is the same thing concerning clear,
bright, and dark Bodies; and we say a Body is more or less pellucid or
transparent, as it possesses a greater or lesser number of Vacuities, or as
they are placed in a right or oblique Line; so Air, for Example, is pellucid at
a certain distance, by reason of the great number of its great Vacuities; and
Glass is transparent, by reason of the Vacuities dispersed through it, which
are placed in a right Line, and are very long, as they are observed to be by
the help of a new Microscope.

The moisture and dryness of Bodies arises from a Mixtion of Atoms, or
Particles either of Air or Water predominating: For if the Aqueous Particles
predominate, the Composition is moist; if on the contrary, the Earth is more
eminent, it will be dry; and it may be justly said, that moisture is nothing
else but moist Bodies, which are Air and Water, as they insinuate themselves
into Compounds, which are therefore moist by reason of their presence, and dry
when they are evaporated: After the same manner as it happens to Wood which
has a long time lain in the Water, and becomes dry by the evaporation of that
Water which it was full of. A Linen cloth dipped in Water, and taken out from
thence, is more heavy, because its pores are filled with Water, and it remains
moist, and equally heavy, until the Corpuscles of Water are exhaled and
evaporated, which suffices to make it afterward dry and light, without the
addition of two Physical Accidents, distinct from Matter. Water therefore, to
speak properly, is not moist, but the moisture it self that moistens all things.

From the same Fountain the hardness and softness of Bodies arises; for a Body
is soft when it yields to the hand that touches, and the less it resists, the
softer, it is, but if it has no sensible resistance, it is fluid like Air, but
if it has a little more than that, then it is Liquid as Water, in which if
with your hand you thrust a Stick, it enters and goes even to the bottom. It is
otherwise in a soft Body, as Wax, and Flesh, into which indeed one may thrust
ones Finger, but it finds some kind of resistance, and there are always found
some compressed Particles that strongly resist: All which arises from the
disposition of the little Bodies, Atoms, and dispersed Vacuities, for an Atom
being in its own Nature Solid, is resisting and impenetrable to another; and if
all things were so filled with Atoms, as that there should be no Vacuum, all
things would be hard and impenetrable; nor would softness, fluidness, or
liquidness be found in any Body, but there would be every where hardness, and
an impenetrable resistency; but a Vacuum which alone does not resist, as it is
more or less mixed with Bodies, renders them less resisting, more soft, more
liquid, and more fluid: to which may be added the figure of Atoms, which is
more or less fit for Motion, and which admits of more or less intervals or
Vacuities.

CHAP. V. Of the Quantity, Weight, and Figure of Compounds.
THe same three Properties which constitute the Essence of Atoms, are found
likewise in Compound Bodies: Atoms have a certain quantity or grossness, and
obtain also weight and Figure, but they differ only in respect of their
Figures. This magnitude or grossness of Atoms, which we find out by reason
only, is visible to the Eye in compound Bodies.

The quantity or grossness of compound Bodies arises from the addition and
gathering together of Atoms, and of little Bodies which are thus formed of
them; which again is lessened by taking away the same Atoms or little Bodies.

Besides this General Cause of greatness, magnitude, and grossness, we yet
acknowledge two others, (viz.) an Exterior, and an Interior; the first of
these regards Artificial Compounds, where the Artificer as an External Cause
increases or diminishes Matter as he thinks fit: But it is otherwise in
Natural Compounds, whose Magnitude and thickness arises from the magnitude of
Corpuscles, and their grossness, and from the figure of the Atoms determining
Bodies to such or such a magnitude: So that each Tree, Fruit, and Animal
obtains a Natural and determinate magnitude and grossness, in respect of the
magnitude and grossness of the little Bodies, and the figure of the Atoms
contained in their Seeds: Hence it is that Giants beget Giants, nor do Dwarfs
ever come from Tall Parents: But if in either kind the individuals are unequal
to their Sires, it happens accidentally, by reason of hindrances caused by
contrary Agents, or by a defect or an excess of Matter, or lastly, by an
intromission of many strange Bodies which in some particular individuals
produce this irregularity.

Figure is the propriety of Bodies; which if they be artificial, the Artificer
is the Cause of determining it according to his purpose, either by adding or
taking away some particles or small Bodies; but if the compound Bodies are
Natural, they obtain their Natural figure, which depends upon the figure of
Atoms and Corpuscles. After the same manner water is round, because all the
Atoms of which it is made are round.

The Weight of Bodies arises from Matter, that is, Atoms; for that Body in
which there are Ten hundred thousand Millions of Atoms, is heavier than another
in which there is not so great a number; provided the Vacuities are equal, or
the Air it self being in their Pores be in an equal quantity: But if you take
two Bodies of the same Magnitude and Extension, That precisely will be more
heavy wherein more Atoms and lesser Vacuities are found; and consequentially
the Other more light.

The Motion of compound Bodies proceeds from external Agents, driving them on
with a greater or lesser force; and the easiness, or difficulty of the same
motion proceeds from the figures of Atoms, and of all Bodies, and from the
inclination which they receive from half emancipated Atoms which agitate all
Bodies. So we see that round Bodies are more easily moved upon a plain, and
again, those that are pointed, more easily enter into the Pores of others. But
this pointed figure is sometimes occasioned by the Artificer, although not
altogether from his hand; for it is confessed that he cannot make an absolute
perfect point out of a Matter whose Atoms are all of them round: From whence it
appears, that the Figure and Position of Atoms does very much contribute to
this; but if a Body Naturally ends in a point, as fire does, it is because all
the Atoms of which it consists, are all of that Figure.

CHAP. VI. The difference between Natural and Artificial Compounds.
THose who reject Atoms, and are the Asserters of substantial and accidental
forms, imagine with themselves, that according to our Opinion there cannot be
an essential difference assigned between Natural and Artificial Compound
Bodies; because, say they, they both consist of the same Atoms, and are alike
made from them three ways. (viz.) by Addition, Detraction, and Transposition;
after the same manner as it comes to pass in the composition of Words, Sayings,
and Discourses, which are made by a various addition, detraction, and
transposition of Letters.

This is the very same Example which we have brought, nor do we desire any
other; for from hence it is manifest, how from the same Letters, without the
addition of any thing else, Words, and discourses essentially different are
framed: And after the same manner, out of the same Atoms Nature forms
Compounds essentially different; so that there is no need at all either to
admit or have recourse to either substantial or accidental forms, which are
plainly useless in Nature.

We may here observe, and add further, That all Letters are not fit to Compose
the Name of KING. By a parity of Reason, all Atoms are not fit to make Gold; so
that all things are not made of all: But, as by the help of twenty four Letters
we express a great number of different and contrary things; so, after the same
manner, Nature out of the same Atoms Composes Mettalline Bodies, Plants, and
Animals; by adding, taking away, and transposing of Atoms; yet not
indifferently, but such and such Atoms, of such and such a figure, for all
Atoms are not fit to enter into the composition of all kind of Bodies.

From hence is the First difference between Natural and Artificial Compounds, I
mean from this addition of Atoms unknown to the Artificer, yet which Nature
has known rightly how to choose; so the Artificer makes an Arrow out of all
sorts of wood; but Nature does not make this wood out of all kinds of Atoms.

Secondly, Artificial Compounds depend upon an intelligent Cause, which in its
mind conceives an Idea and end of its operation; whereas the works of Nature
depend upon a necessary Cause, which operates without any Idea.

Thirdly, Art takes perfect and compound Bodies, and gathers them together, as
a Builder collects and gathers the Materials out of which he frames a House;
whereas on the other hand, Nature first divides Bodies, and takes those Atoms
which are left after dissolution, and fits them to the work it designed; and
out of them, by the addition of some others which it meets withal, and which
are in state of freedom, it produces new Compound Bodies.

There is a difference therefore betwixt Mixtion and Composition, as there is
betwixt the combination of Gold and Silver, and the generation of these Metals
whether in the bowels of the Earth, or in Glass Vessels, where (if it be
possible,) there is a transmutation of one thing into another: For this
combination does not in the least vary their Nature, and they are easily
separated, which does not happen in things which Nature alone, helped by Art,
rightly and duly composeth.

CHAP. VII. Of Metals and their Formation.
IF those things which are above us are unknown to us, no less are those things
also which are beneath us, and which happen in the shade and in the dark; and
it may be truly said that the production of Metals in the bottom of Mines, is
the most obscure mystery in Nature; and without any manner of trifling, to
speak like a Philosopher, all that can be said concerning this subject I reduce
to the Cause producing Metals, to the Matter from whence, and the Manner
whereby they are produced.

The Principal Cause, Chief Agent, and Parent of all Metals is the Sun, the
Planets and fixed Stars concurring likewise to it: the Fixed Stars by their heat
keep the Celestial Gold in fusion, and turn it round in the Cupel in the Center
of the World, that is the Sun; from whence issue bright fumes without ceasing,
out of which proceeds light, and which carry Heat, together with seminal
Spirits, which penetrating the Pores of the Earth, generate Gold in the very
Bowels of it: So Celestial Gold, that is the Sun, is the Parent of Terrestrial
Gold, as it is of all other Metals, by the reflection of its light upon each
Planet, each of which, together with the Sun, produces its particular Metal.
And the Earth performs the Office of a Womb, which furnishes the greatest part
of the Matter out of which Metals are produced, and nourishes them
afterward: But the Sun bestows seminal Spirits all pure for Gold, but mixed
with the Spirits of other Planets, for other Metals.

But that this generation of Metals may be rightly understood, we must call to
mind that out of Letters Syllables are formed before Words, Words before
Speeches, out of which all Discourses are compounded.

Nature does the same in the production of Metals, for she begins with little
Bodies, out of which she makes the three immediate Principles of Metals, (to
wit) Salt, Sulphur, and Mercury.

Of which, Salt is the grosser, Sulphur the more unctuous, and Mercury the more
fluid and moveable part; and out of these three, by diverse preparations,
digestions, sublimations, and fixations, she makes a Mettalline or Mineral Body.

But it might be said, as it seems to me, that the Spirits or Corpuscles
flowing from the Stars, purified in the Sun, and received into the Earth's Lap,
are incrassated, and brought into clear and limpid Water; which Water is that
viscous, sweet, and Mercurial Matter, which after some few Ages is elaborated
and digested, till at last it becomes a yellow and fixed Earth, in which the
Spirit and seed from above resides; which Spirit makes all the Corpuscles of
water it meets withal like to the former, which piercing into the Veins of the
Earth, and finding a Matter that is pure, increases the Golden Mine, until it
meets with dead Earth which hinders its propagation. But if the Mixture be
impure, and strange Matter mingled in it, instead of Gold, it only produces
Silver, Iron, or Copper, which are imperfect Metals.

From this Doctrine I conclude first of all, That by Nature producing Metals,
ought to be understood this seminal Spirit consisting of Corpuscles flowing
from the Fire of the Stars, and working these Miracles under the Earth.
Secondly, That Metals enjoy a Mettalline Life, and after their way, a
Vegetative also; that they are generated out of Mettallick Seed: Gold out of
the seed of Gold. And that this Mettallick Embryo is nourished by the Air of
the Stars, by the Spirit and Dew of the Heavens; that it grows, buds, and puts
forth branches like a Tree, which Metallourgists call a Mettalline Tree,
furnished with boughs, Trunks, and Roots, which could nenever be, without a
vital Principle included in it. Which things will more clearly appear, by what
shall be said hereafter; and especially in the experiment about the Tree of
Diana.

CHAP. VIII. Of Gold, the King of Metals.
THere are Seven Metals, (viz.) Gold, Silver, Copper, Iron, Tin, Lead, and
Quicksilver; which Chemists call, Sol, Luna, Venus, Jupiter, Saturn, and
Mercury; because they suppose each single Planet operates upon each Metal;
which is done as I told you by a remission of Celestial Spirits which are in
the Solar Globe, and out of its Vortex are carried into each Planet; who,
according to the various opposition of the Sun, recieve more or less of his
light, and send it toward the Earth, as being the womb in which pure, and
impure Metals are formed, according to the purity or impurity of the
subterranean Lodgings.

First, Gold is the Chief and Noblest of all Metals, it is the chiefest and
principal work of Nature, and the heaviest of all Metals; because the
Mettallick Corpuscles are so firmly shut and united together in it, that very
small numbers of Vacuities are left in its composition; and in respect of bulk,
there is a much greater quantity of Matter in Gold, than in other Metals.

Notwithstanding this great solidity, and firmness of Gold, yet nevertheless
there are some small Vacuities between its Atoms; for there is nothing
absolutely solid and without a Vacuum, but an Atom in particular; besides
Atoms, since they have Figures, cannot be united without leaving some empty
spaces; for unless it were so, Gold could not de divided, no more than an
indivisible Atom: There are therefore Vacuities betwixt the Atoms of Gold,
though but very small, and also betwixt its Corpuscles, and lastly, between its
little pieces.

From this well-grounded Principle, I discover the difference of the
dissolutions or divisions of Gold. The least and grossest of them all is that
which is made by melting it with other Metals; when therefore it is melted
with some, or with the least of the Seven; it is mixed with them, and divided
into infinite Particles especially if it be mingled with a great quantity of an
imperfect Metal; as for Example, if an Ounce of Gold be melted into ten pounds
or more of Lead or Copper; but the division of it is apparent from this, that
not the least quantity of this mixture can be brought to the test, but some
portion of Gold will be found in it.

Another separation is made in respect of the small masses of Gold, which is
made by the help of Aqua Regis, which divides Gold after that manner, that it
may as in the first Division be melted with any Metal; so in this second, it
becomes like the Water in which it is dissolved and divided: But since it is
only separated into very small masses, it is easily again reduced into a Body,
and to be melted with Borax, and fit to become the massy Gold it was before.

The third Division; which is called radical, (although it be not so) is made
by a proper dissolvent of the Philosophers, which is a Water clear, sweet,
pure, and not at all Corrosive; fetched from the beams of the Sun and Moon; in
which Gold is reduced into a clear and heavy Water, and is as easily melted as
Ice in warm water; and then lastly, Gold cannot be said to be reduced to its
first state, that is, body, unless this Water be turned into Earth, and this
Earth be made fusile, fixed, tinging, and fit to elevate inferior things,
making poor people rich, and to make that perfect which was not actually so,
although it was potentially.

I say this division is hardly radical, because it does not proceed from a
separation of its Atoms: For Gold is only brought into Water, and that is
sufficient; for to bring it into Atoms were to destroy it, and it would be to
no purpose; and this I think exceeds the power of all Natural Agents: For God
only is capable of reducing Gold into its first Elements, and to cause it to be
no longer Gold, either Natural, or Philosophical.

CHAP. IX. Of Silver, Copper, and other imperfect Metals.
SIlver is a Metal much less perfect than Gold, because its Atoms are endued
with Figures scarcely so perfect, for there are mixed with it, particles
reflected from the Body of the Moon, nor is that Metal so heavy as Gold, by
reason of Vacuities dispersed through it, which are both greater, and more
numerous in it than in Gold; for which reason Aquafortis dissolves it without
hurting the Gold.

It is true indeed, that Aqua-Regis dissolves Gold without touching Silver, but
that arises from the different disposition of Vacuities in these two Metals,
and because the Vacuities of Silver are too vast for the subtle Spirit of
Aqua-Regis, which passes through them without division, and from the magnitude
of these Vacuities in Silver, arises a greater sound from Silver, than is given
from Gold.

For the same Cause, a greater and clearer sound arises from Copper, than from
Silver, by reason (to wit) of its greater Vacuities, into which, not a few
Bodies of Air penetrate; which by their motion produce this sound. And for the
same reason That is also lighter than Silver; for as much as Metallic Bodies
are not so strictly bound together by reason of strange Corpuscles of impure
Sulphur mixed with them, hence it is, that Copper is not so flexible or ductile
as is Silver. They are both of them softened in Rust, because Silver has too
little and Copper too great a quantity of Sulphur; wherefore they mutually
temper each other, and the particles of each lose their acrimony.

Silver may be made potable as well as Gold, and as potable Gold is the best
Medicine in Diseases of the Heart; so potable Silver is a wonderful specific
in affects of the Head. These Medicines are potable, and extremely profitable
to Health, when they are dissolved the third way we spoke of, and are brought
into water, by a sweet water, and a Friend to Nature, and which the Sun and
Moon make use of as a Bath. As to Copper, from it is drawn a potent and
innocent Sudorifick Extract, performing wonders in Chronick Diseases. The
Spirits of these three, united by a fourth, make a most excellent Medicine.

CHAP. X. Of Lead, Tin, and Iron.
IRON is heavier than Copper, because its Vacuities are not so great, and
besides it is burdened with much strange Earth, the Corpuscles of which enter
into its Composition: It is the only Metal hard to be melted, because of this
not mettalline Earth it possesses also many Corpuscles of a dry and not
fusible Sulphur, and very little of Mercury, (especially crude) which melts
Metals; so that to melt it there is required a body abounding with Mercury,
such as is Antimony: But if it be mingled with a Sulphurous Body, it is brought
into a red yellowish Saffron-colour'd Calx, out of which are made the
powerfullest Medicines for obstructions of the Hypocondria. The Salt of it is
sweeter than Sugar, and the Salt of Antimony is like it; nor is there in Nature
above one Salt that exceeds it in virtue and eminency. These three Salts are
the restorers of the radical moisture.

Tin is a Metal abounding with much Mercury, much Salt, and but a little
Sulphur; the Salt of it is the sweetest in the World: the Particles of these
three substances leave many Vacuities in the mettalline Body, from whence
arises its greater sound and lightness.

There are three wonderful things to be observed in Tin: The first of which
appears in its calcination, in which we see the weight of this Metal
increased, although many Vapors rise up from it; and one would think that
should much abate its gravity. This according to our Opinion arises from this,
that the Pores of Tin are opened in calcination, that the compound is inverted,
and a great many Atoms enter into them and fill them, and leave fewer Vacuities
than there were before; and so upon that account there is more Matter or weight.

Another that I observe, is, That the Calx of Tin is very hard to be melted,
and indeed so very hard it is, that the wished for end cannot be obtained,
unless you add a special Melter: But this difficulty arises from strange and
immettalick Particles which have parted the body of Tin, and have entered into
its Pores, and hinder the reunion of the parts of this Metal in melting.

The third is, That Tin when it is mixed with other Metals, calcines them, and
hinders their refining; and on the contrary, makes them Volatile: which arises
from the irregularity of its composition; from its fixed Salt, incapable of
being melted; from the subtilty of its Atoms, and the aptitude of its figures,
arising from their easily being divided.

Lead as it is more sweet, so it is more sociable, it purifies and refines Gold
and Silver from all impurities and foreign mixtures: It is the heaviest of all
Metals but Gold and Quicksilver, because there is a fewer number of Vacuities
dispersed through it: After the same manner, and for the same reason, in
calcination it is increased as Tin is, and it is easily melted, because it
abounds with a crude and indigested Mercury, which makes all Metals fluid and
fusible: It may be separated also from its terrestrial part, and from its very
sweet Salt.

There are many things more worthy of note which I observe in Lead. The first
of which is its weight, not much differing from that of Gold, and arising from
that, because this Metal is in a manner almost altogether Quicksilver; as
also that the void intertities are filled with terrestrial and impure Matter,
which hinders the fixity of the Quicksilver; from whence an ill and imperfect
coagulation precipitates it self; but he that can separate this Quicksilver,
and digest it by an agreeable Sulphur in a Vessel appropriated to this work,
has found a most excellent Remedy against most Diseases: For the aforesaid
Cause this Metal is lighter than Quicksilver; and if Quicksilver be poured
upon Leaden-Bullets laid at the bottom of a Pot, the Bullets will ascend, and
swim upon the Quicksilver, as Ships upon the Sea.

Another thing that I observe, are the various colors found in Lead, which are
conspicuous only by an inversion of Atoms, and division of Bodies; as Black,
White, Yellow, Red, and all the Colors of the Rainbow.

A third thing, lastly, is the Salt of Lead (which the Chemists call Saturn,)
which powerfully refrigerates, and is of great use against the too libidinous
provocations of Venus, for it quite extinguisheth them. It is extracted by the
help of Vinegar, from whence it becomes sweet, and loses its acrimony; which
happens only from the mixtion of the Atoms, as does the milky whiteness, which
upon this occasion, the Vinegar is endowed with.

CHAP. XI. Of Quick Silver, and Arbor Dianae, or Silver-Tree.
Quicksilver, the last, and, to appearance the most imperfect of all Metals,
because it neither endures the stroke of the Hammer, nor melting, nor indeed
any other Trial, is yet most perfect, because it is nearest to Gold, that is,
to the most perfect Body; the Atoms of it are round, and in continual motion,
they adhere so loosely together that they may be separated with never so little
Fire; and be sublimed into a Mass, of white or chrystalline Powder: It
degenerates likewise into Poison, by a sole inversion of it, and by being
sublimed with an addition of Salts. It can also be reduced into its first
State, if the Artist so pleases; and it may be truly called Protheus, every
moment putting on a new shape, and receiving, and exhibiting various qualities,
and colors, according to the diverse preparations which it undergoes.

There are three kinds of Mercury or Quicksilver, there is (to wit) a
Mettalline, a Mineral, and lastly, a common Quicksilver; the first of which is
extracted out of Metals, the second out of Minerals, and the third is the
Vulgar Quicksilver; which last is also of three sorts, (viz.) either running,
or sublimated, or precipitated; the sublimated is again, either corrosive or
sweet; it is sweet (to wit) when the sublimated is mingled with running
Quicksilver; for if these two are a second time sublimed, the corrosive
becomes sweet, because the sharp points of the Sublimate are softened and
blunted by the round particles of the crude Mercury, which destroys the sharp
and sharp-pointed Atoms of the Sublimate. It is therefore needless to look for
Physical qualities in the names of sweetness, or acrimony, since the only
mutation of Atoms is sufficient to make that Matter sweet, which before was
sharp, and sour.

This Metal is called Mercury and Quicksilver, because it is in perpetual
motion; so that it seems, as it were, to live: And to make manifest that there
is in it a certain Internal, and hidden principle of Life, we need only examine
what happens in the making of the Silver-Tree, or Arbor Dianae, whose
preparation is as follows.

Take one Ounce of fine Silver, and pour upon it in a Bolt-head, three Ounces
of Aqua Fortis, and let these be left in hot Ashes, till the Silver be turned
into Water, then take nine Ounces of Quicksilver, divide them into three
parts, and put them into three Bolt-heads, or other Vessels; to which pour on
first warm Water to the height of four Fingers, and then the solution of the
Silver, taking care of each of the Vessels, and of the Matter contained in
them; which afterward let them stand all night in the Window, and, in the
morning, in every Vessel you will see little Trees, rightly distinguished with
a Trunk and Branches.

There seems here indeed a certain Principle of Seminal and Vegetative Life,
since these Trees are shaped after the manner of Plants, although there is some
difference: From whence it plainly appears, that Metals have their Seeds
likewise, and as well as all things else are generated out of Seed. But how
this comes to pass I shall not now explain, because I shall speak of it
elsewhere, in the generation of Plants; where I shall give an account of their
coming out of the Earth, and of their growth. What is specially to be taken
notice of, is, that these Trees are produced in one Night, which is never seen
neither in Fruits, nor Corn. And all that can be said upon this occasion is,
that from this very thing the motion of Atoms, and the various disposition of
Corpuscles (which by their dissolution in so little a time form these Trees,)
is best of all demonstrated. These Trees would without doubt bear their Fruit
if we knew how to water them with a water of their own kind, and to transplant
them into a Earth convenient for them.

CHAP. XII. Of Minerals.
MInerals possess the next rank to Metals: The first of which is Antimony,
called the Lead of Philosophers, containing in it self an Arsenical Sulphur,
which is Poison by reason of the subtilty of its Corpuscles; by means of which
it vellicates and corrodes the inward Membranes, as also produces Ulcers,
after which follows a Gangreen, with a corruption and division of the Parts, as
also of the whole Body, and then Death.

From hence it is that the scent or fumes of Antimony melting in a Crusible,
and drawn in by the Nostrils, is deadly; for its sharp and rough Particles hurt
the Brain by their continual motion and agitation: Yet notwithstanding the
harmfulness of this fume, it conduces not a little to correct places infected
with the Plague, because one Venom sixeth another, and hinders its activity.
Gold is purified by Antimony, for both being melted together, and the Antimony
being evaporated by the Fire, the Gold remains most bright and most pure;
Antimony carries along with it all the foreign Particles of the Gold, in as
much as they adhere to the Atoms of Antimony; from this also is made a vomiting
Wine, wonderfully purging the Body, yet not without some violence, by reason of
its vellicating the inward Membranes.

The Mineral that next follows, is Cinnabar, compounded of Mercury and Sulphur,
it is found in Gold-Mines, especially in Hungary, from whence it is brought to
us; there is found in it some portion of Gold, but volatile and indigested;
Mercury is separated from it by distillation, in a Retort, because the
Mercurial* Atoms do not closely adhere to the Sulphurous ones, and this Sulphur
is foreign, crude, and not very well digested; but if the seminal Spirit could
without hindrance have caused that the Sulphur should have been by degrees
separated from the Mercury, and the Mercury digested by a central and Astral
heat, Nature would have produced Gold out of it, but the impure Sulphur hinders
the action of the seminal Spirit in that place where the Cinnabar is found,
although below, or round about it Gold may be found ready made; having Branches
like the Branches of Trees: There is an artificial Cinnabar also, made of
Sulphur and common Mercury, from these mixed and sublimed we see a most
beautiful red is made, by a sole inversion of the Atoms.

The third Mineral is Emmery, or the Smiris-stone, which is a Marcasite found
in the Gold-Mines of India, from whence it is brought into Spain; out of it is
extracted the best and purest Gold, whose Corpuscles were wrapped up in the
Particles of a crude and unprofitable Earth: The same may be said of Lapis
Lazulus, or the Azure-colour'd Stone.

Litharge and Tutty are not properly Minerals, because they are not dug out
of Mines: For the first is only the grosser part of Gold, Silver, or Lead: But
Tutty is the purer part of Copper, the Atoms of which, being set at liberty,
ascend, and stick to the Arch of the Furnace wherein Copper is melted.

The fourth Mineral is Vitriol, containing in it self Saline, Sulphurous, and
Mercurial Corpuscles, all of a different figure. The Spirit which is distilled
from it consists of Atoms so acute, as that they cut thick humors, and hinder
vapors from ascending to the Brain: It penetrates likewise into imperfect
Metals.

Arsenick is a white and Chrystalline Mineral; there is a yellow one also
called Orpiment, and a third, which is red, called Sandover; all these three
are very violent Poisons, for the reasons above alleged.

Sulphur also is a Mineral, easily taking Fire, as being of a Fiery Nature; it
disolves and melts Iron, just as a burning Coal does Wax. There is extracted
from it a Spirit, an Oil, or Balsom performing wonders in Diseases of the
Breast. There is also another Sulphur in perfect Metals which is incombustible.

CHAP. XIII. Of Salts.
SALT is the Principle of Savours, because the Saline Atoms have Figures fit to
affect and vellicate the Organ of Taste, that is, the Tongue* and Pallat; Sea,
or common Salt is made out of Seawater, by the help of evaporation; this very
same Salt is dissolved in Water, a certain quantity of whose spaces it fills;
all which being filled, the Salt falls to the bottom, unless something else be
put into it, as Nitre, or the like, which the water carries with it over and
above; from whence it appears, that the vacuities of water are not all equal,
and that there are some of them which the Atoms of Nitre can enter into, but
not the Atoms of common cubical Salt.

Common Salt, Vitriol, Nitre, and the like, have Atoms, not only sharp or
pointed, but also like little hooks, adhering to Glass it self, though endued
with few and very small Pores; and what is wonderful, Sea Salt, or Vitriol, or
Nitre, or all of them together dissolved in water, and the water evaporated by
degrees, the Salt or Salts we see ascend according to the height of the Glass,
to the very brims of it, whither when it is come it descends on the other side,
to the very bottom of the Glass, so that it is quite covered with Salt.

From this Experiment, three things are manifest: First, that there are little
cavities in Glass. Secondly, that Salt like Ivy is endowed with little hooks.
And Thirdly, that Salt grows, and creeps up according to the height of the
Glass, just as the Sap of Trees, and nourishing humor ascends from the Roots
to the Trunk, and from thence afterward to the higher Branches, as shall be
said elsewhere.

Husbandmen experience this to be true, when they burn their Stubble; that so
the Rains falling upon the ashes, may carry along with them the Salt which is
to penetrate into the Earth, from which afterward Seed, and the fruitfulness
of the Earth arises: Salt does also preserve Bodies from Corruption, by
creeping into their Pores, and by that means hindering the Air from entering in,
which would divide and dissolve their parts, or cause a fermentation in them.

There are a great many kinds of Salts, (to wit) sour and sweet, and acid, and
bitter, and as many others as there are Tastes: Which arises only from a
different disposition of their Atoms.

As Salt is found in all things, so from them it may be extracted; and they who
extract Salt out of the Earth for the making of Nitre, do afterward expose
that Earth to the Air, where it is impregnated again with Salt, either from the
Air or Rain.

Salts have as various motions as they have Figures, which appears in the
evaporation of four Salts dissolved together in Water; for they do not only,
after the water is evaporated, remain at the bottom, but also each of them
chooses to it self a proper place, and fastens it self to it, without mixing at
all with the others, by reason of the irregularity of their Figures.

From the Salt of Urine is extracted a Spirit, which mixed with Spirit of Wine,
composeth a Body hard enough, because those Spirits by filling each others
Vacuities, are hardened; for nothing becomes* hard but in as much as its
vacuities are either filled or made less.

From Tartar a Salt is extracted, which is the Salt of Wine, out of which
calcined, and dissolved in a cold place, is made an Oil, which being mixed
with Oil of Vitriol, a great boiling arises, and that being over, a white
powder falls to the bottom, called Tartar Vitriolate; for all the moisture of
the Tartar enters into the vacuities of the Spirit of Vitriol, and the Salt of
Tartar recovers its first state, that is, of a white Powder. But the strife
betwixt them proceeds from the disagreeableness of their Atoms, by reason of
which, they very much justle one another. That Salt which is called Sal*
Polychrestum, is not of less usefulness, because it drives out peccant Humors
extremely well. It is compounded, that is to say, of Nitre, and Sulphur: D.
Seignette adds to it moreover another Salt, and indeed I must say, that that
has succeeded better than all others; and that his Sal Polychrestum is a very
innocent, and a most excellent Remedy.

CHAP. XIV. Of Subterraneous Fires, and Earthquakes.
THere is no Man can doubt, but that there are Subterraneous Fires, the
Mountains of Hecla in Island, Aetna in Sicily, and Vesuvius in the Kingdom of
Naples are invincible arguments of them; as there are the Fires of the Stars
above us, so there are Fires below us, called Subterranean, lighted beneath the
Earth, from the beginning of the World; or at least, Bituminous and Sulphurous
Matters were never wanting beneath the Earth, no more than Coals or Bituminous
Stones, which easily take Fire, and Flame.

Therefore the setting them on fire was not at all difficult, for there needed
only one little spark arising from the striking together of two Flints, or from
a Lamp or Candle, which Miners carry along with them into the Pits, that so
they may the better work there: The same also might happen by Lightning; or
lastly, Fire might be kindled of its own accord, by a fat and unctuous
humidity; after the same manner as wet Hay, and such like Bodies, heat and take
Fire.

From these Subterranean Fires, the heat of Mineral Waters arises; nor is
there any fear that these should extinguish these Fires, for Bitumen burns in
water, as the Experiment of Camphire teaches us.

Earthquakes are produced by winds, that is by a troop of emancipated Atoms
which shake the Earth; places most obnoctious to these, are the Seacoasts, by
reason of Winds and Tempests creeping into the Bowels of the Earth, through the
holes made hollow by the Water. But these Earthquakes arise when the Earth
recedes never so little from the Center of its gravity, or is interrupted in
its motion about the Center of the Universe, that is, about the Sun; or else,
when it is driven to and fro by the Solar Vortex, and this is a fourth motion
of it, by means of which it is sometimes nearer the Sun in a straight and
perpendicular Line, from whence sometimes happen intolerable Summer heats, or
mild Winters, or on the contrary, as we may have experienced.

CHAP. XV. Of Waters, and their differences.
THere are many kinds of Waters seen, which I here propose to speak a little
of: The first of them is that which is called the common Elementary Water,
whose Atoms are round, and vacuities plenty, and triangular. This may be
rarefied, and condensed, as the Corpuscles of Fire entering into its Vacuities,
either dilate them, and remove the parts of Water from one another; or the
particles of cold compress them, and shut them up by their gravity, or else
expel from thence the particles of Air, which had insinuated therein: Sometimes
water is so closely shut up by Cold, that it is congealed, and brought into
cones of Ice, from whose lightness appears the quantity of Air that has got
into the Pores; and from its hardness is manifested that the vacuities of this
Air are very much compressed.

Another Species of Water is that, which is called destilled Water, and which
by the help of Alembicks, is extracted out of all kinds of Simples, which is
thus done; the Particles of Water which are in Plants do free themselves, and
are driven upwards in the form of Vapors; which striking against the Head of
the Vessel are incrassated, crushed together, and condensed into little drops
of Water, which fall down through the beack of the Alembick: After this manner
Rains arise and fall upon the Earth; and from hence we may learn that Vapors
are nothing else but Water rarefied, and that in Nature there is a continual
Circulation, whilst Water ascends, and descends; it ascends in the form of
Vapors, and makes the Clouds; and it falls down again in Rains and Dew.

A Third sort of Water is called Aquafortis, extracted out of Mettalline
Salts, so that, to speak properly, it is not Water, but Spirits, that is, the
most subtle and most acute Particles that are in the Salts, and by force are
freed from them, and which forsaking their terrestrial parts, carry only the
watery parts along with them, with which they compose a sensible and fluid
Body. This Water dissolves Metals, and brings them into a corrosive Liquor: So
we may see what Saline Corpuscles are able to do when they are freed from their
Earthy part, nor shall we any more wonder at the effects which proceed from
serosities and salt Phlegm in humane Bodies: We may from hence also learn from
whence the intolerable pains of the Gout, Gripes, and the Cholick do arise; for
these are corrosive Spirits freed from their Earthy part, which become so sharp
and penetrating, that they pierce through the parts on which they fall, pulling
and tearing them asunder.

The following Species of Water is that which is called Aqua-Vitae, which is
nothing but the more subtle Corpuscles of Wine, which are of a Fiery and
Sulphurous Nature, and do very easily burn, and take Fire, by the means of
fermentation.

An Aqua-Vitae is extracted out of all kinds of Grain, Pulse, and Plants: It is
a wonderful thing truly, that we see a Linen Cloth dipped in Aqua-Vitae, and
set on fire, and yet nevertheless it is not burnt, nay not so much as scorched:
Which proceeds from this, That in Aqua-Vitae there is a kind of Salt, whose
Corpuscles sticking to the Linen, defend it from the burning heat of the
Flame, which applies it self to the Sulphur only; not being able to touch the
Salt, or the Subject to which it adheres.

Under the fifth Species of Water are comprehended Mineral Waters, so called,
because they contain in them a great many Mineral Spirits, as various as the
places through which they pass, and as various as the Metals and Minerals
which they meet with in their passage: Amongst them some are hot and boiling,
because they run through places in which Sulphur and ^itumen are heated: Of
these there are a great many in France, but the most Natural and sweetest of
them are the Waters of Bourbon, which conduce very much to the Breast and
Stomach, and to the whole Body, by opening their Pores and vents, taking away
by transpiration Head-achs, Rheumatisms, and Pals^es; and they might deservedly
be called an Universal Medicine, because besides the Virtues above described,
they possess wonderful ones also in the Stone of the Kidneys, and curing Fits
of the Mother; unless that they too much irritate Ulcers and inward Apostems,
as also they discover them if they lie hid.

I have Chymically extracted out of these Waters a Salt as white as Snow, and
altogether like to Sal Polychrestum; and I can affirm that Nitre also and
Sulphur are contained in them: For this Reason, their sharp Particles enrage
inward Ulcers, and for the same Cause, sharp-pointed Dock-Leaves being ca(...)
into the Wells of Bourbon, the Salt hinders them from withering. After the same
manner as the Salt of the Aqua-Vitae keeps the lighted Handkerchief without
being hurt, as we observed before.

There are also other hot Waters, which instead of Nitre are impregnated with
Vitriol; whereupon they purge by Stool much more than the others, but they are
not altogether so safe.

Of these there are many kinds, but all the Bourbon Waters are alike, except
the Waters of Jonas, which are not to be reckoned amongst the best. Moreover
the Waters of Bourbon-Lancius in B^^gundy are the hottest, and have some parts
of Nitre and Sulphur, but the greatest part of Bittumen; wherefore they serve
for Bathing indeed, but not at all for Drinking, because they purge only by
transpiration, and plentiful Sweats.

There are also a great many cold Mineral Waters in France, and amongst the
rest those of Passy les Paris, which besides that, they as well as other spurge
by Stool and Urine, they have this peculiar quality, that they cure Agues, and
cool in Burning Fevers; they open inward and inveterate Apostems, they open
Obstructions of the Liver, Spleen, and Bowels, by the help of the Spirits or
Corpuscles of Iron which they carry along with them out of the Mines through
which they pass: Some of these are stronger, some sweeter, and lastly, some
decayed.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Sea, its Ebbing, and Flowing, as also of the Saltness of
Seawater.
THe Sea goes about the Earth like a Circle or Girdle, and the Earth is like an
Island in the midst of it: But if by the Author of Nature cavities had not been
dug in it, in which the Sea might be placed, it would overflow the whole
Earth.

The first thing in the Sea that offers it self of Note, is the Saltness of its
Waters, Originally produced from saline massy Bodies, produced at the beginning
in the Earth, and melted by the help of the Waters, which from thence as now
they are, were impregnated with Saltness. The heat of the Sun does not a little
contribute to th^^ saltness, consuming its humidity and Phlegm, as do also the
Salt which Rivers and Floods wash out of the Earth in their passage thither:
From whence it appears, that it may be truly said, that all the Salt which is
contained in the Earth, is carried into the Sea, and drawn out of the Earth by
the help of Rivers, and Waters derived from them, and running through the
Earth, whilst they are filtred to constitute Fountains of fresh Water. Now if
we could filter Seawater after this manner, there would never be any scarcity
of fresh water in Ships, and long Voyages.

Another thing that I observe in the Sea, is the Ebbing and Flowing of its
Waters, in some places so very remarkable, and regular in their turns every six
hours.

There are some who have thought that Rivers entering into the Sea on one part
are the Cause of its flowing, but falling into it from another part, are the
Causes of its Ebbing. Others have attributed this effect to winds, but the
greatest part to the motion of the Moon, and to the condensation and
rarefaction of the Lunar Air. This is the Opinion of Antonius a Reita, extant
in his Book entitled Oculus Enoch and Eliae, where he supposes that rarefied
Air presses the Sea, and lifts it up on both sides like Mountains, from whence
there arises its Flowing: Which Air being afterward condensed, the Sea begins
to subside, and the Waters to return to their first State, that is, they Ebb.
He endeavors to build this Opinion, by this Argument, (to wit) that this
motion is most observable at the Full of the Moon, at which time the Air is
very much rarefied, and at the new of the Moon when it is very much condensed.

For my part I would rather say that the Ebbing and flowing of the Sea arises
from the Earths motion from one Tropic to the other: For it cannot possibly in
its diurnal motion move a degree forwards daily as it does, without driving the
Waters from one part, and attracting them from the other.

According to this Opinion a reason may be given why its ebbing and flowing is
only from South to North, and from North to South, and that they are lesser
between the Tropicks: Besides, there is nothing contained in this Opinion which
is not very probable. But if there are some irregularities observed in ebbing
and flowing, they arise from Islands, Rocks, Straights, or Promo(...)tories,
which very much hasten, retard, or lessen this motion; and partly upon this
account, that is to say, by reason of the Straights of Gibralter, there is no
notable ebbing and flowing in the Mediterranean Sea; besides it is seated
between the two Tropicks, and is neither too much Northerly, nor too much
Southerly.

CHAP. XVII. Of Springs and Rivers.
THere are two kinds of Springs, (viz.) those that sometimes run, and those
that run always; the first proceed from Rains, but these arise from the Sea:
But to speak properly, the Sea is the source of all Springs, and Fountains; for
Rains arise from Vapors raised out of the Sea by the help of the Sun, and then
falling down by drops, out of which arise the first sort of Springs, which are
not perpetual.

But perpetual Springs are derived from it more immediately, by the help of
some subterraneous Watery Storehouses which are filled by aqueducts proceeding
from the Sea.

It is commonly asked why Seawater is salt, and yet Spring Water which comes
from it is sweet? To which difficulty it is answered, the aqueducts rising out
of the Sea run through subterraneous Sands, by which the Water in its passage
(...) filtred, and deposits its Salt, or else the Salt is precipitated and
falls to the bottom of these subterraneous Watery Storehouses, as we see in
Salt Pits, or after the mixing of Oil of Tartar and Spirits of Vitriol; or that
the Atoms pass through imperceptible aqueducts through which the saline Atoms
cannot pass, by reason of their square Figures: So water is made fresh by the
help of straining: Or lastly, by the means of distillation. So water being
raised up in Vapors, and then condensed, distills into other receptacles which
recieve it, and send it to others, till it comes to the place where the Spring
breaks out.

It seems a Wonder, that Springs arising out of the Sea should be able to
ascend to the tops of Mountains. To which difficulty it may be answered, that
the Water of the Sea is equally as high as the highest Mountain, because the
Earth and Water make but one Globe, and the Mountains of the Earth do appear to
us to be high and lofty, only in regard of the Plains and Valleys in which we
are placed, and from whence we look upon them: But the Sea is higher than the
Plains and Valleys, if you conceive it all Universally, because it makes a
perfect Circle: And if a Line should be drawn encompassing the whole
terraqueous Globe, it would be found a perfect circle, without any irregularity.

From this supposed principle it is evident, that Seawater does not ascend,
that it may find an exit out of the tops of Mountains, but that going out of
them it descends, and produces Rivers in the middle of Plains, and bottom of
Valleys.

And this They ought to mind, who have said that Water ascends out of the Sea
to our Mountains, three ways, by which it is wont to be raised; (to wit) by the
means of Pumps, Pipes, or woollen Cloth; so they say Seawater may be drawn up
to the height of Mountains, by help of the Beams of the Sun, and Stars; or by
Channels or Pores unknown to us, and made in the shape of Pipes, and disposed
of after the manner as we see all the Wine in the Vessel taken out from thence
by the help of a Pipe; or lastly, Sea water may insinuate it self into a spongy
and light Earth, which imbibes it, and causes it to ascend and flow; after the
same manner as we see all the Water contained in a Basin, to ascend to the
brims of it, and by degrees to go beyond, by the help of Cotton, or a little
Woollen Cloth: As pleasant and as subtle soever as this fancy may be, I think
my Opinion is better grounded, and more agreeable to truth.

By what has been said, it is apparent hitherto, that Seawater supplies
Matter to Springs and Fountains; these do supply Matter to Rivulets, and
Rivulets to Streams and Rivers, which empty themselves into the Sea; from
whence they come out to moisten the Earth, and that, as I said before, by a
continual fluid circulation.

It may be lastly asked, what may be the Cause of this circulation, and from
whence proceeds that force, with which we see Floods and Rivers to run
downwards? For to say that Water will seek after its proper Center, is to fly
back again to an Occult Cause, and to renounce our Principles. I conclude
therefore, that the Atoms, Corpuscles, and drops of Water are of a perfect
round Figure, and since they have a certain inclination without hindrance
nothing can keep them back, but that without interruption they do and will
drive one another forward even to the World's End.

The Fourth Part of Physic. Of those things which are in Man, and of Man
himself, as he is a Compound, Physical, Animated Body.
WE are now come at length to our Fourth and last part of Physic, wherein
according to what we proposed, we are to speak of the things which are in Man,
whom now we consider as a Body animated: Which compels us to speak of the Soul,
and of Life in general, and afterward descending to special, we will explain
the Life of Man as he is rational, and we shall endeavor by Natural Reasons to
prove the immortality of his Soul.

CHAP. I. Of Life in general.
LIfe, as we have said elsewhere, appears only by action and motion: So those
Beings which have most of action and motion, obtain also most of Life: And we
say a Man is dying, when there is but little motion left in him, and dead, when
it is quite abolished.

Every motion is not a vital motion, for that it may be so, it must be Internal
of the thing that acts, and proceed from a Principle that is not external:
Wherefore the motion of a Stone that is thrown into the Air, is not a vital
motion, because it comes from an external Cause; (to wit) from the hand of him
that throws it.

I say further, that it must be the motion of a Compound Body, if it be a vital
motion; and for this Cause, the motion of Atoms is not so, because they are
simple and indivisible beings, neither capable of Life nor Death. And for as
much as Atoms are not Compounds, though they compound Bodies; so they are not
said to live in the least, although without their impression and ministry
there is no Life, nor no motion in the Bodies we speak of.

Life therefore is an action and motion of a Compound and Organical Body
arising from an internal and seminal Principle: And in this sense Metals may
be said to possess a certain kind of Life, since they obtain a certain motion
of vegetation, by which they grow: and we may determine this motion to arise
from an internal and seminal principle, though it be abstruse enough, and the
Organs of Life scarcely appear; so that it is a very difficult matter to
distinguish them in Plants, and in some Animals, as in the Fish called a
Muscle, and in Oysters, which are nevertheless endowed with a more perfect life
than Metals and Plants. We shall in the following Discourse tell you wherein
this Life consists, and how Metals and Plants dye as well as other living
Creatures.

There is a great difference between Life and the Principle of it, though not in
like manner between Life and motion, or vital action. For Life is the action
and motion of diverse Beings gathered by Nature together, and united after such
a manner, as that the parts of it move one another, as we see in Machines; and
what the Pullies and Springs are in these, the same are the Spirits in Natural
Compound Bodies, that is, the most swiftly moving Atoms.

From this Doctrine is collected, first of all, That there are Atoms more
swift, and fuller of Motion than others, by reason of their subtilty and
figure, such as are Celestial, Fiery, and Luminous Atoms, to wit, such as
Heaven, the Stars, Fire, Heat, and Light are compounded of: This we judge by
the compound Bodies that are made and framed out of them: For humane Spirits
instructed with material Senses, is not able to penetrate into the essence of
Atoms, and their special difference. But we determine that the Atoms out of
which Heaven, the Stars, and Light are made, have Figures, and activities
greater, more perfect, and more fit for motion, than those that compound cold
and heavy Bodies, although (when the thing is well considered) it may arise
from their greater liberty, and more perfect Figure.

Secondly, according to our Principles, we must say, That the Vital Spirts so
called, are nothing else but a certain number of Atoms free from all
composition, and such whose Figure and condition renders them unfit for service
and slavery: This Doctrine supposes that there are two sorts of Atoms in
Nature, some of which like Common People are destined to Imprisonment, Service,
and Bonds; but others, like Nobles to liberty, and command over others: Now
those whose Lot it is to be like the Commons, are made to compose the Machines
of our Bodies, and they are such as entangle one another, and are linked and
bound together in the formation of Bodies; whereas those which cannot be bound
nor undergo Slavery, are destined to move the whole Machine of our Bodies, as
not being fastened to any part, but running through all parts, and bestowing
every where motion, sense, and disposition: These are what are called Vital
Spirits, because they bestow Life, that is, motion: These Atoms therefore are
not Life, but the Principles and Authors of it.

Sometimes Atoms that Compound Bodies get out of Service, and as often as
occasion offers, and Bodies ^uffer division, are emancipated; for in all
separations and corruptions of Bodies some Atoms do fly away, and like the
first seek to recover Liberty; and when it happens that these Fugitive Atoms
are mingled together with those that are essentially free, from thence arise
conflicts in our Bodies, and from These, Ill dispositions and our Diseases,
which there is no help to be hoped for, nor any cure, unless these rebellious
and emancipated Atoms are restored to their first confinement, or else driven
out of the Body, that so by this means the Spirits may remain pure and
altogether free in their motion, and not be interrupted by these irregular
Atoms which are the common disturbers of Nature and Health. And for as much as
some Atoms continually fly out of those Bodies which we use for nourishment,
by reason of diverse degrees of Corruption which they are forced to undergo
before they can be changed into our substance: So it is certain that there is
always in us some principle of a Disease to be found, and that we never in this
World enjoy a perfect Health, and that those are only most healthy who are less
sickly than others: As I have said elsewhere, that there are no Men absolutely
wise, but that they that are called wise, are less ignorant than others.

But moreover, if Captive Atoms are sometimes freed by emancipation, so on the
other hand, those which are not used to be detained, are sometimes
incarcerated, and involved with others, nor can they stir beyond the limits of
their Prison: And there are some which in like manner are so included with
others by the Providence of the Creator, and necessity of Nature, and some only
by accident, and the power and plenty of Matter encompassing them. So the Atoms
shut up in the Heart, that they may give motion to it, and to the whole Body,
were incarcerated at the beginning of its formation, or rather being cast into
seminal Bands when God created it; afterward they are translated out of this
first Prison where they had little or no motion, into another, where they enjoy
a more free and wandering motion, as shall be more fully discoursed of in the
following Chapters.

The third thing that flows from this Principle, is, That these same Atoms are
the Cause of Motion and Life, and that there is more of action, and more of
Life, where these are in greater plenty and number; provided the Corporeal
Machine be disposed to motion: For one of the principal Springs being broke,
the vital Atoms lose their action, the greatest part of them exhale and
withdraw themselves, and others wandering about, continue Vagabonds without any
order or method.

So that it is necessary that the parts of a Compound Body should be disposed
in some Order, which when wanting, the vital Atoms exert no motion; but this
order of parts would be to no purpose, unless the vital Atoms were present to
give them motion: The same thing we observe in a Clock, where an integrity and
just disposition of the Wheels are required, together with the force of a
Spring to set all the Wheels in motion.

Although there be a great proportion and likeness between living Natural
Bodies, and these artificial Machines, yet nevertheless there is a great
difference between them, for Atoms are Natural Springs, and exist Originally in
the seed out of which the Body is produced, and they themselves are the
Artificers of the Machines which give increase to it, and dispose the Parts of
it in such manner, that they may there exercise their motions, and this is that
great Artifice of Nature, which operates by seeds produced from God, which
exceeds all that ever Art can devise.

CHAP. II. Of the Differences of Lives.
THe difference of Lives are only known by the difference of Vital Actions, of
which there are four kinds, (to wit) the Mettallick, Vegetative, Sensitive, and
Rational.

Man the little World, enjoys a Life, under which all others are comprehended,
and chiefly in him we observe a vegetative Life, as in Plants, and a sensitive
as in Brutes; besides which two kinds of life, He possesses a third of his
own, which is a rational Life; He is nourished, that is, and grows like Plants,
he is begotten of another, he is sensible as an Animal, and he speaks and
reasons as a Man; all these different operations which we see in Man,
persuades us to consider him especially, and to begin with the life of Plants,
which seems less considerable than the sensitive and rational, and which
comprehends under it, their generation, growth, and nourishing, which three are
equally conspicuous in Man as in Plants, though in a more noble and more
eminent manner.

CHAP. III. Of the Vegetative Life, common to Man and Plants.
THe Life of Plants appears from their growth which supposes Nutrition, and
both these suppose a Birth, and this implies a Generation: For whatsoever grows
in a vital manner, and by Nature is nourished; so likewise whatsoever is
nourished, has a birth, and every thing that is born, is begotten. We will
therefore begin to speak of Man's generation, and of the first forming of him.

The Generation we here speak of, is the production of a thing out of Seed,
under this generation are comprehended. Conception and Birth, as Separation and
Death are included in the Corruption of things. This is that which is not found
in the Works of Nature, whose conception is made in the mind of the Artificer,
and its Formation depends upon his hand, but all that is external to the work,
which may be afterward broken and divided; when in the mean time it cannot be
said that we take away Life from it, or bring Death upon it. So that whatsoever
is Begotten, to speak properly, Lives, and whatsoever lives is produced out of
Seed: Now Seeds are created from the beginning, and by the Author of Nature
ingrafted into every Plant, and kind of Tree bearing fruitful Seed: So we see
that there is a perpetual propagation and increase of individuals in every
Species in the Earth, as well as in the Waters and in the Air.

All and the only difficulty remains in explaining the Nature of this Seed, and
the manner of its propagation. These two are Mysteries in Nature, which seem to
surpass all humane reason: Nevertheless I will give you my meditations of them.
And first of all, I suppose we may consider Seed in general, and as it is to be
found, as we have said, in Metals, Plants, Animals, and Man. For after this
manner being looked upon in general, it is nothing else but a Medium disposed
by God to the propagation of these four several kinds in the World, so that one
Substance as to its kind produces its like in the same kind; as Metal is
produced from Metal, and a Plant from another Plant, etc. From whence appears
the fanciful Folly of Chemists, who strive to multiply Metals without a
Mettallick Seed, and to produce Gold without its peculiar Seed: For the same
thing that in general Seed, is in respect of the four named generals; the same
in special, is Seed in respect of the individuals which are produced of it.

For indeed to produce Plants, the Seed is only to be sought for in the
vegetable Kingdom: So in like manner to produce Corn Seed is required, that is,
a grain of Corn; to produce an Apple, there is need of the kernel of an Apple,
or at least a Sien of it, which contains in it part of the Spirits and seminal
Corpuscles, which insinuate themselves into the wild Stock of the Tree in which
they are ingraffed or inoculated, and produce the same effect that a grain does
which is thrown into Earth fit to receive it.

This is that vegetative Seed which we here speak of; and in this regard we
consider Man, as he is partaker of the life of this Species, and begotten out
of Seed. Nevertheless we are to distinguish the two substances in Man; (viz.)
the material part, which is his Body; and his spiritual part, which is his
Soul, Created by God, whereas the other is begotten. So that we here speak of
Man only, as he is a material Compound, without meddling with his Soul which is
immortal.

These things being supposed, I turn me to the two difficulties, which I have
obliged my self to explain, and I design them a peculiar Chapter.

CHAP IV. Of the Nature of Seeds, and of their Propagation.
THe Learned Fernelius affirms that Seeds contain an Astral and Celestial
Spirit, but Galen, that they contain something Divine. These great Wits have
spoken most wisely, and have considered the seminal Spirit as a thing
surpassing the Capacity of our Spirits; but what is much tobe lamented, they
have left us in admiration, and ignorance.

Therefore I try as well as I can to resolve these difficulties, that I may
perform my promise.

First of all, therefore, since Matter is every where one and the same, nor
does the Astral and Celestial differ from the Terrestrial, as we have said
elsewhere, but only in this, that Atoms which make Celestial Bodies, have
Figures different from them which compose terrestrial Bodies, and that the
Particles of those are better and more strictly united than these: I say we
must not conclude with Fernelius, that the Elements of the Stars are different
from the Elements of the sublunary World; nor with Galen, that that divine
thing in the Seed, is a certain part of Divinity: But we must confess, that
Seeds are Bodies composed of many parts, not only in respect of the sperm and
diverse coverings in which the seminal Spirit is shut up and kept, but also in
respect of the seminal Spirit it self, which is not a Simple thing, but a Body
compounded of most subtle Atoms, excellently figured, made, and proportioned,
that as an Original they may serve to the forming all Copies afterward in the
propagation of the Species. These are the Atoms, as I said, shut up, yet
without Bonds or Servitude.

This Doctrine is agreeable to our Principles, and as we have compared Atoms
with the first elements of Grammar, which are Letters; we say likewise,
according to this Opinion, that Letters may be made and written so exactly, as
to serve as a pattern to make others by: in like manner, among Atoms there are
some so well made and formed, and disposed in so just an order, that they may
serve for Samples and Patterns to others; and in this manner I conceive of
Seeds.

I come now to the next difficulty, which represents the multiplication of
every individual, by a sole dilatation of Seeds: but the manner how this
dilatation is made, is not easy to be explained; but I apprehend it after this
manner.

A grain of Corn, which is a Seed, is thrown into the Earth, where it
putrifies, and is dissolved by an acid menstruum which contains in it a Spirit,
whose Atoms are partly of the same Nature with the Spirits of the Seed, or at
least are subtle enough to penetrate into the vacuities of the husk of the
Grain, and sperm in which the seminal Spirit is shut up, which Spirit (the
coverings of it being dilated by these apertures) frees it self from the Prison
wherein it was detained, and the Atoms and Original Corpuscles begin to drive
on one another, they being themselves driven on by the Atoms of the acid or
dissolving Spirit, which acted the first part in the Play, and received its
motion from the others: For whatsoever is moved, is moved by another, and so
successively the parts of the World, Particles, Corpuscles, and Atoms mutually
drive on one another, and this motion began with the World and will continue
'till the end of it, when God will fix all things, and put a stop to all
generations.

So that these seminal Spirits being thus loosed, and endowed with liberty by
the acid Spirits, are still driven on by them, and being pressed, rise upwards,
and form a stalk with a very slender top, by the concourse of the Salt of the
manure, and out of the corruption and division of dissolved Atoms of the
neighboring Bodies which they luckily meet withal, or which are thrown into
the Earth near that place on purpose; this is what Husbandmen know very well,
who for this reason Dung their grounds, and burn the stubble.

But if they knew how to steep their grains, or sees Corn in an acid
dissolvent; or water their grounds with it, there would be none found so
barren, but would become fruitful, nor would the Husbandman be a little pleased
with his plenty of Corn, and from thence the truth of our Principles and
Experiments would be manifested.

Man, who is generated out of Humane Seed, and like plants receives his first
formation, does in this case very much excel them. For as in his dignity he
excels all things that have material life, so also he is begotten and conceived
after a more Noble and more Eminent manner; and we may say with Plato, that a
Man of all wonders is the most wonderful, not only in his perfect being, but
also in his first Formation. This Formation is indeed a Miracle of Nature;
which cannot be more naturally explained, than by saying, That the Woman's Womb
after having received the Man's Seed, is shut up by the Contraction of its
Fibers, and the seminal body, finding there an acid juice, putrifies and is
corrupted, in the space of Eight or Ten Days: The Seminal Spirit thus
extricating it self, and joining with the Blood that is there, and even now at
the beginning being joined to the Woman's Seed, out of Two is made One,
partaking in the Conception of Father and Mother, which is then afterward
formed by the help of this acid Blood which dissolves it, and is the Cause why
these two seminal Spirits are joined together, and out of two, compound One
only Being, which is called Embryo.

The whole Wonder consists in this Ordination of Parts, which are disposed in
so elegant an order, that there is no man in the World able to give them so
just an order and disposition; and now, behold what I think of this business.

Besides the general providence of God, which I acknowledge in all things, and
besides that particular one, which he takes care of Man as of his own Image, I
cannot but return to the motion of Spirits or seminal Corpuscles which form a
Body fit to undergo their operations. As many as proceed from every one part of
the Body generating, produce a part in the Body generated; and form it like
themselves: The Corpuscles or seminal Spirits derived from the Eyes, form Eyes,
and we may say the same of the other parts of the Body; this supposes Seed to
proceed from all parts of the Body, and from hence we gather, that their parts
who exceed measure in the Venerial act, are all weakened, especially the Brain,
which is sometimes so shaken together, that it heavily decays, and the powers
of it are dissolved: So that these sort of Men often dye, seized with
Epileptick Convulsions, Palsies, Tremblings of the Nerves, Arthritick Pains and
Defluxions. It remains therefore to know how the parts of the Eyes form the
Eyes, the parts of the Brain the Brain, and the parts derived from the Hands
and Arms, the Hands and Arms of an Embryo: For we see that the Blind beget
Blind, and the Lame the Lame, unless the Mothers Blood supplies this defect.

I say therefore that in the resolution or dissolving of the seminal Body,
there is necessarily caused a motion of Corpuscles mutually driving one another
to and fro, each possessing that place which gives them its Figure, by which
they are detained in a due site, nor can they abide elsewhere. So the
Corpuscles which form the Eyes, are of that Figure that they cannot be placed
elsewhere, without a violent concussion of these mutually self impelling Atoms,
and these concussions are sometimes the cause why when the Women are hurt, the
Child is not at all formed, and that by reason of the sole inordinate motion of
one Corpuscle, which either does not, or being hindered by others which cause
this motion, cannot find a place due to its Figure.

It is plain therefore that seminal Corpuscles have the Figure of that part
from whence they are derived, and the whole humane Body is no otherwise shut up
in a small part of Matter, than an whole Oak in an Acorn, and an Apple in a
Kernel.

The example brought by me above concerning the diverse kinds of Salt dissolved
in water, which in evaporating part asunder from each other, and each
possesses his place, not without a difference of Figures, will give some light
to this my Doctrine.

CHAP. V. Of Nutrition, which Plants and Brute Beasts have, common with Man.
NUtrition is a vital action, and so proper to Living Creatures, that as there
is nothing nourished that is not Living, so there is no Living thing that is
not nourished.

All the difficulty lies in the manner of Nutrition, for no Man doubts but
Animals and Plants at the beginning of their existence are nourished, and grow,
which could not be, without the addition of new Matter, which is changed into
the substance of the thing Living.

This addition of Matter takes in, its attraction, preparation, digestion, and
its distribution through all the Parts of the Body nourished.

These opperations appear in Plants, wherein it is amiss to attribute that to
Nutritive, Attractive, Digestive, and Distributive Qualities, which may be
explicated by the motion of the Atoms or seminal Corpuscles contained in the
Seed.

But because Nutrition is much more conspicuous in Living Creatures, and
especially in Man, it will be necessary to explain the Reason how that is
performed in him in the first State after Conception; and afterward, when the
Organs are formed: For there is need of Aliment, that the Organs which are just
formed, and tenderer then, to be sufficient to undergo their Operations, may
grow and be increased. So that at the very moment he begins to live, there is a
necessity that he should be nourished.

CHAP. VI. How and with what Aliment an Embryo is nourished 'till the time of
his Birth.
THe first thing that is done after the laying together of the parts of the
Embryo, and the disposition of its Organs, is, the infusion of the Rational
Soul, which God in one and the same moment Creates, and gives to this little
Body as its Lodging, Forty, or sometimes more days after its Conception: what
is done before the infusion of this Soul, to speak properly, is nothing else
but a disposition of the Organs to receive it.

This admirable Structure begins from the Heart, Head, Bones, and other
particular Fundamentals; and when it is already completed, and the Soul
infused, the seminal Atoms Presidents of the formation of the Body, persevere
in performing their works, taking as Companions of their Office these Particles
of the Mothers Blood which may serve to nourish the Infant, being sensibly
solicitous for its increase, 'till the time of its Nativity. Yet nevertheless
it is very difficult thoroughly to declare the true Reason of the Nutrition and
Life of the Infant for seven or eight Months together.

Gassendus recounts three Opinions of the Ancients concerning this thing, the
first is of Alcmaeon in Plutarch, affirming the Infant to be nourished by all
parts of the Body, drawing in by the help of the Pores a necessary Aliment.

The second Opinion is by the same Plutarch attributed to Democritus, this
Philosopher teaches, that the Infant is nourished in the Mothers Womb, in the
same manner as it is nourished when born, to wit, by the Mouth, and this is the
Cause he says why the newly born seek the Breast with open Mouth.

The third is Aristotle's, Galen's, and many others, who conclude that the
Infant takes no nourishment in the Womb but by the Umbilical Veins, which
taking their Original from the bottom of the Matrix, insinuate themselves into
the middle of the Abdomen or Belly, where being collected into one Trunk, they
lead on the Mothers Blood into the hollow part of the Liver, where part of it
is carried into a Branch of Vena-Cava, and part into a Branch of the
Vena-Porta, and the two Arteries which accompany the Umbilical Veins, having
passed the Liver, each of them apart go to the two Branches of the Aorta or
great Artery, and carry the Arterial Blood which they bring thither, that it
may all be distributed through the whole Body of the Infant, and changed into a
substance fit for its Nutrition.

This Opinion is confirmed by the refutation of the two former. For the first
is false: For if the Infant was like a Sponge, it would not be nourished, but
swelled, by the Water or serous humor in which it swims, and which is
contained in the Amnion. The second Opinion is not probable: For the Infants
head is placed betwixt both knees, nor can it suck the Caruncles, which are
covered with a Skin, as is supposed, unless at one and the same time it should
attract the water wherein it lies hid, or penetrate the Membrane in which it is
involved.

The third Opinion standing firm, which I believe rests upon a better
foundation, nor does the Infants Stomach generate Chyle, nor its Liver Blood,
the Mothers Blood subministring all those things: And from hence it is, that a
Woman with Child communicates to the fruit of her Womb the purity or impurity
of her Blood, her good or ill nourishment, as also her Health and Diseases; and
these Diseases are hereditary, not but that there are some which proceed from
the Fathers, whose impure Blood, licentious living, ill nourishment, and
frequent excesses afford matter to these evils.

Besides, we may say, that the Infant in the Mothers Womb does neither live nor
breath, but by the Mouth, Heart, and Lungs of the Mother; from whence it comes
to pass that the Infant for the most part follows the Mothers affections and
inclinations; and seeing that in the state wherein it is in the Womb, it is
tied to its Mother in so strict a bond of Union, it is impossible that she
alone should be feverish, nor that the bigbellied Woman should dye, the Child
remaining alive and healthful.

CHAP. VII. How Man is Nourished after he is Born.
AMan Born has need of Nourishment: now nothing can nourish him which has not
some Spirit of Life: So Roots, Plants, Corn, Pulse, Flesh, serve to the
nourishing of a Man, and all this business is performed by the benefit of Atoms
and vital Corpuscles passing from one Compound Body to another.

This Nutrition is necessary to increase the substance of the born Infant, and
so there is need of a new Compound Body to serve it for Aliment: And this
Compound Body must of necessity perish and be destroyed, that so it may nourish
the other Compound Body that is to be produced.

Such a Compound Body is Milk, being Blood made white, and fit to nourish the
Infant; and the same Blood wherewith the Infant was nourished in the Womb,
being brought by the Epigastrick Veins to the Mammillary's, is there prepared,
and by a sole inversion of the Atoms, or a different combination of the
Corpuscles, this Blood is turned into Milk, which by the Child's Sucking being
drawn into its Mouth, is received into the Stomach where the first digestion is
perfected, and without any other Mystery, the Chyle becomes Milk by the sole
inversion of Atoms, their site being changed: moreover, this Chyle brought by
the branches of the Vena-Porta (according to the Ancients Opinion) to the
hollow part of the Liver, is converted into Blood, and becomes what it was just
before; this demonstrates the circulation of Compound Bodies, which are turned
from one thing into another, the first Elements of things always remaining in
their own Nature in such a number of mutations. Blood being in this manner
prepared in the Liver, is carried from the greater Vessels into the lesser, and
out of theseit distills like Dew into the Parts of the Body, and is there
converted into a substance homogeneal to the Parts that are nourished, and by
this addition of substance the Body is nourished, and increases.

This addition differs much from that, by which Stones take their increase; for
this accretion proceeds rather from an external Agent, than from an internal
Principle, and is almost totally performed in the superficies; whereas in
Living Bodies, Animals, and Man especially, it is done by Internal Agents which
make part of the Compound, and Universally extend themselves into all the
inward parts which are nourished.

We must constitute also another kind of difference between the reason why
Plants and Animals are increased, and the manner how stones and Metals
themselves take their increase. And in Animals indeed, three diverse States are
to be considered.

The first is of Augmentation, in which an Animal by Nutrition acquires more of
substance than is dissipated, which happens in a Man from the time of his
Nativity to the Age of two and twenty.

The second is a State of consistence, where the Animal by aliments acquires so
much substance as it loses in taking pains, which happens to a Man from two and
twenty to forty four.

The third is of decrease, wherein a Man loses and dissipates, more substance
than he acquires by aliment, and this happens to a Man from forty four to the
sixty eighth year, and longer.

Aliment therefore is the support of Nature, without which it could not make up
the losses which we suffer by the evaporation of the more subtle parts, or by
a Consumption of the moist, or by an alteration, loss, and ablation of the
solid parts: But besides that, this very thing discovers that continual loss
which the substance of Living Bodies makes, by reason of the opposite motions
of Atoms which mutually drive one another to and fro, some reciprocally moving
others, and the more fixed those that are less fixed: It does also constitute a
difference between this, and the Life of Metals, which doubtlesly increase
inwardly, and outwardly, by reason of an internal and external Principle, and
new addition of substance: But some contingent loss or dissipation is not
repaired by this Addition, which we may see in Plants, and more distinctly in
Animals.

The Life of Animals, which in some things they have common with Plants, does
yet differ from it in many circumstances, which do not occur in Plants, for
Plants have neither Bones nor Teeth to take and chew their Meat, but they take
their aliment by sucking, without chewing, by which very thing the first
digestion and resolution of aliments is performed.

Hunger and Thirst precede this chewing, which does not appear in Plants.
Hunger is the desire of a solid, and Thirst of a moist Body. Sharp-pointed
Atoms move Hunger, and the Corpuscles of the acid Liquor which velicates the
tunicles of the Stomach. Thirst has its beginning from the drying up of this
acid Liquor, its moisture being consumed by the heat of the Liver, or by
violent Labor, by reason of this dryness the Orifice of the Stomach wrincles
it self up, and the parts of the Jaws, Palate, and Tongue perceive pain and
pricking; to which it requires no other Remedy but Liquor, when the Atoms fill
the wrincles and tissures proceeding from the evaporations of the humid parts.

CHAP. VIII. The Sensitive Life in Man, and other Animals.
MAN would not be in the number of Animals, if he did not enjoy a Life of sense
as well as other Animals, but he is an intelligent and rationable Animal, and
by a special privilege bears the Image of his Author.

He possesses a Spiritual and immortal Soul, than which there is no other
substantial form in the World, and consequentially, only Man is compounded of
Matter and Form. So that all those substantial Forms which go by the name of
vegetative Souls in Plants, and in Brutes by the name of sensitive Souls, are
nothing else but vain illusions, since Atoms and Corpuscles are the internal
Principles of all the sensitive operations which we distinguish in Living
Creatures.

Five of these operations are thus numbered, (viz.) Seeing, Hearing, Smelling,
Tasting, and Touching. To these we may add respiration in all Animals, or the
greatest part of them, and Speech specially in Man.

These operations are not made after the same manner in all Animals, for Man
the noblest of them all, is neither sharper sighted, nor quicker of hearing
than the rest: And in the same respect the other Senses are much more perfect
in other Animals than in Man. The Lynx is sharper-sighted, the Hare hears more
distinctly, the Dog smells better, the Ape enjoys a more exquisite taste, and
the Spider a more delicate touch: For all these kind of Operations are purely
Natural and Animal, and do not depend upon the Will or Reason, but upon the
sole disposition of Atoms, and the construction of the Organical Parts.

CHAP. IX. Of Sight, its Organ and Object, (viz.) Light.
SIGHT is the chiefest and most noble of all the Senses, whether we consider
its Organ and Object, or the operation of it by it self, and the necessity of
it. The Eye is the Organ of Sense, its object is a colored and lucid Body, for
without color and light there can be no seeing.

The Eye is made up of three tunicles, (viz.) the Horn-like, the Grape-like,
and the Net-like: This last is in the bottom of the Eye; the Grape-like Tunicle
has a perforation called Prunella, and the horn-like is the outward covering of
the Eye, some part of which we call the white of the Eye.

The Eye enjoys likewise three transparent humors, (viz.) the Watery,
Chrystalline, and Glassy: the Optic nerve, rooted in the Brain, and applying
it self to the bottom of the Eye, brings hither the Spirits or visual
Corpuscles woven together out of a luminous substance. The particulars
belonging to the composition of the Eye Anatomy will teach: Let us speak
something of the Object of Sight, and first of Color.

Color which Bodies exhibit to us, is nothing else but light reflected and
interrupted by the Angles of the Atoms, and the very small Cavities in the
extremities of Bodies, as also a diverse reflection and refraction of that
Light, upon which the variety of Colors depends.

Experience favors this Doctrine, for Galls being broke and thrown into
artificial or Natural Vitriolated-Water, give a black color like Ink; and
hereby is known whether Waters contain any high of Vitriol, Iron, or Copper:
For Mineral-Waters when they pass through an Iron Mine by an addition of Galls
grow black, but others not; and this blackness is not any Physical and
accidental quality produced in Water by the throwing in of Galls which are not
black; but this change arises only from a new position of Atoms and Corpuscles,
whereby the Rays of Light are bended and broken after a new manner.

The same thing happens if you mix Minium which is red in its own Nature, with
Wine-Vinegar, for that will turn white; and the yolk of an Egg mixed with
Turpentine looks altogether like a white kind of Cream. Now in all these and
other Experiments nothing happens besides a perturbation of Atoms which take a
new place, and reflect or refract Light after another manner, without any
production of any new Accident.

Nor is Light any accident or Physical Quality, as the Disciples of Aristotle
will have it, but a real effusion and spreading of Corpuscles, which flow from
the substance of the Sun and upper Stars, and more or less penetrate through
the empty spaces of the Air, as the Air is more rarefied, or more condensed.

It will be convenient to remember here, that we place the Sun in the Center of
the World, and say that the Sun is of one and the same substance with Gold,
Gold melted and purified, and that its glittering and rays is properly that
which we call Light, and which is reflected upon all the Bodies of Planets,
amongst which, the Earth only is supposed habitable; these Sunbeams are
nothing else than that which we call Light, so Light is a certain thing
compounded of the Atoms of Gold, by a mutual connection amongst themselves
bound together, and which tie all the parts of the World to their Center the
Sun. From whence it is easily gathered, how all things act by virtue of the
Sun, and that the Sun it self also is an helper that Man be produced from Man.

The truth of this our Doctrine appears from those things which we brought from
Monsieur Bezancon's Experiment. Light therefore is of the same Nature with Gold
and the Sun, and is therefore Gold, or the Sun rarefied, and Air in the
daytime is full of this dispersed Gold; so that in breathing we draw in some
Atoms of this rarefied Gold, which brings Life to us, in bringing to us the
Principle of Natural Heat, and radical moisture.

No wonder that Aurum Potabile is of so great esteem, and sought for by every
illustrious personage to restore Health: But since true Aurum Potabile is
scarce, by reason of the defect of a solvent, and of a Natural and Radical
Vehicle, God provides for this, by giving us Light, which we take in by the
Air, which serves instead of a Vehicle to it. Light therefore is our Life, and
preserves it; and we say of a Man that is dead, that his Light is extinguished,
and of a Man tha lies confined in a Dungeon, that he dwells amongst the Dead.

Upon the occasion of this Sentence which I have thought fit to confirm, I
observe that Light is the Universal Spirit of the vulgar, varying according to
the Subject it meets withal; and that the same is that famous dissolvent from
which only, or by the addition of common Gold, may be made the Universal
Medicine. But for as much as to the obtaining this effect there is required
that this Light be made liquid, and out of it be made a living Water, and
Stream, or Rain of Gold, which few can perform: From hence it is that few
possess this supreme Remedy.

I observe, Secondly, that Light excites the seminal Spirit, which is of the
same Nature, and is contained under diverse Seeds, and diverse coverings, and
that the same light produces in us and reproduces those Spirits which are
called Vital and Animal, and which are nothing else than Luminous Corpuscles
which are always in motion, whilst they take Air, and together with the Air,
the Light annexed, without which their motion cease. We see also that a Man
dies for want of Air, and by the hindrance of respiration; and these Spirits
are more dulled by Night than by Day, and so do partly fail in the Body, the
Light failing: And unless there did still continue some Luminous and Solar
Spirit in the Air, or if the Stars did not afford a sufficient quantity of it
in the Night, in the Night it were impossible we should be able to escape Death.

Besides we may observe that by this Light, which penetrates and creeps through
the Bowels of the Earth, Metals are produced, for it is their Seed lying
invisibly hid in their Bodies: We may say likewise, that every Living thing
receives Life from this Light, so that we live by Gold only, we subsist by the
benefit of Gold, and all things are filled with Gold, that is, with the Sun
rarefied, and expanded through all things, through all the most secret places,
and through our very Hearts, whose motions will cease when the Light of the Sun
and other Stars shall cease; whose motion will likewise cease at the end of all
Ages.

By the help of this Doctrine we understand what the Ancients meant, when they
said all was full of Jupiter and Gold, and that the Commerce of Heaven and
Earth was bound together with a Golden Chain: That the Universal Medicine
cannot be extracted but out of the water of the Beams of the Sun and Moon. By
this means also we comprehend the truth of the saying about Apollo and his
Golden hairs, and we shall know that which the Philosophy of the Ancients could
not explain, to wit, from whence the motion of the Spirits in our Bodies
proceed, and in what the Life which we enjoy does properly consist: And so even
the new Philosophy will no less Labor in explaining the Essence of Life,
unless it follows these our Principles.

As many as shall have been sufficiently illustrated by this Light, will here
find a Secret for the Nobility, by which for many years they will be able to
preserve Health and Vigor beyond the ordinary term. I say enough of this thing
to move Illustrious Wits, as being enlightened People, to enquire into the
Nature and Effects of the Light and Colors which we see, which the Sun
produces in the Rainbow, and in the Peacocks Tail, where, by the help of a
Microscope a thousand Golden threeds are seen.

Nor is there any reason why we should stand amazed at the sight of these
Colors, since they are nothing else, than Light reflected and refracted,
wherein all Colors are contained, as I have said; for it is of the same Nature
with Gold, out of which all Colors may be produced, although the yellow only
is apparent. They who have diverse ways dissolved Gold, and Mercury, or crude
Gold, have there found all of them as many Colors as ever they had seen, and
many more Colors than they knew.

CHAP. X. How Illustrated Objects are seen.
ARISTOTLE and his Scholars will have Vision to be made by certain Qualities
commonly called the Intentional Species, which, as is reported, join the visive
power, that is the Eye, with the Visible Object, and the Powers represent the
Object. These Species according to this Opinion are discernable, and are in the
Air as in their proper subject: but this is not to be endured, for if these are
accidents, and have Air for their Subject, the Air being changed by the least
breath of wind, the accident would pass from one Subject to another, which is
refractory to the Principles of these Philosophers. These species bring in a
great many other difficulties, which relate to their Nature, Production,
Propagation in the Air, Eduction, Extension, and Reception into the Eye; all
which cannot be solved without captious contensions, and when all shall be
thoroughly canvased, no body will be e're the wiser, from whence it happens,
that all these accidents which are neither Bodies nor Spirits, I am forced to
send back to School with their Doctors.

Some believe Vision is made by an emission of visual Rays out of the Eyes;
but neither will this Opinion subsist, in as much as it supposes, that to see
an Object ten Leagues distant from us, it is of necessity that the Eye should
send Corpuscles thither, and even to the very Heavens, to see the Stars there.

Gassendus would have vision made by the Species or Figure of the Object,
composed of Corpuscles or most subtle Atoms proceeding from the Object, and
received by the Eye: But it cannot be conceived, that a Man placed in the midst
of a Plain can continually emit (without diminution) Corpuscles from every
part, or that these Corpuscles can be in the Air without perturbation and
confusion at the same time, whilst other Objects emit an infinite number of
theirs; and all this transmitted in a right Line through the vacuities of the
Air, from whence it follows that through one, and that a little space of a
Vacuum in the Air, that vast number of Atoms or Corpuscles must pass without
penetration and confusion. Gassendus answers, that the difficulty arises from
this, that we do not enough conceive the subtilty of Atoms, nor the rapidity of
their motion.

This reason does not satisfy, since we know that the Vacuities of the Air are
not greater than Atoms. How then can a thousand Atoms of Matter pass in a right
Line through one only Vacuum, no bigger than one single Atom, without
penetration? This difficulty, besides some others, has moved some Philosophers
to say that the Eye is a natural seeing-Glass, endued with such a convexity as
those Glasses have which are put into perspectives, by which we see things a
great way distant.

These Philosophers say, that Light, wherein is contained every kind of diverse
Colors, as it is determined upon the Objects by the angles of the Atoms, does
also comprehend all kind of Objects too, and represents them with all variety
of Colors, according to the diverse determination of the Objects: Or to say
more truly, that Light represents it self to the Eye, as it is determined by
Objects, and it is certain we see nothing but Light, and Color, that is Light
with its determination; and when we distinctly see an Object, its extention and
Figure, that proceeds from nothing else than that we see Light determined by
the dimensions and circumstances of the Object.

The Nature of Light therefore is solely to be considered, and it will no ways
hinder, but that we shall avoid all the difficulties of the others, by
embracing an Opinion which rests upon truth, which very well, and with the
consent of all, conceives that Light is seen by it self, nor is there need of
any Species to see Light: and since we, to speak properly, do not see the
Objects, but Light the Object of Sight, there is no necessity, that the Object
should transmit Accidents or Corpuscles, as if Light could not be seen of it
self.

From this Doctrine, that which appears new, follows, that Light is to be
considered in a threefold State; and first of all in the Quality of the Object;
secondly, in the Quality of the Term.

The first state is Light, determined by the Object, the second is Light
expanded in the air, the third is Light received by the Eye, and represented
with all its determinations. And this is it which we call the Image of the
Object in the Eye, as it were in a Glass.

In prosecuting this subject, we might have treated of the reason why we see
Objects by the help of perspective Glasses multiplying their Figure; or by
Microscopes, a new invention, by the help of which many things are discovered
which before lay hid, such as are Worms in Wine Vinegar, Gnats in Water and
Dew, as also, Pores in Glass, and a thousand little Animals in Seeds. But of
these I shall say nothing now, since I have done it already in a little
peculiar Tract, which I will Print the first opportunity, where the application
of the Principles of my Physic will be seen to explicate more illustrious
things which are discovered by the help of Microscopes, if the Reader pleases
to spend his time to see and judge of what I say concerning these things.

CHAP. XI. Of Hearing, its Organ, and Object.
THe Organ of Hearing is the Ear, composed of a Cartilage and hollowness's,
wherein the air insinuating it self by its motion causes sound. Besides these
external and apparent Particles, there are others also internal, which are
composed of Membranes, as also some little Bones and included air, the auditory
Nerve does also run down thither, that it may bring the Animal Spirit,
necessary to all the Operations of the Senses.

The Object of Hearing is Sound, to wit, the motion of two or more Bodies
mutually meeting one another; and as no Body that wants Heat and Light is the
Object of Sight, so no Body that wants motion can be the Object of Hearing: Or
rather, as Light alone, without the intervention of any other Medium, is the
Object of Sight, so is motion the Object of Hearing, so that there is no
necessity to have recourse to the pretended Quality which is commonly called
Sound; nor to any intentional Species, no, nor so much indeed as to Corpuscles
sent out a great way off.

I say therefore, that as Light is seen by it self, and Truth immediately and
without any other intermedium is known by it self, so Motion is apparent of it
self, without the pretended Qualities of Aristotle, or Corpuscles of Gassendus,
except those of the Air, which are in motion: For they being wanting or stirred
up by an opposite motion, little or very little is observed of it. The motion
therefore of Bodies, is the Object of Sounds, but there is a necessity for a
fluid Body to be present, that it may be violently moved to and fro, which
happens in irregular Sounds, or with Method and Measure; as in Music, and the
use of Instruments. This Fluid Body is sometimes intercepted by two Solid
Bodies, and is forced to go back with violent motion.

CHAP. XII. Particular Questions concerning Hearing.
THe first Question is concerning the Penetration of Sounds, and it is asked,
How it comes to pass that a Sound constant in Motion can more easily penetrate
through a thick Wall, than through Glass or Water?

I answer, that the thickest Walls have great Cavities, into which the Air
insinuates it self, or lies shut up in them whilst they are Building: After
which manner without doubt it is shut up in Guns made of melted Brass, which is
the cause that when they are tried, they sometimes burst asunder, which happened
about two Months ago at Niverina in a Field near St. Germans. Air therefore is
more easily shut up within Walls whilst they are Building, than in Guns whilst
they are casting: And this included Air, receives its motion from the external
Air, and communicates the same with that which is found in the Breech or
adverse part of the Gun. Which thing does not happen in Glasses, which have but
very small pores, into which the External Air cannot enter, only Light and the
most subtle Air enjoying this privilege.

From hence it follows, that Bodies which have none, or but very small
Vacuities, and contain no Air, or but very little, are more surd, and less
resounding, as Gold, and Lead, however Lead is more surd than Gold, although it
has more frequent vacuities, but they are less regular; for since it is
endowed with more Pores than Gold, it ought to give a greater sound than Gold.
For to the making a sound, it is not sufficient that the Body contains Air, but
that the Air be so bound up that it cannot sind a way out: and as to the sound
of Bells, that depends upon the Air intercepted between the Clapper and the
Bell, and wandering round the compass of the Bell, before it can get out, and
drive on other Air, yet so, as that it presupposes Air shut up in the Pores of
the Metal.

The second Question regards the propagation of Sound; or the sound of Bells
and Guns are heard a great way off: But the reason of this is not difficult to
be given; for the Air violently driven on, because it is easily moved, gives a
sound according to its motion, greater, or lesser, and because the motion of
Air is not momentaneous, so the sound likewise is not in a moment brought to
the Ears. Certainly the Air that is impelled, drives on other Air on every
side, until that circular motion cease, as we see when a stone is thrown into
a Pool the water is moved in circles: This motion in respect of Sight is not in
the Air, we see the stroke ere we perceive the sound, for Light is determined
in a moment; nor does a contrary wind hinder Light as it does sound; for Light
does not depend upon the motion of the Air, and the Light of the Air is fixed,
in the same manner as the Center of the World, from whence it draws its
Origin, to which it is firmly and immoveably annexed, at least that it be not
condensed and grow thick.

The third Question regards the repetition of Sound, and is called Echo; and
it is nothing else than a repercussed and reflected motion of the Air by hard
Bodies, or retained and renewed by other Air shut up in the Cavities of Bodies,
and if there are many Cavities in a straight Line, there are made many
reflections, and the Echo is multiplied, and that more or less distinctly, as
the reflections are more or less perfect, and the Ear more or less distant from
the angle of reflection, which is always formed right forwards, and is
straight, unless there be some hindrance, and has always a certain and
determined Distance.

Fourthly, it is asked how it comes to pass that the strings of two Harps Tuned
alike, although they be distant two or three paces from one another, the one
being struck, the other will give a sound? I answer, that the air of one being
struck into motion, does by its motion excite the motion of the other, which is
constituted in the same state, or tuned alike. For here to allege Sympathy,
would be nothing else but to fly to the Sanctuary of Ignorance.

Fifthly, It is asked, Why some sounds are sweet and very pleasant, and others
on the other hand harsh and displeasing? It is answered, that this proceeds
from a diverse motion, and from the ruggedness and smoothness of Bodies, as
also from the smiteing of the Air that is driven to and fro.

Sixthly, it may be enquired from whence the noise in the Ears proceed? and it
is answered, that this inconvenience proceeds from a motion of the interior
Air, against Nature, which sometimes happens from the breaking in of foreign
Corpuscles, or from the solution and emancipation of some Atoms, or from the
Pulse of the Arteries, or motion of Vapors, which striking against the Drum of
the Ear, make that humming noise of the Ears.

Lastly, it is asked why some People hear better than others? and we may
answer, that this proceeds from the impurity of the interior Air: For not to
say any thing of those that are born deaf, or have their Organs ill formed, or
have no interior or included Air; or of Old Men, in whom this Air is
dissipated, or of those whom a kind of thick humor falling upon the Organ after
a long Disease makes Deaf; or who are wounded, or have an Imposthume in their
Ears, I say that those who have most of this interior and purer Air, have their
Ears more accurate, and their Hearing more distinct, if withal the Auditory
Nerve be well Composed.

CHAP. XIII. Of Smelling, its Organ, and Object.
SMELLING is an action by which we perceive and distinguish Smells; the
external Organ is the Nostrils, the internal are some glandulous and spongy
parts like Teats, which descend from the Brain to the Nostrils, or the
Olfactory Nerve; or Odours which affect the Spirits contained in the Nerve, and
move them; and these Spirits being moved and stirred up, carry the sense of the
Odor to the common sense.

The Object of Smell are Odours, in quality not distinct from Bodies, but are
rather Atoms or sulphurous Particles going out of Bodies, their Figure is
hooked and adhering; from whence it comes to pass that they adhere like Oil or
fatness; and are preserved a long time in Chests among Clothes, especially
Woollen ones. And therefore contagious Particles lie hid for many Years in
Ward-Robes; and they who frequently Visit those that are Sick of the Plague, do
not use Woollen Garments, but Linen ones, to which the contagious Particles do
less adhere.

From this Doctrine it appears, that Smells are little Bodies which issue out
of all Compound Natural Bodies, especially Living ones; by reason of their
frequent agitation; and which have Pores more open than Bodies not animated.

Besides, it appears that these Corpuscles do never go out of Bodies in greater
number, than when they are a dissolving; after which manner, a smell exhales
out of Gold and Silver dissolved, excelling that of Musk and Amber. From
Antimony dissolved, an Oil is drawn of a very grateful smell, and by another
way a Sulphur is drawn out, not to be endured for its stink.

And by the help of these Odoriferous Corpuscles Dogs Hunt Hares, and find out
their forms, and by this means they discover their Masters footsteps: It is an
argument that this is done by the help of these Corpuscles, because they are
dissipated by Wind, and hindered by Dew, and Experience teaches that those that
handle Musk, carry the smell of it a long while about them: From whence it is
known that these very small Bodies are adhering, and that they have hooked
Figures, and that they do please and tickle according to that proportion which
they have with the Organs.

CHAP. XIV. Of Taste, and its Object.
TASTE is a Sense Natural and proper to Animals, and by the help of that they
distinguish Savours, making a difference between the grateful and the
ungrateful. The Organ of this sense is the Tongue and Palate, and it is done by
the help of Spongy Flesh, and of Nerves which terminate in the Tongue, and
^arry the Animal Spirit to the Organ, and the Savor to the imagination.

Savor the Object of Taste, consists in certain saline Corpuscles of Aliments,
or other Bodies, out of which they come, and pleasantly or unpleasantly
vellicate the Tongue and Palate, according as their Figure is more or less rough
and pungent, or smooth and round, and more or less adequetated to the Organ.

Since Savours are Corpuscles of Salt, it follows that they differ according to
the diversity of Salts, to wit, that they are sharp, sweet, bitter, sour, and
the like, according to the Nature of the Salt that bears rule in their
Composition, and according to the quality of Corpuscles coming from elsewhere;
which change the Natural Savor of things, as Wine, by the addition of Water,
loses both its strength and Savor, although in this condition it is more
grateful to some, than when pure Wine.

From whence we know that the diversity of Tastes does not proceed from the sole
diversity of Savours, but also from the diversity of the Organs; and hence it
is, that all people do not relish alike one and the same thing; nor have all
People a Taste equally delicate, from whence it comes that some are delighted
with those Meats that others abhor.

The Organ also is sometimes so ill disposed, and the Tongue burdned with so
great a quantity of ill Humors, that things of the most grateful Savor seem
insipid, as also things not very sweet seem bitter; which thing happens in a
double and a continual Tertian Ague, by reason of the dominion of Choler.

CHAP. XV. Of Feeling.
FEELING is a general Sense extended throughout the whole Body, and is made by
the help of Membranes, such as the Skin, the Scarf Skin, and the Skin that
covers the Bones called Periostium, and others that are internal; and this sole
sense distinguishes every thing that by its contiguity brings pleasure or Pain.
The Object of it is Hot and Cold, Soft and Hard, Moistness and Dryness.
Concerning these different qualities of a Body we have treated elsewhere;
excepting Heat and Cold, as which are not Physical accidents, but two
particular Bodies. Heat is a heap amassing or flowing together of sharp pointed
Corpuscles which penetrate into solid Bodies, and do there cause a Division,
and do dissolve the more perfect Bodies; and this is what we call to be set on
Fire, and to be burnt: For Fire does not burn Wood, but by dissolving, nor
dissolves it but by burning.

Cold is an heap amassing and flowing together of Atoms and Corpuscles of a
blunt and plain Figure; and hence it is that Cold does not penetrate into the
Body but with pain and torment, as also it excites a frequent motion of the
Parts, or shivering. Besides there are not wanting some Particles so gross as
to stop up the Pores of the Body, and to drive the Heat into the inward parts,
which we call Antiperistasis, by reason of which the included Heat becomes
stronger, which is the Cause why the Heat of the Stomach in Winter time is
greater than it is in Summer, and why Wells are warm and reak like Smoke. For
the same Reason, Heat being shut up in our Bodies by the external Cold,
sometimes such like fumes are raised up in the Brain, which are not without a
great deal of danger.

Feeling is several ways performed, and first of all by application, where Body
is moved to Body, and Hand to Hand, by penetration, in making a solution of
that which was whole; as a Needle pricking the Hand.

Secondly, Feeling is made by separation, one Body coming out of another, which
if occasioned by Nature, is always accompanied with pain, as in non-Natural
ejections.

Thirdly, this Sense appears in the motion of those Bodies which are contained
by others; for sometimes they move themselves with so great force, and do so
press, rend, and tear, that they excite pains not to be endured, as in violent
Headaches, the Pleurisy, and pains of the Gout and Cholick.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Speech, Pulse, and Breathing of Man.
VOICE is common to all perfect Animals as well as Men, but so is not Speech,
or an articulate Voice. Brutes express their sense of things by Natural Voices:
and Men their interior Speech, to wit, Thoughts, by outward Speech as its
Interpreter: And this is done by the motion of the Tongue, as also of the Air
after a certain manner driven to and fro between the Teeth, and the fluctuating
windings and turnings of the Throat. This motion is natural and voluntary: For
Discourse or Speech is an expression of an action of the Soul, to wit, of
Thought: But this Thought cannot be outwardly made manifest, without the
command of the Will, or the strength or weakness of the Imagination.

The dilatation and contraction of the Lungs, as also the action of the Muscles
of the Breast serve to the formation of Speech, and a Voice becomes sweet and
harmonious, when the Lungs and the aforesaid Muscles act methodically, as also
when the Air is duly reflected, repelled, and interrupted by the passages and
turnings and windings of the rough Artery, and where the Corpuscles of this
Natural little Tongue are less rough and more free from strange Bodies. The
Diaphragm, Stomach, and Belly move when we speak, and follow the motion of the
Lungs, and the Muscles of the Breast.

The Pulse is nothing else but a percussion of the Arteries, upon the variety
of which, the difference of Pulses depends. The Cause of the Pulse according to
Aristotle, is the Natural heat of the Heart, according to Galen it is the
moving faculty; according to Harvey, this motion of the Heart, and Pulse of the
Arteries depends upon the circulation of the Blood, which we will examine in
the next Chapter.

Breathing comprehends two actions, Inspiration, and Respiration, by the action
of the first, the Lungs receive the external Air, and by the help of the last
they drive it out. The first is made by a dilatation of the Lungs and Breast,
as also by the motion of the Diaphragme, by which the Lungs are opened like a
pair of Bellows, and are by that means filled with Air, the second is made by a
pressing downwards of the Diaphragme, by which the Lungs are unlocked, and the
Air driven forth.

Breathing conduces to the tempering the heat of the Heart, and to the exciting
and preserving Natural heat, besides it conduces to the forming the Voice, to
perceiving Smells, to expelling Excrements, and dissipating the fumes of the
Blood, and lastly to produce vital Spirits, in promoting their motion, by which
it happens that we dye when breathing cease, or when we take our last Breath.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Motion of the Heart.
THat I may rightly explain the motion of the Heart, I suppose it is moved by
two different motions, the first of which is Natural, the second against
Nature. That resembles the motion of Machines and Clocks, which are moved by
help of Strings and Wheels. So the Heart is the principal and chief Wheel of
this animated Machine, and moves and drives on all the others, and takes its
motion from the weight and impression of certain Fiery and Celestial Atoms,
which like the Silkworm are shut up in the Seed and its covering, and which
give motion to it, until they fly away from it, which slight of the Atoms
Death follows, and an end of motion.

The Authors of the circulation of the Blood, deduce the motion of the Heart,
from the Bloods entering into it, saying that the Heart is opened by the motion
commonly called Diastole, the Blood entering into the Heart; and that by the
motion commonly called Systole, the Blood returns back, and this returning, is
the Cause of those two motions; but it is more reasonable to say, that the
motion of the Heart has its Principle in its self, for it is Vital, and the
passing through of the Blood is rather an effect than a Cause of this motion,
for the Heart opens it self before the Blood enters in, nor does the Blood go
out, but as it is driven by the opened Heart.

The second motion of the Heart is accidental, and against Nature, and proceeds
from the intemperies of the Blood that passes through the Heart, and which
impresseth this febrile motion, whether as being more hot and subtle than it
should be, or having certain foreign Corpuscles mixed with it, or being too
thick and viscous, or else offending in quantity, it overwhelms the Heart; and
hereupon depends the difference of motions, contrary to Nature, as also the
difference of Pulses and Fevers; from hence proceeds the palpitation of the
Heart, intermitting Pulses, Convulsions, Suffocations, and sudden Death. And it
is commonly said that the Life is in the Blood, nor does any thing hinder why
we should not say that Death is in it too, when it is corrupted, or very sharp
and corroding, or unfit for motion, and containing such like Bodies as lie hid
in Venoms and Narcoticks.

The motion which is observed in the Hearts of Animals taken out of their
Bodies; as for Example, that of a Viper, which continues a long while, does not
disanul Circulation, but only lets us see that Circulation is not the Cause of
the Natural motion of the Heart, and if you stretch it never so far, it is only
its condition which makes it continue, and keeps the same in its Natural state.

Whatsoever we say concerning the Heart and its motions, does not make up that
Idea which we conceive in our mind, nor does it satisfy the mind of the
Reader, who expects we should explain from whence this motion of the Heart
while it is in its natural state proceeds, and what is the Cause of its
immoderate motions.

That I may therefore satisfy the Reader, I Affirm the Natural Motion of the
Heart to be in the motion of the Vital Spirits, shut up in the central Vacuum
of the Heart, where they are detained by little Membranes, made firm by the
interweaving of Fibers, and of thin threads, so that they cannot escape out,
since the Pores of these membranes have a Figure opposite to the Pores of those
Spirits or Vital Atoms: And seeing that Atoms enjoy an actual motion, and which
can no more be separated from their Essence, than Intelligence from an Angel or
separated Soul, or the Inclination from the Will, it follows, that they are
always in motion, and by their motions by turns dilate the Heart.

This Doctrine supposes what has been said of Vital Spirits, being as it were
the internal Principles of Life and Motion, as also of the essential and proper
motion of Atoms, and of Bodies compounded of Atoms; but it is convenient that
we remember that we have said, that motion is Natural to Atoms, and that God
who has created them essentially moveable, preserves their motion and moveable
Nature in the same action that he Created them.

Besides it may be convenient to remember, that there are such a sort of Atoms
which may be detained, and constitute the parts of a Compound Body, and others,
which are not Naturally such, yet may be shut up, such as those are, which we
have said are shut up in the central Vacuum of the Heart of Living Creatures:
And these indeed are shut up by the decree of the Creator, and the
determination of the seminal covering.

The Comparison of an Angel, and the Rational Soul seems to contribute much to
the illustrating this Doctrine. An Angel is a certain indivisible, spiritual
thing, and an Intelligence free from Matter; and the Rational Soul is no less a
certain indivisible Spiritual thing, endowed with Understanding and Will as an
Angel, yet they differ in this, that theSoul is consined, or, as being a part
of the Compound, can be consined by a material Body, whereas an Angel neither
is nor can be confined, which notwithstanding does not hinder but that it may
be shut up into a Body, as it were an assisting Form, yet it has not any
respect to an internal and substantial Form. Besides I look upon an Angel, and
consider it under the notion of Atoms naturally free, and the Rational Soul
under the notion of those which are subject to confinement. It is true, that a
Rational Soul going out of this Dungeon or Physical Prison, by reason of the
Corruption of the Body, which permits it a free exit, is like to an emancipated
Atom, which being free from the bonds of the Composition, never returns thither
again, unless that be restored to its pristine, or to a better condition.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Irregular Motion of the Heart, in Animals, and of Fevers.
I Cannot but say something of the inordinate motions of the Heart, stirred up
by diverse Fevers, and from that Occasion, discourse of the difference of
Fevers, their Causes, and Remedies.

Fevers are either Diary, (viz.) an inordinate motion of the Spirits which are
agitated and disturbed by emancipated Atoms; or they are Hectic, which attack
the Fleshy and Solid Parts: And these Fevers are excited by emancipated Atoms,
which insinuate themselves into the substance of our Bodies, and are the Cause
that the Corpuscles of the Radical Moisture are driven away, and exhaled; by
reason of which, the Body is sensibly dried.

The other Fevers consist in the Humors, and in their fermentation and
ebullition, and when this fermentation never remits, the Fever is continual;
where it keeps its periods by turns, it is an intermitting Fever, and it is
called either a Quotidian, where it comes every day, or a double Tertian, or
Quartan, as Phlegm, Choler, or Melancholy predominate. When it comes one day
and not the next it is a Tertian, when it remits for two days it is a Quartan,
when it rages for two days together, and remits the third, it is a double
Quartan: And all these Fits, or redoublings, are owing to emancipated Atoms, or
relaxed Corpuscles, which provoke, move, and stir up this or that humor, which
cannot be done without an agitation of the Heart, and a manifest Pulsation of
the Arteries.

That which in this Subject is difficult to be explained, consists in the
regular Fits and intermission of Fevers; that is to say, what is the
beginning, and what the Cause of this Flux and Reflux, and of this periodical
Motion and State of Rest, and how it comes to pass that Phlegm ferments daily,
Choler but every other day, and Melancholy after two days of rest.

Physicians say this motion proceeds from the diversity of humors, and that
Phlegm has its motion and fermentation every day, Choler every other day, and
Melancholy every fourth day. But the Physical Philosopher examines this
difficulty more nearly, and the Sick Person has reason to rest satisfied, when
the Physician knowing the Quality of the Fever, administers Remedies which
evacuate the offending humors, and prohibit the generation of the new; and by
this means, the Cause being taken away, they raise him up, and restore him to
health.

The Physical Philosopher who enquires into the true Causes of the motions in
Nature, and does not like the Physician precisely respect the Health of this or
that Person; but endeavors to discover the truth of all things, supposes
first, that there is no humor in our Bodies which goes on from Rest to Motion,
unless it be stirred up by some Agent and Mover. So it is questioned, what may
be that Principle by which Choler after twenty or twentyfour hours rest is
stirred up, and what should excite the fermentation of Melancholy, after it
has sat down quietly and unmoved two days, or there abouts.

Physicians who are truly Philosophers, and ought to be so, teach us, that in a
Cachochymick Body there is always a new generation made of these sort of
humors, and when they are already arrived to a due state of plenitude, some
sooner than other some, and sometimes where there is a complication, many of
them go on together to a fermentation; and that all this proceeds from the
different Nature of humors, and their more easy or more difficult motion, as
also from a greater or lesser quantity of one or more humors.

But it may also be asked, what is the Principle of this agitation or
fermentation in that State of Plenitude, and for what Cause these Febrile
motions are so very regular and periodick? Here, and every where, we will speak
Bona Fide, and without a Fallacy, and say according to our Principles, that the
Atoms asserting their Liberty, with every dissolution of the Aliment, Chyle and
Blood, as we have said elsewhere, do by their sharp-pointed Figures tear the
Internal Membranes and Tunicles of the Stomach and Intestines, as also excite
those horrors and tremblings at the beginning of the Fit, and which are
longer, or shorter, and more, or fewer, according as their Figures are more or
less aculeated and rugged, or smooth and orbiculate.

According to this Principle we may say, that the Atoms, from the first
digestion of the Stomach challenging to themselves a Liberty, and being weary
of the covering of Phlegm and Saltwater, do daily stir up this agitation; but
those, which in the dissolution of Chyle, withdraw themselves from servitude,
and which abound with a Sulphurous Water, which we commonly call Choler, do
stir up a motion more slow by a day than the former, and as many as are
emancipated after the third Concoction and dissolution of the Aliments, and are
wrapped up in adust Blood, or that black Excrement which they call Melancholy,
do produce this Febrile motion two days slower than the first, according to
these different dissolutions.

Where we must first of all take notice, that the shakeings in the motion of
these differing humors are not equal, nay, not in the very Fits of one and the
same Fever, proceeding from one and the same Cause, but which has different
degrees of activity: To which thing, besides what we have said, the Quality of
the Food given to the Sick Person in the time of the intermission does much
contribute.

Secondly, the Fits of one and the same Fever are not so very regular, but
that they frequently are perceived sooner or later, as the Atoms the disturbers
of Health are sooner or later set at liberty. To which thing the regimen of the
Sick persons manner of Living does not a little contribute.

Hence it follows in the Third place, That the true Remedy of intermitting
Fevers does consist, First, in an order of Living. Secondly, in an evacuation
of peccant or strange humors, which hinder, retard, or interrupt, or
precipitate the digestion of Aliments, which must be well observed by an
experienced Physician; and Lastly, the Parts which serve to the first
Concoction are to be strengthened, because their faults and defects can never be
corrected afterward.

Moreover if it shall happen that there are some emancipated Atoms, as without
doubt there are more or less of them in all Bodies, they are to be expelled by
transpiration, or their Figures to be inverted by Remedies called Febrifuges.
For Experience teaches us, that there are some of those sort of Remedies very
profitable, which are administered with extraordinary good success, and which
are not fruitlesly administered by me: And I have now some of these sorts of
Remedies found out by me, and administered, which in one day have Cured the
Quartan and double Quartan. I speak the truth; but I should injure the truth,
if I should go so far as to say that my Remedy is infallible: For truly I
believe, and not a few of the most eminent and ablest Physicians of the Faculty
in Paris are of the same Opinion with me, that there is not a Remedy which can
be called infallible and made public. Of which thing, in the occasion of the
fermentation of humors, I will a little more specially treat in my
Philosophical Reflections, which in a little time will see the Light.

I only add this here, that the Heat which follows the shakeing, does proceed
from an agitation of the Spirits, stimulated by the violent motion and repeated
stroke of the emancipated Atoms, which are at last expelled through the Pores
of the Body, as the Rebellious Angels were thrown out of Heaven by the more
powerful good Spirits.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Circulation of the Blood.
AS many as have delivered themselves from the prejudices of Ancient Physic,
and Vulgar Philosophy, have taught, after Harvey, That the blood in our Bodies
is moved in a circular motion, from the extreme parts to the Center, and not
from the Center only to the extreme parts, as was heretofore believed.

Gassendus does not disapprove this Opinion, although he does not embrace it,
for Reasons alleged in a particular Treatise set forth by him. I use his
Reasons to establish it, as being better founded in Reason, and more agreeable
to the disposition of the Veins and Arteries. Let us see therefore how the
Circulation of the Blood is made, according to Harvey, and the most Learned
Physicians. The Blood, say they, passes into the Heart, from the Vena Cava,
and Arteria Venosa by two Valves, where they are ended, and as often as the
Heart dilates it self, a drop of Blood falls into each of its Cavities; and as
often as the Heart contracts it self, the Blood passes into the Lungs from the
right Cavity, through the Vena Arteriosa, and from the left Cavity, into the
Aorta; so that the Blood is moved from the extreme parts of the Body, to its
Center, into which it is carried by the Vena Cava, where it exonerates it self
in the Right Cavity, from whence it passes into the Vena Arteriosa, and drives
on the Blood which is contained in that, through Anastomoses already
discovered, and through Pores less sensible into the Arteria Venosa.

And as much Blood as the Arteria Venosa has received, so much of it deposits
into the left Cavity, from whence passing into the Aorta, it is carried into
the extreme parts of the Body, through Branches which go to the Branches of the
Vena Cava, from hence the Blood being brought into the Trunk, continuing its
journey by the same way it returns to the Heart, and by the same reason as I
said, it wonderfully and without intermission performs the Circulation.

This Circulation of the Blood relies upon some Experiments, the first of
which, is taken from Blood-letting: For Chyrurgeons when they Bleed a Vein, tie
the Arm above the Orifice, and if they put their Finger upon the Vein on the
other side of the Ligament, the Blood is stopped immediately: From whence it is
apparent, that it comes from the extremity of the Fingers to the Trunk, and not
from the Trunk to the extremity of the Fingers, but by Circulation, of which we
are discoursing.

The Second Experiment is made, if a Vein be tied in a part of the Body,
separated from the Artery: for it will be emptied on that side toward the
Trunk, and it will be swelled on the other side; on that side, that is to say,
from whence the Blood according to this Opinion ought to proceed.

There is nothing therefore so certain as this Circular motion of the Blood,
and its passage into the Heart, but here are three things to be observed.
First, that the motion of the Heart does not depend upon this Circulation of
the Blood, although it conduce to its conservation and inordinate motion, as
this Circulation is made more or less hastily, and as the Blood is more or less
temperate in the disposition of its particles, and in its saline serosities
which serve for a vehicle to it, and render it more fluid.

Secondly, that the Circulation of the Blood as the Moderns indeed will have
it, may be performed three times in an hour, yet so that all the Blood does not
enter into the Cavities or Ventricles of the Heart, as not once every hour, but
either sooner or later, according to the greater or lesser quantity, or greater
or lesser subtilty or mobility of the Blood.

Thirdly, I say, that the Blood in some cases, cannot pass out of the Arteries
into the Veins, through the extremities, that is, when the extremities are cut
off; in which Case, it goes on another way, through insensible Pores, which
they call Transpiration, or Transudation.

CHAP. XX. Of the Inward Senses, and the Inferior Appetite.
BEsides the exterior Senses of which we have spoken, there are also found to
be in Man interior Senses, (to wit) the Imagination, common Sense, and
Sensitive Memory. The first forms a lasting Image of Objects.

The Second judges of the agreeableness or disagreeableness of them.

The third retains and preserves these Images or Ideas; which is manifest in
Dogs, who represent to themselves persons absent, and distinguish both between
the good and the evil that has befallen them, witnessing that they remember
the thing by running away if they have an opportunity, or by Fawnings.

Appetite follows the interior Senses, and is common to all Animals, and which
is performed by the weight of Atoms, whereby it comes to pass that an Animal
has a propensity, and is driven to seek for that with which it is delighted,
and to abstain from that which might bring trouble: So that Delight and Pain
are the two great importances of the Life of an Animal. Pleasure according to
the Opinion of Epicurus, depends upon Corpuscles which have a soft, round, and
agreeable Figure, especially to the Brain, as to which the Object is
represented by the imagination, and from which it is carried by the Senses:
Pain on the contrary, and both of them are performed by those Corpuscles,
whether they come to, or go from, or continue.

In Morals, we will speak concerning these Passions, as the two Scales of
sensitive actions; in the mean time I may here say, that the interior Senses
receive these Corpuscles, which bring pleasure or pain by the ministry of the
exterior Senses; from whence it comes, that those that Sleep, or are
Lethargick, or Apoplectick, feel nothing, though they are pricked: For the
Brain is filled with strange Humors, which hinder the motion of the aforesaid
Corpuscles, or else that motion is stopped by Vapors, brought from the lower
parts to the Brain, which happens to those that are asleep.

CHAP. XXI. Of Sleep, Wakefulness, and Death.
SLEEP is the Image of Death, for all the Senses are at rest, nor is there any
motion left but that of the Heart, Lungs and Arteries; this Rest proceeds from
Vapors arising out of the Stomach, which by their clammyness, humidity, and
viscousness, do stupifie the Animal Spirits, and Sleep is sweet or restless,
according as those Vapors are sweet, or abound with Corpuscles, or are stirred
up from Choler, or other things of an irregular Figure, or where some
emancipated Atoms make the disturbance.

The mixture of these Atoms is often the Cause of Light-headedness, Madness,
and Hypochondriac Melancholy; and they likewise produce watchfulness, by an
inversion and confusion of the Ideas in the imagination; from whence it happens
that we see that which we never see directly; and sometimes Monsters and
horrible things.

This motion of the Images or Ideas is sometimes so very violent, and there is
so great a Troop of these emancipated Atoms in the Brain, that those that are
asleep, do sometimes rise out of Bed, Talk, climb up Walls, Bathe themselves,
and then go to Bed again, without ever waking all the while.

Death is commonly called a perpetual Sleep, and in Animals (excepting Man) it
is nothing else than a total dissipation of the Vital Atoms, or a cessation of
motion, in which their Life consists. In Man these things are not after the
same manner, although however all these things cease in a dying Man, either
immediately, as in a violent Death; or by degrees, as in a Natural Death; we
must confess nevertheless, that in that respect something else is to be
accomplished, to wit, the separation of the Soul which God gave him, and which
returns unto him that gave it.

Before we go any further, and that we may make an end of this Chapter, and be
as good as our Word, I am forced a little more specially to discourse
concerning the Death of those things which have Life: For whatsoever is Created
and Compounded of many Parts, and Lives, is subject to Death.

Man, who is Compounded of a material and Organical Body, like other Beings,
dies at last; but because he has an immortal Soul Created after the Image of
God, he only dies that he may live Eternally with God, if he be Faithful; and
his Death is no more than Sleep, and a passing into Eternity.

What a Christian Philosopher ought to think of this Soul I shall declare in
the last Chapter of this Book: Here I will say something of his Body, as also
of its Corruption and Dissolution. The Rational Soul never goes out of this
Mortal Body before the motion of the Heart is stopped; this motion, which is
not voluntary, ceasing, Life can no longer continue, since it consists in this
motion.

If the Rational Soul was only in the Brain, as Duncan and some others will
have it, it would be hard to tell why it should depart, upon the cessation of
the Hearts motion, whilst the rest of the Parts are in good order. As for my
part, I consider it in its Spiritual Nature, believing that he must have too
mean an Idea of this Spiritual Substance who confines it to the Brain, and to
the smallest part of it. That Opinion which affirms it to be present every
where in the whole Body, although it operates more particularly in the Brain
and Heart, seems to me to be more Reasonable, and for this Reason, the Soul
acting in the Heart, the Organ ceasing, it departs in the same Moment.

It may seem a wonder to not a few, that the Rational Soul should so depend
upon the material Body, but since it so seemed good to the Author of Nature, we
ought to rest satisfied. The Body is endued with Organs for the sake of the
Soul, and the Soul is created for the sake of the Body, and one is made for the
other, and the Conjunction of these two make a complete Man. One part only
does not make a Man, nor does a separate Body make up the Essence of a Man; and
indeed a dead Man is not what he was, 'till he Rises again. The Soul therefore
is annexed to the Body by such a sort of Tie, that it cannot act but by Organs.
So that he sees nothing when his Eyes are out, he hears nothing when his Ears
are stopped, and the chief Organ being deficient, the Soul departs because it can
do nothing.

This Chief Organ, to wit, the Heart, is deficient many ways; it may be stopped
and suffocated for want of Air and respiration, for the Atoms of Light
implanted in the Heart at the time of a Man's Conception, (the commerce of the
Solar Spirits being intercepted for want of Air,) do sometimes suddenly stand
still, they fly away, finding a passage through a solution of the continuum,
or through Pores made fit by a burning Fever in the Heart, all the Water of
the Pericardium being dried up: Thick and viscous Blood does sometimes stop the
motion of these Vital Atoms. Poison also does by its acute Particles pierce
through the Heart, and give an exit to these Spirits of Light, which are tied
to those which the Sun bestows upon us, and are attracted by them, returning
thither from whence they came.

Let us see now what the Body does in the Grave; it putrifies there, that is,
it is dissolved, some Corpuscles or Atoms withdraw themselves, some part of the
Body is changed into Worms, some of the Vital Spirits resisting. It is a folly
here to imagine any substantial form of the Dead Carcass, or to acknowledge
partial forms of the Bones, Flesh, Veins, Arteries, and such like things,
Subjects to the form of the dead Carcass, or alone without this Form. These
are Illusions and Chimera's. Matter is the same, and all the change that
happens, consists in this, That when the Rational Soul is absent, there remains
nothing besides matter; the Organs by little and little lose their Figure, and
having lost their Composition, they lose their action, that which was
compounded is dissolved, and the greater part goes into Dust and Ashes; the
Luminous Spirits recede, and follow the motion of the Spirits of their kind:
some Parts or Corpuscles joined to the putrefying Body, purtifie in the place
where they are: Experience favors this Doctrine.

A certain Servant to a Nobleman, whose Nose had been by great misfortune
newly cut off, freely parts with his own Nose to serve his Master. This Nose
being put in the place of that which was newly cut off, took Root, and grew
together, after such a manner, with a Cartaliginous Flesh, that it seemed to be
Natural. About twenty years afterward, the Servant dies in a far Country, and
was Buried, and as by degrees he putrified, so after the same manner, this end
of a Nose began to putrify, to be corrupted, and to fall off, parting from
that part to which it had so long stuck without withering, whilst the Servant
lived, the part following the condition of the whole.

I say moreover, that the least parts or Corpuscles which proceed from a Body,
the Body being Dead and Corrupted, they also are Corrupted, and joined in
commerce with Atoms of the same Nature, which they do, by inviting them to join
and come together.

And here is an Experiment which every one can understand. It is very well
known, that he that puts on a Garment, or touches it, leaves upon it his Scent,
that is, Corpuscles which proceed from his Body, and which constitute part of
it; and by the help of these Corpuscles a Dog is able to know his Masters
Handkerchief, Hat, or Garment from ten thousand others. This being supposed, if
the Dead Man's Garment or Gloak be put into a Press or Chest, first, and for
some days, when the Body that is Buried begins to putrify, there will be a
considerable noise and disturbance in the Press or Chest, enough to frighten
Children, and other folks too, and the Corpuscles of the dead Body being
attracted by those that are going away, by their motion make this noise among
the Clothes: And whereas this attraction is made in a straight Line, and these
Corpuscles cannot pass through the Bords, but obliquely, the Wood suffering
violence, makes a noise as if it were cracked. Any one may try this, and know
whether this Experiment made by others be true or no: I see no reason to doubt
of it: From hence appears that invisible Bond of the Parts with the Body from
whence they did proceed.

A third Experiment may be made, which will serve to the illustrating this
Subject. Take a piece of Veal, or any other Flesh from the Shambles, and with
it rub the Warts of any ones Face or Hands, then afterward fling it upon the
Dunghill, or Bury it, and as that putrifies, the Warts will fall off, which
denotes that the Corpuscles of Flesh returning to their whole or greater part,
and being violently attracted, do in the same manner attract the Warts, and
make them go away, which some Learned Men say they have Experienced.

We may admire in all these things the Providence of God, who has Created
Atoms, and out of them has compounded the Universe, wherein we find so great a
number of wonderful things, which are the subject of our admiration, and
convince our Ignorance.

CHAP. XXII. Of the Death of Brutes, Plants, and Metals.
SEeing that Man dies, other Animals cannot escape Death; let us see wherein it
consists.

The Followers of Aristotle are very much puzzled in explaining the Death of a
Dog, for when it is destitute of all Sense and Motion, it is dead without
doubt, yet in the mean time it has all its parts and Organs. What therefore
happens to this Animal? Its Soul is separated from its Body, say they, and the
Spirit of Life is not in him; they do the Beast much honor who speak thus in
his Favor. But what becomes of this Soul? Is it corrupted or annihilated; or
does it subsist apart in some other place, or is it taken into some other Body?
No, by no means, say they, it is not, it is destroyed, and that is sufficient.
So it is sufficient to People who don't seek after the Truth: For if this Soul
be a substance as they say it is a material one, it is impossible but it must
go into some other thing, or else be reduced into nothing. It is reduced into
nothing say they; therefore it is annihilated, therefore it is Created and made
out of nothing, which is Ridiculous, and unbecoming a Christian Philosopher. It
is true, this Opinion is very common in the Schools, but this Error is
detected, and they who are wiser than others, say with us, that the Spirits of
Life, or Corpuscles of Light being altogether dissipated or hindered in their
motion, do withdraw and return to their Original, and Copulate with others
which are in the Air, so dies a Dog, without the loss of that which God made;
the Parts are separated, the Spirits seek the Air, the Body the Earth.

Plants dye like other Living Creatures, but their Death very much differs from
the Death of Animals, for as much as their Organical Parts do not appear so as
they do in Animals, nor does a Plant dye so easily as an Animal: For a Plant is
not dead so soon as it is pulled out of the ground, its Life continues to the
extreme dryness, or evaporation of the Radical moisture, which contains all the
Spirits of Life; and though the Plant be calcined, or burnt to Ashes, part of
the Spirits will remain in those Ashes; for the Lixivium that is made, or the
Salt that is extracted, gives all the Savor of the Plant; and where that
Lixivium is congealed by the Cold of the Night, the Figure of the burnt Plant
will appear in the very Ice.

But what is more to be observed, is, that a Plant dried in a Kilne, and put
into a particular Water whose Virtue is Universal, receives its pristine
Greenness, Leaves, and Flowers; without doubt in this dried Plant some Vital
Spirits were shut up, which are relaxed by the Spirits of this Water, or the
Vital Spirits exhaling, give way to the Spirits of the Water we speak of, to
take their places. This Water is endued with Vital Spirits, which can fill the
place of those that exhale in us, and with this sole Remedy Life may be
prolonged, and the losses of ruined Old Age be repaired, by filling up the
Vacuities of the radical moisture which is dissipated. But you will say, where
is this Water, it is to be found in Light, according to our Principles, and
certainly no where else. This Water is the true Elixir-Vitae, and the Universal
Medicine of the Ancients, and it is meet that we use it to the preservation of
the most Sacred Persons.

Metals have a more abstruse Life than Plants, nor is their Death more
conspicuous: Their Life consists in a certain disposition of Parts, which
permits a free motion to the Atoms of Life and Light. This is the State of
Metals in their Mines, and when they are melted, this Liberty is lost, by the
intervention of the Atoms of Fire; and when after melting they grow cold, they
may be called Dead, for they are deprived of motion, nor do they perform any
action. Gold melted when it is grown cold is dead; it Lived in the Mine, it is
dying whilst it is melting, and it is dead, when cast into Ingots.

In vain therefore do the Chemists seek for the Living among the Dead, Common
Gold is dead, and good for nothing but to make Money of; but if any one can
dissolve this Body, and bring the Dead to Life again by the benefit of that
resuscitative Water which we spoke of before, he may prepare a Medicine,
profitable to humane and Mettalick Bodies.

It is said before, that Stones want Life: But this I meant, that they not a
Life so notorious as Metals, whose Life hitherto is yet obscure enough; for I
have Learnt being convinced by Experience, that the greatest part of Stones are
multiplied, and increase, according to all their dimensions; and that Sand is
turned into Shells.

And this very thing is the Cause that I conclude, Light to be the Spirit of
Life, that by the benefit of it all things Live, the very Stones also take
their Life from hence, Seeds owe all their Vigor to Light, and seeing that
Light is woven out of thin threads of Gold, all things therefore Live by the
Spirit of Gold. But the Soul of Man is Spiritual* and a Ray of Divine Light,
and owes its Life to God and his Word, as also it is an Immortal Substance, as
we shall say in the next and last Chpater.


