A METHOD Concerning the Relief and Employment OF THE POOR: Humbly offered to
the Consideration of the KING and both Houses of PARLIAMENT. Taken out of Sir
Josiah Child's Writings. With somewhat added; Which the Late Renowned Judge,
Sir Matthew Hale, Writ in his Book Entitled, A Discourse touching Provision for
the Poor.

May true Wisdom be given, for the carrying on so Great and so Good a Work.

LONDON, Printed by the Advice of some in Authority, 1699.

A METHOD Concerning the Relief and Employment OF THE POOR.
IN the Discourse of this Subject, I shall first assert some Particulars, which
I think are agreed by common Consent, and from thence take occasion to proceed
to what is more doubtful.

1. That our Poor in England have always been in a most sad and wretched
condition, some Famished for want of Bread, others starved with Cold and
Nakedness, and many whole Families in all the out Parts of Cities and great
Towns, commonly remain in a languishing, nasty and useless Condition,
Uncomfortable to themselves, and unprofitable to the Kingdom, this is confessed
and lamented by all Men.

2. That the Children of our Poor bred up in Beggary and Laziness, do by that
means become not only of unhealthy Bodies, and more then ordinary subject to
many loathsome Diseases, whereof very many die in their tender Age, and if any
of them do arrive to years and strength, they are, by their idle habits
contracted in their Youth, rendered for ever after indisposed to Labor, and
serve only to stock the Kingdom with Thieves and Beggars.

3. That if all our impotent Poor were provided for, and those of both Sexes,
and all Ages that can do Work of any kind, employed, it would redound some
Hundreds of Thousands of Pounds per Annum to the Public Advantage.

4. That it is our Duty to GOD and Nature so to Provide for, and Employ the
Poor.

5. That by so doing one of the great Sins (for which this Land ought to Mourn)
would be removed.

6. That our Forefathers had pious Intentions toward this good Work, as
appears by the many Statutes made by them to this purpose.

7. That there are Places in the World, wherein the Poor are so provided for,
and employed; as in Holland, Hamborough, New England and others, and as I am
informed, now in the City of Paris.

Thus far we all agree: The first Question then that naturally occurs is,

How comes it to pass that in England we do not, nor ever did comfortably
Maintain and Employ our Poor?

The common Answers to this Question are two.

1. That our Laws to this purpose are as good as any in the World, but we fail
in the execution. 2. That formerly in the days of our Pious Ancestors the work
was done, but now Charity is deceased, and that is the reason we see the Poor
so neglected as now they are.
In both which Answers (I humbly conceive) the Effect is mistaken for the
Cause: For though it cannot he denied, but there has been, and is a great
failure in the Execution of those Statutes which relate to the Poor; yet I say,
the Cause of that failure, has been occasioned by defe^t of the Laws
themselves.

For otherwise, what is the reason that in our late times of the Confusion and
Alteration, wherein almost every Party in the Nation, at one time or other,
took their turn at the Helm, and all had that Compass (those Laws) to Steer by,
and yet none of them could, or ever did, conduct the Poor into a Harbor of
security to them, and profit to the Kidgdom, i. e. none sufficiently maintained
the Impotent, and employed the Indigent amongst us: And if this was never done
in any Age, nor by any sort of Men whatsoever in this Kingdom, who had the use
of those Laws now in force, it seems to me a very strong Argument that it
never could, nor ever will be done by those Laws, and that consequently the
defect lies in the Laws themselves, not in the Men, i. e. those that should put
them in Execution.

As to the second Answer to the aforesaid Question, wherein want of Charity is
assigned for another cause why the Poor are now so much neglected, I think it
is a scandalous ungrounded accusation of our Contemporaries; for most that I
converse with, are not so much troubled to part with their Money, as how to
place it, that it may do good, and not hurt to the Kingdom: For, If they give
to the Beggars in the Streets, or at their Doors, they fear they may do hurt by
encouraging that Lazy unprofitable kind of Life; and if they give more than
their Proportions in their respective Parishes, that (they say) is but giving
to the Rich, for the Poor are not set on Work thereby, nor have the more given
them; but only their Rich Neighbors pay the less. And for what was given in
Churches to the Visited Poor, and to such as were impoverished by the Fire; we
have heard of so many and great Abuses of that kind of Charity, that most men
are under sad Discouragements in Relation thereunto.

I write not this to divert any Man from Works of Chaity of any kind: He that
gives to any in Want does well, but be that gives to Employ and Educate the
Poor, so as to render them useful to the Kingdom, in my judgment does better.

And here by the way, not to leave men at a loss how to dispose of what GOD
shall incline their Hearts to give for the Benefit of the Poor, I think it not
impertinent to propose the Hospitals of the City, and Poor Laboring People
that have many Children, and make a hard shift to sustain them by their
industry, whereof there are multitudes in the out Parts of this City, as the
best Objects of Charity at present.

But to return to my purpose, viz. to prove that the want of Charity likewise
that is now, and always has been in relation to the Poor, proceeds from a
defect in our Laws. Ask any Charitable-minded Man, as he goes along the Streets
of London, viewing the Poor, viz, Boys, Girls, Men and Women of all Ages, and
Many in good Health, etc. why he and others do not take care for the setting
those poor Creatures to Work? Will he not readily answer, that he wishes
heartily it could be done, though it cost him some part of his Estate, but he
is but one Man, and can do nothing toward it; giving them Money, as has been
said, being but to bring them into a liking and continuance in that way.

Question 2. Wherein lies the defect of our, present Laws relating to the Poor?

I answer, that there may be many, but I shall here take notice of one only,
which I think to be Fundamental, and which until altered, the Poor in England
can never be well provided for, or Employed; and that when the said Fundamental
Error is well amended, it is almost impossible they should lack ei^^er Work or
Maintenance.

The said radical Error I esteem to be the leaving it to the Care of every
Parish to maintain their own Poor only; upon which follows the shifting off,
sending or whiping back the poor Wanderers to the place of their Birth, or last
Abode; the Practice whereof I have seen many Years in London, to signify as
much as ever it will, which is just nothing of Good to the Kingdom in general,
or the Poor thereof, though it be sometimes by accident to so^^ of them a
Punishment without effect; I say without effect, because it reforms not the
Party, nor disposes the minds of others to Obedience, which are the true ends
of all Punishment.

As for instance, a poor idle Person, that will not Work, or that no Body will
employ in the Country, comes up to London, to set up the Trade of Begging, such
a person probably may Beg up and down the Streets seven Years, it may be seven
and twenty, before any body asks why she does so, and if at length she has
the ill hap in some Parish, to meet with a more Vigilant Beadle then one of
twenty of them are, all he does is but to lead her the length of five or six
Houses into another Parish, and then concludes, as his Masters the Parishoners
do, that he has done the part of a most diligent Officer: But suppose he
should yet go further to the end of his Line, which is the end of the Law; and
the perfect Execution of his Office; that is, suppose he should carry this poor
wretch to a Justice of the Peace, and he should order the Delinquent to be
Whipped and sent from Parish to Parish, to the place of her Birth or last Abode,
which not one Justice of twenty (through Pity or other cause) will do; even
this is a great charge upon the Country, and yet the business of the Nation it
self wholly undone: For no sooner does the Delinquent arrive at the place
assigned, but for Shame or Idleness she presently deserts it, and wanders
directly back, or some other way, hoping for better Fortune, whilst the Parish
to which she is sent, knowing her a Lazy, and perhaps a worse qualified person,
is as willing to be rid of her, as she is to be gone from thence.

If it be here retorted upon me, that by my own confession, much of this
mischief happens by the ^on, or ill Execution of the Laws, I say, Better
Execution then you have seen, you must not expect; and there was never a good
Law made, that was not well executed; the fault of the Law causing a failure of
execution; it being natural to all men to use the remedy next at hand, and rest
satisfied with shifting the Evil from their own Doors; which in regard they can
so easily do, by threatening or thrusting a poor Body out of the verge of their
own Parish, it is unreasonable and vain to hope that ever it will be otherwise.

For the Laws against Inmates, and empowering the Parishioners to take Security
before they suffer any poor Person to inhabit amongst them; it may be they were
prudent constitutions at the times they were made (and before England was a
place of Trade) and may be so still in some Countries; but I am sure in Cities
and great Towns of Trade, they are altogether improper, and contrary to the
practice of other Cities and Trading Towns abroad. The Riches of a City, as of
a Nation, consisting in the multitude of inhabitants; and if so, you must allow
Inmates, or have a City of Cottages. And if a right course be taken for the
Sustentation of the Poor, and setting them on Work, you need invent no
Stratagems to keep them out, but rather to bring them in. For, There sort of
Poor to a City or Nation well managed, is in effect, the conflux of Riches to
that City or Nation; and therefore the subtle Dutch receive, and relieve, or
employ all that come to them, not enquiring what Nation, much less what Parish
they are of.

Question 3. If the defect be in our Laws, how shall we find a remedy that may
be rational and consistent?

This I confess is a hard and difficult question, it is one of the Ardua Regni,
and may very well deserve the most deliberat consideration of our wisest
Counselors. And if A WHOLE SESSION OF PARLIAMENT WERE EMPLOYED ON THIS
SINGULAR CONCERN, I think it would be time spent as much to the Glory of GOD
and good of this Nation, as in any thing that noble and worthy Patriots of
their Country can be engaged in: But seeing I have adventured thus far, I shall
humbly proceed to offer some General Proposals that have a tendency toward the
effecting this great Work, which being seriously thought of and debated by a
COMMITTEE, may be capable of such melioration as may render them in a great
measure effectual to the Kingdom in general, although at present, to prevent
that Common Objection, that great Mutations are dangerous; I shall only propose
them to be experimented in these parts of the Kingdom, which are the Vitals of
our body politic, which being once made sound, the care of the rest will not
be difficult.

Proposition, 1. That the City of London and Westminster, Borough of
Southwark, and all other places within the usual Lines of Communication,
described within the weekly Bills of Mortality, may by Act of Parliament be
associated into one Province or line of Communication for relief of the Poor.

2. That there be one Assembly of men (and such as they shall from time to time
appoint and deputise) entrusted with the care for, and treasure of all the Poor
within the said Pale or Line of Communication.

3. That the said Assembly be incorporated by Act of Parliament, with perpetual
Succession by the name of Fathers of the Poor, or some other honorable and
significant Title.

4. That all Constables, Churchwardens, Overseers, or other Officers in all
Parishes, within the said Line, be subordinate and accomptable to the said
Fathers of the Poor, and their Deputies, for, and in all things relating to the
Poor.

5. That the said Fathers of the Poor may have liberty to Assess and receive
into their common Treasury, for relief of their Poor, so much Money from every
Parish as they yearly paid to that purpose any of the three Years preceding
this Constitution, and to compel the Payment thereof, but not of more.

6. That the said Fathers of the Poor, and their Deputies, may have very large
and sufficient Power in all things relating to the Poor, and particularly to
have and receive the charitable benevolence of all Persons once every Sunday in
every Parish Church, and in any other place, and at any other time or times
which they shall think fit.

7. That the said Fathers of the Poor, and such as they shall authorize, may
have Power to purchase Lands, erect and endow Workhouses, Hospitals and Houses
of Correction, and to exercise all other Powers relating to the Poor, that any
number of Justices of the Peace now may do, in their Quarter Sessions or
otherwise.

8. That the said Fathers of the Poor may have Power to send such Poor beyond
the Seas as they shall think fit into his Majesty's Plantations, taking
Security for their comfortable Maintenance during their Service, and for their
freedom afterward.

9. That the said Fathers of the Poor may have Power to erect petty Banks and
Lumbards for the benefit of the Poor, if they shall find it convenient, and
also to receive the one half of what is paid at all the Doors of Play Houses
[if they be continued] and have the Patent for Farthings, and to do whatever
else his Majesty and the Parliament shall think fit to recommend to them, or
leave to their Discretion.

10. That the Treasure that shall be collected for this purpose, be accounted
sacred; and that it be Felony to misapply, conceal, lend or convert it to any
other use or purpose whatsoever.

11. That there be no Oaths, or other Tests imposed upon the Fathers of the
Poor, at their Admission, to bar out Nonconformists, amongst whom there will be
found some excellent Instruments for this good Work, and such as will
constantly attend it, for if they be kept out, the People will be cold in their
Charity, and in their hopes of the success.

12. That the said Fathers of the Poor may constantly wear some honorable
Medal, such as the King and Parliament shall devise, besides the Green Staff
which is now used in London to such like purpose (but upon extraordinary days
only) to denote their Authority and Office, at all times, and in all places,
after the manner of the Habits in Spain, or rather, as have all the Familars of
the Inquisition in most Romish Countries, with admirable effect, tho to a
wicked purpose; the consequence whereof will be, that the said Fathers of the
Poor, being Numerous, and dispersed by their Habitations and Business into most
parts of their Province, will readily see any neglects of Officers, and as
easily redress them; the Medal which they wear about them, being a sufficient
Warrant to command Obedience from all Parish Officers wherever they come,
although their Persons be not known there.

13. That the said Fathers of the Poor may have Liberty to admit into their
Society, and all Powers and Privileges equal with them, any Persons that are
willing to serve GOD, their King and Country in this Pious and public Work,
the Persons desiring to be so admitted, paying at their admission 100l. or
more, into the Poors Treasury, as a demonstration of the Sincerity of their
Intentions to labor in and cultivate this most Religious Vineyard. This I only
offer because the number of the said Fathers of the Poor hereafter mentioned,
may be thought rather too few than too many.

14. That the said Fathers of the Poor, besides the Authority now exercised by
Justices of the Peace, may have some less limited Powers given them, in
relation to the Punishment of their own, and Parish Officers by pecuniary
mulcts for the Poors benefit, in case of neglect, and otherwise, as his Majesty
and the Parliament shall think fit.

15. That the said Fathers of the Poor may have freedom to set the Poor on Work
about whatsoever Manufacture they think fit, with a Non obstante to all Patents
that have been or shall be granted to any Private Person or Persons for the
sole Manufacture of any Commodity; the want of which privilege, I have been
told, was a prejudice to the Workhouse at Clerkenwell, in the late design of
setting their Poor Children about making of Hangings.

16. That all Vacancies by reason of Death of any of the said Fathers of the
Poor, be perpetually supplied by Election of the Survivors.

Quest. 4. Who shall be the Persons entrusted with so great a Work, and such
excess of Power?

This is a Question likewise of some difficulty; and the more, in regard of our
present Differences in Religion; but I shall answer it as well as I can.

In general I say, They must be such as the People must have ample satisfaction
in, or else the whole Design will be lost: For if the universality of the
People be not satisfied with the Persons, they will never part with their
Money; but if they be well satisfied therein, they will be miraculously
charitable.

Qest. 5. What sort of men the People will be most satisfied in?

I answer, I think in none so well as such only as a common Hall of the
Livery-men of London shall make choice of, it being evident by the experience
of many Ages, that the several Corporations in London are the best
Administrators of what is left to ebaritable Uses, that have ever been in this
Kingdom, which is manifest in the regular, just and prudent management of the
Hospitals of London, and was wisely observed by Doctor-Collet Dean of St.
Paul's, that prudent Ecclesiastic, when he left the Government of that School,
and other great Revenues assigned by him for charitable Uses, unto the
disposition of the Mercers Company.

Object. That Country-Gentlemen, who have Power in places of their Residences,
and pay out of their large Estates considerable sums toward the Maintenance of
their Poor within the aforelimited Precincts, may be justly Offended if they
likewise have not a share in the distribution of what shall be raised to that
purpose.

Answ. The force of this Objection may be much taken off, if the City be
obliged to choose but a certain number out of the City, as suppose seventy for
London, ten out of Southwark for that Borough, twenty for Westminster, this
would best satisfy the People, and I think do the Work: But if it be thought
too much for the City to have the choice of any more than their own seventy,
the Justices of the Peace in their Quarter Sessions may nominate and appoint
their own number of persons to assist for their respective Jurisdictions, and
so to supply the vacancy in case of Death, etc. But all must be conjunctive,
but one Body Politic, or the work will never be done.

Quest. 6. What will be the advantage to the Kingdom in general, and to the
Poor in particular, that will accrue by such a Society of men, more than is
enjoyed by the Laws at present?

I answer, innumerable and unspeakable are the Benefits to this Kingdom that
will arise from the Consultatons and Debates of such a wife and honest Council,
who being men so elected as aforesaid, will certainly conscionably study and
labor to discharge their trust in this Service of GOD, their King and Country.

1. The Poor, of what quality soever, as soon as they are met with, will be
immediately relieved or set on Work where they are found, without hurrying them
from place to place, and torturing their Bodies to no purpose.

2. Charitable minded men, will know certainly where to dispose of their
Charity, so as it may be employed to right purposes.

3. Housekeepers will be freed from the intolerable Encumbrance of Beggars at
their Door.

4. The Plantations will be regularly supplied with Servants, and those that
are sent thither well provided for.

5. The said Assembly will doubtless appoint some of their own Members to visit
and relieve such as are Sick, as often as there shall be occasion, together
with poor Laboring Families both in City and Suburbs.

6. Poor Children will be instructed in Learning and Arts, and thereby rendered
serviceable to their Country, and many other worthy Acts done for public good
by the joint deliberation of so many prudent and pious Men, assisted with such
a Power and Purse, more then can be foreseen or expressed by a private Person.

Quest. 7. What shall all the Poor of these Cities and Countries, being very
numerous, be employed about!

This question will be answered best by the said Assembly themselves when they
have met and consulted together, who cannot be presumed deficient of Invention
to set all the Poor on Work, especially since they may easily have Admirable
Presidents from the Practice of Holland in this particular, and have already
very good ones of their own, in theOrders of their Hospitals of Christ-Church
and Bridewell in London; the Girls may be employed in mending the Clothes of
the Aged, in Spinning, Carding, and other Linen Manufactures, and many in
Sowing Linen for the Exchange, or any Housekeeper that will put out Linen to
the Matrons that have the Govenment of them.

The Boys in picking Okam, making Pins, rasping Wood, making Hangings, or any
other Manufacture of any kind, which whether it turns to present profit or not,
is not much material, the great business of the Nation being first but to keep
the Poor, from Begging and Starving, and en^ring such as are able to Labor and
Discipline, that they may be hereafter useful Members to the Kingdom: But to
conclude, I say the wisest Man living solitary cannot propose or imagine such
excellent ways and methods as will be invented be the united Wisdom of so garve
an Assembly.

The sitting of the said Assembly, I humbly conceive, ought to be de Die in
Dlem; the Quoram not more then thirteen; whether they shall Yearly, Monthlyor
Weekly choose a President, how they shall distribute themselves into the
several quarters of the Communication, what Treasurers and other Officers to
Employ, and where, and how many, will be best determined by themselves, and
that without diffculty; because many that will probably be Members of the said
Assembly, have already had large experience of the Government of the Hospitals
of London: The manner of Election of the said Fathers of the Poor, I humbly
suppose, cannot possibly be better contrived then after the same way which the
East India Company choose their Committee, which will prevent the Confusion,
Irregularity and Incertitude that may attend the Election of Voices, or holding
up of Hands; especially because the Persons to be Elected at one time will be
very many; the said manner Proposed is, Every Elector, viz. every Livery-Man,
to bring to Guild Hall at the appointed day for Elections, a List of the whole
number of Persons, such as he think: fit that are to be Elected, and deliver
the same openly unto such Persons as the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and
Common-Council-Men shall appoint to make the Scrutiny; which Persons so
entrusted, with the said Scrutiny, seven, or ten days after, as shall be
thought fit, at another Common Hall may declare who are the Persons Elected by
the Majority of Votes.

If it be here Objected to the whole purpose of this Treatise, that this work
may as well be done in distinct Parishes, if all Parishes where oblidged to
Build Workhouses, and Employ their Poor therein; as Dorchester, and some
others have done, with good success.

I answer, That such attempts have been made in many places to my knowledge,
with very good intents and strenuous Endeavors, but all that ever I heard of,
proved vain and ineffectual (as I fear will that of Clarken-well) except that
single Instance of the Town of Dorchester, which yet signifies nothing in
relation to the Kingdom in general, besides all other places cannot do the
like, nor does the Town of Dorchester entertain any but their own Poor only,
and Whip away all others; whereas that which I design is to propose such a
Foundation, as shall be large, wise, honest and rich enough to maintain and
employ all Poor that come within the Pale of their Communication, without
enquiring where they were Born, or last Inhabited: Which I dare affirm with
Humility, that nothing but a National, or at least such a Provincial Purse can
so well do, nor any persons in this Kingdom, but such only as shall be pricked
out by Popular Election for the reason before alleged, viz. That in my Opinion
three fourths at least of the Stock must issue from the Charity of the People;
as I doubt not but it will to a greater proportion, if they be satisfied in the
Managers thereof; but if otherwise, not the fortieth; I might say not the
hundredth part.

I propose the Majority of the said Fathers of the Poor to be Citizens (though
I am none my self) because I think a great share of the Money to be employed,
must and will come from them, if ever the Work be well done, as also, because
their Habitations are nearest the Center of their Business, and they best
acquainted with all affairs of this Nature, by their Experience in the
Government of the Hospitals.

Earnestly to desire and endeavor that the Poor of England should be better
provided for and employed, is a Work that was much studied by my deceased
Father, and therefore though I be as ready to confess, as any shall be to
charge me, with Disability to propose a Model of Laws for this great Affair,
yet I hope the more Ingenuous will pardon me for endeavoring to give aim
toward it, since it is so much my duty, which in this particular I shall be
careful to Perform (though I may be too remiss in others) as shall appear by
MORE VISIBLE AND APPARENT DEMONSTRATIONS, if ever this design, or any other
(that is like to effect what is desired) succeed.

I. C.

This following, Judge HALE writ (with much more to the same purpose) in his
Book, Entitled, A Discourse touching Provision for the Poor.
WE have very severe Laws against Theft, possibly more severe than most other
Nations, yea, and than the Offense simply considered deserves; and there is so
little to be said in defense of the severity of the Law herein, but the
multitude of the Offenders, and the design of the Law rather to terrify them
punish: ut metus in omnes paena in paucos: But it is most apparent that the Law
is frustrated of its Design therein; for although more suffer at one Sessions at
Newgate for Stealing, and Breaking up Houses, and Picking of Pockets, and such
other Larcenaries, than suffer in some other Countries for all Offenses in
three Years, yet the Goals are never the emptier: Necessity and Poverty and
want of a due Provision for the Employment of Indigent persons, and the custom
of a loose and Idle Life, daily supply with advantage, the number of those who
are taken off by the Sentence of the Law: And doubtless, as the multitude of
Poor and necessitous, and uneducated Persons increase, the multitude of
Malefactors will increase, notwithstanding the Examples of Severity.

So that upon the whole account, the Prudence of Prevention, as it is more
Christian, so it will be more effectual that the Prudence of Remedy. The
prevention of Poverty, Idleness, and a loose and disorderly Education, even of
Poor Children, would do more good in this Kingdom, than all the Gibbets
Cauterisations, and Whipping-Posts and Goals in this Kingdom, and would render
these kind of Disciplines less necessary and less frequent Pref.

In that State that things are, our Populousness, which should be a blessing to
the Kingdom, becomes the Burden of it; by breading up whole Families, and
Succesful Generations, in a mere. Trade of Idleness, Thieving, Begging, and a
Barbarous kind of Life, which must in time prodigiously increase and overgrow
the whole face of the Kingdom, and eat out the heart of it, unless care be
taken to prevent it. p. 32.

He Concludes his Book thus, viz.

That it would be a Work of great Humanity (to relieve and employ the Poor) and
such as we owe to those of our own Nature as we are men. The wise GOD did tell
his ancient People that the Poor should be always among them; 1. to exercise
their Liberality and Charity in supporting the wants of some by the abundance
of others And 2. to Exercise their Discretion and Industry to think of and set
on foot such means as might put them in a Course of honest Employment, and
encourage them in it. They that are Rich are Stewards of their Wealth, and they
that are wise are Stewards of their Wisdom unto the Great MASTER of the Family
of Haven and Earth, to whom they must give an account of both, and one (I am
sure) of the best accounts they can give of both is, to employ them in the
^^formation and Relief of those that want both or either.

2. A work that as well becomes a Christian as any: Christianity commending
Charity as one of the Principial Virtues, and indeed the ill Provision for the
Poor in England, is one of the greatest Reproaches to us in relation to our
Christian Profession.

The want of a due Provision for Education and Relief of the Poor in the way of
Industry, is that which fills the Goals with Malefactors, and fills the Kingdom
with Idle and unprofitable persons, that consumes the Stock of the Kingdom
without improving it, and that will daily increase even to a Desolation in
time. And this Error in the first Concoction is never remediable but by Gibbits
and Whipping. But there must be a Sound Prudent and Resolved Method for an
Industrious Education of the Poor, and that will give better remedy against
these Corruptions than any Penalties can.

FINIS.

