RELIGIO STOICI.

Acts 1. 11. -- Ye men of Gallile, why stand ye gazing up into heaven?

EDINBURGH. Printed for R. Broun, 1663.

THE STOIC To his CENSURERS.
I Am, by Religion, a Protestant, and such confide little in merit; and by
Humor, a Stoic, and such are most inconcerned in censures: Wherefore, as I
intend to rival none of these who court fame, I hope none of these will asperse
me; and if I obtain truce from them, I know none else will attaque me.

The multitude (which albeit it be said to have many heads, yet, was ever known
to have few brains) will doubtless condemn me for enveighing against vanity,
whilst I my self am so vain as to write Books; and will pronounce me as
ridiculous in this, as these Philosophers were of old, who denied motion whilst
their tongues moved in their cheek; to whom my return shall be, that finding
many (even of such as I know will censure me) be-myred in the puddle of error,
I have, in this Essay, proffered them my assistance, with an intention, not to
show my strength, but my compassion. I am no such fool, as to show these
Philistines the Sampsons-lock wherein my strength lies, which doubtless their
cruelty would never spare.

Others, who, by their gravity, (or serious dullness) have sublimated themselves
above the rabble, will possibly accuse my Studies of adultery, for hugging
contemplations so excentrick to my employment. But, these may know, that their
Papers are but the pairings of my other Studies, and because they were such, I
have flung them out into the streets. Neither can I understand, how it proves a
Lawyer to be remiss in his employment, that he takes leisure to reach a little
helebor which lies by him, to such poor persons, as because of their phanatick
melancholy stand much in need thereof. This discourse is intended to be a
medicine, and such never rel^sh well nor receive commendation from their
pleasantesse, but from their profit, and are not to be censured by their taste,
but by their operation.

There are many things in this small Piece, which may seem heterodoxe to such
as defy custom, and worship the Dagon of authorized tradition: Yet, who knows
but my Watch goes right, albeit it differ from the public Clock of the City;
especially where the sun of Righteousness has not, by pointing clearly the
dyal of Faith, declared which of the two is in the right. I acknowledge the
Church to be my Mother; neither will I offer to scratch out my Mothers eyes
when they perceive my errors: yet, I believe that a child may differ from his
mothers judgment, in things wherein her honor is not concerned: But, I will
wed no opinion without her consent who is my Parent; or, if I have wedded any,
it is in the power of the Church and it is Officials, to grant me a divorce. I
submit my self and this Tractat to her and their censures, and desires none to
believe me or it, but in these things only wherein I believe her and them. As
for others, since I have taken the liberty to write, I were unmannerly if I
refused them the liberty to censure and really it pleases my humor, (...) see
curres bark and snarle at wha(...) hold out to them.

G. Mk.

THE STOICS Friendly ADDRESS To the PHANATICKS Of all SECTS and SORTS.
THe mad-cap Zealots of this bigot Age, intending to mount heaven, Elias-like,
in Zeals fiery Chariot, do, like foolish Phaeton, not only fall themselves from
their flaming seat, but by their furious over-driving, invelop the ^^rld in
unquenchable combustions; (...) when they have thus set the whole Globe on a
blaze, this they term a new light. It is remarkable in Scripture, that Jehu,
who drove furiously, and called up the Prophet to see what zeal he had for the
house of God, was even at that instant, doing it more wrong then ever was done
to it by unconcerned Gallio, who flantingly cared for none of those things. And
that none of all the apostolic Conclave desired ever fire might rain from
above upon mis-believers; except the Sons of Zebedee, who immediately
thereafter, arrived at that pitch of vanity, as to desire to sit in heaven upon
Christ's right and left hand. And that Peter, who was the first who did draw a
sword in his Masters quarrel, was likewayes the first who denied him. Fiery Zeal
blows soon up, such combustible matter as the Sons of Zebedee; and that flash
being spent and evaporat, a fall follows, as befell Peter. As that body is
hardly cureable, which entertains such ill-suited neighbors as a cold Stomach
and a hot Liver; So, the body of the visible Church may be now concluded to be
in a very distempered conditon, when it is Charity waxes cold, and it is Zeal
hot, beyond what is due to either; and these feverish fits of unnatural Zeal,
wherewith the Church is troubled in it is old and cold age, betokens too much
that it draws near it is last period.

The inconsiderableness likewayes of our differences, and inconsideratness
wherewith they are persued, induces me to believe, that the Zeal now a-la-mode,
is not that holy Fire which is kindled by a coal from the Altar, but is that
ign's fatuus, or wildfire, which is but a Meteor peec'd up of malignant
Vapors, and is observed to frequent Churchyards ofter then other places.

I am none of those who acknowledge no temples, besides these of their own
heads. And I am of opinion, that such as think that they have a Church within
their own breasts, should likewayes believe, that their heads are steeples, and
so should provide them with bells. I believe that there is a Church-militant,
which, like the Ark, must lodge in it is bowels all such as are to be saved from
the flood of condemnation: but, to chalk out it is bordering lines, is beyond
the geography of my Religion. He was infallible who compared Gods Spirit to the
wind which blows where it lists, we hear the sound of it, but knows not
whence it comes, or whether it goes. And the name graven upon the whit-stone,
none knows but he who has it. Eli concluded Hannah to be drunk, when she was
pouring out her soul before her Maker: and Elias believed, that the Church, in
his days, was stinted to his own person; and yet God told him, that there were
seven thousand in Israel who had not bowed their knees to Baal: why then should
any private Christian determine, magigisterially, that, wherein the greatest of
Prophets erred?

The reed wherewith the Temple was to be measured, Rev. 11. 2. was only
entrusted to an Angel; and yet he had not in commission, to measure the Court
that was without, because it was given to the Gentiles. And albeit, Rev. 7. the
number of the Jews who were saved is determined; yet, the number of Gentiles is
left indefinit, and said to be numberless.

There is nothing more ordinar, then for each Nation to confine the Church
within themselves. And in that Nation again, one corner will have themselves
the Sanctum Sanctorum of that only Temple; albeit our Savior in His Gospel
assures us, that men shall come from all corners of the world, and sit down
with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. And John in his Revelation tells us, that
multitudes of all Nations, Kindreds and Families, were seen following the Lamb.
Upon this same block do these likewayes stumble, who put the bolt of their
uncharitableness upon the gates of heaven, to debar whole Professions, such as
Lawyers and Physicians, from entering in thereat; notwithstanding that the
abovecited place tells us, that there were only twelve thousand of the tribe of
Levi the Priest chosen, and the like number was pricked; in the tribe of Judah,
the Lawgiver: Aaron the Priest did mould the golden calf, and not Moses the
Judge; and Korah and Dathan were Levits, and yet mutined against their
Magistrates.

I say not this to disparage that holy Function: For, none shall wish Aarons
rod to flourish more then my self; and ordinarily, these who love not to touch
the Lords anointed, will likewayes be sure, to do His Prophets no harm: but, I
say it to take off an aspersion which has stained too long, and too injustly,
these of my own profession. Is not the Church our common Mother? albeit, I
confess, she is likewayes their Nurse, in a more particular way; and since
there is heavenly Mannah enough to aliment us all, why should Christans de ny
to admit their brethren to an equal partage?

It grieves me sore to see my mother the Church tortured like Rebecca, by
carrying struggling twaines in her pained bowels. And seeing all Christians are
but pilgrims here, I admire that these pilgrims should leave off to journey,
and stand skirmishing and fighting with all such as will not travel their road.
And albeit we acknowledge, that the Spirit of God takes pains, and is
sufficient for leading all men in the way wherein they should walk; yet, we
must compel them, as if either He needed our help, or we resolved to share
with Him the glory of their conversion. Thus God (who loves us all infinitely
better then one any of us does another) leaves us, upon our own hazard, a
freedom in our choice, albeit we poor miscreants compel one another, denying
to our fellow creatures that freedom which he allows all the Creation. I wish
we would consider how each man eats, drinks, cares for his family and performs
all common duties, rational enough without any compulsion; and yet, in the
affairs of Religion, wherein doubtless man is led by a far more infallible
assistance, there are many slips committed, daily and grossly, notwithstanding
of all the pains taken, and force used by one man toward another. Thus it
fairs with us as with Patients, whom when the Physicians stints to a narrow
diet, then they loath even that food, which their unreined appetite would never
have rejected. And this makes me apt to believe, that if Laws and Lawgivers
did not make Heretics vain, by taking too much notice of their extravagancies,
the world should be no more troubled with these, then they are with the
Chimeras of Alchimists and Philosophers. And it fairs with them as with Tops,
which, how long they are scourged, keep foot and run pleasantly, but fall how
soon they are neglected and left to themselves.

In order to which, it was wittily observed by our great King James the Sixth,
that the Puritans of his age strove with him, and yet ceded at first, in a
difference between them and the Shoe-makers of Edinburgh: For, not only pleases
it their humor to contend where they may gain honor and can loss none, but
likewayes, by contesting with Monarchs, they magnify to the people their pious
courage, assuring the world, that such attempts require a particular assistance
from heaven; and when their jangling has extorted some concessions from the
Magistrate, (as ordinarily it does) then they press that success as an
infallible mark of the Jure-divinoship of their quarrel. Albeit, I confess,
that when these, not only recede from the canonized Creed of the Church, but
likewayes incroach upon the Laws of the State, then, as of all others, they are
the most dangerous; So, of all others, they should be most severely punished.

Opinion, kept within it is proper bounds, is an pure act of the mind: and so it
would appear, that to punish the body for that which is a guilt of the soul, is
as unjust as to punish one relation for another. And this bloodthirsty zeal,
which has reigned in our age, supposes our most merciful God to be of the
same temper with these pagan Deities, who desired to have their Altars gored
with blood; and being devils themselves, delighted in the destruction of men:
whereas the Almighty, who delights not in the death of a sinner, but rather
that he should repent and live, has left no war and upon holy Record, for
persecuting such as dissent from us; but even then when He commands that the
Prophets, who tempts others to idolatry, should be slain, yet, speaks He
nothing of punishing these who were seduced by them. And why should we show so
much violence in these things whereof we can show no certain evidence? as
ordinarily we cannot in circumfundamental debates. Are we not ready to condemn
to day, as Phanatick, what yesterday was judged Jure-divino? And do not even
those who persecuted others for their opinions, admire why they should be, upon
that score, persecuted themselves? So that (victory depending upon event) we
legitimat the persecutions, to be used by others, against our selves, by the
persecutions used by our selves, against others. Our Savior forbids us to
pluck up the tears, lest the wheat be pulled up with it; and how can the most
pious persecutors know, that the Saints are not destroyed with the sinners?

It is remarkable, that our Savior disarmed zealous Peter, even when he was
serving Him in person, in His greatest straits, and against the most profligat
of His enemies, the Jews: and that to prevent the irregular zeal even of the
first and best of Christians, the blessed Apostles, their divine Master thought
it fit to arm them not with swords, but with scrips, and to root out of their
hearts all thoughts of violence, did often inculcat in them, that His Kingdom was
not of this world; convinceing them by an excellent argument, that He had no
need of arms or armies; for else He could have commanded thousands of Angels.
Did ever God command the Jews to war against any neighboring nation because
they were Pagans (a quarrel which would have lasted till all the world had been
conquered) Or, did our Savior leave in legacy to his servants, that they
should force others to turn prosylits, which doubtless he had done, if he had
resolved to allow such a rude mean of conversion? All which makes me admire,
why in our late troubles, men really pious, and naturally sober, could have
been so transported, as to destroy whom they could not convince, and to
persuade these who were convinced, that Religion obliged them to destroy others.

My heart bleeds when I consider how scaffolds were dyed with Christian blood,
and the fields covered with the carcasses of murdered Christians; and its
probable, that there were more damned by unprepared deaths, in the fields, then
were saved by peeping Sermons in incendiary Churches; and in this, I admire the
clemency of our Royal Master, who, albeit His cause was more just then theirs,
albeit He might have convinced them by obtruding to them their own practices:
yet, has rather chosen to command with His Scepter then His Sword. But, if the
glory of God were the mark at which these do level, Why bestow they not their
zeal, rather in converting such as scarce know or acknowledge that there is a
God? And why are they more enraged against these who agree with them in most
things, then these who dissent from them in all? Take not Christians more pains
to refute one another, then to convince Gentiles? And stand not Episcopists and
Presbyterians at greater distance, then either do with Turks and Pagans? And to
evidence, that rather humor then piety occasions our differences, we may
easily percieve, that the meaner the subject is, the heat is always the
greater.

If I had ever known so much as one whose faith had been the trophy of a
debate, I should allow of debates in matters of Religion: but seeing men cannot
be convinced by miracles, it were ridiculous to press conversion by arguments.
All the Divines in Europe could not press the best founded of their
contraverted and polemick truths, with so much scripture, or so many miracles
as our blessed Savior did His own divinity (which is the foundation of all
truths) And yet the Jews and all the world besides, slighted this infallible
doctrine; And to evidence that there is a season of grace, independent from
arguments, did not many thousands turn prosylits at Peter's sermon? whom all our
Saviors homilies and miracles could not persuade. If one should say, that the
testimony of a few fishermen should not be believed in a matter of so great
consequence, as is the salvation of the whole world, especially when they did
depone as witnesses, in a matter wherein both their honor and livelihood was
concerned, might not this stagger some mean Christian? And yet I believe these
truths so much the more, because such as these were its first asserters; for,
certainly it is one of the greatest of miracles, that so few, and so illiterate
persons were able to convince the whole world. Thus we see, that one may
account that a miracle which another looks upon as a folly; and yet, none but
Gods Spirit can decide the controversy. Matters of Religion and Faith,
resembling some curious Pictures and optic Prismes, which seems to change
shapes and colors, according to the several stances from which the asp^cient
views them.

The balance of our judgments has ^atched such a bruise by Adams fall, that
scarce can we by them know the weight of any argument. But, which is worse,
there is as great a defect in our partial weighing, as in the scales
themselves: For, when we take either the pro or con. of any controversy into
our Patronage, we throw always in arguments into that scale, wherein our own
opinion lies, without ever taking leisure to consider what may be alleged for
the antipode proposition: and then, when we receive an answer, our invention is
busied, not in pondering how much conviction it has in it, but by what slight
it may be answered; and thus either passion, interest or frequent meditation,
are still the weights which cast the balance.

This fiery zeal has likewayes made an other pimple flash out in the face of
the phanatick Church, and that is, a conceit that the Saints have the only
right to all Gods creatures, the wicked being only usurpers and not masters of
them: But, I have heard this opinion (so beastly is it) confuted by Balaam's
ass, who could tell it is Master, Am not I thine own ass? When Aaron and the
people did covenant without Moses, then every man did bring his earrings to
make up the golden calf. And we have lived in an age, wherein we have seen our
Contrymen, like the Chaldeans, take the furniture both of the Temple and of
the Kings House, and carry them away to their Babylon of confusions; and in an
age wherein sober men were forced to lend moneys, to buy for their own arms
the heavy shekles of slavery,

Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum. Religion doubtless aims at two great
designs, one is like the first Table, to persuade us to adore God Almighty.
Another is to persuade us, like to the second Table, to love our neighbor, and
to be a mean to settle all these jealousies, and compesce all these animosities
which interest might occasion; and this appears by the Doxology jubilyed by the
Angels at our Saviors birth, Glory to God, and peace and good will toward
men. And therefore, as every private Christian should be tolerated by his
fellow subjects, to worship God inwardly according to his conscience; So all
should conspire in that exterior uniformity of worship, which the Laws of his
Country injoins. The first remark which God made of us after the Creation,
was, that it was not fit for man to be alone; there was only one Ark amongst
the Jews by Gods own appointment. And seeing the Gospel terms the Church
Christ's Spouse, it were absurd to think, that He will divorce from her upon
every error or escape; especially, seeing His blessed mouth has told us, that
under the Gospel it is not lawful to divorce upon all occasions; and if He
will not for these, deny her to be His Spouse, much less should we deny her to
be our mother. May not one, who is convinced in his judgment, that Monarchy is
the best of Governments, live happily in Venice or Holland? And that traveller
were absurd, who would rather squable with these amongst whom he sojourns, then
observe these rites and solemnities which are required by the Laws of the
places where he lives? What is once statuted by a Law, we all consent to, in
choosing Commissioners to represent us in these Parliaments where the Laws are
made; and so if they ordain us to be decimated, or to leave the Nation if we
conform not, we cannot say, when that Law is put to execution, that we are
oppressed; no more then we could complain, if one did remove us legally from
these Lands which he purchased from our Trustee, whom we had empowered to sell
it.

As David said to Saul, 1 Samuel 26. 20. why went the King out to catch a flea?
So may I say to our great Divines, why contravert they about shadows? Is it fit
that Christians, who find it too great a task to govern their private souls,
should be so much concerned how the Church is governed by others? Wherefore,
seeing many have been saved who were most inexpert in these questions, and that
foolish zeal, passion, and too much curiosity therein, has damned many, I may
conclude, that to pry in these, is neither necessary, because of the first, nor
expedient, because of the last.

Since discretion opened my eyes, I have always judged it necessar for a
Christian, to look oftener to his Practice of Piety, then to his Confession of
Faith, and to fear more the crookedness of his will, then the blindness of his
judgment, delighting more to walk on from grace to grace, working out the work
of his own salvation with fear and trembling, then to stand still with the
Galileans curiously gazing up to heaven. True Religion and undefiled is to
visit the widow and the fatherless; and the dittay drawn up against the damned
spirits shall be, That when our Saviors poor ones were hungry, they did not
feed them; when they were naked, they did not cloth them, without mentioning
any thing of their unbelief in matters of Controversy or Government. And
therefore I hope, that these to whom I address my self in this Discourse, will
rather believe me to be their friend, because of their piety, then their enemy,
because of their errors.

THE VIRTUOSO, OR STOIC.
ALbeit man be but Atheism.
a statue of dust kneaded with tears, moved by the hid engines of his restless
passions, a clod of earth, which the shortest fever can burn to ashes, and the
least shower of rheums wash away to nothing; Yet makes he as much noise in the
world, as if both the Globes (these glorious Twaines) had been un-wombed from
that formless Chaos, by the midwifry of his wit; he speaks thunder, looks
lightning, breaths storms, and by the eloquence of his own vanity, perswads
himself that his commands are able to unhinge the Poles. From which boundless
pride, I considently conclude, that if a natural Instinct, or as the Stoics
term it, (...), had not irresistably bowed his faith to assent to a Deity, he
had never, neither upon design nor in compliance to custom (as Atheists
allege) suffered to creep into his Creed, that there was one greater then
himself, who could rein his affections, and bound their effects, according to
the dictates of his irresistible will.

And albeit Regiments of Arguments, levied both from the stately fabric of
heavens arched Pend, and from the inimitable embroidery of earths flowery Boul,
be requisite for conquering the infidelity of others, and for rendering them
tributaries to that all-forming Essence: Yet, does my faith render up the arms
of it is depraved reason, and turn Prosolyte to this divine truth, upon the sole
sight of one of these dying Atheists; who, upon any surprisal, do with
amazement throw up their eyes to heaven, as if they sent their looks in
ambassade to beg assistance from thence; and cry, God save me, as if these
beastly souls, when attaqued unexpectedly, knew whence their health were to be
expected: Like to other sick brutes, who when assaulted by sickness, are, by
the hand of that same storge and instinct, led to some herb or flower, which is
an Apothecary shop appointed by nature for them.

Neither think I these arguments which are twisted together of three
propositions so strong as these Instincts are; where truth, like the Sun, seems
to dart home it is light in one unperceiveable act, whereas in these, pur-blind
nature may be mistaken, not only in judging of the truth of either of the three
parts, but likewise of their connection and alliance. I know that that
miscreant, who began his hell upon earth, by being burnt at Toulouse for
theorick Atheism, did upon his first approach to the Fire, cry, O God:
Whereupon, being taxt by the assisting Jesuit, answered, that these and such
like expressions were the offspring of custom: But poor soul, he might have
considered, that seeing he had creept from his cradle into that error, and had
run his glass to it is last sand, in propagating that hellish conceit: That
therefore this expression was rather a confession then an escape, rather the
product of a rational soul then of depraved custom; for as it was in it self a
divine truth, so it was in him contrary to a settled habit.

There is another Caball of Atheists, who think that this Belief was at first;
but the quaint Leger-de-main of some strongly-pated Statesman; who to overawe
the capriciousness of a giddy multitude, did forge this opinion of a rewarder
of all humane actions: And to enforce this, do instance Numa Pompiluis, and
Mahomet, whose palpable cheats grew up in their successors into religions; and
whose inventions were received with as much bigotrie, by the wisest of men, as
is that Deity which is now the object of our adorations. Wherefore (say they)
seeing the rational soul has failed so often, and so absurdly in its discoveries,
how, or why, should we submit our selves slavishly to it is determinations? For
that which does at some times err, can never at any time be concluded
infallible.

To these I answer, that albeit, as to the particular way of worship, the world
is often times deluded. And albeit, even as to their apprehensions of this
incomprehensible Essence, multitudes be some times misled; Yet, these
staggering Fancies fix this great Truth, that there is a Supreme who must be
adored: For if this innate Instinct did not coopere with these impostures, in
gaining an assent no their fictitious Religions and Hierarchies, it were
impossible for any humane Authority to establish Principles so remote from
reason, and to subjugate by these even the mildest tempers. But I take the root
from which these errors do spring, to be, that the twilight of darkened reason
glimpsing to man, that impressa of the divine Image, which though much decayed,
yet rests still upon his soul; and not being able, because of the faintness of
his light, and the decay of that divine Impressa, to discern exactly what that
Deity is, with whose image it is signeted; believes implicitly with a profound
respect, any who has the confidence to obtrude any knowledge of it upon them.
Concluding in the conclave of their own thoughts, that none durst contemn so
far, that omnipotent Thunder-darter, as to vend their own Fancies for sacred
Oracles. And albeit these hoodwinked Nations did erect a (...) in their own
hearts, wherein all these Vice-gods were worshipped; Yet were all these but
representations of the true God; for His Omnipotency and Power was adored in
their Mars; His Omniscience in their Appollo, etc. And it is very probable that
the Heathens admired so each attribute of God Almighty, that they thought each
deserved distinct Altars; so that their errors had their rise from rather too
much then too little respect; and that as the same Ocean receives several names
from the several shoars it washes, so, according to the several operations of
the most High, did these deluded Pagans establish several Deities. But that all
these did ultimatly terminat in one, is clear from the Inscription of that
Athenian Altar, To the unknown God; from the designation of (...), from their
common feasts or (...); from the adjunct of Delphicus given to Appollo, which
in Greek signifies unus; as Macrobius observes, from their Altars erected,
Disque Deabusque omnibus, and from the general invocation of all the Deities
jointly subjoyned to all their particular sacrifices. So that the great and all
comprehending Idea, wherein he is represented, as in one big mirror to us, was
by them broke in pieces, and in each of these pieces taken alone did they see a
Deity, though much abridged; Whereas all these pieces, when set together, did
represent but one, and each piece did then show but a part. But to evidence
that our belief of a Deity is not a state and traditionall imposture, I would
willingly know if ever the skilfullest of Satan's emissaries was able to induce
the world to believe that there was no God; which (doubtless) might have at
some occasions contributed much to some men's politic designs, and which that
rebel would have attempted, if either God had not restrained him, or himself
had not known it imprestable. And it is most remarkable, that the first
promoters of that divine Doctrine were persons, who, both by precept and
practice, decryed Ambition and declined State employments; and so it were
absurd to think that they invented these in subordination to State Projects.

There is also much force in that Argument, wherein from the nature of
prophesying, is concluded the being of a God: for, to foresee, is doubtless a
way of seeing, far above the reach of humane nature; man not being able to
conclude but that, What is possible upon both parts, may come to pass upon
either of its parts. And hence it was, that the Heathens themselves termed this
prediction divination, as if it could not be but divine. As also, if there were
not a God, but that this were a fiction, it would follow, that error and
delusion (such as this ex hypothesi) were able, and actually did, of all other
things, frame a man's soul most to virtue: and that the best of men (such as
are the adorers of a Deity) were both the greatest cheats and block-heads. All
which, are absurdities to be hissed at by all who are masters of the meanest
portion of humane reason.

There lurketh much curious contemplation in pondering, how that albeit the
parents of all heathnish Religions, have been incomparably the chiefest wits
in their times; for else they could not have impressed the spirits of their
disciples with such abstract principles; Yet, all their Models, seem repugnant
to common reason: and they have chois'd to teach principles which seem
ridiculous.

Thus the Fictions related by the Poets of their gods, the Rites used by the
Romans, and the Fopperies of the Alcoran, are absurdities unworthy of a
rational belief, if man were not acted by an innate principle, to place the
mysteries of Religion above his reason.

By which we see, that the imputation cast upon the Scriptures of their
contrariety to reason, chocks likewayes the principles of all Nations: and
certainly, if there were nothing revealed to us in Religion, but what the short
line of our reason might fadom, the omnipotency of God, and the weakness of our
own reason, should remain still unknown: and seeing our reason is only suitable
to our nature, certainly if that infinite essence and it is mysteries might be
comprehended by that same reason, which measures things finit, we might
conclude God to be finit likewayes; and is it not impudence in us who know not
the ebbing and flowing of the sea, nor the reason why the Adamant draws the
iron, to repine because we cannot comprehend the essence of God Almighty? and
then vainly to conclude, that because we cannot grasp within the short arms of
our understanding, the vast bulk of the Deity, that there is no Deity? A
conclusion as absurd, as if one should say, that when the nimble wings of an
arrow transport it above our sight, it did leave off to be, when it left off to
be perceived. And I am of opinion, that mysteriousness suits rarely well with
divine Truths, the finest things using always to be best wrapped up: thus if we
listen to our hid inclinations, we will find a pleasing veneration in reserved
silence; and our curiosity will swiftly follow, what by it is retiredness flees
from us: silent groves whose bush-top trees lay their heads together, as in a
conspiracy to resist the Sun's entry, and powder its light with Sables, creat's
a veneration in us. And as the Heathens did choice groves, So did the primitive
Christians light their Devotions with torches and candles, intimating thereby
that umbrag'd silence was an excellent Shryn for sincere devotions; and in this
sense, it may be, the Word of God is said to be a Lantern to our steps, and the
seven Churches are compared to seven Candlsticks. Did not our Savior teach His
disciples in parables? and was not the Ark veiled from the eyes of the people?
the Pagans dispensed their divinity in Hieroglyphics; and amongst humane
Writers, the most mysterious carry still the Laurels: And why should we vainly
wish to comprehend the nature of the Deity, seeing Moses, God's intimate, and
minion, could not have that allowance? And God himself, when for our necessary
instruction He would discover something of Himself to us, is forced per (...),
(as Divines speak) to discover Himself in a style borrowed from humane frailty,
and to express His infinite affections by our disordered passions.

I believe, that Socrates, natur's greatest disciple, and the Deity's
protomartyr, was a prosolyt of the same faith, which we profess, and had his
large soul illuminated by that Sun of righteousness, whose refulgent rays are
now the bright torches of the christian Church. Neither is my belief in this
staggered by the silence of his co-temporary Writers, as to this particular:
seeing these, not being of the same persuasion with him, but being convinced of
his moral worth, did descrive his opinions suitably to their own apprehension.
Thus did these pagan Historians admire the great Savior of mankind, only for
His moral accomplishments, without reaching these divine principles, by which
He was acted. The Stoics likewayes were in all probability, a tribe of John
Baptist's, and God having resolved to purge the Universe of its original
unrighteousness by that blessed Manna which came down from heaven to give life
to the world, did by their doctrine of abstemiousness, as by a spare diet,
prepare its body for receiving that divine Dose. And certainly, if men had
disbanded that execrable troup of lusts, against which these preached, and had
listened (as the Stoics Book of Discipline enjoined) to their own private
consciences, and had by retiredness abstracted themselves from the reach of
temptations, it had facilitated much their conversion: for if the young Lawyer,
who came to consult Christ how to draw up his Securities of heaven, and of his
portion there, had believed their Oracle, which decry'd riches as the
unnecessary baggadge of man's life, and the mudd which clogged the wings of the
souls contemplation, and kept it from soaring its natural pitch, he had never
refuised our Savior's yoke, because he was commanded to sell all and to give
it to the poor. Thus likewayes if the rich glutton had dyeted himself according
to the scant prescript of their allowance, his scoarched tongue had not stood
in need of a drop of watter to allay it is thirst. Neither had Nicodemus needed
to have mantled himself in the darkness of the night, when he came to our
Savior, out of fear, lest he should have been discovered; seeing their doctrine
might have taught him, that fear was a passion, unworthy to be lodged in the
soul of man: And that there is nothing here, which a man either should, or
needs to fear.

But albeit neither instinct nor faith, were able to convince us infallibly of
this truth; Yet is it both more satisfying, and more safe to embrace this
opinion, then its contrary. More satisfying, because man's summum bonum here,
being lodged in the tranquillity of his spirit; That which can best plain and
smooth the rugged and uneven face of his frequent and inevitable misfortunes,
must be doubtless the most carressable of opinions: wherefore, seeing nothing
can strengthen so much man's frailty, nothing check so soon his despair,
nothing feed so much his hope, nor animate so much his courage, as to believe
that there is a God, who bears the heaviest end of all our crosses upon the
shoulders of His love; who is able to turn, or arrest the giddie wheel of
fortune by the strong hand of His Omnipotency; and who twisteth Laurels of
inimaginable joys for the heads of these who fight under his banners. If a man
leaned not his weary soul upon this divine Rest, he were not only an enemy to
nature, but even to his own happiness. What rocks of danger could men escape,
if blind-fortune did sit at the helm, and if virtuous persons complain, as
affairs are presently stated? that their merits are not weighed with
indifferency enough in the Scales of justice, What might be expected, if hazard
got the balance to manage? And these who leave their native countries, when
they perceive that the Law begins to render its Oracles in an unconstant
Style, and with a trembling voice, behooved to leave the world, if this Anarchy
were by Atheism established? For as a wise Stoic well observed, (...). It
were impossible to live in a world, void of God and void of providence.

It is likewayes most safe; for if there be a Deity, doubtless these obdured
Atheists, whose obstinacy has conjured their consciences to a constrained
silence, and brybed these infallible Witnesses, to depone what suited best with
their wild resolutions, or rather neglected resolutly their sincere
depositions: then certainly, the just flames of that God's indignation, whom
they have disclaimed, will heat for them a furnace in hell, beyond what the
other damned spirits shall meet with in their torture. Whereas albeit there be
no tribunal, from which such a thunderbolt sentence may be darted, nor no
supreme Judge by whom our actions shall be canvass'd, Then these who have paid
their adorations at His altars, shall be in no danger. Wherefore, seeing it
should be the task of a Virtuoso, to turn out all such thoughts as may raise a
mutiny in his breast; it were a foolish toy in him to entertain Atheism, which
is a Nurcery of disquietness: for whose breast could enjoy a calm whilst a
concernment of so much weight, as his external portion, did hing from the weak
thread of a mere may be, and of such a may be, as marches so near with a will
not be?

But if ye would know, what disquieting vapors Atheism sends up to the brain,
when it is once drunk in: go to the horror creating beds of a dying Atheist,
whose roaring voice, might awake the most lethargick conscience that ever the
devil Iull'd a sleep. There ye shall know by the Urinal of his eyes, and the
water standing therein, what convulsion-fits his soul suffers; and shall learn
from his own mouth, how grievously his diseased soul is streatched upon the
rack of despair: then it is, that the voluminous Registers of his conscience,
which did ly formerly clasped in some unsearcht corner of his memory, are laid
open before him, and the devil who hitherto gave him the lessening end of the
Prospect, to survey his sins in, turns now its magnifying end to his fearful
eye. It should be then the grand design of a Philosopher, to order his own
breast aright, before he go abroad to view the Works of the Creation; least if
he leave its door unbolted, the devil steal from him his richest Jewel, whilst
he sweats to enrich his contemplation with what is of far less consequence.

It is no wild fancy to think, that Superstition.
Atheism has been the product of Superstition: for certainly, many who were
by humor Gallio's, finding that Religion exacted from men such inhumane homage
to its recognizance, as was the sacrificing children amongst the Heathens,
wearying Pilgrimages, and hectic Lents amongst Christians, did resolve rather
to deny than to adore such Deities. Thus Lucretius revolted upon Agamemnon's
sacrificing his daughter Iphigenia for the grecian safety, crying out,

Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum. And thus Petronius* Arbiter a monck of
the same Cell, says that,

Primus in orb deos timor fecit, fulmina coelo
Cum caderent --
And to prevent this, our Savior does often inculcat, that His yoke is easy and
His burden is light. And doubtless, as the straightest line is always the
shortest; So the most rational designs are always easilyest effectuated; and
as Seneca has excellently observed, Licet Deus non esset, tamen non peccarem
ob peccati vilitatem. There is something of meanness in the gallantest, and
most alluring sin. And this is most energetically expressed in Scripture, whilst
it is said that the wicked weary themseles by their sins. A principle, which
not only the magisterial Authority of God's Spirit, but our experience
likewayes places above the reach of all scruples: for are not the inquietuds,
the cheats, and palliated parricids, and sacriledges brooded by ambition, the
churlishness and close-handedness parented by avarice, effects unworthy to be
fathered upon any rational soul; And at which we should scarlet our cheeks with
blushes, as well as ^npale them through fear, and should stand as much in awe
of our consciences, as most do of a Deity? Yet, it may be we are in a mistake,
whilst we place Superstition in the excess of such adorations, as are either
commanded or indifferent: for seeing the object of our adorations, God Almighty,
is in Himself infinite, we can never exceed either in our respects to Him, or in
the expression of them. Excess being only admissible, where the object is
finit, and where we attribute mor then is due, which can never be here. Thus if
Kneeling be lawful at any occasion, I hardly see why it is not lawful to
kneel at all occasions. And if these exterior rites and ceremonies (some
whereof are allowed in all Churches) be judged requisite, for expressing our
vassalage and subordination to God our maker, either they are altogether
unwarrantable, or else we should proportion them (as far as in us lies) to that
infinite object. And seeing the Angels are said to cover their faces with their
wings before Him, the Patriarchs to fall upon their face and worship; and our
adorable Savior, in that conflict wherein He represented sinful man, is by
Matthew remarked to have fallen upon His face, by Mark to have fallen upon the
ground, and by Luke to have kneeled. What is crawling man, that he should
account such gestures fond Superstition? It would appear then, that
Superstition consists in man's worshipping God by means unlawful, such as are
children-sacrifices, and such like, whereby His divine attributes are
misrepresented, and tainted with cruelty, or tyranny, and not in an excess,
in such expressions of our respect as are in themselves lawful. And if there
be any strength in that argument, wherein we enforce the being of God, from the
harmonious consent and assent of all Nations: certainly, by that same argument,
we may establish the decency, if not the necessity, of Ceremonies. For, what
Nation bows to Altars, without profound and external submissions? And, who
lodges upon the surface of our Globe, who pays not as the reddendo of their
Charter to these gods whom they worship, ceremonial Adorations, wrapped up in
most submissive Rites?

That God made all things for Why the world was created.
His glory, is an expression, which (I think) looks not well at the test of
reason, and has no warrant but unwary custom: for beyond all question, His
glory was so brim-full formerly, that it neither needed, nor could recieve any
considerable accession from this small drop. And besides this, the innate
apprehension we have of doing any thing for one's glory, dies this expression
with some guilt; Yet, I confess, we may warrantably say, that when perverse man
calls His power in question, or controverts His being only wise; that then, God
for our instruction, and the vindication of His own glorious Attributes, does
many things for His own glory. And in this sense, the Scripture says, that God
will punish the wicked, and deliver His people, for His own glory. And wherever
it is said, that God does, or createh any thing, for His own glory, it is
doubtless in this sense; in which man (who is made after His image) may act for
his own glory without any vanity; albeit to act for his own glory in the first
sense, were in him criminal. It is then more probable, that God being infinitely
good, and all good being sui communicativum, that His design in creating the
world, was to communicate and display His goodness: and upon this base probably
has Aristotle reared up his error, of the worlds existency from all eternity:
for, seeing God was ab aeterno infinitely good, and that good is still
communicative: he did (it may be) conclude, that ab aeterno, God did
communicate His goodness: which could only be to creatures. And therefore it
was necessar that there should have been a world: and some Philosophers have
aver'd, that the world flowed from God per emanationem, ab aeterno, as beams
are lanced out from the body of the Sun. Albeit I be none of Aristotle's
Partisans, nor holds my philosophy of him as my Superior; Yet I cannot but
think, that God has communicated His goodness to worlds prior to ours, which
is but of 5662 years standing. But I am not so arrogant as to determine the
time of the first worlds birth, nor how many Cadets it has had, resolving to
leave its Date, blank, to be filled up by some arrogant Pretender. Neither
should I accuse mine own thoughts of Heresy, for concluding, that probably
there are presently thousands of worlds co-existing with ours, whereof some, it
may be, are governed by Maxims. If not contrair, yet at least differnt from
these which are our Canons. All which worlds, albeit they were actually
subsisting, would ly in the bosom of the large imaginary Spaces, but like so
many small balls in the corner of a large Tennis-court. I shall not for
confirming this opinion, cite, with an ignorant french Curate, the parable of
the Lepers, where it is said, Nonne sunt december mundi? because I know that it
was wittily answered, Sed ubi sunt reliqui novem?

That Eternity is all present, and Eternity.
that in it, there is neither preterit, nor future, is but a conceit, and a
needless mystery imposed upon our belief, which is really more mysterious then
the Trinity; who knows but it is founded upon an expression in Cicero, wherein
Eternity is called aeternum instans? For how then can it be said, that God was
before the world? for was is preterit, and before the world there was, as
themselves allege, no time; and so there was a was in eternity. Is not God
called by Himself Alpha and Omega, first and last, the one whereof is preterite
and the other future? And it is said, Rev. 16. 5. O glorious God, who art, and
wast, and shall be. And if it be answered, That this is only fitted to our
capacities; certainly, that is all is craved: for, doubtless there is no such
real thing, as these three measures of time, even in things finit and created;
for they ow their being only to our conceit, as well in the one as in the
other. And when God descriv'd Himself by His name JAH I am, it was not meant,
that no measure of time could be attributed to Him, but the present; but
rather, that what He was, was to man incomprehensible. And that all we could
know of Him, was that He existed; and by that expression, that all things to
Him are present, was meant, that by His Knowledge intuitive, (as Divines term
it) He comprehends all things which were to be, as if they were really present;
and this is spoke, not of his being, but of his knowledge. Neither can it be
concluded that if was or shall be, may be attributed to God, then He must be
mutable, and that was, denotats mutation; for as I said formerly, these are but
terms, not really existing, and so cannot import any real mutation.

How God imployes His uncontrolable Providence.
Scepter, after what fashion He governs this lower world, and in what
characters He writs His eternal Decrees, has been the arrogant study of some
mad-cap Pedants, who talk as magisterially of His Decrees, as if they were of
His cabinet Council. And albeit to deter such bold intruders, He destroyed
thousands of His ancient people, because they looked into His Ark; Yet, such is
the petulancy of some latter Wits, that they must needs look in to His
unsearchable bosom, and there marishall all His Decrees, and conceit they
understand His way of working; and thus in disputing of objects, infinitely
removed by their obstruseness from their sense, they show themselves more
ridiculous, then these who would dispute concerning the qualities of an object,
before it come so near, as that they may know of what species it is: for seeing
it is a maxim, that there is nothing in our understanding, which has not past
to it through our senses, and that the things of God are immaterial, and so fall
not under the cognizance of our senses; It must be folly to think, that any
humane scrutinie can find out mysteries that are so unsearchable, except they
be imparted to them by immediate revelation; a kind of correspondence which I
concieve few now a days holds with heaven. Yet, I confess, it is as hard to
confute their fictions, as it is impossible for them to come by the knowledge
of them. But as this study is unattainable, so it is unprofitable for seeing
God's art of governing the world, and His Decrees of saveing or damning its
Citizens is a trade we shall never be able to practice, Why should we have such
an itch to understand it? It should be enough to us, to be saved, albeit we
know not how, or by what manner of Decrees; except we be of the same metal
with that foolish patient, who would not be cured, because the Physician would
not show him how the cure was to be composed, and what were its ingredients.
And is it not the Zenith and topbranch of madness for us to pry into Go'ds
unsearchable Decrees, who know not how our neighbor's calf is formed in its
Dames belly?

It was a narrow Omnipotency, which some mean spirit'd Heathens allowed their
Jupiter, when they conceited that he wanted leisure to dispose of trifles.

Non licet exiguis rebus adesse Jovi. For if the twinkling of an eye, were not
time sufficient for God to dispose upon all the affairs of this world, then
there might be a greater power then His; and the power to dispose so suddenly,
were wanting to his Omnipotency, and so He were not infinite, and consequently
no God.

Neither was the Rodomontade of Alphonsus, King of Portugal, more pious then
this; when he alleged that if God had made use of His advice in framing the
world, He had helped many things in it, which he now could justly tax of
error.

These two extremes, are the two Poles, whereon the globe of Atheism turns it
self; some, out of an impious humility, complementing God out of His Authority,
by denying that He disposes of the meaner size of business, and others
detracting from His providence, in attributing His operations to chance and
fate, or branding them with injustice or imprudence.

There are among Schoolmen two opinions which dispute victory with (almost)
equal forces. The one whereof, will have God the sole agent, and to make use of
secundary causes, only, as of ciphers, these say that it is not fire which
burns, but that God burns ad praesentiam ignis; nor water which cools, but that
God cools ad praesentiam aquae: which is, in my opinion, the same thing as to
say, that God jugl'd with man; and as Charmers do, presented ingredients, but
wrought by hid means.

In too near an affinity with this, is the Doctrine of Predestination as some
teach it, wherein they will have man to play the mere spectator in his own
Salvation: and albeit there be a free and full tender of mercy made to lost
man, yet will not allow him any power to embrace or reject it; judging this one
of the necessary appanages of God's Omnipotency, that He does save or condemn
ex mero beneplacito, never considering, that the question is not, what God can
do, but what He does: And that it derogats nothing from His Omnipotency, that
He will not damn poor sinners, who according to their Doctrine cannot be blamed
for their obstinacy; because it was never free to them to do otherwise: and how
(I pray you) could the sluggard in the parable, have been punished, for not
improving his talent, and laying it up in a napkin, i^ God had by His Decree
cast an insolvable knot upon that napkin, wherein it was laid up?

The other opinion, will have secundary causes the sole agents; and teaches,
that God in the first moulding of each creature, did dote it with innate
qualities, sufficient to act every thing requisite for its subsistence; but in
sign of its subjection to its Maker, reserved to Himself, as His prerogative
royal, a power to bend and bow these inclinations upon extraordinary occasions,
for the good of the Universe, or when His infallible Omni-prudence should think
expedient. Thus, when that Alleyeing eye of the world, the Sun, was first
turned off the frame, it had in Commission to sow its influences over the world
without any retardment; Yet was its motion arrested, and turned back by an
extraordinar warrant in the days of Joshua and Zedekiah. Thus they make the
creatures resemble a Watch, which after it is once completed, goes by its own
Springs and Wheels, without the Artist's continual assistance. Yet, when either
its motion becomes irregular, or when the owner finds it fit, it is unpeec'd,
or has its Index put forward or backward at his pleasure. And this last, seems
to suit best with the principles, both of Christianity and Stoicisme. With
Christianity, because it gives a check to presumption, and suffers not man to
think himself the sole arbiter of his own condition; because God can easily
quash these babylon-like fancies, which his topless ambition is still a
building; and to his despair, because a lift from the strong arm of
Providence, may heave him up above all his difficulties.

This corresponds best likewayes with Stoicisme, because it pulls the hands of
a sluggard from his bosom and setts them awork to prepare for himself, and not
to repose his unreasonable hopes upon divine Providence; which only keeps these
from sinking, who endeavor to swim. This likewayes takes from man, all
excuse of sining, not suffering him to lay over his vitiousness upon
Providence, a shift too ordinar amongst such, as misunderstand the tashless
Doctrine of the reformed Churches.

This opinion makes us likewayes understand, what the Heathens meant by
fortune, which they termed giddie; what the Stoics meant by fate, which they
confessed to be irresistible; and in what sense Philosophers concluded, that
each man could hammer out his own fortune. As to the Pagan's fortune, it cannot
be thought, that seeing it was by themselves confessed to be blind, that they
could trust it with the reins of the admirably managed world. And seeing they
confessed, that it was always stagering and unconstant, it cannot be thought
that they could ascrive to it, all these curious and just events, which they
themselves admired hourly. Wherefore it is probable, that the Philosophers,
having through the prospect of nature, and by an uninterrupted experience,
observed, that man (who acted from a freedom of spirit unrestrained, either by
providence or starr-influences as to his ordinar operations) was of a volatile
and capricious humor; therefore they concluded, that the state of humane
affairs, which was framed and unframed at his ill-fixt pleasure, behoved
necessarily to be most subject to changes. And that seeing the victories of
Caesar, depended upon the inclinations of his soldiers, who by abandoning him,
would fetch his prosperity away with them: they had reason therefore to term
his fortune Frail and exposed to hazard.

Thus the advancement of the restless Courtier is uncertain, because it hings
from the humor of his Prince, whose spirit has some allay of unconstancy, as
well as has that of the fearful subject, who trembls under his Scepter. And
thus the oyl-consuming Student, can promise himself no applause, because the
paralytick hand of the multitudes fancies, holds the scales wherein his
abilities are weighed.

In fine, fortune was nothing to these Ancients, but the unbodyed freedom of
man's will, considered abstractly from all particular persons and the innate
qualities of all other creatures, (which, because they are mortal, must
therefore be changable) then which nothing is more inconstant, nothing more
blind.

The other branch of divine Providence, which consists in the supreme
Authority, whereby God makes all humane inclinations run sometime against the
byasse of their specific nature, was by them termed fate. And this in their
mythologie they fabled to be an Adamant chain, which they fastened to the foot
of Jupiter's chair, meaning by its adamantine nature, that it was hard to be
brok like the Adamant; and by fastening it to Jupiter's chair, that it was the
product of the Almighty's power. Thus fortune and fate, were to them but the
right and left hands of christian providence.

These embodyed angels, the Stoics, finding that fortunes megrim could not be
cured, nor fates decrees rescinded, and yet resolving, in spite of all
external accidents, to secure to themselves a calmness of spirit; did place
their happiness in the contempt of all these follies, whose blossoms fortune
could not blast, and sought for happiness in an acquiescence to all which
providence did unalterably decree; So that neither fortune nor fate could stand
in the way of their happiness, because they slighted the one, and submitted to
the other.

And in this sense, each man in their schools, was admitted to be
Master-of-work to his own fortune: and that without disparaging the omnipotent
power of the great Fortune-maker, in submission to whom their happiness was
placed.

Albeit the knowledge and acknowledgment of a God, be the basis of true
Stoicisme, and a firmer one then any the Heathens could pretend to; Yet, that
knowledge of Him, which by the curiosity of Schoolmen and the bigotrie of
Tub-preachers, as now formed in a Body of Divinity, is of all others the least
necessary and the most dangerous. And whereas we did see God but in a Glass
formerly, that Glass is now so misted and soyl'd by each Pedant's phlegmatic
breath, that it is hard to see Him at all, but impossible to see Him there. And
to extend a little that mysterious analogy; we are said to behold God here, as
in a Glass, and as objects are best percieved in the smoothest mirrors; So the
plainest descriptions of Him, are still the truest: for when He is seen by
Atheists in the globe-glass of their infidelity, He appears less then really He
is, when beheld by the Pagans in the multiplying Glass of Paganism, He appears
many; and when He is looked upon in the magnifying Glass of Superstition,
though He appear but one, Yet He is misrepresented, because He is represented,
as more terrible then He desires to appear: and ordinarily the better cut
Glasses are, and the more artificial, the worse the face is by them
represented.

That first Curse which did sow Theology.
all the world with briers and thorns, did, of all other things, fall most
heavily upon the soul of man. Which because it was chief in the transgression,
ought in reason to have been most tortured in the punishment. And now his
disquieted spirit, is daily pierced with the prickles of thornie disputes and
debates: which, as like briers, they produce no fruit fit for alimenting that
noble half of man, which is his rational soul; So do they, like thorns, pierce
his tender conscience, and to screw his torments to their highest pinn; the
thoughts of God, and of settlment in Him, which like balm should cure these
sores, is become that hemlock, which occasions his distractions, and poisons
his meditations. For, albeit the Heroes of the primitive Church, did give milk
in abundance to Infant-christians; Yet, many of their successors, have mixed it
so with the tart vinegar of contention, that that milk beginns now to crudle,
and so is become loathsome to the appetite of tender believers. For, most of
Churchmen, being idle, and concieving, that if they taught only the holy
Scriptures, their vocation might by Laics be undervalued as easy; and that
they would be denied that applause, which was due to quaintness of wit,
especially in a settled Church, wherein Churchmen could not draw reverence from
the people, by Oracles, as did the heathen Priests; nor by prophecies and
miracles, as did the Servants of the most High, under the old and new
Testaments. Did therefore, according to their private inclinations, frame each
to himself a new kind of Divinity. The more pragmatick sort, and these whose
humor was edged with choler, invented polemick or controverted divinity. And
so by an intestine and civil war of opinions* raised within the bowels of
Religion; did waste and pillage that holy Canaan, which formerly slowed with
the milk of sincere Doctrine, and the honey of divine Consolations. And then,
that precious blood, which formerly purpled only pagan-scaffolds, dyed now the
swords of fellow-believers: who, to propagate their private judgment, buried
Churches under their rubbish, fed the birds of heaven with the carcases of
pious and reverend Churchmen; and by the mad hands of bigott opiniastrity,
brok to pieces all the sacred bonds of natural and civil duties: and thus they
raised the devil of contention, whom they could not lay again; and made this
Itch of disputing, turn the Scab of the Church.

Others again, in whose brains sullen melancholy, formed phantomes and ideas,
invented scolastick Theology; and these, in abstract cells, erected a
Mint-house for coining the dross of their own contemplations, into wonderful
bombast notions: and to make them go current, in the suffering Church, gave
them the impressa of Theology.

A third sort, not able to soar their pitch in the sky of Invention, resolved
to set up a correspondence with heaven: and this they called enthusiastic, or
inspired, Theology. And their Cabbins were Post-houses, where one might know
what was resolved lately in the conclave of heaven, whether the King or
Parliament was to wear the Laurels, and what should be the issue of our pious
rebellions. These could likewise cast the horoscop of your salvation; and
invented a species of Physiognomy, whereby they could tell if the marks of
Grace dwelt upon a face, and if one had the traicts of an elect child of God.
After this fashion did they prophecy their own fancies, and call that
Providence only which made for them.

There wants not some likewayes, who, out of a well meaning desire, to make the
lamp of truth darte its rays with the clearer splendour, snuff it so nearly,
that they extinguish it quyt: and leaves us nothing but the stink of its snuff;
like some curious Physicians, who purge so frequently, that they destroy the
body entrusted to their cure. We in this Island have met with some of these
Charletans, who, I am confident, purged oftener both Church and State, then
Luke, the beloved physician, would have prescrived, if we had had the good
fortune to have been his Patients.

The talest wit is not able to reach heaven, albeit (I know) many disjoint
their wits in stretching them too high in the inquiry of its mysteries.
Neither impute I our short-coming in the knowledge of these mysteries, solly to
their obstrusness; but, I believe, our meditations are more clouded in relation
to these, then really they need to be, because of their innate frailty: for we
see, that some who are masters of much reason in things humane, betray much
solly in their devotions: wherefore* I am induced to believe, that it fares
with the soul in this, as usually it does with the body, whose pulls are
proportionally the weaker, as the thing grasp'd-after is placed above its true
reach. And so these arrogant Pretenders pull but faintly, because they raise
their meditations too high on their tip-toes: whereby they are disabl'd from
employing all their natural vigor, in pulling at these weighty and sublime
Truths, which they catch, not by that corner which is nearest, as meanner wits
do, (and so are more successful) but endeavor a fetch at what in Divinity is
highest, by which effort, their endeavors are fainter, then these whose spirit
is of a lesser size. And these colossus wits, become the greatest Heretics,
as these ordinarily are most burnt, whose fingers oftest stir up fires, and as
Chirurgians have more cuts and wounds, then any other Mechanics, who handle not
so often these wounding tools. It is not fit that mortal man should wrestle too
much with these mysteries, least his reason, like Jacob, be forced to come off,
halting.

Nothing has more busied my thoughts, then to find a reason why the Heathens,
who were as assiduous and zealous too in the worship of their gods, as we
Christians, did never frequent Sermons, nor knew no such part of divine
Service; whereof (probably) the reason was because their Governors (whose
commands amongst them were the sole jure-divinoship of all Ecclesiastic Rites)
feared, that Churchmen, if they had been licensed to harangue to the people,
would have influenced too much that gross body: which was the reason likewayes,
why in the primitive Church (as one of their Historians observes) ex formula
populo praedicabant, tantum antiquitas timebat (...). They preached only
approved Sermons, so much did antiquity fear these leaders of the people, a
practice, as is reported, lately renewed by the Duke of Russia: and this
seems also to have been the reason, why all Liturgies have pricked texts for
their Preachers, lest if they had been left a freedom in their choice, they had
chose such as might, in the letter, have suited best with such seditious Libels
as are now obtruded upon the people, in lieu of pious homilies, at remarkable
or festival occasions. Yet, I think, that our late Doctors, who can find all
Doctrine in any text, would easily have eluded that canonick design. If we
should parallel the homilies, which these renowned Fathers have left, as
Legacies, to posterity, with these which our age runs after, we would find,
that the first were pointed lessons of mortification; which, like Moses rod,
could draw gushes of tears from the rocky hearts of the most obdured sinners;
whereas many of these last are but State-gazets, wherein the people are
informed, what are the resolves of the civil Magistrate: And whereas their
first institution made them Ambassadors of glad-tydings betwixt God and His
people, they have made themselves Heralds, to denounce wars betwixt God's
Vicegerent and His subjects. Thus, Peter's successors will often times, like
himself, rather draw the sword then watch for their Master. And since our
Savior has disarmed them, as He did Peter, and filled their hands with the
keys, these who offend them are sure to get over the head with these. I
confess, God has not left His Church without some skillful Pilots, to lead in
His servants, with security, to the harbor of Salvation: to whom this
Discourse and it is Author shall pay all respects.

Most of all Churches do, like coy The strictness of Churches.
maids, lace their bodies so strait, that they bring on them a consumption; and
will have the gates of heaven to have been only made for themselves: and as
this nigardliness has possessed Churches, so from that root has stem'd the
churlishness of some private Christians, who will allow God but a most
inconsiderable number of these whom He has admitted to make up His visible
Church. Thus, some Pastors will only admit two or three to be guests at the
Lord's Table, allowing no wedding garment, but what is of their own spinning:
and others, with their uncharitable hands, blut the names of all their
acquaintances out of the Books of Life, as if they were keepers of His
Registers and Rolls; and will only have seats kept in the Church, triumphant,
for three or four Sisters, who are so srugal of their devotions, as to spare
them at home, to the end, they may be liberal in public. But both these should
consider, that the new Jerusalem is said to have more gates then one; that John
in his Revelation tells us, that numberless numbers were seen following the
Lamb; and that it is not probable, that the wise Framer of the world made such
a spacious dwelling as heaven, to be inhabited by so inconsiderable a number:
whereas hell (in the geography of believed tradition) is only the small kernel
of this small shell the earth. I know, that many are called and few chosen; and
that the way is strait, and few enter in at it: But we should consider, that
these chosen, are said to be few, in respect only of these many who are called.
Which is most certain; for ten Parts of eleven are Pagans or Mahumetans, (and
all are called) of that elevnth part, many are malicious Heretics; and amongst
the residue many are flagitious and public sinners; So that albeit the
greatest part of the regular members of the visible Church were saved, Yet the
number would be small in comparison of these others: The body of the visible
Church, must (like all other bodies) be compounded of contrary elements. And
albeit I am not of opinion, that this body should be suffered to swell with
humors, yet I would not wish, that it should be macerated with purgations.
It Is nails (though but excrementitious parts) should not be so nearly paired,
as that the body may bleed; yet, they should be so pared, as that christians
may not scratch one another. They should feed, not upon blood, but milk: and
they are unmannerly guests, who will not suffer others to sit at their Masters
table with them.

It pleases my humor to contemplat, how, that albeit all Religions war against
one another; yet, are all of them governed by the same principles, and even by
these principles, in effect, which they seem to abominat. Thus, albeit the
cessation of miracles be cried down by many, yet, do the most bigot relate,
what miracles have been wrought by the founders of their Hierarchies, and what
prophesies they have oraculously pronounced. And seeing all confess, that God,
in our days, breaks the prosperous upon the same Wheel, on whose top they did
but lately triumph; making fortune adopt the oppressed in their vice; why should
we talk so much of the ceasing of miracles? For, doubtless, these effects are
in policy, as contrair to nature, as are the swimming of iron, or sweetning of
rivers; or rather more: Seeing in the first, man's will is forced (without which,
such revolutions could not be effectuated) whereas in the last, dull and
sensual qualities are only wrested: which, as they are not so excellent, so,
doubtless, are not able to make such resistance as the Soul of man: Yea, I
should rather think, that the world being become old, must, doubtless, be more
dim-sighted (as all old things are) then formerly; and therefore, God does now
present greater objects of admiration to our eyes then He did formerly: For,
man is become so atheistical, that if God did not press His meditations with
such infallible testimonies of the being of an irresistible power, he would,
doubtless, shake of all resolutions of submitting. Thus, we see that in all the
tract of John's Revelations, miracles grow still more frequent, the nearer the
world draws to it is grave; and, like all other bodies, the weaker it becomes,
the more subject it is to all alterations, and the less is nature able to
resist. And it would appear, that if miracles were requisite at first, for the
establishment of Religion, even when no older Religion was to cede to it, and
to make an exit at it is entry; much more, should miracles be necessar, for
fixing any Religion against the received constitutions of a previously settled
Church. But to prosecute my first design, it is remarkable, that albeit
infallibility be not by all, conceded to any militant Church; yet, it is
assumed by all: Neither is there any Church under the Sun, which would not fix
the name of heretic, and account him (almost) reprobat, who would refuse to
acknowledge the least rational of their Principles: and thus these Churchmen
pull up the ladders from the reach of others, after they have by them scaled
the walls of preferment themselves. That Churchmen should immerse themselves
in things civil, is thought excentrick to their sphere, even in ordine ad
spiritualia: And yet, even the Capuchins, who are the greatest pretenders to
abstract Christianity and Mortification, do, of all others, dipth most in
things civil. The Phanaticks enveigh against Presbyterian Gowns. The
Presbyterian tears the Episcopal lawn Sleeves, and thinks them the whore of
Babel's shirt. The Episcopist slouts at the popish Robes, as the livery of the
beast. The Antinomian emancipats his disciples from all obedience to the Law.
The Protestant enjoin good works, and such are commanded, but place no merit in
them. The Roman Catholic thinks he merits in his obedience. The Phanatick
believes the Lords Supper but a ceremony, though taken with very little outward
respect. The Presbyterian allows it, but will not kneel. The Episcopist
kneels, but will not adore it. The Catholic mixeth adoration with his
kneeling. And thus, most of all Religions are made up of the same elements,
albeit their asymbolick qualities predomine in some more then in others. And if
that maxim hold, that majus and minus non variant speciem, we may pronounce
all of them to be one Religion.

The Church, like the river Nilus, can hardly condescend where it is head lies;
and as all condescend that the Church is a multitude of christians, so join all
their opinions, and you shall find that they will have it to have, like the
multitude, many heads. But in this (as in all Articles, not absolutely necessar
for being saved) I make the Laws of my country to be my Creed: and that a
clear decision herein is not absolutely necessar for Salvation, is clear from
this, that many poor Clowns shall be saved, whose conscience is not able to
teach their judgments how to decide this controversy, wherein so many heads
have been confounded, so many have been lost, and so many have been shrewdly
knocked against one another; from which flinty collisions, much fire, but little
light, has ever burst forth.

God, by His Omniscience, foreseeing, that it was too dazleing a sight for the
pur-blind eyes of man's soul, to behold Him environed with the rays of divine
Majesty, did bestow upon us, three mirrours, wherein we might contemplat Him
(as we use to look upon the Sun in a tub of water, not daring eye His native
splendour) the one was the mirror of the Law, the second is the works of the
Creation, and the third is the Soul of man, which He Himself has told us is
framed after His own glorious Image.

As for the first mirror, the Law; God knowing that instinct, or as we term
it, a natural conscience, were complete digests of all that man was to observe*
He did make that mirror very little, a volumne of only two pages; but that
mirror is, of late, so mullered about, by marginal Notes and Commentars, that
the mirror it self is almost overspread by them; and it is very observable,
that in the holy Registers, the Law is still abridged, but we never see it
enlarged: For, albeit the fundamental Laws of both Tables were packed up in
narrow bounds, yet our Savior sums them in these two, fear the Lord thy God
with all thy heart, and, love thy neighbor as thy self. And the Apostle Paul,
in his divine Epistles, professes, that he desires to know only Christ, and Him
crucified: So, that I am confident, that if our Savior were to preach in
person, once more to the world, He would enveigh against our Casuists, as much
as He did against the Jewish Talmudists; for, the one as well as the other, are
equally guilty of burdening the shoulders of weak christians, with the
unnecessary trash of humane inventions. For, I remember to have seen a late
Casuist, dispute contentiously amongst his other cases, whither Tobacco, taken
in the morning, did break a commanded fast or not? To which, after a feverish
conflict, his wisdom, forsooth, returns this oraculous answer; That if Tobacco
be taken at the nose, it breaks not the fast, but if it be taken at the mouth,
then it breaks the fast. Which, because I made a Collasterion betwixt the
Casuists and the Talmudists, I shall only mention out of the Talmude (which was
the Jews comment upon the Law) a case, exactly parallel to this: wherein is
decided, that if a man carry a burden on the Sabbath day, upon both his
shoulders, then he is guilty of breach of Sabbath, but that he is not guilty if
he carry it upon one shoulder. As to my own private judgment, (which I submitt
to my spiritual tutors) I think, that seeing the conscience of man, is the same
faculty with the judgment when conversant about spiritual employments (as the
word (...) which imports a knowledge reflexive upon a man's own self, does
abundantly evidence) that therefore, as there are judgments of different
tempers; So there are likewise consciences of different frames: and which vary
as much amongst themselves, as natural constitutions do. And therefore, as the
same Dose would prove noxious to one constitution, wherein another would find
his health; So in one and the same act, that resolution may be saving to one
conscience, which may condemn another: for, seeing God has kindled a torch in
each man's breast, by whose flame he may see what path he should beat. In which
sense it is said, Prove. 20. 27. That the understanding of man is the candle of
the Lord; and can that light mislead? And seeing man must be answerable
according to what it prescrives to him, doubtless it is fitter that he should
hearken to the reiterated dictates of his conscience, than to the resolution of
any School-casuist: and that for the same reason, that it is more rational to
obey the Law it self, than the wisest Lawier, who may either be deceived
himself, or have a design to deceive others. For if God has endued man with
every thing necessary for working out the work of his own Salvation, with fear
and trembling, He has doubtless bestowed upon him an internal touchstone, by
whose test he may discern betwixt good and evil; seeing to command man to walk
uprightly, and not to bestow on him eyes to see the road, were to command a
blind man to walk, and to punish him if he went astray. And as the composure of
man's body, would be imperfect and manck, if he wanted a palate to discern
bewixt the taste of what is wholesome, or what is putrid; So if the soul of man
were not able to know its own duty, and by the palate of a natural conscience,
to difference betwixt lawful and unlawful: certainly the soul might be
thought to be but ill appointed. Thus, beasts are by an intrinsic principle
taught their duty, and do accordingly shun or follow what is convenient for
them, without consulting any thing from without. And shall man be less
perspicacious, or more defective then these? As also seeing man is oftimes by
thousands of occasions, removed far from the assistance of Chair or
Pulpit-informers; and in that his retiredness, has most of these cases to be
resolved: it were absurd to think that he then wants sufficiency of help for
their resolution. And it is most observable in Scripture, that men are often
checked for quenching the Spirit, but never for not consulting Casuists. I know
it may be thought, that when the soul of man rages at sometime in a fever of
lust, revenge, or some such sin, that then the conscience may rave; Yet I dare
say, that albeit the soul, out of an inordinat desire to enjoy its own
pleasures, may set its invention a work, to palliat the sinfulness of what it
desires; yet by some secret knell, the conscience sounds still its reproof. And
I dare say, that never man erred without a check from his conscience; nor that
ever any sinned, after an approbation obtained from his conscience of what he
was about: and when we assent to these Doctors, is it not because our
consciences, or our judgments (which are the same) assent, to what they inform?
which evidences, that our consciences are more to be believed, then they, by
that rule, Propter quod unumquodque est tale, etc. but to convince us of the
folly of our addresses to these Doctors. It may, and often does fall out, that
that may be a sin in me, which a Casuist pronounces to be none, as if my breast
did suggest to me, that it were a sin to buy Church Lands; if thereafter I did
buy them, it were doubtless a sin, albeit my Doctors, following the Canons of
their particular Church, assured me, that the sale of Church Lands were no sin
in it self. I am confident then, that this Casuist divinity, has taken its
rise from the desire Churchmen had to know the mystery of each man's breast,
and to the end, nothing of import, might be undertaken without consulting their
Cell; persuading men, that in ordine ad spiritualia, their consciences, and
consequently their Salvation, may be interested in every civil affair. And to
confirm this, it is most observable, that this trade is most used by Jesuits
and Innovators, who desire to know all intrigues and subvert all States,
whereas the primitive Church knew no such Divinity, neither has its Doctors
left any such Volumns.

It may be urged, that seeing the conscience is but a reflex act of the
judgment, that as the judgment is an unsure guide, the conscience cannot pretend
to be infallible; and that the one, as well as the other, is tutored by the
fallacious principles of sense and custom: And I my self have seen my
Lands-lady, in France, as much troubled in conscience for giving us flesh to
eat in Lent, as if she had cast out the flesh of a christian to be devoured by
dogs; and so Atheism may attribute to custom, these inclinations whereby we
are acted-on to believe a Deity; and may tell us, that the Mahumetans find
themselves as much pricked in conscience, for transgressing their Prophets
canons, as we for offending against the moral Law. And thus the adoring of a
Deity might have at first been brooded in the councilchamber of a States-mans
head, and yet might have been, at that time by the vulgar, and thereafter by
the wisest pates, worshipped with profound respects: Yet, if we pry narrowly
into this conceit, we shall find in it something of instinct previous to all
forgeries possible. For, what was it (I pray you) which encouraged, or
suggested to these Politicians, that such a thing as the Deity might be
dissembled to their people for their imposing that cheat, presupposed some
pre-existing notion of it? Or, how entered that fancy first in their wild
heads? Or, how could so many contemporary, and yet far distant, Legislators,
fall upon the same thoughts, especialy, it being so remote from sense; and for
framing of which idea, their experience could never furnish a pattern?
Conscience then must be something else then the fumes of melancholy, or,
capricio's of fancy; for else, roaring Gallants, who are little troubled, or
can easily conquer all other fancies, would not be so haunted by these pricking
pangs; which if they were not infallibly divine, behooved to be merely
ridiculous, and to want all support from reason or experience.

There is another fyle of cases of conscience, which is a Cadet of that same
family; and these are such cases as were the brood of these late times, which,
like Infects and unclean creatures, may be said generari ex putri materia: an
instance whereof, was that famous Sister, who asked if she was obliged to
execute her catt for killing a mouse upon the Sabbath. This was a Theology,
taught by old dotting Wives, and studied by State-expectants, who, to gain
applause, and in hope to mount Preferment's Sadle, made use of this gilded
stirrup. I shall not inveigh against this foppery, seeing it has not possessed
men's conceit so long, as to have prescrived the tittle of Divinity; but, like a
meteor, which, because it is fixed to no Orb, and is but a mass of inflamed
vapors, does therefore disappear immediately, how soon its substance flashes
out; and its ashes are now entombed in the same clay with its brother twain,
that pious Nonsense, wherein God Almighty was treated with in familiar and not
in superior.

As God did light the candle of a The Scrip tures.
private conscience, in each private breast; So has He hung up the lamp of the
Scriptures, in the body of His Church; and these we may call the conscience of
the Church, whilst triumphant. Which some, by the breath of their vanity, and
storms of their passion, endeavor to blow out, whilst others, make no other
use of its Light, then to show them where to find a jest. And within the arms
of this division, ly folded, all the profane race of mankind. As to these
first (who should be first, because they are Sathan's firstborn, and so
deserve a double portion of this reproof) they contend, that the Scriptures are
written in a mean and low style; are in some places too mysterious, in others
too obscure; contain many things ineredible, many repetitions, and many
contradictions. But these miscreants should consider, that much of the
Scriptures native splendour is impared by its Translators, who, fearing to fall
within the verge of the curse pronounced against such as should pair from, or
add to, any thing contained in that divine Book, were, and are willing, that
their Translation should want rather the luster, then meaning of the Original.
As also of all Tongues, I believe the Hebrew admits least of a Translation;
especially into northern Languages: for as these Nations differ least in their
expressions, who, because of their commerce or contiguity, have the most
frequent converse. So doubtless* the Jews and we, by this Rule, should in
language hold the least correspondence. And because there is no pure fountain
of this Tongue left, besides the Bible, it must be hard to understand its
expressions, wherein the Translators can find little or no help from the
variety and collation of Authors. And seeing this Book was penned indifferently,
for all Ages, Nations and Sexes, it was sit that its style should have been
condescending: for these who are tall, can pull the fruit which hangs low,
whereas these who are low, cannot pull what pearch's high. And it is very
observable, that where the fruit is greatest and ripest, there the branch
whereon it hangs, bows lowest. When God appeared to Elijah, Kings 19. there
came first a terrible wind, thereafter a great earthquake, and then fire; and
yet God was in none of these, but spoke in the shrill small voice. His divine
Providence has so ordered it, that our conviction cannot be ascribed to the
fard of Eloquence nor slight of Logic, but merely to the truth of what is
therein represented: our Savior, will with clay and spitle, illuminate our
eyes, as He did these of the other blind man in the Gospel. And such is the
strength of His divine Arm, that He can vanquish Satan, misbelief and
ignorance with any weapon. And as we think the Sun's circumference but little,
because it is situated so far above us; So we conclude these truths and
excellencies but mean, because they are placed above our frail reach, and will
blame the Scriptures, when the fault lurks in our selves, that great Physician
will cure us, like an artist, with simples, specific for our disease, and not
like a Charletan, with perfumed and gilded nothings. It is not always the
best metal, which carries the pleasingest impressa; nor does the painted
candle cast the clearest light. There are many things in Scripture, which
because of our frailty, appear (like a staff in the waters) to be crooked,
albeit they be straight. Why Abraham should have killed his son Isaac; or the
Israelites have borrowed and not restored the egyptian Earrings, staggers not
my belief: for these belonged to God, and neither to Abraham, nor the
Egyptians: and so God might have given order to any He pleased to recieve them:
and these who obeyed, were no more guilty, then such are, who by order from the
Master, recieve what he did formerly lend to others. And as to its repetitions*
they differ, no doubt, from one another; albeit we (who think all things
removed, though by a little distance from us, of one shape) judge ill, in
judging otherwise. And as an excellent person has well observed, God has
appointed these reiterated expressions, to be as so many witnesses, to convince
Heretics and others, who should call the meaning of any one place in question,
or wrest it by what preceeds or follows it.

As to these others, in whom the wine of God's consolations, (by being winded
in the cracked vessels of their heads) turns into the tart vinegar of profane
Satyrs, I condole their condition: for, that stomach must be very corrupt,
wherein the best of aliment putrifies most; and probably, that indigested milk,
being converted in excrementitious bile and humors, may cast them in a fever
which shall never cool to all eternity. I pity likewayes these, who, out of an
in-advertent (and as they think, sinless) humor, jest with these divine
truths; like foolish children, who love rather to sport with their meat then
eat it. These, albeit they intend not to profane Scripture, yet, they vilify
it: And we may say of the Bible as of taking of God's name in our mouths, which
must not only, not be done upon design, to blaspheme and diffame Him; but must
not be taken but upon necessity, and, like the Shewbread, must be used only
when we are in straits. I have been too guilty of this last sin my self; and
therefore, least I should make no atonement, I have rather resolved to appear
before the world, in the dust and sackcloath of this silly Discourse, a
Penance, really, to me very great.

When I consider how various and innumerable are the actions of men, and that
in all these, they need particular instructions from above the Poles, I admire
why there are so many passages in Scripture, from which our necessity may
expect no assistance. And therefore, least I should think, that in Scripture
there is any waste of words, I am induced to believe, that there run(...)
allegory in that holy Book from Genesis to John's Revelation, and that it is
mystical sense is that which deserves the name of God's Word. Might we not have
admired why the Story of Hagar and her bastard is there voluminously descrived,
and what the Church or private Devotion was concerned therein, if Paul, Gal. 4.
24. had not discovered the mystery to us? By which things, another thing is
meant: For, these two mothers are the two Testaments, the one which is Agar, of
mount Sinai, which gendereth into bondage, etc. I might here relate many
excellent allusions to prove this, but I shall satisfy my self with one which
I did read in one Doctor Ever^t; who, preaching upon Joshua, 15. 16. Then Caleb
said, he who smites Kirjathsepher and takes it, even to him will I give
Achsah my daughter to wife. And Othniel took it, etc. says, that Caleb
signifies a good heart, Kirjath-sepher the city of the Letter, Achsah the
Vision, Othniel God's opportunity. And so the mystical sense runs, a good heart
says, that whoever will take in (and smite, as Moses did the rock) the Letter
of the word, shall have the vision which lurks under it discovered and given to
him. And God's own time is the only mean for accomplishing this: As also, it is
most remarkable, that that City which was called Cirjath-sepher before it was
taken in, or, the city of the Letter, was, after it was conquered, called
Debi^, which signifies an oracle; so that the Word or Letter is no oracle, till
it be once, as it were, taken in and overcome. Since the reading of which
Sermon, I believe that one may profit more by an hebrew Lexicon, then by a
thousand English Lectures.

These who detract from Scripture, by attributing the production of miracles,
to natural causes, do not much disparage the power of God, but (though against
their depraved intention) cry rather up his omnipotency: For certainly, if
these miracles were produced by secondary causes, then doubtless, that
productive faculty was bestowed upon them by the Almighty; and if he can make
the creatures produce such strange effects, much more is he able to effectuate
them himself; as it is more difficult, for a great Master, to form curious and
admirable Characters when he leads a scholars hand, then when he writes them
with his own; for, such help may be called resisting assistance. I cannot
likewise but blame many of our Preachers, who rather break then open holy
Texts; and rather make new meanings, suiting with their private designs, then
tell the meaning of the Spirit. Who would not have laughed to hear a
Presbyterian observe, from the first chapter of Genesis, first verse, that
whilst Moses relates what God made, he speaks nothing of Bishops; by which it
was evident (said Don Quixot's Chaplain) that Bishops were not of divine
Institution: a conceit as ridiculous as that of a Priest, who hearing Maria
spoken of for to signify Seas, did brag that he had found the Virgin Mary
named in the old Testament. Albeit I think preaching no part of divine Worship,
hearing being no adoration; yet, love I to go to Church, were it but to see a
multitude met together, to confess that there is a God: But, when I go to hear
I care not whom, knowing that Christ elected Fishermen to preach down
infidelity, when it was in the ^uff of it is pride: and that Paul (the most
signal Trophe of our christian Faith) was sent for confirmation, not to Peter
or James at Jerusalem, but to Ananias, one of the meanest amongst the
Disciples. And seeing our Salvation, by preaching, is a miracle; it is still so
much the greater by how much weaker the instruments are. When the Pulpit was a
mount Sinai, from which the Law was thundered, or a mount of O lives, whereon
our Savior's glorious transformation was to be seen, then were Sermons to be
honored; but, since it is become a mount Calvar, whereon our blessed Savior
suffers daily, by scandalous railings, Sermons are now become unfavoury for the
most part. I hate to see that divine place made either a Bar, whereat secular
quarrels are, with passion, pleaded; or a Stage, whereon revenge is, by
Satyrs, satisfied; or, a School-chair, from which un-intelligible questions
are mysteriously debated; but amongst all these innovations, introduced by our
infant Divines. I hate none more then that of giving reasons for proving the
Doctrine, which being Scripture it self, can be proven by nothing that is more
certain. As for instance, when the Doctrine is, that God loved us freely, how
can this be proven more convincingly then thus, my Text says it: and that is
idem p^r idem, a most unlogical kind of probation. When I then go to Church, I
should love to spend my time in praises and prayers; which as they are the only
parts of adoration, so are they the natural employments of the Church, either
Militant or Triumphant: Yet, it displeases me to hear our young Pulpitires
skrich and cry, like Baal's Priests, as if God were no nearer them then the
visible Heavens.

It honors much our employment, The moral Law.
that God Almighty was the first and great Lawgiver; and that our blessed
Savior styles himself our Advocat. And it is an amazing wonder that we are
tied only by ten Laws; whereof seven were enacted doubtless for our advantage
and respect, more immediately the security of the creature then the honor of
the Creator, and are such restraints as men behoved to have laid upon one
another, and which nature lays upon us all. And albeit I laugh at the jewish
Cabala, which says, that the moral Law was written, two thousand years before
Moses, in black letters, at the back of a clear burning fire: Yet, can I not
approve Tertullian's wit, who endeavors to find all these ten in the
prohibition made to Adam. There are indeed some sins which scarce a consequence
can bring within the verge of these Commandments. As for instance, Drunkenness:
Yet, these are such as are so destructive to our nature, that there needs no
Law be made against them. So that the Priest hit wittily, to whom that sin
being confessed, enjoined as an Penance, their being drunk a second time;
which makes me conclude, that if Drunkenness were to be ranged under any of
these Laws, it would fall most naturally under that, Thou shall not kill. Albeit
the fourth Commandment seems to respect only the honor of God, and that the
creature seems to be no ways bettered by it: Yet, our more serious observation
will discover, that all be-labouring creatures, as it were, expect an ease the
seventh day more then any other. Whether it be, that nature is by custom framed
to that expectation, I cannot tell: But, we see that God choic'd that number to
be the year of jubilee amongst his own people, and that it is the period of all
the several consistencies in our life, infancy, pubertie, etc. And for this
reason Physicians observe, that the child born in the seventh month is
stronger then that which is born in the eight; because in the seventh it is
come to a knot, by passing whereof, in the eight it is in a state of
imperfection: But, what the mystery of this holy Climaterick is, I refer till
we come to that Sabbath of rest, whereat we ordinarily arrive, after seven times
nine years has snowed upon us.

We may think, that if God had intended, that one and the same day of the week
should have been appropriated to have been a Sabbath, He had designed each day
by a special term, and had commanded, that a day of such a designation, should
have been sequestrated for a Sabbath; and that by designing only the seventh
day He did leave a liberty to employ any day of the seven for that use. Yet, it
is remarkable, that Mosos nor the jewish Church durst not attempt the change of
their new years day; but that the Almighty was pleased to bestow a peculiar
sanction upon that alteration: For, Exodus 12. 2. He commands, that the month
wherein the Israelites came from Egypt, should be, by them, reputed the first
month of their year. Wherefore, seeing each Nation chalks out a diverse Sabbath,
it would appear that there is something of humor in it as well as of Religion.
The Venerious Mahumetan chooses Friday, or, dies Veneris; The dull Jew dull
Saturn's day; The warlick Parthians Tuesday, or, Mars-day; The cheery Europeans
Sunday. And albeit the Christians are influenced only by inspiration; yet, I am
confident, that the heathens did follow that for Religion, which suited best
with their natural temper. But this is a meditation which should travel no
where beyond a man's private breast, lest it meet with enmity and beget scandal.

It would puzle a heathen much to hear, that he who breaks one of these Laws,
is guilty of the breach of all: But, it troubles not me, seeing all these Laws
are made to show our obedience, and the breach of any one of them shows our
contempt of Him who is the author of all. And it may be this was typified in
Moses's breaking both Tables with one passionat fling, after he came down from
the Mount: For, if this breaking of them had not been pre-design'd for some hid
end* doubtless he had been reproved for his negligence. However, we may from
this learn the desperate nature of passion, which made Moses, who was the
meekest man upon earth, break all the Laws of God in one act. It might be also
argued, that seeing all the Laws of the second Table were enacted for, and
respect ultimatly, the advantage of man, that where man is not wronged, there
the Law cannot be broke. And thus, if a married man should have liberty from
his wife to take another woman, this could be no more reputed adultery, then it
could be reputed theft to take what belongs to our neighbor, himself
consenting; and that for this cause, Jacob's begetting children with his wifes
maids, is not in Scripture reproved as adultery, because they were given to him
by her self for that effect: but, seeing the practice of all the world condemns
this conclusion, far be it from me to press it further.

Albeit the judicial Law (which The judicial Law.
may be justly called the judicious Law) is commonly reputed to be but the
municipal Law of the Jews; yet, seeing it was thundered from mount Sinai with so
much pomp, and is ingrost in the Books of holy Truth, and seems nearlier
related to reason then any other Law, I admire why it should not be religiously
observed by all Nations: especially seeing, as it is, the exactest picture of
Justice that ever was drawn, so it has this of a picture in it, that it seems
to look directly upon all who behold it, albeit they be placed (amongst
themselves) in directly opposite, situations and stances. Thus this Law suits
even with contrary tempers, and the unequal complexions of all Nations. I know
that the ceremonial Law is likewayes insert amongst the other holy Canons, and
yet binds not us who live under the jurisdiction of the Gospel: But, the reason
of this seems to be, because these did immediately concern the jewish Church,
and were conversant about these holy things. And so, seeing the old Testament is
a description of their Hierarchy, and of God's way of working in these times, I
wonder not to see these ceremonies amidst other sacred truths, and yet not
observed, seeing they are expressly abrogat. But, if the judicial Law, which
respected not the Hierarchy of that Church, was obligatour only whilst the
jewish State was in being, I admire why the Spirit of God took so much pains,
first to penn it, and then to deliver it so Canon-like to posterity. And since
it is a principle in Law and reason, that Laws must still stand in vigor till
they be expressly abrogat, and must not be derogated from by consequences or
presumptions, I admire why this Law, which God has enervat by no express Text,
should be now looked upon as Statutes nowise a-la-mode. It is true, that our
Savior, when the woman, convicted of adultery, was brought to Him, did not,
according to that Law, pronounce the sentence of death against her; whence some
think, that Churchmen, following their Masters example, should not give their
suffrage in criminal cases, and have only (...), a bloodless Jurisdiction; for,
they are appointed to be Nurses, not Chyrurgions. But, it is as true, that our
Savior professed in all the tract of His life, that He came not to be a Judge
in things temporal, and His design in that place was only to convince them of
their own sins, and not to absolve her, not to abrogat the Law: and therefore
He desired him who was freest from sin, to cast the first stone at her. And
whereas it is conjectured, that these words which our Savior stooped down to
write in the clay, immediately thereafter was an abrogation of that Law; this is
a Geomancy more wild then any lesson which is alleged to have been read in
the mysterious face of Heaven, and should never be taught but in a Rabbis
cabalastick Gown. And whereas it is alleged, that there are many precepts in
that corpus Iuris, which respects only the humor of the Jews, I admire why that
can be urged; for certainly, theft, murder, and these other crimes punished
there, are the same crimes which reigns amongst us; and so why not punishable
after that same manner? Neither are the humors of these Jews more different
from ours, then was the genius of the Romans; and yet, few or no Nations refuse
to cast their modern Laws in that antique mould. And it is very probable, that
as God did, in the moral Law, teach man how to be just in his own actions, so
He would likewayes instruct him by a judicial Law, how to administrate Justice
to others.

What can perpetuate a Law more then that the Authority whereby it is enacted
should be obligatory in all ages, and the reason whereon it is founded should
be eternal? and in what Laws do these two qualities appear more, or so much, as
in the judicial Laws of the Jews, where the eternal Lawgiver was Legislator,
and the occasion, productive of them seemed rational (and necessar) to His
infallible omniscience? and if in any of these statutes, our purblind judgments
cannot see a present convenience, we should rather impute that to our own
simplicity, then charge it as a guilt upon His divine Statutes; and are there
not many municipal Laws in each Country, which have no hedge about them to keep
them untrampled upon by wanton and too curious wits? But, that excellent
Maxim, Omnium quae fererunt Majores nostri, non est reddenda ratio, ne que
certa sunt, incerta redderentur; a reason must not be rendered for all that our
Ancestors have enacted, lest what is now certain, become then uncertain. Albeit
a Law enacted only by humane Authority, seem unreasonable or inconvenient; yet,
it retains it is vigor till it be abrogat by the same, or a higher Authority,
then that whereby it was first statuted; and the Law says, that nihil est tam
natural quam unumquodque eodem modo dissolvi quo colligatum est. And, seeing
the moral and judicial Laws are twisted so together, and are often incorporated
in one statute, as Levit. 20. 10. Deuteronomy. 22. 22. where adultery is forbidden,
and the adulterer is to die the death: how can we think the one half of this
Law obligatory for ever, and yet neglect it is other half, wherein the
punishment is specified, and which appears to have been the scope of the divine
Lawgiver? For, the world needed not so much to have been acquainted, that
adultery was a sin, as that that sin deserved death; and if we allow our
capricious humor the liberty to reject what we think inconvenient, we may at
last arrive at that pitch of licentiousness, as to abrogat, by our practice,
whatever choaks our present humor.

There are many things much mistaken in that Law, which makes the dissonancy
betwixt it and our Law, appear so much the greater. As for instance, it is
concluded, that by that Law, no theft was punishable by death; whereof this is
given as a reason, because there is no proportion betwixt goods and life; and
that all that a man has he will give for his life, whereas this argument would
prove, that no guilt but murder should be punished with death; and so this dart
rather flees over then hits the mark at which it is levelled. And if this
argument concluded, why should adultery have been punished with death by that
Law, seeing there seems no proportion betwixt that guilt and death? For, if vita
and fama be in Law equiparat, by that same Law, pecunia est alter sanguis. But,
if there be no proportion betwixt goods and life, and if the punishment of
theft; when it is aggrag'd to it is greatest height, cannot, in their opinion,
reach so far as to be capital. Why was it, that by that Law nocturnal thieves
might have been killed by those who found them? Exodus 22. 2. For, it appears
against reason, that more should be permitted to a private and passionat party,
then to a dis-interested Judge. And it is clear by 2 Samuel 12. 5* that theft was
in some cases capital: For, there David vows, that he who took his neighbors
one sheep, and spared his own many, should surely die; which being spoke by a
just King to an excellent Prophet, and not reproved, must not be thought a
flash of passion, but a well-founded sentence. Were not likewayes two thieves
crucified by the Jews at the same time with our ever glorious Savior? which
must not be thought a romish execution, seeing the Law of the Romans allowed no
such punishment for theft: I judge therefore, the reason why murder and
adultery were punished with death, rather then all thefts, to have been,
because theft may be repaired by restitution, but murder and adultery cannot.
And albeit the judicial Law commands restitution only in the theft of an ox or
sheep, (things of small moment, and which may be stolen to satisfy rather
hunger then lust) yet, I see no limits set to Judges, commanding them not to
inflict a capital punishment in extraordinary cases: For certainly, he who
steals, may, for ought he himself knows, be about the committing of murder,
seeing to steal what should aliment any poor one, is, in effect, the same thing
as to murder him. It is much controverted, if this Law prohibits self-murder,
and I think it does: For, we are commanded to love our neighbor as our self;
and so, since we are commanded not to kill our neighbor, that same Law must
likewayes forbid our killing of our selves. But the reason probably, why no
express Text did forbid that sin, was, because the Spirit of God knew that the
natural aversion we have against death, would, in this, do more then supply a
Law; and that these who would be so desperate as to neglect the one, would never
be so pious as to obey the other. Or else, God has been unwilling, by making
such a Law, to intimate to the world, that such a sin might be committed. Yet,
it seems strange, that many are in Scripture related, as Saul and others, to
have killed themselves, against whom no check stands registrated in holy
Records. But, I stop here, intending to bestow a whole Tractat upon the
judicial Law, a task hitherto too much neglected.

The second mirror, wherein God Almighty is to be seen, is that of His
creatures; and in that a Virtuoso may contemplat His infinite power, as in the
other he may see His admirable justice. It is very observable, that when God,
or His Prophets, would prove His greatness, the Sun, Orion and the Leviathan,
are made use of as arguments. And when the Spirit of God descrives the
inimitable knowledge of Solomb^, bestowed upon him by God, as an extraordinar
mark of His favor, he says not, that he understood the quirks of Philosophy,
or notions of Divinity; but, it is said, that he knew all from the Cedar of
Lebanon to the Hysope that grows upon the wall. And in earnest, it is strange,
that when man comes into the gallery of this World, he should take such
pleasure in gazing upon these ill-drawn fictions, which have only past the
pencil of humane wit, and should not fix his admiration upon these glorious
creatures, which are the works of that great Master; in framing whereof, God is
content to be said to have spent six days, to the end, that man might admire
the effects of so much pains; whereas His omnipotency might, with one fiat,
have summoned them all to appear, apparrell'd in these gorgeous dresses which
now adorns them. And it is as strange, that man, having that huge volumn of the
Creation to revolve, wherein is such an infinite number of curious tale-duces,
to feast his eyes with curiosity, and to futnish his soul with solid knowledge;
he should notwithstanding spend so much oil and sweat, in spinning out ens
rationis, materia prima, potentia obedientialis, and such like untelligible
trash, which, like cob-webs, are but envenomed dust curiously wrought. And
because the Gross of mankind was so gross, as not to understand God's greatness
by the abstract idea's which instinct presented to him: Therefore, to teach
that sensual crowd, by the trunchmanrie of sense He has bestowed upon them
this mirror, wherein they may see how infinite He is in power, who made Nothing
so fruitful, as to bud forth in this glorious crop of creatures, which now
inhabits the surface of heaven and earth.

I admire that such Philosophers Monsters.
as have had their faces washed at the font, can allow of Monsters, and define
them to be the preter-intentional works of nature, wherein nature missed of her
design, and was not able to effectuat what she intended: For, if nature and
providence signify the same thing in the Dictionary of christianity, it were
blasphemy to think, that providence could not be able to effectuat what it once
designed. All the creatures are indeed but as clay in the hand of this great
Potter; but, it were impious to think, that His art can be mistaken in framing
any Vessel: wherefore, I am apter to believe, that all these creatures which
the Schools term Monsters, are rather the intentions, then errors of nature;
and that as nature does nothing without design, so it does nothing without
success. And thus I rather admire nature in these, for her cunning variety,
then upbraid her with insufficiency and weakness. Neither term I an
Hermophrodite, man or woman, according to the prevalency of that Sex which
predomines in it, no more then I think that the Painter, when he has
delineated curiously an exact Marmaid, resolved to draw either a woman or fish,
and not one distinct creature, peec'd up of both. And doubtless this error did
at first proceed from man's vanity; who concluded, that every frame which
answered not that idea, which resides in him, was the effect of chance, and not
of nature; as if nature had been obliged to leave in the bibliothick of his
head, the Original of all such Pieces as was to pass it is press.

Seeing God, in His survey of the Creation, called all that He had made good,
because they were useful. I conclude, that these are the best which are the
most useful. And albeit I condemn prodigality of ignorance, in preferring a
diamond to a capon or sheep; yet, do I not condemn such of vanity, as shine
with these sparkling creatures: For, since God made nothing, which He did not
destinat for some use, and seeing most of these serve for no use else,
doubtless, the wearing of them is most allowable. Yet, can I not allow of these
gaudy compounds, which men creat to themselves; as if something had been still
wanting after the Creation was finished; wherein man could supply God, and art,
nature. The bestowing a hundred pounds upon a Tulip, or a thousand on a
Picture, are not to me the mere rants of luxury; but are courses pre-ordained
by the Almighty, for returning to poor Artisans, that money, which oppression
did at first most injustly screw from their weary hands. It is our ignorance of
nature's mysteries which perswads us, that some, if not most of the creatures,
serve rather for beautifying the universe, then for supplying necessity, an
error which experience daily confutes: So, these herbs which of old clothed
only the uninhabited mountains, do now deserve their own place in Apothecaries
shops. And it is most observable, that the Scurvy grows no where but where the
disease rages, which is cured by it: Seeing God loved variety in the Creation,
He cannot hate curiosity in man, these two being correspondents; and the one
without the other would be but as flowers to the blind, or music to the deaf.
I laugh at the fruitless pilgrimages of such as travel to Ioppa or China, to
satisfy their curiosity; there being a Tredaskins closet in each Tulip, and a
Solomon's Court in each Lilly of the field. And seeing men's tempers are so
various, it was no wonder that the creatures (which* were made for his use)
should have been made proportional to his humor: But, seeing art has in many
things copied nature to the life, I think not the Symetrie nor variety to be
seen amongst the creatures such an infallible argument for proving the being of
a God. As is instinct, which all the art of men and Angels cannot counterfit;
and herein is it, that that grand Magician must acknowledge the finger of his
Maker, seeing here his own art fails.

These who expect equal excellency in all the parts of this curious Fabric, do
not understand wherein its Symetrie consists. All the strings of an Instrument
sound not equally high, and yet they make up the harmony: the face of the earth
looks in some places deformed and parcht; and yet it is there the mother of
rich mines (as if God intended to bestow a great portion where He bestows an
ill face) and what we think deformities, were placed there as patches, and are
no more blemishes, then the spots are to the Leopards.

I confess, that at first it puzl'd much my enquiry, for what end these
mountains were made so near neighbors to the divided clouds: and I once
imagined, that these were rather the effects of the flood, then creatures at
first intended; and were but the rubbish and mud which these impetuous waters
had heaped up in a mass: But, I was thereafter dissuaded from this conjecture,
by the 8. Chap. Prove. where wisdom, proving it is antiquity, says, that it was
with God before the heavens were prepared, and the mountains settled; by the
scope of which Text, it is clear, that the heavens, hills, and the rest of the
Creation, are said to bear one date. It is then more probable, that God
foreseeing that the lust of conquest would, like the needle of the Compass,
look often north; as is evident by comparing all the Monarchies (first the
Assyrian, then Grecian, then Roman, now German) did therefore bound ambition,
as it were, with high hills, (albeit since, ambition has found a way to climb
over them) as if He told them, that they should march no further. Thus, it is
very observable, that the northern parts of one Kingdom are always more barren
then the southern limits of the Country which lies to the north of it. The
north of England more mountainous and barren then the south of Scotland, albeit
it ly nearer the Sun; the south of England more pleasant and fertile then the
north of France; and the south of France then the north of Italy, etc.

We must like ways consider, that nature bruised it is face so when it fell in
Adam, that it did then contract many of these blemishes which now deform it;
and that as it waxes old, it is native beauty is the more deformed by furrowed
wrinkels. We cannot judge what it was in health, by it is present distempered
condition, wherein it groans and travelleth in pain, as the Apostle tells us.
And the differences betwixt these two states may be known from this, that God,
when He completed the Creation, saw that all was good; whereas Solomon, having
reviewed it in his time, saw all to be vanity and vexation of spirit.

The third mirror, wherein God Man and his creation.
is to be admired, is man. This is that noble creature which God was pleased to
mould last of all others, not willing to bring him home, till, by the
preceding Creations, He had plenished his house abundantly for him. And albeit
in the creation of all other creatures, it is only said, that God spoke, and it
was: Yet, when man was to be framed, the cabinet Council of heaven was called*
and it is said ( let us) as if more art had been to be showed here, then in all
the remanent Fabric of the terraqueous Glob, and glorious Circles of heaven.
It is likewise very observable, that albeit all the fishes of the sea were
formed by one word, all the beasts of the field by one act, etc. Yet, God was
pleased to bestow two upon the creation of man; by the first, his body was
created out of the dust, and thereafter, was breathed in, his soul. And albeit
transient mention is only made of all other Creations; yet, the history of man's
Creation is twice repeated, once, Gen, 1. 27. and again, 2. 7. And, least that
foreseen deformity, wherewith he was to be besmeared after his fall, should
make it be questioned, that at his first creation he had received the impressa
of God's Image, this is often repeated: For, in the 26. ver. Genesis 1. it is said,
Let us make man in our image; and then again* and after our likeness. And in
the 27. verse, So God created man in his own image; and again immediately
thereafter, in the image of God created he him. Yet, I am confident, that this
image is so bedabled in the mire of sin, and so chattred by it is first fall,
and this divine impressa, and print, so worn out, by our old and vicious
habits, that, if this genealogy had not been so often inculcat, we could not but
have called it in question, albeit our vanity be ready enough to believe a
descent so royal and sublime. Wherefore I must again admire the folly of
Atheists, who, by denying a Deity, cloud their own noble birthright.

But, albeit man be made after God's image, yet, that can be no argument to
conclude, that therefore God may be made after man's image, or represented
under his figure, as the Anthropomorphits foolishly contend, no more, then if
we should conclude, that because a Copy may be taken off an Original, therefore
an Original may be taken off a Copy. Neither is this representation salv'd from
being idolatry, by alleging, that the image is not worshipped, but God, who is
represented by it: For, it has been well observed by an ancient Father, that
idolatry in Scripture is called adultery* And it is no good excuse for an
adulteress, that she did ly with another because he represented her husband to
her, and resembled him as a Copy does it is Original: Yet, seeing nothing is
room'd in our judgment and apprehension, but what first entered by the wicket of
sense, it is almost impossible for man to conceive the idea of any thing but
vested with some shape, as each man's private reflections will abundantly
convince him,

As the boundless Ocean keeps and shows it is well drawn images, whilst it
stands quiet, with a face polisht like a crystal cake, but losses them
immediately, how soon it is proud waves begin to swell and in rage, to spit it is
froathy foam in the face of the angry heavens; so, whilst a stoical indolency
and christian repose smooths our restless spirits, it is only then, that the
soul of man can be said to retain that glorious image of God Almighty, with
which it was impressed at it is created nativity. But, when the waves of choler
begin to roar, or the winds of vanity to blow, then that glorious image is no
more to be discerned in him, then the shadows and representations of in-looking
objects are to be seen and discerned in the disquieted bosom of the troubled
waters.

The stings of a natural conscience, The immortality of the soul.
which, according to each man's actings, creats to him either agues of fear, or
paradises of joy, do by these ominating presages, convince us of the
immortality of the soul: and seeing we see its predictions, both in dreams, in
damps of melancholy, and such like enthusiastic fits, followed by suitable
events; why may we not like ways believe its predictions, as to its own
immortality, it being the prudence of a Virtuoso to lay hold of every mean,
which may allay the rage of his hereditary misfortunes? And to what end would
the soul of man receive such impressions of fear and hope, if, by its
mortality, it were not to be stated in a condition, wherein its fears and hopes
were to have suitable rewards or punishments? Moreover, seeing God is just, He
will punish and reward: and therefore, seeing He punishes and rewards not men
according to their merits, or demerits here, there must be doubtless a future
state wherein that is to be expected. But, that which convinces my private
judgment most of this truth, is, that the noblest Souls, and the sharpest
sighted, do, of all others, most desire the state of separation, and have the
weakest attaches to this life; which must doubtless proceed from an assurance
of immortality, and that it has, from the Pisgah of its contemplation, got a
view of the spiritual Canoan: For, seeing the brutishest of creatures abhors
annihilation, as the most aversable ill in nature, doubtless the soul of man,
which is the most divine of all creatures, would never appete this separation,
if by it it were to be extinct, and to be no more. And how absurd were it to
believe, that man's soul should be made after God's image, and yet conclude it
mortal, a quality repugnant to any thing that is divine? As also, how can the
soul be thought to perish with the body, seeing these accidents which destroy
the body cannot reach it? how can the heat of a fever burn, or rheums drown,
that which is not corporeal and cannot be touched? And, seeing man's least
peccadilio against God Almighty, is against one who is infinite, were it not
absurd to think, that it could be proportionally punished in the swift glass of
man's short life? then which, nothing is more finit, or sooner finished.

As the soul is God's Image, So it is products are the images of His admirable
operations. Do not Mathematicians creat eagles, doves, and such like
automata's? And spring not flowers from the Chimists glasses? And thus art,
which is man's offspring, does ape nature, which is the workmanship of the
Almighty: and therefore, seeing the soul can with one thought grasp both the
Poles, can dart out it is conceits as far as the furdest borders of the
imaginary spaces, creat worlds, and order, and disorder, all that is in this
which is already created; it is strange to think it to be either corporeal or
mortal: For, if it were corporeal and a mass of blood, it is actings would be
lent and dull, neither could it is motions be so nimble and winged, as are these
of our agile spirits. It were impossible for our narrow heads, to inn all these
innumerable idea's (which are now in them) if these were all corporeal, and if
these be not corporeal, that which produces them most be doubtless incorporeal,
seeing simile generatur a simili; and dull flesh and blood could never produce
such spiritual emanations.

As the soul is God's Image, so in this it resembles Him very much, that we can
know nothing of it is nature without it is own assistance: like a dark lanthron,
or a spy, it discovers every thing to us, except it self. And because it
refuses us the light of it is candle, whilst we are in the quest of it is
mysteries; therefore it is, that our re-searches of it is nature are gropeings
in the dark: and so ofttimes vain, if not ridiculous. Avicenna, Averroes, and
the remanent of that Arabian tribe, admiring it is prodigious effects, did
attribute our spiritual motions to assisting Angels; as if such admirable
notions could not be fathered upon less sublime causes; which Cardan likewayes
thinks, do offer their assistance and light to sensitive creatures, but that
the churlishness of their matter will not suffer them to entertain such pure
irradiations. This disparages so much humanity, making man only a statue, that
it were against the soul's interest to admit of any such idea's: For, as it
tends more to the Artists praise to cause his products move from hid and
internal springs, then from extrinsick causes; as we see in Watches and such
like. So it is more for the honor of that great Artist, and more suitable to
the being and nature of His creatures, that all it is operations flow from it
self, then from assisting but exterior co-adjutors* which makes me averse from
Aristotle's opinion of the motion of the spheres by intelligences. And it were
absurd to think, that men should be blamed or praised for those effects which
their assessour Angels could only be charged with. The Platonicks alleged,
that all souls existed before their incarceration in bodies* iin which state of
pre-existence, they were doted with all these spiritual endowments, which shall
attend them in the state of separation: and that at their first alliance with
bodies, their native knowledge, was clouded, (...), with the putting off
knowledge for a time, till, by a reminiscentia, their intellectuals revived, as
by a resurrection. And Origin added, that these souls were, according to their
escapes, committed in the state of their primitive separation, yoaked with
better or worse bodies; a shift taken, in all probability, by him, to evite the
apprehension of God's being injust, for nfusing innocent souls, in bodies which
would infect them; and by drawing them in inevitable snares, at last condemn
them, or at least their infusion was the imprisoning these who were not guilty;
a difficulty which straits much, such as maintain that the soul is not ex
traduce. What the hazard of this opinion may be, my twilight is not able to
discover.

It may be, that the Stoics mistake in making the souls of men to be but
parcels, decerpt from that universal anima mundi (by which they doubtless meant
God Himself) was occasioned by a mistake of that Text, that God breathed into
man's nostrils, the breath of life: concluding, that as the breath is a part of
the body which breathed it, So the soul behoved to be a part of that divine
essence, from which, by a second consequence, they concluded, that the soul,
being a part of that divine being, could not suffer, nor undergo any torments;
as is asserted by Seneca, epist. 29. Cicero, tusc. 5. and defended by their
successors, these primitive heretics, the Gnostics, Manichees and
Priscillianists. But this bastard is not worth the fostering, being an opinion
that God has parts, and man real divinity, and is doubtless a false and
flattering testimony given by the soul to it self: For, seeing the soul is, by
divine Oracles, told us to be made after God's Image, it can be no more called
a part of God, then the picture should be repute a part of the Painter.

Aristotle (like the devil (who because he knows not what to answer, answers
ever in engines) tells us, that anima is (...), a term fitted to exercise the
empty brains of curious Pedants, and apter to beget, then explicat
difficulties. Neither believe I, that his three souls, which he lodges in man,
to wit, the rational, sensitive and vegetative, do differ more amongst
themselves, then the will, understanding and fancy differ from the two last; So
that his arithmetic might have bestowed five souls upon man, as well as three:
But, seeing he, and many of his disciples, believe these to be three and yet
these three to be but one; I admire why they should be so nice, as not to
believe that pious mystery of the holy Trinity: whereof in my opinion, his
trinity of the soul is as apposit an emblem, as was the conceit of a simple
Clown, who being asked, how he could apprehend the three glorious persons to be
but one? did fold his garment in three plates, and thereafter drew out all the
three in one*

As the herauldrie of our reason cannot blazen the souls impressa; So can it
not help us to line out it is descent: and such would appear to be the
excellency of that noble creature, that heaven and earth seem to contend, the
which shall be the place of it is nativity. Divines (who are obliged to contend
for heaven, because they are it is more immediate Pensioners) will have it to be
created and infused: whereas Philosophers (ambitious to have so noble a
compatriot, and willing to gratify nature, which aliments their sublime
meditations) contend, that it is ex traduce, and is in generation, the bodies
other twinne. And albeit it would appear from Scripture, that God accomplished
the Creation the first seven days, and that nature did then pass
childbearing: Yet, that, in my judgment, must be meant of the Creation of
whole species, and not of individuals, and to press the souls not traduction; I
shall lend only one argument, not because it is the best, but because it is my
own. We see, that there where the soul is confessed to be ex traduce, as in
bruits and vegetative creatures, that nature, as it were, with a pencil, copies
the young from off the old. The young Lions are still as rapacious and roaring
as were their Syers, from whose loins they descended: and the Rose being pous'd
up by the salt nitre which makes it vegetative, spreads the same leaves, and
appears with the same blushes or paleness that beautified it is eye-pleasing
predecessors. The reason of which continual assimulation, preceeds from the
seeds, having in it is bosom, all these qualities and shapes, which appear
thereafter in it is larger products, whereof they were but a map or index.
Whereas man resembles never, at least not often, these who are called his
parents; the vicious and tall father, having often low, but virtuous children;
which shows, that the soul of man is not derived by generation, and that the
soul bestowed upon the son's body, is most different and assymbolick to that
which lodged in the father. And this may be further confirmed by that excellent
passage, Prove. 20. 27, where it is said, that the understanding of man is the
candle of the Lord. Our soul is God's Image, and none can draw that Image but
Himself; we are the stamp of His divine nature, and so can only be formed by
Himself, who is the glorious Seal.

From this divine principle, that man's soul is made after God's Image, I am
almost induced to believe, that prophecy is no miraculous gift bestowed upon
the soul at extraordinary occasions only, but is a natural (though the highest)
perfection of our humane nature: For, if it be natural for the stamp, to have
impressed upon it all the traits that dwell upon the face of the Seal, then it
must be natural to the soul, which is God's impressa, to have a faculty of
foreseeing, since that is one of God's excellencies. Albeit I confess, that
that Stamp is here infinitely be-dimm'd and worn off; as also, we know by
experience, that men upon death bed, when the soul begins (being detached by
sickness from the bodies slavery) to act like it self, do foresee and foretell
many remote and improbable events: and for the same reason do I think
predictions, by dreams, not to be extraordinary revelations, but rather the
products natural of a rational soul. And if sagacious men can be so
sharpsighted in this state of glimmering, as to foresee many events which fall
out, why may we not say, that man, if he were rehabilitat in the former state
of pure nature, might, without any extraordinary assistance, foresee and
prophecy? For, there is not such a distance betwixt that foresight and
prophecy, as is betwixt the two states of innocence and corruption, according
to the received notion, which men have settled to themselves of that primitive
state of innocence.

From the same principle, may it likewayes be deduced, that natural reason
cannot but be an excellent mean, for knowing, as far as is possiible, the
glorious nature of God Almighty: He has doubtless lighted this candle, that we
might, by it, see Himself; and how can we better know the Seal, then by looking
upon it is impression. And if Religion and it is mysteries, cannot be
comprehended by reason* I confess it is a pretty jest, to hear such frequent
reasonings amongst Churchmen, in matters of Religion. And albeit faith and
reason be looked upon as Jacob and Esau, whereof the younger only has the
blessings, and are, by Divines, placed at the two opposite points of the
Diameter; yet, upon an unbyassed inquiry, it will appear, that faith is but
sublimated reason, calcined by that divine chemical fire of Baptism; and that
the soul of man has lurking in it, all these virtues and faculties which we
call Theological; such as faith, hope and repentance: for else David would not
have prayed, Enlighten, Lord, my eyes, that I may see the wonders of thy Law;
but rather, Lord bestow new eyes upon me. Neither could the opening of Lidea's
heart, have been sufficient for her conversion, if these preexisting qualities
had not been treasured up there formerly: So that it would appear, that these
holy flames lurk under the ashes of corruption, until God, by the breath of
His Spirit (and that wind which blows where it lists) sweep them off: And
that God, having once made man perfect in the first Creation, does not in His
regeneration super-add any new faculty (for else the soul had not at first been
perfect) but only removes all obstructing impediments.

I am always ashamed, when I Faith and reason
hear reason called the stepmother of faith, and proclaimed rebel against God
Almighty, and such declared traitors, as dare harbor it, or appear in it is
defense. These are such fools as they who break their Prospects, because they
bring not home to their sight the remotest objects; and are as injust as Jacob
had been, if he had divorced from Leah, because she was tender-eyed: whereas,
we should not put out the eyes of our understanding, but should beg from God
the eye salve of His Spirit for their illumination. Nor should we dash the
Prospect of our reason, against the rockie walls of despair; but should rather
wash it is glasses with the tears of unfeigned repentance.

Ever since faith and reason have been, by Divines, set by the ears, the
brutish multitude conclude, these who are most reasonable to be least
religious; and the greatest spirits to be least spiritual: a conceit most
inconsistent with that divine parable, wherein these who received the many
talents improved them to the best advantage, whilst he who had but one laid it
up in a napkin. And it is most improbable, that God would choose low shrubs,
and not tall Cedars, for the building of His glorious Temple. And it is
remarkable, that God, in the old Law, refused to accept the first born of an
ass in sacrifice, but not of any other creature. And some, who were content to
be called Atheists, providing they were thought Wits, did take advantage in
this of the Rables ignorance, and authorized by their devilish invention, what
was at first but a mistake: and this unridles to us that mystery, why the
greatest Wits are most frequently the greatest Atheists.

When I consider, how the Angels, who have no bodies, sinned before man; and
that brutes, who are all body, sin not at all, but follow the pure dictates of
nature. I am induced to believe, that the body is rather injustly bamed for
being, then that really it is, the occasion of sin; and probably, the witty
soul has in this, cunningly laid over upon it is fellow, that where with it
self is only to be charged. What influence can flesh or blood have upon that
which is immaterial, no more sure then the case has upon the Watch, or the
heavens upon it is burgessing Angels? And see we not, that when the soul has
bid the body adieu, it remains a carcass, fit nor able for nothing. I believe,
that the body being a clog to it, may slow it is pursuit after spiritual
objects, and that it may occasion, indirectly, some sins of omission: For, we
see palpably, that eating and drinking dulls our devotions; but, I can never
understand, how such dumb Orators, as flesh and blood, can persuade the soul to
commit the least sin. And thus, albeit our Savior says, that flesh and blood
did not teach Peter to give him his true Epithets; neither indeed could it:
Yet, our Savior imputes not any actual sin to these pithless causes. And seeing
our first sin has occasioned all our after sinning, certainly, that which
occasioned our first sin was the main source of sinning, and this was doubtless
the soul; for, our first sin being an immoderat desire of knowledge, was the
effect and product of our spirit, because it was a spiritual sin; whereas if it
had been gluttony, lust or such like, which seems corporeal, the body had been
more to have been blamed for it. And in this contest, I am of opinion, that the
soul wins the cause, because it is the best Orator.

What was the occasion of the The fall of Angels.
first ill, is much debated (and most deservedly) amongst Moralists; for, that
which was good could not produce that which was evil, seeing that which works
mischief cannot be called good. Nor can we ascribe the efficiency of the first
evil to evil* for then the question recurres, what was the cause of that evil?
And by this, the supposition is likewise destroyed, whereby the evil enquired
after, is supposed to be the first evil: but, if we enquire, what could produce
in the Angels that first sin, whereby they forfeited their glory? we will find
this disquisition most mysterious. And it is commonly believed, but by what
revelation I know not, that their pride caused their fall; and that they carcht
their bruise in climbing, in desiring to be equal to their Creator, they are
become inferior to all their fellow creatures. Yet, this seems to me most
strange, that these excellent spirits whose very substance was light, and who
surpassed far, man, in capacity and understanding, should have so erred as to
imagine, that equality fa^sable, a fancy which the fondest of men could not
have entertained. And it were improbable to say, that their error could have
sprouted at first from their understandnging; and to think it to have been so
gross, as that fallen man does now admire it: but, why may we not rather think,
that their first error was rather a crookedness in their will, then a blindness
in their judgment* and that they fretted to see man, whom they knew to be
inferior to themselves by many stages, made Lord of all that pleasant
Creation, which they gazed on with a stareing maze. And that this opinion is
more probable, appears, because this Sin was the far more bating, seeing it
appeared with all the charms, wherewith either pride, vanity or avarice could
busk it; and explicats better to us the occasion of all that enmity with which
that Serpent has always since pursued silly man: But, whither God will save
just as many believers as there fell of the Angels, none can determine; neither
can it be rationally deduced from that Scripture, Statuit terminos gentium,
juxta nu^erum Angelorum Dei. But, if it please God so to order it, it will
doubtless aggrage their punishment, by rackling their disdain.

And seeing the Angels have never obtained a remission for this crime, it is
probable, that the correspondent of their sin is, in us, the sin against the
holy Ghost.

For, if their lapse had been The sin of the Angels was the sin against the
holy Ghost
pardonable, some one or other of them had in all probability escaped; but, if
this was not that unpardonable sin, I scarce see where it shall be found. For,
to say that it is a hateing of God, as God, is to make it unpracticable rather
then unpardonable: For, all creatures appete naturally what is good, and God,
as God, is good; So that it is impossible that He can be hated under that
reduplication.

It may be likewise conjectured, that voluntar and deliberate sacrilege is the
sin against the holy Ghost; because Ananias and Saphira, in withholding from
the Church, a part of the price for which they sold their lands, are, by Peter,
said to have lied, not to man, but to the holy Ghost; and his wife is there
said to have tempted the Spirit: but, seeing both of them resolved to continue
in the Church (a resolution inconsistent with the sin against the holy Ghost)
And seeing many sins are more heinous, I cannot interpret this lying to the holy
Ghost to be any thing else, but a sin against light, in which most penitents
have been involved; albeit, I confess, this was a gross escape, seeing it robbed
God of His omnisciency, and supposed that He was not privy to such humane
actings as have not the Sun for a witness. I do then conclude, that the sin
against the holy Ghost may rather be a resolute undervaluing of God, and a
scorning to receive a pardon from Him: and this is that which makes the Angels
fall irrecoverable, and like the flaming sword, defends them from their
re-entry into that Paradise from which they exile. And albeit to say, that the
Angels rebellion flows from God's denying them repentance, may suit abundantly
well with His unstainable justice; yet, it is hard to reconcile it with his
mercy. And this makes my private judgment place the unpardonableness of this
sin, not in God's Decree, but in their obduration and rebellious impenitency:
And the reason why these who commit this sin are never pardoned, is, because a
pardon is never sought. That place of Scripture, wherein Esau is said to have
sought the blessing with tears and not to have found it, astonishes me: Yet, I
believe, that if his tears had streamed from a sense of his guilt more then of
his punishment, doubtless he had not weept in vain; and in that he tear'd, he
was no more to be pitied, far less pardoned, then a Malefactor, who, upon the
scaffold, grants some few tears to the importunity of his tortutes, but scorns
to acknowledge the guilt of his crime: for, pain, by contracting our bodies,
strains out that liquid matter, which thereafter globs it self in tears: there
could ^ome no holy water from the pagan font of Esaw's eyes; and if his remorse
could have pierced his own heart, it had easily pierced heaven. Whilst others
admire, I bless God, that He has closed up the knowledge of that unpardonable
sin under his own privy Seal: for, seeing Satan tempts me to sin with the hopes
of an after-pardon, this bait is pulled off his hook, by the fear I stand
under, that the sin to which I am tempted, is that sin which can expect no
pardon. And albeit it be customary amongst men, to beacon and set a mark upon
such shelves and rocks as destroy passengers; yet, that is only done where
commerce is allowed and sailing necessar: But, seeing all sin is forbidden, God
was not obliged to guard us with the knowledge of that sin, no further then by
prohibiting us not to sin, but to stand in awe.

That first sin whereby our first Man's fall.
Parents forfeited their primitive excellencies, was so pitiful a frailty,
that I think we should rather lament, then enquire after it. To think that an
aple had in it the seeds of all knowledge, or that it could assimulate him to
his Creator, and could, in an instant, sublimate his nature, was a frailty to
be admired in one of his piety and knowledge. Yet, I admire not that the breach
of so mean a Precept was punished with such appearing rigor, because, the
easier the command was, the contempt was proportionally the greater; and the
first crimes are by Legislators punished, not only for guilt, but for example:
But, I rather admire what could persuade the facile world to believe, that Adam
was created, not only innocent, but even stored with all humane knowledge: For,
besides that, we have no warrant from Scripture for this alleadgiance, this his
easy escape speaks far otherwise.

And albeit the Scripture tells us, that man was created perfect; yet, that
inferres not that man was furnished with all humane knowledge: For, his
perfection consisted in his adoring of, and depending upon, God, wherein we see
these are exactest, whose judgments are least pestered with terrestrial
knowledge, and least diverted with unnecessar speculations. And thus it
appears, that these Sciences, after which his posterity pants, were not
intended as noble appanages of the rational soul, but are rather toyish babies
busk't up by fallen man, whereby he diverts himself from reflecting too narrowly
upon his native frailty. And thus Scripture tells us, that God made man
perfect, but that He sought out to Himself many inventions, where perfection
and invention seem to be stated as enemies; and it is palpable, that these
Sciences, which are by us lawrel'd and rewarded, are such, as were inconsistent
with that state of innocence, such as Law, Theology and Physic. And as for the
rest, it is absurd to think, that Adams happiness did consist in the knowledge
of these things which we our selves account either impertinent or superfluous.
But, that which convinces me most of this, is, that we forfeited nothing by
Adam's fall which Christ's death restores not to us; wherefore, seeing Christ by
his own, or his Apostles promises, has not assured us of any sub-lunary or
school knowledge; nor has our experience taught us, that Sciences are entailed
upon the Saints, I almost believe, that Adam neither possessed these before, nor
yet lost them by his fall. Neither think I St. Paul the more imperfect, that he
desired to know nothing but Christ and Him crucified: So that the difference
betwixt Adam and his successors, stood more in the straightness of his
affections, then in the depth of his knowledge. For, albeit it be believed,
that the names whereby he baptized the creature, were full histories of their
natures written in short hand; yet, this is but a conjecture authorized by no
holy Text. It is a more civil error in the jewish Talmudists, to think that all
the creatures were brought to Adam, to let him see that there were none amongst
them fit to be his companion, nor none so beautiful as Eve, then it is in
their Cabalists to observe, that the hebrew word, signifying man, does, by a
transposition of letters, signify likewayes, benediction, and the word
signifying woman, makes up malediction. If we should take a character of Adam's
knowledge from the Scriptures, we shall find more imprudence charged upon him
then upon any of his successors: For, albeit the silly woman was not deceived
without the help of subtilty; yet, Adam sinned upon a bare suggestion, and
thereafter was so simple, as to hide himself when God called him to an account,
as if a thicket of trees could have sconced him from his all-seeing Maker; and
when he was accused, was so simple, as to think his wives commands sufficient
to exoner him, and so absurd, as to make God Himself sharer with him in his
guilt, the woman whom thou gave me, etc.

There is more charm in acquireing new knowledge, then in reflecting upon what
we have already gained, (as if the species of known objects did corrupt, by
being treasured up in our brains) And this induces me to believe, that our
scantness of native knowledge, is rather a happiness then a punishment; the
Citizens of London or Paris are not so tickled by the sight of these stately
Cities, as strangers who were not born within their walls, and I may say to
such, as by spelling the Stars desire to read the fortunes of others, as our
Savior said to Peter, when he was desirous to know the horoscope of the
beloved Apostle, What is that to thee? What can it advantage us to know the
correspondence kept amongst the Planets, and to understand the whole anatomy of
natures skeleton; in gazing upon whose parts, we are often times as ridiculous as
children, who love to leaf over taliduce Pictures; for in both variety is all
the usury that can be expected, as the return of our time and pains; and if we
pry inly into this small ma^s of our present knowledge, we shall find, that our
knowledge is one of the fertilest fountains of our misery: For, do not such as
know that they are sick, groan more heavily then a country Clown, who
apprehends nothing till extremity creat in him some sense? And doubtless the
reason why children and idiots endure more, and drunken men escape mo dangers
then others, is, because albeit they cannot provide such apt remedies, yet,
they are less acquainted with what they feel then we are. Are not these who
understand that they are affronted, more vexed then such as are ignorant of
these misfortunes? and these who foresee the changes and revolutions, which are
to befall either their friends or their countries, are thereby more sadly
diseased, then he who sees no further then his nose? Our Savior wept when He
did foresee, that one stone of Jerusalem should not be left upon another; and
when Hazael asked Elisha why he wept, he told him, it was because he did foresee
what mischief Hazael was to do in Israel. Let us not then complain of the loss
of Adam's knowledge, but of his innocence; we know enough to save us, and what
is more then that, is superfluous.

Adam cannot be thought to have been the first sinner, for Eve sinned before
him; So that albeit it seem a paradox, yet it is most probable, that albeit
Adam had for ever abstained from eating the forbidden fruit, his posterity had
been still as miserable as now they are; seeing the guilt of either of the
Parents had been sufficient to tash the innocence of the children. For, as the
Scripture tells us, who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? And David,
in that Text, which of all others speaks most expressly of original sin, lays
the guilt upon her and confesses only, that his mother had conceived him in
sin.

As Adam was not the first sinner, So the eating of the aple may be justly
thought not to be the first sin; Eve having, before his eating the aple,
repeated most falsely the Command: For, whereas God did assure them, that in
that day they did eat the fruit, they should surely die, Eve relates it thus,
Ye shall not eat the fruit, least ye die, representing only that as contingent
which was most certain: and whereas God had only said, ye shall not eat of the
fruit of the tree, Eve says, God said, ye shall not touch it; which it may be
furnished the serpent this argument to cheat her, ye see God has deceived you,
for the fruit may be touched without danger, why may it not then be eaten
without hazard? and it is probable, that he has failed in the one as well as
in the other. But to abstract from this, it cannot be said, that the eating of
the forbidden fruit was the first sin; for, before Adam did eat thereof, he
behoved both to believe the Serpent and mis-believe his Maker, and thus
mis-belief was the first sin: For, after he had credited the Serpents report,
he was no longer innocent, and so he did not eat the aple till after his fall.
What wiser are these Divines, who debate, whither Adams falling sickness and
sin had become heriditarie, if our predecessors had come out of his loins
before he sinned, then these who combated for the largest share of the King of
Spains gold, if it had been to be divided?

In the Almighties procedure against poor Adam for this crime, His infinite
mercy appears to admiration; and God foreseeing, that man might sharpen the ax
of justice too much upon the whet-stone of private revenge, seems to have, in
this process, formed to him, an exact model of inquisition. For, He arraigns
and cites Adam, Adam, where art thou? He shows him his dittay, Have thou eat of
the fruit whereof I commanded thee that thou should not eat? He allows him
exculpation, Who told thee? and in order thereto, did examine the woman, upon
whom Adam did transfer the guilt. And albeit nothing could escape His
omnisciency, and that He did see Adam eat the aple, yet, to teach Judges that
they should walk according to what is proven, and not according to what they
are themselves conscious to, He did not condemn him till first he should have a
confession from his own mouth. And thus, Genesis 18. 21. the Lord says* Because
the cry of Sodom is great -- I will go down and see whether they have done
altogether according to the cry of it, etc. And in the last place, albeit the
fatal decree did bear, in that day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely
die, yet, were his days prolonged a hundred and thirty years after the sin was
committed.

It is too curious a disquisition to enquire how God can be said to be
merciful, mercy being the mitigation of justice, of which His pure nature
cannot be capable, seeing whatever He wills is just: And so He cannot be thought
in any thing which He wills to recede from justice, and so can no more properly
be said to be merciful, then one Act can be both the Law and the mitigation of
the Law. But I will press no point of this nature, knowing that humble modesty
is the best Theology.

The vatican of paganism cannot, The style of Genesis.
for the male-ness of it is style, match that matchless Book of Genesis, whereof
each sentence seems a quarry of rich meditations, and each word a spell,
sufficient to conjure the devil of Delphos. Might not that excellent
expression, Let us make man after our image, convince any of the being of a
Trinity, who deny plurality of Gods. It is wonderful, that the Saturn-humour'd
Jew can, in this Passage, mis-take his own Savior; and it is strange that he
should not, from the triangular architecture of his own heart, conclude the
Trinity of the Godhead, whose temple it was appointed to be. Albeit I be an
admirer of this nurse of Cabalism; yet, I approve not the conceit of these
doting Rabbis, who teach, that God from His own mouth, dited both the words
and matter of the Pentateuch; whereas, He furnished only to the other Prophets
the matter and subject unphrased: for, not only did God promise, that He should
put His words in their mouths, but likewayes, they preface thus their own
prophesies, In the days of such a King, the Word of the Lord came to such a
Prophet, saying, etc. Neither is this conceit consistent with that high esteem,
which they, (even in this) intend for their patron, Moses; seeing it allows him
less trust from his divine Master, then the other Penmen of Scripture had
reposed in them.

That brain has too little pia matter, Why man fell.
that is too curious to know why God, who evidences so great a desire to save
poor man, and is so powerful, as that his salvation needed never have run the
hazard, if His infinite wisdom had so decreed, did yet suffer him to fall: For,
if we enter once the lists of that debate, our reason is too weak to bear the
burden of so great a difficulty. And albeit it may be answered, that God might
have restrained man, but that restraint did not stand with the freedom of man's
will which God had bestowed upon him; yet, this answer stops not the mouth of
the difficulty. For certainly, if one should detain a mad man from running over
a precipice, he could not be thereby said to have wronged his liberty: and
seeing man is by many Divines allowed a freedom of will, albeit he must of
necessity do what is evil, and that his freedom is salv'd by a liberty to
choose only one of more evils, it would appear strange why his liberty might not
have consisted well enough with a moral impossibility of sinning, and might not
have been abundantly conserved in his freedom to choose one of more goods: yet,
these reasonings are the calling God to an account, and so impious. For, if God
had first created man, surrounded with our present infirmities, could we have
complained? Why then should we now complain, seeing we are but fallen to a better
estate then we deserved; seeing we stumbled not for want of light* but because
we extinguished our own light, and seeing our Saviors dying for us may yet
re-instate us in a happier estate then that from which we are now fallen.

Albeit the glass of my years has not yet turned five and twenty, yet the
curiosity I have to know the different limbo's of departed souls and to view
the card of the region of death, would give me abundance of courage to
encounter this king of terrors, though I were a pagan: But, when I consider
what joys are prepared for them who fear the Almighty, and what craziness
attends such as sleep in Methuselams cradle, I pity them who make long-life one
of the oftest repeated petitions of their Pater noster; and yet these sure are
the more advanced in folly, who desire to have their names enshrined after
death in the airy monument of fame: Whereas it is one of the promises made to
the Elect, that they shall rest from their labors, and their works shall
follow them. Most men's mouths are so foul, that it is a punishment to be much
in them: for my own part, I desire the same good offices from my good name that
I do from my clothes, which is to skreen me from the violence of exterior
accidents.

As these Criminals might be judged distracted, who being condemned to die,
would spend their short reprival in disputing about the situation and fabric
of their gibbets; So may I justly think these literati mad, who spend the short
time allotted them for repentance, in debating about the seat of hell, and the
torments of tortured spirits. To satisfy my curiosity, I was once resolved,
with the Platonic, to take the promise of some dying friend, that he should
return and satisfy me in all my private doubts concerning hell and heaven; yet
I was justly afraid, that he might have returned me the same answer which
Abraham returned to Dives, have they not Moses and the Prophets? if they hear
not them, wherefore will they be persuaded though one should rise from the dead?

The Millenar's ephimerides, which The Millenaries refuted.
assures us, that Christ shall reign a thousand years with the Saints on earth,
is as sensual an opinion as that of the Turks, who make heaven a bordell,
wherein we shall satisfy our venerious appetites; for the one shows the vain
glory and vindictive humor of the Saints, as palpably as the other shows the
lust of the Mahumetans. If Christ's reigning some any years be for convincing the
world that he is the real Messiah, their heresy should have ante-dated his
coming; and his reign should rather have begun long since, when many ages were
to be converted, or at least it should not have been thrust out upon the
selvage and border of time, when very few shall remain to be convinced: and if
in this they intend a displaying of Christ's glory, certainly they are mistaken;
for what honor can it be for a King, to have his footstool made his Throne? So
that I think, these poor Phanaticks have taken the patronage of this error
rather by necessity then choice, all other opinions and conceits being formerly
pre-ingaged to other Authors.

As I am not able, by the Iacobsladder The Authors censure of this Essay, and
an account of his design
of my merits, to scale heaven, So am I less able, by the Iacobsstaffe of my
private ability, to take up the true altitude of its mysteries. I have
traveled no further in Theology then a Sabbath-dayes journey; and therefore,
it were arrogance in me to offer a map of it to the credulous world: But, if I
were worthy to be consulted in these spiritual securities, I should advise
every private Christian, rather to stay still in the barge of the Church with
the other Disciples, then by an ill bridled zeal, to hazard drowning alone with
Peter, by offering to walk upon the unstable surface of his own fleeting and
water-weak fancies, though with a pious resolution to meet our Savior. For,
albeit one may be a real Christian, and yet differ from the Church, which
says, that the wise men who come to bow before our Saviors cradle-throne,
were three Kings, and in such other opinions as these, wherein the fundamentals
of faith and quiet of the Church are no ways concerned; yet certainly, he were
no wise man himself, nor yet sound Christian, who would not even in these bow
the flag of his private opinion to the commands of the Church. The Church is
our mother, and therefore we should wed no opinion without her consent who is
our parent; or if we have rashly wedded any, it is in the power of the Church
and her Officials to grant us a divorce. As for my self, my vanity never
prompted me to be standard bearer to any, either new Sect, or old Heresy; and
I pity such as love to live like Pewkeepers in the house of God, busied in
seating others, without ever providing a room for themselves. If there be any
thing in this Discourse which may offend such as are really pious, it shall
much grieve me, who above all men honors them most. What I have spoken against
cases of Conscience and the like, strikes not against their Christian
fellowship and correspondence, but against the apish fopperies of prentending
counterfeits. It shall always be my endeavor for the future, rather to drop
tears for my own sins and the sins of others, then yrk for their conversion:
our prayers help such as never heard them, whereas these only who read our
discourses are bettered by them. Abraham's prayers prevailed more with God (even
for Sodom) then Lot's re-iterated Sermons; and no wonder that the success be
unequal, seeing in the one we have to do with a merciful God, whereas in the
other we must persuade a hard-hearted people.

I intend not to purchase from posterity the title of Reformer, seeing most of
these have fallen under the same guilt; and have had the same fate, with that
curious Painter, who having drawn an excellent face, as happily as could have
been expected from the smoothest mirror, did thereafter dash it afresh upon
the suggestion of each intrant, till at last he reformed it from being any way
like to the Original.

Divinity differs in this from all other Sciences, that these being invented by
mortals, receive growth from time and experience; whereas, it being penned by
the omniscient Spirit of God, can receive no addition without receiving
prejudice. It is most remarkable, that our Saviors Prayers, His Sermons and
the Creed, delivered to us by His Apostles, were roomed up in far narrower
bounds then these of our times, which an hidropsie of ill concocted opinions
has swelled beyond their true dimensions: many whereof have either been
brooded by vanity or interest; or else ignorant and violent defendents being
brought to a bay, by such as impugn'd their resolv'd-upon principles, have been
forced to assert these by-blow and preter-intentional tenets; and having once
floored them, have thereafter judged themselves concerned to defend them, in
point of Scholastic honor. Some well-meaning Christians likewayes, do
sometimes, for maintenance of what is lawful and pious, think, that they may
lawfully advance opinions, which otherwise they would never have allowed of;
and as in nature we see, that the collision of two hard bodies makes them
rebound so much the further from one another, So opposition makes both parties
fly into extremeties. Thus I believe, that the debates betwixt Roman Catholics
and Protestants, concerning the Virgin Mary, have occasioned, in some amongst
both, expressions, if not heretical, yet aleast undecent. Thus a great many
Confessions of Faith become, like Noah's Ark, a receptacle of clean and unclean:
and which is also deplorable, they do, like ordinar dyals, serve only for use
in that one meridian for which they are calculated, and by riding twenty miles
ye make them heterodox. I speak not this to the disparagement of our own
Church, (which I reverence in all it is Precepts and Practices*) but to beget a
blushing conviction in such as have diverted from it; and whose conventicles,
compared with our Jerusalem, resemble only the removed huts of these who live a
part, because they are sick of the plague.

I am not at a maze, to see men so tenacious of contrary principles in
Religion; for, man's thoughts being vast and various, he snatches at every
offered suggestion, and if by accident he entertain any of these many, as a
divine immission, he thereafter thinks it were blasphemy to bring that thought
to the test of reason, because he hears that faith is above reason, or to
relinquish it, because the common suffrage of his Country runs it counter,
seeing he is taught even by them, that the principles of belief must not be
chosen by the Pole.

And seeing faith is above reason, (albeit, as I said formerly, it would seem
otherwise) I wonder not to see even the best tempered Christians, think that
which is not their own religion to be therefore ridiculous.

My design all along this Discourse, butts at this one principle, that
Speculations in Religion are not so necessary, and are more dangerous then
sincere Practice. It is in Religion as in Herauldry, the simpler the bearing
be, it is so much the purer and the ancienter. I will not say that our
School-distinctions are the impressions of the devils cloven foot; but I may
say, that our piety and principles scarce ever grow after they begin to fork in
such dichotomies; which, like Jacob and Esau, divide and jar as soon as they
are born: and betwixt whom, the poor proposition, out of which both did spring,
is like a malefactor, most lamentably dragged to pieces. I have endeavored to
demonstrat, that dogmaticalness and paralitick scepticisme, are but the
Apocrypha of true Religion; and I believe the one begets the other, as a toad
begets a cockatrice: For the Sceptick perceiving, that the magisterial
dogmatist erres (as these must err somewhere who assert too much) even in
these things whereof he affirms, he is as sure, as of any principle in
Religion, (which is their ordinary style) he finding out their error in one of
their principles, is thereby emboldned to contravert all. This being the scope
of this Essay. I wish that these who read it would expound it as Divines do
parables, Quae non sunt argumentativa ultra suum scopum.

I doubt not but some will think me His Apology.
no less absurd in writing against vanity, whilst I am so vain my self as to
write Books, then the Philosophers were judged of old, for denying motion
whilst their tongues moved in their cheek; but, to these my answer shall be,
that finding many grovelling in their errors, I have, in this Essay, proffered
them my assistance, not to show my strength but my compassion. The multitude
(which albeit it has ever been allowed many heads, yet was never allowed any
brains) will doubtless accuse my Studies of adultery, for hugging
contemplations so excentrick to my employment; to these my return is, that
these papers are but the pairings of my other Studies, and because they were
but pairings, I have flung them out into the streets. I wrote them in my
retirements when I wanted both books and employment, and I resolve that this
shall be the last inroad I shall ever make into foreign contemplations. There
are some thoughts in this Piece which may seem to rebel against the empire of
the Schools; yet, who knows but my Watch goes right, albeit it agree not with
the public Clock of the City, especially where the sun of Righteousness has
not, by pointing clearly the dyal of Faith, showed which of the two are in the
error. There are some expressions in it, which censure may force to speak
otherwise then they have in commission; yet none of them got room in this
Discourse, until they first gave an account of their design to a most pious
and learned Divine: and so, it may be the lines are of themselves straight,
albeit they lie not parallel with each censurers crooked rule. As this
Discourse intends, for the Divines of our Church, all respect; So all that is
in it, is most freely submitted to their censure.

The Author intended this Discourse only as an introduction to the Stoics
morals, but probably, he will, for many years, stop here.
ERRATA.
Blurres in the Copy and the Authors absence occasioned these errata's, which
must be helped before reading, seeing they destroy both the sense and soundness
of the Discourse.

IN the Preface, p. 2. l. 4. for Prophet, read Iehouadab: p. 9. f. Taps r.
Tops. p. 15. l. 7. add some before Episcopists and Presbyterians. p. 16. l. 4.
f. all r. almost all.

In the Book, p. 24. l. 16. f. has no, r. seems to have no. p. 2^. l. 18. f.
is but a conceit, r. seems but a conceit. p. 35. l. 13. f. continual r.
extraordinar. p. 58. l. 19. f. triumphant, r. militant. p. 63. l. 22. f. ever
any, r. few have. p. 73. l. 10. f. excrementilius, r. excrementitius. p. 74. l.
17. f. an allegory,etc. r. that there run many hid allegories from Genesis to
John's Revelations, wherein the mystical sense deserves likewayes the name of
Gods Word. p. 85. l. 8. add, yet this is but a sophisme; for, seeing our bodies
are the temples of the holy Ghost, we can no more bestow them upon such uses,
then a Churchwarden can give the use of the Church to Taverners, p. 85. l. 13.
f. thundered from mount Sinai, r. delivered in almost one context with that Law
which was thundered from mount Sinai. p. 121. l. 22. f. an unbyassed enquiry it
will appear, r. upon an superficial enquiry it would appear. By the Laws of his
Country, p. 57. and elsewhere,
the Author means, that Religion which is settled by Law.

In other expressions, the Author recommends himself to the gloss of the
readers charity.

FINIS

