REASON. AN ESSAY. BY Sir George Mackenzie.

LONDON, Printed for Jacob Tonson at the Judges Head in Chancery Lane near
Fleetstreet. 1690.

For the Honorable ROBERT BOIL, Esquire.
I Know nothing (Sir) more inconsistent with right Reason, or which deserves
more to be Reformed amongst Learned men, than their way of Dedicating Books:
And that we may the better understand what ought to be done in this Age, let us
look back into what was done by the Ancients.

The Poets did indeed invoke their Gods or the Muses in the beginning of their
Works, but that was rather to obtain their assistance, than to bestow upon them
Panegyricks; but their praising the Gods was a safe Subject in which they could
not exceed: And therefore, though these Invocations were the first occasion of
writing Dedications to Mortals, yet Flattery in this made them mistake their
Model so far, that at last some of the Poets did likewise invoke the Assistance
of their Emperors, as if they had been Gods as well as Patrons.

Others of the Poets did very anciently Dedicate their Works to Men also, as
Hesiod who was older than Homer, dedicates or rather addresses his first Poem
to Perses; but it is very observable, that he and others in such like Addresses
rather excite the Persons to whom they address to Virtue and Glory, than
magnify them for having attained to the perfection of either or both. Yet some
of these Poets have left us Dedications so excellent, that they are as little
to be imitated as censured, such as:

Hor. Epist. 1. Lib. 2. Cum tot sustineas and tanta Negocia solus:
Res Italas Armis tuteris: moribus ornes:
Legibus emendes: in publica Commoda peccem,
Si longo Sermon morer tua tempora, Caesar.
And others of them, such as Virgil, end their Poems with very decent and
delicate Complements, as that which closes the 4th Book of his Georgicks,

Haec super arvorum cultu pecorumque canebam,
Et super arboribus: Caesar dum magnus ad altum
Fulminat Euphratem bel^o, Victorque volentes
Per populos dat Jura, viamque affectat Olympo.
which exceed, in my humble Opinion, the famed and large Dedications of Grotius
and Causabon.

It was usual amongst the modest Ancients, to address their Books to such as
they thought able to correct them, seeking rather Advice than Patronage: And
thus Plutarch tells us in the Life of Lucullus, That Scylla having wrote an
History, sent it to Lucullus to be corrected; (...).
and the Greek word used there, seems to me to import only adlocutio. And I
think that the Ancients have found Protection and Patronage even in those
Addresses wherein Advice was sought for; who durst have censured, as Tully
observes, what Brutus or Pomponius Atticus approved?

Some also prefixed modest Prefaces, wherein they acknowledged the Favors done
them, and told the occasion of their Writing, as Vitruvius to Augustus; others
did thereafter in imitation of the Writers of Tragedies and Comedies, address
themselves in a Prologue, as Valerius Maximus to Tiberius; and this I think he
did* to give his Fancy scope, as a Poet, to praise with the Latitude that Poets
take; for that is the first Debauch I find committed of this kind, for he could
not have said greater things to a worse Man.

To shun which Excess, some gave to their Books the Names of the Muses, as
Herodotus; or of men of great Merit, as Plato did in his Socrates, or Tully in
Laelius, etc. or else omitted all Addresses, as Thucidides, Livy, Salust, or at
most extended not their Addresses beyond a mere Compellation, such as that in
St. Luke to Theophilus, by which possibly may be meant any Christian under this
appellative Name, rather than a particular Patron or Friend, as some Books are
now addressed to the Christian Reader, in imitation it may be of him; for it is
observable that the Churchmen imitated this (...), of St. Luke, and thus
Origin dedicates his Book against Celsus, with this Compellation, (...): And
Eusebius names his Patron (...).

At last the word Dedication was brought in by Flattery, and Books were
dedicated to Men in imitation of their dedicating Temples, Statues, and other
things to the Gods; nor did this extravagant way of excessive praising ever
appear till the World was under Tiberius corrupted in all its Morals. This
depraved Custom was also much heightened by the Panegyricks, made by Pliny to
Trajan, and by Eusebius to the Great Constantine, who thought that they might
more justly praise the good than others might impious Emperors, though I am
afraid the Eloquence which charms us in those two Discourses, shall never be
able to account for the ill Example they have given.

My design in all this is to show, That we can as little justify our Flattery
by the Practice of the Ancients as by the Principles of Reason, by which they
always regulated their Eloquence; And therefore it seems to me, that
Dedications should be brought back to the ancient Model, either of a naked
Compellation which satisfies abundantly Friendship, or of acknowledging Favors
which satisfies gratitude, or of exciting the persons to whom we write, to
deserve those praises which are now most unjustly bestowed upon them, which is
a Christian Duty. And I cannot but observe three very ill Consequences which
arise naturally and necessarily from our late Dedications; the first is, That
they learn men to lie and flatter, and Custom has almost legitimated this
Crime, and made it a Duty Secondly, They have poisoned the very Fountains of
Truth so far, that Posterity can hardly distingnish betwixt those who have
deserved well or ill, Flattery thinking always fit to supply by its excessive
praises, what is wanting in due merit; and therefore by how much their Patrons
deserve ill, they praise so much the more, and the only mark of Virtue in an
Author or Merit in a Patron now is, that there is no extraordinary thing said
in any Address to the one by ^he other; for who can believe an Author speaks
truth in his Book, who lies and flatters in its very beginning; or that a
Patron has any modesty or common sense, who suffers himself to be so imposed
upon? If the Patron believe what the Author says, he must be a fool; and if he
believes him not, he must think the Author one; and since they who lie
improbably, are thought fools in all things else, why not in this too, in which
they exceed the most Romantic Travelers, for they only would impose on us in
things which we know not, but these in things wherein we cannot but discover
them? and I wonder why they do not as well praise the French King for having
found out America, or for having vanquished Alexander the Great, as for those
things which they of late ascribe to him in their Dedications. Thirdly, Our
late Dedications have really corrupted the Eloquence of the Age; for whereas
the true Ornaments of Eloquence are to be natural and decent in expressing our
Thoughts, these Dedications have blown our style into a Tympany, and have
ruined it is natural Beauty by fulsome and ill placed daubing Paints: Which made
Chrysippus, (...).
as Laertius tells us, decry all Dedications to Kings and Princes, lest they
should entice men to Flattery; but this were to run from one Excess to another.

I Design, Sir, nothing in this Essay, but to hold out a Lanthorn to those who
are ready to split on a Rock; and I wish rather that this may be one of the
Works that may follow me, than one of those that may bring me Reputation: And I
send this to you as Lucullus did to Scylla for Correction; or as Cicero did to
Atticus, as a token of our Friendship, and of my just esteem of your Piety and
Learning.

G. M.

PART I.
How weakly Men reason in matters of greatest Importance.
IT may seem a bold Undertaking in any man to own right Reason in this Age, it
being the declared Enemy of our interests and inclinations, for it may possibly
excite man to reflect upon what the World and himself does, and so inspire him
with thoughts contrary to those which are generally received, and that is the
only unpardonable Error. It may likewise seem ridiculous to think, that there
is any common Standard of Reason amongst men, since that charms in one Country,
which is abhorred in others, and the very imaginary lines which divide
Kingdoms, seem likewise to divide their way of thinking, and to make a
different Geography in the Reason which they adore, as well as in the Earth on
which they trample; every Age of the World has almost had a different way of
reasoning, and every Age in Man suggests to him contrary thoughts, in the
present he condemns what himself formerly admired: So little influence has it
upon the best refined Judicatures and Assemblies, that the most infallible
Churchmen, the most learned Judges, and the most zealous Patriots must trust to
Voting, because they cannot to Reasoning, and they are by this likewise so
often misled, that it may be expected men will one day agree to decide matters
by the fewest Votes, as the wiser have always told us, that Votes are rather to
be weighed, than numbered. It has often grieved me, that men could guess the
decision and determination of any point to be debated, before they heard the
Reasons to be produced upon either side, and to hear them laugh at such as
trusted to the solidity of the Reasons they were to produce, being fully
convinced that the point would be determined by Interest, and not by Reason.
The Inka of Peru was much in the right, when he regreted, that his Predecessors
had not obliged him to worship a reasonable Man; yet his choice in this had
been unsuccessful; for it would have been as hard to have found him, except he
had believed his Priest, who had undoubtedly told him he was the man. And though
I believe not that French Physician who assures us, he found in his Travels a
Nation that differed altogether from us in our way of reasoning, as if God
designed to show Mankind that his Omnipotency is not tied in this to any known
measures; yet I see, even amongst our selves, that Convenience (the gentler
name of Avarice) Pride, Revenge, Bigotry, Education, and every thing else pass
for Reason, except Reason it self, which makes me oft-times cry out, Is this
that noble Creature formed after the Image of God, for whom Christ dyed, and
who is to be Coheir with him of his everlasting Kingdoms. All which
notwithstanding it is undeniably true, that there is something in man more
sublime than can be ascribed to flesh and blood, that dull matter could never
inspire him with these penetrating, subtle, comprehensive, generous, and
elevated thoughts, which made the Pagans believe, that his Soul was particula
Divinae Naturae, a parcel of that same Divine Substance of which the Gods were
formed, and that men so qualified were Demigods, and God Almighty himself has
by a surer Revelation revealed to us, that this Noble Soul was formed after his
Image, and it was most consequential that God who is infinite, being to
communicate himself to some of his Creatures, to the end his Greatness and
Goodness might be known to them, he should in order to this breathe into them
somewhat that might comprehend, at least, some Ideas of that infinite
Perfection; and therefore it was necessary that the Soul should be an image of
what was infinite, and that we might understand this from some exterior and
sensible representations and things, he has formed his very body (the Casket
wherein that Noble Jewel is kept) after a very wonderful manner, thus by small
and interceptible Rays darted into his Eye, the representations of the vast
Hemisphere, are imprinted so on that little Tablet, that it seems as great and
distinct there, as in the Original; all he ever heard is laid up in his memory,
as distinctly as Papers in a Cabinet. And almost by the same motion of the
Tongue; or at least, without any studied variation, vast numbers of delicate
words, or harmonious sounds, do, in a way unknown, and unperceptible by Flesh
and Blood, sally out in mighty Swarms and Armies, which passing thus
undiscovered, through the Air, enter at many thousand Ears in the same Figure,
Ranks, and Files, wherein they were at first spoke; and there, in a spiritual
way, they charm some, and enrage others; they animate some, and discourage
others; working almost as great varieties as they bring.

Divine Wisdom also foreseeing that Interest would persuade men to pull all to
pieces, whilst each drew all to himself, he impressed upon this Soul common
Principles, which even those must reverence who neglect them, and therefore
they err, not in the rule, but in the application, and cheat themselves by
Subterfuges, the recurring to which infers necessarily, that these Principles
are submitted to by the most stubborn, and somewhat respected by the wildest in
sublunary matters; and yet in what concerns our immortal Souls, and eternal
state, we are more negligent, as will appear too clearly by these following
Particulars which I have classed according to their different inferences.

I have oft-times admired to see men busied about nothing, save external and
sensual Objects; but it is yet stranger to find, that amongst such as are
convinced, that Knowledge is as much to be preferred to all other things, as
the Soul is to the Body; there are yet some so sensual, even in this point,
that the knowledge they seek after is but a mere delicate sensuality.
Mathematicians consider chiefly how to measure Bodies, Physicians how to know
and cure men, as Soldiers do how to destroy them. But the study of Christian
Morality (which has for its Object the Soul of Man heightened by the Christian
Religion, teaching him how to understand the duty of that Soul to God) is too
much neglected, as a thing obvious and easy: Whereas when our Savior came
into the World, he neither taught Mathematics, Medicine, nor Physiology, though
all these were much considered in that Age wherein he assumed our Nature; and
he could have made himself as much admired by clearing mysterious doubts in
these, as by working Miracles; but he passing by all these as less useful
Notions, and such as too frequently divert and distract, rather than inform; he
declares he was come to make Man happy, and begins his Ministry by an admirable
Sermon on the Mount, whereby, in order to the making him happy, he teaches him
to reason rightly upon his duty to God and Men: and it is strange, that we
should think dull matter is able to afford more noble Contemplations, than that
subtle, that sublime, that vast, and that nimble Soul, which retains so far the
Image of its Maker, as to be inscrutable in all its faculties: and Oh what
wonderful Springs and Motions, what various windings and flights, what
boundless and new Spheres and Worlds are there in his Reflections, and what
things are daily said, and Volumes written on the Love to Women, which is but
the excursion of one of them. Our diseases cannot conceal themselves being tied
to matter, but the diseases of our immortal Souls are so concealed by
Self-love, which loves to cover its own imperfections, and to hide its own
retreats, that they are past finding out; and if a little Microscope can
discover to the Eye new and strange things in Objects that have been daily
seen, without being considered for many Ages; what wonderful discoveries may
serious thinking men make in so immense an Object that has been so much
neglected? especially since the thoughts of Man do change and vary themselves
into as many shapes, and give themselves as many colors as they please: and
every Duty or Error is really a different Object as they are in conjunction
with, or in opposition to one another; whereas all other Objects are incapable
of such Variations either from themselves or others: And though God has designed
to be known in his Works, yet he seems on purpose to have made the knowledge of
them so unsearchable to Natural Philosophers, and the success so little able to
reward or honor their Endeavors, to the end they might the more relish Moral
Philosophy, which is then only uncertain when like the other it grows more a
Science than a Duty.

In my reasoning I will use the Forms prescribed by God himself in his holy
Scriptures; wherein when he would convince man of his Folly, Sin, or
Ingratitude, he argues with him from his own concessions, in these cases, or
his own practice, on all other occasions: As for instance, when he sends Nathan
to David, he asks him what the Man deserved, who having great Herds and Flocks
of his own, took a poor Man's Lamb out of his Bosom? And David, having in great
anger sworn that he should die, Nathan then tells him, it was his case, and
condemns him from his own mouth: And God says to his People, who acknowledged
him to be their Lord and Father, but walked not suitably to their
acknowledgment. If I be a Father, where is mine Honor, and if I be a Master,
where is my Fear? Malach. 1. 6. He calls to them, Isai. 1. 18. Come, let us
reason together; and admiring the unreasonableness of unthinking Man, he
appeals to the Heavens and Earth, Hear, O Heavens, and give ear, O Earth, for
the Lord has spoken! I have nourished and brought up Children, and they have
rebelled against me! The Ox knows his Owner, and the Ass his Master's Crib:
But Israel does not know, my People do not consider! And in the several
Gospels, we find our blessed Savior, after the same manner, confuting the
Jews, and convincing all his Hearers. Nor do I find so much delicate reasoning
in any of those Books, highly esteemed by our Men of Sense, who slight too much
that admirable one, which God himself owns as his sacred Word: And I admire our
Savior, as much for his Reasonings as for his Miracles. Thus when he would
convince Men of the folly of careing immoderately for the things of this World,
he asks them, What profit shall it be to gain all the World, that soon
perishes, if they lose their own Soul, which is Immortal? And which of you,
(says our Lord) by taking thought, can add one cubit to his stature? And urges
them, not to fear want, because, if they who are sinful know how to provide for
their own Families, how much more shall your Father, which is in Heaven, know
how to provide for you, if ye be his Children? Behold, (says our blessed Maker)
the Fowls of the air, for they sow not, neither do they reap, yet your Heavenly
Father feeds them; are not you much better than they?

For establishing this my Position, it is fit to consider, that such as are
reasonable, endeavor to show it in the greatest concerns; and it implies a
want, or weakness of Reason, to be exact and delicate in inconsiderable and
silly things, and yet to err and be careless in matters of greatest
consequence: And who would not laugh at an Ambassador or a General, who would
value himself upon his Dancing or Playing upon the Lute, bestowing upon these
Exercises the time due to his King, Country, and Negotiations; which makes me
admire, why in this foolish Age, we call these Men of good Senses, and strong
Spirits, who can criticize Virgil, Iuvenal, Livie, Tacitus, or it may be,
understand the Mathematics, or Conversation; whilst we are convinced, that
albeit they believe there is a God, yet they mind him not, and care less for
their Souls than they do for any of their ordinary recreations, though they are
forced to tremble at its ill condition, when they begin to consider it.

One of the things which prompted me to write this Book, was the reading of a
French Treatise, De la Iustesse* wherein, though he made me expect great matters,
by promising to learn us to think justly; yet it only taught how to choose true
Epithets, or understand Criticisms, and such trivial knacks: But, alas, it is
more to be regreted, that Men should have the sense to laugh at others, for not
having considered the Plot and design of their Plays; whilst many who pass for
refined Wits, want one in their whole life; and where the want of it is not
only a greater shame, but is of greater danger, since a Man cannot err here
without being ruined to all eternity: And one of these great Wits, without a
solid design in his life, appears to me, like a glorious, first-rate Ship,
magnificently equipped, richly gilded, and abundantly provided of all
necessaries; but because it wants a Rudder, and a skilful Pilot, fluctuating in
a great Storm, and near a dangerous Shore, on which it is driven with violence,
threatened by the Wind, and overflown by the Billows; sometimes shattered by
one Rock, and sometimes by another, till at last it sinks down irrecoverably
into an unfathomable and dreadful Abyss. Whether then is the Owner of this
Ship, who looks on unconcernedly, and perhaps, would not leave his Whore, Game,
or Supper; or that Poet, who wrote his Play without a Plot, most to be
contemned? Yet he who has no design to save his immortal Soul from endless
torments, is a much greater Fool than either; which recommends to me the sense
of a Wiser, though a Heathen Poet, on this subject, and which I wish the whole
Tribe would seriously consider.

Discite, o iniseri, and causas cognoscite rerum,
Quid sumus, and quidnam victuri gignimur, ordo,
Quis datus, aut metae quam m^llis flexus and ^nde.
Quis modus argento, quid fas optare, quid asper.
Vtile nummus habet: patriae carisque propinquis
Quantum elargiri deceat: quem to Deus esse
Iussit and humana qua part locatus es in re.
It is a pleasant thing to hear us admire Men, for considering exactly the
Anatomy, Specialities, and Natures of Fishes, Fowls, Flies, and other Insects;
and yet never consider whence themselves came, whither they are going, or what
is their duty whilst they remain here. And I wonder why we should think it
just, to look upon Men in Bedlam, though they be very reasonable in many things,
if they be very distracted in any one; as I know one, who seemed a discreet
Person, and could converse most pertinently in every thing, till they spoke of
the Moon; but upon hearing that named, fell instantly a staring, and into great
extravagancies, believing himself to be Secretary to the Moon: And others will
be discreet enough, till you mention the name of such a Man or Woman; and yet
we do not conclude such mad and distracted, who, though they understand to
measure Heaven, never design to enter into it; and who can eloquently convince
Men of eternal Torments, and fright them from the wicked course which lead to
these, and yet ruin themselves on the precipices against which they guard
others. And who would not think a Physician mad, for all his skill, if after he
had made a learned discourse, to prove a liquor to be Poison, he should drink
it off himself; and yet more, if he would not take an Antidote, though ready, and
which he knew would secure him.

I shall but lightly touch that ridiculous and impudent extravagance of some,
who, rather pretending to reason, than having it, take pains to persuade
themselves and others, that there is not a God, whilst even the subtilty which
they use, when they are endeavoring to prove this their Assertion, does
necessarily prove his Being: It being impossible, that Matter and Chance,
(their great Idols) could forge and polish such subtle notions: And how can
they imagine, that since their own little Affairs could not be managed without
foresight and conduct, that yet this Great and Glorious Universe, which
comprehends so many Millions, such as they, should be so exactly and justly
governed, by blind Chance? If there were no Men but the silly and humorous
Asserters of this Opinion, I should be ashamed to bring Man as an instance of
the Power and Wisdom of God: Let us then consider this Creature, formed of I
know not what, fed, breathing, and growing in the Womb, we know not how; but
from those despicable beginnings, one rises in a short time, to measure the
Heavens, to calculate their Motions, and to imitate their Lightning and
Thunder; another does for his own Glory, form such Models of Religion as
seduces, and draws after him Millions of Men, contrary to their former
Interests, as well as former Inclinations: A Third, by his Skill, Conduct, and
Courage, makes even the remotest Countries of the World to tremble,
overturning, and confounding that World, whereof he is so small a part: And a
Fourth, by drawing sweetly, and gently together very distant and different
reflections, and thoughts, which come readily, as it were, upon his call, from
their several repositories, forms an Harangue, or a Poem, which pleases or
torments the hearers irresistably, as they have commission from their Author;
it being harder to resist them than to make them: Can so regular things be
ascribed to wild Chance, or such subtle things to dull Matter, which by its
Nature, moves necessarily and without choice? The best contrived Machine can
only repeat; but Man chooses his own thoughts, and varies or changes them as he
pleases.

I desire our Wits to consider, that every thing which they see, or know, is so
marvellously fitted to some use, that as they could not be wanted, so they
cannot be contrived better: And it is ridiculous to answer with Epicurus, (who,
though he denied Providence, yet denied not a Deity) that these things were not
made for these uses, as we pretend, but were, in process of time, made use of
to these ends by Wit or Necessity: For even Bruits do immediately after they
are brought forth, run to those things which they need, with greater exactness
than Man could teach them; and how could Men, by Reason, make every thing
useful, if so infinite a Being did not direct and supervise their almost
infinitely various Necessities and Designs, and instruct them, by the use of
Thinking, (that wonderful Engine) to accommodate every thing to its true use.
The next thing I recommend to them, is to consider that all the Principles of
Justice and Government, without which, the World could not subsist, depend upon
the belief of this infinite Being; for how could I convince a Man without this,
that it were not fit to poison his Brother for an Estate; or his Prince, when
he thought that by that he might step into his Throne; which ofttimes might be
done covertly enough, to escape the punishment of Laws, if they could that of
Conscience: Nor is it of any force to tell us, that Politicians have only
invented this for their own convenience, since even this answer presupposes
that there was a pre-disposition on the Spirits of Men, to receive and submit
to this impression, which is an unanswerable proof of its truth; and this trick
had not been long believed, had it been only such; nor could their inventions
secure us against private Treachery, though it could against open Force; nor can
I omit to observe from this answer, how unfit these Men would be to govern
others, and how unsufferable they are under all Governments; who thus expose to
contempt that which they confess to be the great Engine of Government. I might
likewise urge the consent of all Nations, which, by how much they became the
more polished and civilized, do so much the more rest on this belief. The
certainty that has arisen from Predictions which are above Nature, and the
wonderful Effects wrought by Miracles, even against it, are confirmed to us, by
the unerring testimony of those Senses, which our Atheists make the only and
sure test of Knowledge. And do not we perceive, that that light of Reason,
which by constant and penetrating reflections, in time, discovered, overcame,
and baffled every Cheat and Error; has notwithstanding, more fully fixed,
ascertained, and cleared the Being of a God, whose Power affords us such
Protection; and whose Providence affords us such beautiful and pleasant
Contemplations, that to love that life, without believing his Being, is to be
without that Sense and Wit which these wild Scepticks pretend to; who, whilst
they shun to be miserable, make themselves so, and whilst they pretend to pass
for Wits, demonstrate themselves to be Fools, and Brutish. I purposely avoid
the proof of this by Metaphysical Arguments, because God's own way of proving
it, is, by desiring us to consider the Sun, Moon, and Stars, and the other
Objects which are obvious to all Men; for it was fit, that what was to be
universally believed, should be inferred from what was universally seen: And
such as understand not those Metaphysical Notions, are apt to beli^^e that
there is a design to impose upon them.

But since our curiosity must be always somewhat satisfied with Arguments
raised above Sense, I shall offer this one: It cannot be denied, but that there
is something in Man that can compare two or more different things, such as,
Whether the pain of the Head or the Leg be greatest? And that this cannot be
done by any thing that is material, is very clear; for if so, it must be done
by something that touches at once both the things to be compared, and no
material thing can do that in the same points; and if it be in different
points, then it cannot judge of the difference betwixt the two; for they must
be touched in one common point, else there can be no application of the
material Judge, to both, at the same time: And if this judgment must be made by
something in Man that is immaterial, and so is able to extend its indivisible
self to both the things to be compared; then it necessarily follows, that this
must be a Sprit; for there can be nothing immaterial bur a Spirit; and if we
can once comprehend a Spirit, we can never deny there is a God: For the hardest
things that are objected against his Being, are those which strike against the
Being of Spirits in general.

Because few or none are really distracted by this kind of Madness, though they
could wish they were, by smothering their Reason with Illusions, that they may
cover their Crimes to themselves, with the hopes of Impunity, I hasten to
another kind of unreasonable Men, who, though they acknowledge there is a God, do
yet, by a deplorable negligence, little mind how to please and obey him. And
that I may enforce upon my Reader, the weakness of their Reasonings, I wish any
of us would think, that if a Society of Men were Shipwrack'd upon, or sent
Prisoners to an unknown Isle, were it not most unreasonable for them, to sit
Reading, Discoursing, or Gaming, and not to think who were Masters of that
Isle, and how they might live in it; and if they learned that it belonged to a
great Prince, who had absolute power of Life and Death, were it not
unreasonable, not to desire to obtain his friendship? But much more to reject
it, if he offered it with Riches and Preferment, upon no other condition, save
that they would attend at his Court, love him, and not wrong one another? But
this is our condition in a much stronger case; for we are here in a World
created by God Almighty, in which he can kill and preserve, not the Body only,
but the Soul too; nor for some time only, but for ever; nor requires he any
harder condition of us, than that we would love the Lord our God with all our
Hearts, and our Neighbors as our selves; which are so far from being hard
Lessons, that one would think we could not but take great delight in them, if
they were not prescribed to us as our Duty: For if a Man be admired once for
his great Courage, Conduct, or Learning, who would not be pleased with being
allowed to converse with him? Who amongst us would not have taken pains to have
been loved by Caesar, as his Friend, but more, as his Son? But if Caesar had
been as expert a Mathematician as he was a Soldier, and could have burnt his
Enemies Ships, like Archimedes; if he had invented Gunpowder for his Magazins,
and found out the whole new World, as well as conquered a considerable part of
the old: How much more would we yet have esteemed him? And to proceed further,
if this Caesar could either have saved his own life, by knowing the secrets of,
or by killing alone all his Assassinates, or prolonged for many hundreds of
years that of his Servants; we should yet more have rejoiced in his Service and
Adoption: But what is all this to the Infinite Perfection of the Great King of
Kings, whose Servants, Friends, nay, and adopted Sons we may be? He it is who
governed Caesar, as he does the Flies or Ants, who, with one word made Caesar,
and all the Wrld, whereof he conquered only a part, which he was not able to
retain. By whose skill, the Heavens were stretched out, in which, vain Caesar's
greatest Ambition was to be a little Star: Who not only knows, but in one
moment, governs all the various, and almost infinite thoughts and designs of
Angels, Men, and Devils; and who forces them all, how contrary soever to one
another, to agree in the great designs he has in governing the World.

Who would not rejoice to serve a Master, that knew when he were innocent, and
who, as he is exactly just to his Servants, so could not be imposed upon by
others, to their prejudice; and though even swarms of Witnesses combined against
them, could see through the Mists that they threw up, which no Earthly Master,
how just soever, can do? But such is our Heavenly Master, who can also not only
enrich us when we are poor, and cure us when we are sick; but can tame our
Passions, illuminate our Ignorance, strengthen our Inclinations, sweeten our
Tempers, and make all these Joys complete, by the removal of all Fears or
Jealousies that can end or lessen them. Can we give any reasonable account, why
we should be careful to keep the Road exactly, if we knew there were great
Precipices on every hand, into which whoever fell, were irrecoverable; and yet
knowing, that in our voyage to Eternity, there are Precipices that lead to
dreadful Pits of Fire and Brimstone, kindled by the wrath of an angry God: We
notwithstanding, go on carelessly, laughing at such as admonish us, and minding
little trifles, which we are convinced will please no longer than we possess
them.

How falsely do we reason, in reflecting on our selves and others? For we think
them mad who endeavor not to get themselves cured, when they find they are
tormented with Gout and Gravel; yet who amongst us is at any pains, so much as
to seek remedies for his Passions and Vices, which of all other Diseases
torment us most: And if we heard a Fellow in Livery, value himself upon the
Richness of his Suit, would we not esteem him an airy and foolish Creature? But
if we saw a Man who were condemned, and going to the Scaffold, admire himself,
and talk of his Power and Glory, would we not conclude him distracted? And yet
this is the true State of a Vain and Glorious Monarch, who has nothing but what
he has received from an Infinite God, who can recall it when he pleases; and
who* whilst he talks of his Glory and Greatness, is by that God condemned to
die, as irredeemably, as must the meanest Slave, over whom he insults. And
since we would laugh at a vain Coxcomb, who whilst he were entertaining his
friends in his Master's house, as if it were his own, were taken out of it by
the ears, and forced to tremble under the lash; how ridiculous must we conclude
Belshazzar (and which is the case of too many other great Men) who whilst he
was feasting all his Nobles, and persuading them of His independance, was
seized by an irresistible horror which shak'd him all to pieces.

I doubt not for all this but Learned men will think they may justly value
themselves on their own great Parts and Skill; and you may read long Lectures
made by them on this Subject; but how unreasonable are they in this, since
these Endowments are given them as external things are given to others; and a
Schoolboy may more justly admire himself, because he can repeat excellent
lines made by another: or a man, because the borrowed Furniture, that he would
make us believe to be his own, were within, and not without doors, or were
finer than that borrowed stuff which another had, whom he despised. If two poor
men should borrow, the one ten, and the other a thousand pounds, the difference
of the borrowed Sums should not cease to leave both of them equally poor. But
he is really a wise and reasonable man, who knowing that what he has is
borrowed, endeavors not to boast of it as his own, but to repay as much as he
can the Interest to the true Owner for the Loan. Let us then conclude this
Period with the Apostle's just reasoning, 1 Cor. 4. 7. For who makes thee to
differ from another? and what have thou that thou did not receive? Now if
thou did receive it, why do thou glory as if thou had not received it?

Being once in company with a great Wit, who seeing two poor Chair-men sweat in
carrying a gross corpulent vain Fellow; he cried out, that he had rather be
hanged than serve so meanly such a Rogue. Whereupon I told him he was doing a
meaner thing, in bearing up the Extravagancies of a violent and tyrannous
Statesman, to please whose extravagant humor, I had seen him sweat more than
these poor men did; who had also in this the advantage of him, that they did so
to get bread for their Family, whereas he did the other to feed that Ambition
and Avarice which tended to destroy himself.

Man's unreasonableness appears also in the unsuitableness of the Means he
uses, to the Ends he proposes to himself. Who would not think him a Fool, who
would endeavor to cure a mad Dog by putting a golden Collar about his Neck? Or
who would think to cure a Fever in a man by bestowing a great Office on him?
But are not men such Fools, when they think they can quiet their Passions by
Riches, or their Minds by advancement? Spiritual distempers are to be cured by
spiritual means, and as the finest Thoughts cannot feed the body, so neither
can the greatest Riches, or any other external thing satisfy the immaterial
Soul.

If I were desirous to get Preferment, would not I endeavor to please him from
whom I were to expect it, and not his Enemies? but though we say that we expect,
or at least wish to be Favorites to God Almighty, and to be by him happy for
ever; yet we spend not our time in obeying him, but in serving openly and
assiduously the World, the Devil, and our own Lusts, which are his declared
Enemies; and that too so resolutely, that any reasonable man cannot upon
considering our actions, but conclude, That either we cared not for what he
could give, or else that we were subtle enough to cheat him, or strong enough
to overpower him.

If a man were going to live in another Country, would he not endeavor to
accustom himself to the Customs of it, and to carry with him things that were
useful in that Country? And would we not laugh at him, if he spent his time in
building and adorning that Inn which he were to leave? But this is our
condition, who bestow all our thoughts on the things of this World, from which
we should expect to remove every moment, and in which we cannot stay long.

It is most strange that men, to secure themselves against Fortune, should put
themselves more and more into its power: For the remedies we use are to grow
richer and greater, and nothing subjects us more to accidents than these do;
for it is for these that men are pursued, and destroyed, and they are oftener
crimes than defenses.

God has promised, that if we seek we shall find, if we knock it shall be
opened; so that Prayer is the true way to attain to what is desirable: and men
may pray securely at their own Bedside, or in walking about their own Field.
But yet men will leave this sure, safe, and easy way; and sail to the Indies
amidst storms, and travel through the Deserts of Arabia amongst Thieves, to get
unnecessary Riches; expose themselves to Cannons, and watch in Camps to get
Honors, trusting the Seas, Winds, and Cannons more than their own kind and
merciful Father, who made and governs all these.

When we have Children, we are very desirous to leave them well secured, and
consequently provide them Estates; but though we take pains to breed our Colts,
and Hawks, we take no pains in teaching our Children their duty to their
Master, as we do those Beasts; and probably by not being bred to a just way of
reasoning, they may lose by one extravagance all that we have left them, or at
least live unhappily in not knowing how to use it aright. And the same Parents
which would bestow their Estates to free their Children from burning for a
month in a Fever, will, to get them a little addition to that same state, breed
them so, as may occasion their burning to all Eternity.

If any man were guilty of Crimes, and so needed the King's Pardon, would we
not think him a mere Brute, if he should instead of seeking it earnestly and
sincerely, run up and down railing at him, and reviling his Laws? Yet most of
our Wits, who have indeed more guilt than wit, and are not sure what moment
they shall be damned for ever, make it their business, rather than sport, to
treat in ridicule his Divine Majesty and Laws.

Let us a little examine the unreasonableness of men's arguing in matters of
Honor, wherein they pretend to be so exact, and delicate, and we shall be
convinced how weak their Reason is.

And in the first place, would not right Reason dictate to us, that those
things are fittest for men of Honor, which are most approved and recommended
by that Judge whom all acknowledge to understand best what is great, glorious,
and just? Who would believe any thing to be honorable for a Soldier, which
Caesar or Mareshal Turenne had condemned as unjust and mean? And if this Rule
hold, we must conclude, That it is the Almighty God, the Glorious Maker of
Heaven and Earth, and of the heart of man, and not the insolent Courtier, the
huffing Hector, or the unstable and ignorant Rabble, who must give the Rules to
just Honor and true Grandeur. Nor should the best of moral men be able to
persuade us, that any things is honorable, but according as it agrees with the
revealed Will of that Omnipotent and Infallible Judge; for if he be Infallible,
it is ridiculous that his judgment should not be acquiesc'd in; and if we think
him not Infallible, we cannot think he is God.

If any man should call one perjured, especially if he were a Person of
Quality, he would resent it irreconcileably; and yet are not all such as are
guilty of Adultery, guilty of Perjury? and to aggravate this Perjury, it is
Perjury against a Lady, to injure whom, and to whom the breach of an ordinary
promise would be thought a shameful Crime; but yet much more, when it is
considered, that upon that Oath the Lady had delivered her self up, and by the
like Oath had forsaken all the rest of mankind: So then, if Perjury be a
Villainy, when committed in the most trivial things, and to a person who never
obliged us; what can it then be, when committed in the greatest concern, and
when the Oath was given in the most considerate manner, and under the greatest
obligation to the most deserving person, and to one of that delicate Sex, which
the most unworthy are unwilling to injure or cheat?

I doubt not, but all who pretend to Reason, will acknowledge, that Ingratitude
is the most abominable of all Vices, and most inconsistent with true Honor.
And if a Prince had obliged one of his Subjects, behaving himself as a kind
Father to him; would he not be a very Rogue if he were ungrateful; but yet
more, if he refused to obey him, after many Promises and Vows, nay, and after
many Pardons, having several times relapsed again and again into those Crimes,
and even employed the Forces, with which the King had trusted him, against
himself? And yet the King of Kings, and our Heavenly Father, having heaped
hourly such favors on us, that it needs a man's whole time to repeat them,
because every moment of our time makes a part of them, we ungrateful Miscreants
employ all the strength of our Spirits and Bodies in offending him daily, to
that height, that though we our selves tremble when we think with confusion upon
them, and vow against, and mourn for them; yet we reasonable men return with
the Dog to the vomit, and with the Sow to the puddle; and add the breach of our
new Vows to our old sins.

I know that Pride has formed for its own defense a body of Law called Point of
Honor; as one instance whereof, amongst others, I urge how unreasonably men
repair their Honor, in endeavoring to take a man's life for a word, damning
both themselves and him, and by way of Complement drawing innocent men (and
such ordinarily as have the greatest Kindness for them) into the same hazard
and condemnation; which in spite of all the Gallantry imaginable, does prove
how little use of true Reason men have, though they value themselves very much,
as if they were the sole Masters of it. For this is not only contrary to the
Law of God, the true Fountain of Honor, as of all good, but to the Laws of our
Country: And what can be more absurd, than that some private, young, and
ranting Hectors should be able to make that pass for generous and gallant,
which whole Nations assembled have after much reasoning and deliberation
condemned as a Crime in all Ages and Countries; and even the same men, who brag
of this when enraged, and in the field, condemn it in Parliament and in cold
blood? But nothing discredits this Heroism more, than that those, who would not
yield up their revenge to God, nor their Conscience, have been frighted from it
by the French King and the Gallows.

If one man give another the Lie, he must pay down his life, because a Man of
Honor would rather choose to dye than to be a Liar, or rather thought one; but
this Man of Honor will flatter, till all Men laugh at him for lying so grossly;
and this Eloquence of Knaves must likewise make his Patron a Fool, for being
capable to believe what none believes, save himself; so that this Flatterer,
who yet passes for a Man of true Honor, makes himself a Liar, and his Patron a
Fool. How oftentimes also have we seen these Men of Honor lie and flatter, to
promote Faction, and to please the Multitude, which they were thereby designing
to cheat, as if the addition of a Cheat could make a Lie honorable. Rebellion
and Pimping are Noble flights of Glory and Kindness, to which, fashionable Men,
and Men of Honor can only pretend, and a Prerogative denied to those Men who
are truly virtuous. If Men, who are tender of their Reputation, were
reasonable, would they not consider, that all these their Crimes and Vices are
known to that Great God, who is the Fountain of Truth, and the Rule of Purity,
and shall at the Great Day be known to Men and Angels? If a Lady considered,
that all her unchaste thoughts, and a Person who passes for an Honest Man, that
all his Secrets and Cheats would be discovered to their Neighbors, though as
guilty as they, it would confound them: How then will all Men look, when the
Sins they are endeavoring to cover, shall be laid open in that Illustrious
Assembly, where Innocence and Knowledge shall be in such high perfection? How
can we then be judged Reasonable Creatures, when we dare do that before the
Almighty God, who is of purer eyes than that he can behold iniquity, which we
durst not attempt before our own Servants, who depend on us, and are as frail
as our selves? And if we cannot abide the Accusation of our own Conscience, how
shall we be able to hold up our Faces in so glorious a Judicature? And can Men
be Reasonable Creatures, and yet not mind so great a Concern?

Fame, that tacit acknowledgment of Immortality, even in those who believe it
not, is pursued so extravagantly, that Idolatry it self is not more
inexcusable: For to gain the opinion of a brutal multitude, we sacrifice to
them our Duty, our Quiet and our Security; and what design can we have, or
return can we expect for all this? For if we be not Immortal, what signifies
our being esteemed, when we are to have no being? And why should we give our
selves real Trouble for an imaginary Good? And if we believe the Christian
Religion, it teaches us, that either we must be saved or damned; if saved, Fame
from Men will signify nothing, when we discover how foolish we were to adore
such Worms; if damned, that which made a great part of our Crime, cannot be an
alleviation of its Punishment. But if a Man, believing there is a God, did
argue justly, he would value highly the being esteemed by that Wisdom that
cannot err, and whose fuffrage will last to all Eternity. Men can only raise
our Character, without being able to raise our Merit, but our great Master can
really make us merit, and open the eyes of others to understand it, when true,
which no Man can do, and his esteem brings Rewards suitable to its Greatness;
and therefore is only worthy of our pains, especially if we bestowed that pains
in serving him, which we do in gaining Fame; we might expect from his goodness
what can never be valuable when obtained from Men, because of their meanness;
or secure, because of their Injustice or Caprice. If we saw any of our
acquaintance running up and down among mean and ignorant People, to persuade
them to praise and admire him, we would laugh at his folly, as well as vanity;
but this is the condition of us poor blind Sinners, who are sick and dejected,
if our silly, blind Fellow-Mortals do not admire us, and praise our Actions.

I have remarked in my own time, that some, by taking too much care to be
esteemed and admired, have by that course missed their aim, whilst others of
them, who shunned it, did meet with it, as if it had fallen on them, whilst it
was flying from the others; which proceeded from the unfit means these able and
reasonable Men took to establish their Reputation. It is very strange to hear
Men value themselves upon their Honor, and their being Men of their word in
Trifles, when yet that same Honor cannot tie them to pay the debts they have
contracted upon solemn Promises, of secure and speedy repayment, starving poor
Widows and Orphans, to feed their Lusts; and adding thus, Robbery and
Oppression to the dishonorable breach of Trust. And how can we think them Men
of Honor, who, when a Potent and Foreign Monarch is oppressing his weaker
Neighbors, hazard their very lives to assist him, though they would rail at any
of their acquaintance, that meeting a strong Man fighting with a weaker, should
assist the stronger in his Oppression.

The surest and most pleasant path to universal Esteem, and true Popularity, is
to be just; for all Men esteem him most, who secures most their private
Interest, and protects best their Innocence; and all who have any notion of a
Deity, believe that Justice is one of his chief Attributes; and that therefore,
whoever is just, is next in Nature to Him, and the best Picture of Him; and to
be reverenced and loved: But yet, how few trace this Path, most Men choosing
rather to toil and vex themselves, in seeking Popular Applause, by living high,
and in profuse Prodigalities, which are entertained by Injustice and
Oppression, as if rational Men would pardon Robbers, because they feasted them
upon a part of their own Spoils; or did let them see fine and glorious Shows,
made for the honor of the giver, upon the expense of the robbed Spectators.
But when a virtuous Person appears Great by his Merit, and obeyed only by the
charming force of his Reason, all Men think him descended from that Heaven
which he serves, and to him they gladly pay the noble Tribute of deserved
Praises.

Another great Class of Arguments, to prove how ill Men reason in matters of
greatest importance, may be brought from the Contradictions we are guilty of in
our Conduct. As for Instance, Life is the thing in the World most valued, for
without it, we can enjoy nothing; and yet, so unreasonable are we, that for a
Complement, we will hazard it so far, as may be rather called a losing of it.
When time is going, we cry out against Providence, for having made it so short,
and when it is gone, we would give all the World to redeem it; and yet we are
weary of it so far as to bestow Money upon any thing that will help to spend
it; and give it away in Visits, to such, to whom we would not give any thing
else. We would for no Money quit one Year of our Life; and yet for the same
Money; which we so undervalue in the express exchange, most Men do really give
away very many of their best years, since they are spent in gaining Money.

We exclaim against Tyranny, Usurpation and Oppression, and in this we are much
in the right: But why then do we admire, and cry up such as have been great
Oppressors and Usurpers, as Alexander, Coesar? for in this, we are not only
unjust upon the matter, but Enemies to our selves; for that esteem we put upon
them who have been such, invites others to make us the prey of our own Errors.

Most Men do admire, and prefer themselves to all others, which is a great
proof of our unreasonableness; but yet, even these cannot stay with themselves,
and by being afraid to look into their own hearts, contradict the esteem which
yet at all times they have for themselves, to an unsufferable Excess. All Men
desire to prefer the best Company; and when Men prefer any Company to the being
alone, they demonstrate that themselves are not the best. Most Men, when they
are young, contemn Riches, and love them when they are old; and though our Wits
scorn to think, or say with the vulgar, yet even these are swayed as much, and
as stronly by vulgar Vices, as those who never exclaimed against the unthinking
Crowd. All Creatures stand in awe of others, according to the esteem they have
of them; and though we admire our own Perfections, and value our selves far above
our proportion, yet stand we not in awe to commit wickedness when alone, which
we durst not commit if others were present; and thus we are so unreasonable,
that we want a due reverence and esteem for our selves, where we ought to have
it, and have it excessively where we ought to want it totally.

Self-love, the falsest though the subtilest of all Reasoners, endeavors to
persuade us, that in revenge, we shall, by seeing our Enemies ruined, remain
our selves the more excellent Creatures, our Rivals being thus depressed: And
this is that hid reason which justifies to us that Passion which is truly most
inhumane. But what an improper Argument is this, for we are not one whit the
more excellent, that another is ruined by an Accident. Another Argument brought
by Revenge, is, that thus we shall secure our selves against our Enemies, and
so Revenge would pass with us under the disguise of Self-defence; but because
this would seem cowardly, and be in effect, a tacit acknowledgment of Fear; we
rather say, that in Revenge, we will teach others not to attack us. But all
these are false reasonings; for no Man secures his true Quiet by Revenge, for
it raises an Enemy within, which is always present, and able to disquiet: And
all Men conclude themselves obliged to destroy the Revengeful Man, by the same
Argument that he pursues his Revenge; and thus a Man is tortured by it till it
be satisfied, and frighted by it after he has prevailed.

Most Men desire to be in Employment, from a secret desire to be admired;
whereas when they are in Employments, they do not those Just and Virtuous
things, for which they would be truly admired: And albeit Self-love makes them
believe, that the being feared is a mark of true Dominion; yet they consider
not, that even Dominion is only at the bottom desirable, because it is a sign
of Merit and innate Excellency; and does please, because it makes us believe,
by the Suffrage of others, that we are Noble and Excellent Persons, of which,
even the least reasonable cannot seriously be persuaded, except they believe
they have done virtuous things. And thus it were more reasonable to do what is
really virtuous, than to cheat our selves, with thinking that others admire us.
And it is very unreasonable not to do things rather for Virtue it self, than
for the Applause which follows it, since that Applause derives its
desireableness from Virtue, and so Virtue it self should be much more desired:
And which shows yet more the weakness of our Reason, though in this we contradict
the undeniable Sentiments of Mankind, yet we are cheated into it by a mistake,
as if it were easier to attain to the Applause of Virtue, than to Virtue it
self; whereas, quite contrary, it must be more difficult to attain Applause,
since it depends upon many thousands of Rivals and capricious Fools; whereas
Virtue springs from a Man's own Breast, and we may have it, and keep it, in
spite of all Mankind.

Every Man also, may in his private Station and Employment, find thousands of
Instances to confirm this Truth. And thus a Courtier should consider, that when
he sees his Prince bow and pray to a Superior, before whom, he acknowledges
himself to be a Worm and a Vapor, that certainly it is fit to do nothing to
displease that Superior Power, for gaining the favor of that Prince who
adores him; and who would not think him mad, who would scorn to depend on a
Monarch, but would take pains to flatter his Footman? When a Lawyer observes
that Men take such pains to secure in Law an Interest that cannot be secured
against Accidents, he should in reason conclude, that it is brutish not to take
more pains to secure that which shall never fail: And when he observes how
zealously the Eldest Men defend a Life that Accidents, nay, and Nature probably
will end with the Process, should he not consider, what pains should be taken
to secure a Life that continues for ever, free too from that Care, and those
Sicknesses, that even before Death make this Life miserable.

If a Soldier who were besieged by his Enemies, should abandon his Watch, and
spend his time in Gaming and Drinking, or should lose the glorious opportunity
of defeating them, for a Feast; or, as Mark Anthony, for a Mistress:
Especially, if they be such Enemies, whom we know, would not only kill, but
torment us to Death, were he not to be accounted a Fool? But that is our case;
for being surrounded with Temptations and Devils, we spend our time in Toys
and Trifles, and whilst we hear that others have received an Immortal Crown,
for having overcome their Spiritual Enemies, we, who value Fame and Glory so
much, spend our time in pleasing two or three silly Courtiers, whom we despise
whilst we attend them, and laugh at the Actions which we seem to admire. A
Merchant were ridiculous, if he should spend his Stock and his time in buying
up Wares that were unfashionable in that Country where he has his abode; and
yet most Men employ themselves wholly in gathering Riches, and getting that
Knowledge, which can neither be carried to Heaven with them, nor can comfort
them when they are in Hell. And I have often applauded the remark of a
Gentlewoman, who hearing a whole Society admire one of her acquaintance, for a
great Wit, told them, that his Father had left him a great Estate, which he had
spent amongst Whores, that he had himself married a Whore, and had changed the
Orthodox Religion, in which he was bred up, for a worse, and was not devout in
that neither; and desired them to consider if that Man deserved to be called a
Wit?

Nor are we only unreasonable in pursuing our Pleasures and Vices; but the very
measures we take in being Virtuous, show how weak our Reason is, and how ill we
use it. For our Friendship is for the most part but the preferring those for
whom we have a kindness, to those who deserve better both our kindness and
those employments; and thus we rob the Commonwealth, to repay the debt our
Gratitude owes. The Courage of many is but a hypocritical disguising of their
fear, or a dull ignorance of their danger. For when a man goes to Battle, he
fears to dye; but to disguise this fear, he considers the shame of flying, and
knowing certainly that his Reputation would be ruined, he fears more this
certain loss, than the hazard of being killed: but if he cannot attain to that,
he at least braves it out, and endeavors to cheat others, when he cannot
satisfy himself.

Liberality and Charity are ofttimes but the disguised effects of Vanity,
wherein men tacitly design rather their own perpetuity, than the advantage of
those on whom they bestow what is given, in which they act very unreasonably:
for if they lent it to God, he would restore it with a very enriching interest:
But in bestowing it on Fame, they bestow it on a Cheat, which has often deceived
both them and others. And it still seems strange, that we will bestow it on
that Multitude (for Fame and the Multitude are the same thing) to preserve any
one of whom from starving, we would not bestow one farthing. And yet the World
esteem those who do such things more than they do reasonable and judicious
persons.

It is one of the chief and fundamental Dictates of Reason, that we should do
to others as we would wish them to do to us. But though we exclaim against our
Equals, poor Mortals, if they refuse us this measure, yet we allow it not to
our great King and Sovereign. If we heard that any who pretended to be our
friend, did sit tamely and hear us railed at, and contemned, we would conclude
them base and treacherous; and a King would for this treat His Subjects as
Rebels; but yet we sit not only to hear impious Creatures rail at Religion, and
ofttimes at Providence it self, with so little resentment, that we comply and
even admire the Miscreant. I remember that I suggested once to a Person of
Quality, who was busy about his Accounts, to consider if our Steward should
spend our Rents upon his own Affairs, or upon maintaining his own Family or
Luxury, and much more if he should riot it away with our Enemies, would we not
hate him as a Rogue, and at least recall the Trust we gave him. But the Great
Master of the Family of the Faithful having appointed us only to be Stewards,
not to appropriate, but to bestow the Estates he gave us for the use of his
poor Children and Servants, preferring us kindly to as much as may satisfy our
Convenience, for so the Scripture, and even Reason it self, teaches us: (for
why should the Wise God have bestowed so much upon some, whilst others want, if
he had not designed to level all by this necessity of distribution) yet we see
his Children starve, whilst we employ the portions due to them upon the Wicked
who are his Enemies. And thus we use the Almighty God at the rate we would not
suffer from the meanest of our Servants. And so unreasonable are even such as
are convinced of the reasonableness of Charity, that by doing their charitable
actions in public, they lose the reward, by not preserving the true design of
it; for as our Savior argues, Mat. 6. 4. It is very just, that since they
bestow their Charity to gain the applause of men, they should be rewarded with
the applause for which they bestowed it; And how can they expect a reward from
God, to please whom it was not given; and he is not obliged to repay what was
not lent him: And they cannot expect double payment, for being paid by men, the
Obligation is fully satisfied.

I shall conclude these Observations with what ordinarily we conclude our
unreasonable lives, and that is Deathbed Repentance, which of all things is
the most unreasonable. For if we believe the Rewards and Torments which attend
our future state, and make the delay so dangerous, why delay we? And if we
believe neither of these, why repent we? The one cannot but make our present
pleasures very bitter, by the fear that must thereupon haunt us; and the other
cannot but needlessly cut off the pleasures which we exclude as inconsistent
with true Repentance. But which of us being condemned to horrible Torments,
would delay to seek a remission till the last hour? or being invited to leave
our Cottage to receive a plentiful Estate, would delay to undertake his
Journey? and yet we easily delay our Repentance, which can only preserve us,
condemned Sinners, from eternal Torments; and which would certainly bring us,
poor Wretches, to that Inheritance of immortal Glory. And though we condemn our
selves for leaving the dispatch of our little Concerns till the last hour, yet
we delay that great and necessary Work, on which a long Eternity hangs, for
every trifle. And that which aggravates much this Neglect, is, that the Reasons
which encourage us to it are as weak, as the thing it self is absurd and
dangerous. For the hope we may live, has for its foundation a frail Body, that
every accident can destroy; and it is a wonder, that when we hear of so many
unexpected deaths, we should not tremble to think, what if I had dyed? And though
the Mercy of God be as infinite as his Justice, yet it is insupportable
insolence in us to think, that we can be saved when we please: this is not only
to undervalue him as the last thing to be chosen, which implies that our
infinitely glorious Maker is of all things least worthy of our choice, but in
this we exalt our selves above him, as if we might command him to bestow upon
us Heaven and Happiness whenever we thought fit to call for it. And which of
us would bestow the meanest favor upon him, who would resolve to oppose, or
but neglect us as long as he pleased. The delaying makes us the unfitter, not
only to crave, but even to receive, Mercy; and since all our life, albeit as
piously spent as humane frailty can allow, is short enough for so great a Work;
what can we expect from a few sickly hours distracted by new pains, and amazed
at so many old sins? And the Scripture having commanded us to repent, and bring
forth good Works; it has every where made good Works and a subsequent Amendment
of our Lives, the mark as well as fruit of sincere Repentance: and therefore
since a Deathbed Repentance must want this proof, it cannot but be by so much
the more uncomfortable to us and our friends. Nor is there any generous Soul,
who having received so great and undeserved a Pardon, would not desire to be
able to live, that he might magnify that Infinite God to whom he owed it. I
know that the Thief on the Cross has been a stumbling block to many others; but
we reason very weakly from this instance of God's Mercy: for he by believing
the Divinity of our Savior amidst all that could have been said against it,
when even the Jews were desiring him to come down from the Cross, and they
would believe in him, and the other Thief was reviling him; did evidence as
much Faith in that contracted Span when dying, as the best of us can do in a
prolonged Life. And it being fit for the Savior of the World to show his Power
and Mercy when he was leading Captivity captive, that happy Thief can be no
Precedent for us who remain unconverted after so many Miracles, that no
reasonable man can now doubt of, especially if he never heard, as its probable,
of that Gospel which we have so often undervalued, and if he has not neglected
former offers of Mercy which we have so often contemned. And shall we presume on
God's Goodness, because one man was saved, and but one, to preserve Mankind
from despair; not remembering, that as the Thief obtained a Pardon when he
sought it, so Esau found no place for Repentance, though he sought it earnestly,
Heb. 12. 17. And though those who came in at the last hour, got as much as those
who had wrought at the first; yet it is remarkable, that it is said, they came
not sooner, because no man had desired them. But let me conjure any noble Soul
to consider, that if God be worthy of the Adoration of Angels through all
Eternity; and that we confess, that to walk, like Enoch, with him, will be so
amiable and glorious, why should we delay it for Pleasures that are unworthy of
a reasonable Soul, and which last but for a moment? For at least we lose so
much unexpressible Joy and Pleasure; and in delaying our Repentance we continue
to be sick when we may be whole, to be blind when we may see, to be poor when
we may be rich, to lie in Prison when we may live at Liberty, and to be Slaves
to our Enemies when we may be Heirs to a Kingdom. All which induce me to
believe, that they who delay Repentance, design not to repent, but flatter
themselves with a false conceit of it; for to repent is to be grieved, and no
man who is grieved can put it off at his pleasure, no more than a man can be
grieved or not as he pleases. As also if a man resolved sincerely to repent,
it is necessary that he were convinced of the greatness of his danger, and were
actually ashamed as well as afraid thereof; and if he were truly touched with
these Convictions, he would not continue in the Courses which occasioned them.
And to finish all, is it not the height of unreasonableness for a man to
continue to do these things, of which he knows he must be ashamed, and for
which he resolves to be exceedingly troubled and afflicted? And if we were
coming into a Room where a man were wounding himself, would we not conclude him
yet madder if he told us, that he would give himself more and more, because
such a man got so many Wounds, and yet was cured.

Let me therefore conclude this Discourse with the noble and just Reasoning
used by St. Peter, 2 Epist. 3. 10, 11. But the day of the Lord will come as a
thief in the night, in the which the Heavens will pass away with a great noise,
and the Elements shall melt with a fervent heat, the Earth also and the works
that are therein shall be burnt up: Seeing then that all these things shall be
dissolved, what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy Conversation and
Godliness?

And what a frighted Creature will the greatest Hero be, when he finds himself
in the midst of a burning World, having greater terrors within his Breast than
these, raised by an Omnipotent God, and which will force him to cry to the
Hills and Mountains to fall upon him, and cover him from the face of this angry
Judge?

But these great and sad Truths need (alas) to be preached by an Angel, to
Hearers standing upon the brink of their Grave, and having Heaven and Hell
opened before them.

PART II.
Whence proceeds it that Man is so unreasonable, and how to improve our Reason.
IT is indeed very strange, that Man, who improves daily so much in all Arts
and Sciences, that are neither so necessary, so easy, nor so advantageous to
us, should still decrease in this excellent Study, this Noble and Useful
Knowledge: Let us then enquire a little into the occasions of these Errors in
his reasonings, and we shall find them so silly, that they also discover to us
new Weaknesses in his Reason.

I know that we generally charge this on Man's Atheism, imagining he would
reason justly, if he believed the Principles I have laid down; but this is a
mistake, for Atheists reason most weakly, as well as others, and most
inconsequentially to their own Principles: for even Atheists disquiet
themselves for Fame and Money, and by Whoring and Drinking destroy their
Bodies, which is all they dote upon, and should preserve, and which shows their
unreasonableness, according to their own Principles; and that Infidelity is not
the cause of false reasoning, appears clearly, because such as are not
Atheists, reason falsely; and we may observe, that such as believe that by the
ill Diets they use, their terrible pains will be renewed, do yet adventure on
them; oh, that they only of all Mankind were the unreasonable Men! But how
unreasonable are they, who believing there is a Crown of Glory reserved for
those that will run that Heavenly race, choose rather to sit Tippling and Gaming;
that believe the Son of God stands stretching out his arms, ready to preserve
them, and yet will rather sink down into that fearful Pit, from which there is
no redemption; who will rather starve than seek that Heavenly Manna, and
languish of their Wounds, than seek the Balm of Gilead, from the hand of a
loving Father; whom no Judgments on others can awaken, nor Mercies to
themselves can oblige; Sick amidst so many Cures; Poor, amidst such Plenty;
Blind, notwithstanding so much Light; and Insensible, in spite of so many
Convictions.

But how can Men reason well, since they neither understand the true use of
Reason, nor what Man is? And these are the two first and great occasions of our
Errors.

As to Reason, let us examine our selves narrowly, and we shall find that Men
think they need not Reason in the great and considerable designs of Life, as if
these were matters to be taken upon trust; And as if Reason were to be used
only in matters of State, or in Debate or Trade. And I desire to know, who sits
down to reason with himself, why he lives so or so, or to know, if what he
does, is according to the Rules given him, for regulating his Actions. I have
my self spent Twenty years in reasoning eagerly to secure other Men's Estates;
but I have spent very little time to consider, by a nobler reasoning, why do I
spend so much time in reasoning for other Men, and yet so little for my self?
though in the mean time, I do but too much prefer my self to all others? You will
find some Divines very busy in arguing, whether God from all Eternity could
have made Creatures, and yet these Men will never consider what shall become of
them in Eternity. The cure then of this, is to consider Reason, not as a Tool,
useful for Gain or Fame only, but as a Square, put in our hands, by our kind
God, to instruct us how to make our Actions straight and even; and as a Workman
does first mind to have all regulated by his Square, and after his work is
finished, applies the Square to what he has made; so ought we, when any thing
is designed by us, resolve to do all in it by the rules of Reason, and when the
Action is ended, examine if it be so: And to invite us to this, God has not
obliged us to seek for this any foreign or remote Remedy; no, nor to owe our
Remedy to any other; but has placed his Candle in our Breasts, and honored us
with the being our own Governors and Directors. Let us then think, and think
of matters of Importance, and of matters that import us; let us think as much
of Heaven, which cannot be taken from us, when once we are possessed of it, as
we do of temporal Estates, in the possession of which we cannot be secured. Let
us think as much upon our selves, whom we value too much, as upon others, whom
we value too little.

We use oft-times our Reason to argue falsely for Interest, or by
Pre-ingagement, and this debauches our Reason, after which it continues easily
in this Error: For this takes off that Reverence and Esteem we ought to have
for just reasoning. Thus Lawyers favoring still, and being obliged to maintain
the cause of those who have retained them, force their Reason to find Arguments
for their own side; Divines thinking themselves obliged to defend the Positions
of that Church wherein they were born, reason still in its defense: Statesmen,
to fortify their Party, endeavor to persuade all Men to embrace it; and
Orators, not excepting the Philosophers amongst them, to beautify their
discourses, urge things that are mere Flourishes, having much Luster, but no
Strength; great instances whereof are to be seen in Seneca, and generally in
all the Heathens, who, as I shall show expressly elsewhere, were forced, by not
knowing the true Principles whereupon Reason was to be built, to maintain by
false reasonings the true Principles that they designed to recommend. We do
likewise form our Morality by our Interest, and guide not our Interest by our
Morals; and after we have formed any Design, we find out Reasons to persuade us
that it is just: And thus we oft-times mistake Interest, Imagination, and
Prejudices, for solid Reason; the true cure whereof lies in being painful and
curious in our first Reasonings; and as careful not to commit Errors by false
and careless Arguings, in matters of eternal Happiness, as Mathematicians are
in their Demonstrations about Figures and Conclusions, which cannot secure them
against one Misfortune, nor add one day to their Lives.

Bigotry, and false conceptions of Religion, do also darken much our Reason;
for sometimes, by implicit Faith and Infallibility, (those great Tyrants over
Reason) we accustom our selves to Laziness, wherein we lose the habit of
Reasoning; and sometimes by imposing upon us things inconsistent with it, and
by teaching us that it is a dangerous Guide, we lessen our own esteem for it,
and create insensibly in our selves a Jealousy that it is an Imposture; and we
baffle it so on these occasions, that at other times it dares not try its own
strength. I confess, that it ought in a just submission yield to his commands
who made it, nor should we hear the Servant when the Master speaks; but except
when the will of God does expressly ordain ones Reason to submit, we ought not
to deny our selves the true exercise of it, to please Men, who understand not
its true strength, or do upon designs impose on us the abandoning of it. And
this has infected us so far, that by it all other Sciences did fall very low.
And if some bold Defender, such as Carts and others, had not interposed, we
had been led by implicit Faith, in all the Objects of Knowledge as well as in
all the Objects of Faith; and every School-man would have exacted as much
absolute submission to his own Dictates, as we should pay to the unerring
Commands of our infallible Creator. And oft-times Self-love passing for
Religion, blinds us whilst it promises Illumination: As a clear instance
whereof I shall desire any wise Man to consider, that if this were true Zeal
which led Men to hazard all they have for the ridiculous difference about
indifferent Ceremonies or Tenets, why do they not hazard all they possess for
the defense of the Christian Religion against the Turks; since in sound Reason,
and by a Mathematical certainty, the whole is to be preferred to a part; and to
prove that this is the effect of Self-love, and not of true Devotion, it is
very observable, that the less the differences be in such cases, we are
ordinarily the more passionate in them, being inclined rather to have our
Sentiments sustained, than the Commands of God obeyed; most men being to
themselves their own only God, and being ashamed that they should err even in
the meanest circumstance.

Men may think me insolent when I tell them that they understand not
themselves, but they should bear this from me; who would willingly wish that
they could justly tax me of a Lie in it. But for my security I must put them in
mind, that Monsieur Paschal told them before me, that he had laid aside the
study of the Mathematics, because few understood to converse with him in it,
and betook himself to consider Man; as thinking that a Subject so near, and of
such concern to every one, that all could not but understand it; and yet he
found this less understood than the other. But that I may contribute my mean
Endeavors for clearing them in this, I must desire them to consider, that Man
being created to love and admire God, it must follow by a necessary
consequence, that God was to be the Center of all his Knowledge; and right
Reason was a drawing of all his Conclusions as so many Lines, to rest upon God
as that Center. But Man designing to exalt himself, does by a woeful mistake
make himself the Center, and Self-love, as another Reason, draws all into this
design. And thus, whereas we should study to understand the excellent Works of
the Creation, that in them we may understand the Infiniteness of that wonderful
Creator; we study them only thereby to adorn our own Spirits, and thus to raise
an Esteem in others for us: and crook in all the Conclusions we make to our
selves and our Convenience, as the Center of all our Designs. And thus we have
invented new Sciences, Arts, and Recreations, such as Criticisms, Rraillery,
Comedies, Tragedies, etc. merely that our Works may be admired as much as his.
And therefore it is impossible we can ever reason justly, since all the Lines
of our Reasoning tend to a wrong Center; but if we return to our Duty in
resolving to love and admire him, and not our selves, every Conclusion being
drawn from true Principles and Positions, would recover its original
streightness. And thus if we adored God more than Kings and Princes, we would
not displease God to please them, that we might be enriched or advanced by
them. If we studied only to know him in his Creatures, and not to raise our own
Fame by them, we would not toil and vex our selves to acquire Fame; nor forget
serving and adoring him, that we might get time to know those Sciences, and be
esteemed for, and delighted in that Learning. Self-love, amongst its other
Cheats, hinders us to study Christian Morality, because that would let us see
how vile and frail we are; and therefore, as a diversion, it carries us
impetuously to study other Sciences, wherein we may admire our own Wit and
Sagacity: but that which seems to me the true Notion of Learning is, that it
should be a design to know and admire God in his Works; for which Natural
Philosophy and Mathematics are to be studied; in his Providence, which we may
know by History; in his Justice to be known by Law; and in his governing the
Soul of Man, which is the Object of Moral Philosophy: but above all, in himself
and the Mysteries of our Salvation, taught by Divinity when well directed.

A Proof of which, as well as a new Cause of our Errors and Reasoning is, That
the first Rule by which our Reasons are squared and directed, are the Writings
of those Illustrious Heathens, who in our Youth are recommended to us as the
only Guides and Patterns: The best of which, such as Plato, Epictetus, Seneca,
and others, being absolutely ignorant of Man's great Disease, which is Original
Sin, could not but mistake the Remedies of his Actual Transgressions; and
knowing nothing more excellent than their own Reason, they concluded it was
sufficient. And having from their Poets and Traditions learned mean, low
thoughts of their Gods, who were in those days made the chief Actors of the
sins they should have punished, and described as more employed in satisfying
their own Passions, than in governing of the World. Those misled Philosophers
did not only equal themselves to, but raised themselves above the Gods, whom
they taught others and themselves to adore. And to that height did this mistake
in their Reasoning fly, that Seneca concludes his Wise man much preferable to
the Gods, because the good they did, arose from the necessity of their own
Nature; whereas man being left to a freedom in his Actions, made them good by
his own wise choice. Epictetus founds his Philosophy upon that only Principle,
That the things within us are in our own power, but the things without us are
not. Whereas St. Paul from Heaven assures us, That of our selves, as of our
selves, we can do no good. And our own Experience does most convincingly agree
with St. Paul, against Epictetus. And whereas a Principle in any Science should
be an uncontroverted Truth, we find daily that this Principle is an absolute
Lie. For that man who thinks that he can with an unerring hand govern his
Passions, has never undertaken the subduing of them. And video meliora,
proboque, deteriora sequor, agrees much better with our own Experience, as well
as with St. Paul, who, though among the greatest of Saints, complains justly,
Romans 7. 15. That which I would, that do I not; but what I hate, that do I: and
therefore is forced to cry out, Who shall deliver me from this body of Death?
Cicero's Discourse concerning the Nature of Gods, and Plato's Dialogues of the
Immortality of the Soul, may convince us how weakly those great Patterns of
Philosophy do reason, even upon those Subjects where Reason was not altogether
mistaken. And from those, and all the Writings of the Ancient Pagans, I do more
justly conclude, That those great Ideas which our Masters have given us of
them, and the Eloquence which shines every where in their Writings, have misled
us from the ways that lead to the New Jerusalem; and from admiring the Beauty
of Holiness which shines in those Scriptures, which have God Almighty and the
Holy One of Israel for their Author and Subject, and in which we are taught to
expect more help from Heaven, than from our selves, against our innate and
original Corruption, which is more to be overcome by praying than thinking, and
can never be overcome without that Humility and Self-denial, which was
absolutely unknown to the Heathens, as I hope to prove in another Discourse,
where these thoughts shall have their full scope.

I am far from designing in this to root out Self-love, but rather to direct
and improve it. For certainly God has grafted Self-love in every Man's Heart,
to the end, Man might thereby be the more obliged to love him, to whom he owes
all those Excellencies which he loves in himself, and that he may be thereby
obliged to preserve himself as a part of the Universe, and which is in general
preserved by every Man's loving himself; and so far has God allowed this
Self-love, that he punishes Man when he destroys himself. But that Self-love
which I here inveigh against, is a false and imposture passion, whereby Man
makes himself the Spring, from which all his Designs follow, the Mark at which
they aim, and the Rule by which they are to be squared, than which nothing can
be more unreasonable. For how can we justify our selves, in requiring absolute
deference from all that is ours, if we yield it not to that Infinite Being to
whom we owe all; and as he brought us out of nothing, so we should still
remember that we are nothing before him. If every Man made himself the Rule,
and drew all to himself, what a distracted thing would this World be, and how
impossible would it be for any Man to live comfortably in it? And as a private
Man would be esteemed mad, who in a Court, would think that all things should
be designed there for his Glory and Pleasure: So much more is Man a distracted
Creature, when he makes himself the chief aim of all his Actions. Whereas, if a
Courtier take great care to please the Monarch, and to design his Glory and
Advantage, he will thereby raise himself in a securer, as well as a juster way.
And therefore because Self-love is so strong an Orator, and is still at the
bottom of all persuasion, we should examine cautiously, what is urged upon us
under the disguise of Self-love, and whether we do really love our selves when
we yield to those things to which we are tempted. I shall conclude this Period
with a sad Assertion, That in spite of all that Men profess, yet too many
really, at the bottom, mistake themselves so far, as to think that they have no
original Frailties, and therefore that they are able to command their Passions,
and that they need no Divine Assistance, that they are nothing else, save that
body which we see, that they are not to die so soon, and that the things they
are doing now are the only things to be cared for, and will remain with them
for ever. And if most Men have this Idea of themselves, I desire to know how
they can draw just conclusions from such mistaken Principles.

Another cause of our Reasoning so weakly, is, that the things of another World
are too remote to seem great to us, and too spiritual to be discerned by carnal
Eyes. The least thing, when placed immediately before our Eyes, will intercept,
and exclude all further prospect; and even the least conspicuous Objects, and
Sensual things do, by a constant tide of emanations, flow in continually upon
us, so as to fill our thoughts, and leave little room for any thing else. But
as a Remedy to this, let us consider, that since even Corporeal, and Sensual
Pleasures charm us only when we think much upon them, it follows, that thinking
is the Source, and Origin of Esteem: though we see not the Riches of a golden
Mine, yet our belief will make us toil for it, and the hope of succeeding to an
Estate will oblige us to follow eagerly what that hope suggests. And since
Faith is the evidence of things not seen, it does represent things to come,
with a certainty, that makes them present; and albeit it may be objected, that
we have seen some such things as these Mines, and Worldly Successions, and
therefore it is that we believe and love them more; yet that is of no moment:
For the miracles that Men have heard of, and the wonderful works of Providence
which we daily see, especially when born in upon us, by the conviction of our
own Consciences, seem as strong motives as any that sense can afford
Conscience, that luminous Sense of the Soul, being stronger, and more
persuasive to any that will hear it, than any of our dull and outward Senses,
which have only assistance from stupid Flesh and Blood: Conversation also about
things Spiritual and Divine, will be in place of Sensual Emanations to us, and
will represent a future Life, and the World to come to a harkening Soul, as if
it were present; nor will the Almighty fail to assist that Eloquence which has
him for its only and ultimate scope.

The Soul cetrtainly being a Spiritual substance, can more easily unite it self
to immaterial Objects, such as a future state of Happiness, than to the
terrestrial Objects, with which we fill it; and the only fault is in us, who do
not apply our selves to the thinking on these. Do we not find that such as
aspire to Fame are more taken with it than any Man is with Meat or Drink, yea,
and Life it self, for the conquest whereof all these are contemned: And yet
Fame is a mere immaterial Object, that has nothing affecting the Senses
otherwise than by thinking nothing Present, nothing Corporeal; and generally,
the Spirit of Man is more pleased with Expectation than with any present
Possession whatsoever; so far, that if we expect any little accident, it will
busy more our thoughts, and fasten them more to it than a thousand things of
greater value already possessed. This then can be no such hard task as our
laziness persuades it to be.

Though we be convinced of the truths on which I have founded my Observations,
yet we advert not to them, nor heed them. Thus though an Object were most
conspicuous, yet if we dote so upon any other, as* never to turn our eyes that
way, we shall not be taken with either its Value or Beauty. We are bred up in a
great esteem for the things of this World, and so are rather pre-engag'd than
blind, and buy not that Pearl of price, because we have laid out our Stock on
other trifles, which is a great defect in our Reason, and for which we would
contemn other Merchants: And this is to be cured by having a true value for
things, and by rectifying all our Ideas; and therefore, he who resolves to
reason justly, should begin first to consider, when any thing occurs, of what
use it may be, and of what value it is. As for instance, Is this Land, for
which I am sinfully providing Money, worth Heaven? or this Man, whom I am to
please, abler to make me happy than God Almighty, to whom in this I prefer him?
And so, like a skilful Chemist, resolve every thing into its true Principles,
and then try its value; and like a Merchant, who has been often cheated,
resolve at last to consider what such things are worth, whether they will be
fashionable where we are going, and whether they will return us the Stock we
lay out upon them?

For improving this thought, we should consider, that though we discover truths,
yet we do not take time to ponder them sufficiently: And thus, though we be
convinced, yet we improve not sufficiently our convictions. Self-love, and the
love of Ease has used us to a partial and superficial way of enquiry; and from
this also proceed these wanderings which weaken those pious Meditations, and
disturb that earnestness in Prayer, by which we can only procure a just
illumination in our reasoning; desultoriness of thought grows daily when it is
not lessened, and the next days wanderings are the punishment of those which we
suffered to prevail yesterday. But should we not be ashamed, that we cannot
think our Salvation worthy of some serious hours, since it is that which God
Almighty has constantly designed, and followed from all Eternity, though we are
far more concerned in it. And that we can spend many entire hours upon a
question of Law or Mathematics, and yet cannot fix our thoughts upon that
Infinite Being, in whom there are far more infinite Perfections; an Object that
can never be exhausted, where every thought would open a new Scene of thoughts,
yet more delightful; by which, Angels have been for many thousands of years
detained in constant raptures, contemplating those admirable Mysteries, which
the Scripture tells us, the Angels desire to pry into, finding by a constant
enquiry, new matter of holy Learning, and blessed Curiosity; and are said by
God himself to have learned this from those happy Christians to whom those
mysteries were first revealed, Ephesians. 3. 8. Learn then, O Christian, to manage
thy Spirit, try first by what means thou usest to fix it on other occasions,
and improving these from the obvious advantages that pious fixation will yield
above all others; beg humbly, by Prayer, a new supply to thy native Forces,
acknowledge to God that thou have taught thy own thoughts this seditiousness
and tumultuariness of which thou complain'st, and hope, that as by frequent
yieldings thou feddest that Vice into a habit, so that by frequent and resolute
oppositions thou may destroy that obstinate and dangerous habit, and
introduce a contrary one, which will make thy fix'dness easy and pleasant.
Frequent reasonings do also not only make us argue more strongly and easily,
but do warm us into a conviction first, and then into a love for that for which
we contend: And thus Lawyers are oft-times convinced, even in the ill Causes
they plead; and Heretics fix themselves in their Errors, by frequent contests
for them. Why then should we not argue more frequently both against our selves,
and with others, upon these excellent Truths, by which also we should be
engaged in honor to walk sutably to these truths, of which we profess to
others that we are convinced? And who could be so absurd, as after he has been
debating against another for his Drinking, yet would invite him to a Debauch?
But, alas, every Man loves to debate in his own Calling, except the Christian:
And it is become as much a shame to talk of Devotion as it ought to be our
Glory and Delight; and men seem afraid to debate, lest by being too much
convinced of what they ought to do, they should be too much terrified for what
they have done; and so these Convictions beget an uneasiness to them, when to
gratify their humor; they are tempted to renew their sins.

Hypocrisy affords us a clear proof of this partiality, as well as of Man's
contradicting himself; for to confess there is a God who is Omniscient, who
knows the secrets of hearts, and before whom there is nothing hid in Heaven or
Earth, and yet to think that we can conceal our thoughts from his all-seeing
Eye, implies a flat Contradiction; as it also does to care for nothing but what
may cause an esteem in our selves, for our selves. We really value other men's
approbation, because it confirms us in our own: nor would the vainest man alive
value all the flatteries imaginable, if he thought he could not deserve them.
Yet in Hypocrisy we must know, that we deserve not the applause to which we
pretend, and it is worthy of our thoughts to enquire impartially, how men can
reconcile these in themselves; for the most debauched Reason will not adventure
upon any Contradiction without some seeming reconciliation. And though at the
first it may seem that want of consideration is the cause of this, yet this
cannot be; for if we know not that we are masquing, it is no Hypocrisy; and on
the contrary, Hypocrisy requires great reflection, because it needs much
precaution. The Reason then of the first must be, That as to God we trust our
Repentance, and to his Mercy; as if forsooth, we did him little wrong, by
making his Creature appear more excellent than it is, and as if it might
prejudge his Service to let others see, that we are many times more wicked than
they, or that we did God good Service in encouraging others to be Pious by our
good Example, and that we by Hypocrisy do only raise an esteem, or come to an
employment by which we may be truly serviceable to God in our other actions.
But I really think, that the Heart of Man is so narrow, that it can hold only
one Scheme of thoughts at once, and therefore this little Soul being filled
with a desire of applause, and with the shame of being silly and undeserving,
it reflects indeed, but all its reflections look that way. The man is full of
this, and intent upon it, and so he sees not the Contradiction, how palpable
soever it be; but yet it is so notorious and discernable, that I may justly
conclude his Reason weak, if not blind, who does not discern it. The Cure then
of this subtle Cheat must be by pursuing this Imposture into its secret
recess, by seeing this Player before he put on his fine Clothes and Disguises,
by turning all our thoughts to God, and from our selves, adverting seriously
and impartially to every little circumstance in the design that is to be
considered.

I have oft-times admired the prevalency of Custom above Reason; and though
Brutes, who want Reason, or Children, in whom it is yet scarce ripened, be led
by it; yet what a strange thing is it, that in men who have Reason in maturity,
Custom becomes not only a second Nature, but overcomes Nature, and is a second
Nature, because it almost extirpates Reason, which was our first Nature. For
though the older we grow, our Reason should grow the stronger, yet it falls still
weaker, and melts so before Custom, that even the virtuous and dutiful Actions
we do, seem rather the effects of Custom than of Reason. For if they proceeded
from Reason, the same Reason which prompted us to do them, would oblige us to
act virtuously on all other occasions. And we see that we alter our Virtues as
the Fashions and Customs of our Country change. But to conclude this
expostulation, I cannot but wonder that a man should be called reasonable,
after he has trusted the making Laws and Moulds for living happily and
dutifully to the Multitude or Crowd, the worst of all Judges; and which we our
selves contemn as an ignorant, giddy, and capricious Rabble.

Of which influence of Custom over Reason, many different Causes occur to me;
for sometimes I think that Customs establish and fix themselves in us whilst we
are yet young, that Reason can neither defend it self nor us, especially as to
unusual Pleasures, which are the proper and natural objects of our first years:
and like Weeds that have overgrown the ground, though never so fertile, they
hinder the better Plants from growing up. To prevent which, it is necessary
that we teach young ones to reason very early, and accustom them to a Christian
Logic, that is better than what they can learn in the Schools. Thus we may
make Custom it self useful rather than hurtful to Reason, and teach it to
serve, whereas now it governs. And I know one who cured his habitual Swearing
by arguing with himself, That since even the King's Enemies were able to
restrain themselves from speaking Treason, by reflecting on its dangerous
consequences, it was strange, that he who was convinced that Swearing did draw
on more dangerous consequences, could not abstain from a custom that was
altogether hateful, without the least allay of pleasure or advantage, to which
the others might pretend.

Sometimes I think, that Custom having the force of the Multitude which
supports it, they all concur to pull back a well resolved Man from his virtuous
resolutions; and Custom prevails rather by numbers than by strength: And to
prevent this, it is necessary for a man who resolves to Reason justly, to
withdraw for some time from the Crowd: Prove. 18. 1. A man, says Solomon, having
separated himself, meddleth with all Wisdom; and Seneca tells us, That
sanabimur modo a caetu separemur. Jesus Christ also who has triumphed over the
World, is by strong Intercessions, to be called in against this potent Enemy,
who has shown us, that he can throw out and dispossess that Devil whose name is
Legion: but the Multitude is never so corrupt, but that still some are to be
found who can assist us in reasoning justly upon things; and we should also
remember, that we value so little the Multitude, that we stand not in awe of
what they say of us, when we are gaining Money, or satisfying our Pleasures:
why then should we still spend all we have, and deny our selves all Pleasure in
following Custom, or courting Fame; since Custom and Fame are but the Dictates
of the Multitude, an Homage which unthinking men are forced to pay the Rabble,
because they dare not seriously reflect on what they do? Or which designing men
pay them in hopes to make them first Tools to their Ambition, and thereafter
Slaves to their Tyranny.

But at other times the strength of Custom flows from our laziness, who love
the way that is chalked out to us, and think it safe to follow, rather than
lead the crowd; cheated to this by a cowardly Humility, which proves our never
having considered the Nobleness of our own Origin: which is to be cured by a
generous resolution of despising difficulties; and of being Slaves, as all
persons are, who love better to obey, than to examine the Dictates of others;
and we are most unreasonable, when we have so strong desires to lead the
Multitude to our ruin, as in seditious Tumults and Factions; and yet will be
content to be tamely led by them in what is much nobler and of greater
consequence. How much more do we praise those great Legislators, who governed
the Multitude by their Virtues, than those Sycophants who adored them by
submissions? There is Light in Virtue and Religion, and there is none dares
resist it; it is able to astonish as well as convince: nor are men so wicked as
not to desire to be assisted by some happy Genius, in what they are convinced
is best. And every man almost stands only in awe of another, expecting and
wishing some Moses to undertake their delivery.

Generally Self-love seems to lead into these Sentiments, as thinking the
Multitude will cry up their own inclinations, and is unwilling to check that
Multitude from which it expects applause; and whose many Suffrages it needs to
maintain it, against that inward sense it has of its own weakness and
silliness: and this is to be cured by a noble reflection upon the dignity of
our first Creation; and a desire to be again like to that God whose Image at
first we were, and whose Sons we may yet be, if we can raise our hopes above
those lower Spheres of sensual Joys and Pleasures which poison us when they
seem sweet, and cheat us when they appear great.

One of the dreadful effects of our following the Example of others, is, that
we think it is sufficient to be as reasonable as they: And thus we foolish and
unreasonable Mortals, stint and bound one another goodness; now this we shall
easily perceive to be most unreasonable, when we consider that no Man will
satisfy himself in being as powerful or rich as his Neighbors; though these be
much less desirable for a Soul and Spirit, which is the Image of an Infinite
God, and is, after all its best endeavors here, very far from attaining to
that degree of perfection which is even requisite to the life of a Christian.
Devotion is a Race, and who is it that when he runs with many Rivals, will
content himself to be in the throng, especially if the Prize be considerable:
And therefore the Apostle exhorts us to forget those things which are behind,
and to reach forth to those things that are before, pressing toward the mark,
for the prize of the high calling in Christ Jesus, Phil. 3. 14. We are not only
obliged to press on to obtain the Crown, but being pursued by our spiritual
Enemies, we are concerned to use all the speed that is possible. And would not
we conclude him mad, who if he were pursued for his life, would not desire to
be past all danger, but content himself that he were not the last amongst those
who endeavored to escape?

It is strange, that notwithstanding that Custom does so lead us when we go not
where we ought to go, but where others have gone before us, yet we ofttimes err
to a contrary extreme, and by a contrary reason, which is as false and more
dangerous than the other, reasoning weakly and falsely from a design and desire
to be singular, and consequently to be admired; thus even whilst in this we
oppose the multitude, we design to please them too; for no Man admires what
does not delight him; and probably, these same contradictors would have chosen
rather to have gone to Fame in the beaten path, by a direct pleasing and
following of them; but finding a Crowd before them in it, which they could not
pass by, they, by a long and a dangerous circuit, run before, and endeavor to
keep the Pass on their Rivals, and hinder them from coming up at Fame; and though
they want the multitude at present, yet they hope to make them follow, else
they would not differ from them; for few would care to continue alone till the
last, though they love to be singular at first; yet this humor is a very great
Enemy to true reasoning, for it introduces a habit of arguing falsely; and it is
difficult in this dark estate to recover our road; if we once quit our light,
one error emboldens us to commit another, and it is the punishment of it, when
committed; even those who care not to oppose Truth, love to be consequential in
their opposition; for to do otherwise, were to be guilty of a double and more
palpable vice in reasoning.

Another great hinderance to right Reasoning, is Sensuality: For though I am
far from being of their opinion, who think the Soul nothing but the Animal
Spirits; since we cannot conceive how matters can think so delicately and
subtily, yet there is no doubt but the tempers of the Body has great influence
on the Mind; and that Sobriety does purify the Blood, and make these animal
Spirits fitter Organs for the Soul; as on the other hand, Drunkenness drowns
it, Gluttony stupifies it, and even after that time has dissipated those loads
which oppress the Soul, there remains a stock of dregs which are easily
inflamed into Lust, Rage, and other brutal Passions, which in a more lasting
manner inslave it. Therefore Pagans have recommended Sobriety as a Diet for the
Soul as well as the Body, and the Scripture Fasting, as a Religious Duty; and
since there is none of us so Brutal, but if we were about to Preach, Plead, or
assist in a public Judicature, we would be careful to avoid all these
Excesses, lest thereby our Reason might be disturbed or clouded; we ought much
more to shun them, with an Eye to the service of an Infinite God, and the
preservation of our immortal Souls, minding in this the observation of the
Prophet, Wine, and new wine take away the heart; and the advice of our Savior,
See that you be not overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness.

There remain yet two vigorous Enemies to our Reason to be subdued, Bigotry and
Raillery; which though they be contrary to one another; Bigotry treating things
that are ridiculous as Sacred, and Raillery treating things Sacred as
ridiculous, yet they both conspire against our Reason, and are the favorite
extravagancies of the times, which obliges me to insist the more upon them.

I define Bigotry to be a laying too much stress upon any circumstantial point
of Religion or Worship, and the making all other essential Duties subservient
thereto, and got its name from an occasion extravagant like it self. Rolland
first Duke of Normandy, being obliged to do homage to Charles King of France,
Du Lange verb. Bigot.
for that Duchy, refused to kiss his Foot, except the King would raise it
himself to his mouth; and when it was told him that the Solemnity consisted in
his taking up the King's Foot and kissing it, he answered, Ne se bigot, that is
to say in old Norman, Not so by God; Whereupon the King and Court derided him,
and the Normans were from that occasion called Bigots, as they who adhered
pertinaciously to Ridiculous Extravagancies. These latter Ages having, in this
dotage of the World, produced multitudes, who mistaking Reformation for Humor,
and seeing some Devout Men admired for separating from Idolatrous and
Superstitious Churches, because they would not reform great and fundamental
Errors, imagined that every thing was to be stuck at with the same zeal which
these showed in matters of greatest consequence, and by a farther effect of the
same zeal, they proceeded to force others to concur with them in their
extravagancies, which surprising distraction forced Men to bestow on them the
name of Bigots; Superstition could not so well agree to them, that being only
an excessive Worship paid to a Deity, true or false, from an ill-grounded fear
of mischief from it: nor could dogmatising serve, that being only a
positiveness in any Opinion, joined to the vanity of thinking, that the
Dogmatizer had right to dictate to others; nor Opiniarity, because that
consists only in adhering too stiffly to any Opinion in spite of the best
Reasons; nor Schism, because it is an unnecessary separation; nor Heresy, for
though it is an obstinate Error in some important point, yet it is always in
matters of Faith; whereas Bigotry rests only in matters of small importance;
but tho Bigotry properly relates to matters Ecclesiastical in our late
acceptance, yet it is by an easy stretch used to express opiniatrities of all
kinds; and if we consider its original, we must conclude, that it has been
drawn to matters Ecclesiastic, and is appropriated now to them, because they
are the most remarkable and frequent instances or effects of this mischievous
Principle. For we may justly say, that Bigotry is the Hypochondriacism of
Reason, the Bedlam of Religion, and the Ape of Infallibility.

Instances of this Bigotry, as they are very frequent, so they are very
ancient. The Apostles themselves were forced very early to inveigh against Zeal
that was not according to Knowledge; and the chief of their Scholars, who had
been so happy as to hear them preach, did yet rend the Church by a dreadful
Schism, which soon after grew to that height, that the Western Church
excommunicated the Eastern, for differing from them in the observation of
Easter.

The best way to deter Men from spending their time and zeal in the service of
Bigotry, either as its Chaplains, or as its Emissaries or Executioners, will be
to consider the great defects, under which it labors, and the sad effects
which it produces.

The first pernicious effect of Bigotry, is, that it obtrudes on us things of
no moment as matters of the greatest importance. Now, as it would be a great
defect in a Man's sense to take a Star for the Sun; or in an Orator to insist
tenaciously on a point which deserved no consideration; so it must be a much
greater error in a Christian to prefer, or even to equal a mere circumstance
to the solid points of Religion.

But these mistakes become more dangerous, by inducing their Votaries to
believe, that because they are Orthodox in these matters, they are the only
People of God, and all who join not are Aliens to the Commonwealth of Israel:
And from this springs first, that they, as Friends of God, may be familiar with
him, and, as Friends do one to another, may speak to him without distance or
premeditation; thence it is that we hear dreadful nonsense insolently vented in
extemporary Prayers, such as would induce one to think that they do not believe
him to be a God to whom they show so little respect; for who can think that
Infinite Wisdom can consider them as Friends, who dare address to him so
unsuitably? Bigotry having thus corrupted our reasoning in matters of Religion,
it easily depraves it in the whole course of our Morals and Politics.

The Bigots in the Second place proceed to fancy, that they who differ from
them are Enemies to God, because they differ from God's People; and then the
Old Testament is consulted for expressions denouncing Vengeance against them:
All Murders become Sacrifices by the Example of Phineas and Ehud; all Rapines
are hallowed by the Israelites borrowing the Earrings of the Egyptians; and
Rebellions have an hundred forced Texts of Scripture brought to patronise them.
But I oftentimes wonder where they find Precedents in the Old Testament for
Murdering and Robbing Men's Reputations, or for lying so impudently for what
they think the good Old Cause; which God foreseeing, has commanded us not to
lie, even for his sake.

The Third link of this Chain, is, That they fancying themselves to be the only
Israel, conclude that God sees no sin in them, all is allowable to them; and
(as one of themselves said) They will be as good to God another way.

The Fourth is, That such as differ from them are Bastards, and not the true
Sons of God, and therefore they ought to have no share of this Earth, or its
Government; hence flow these holy and useful Maxims, Dominion is founded in
Grace, and the Saints have the only right to govern the Earth; which being once
upon an occasion earnestly pressed in Cromwell's little Parliament, it was
answered by the President of his Council, That the Saints deserved all things,
but that Public Employment was such a drudgery that it would be unjust to
condemn the Saints to it, and that the securest way to make the Commonwealth
happy, was to leave them in a pious retirement, interceding for the Nation at
the Throne of Grace.

The Fifth Error in their reasoning, is, That seeing their opinions flow
immediately from Heaven, no earthly Government can condemn any thing they do,
in prosecution of these their Opinions; thence it is that they raise Seditions
and Rebellions without any scruple of Conscience, and believing themselves the
Darlings and Friends of God, they think themselves above Kings, who are only
their Servants and Executioners.

It may seem strange, that such Principles as Bigotry suggests should be able
to produce so strange effects, and many fanciful persons pretend it to be from
God, because it prevails so. But this wonder will be much lessened if we
consider first, That the greatest part of Mankind are weak or dishonest, and
both these support Bigotry with all their might. Many virtuous Men also promote
its Interest from a mistaken good nature, and vain Men from a design of gaining
Popularity. These who are disobliged by the Government join their Forces with
it, to make to themselves a Party; and those who are naturally unquiet or
factious, find in it a pleasant divertisement; whereas on the other side, few
are so concerned for Moderation and Truth as the Bigots are for their beloved
Conceits.

There is also a tinsel Devotion in it which dazles the Eyes of unthinking
People; and this arises either from the new Zeal, that like Youth, is still
vigorous, and has not as yet spent it self so as that it needs to languish; or
else, from the Bigot's being conscious that his Opinions need to be disguised
under this hypocritical Mask.

Severity also increases the number and Zeal of Bigots. Humane Nature inclines
us wisely to that pity which we may one day need; and few pardon the Severity
of a Magistrate, because they know not where it may stop. I have known also
some very serious Men, who have concluded, that since Magistrates have not
oftentimes in other things a great concern for Devotion, their forwardness
against these Errors must arise either from the cruelty of their temper, or
from some hid design of carrying on a particular Interest, very different from,
and oft-times inconsistent with the Religious Zeal they pretend. And generally,
the Vulgar believe that all Superiors are inclined to triumph over those who
are subjected to them; many have also a secret persuasion that the Magistrates
are still in League with the National Church, and its Hierarchy, which they
suspect to be supported by them, because it maintains their Interest, and they
are apt to consider Churchmen but as Pensioners, and so as Partisans to the
Civil Magistrate.

Many are drawn into the esteem of such Opinions as they see Men suffer
difficulties for But this mistake was foreseen by the Primitive Church, who
therefore declared that non Paena, sed Causa facit Martyrem. Christian Prudence
does not allow a Man to sell his precious Life for an incompetent Price;
Forwardness that way does not always recommend an Opinion: Men of all
Persuasions have died with firmness; Pagans, yea, Women for their Country or
Husbands have showed a courage beyond any of these Bigots or Enthusiasts. The
History of China relates a notable Instance of fantastical Bigotry; an Hundred
Thousand Chinese, who had born tamely their Nation's being enslaved by the
Tartars, without making any Effort to recover their Liberty, chose rather to
dye than conform to the Tartars, in turning up their Mustaches after their
Mode; Vanity well disguised can flatter Men with the Glory of Martyrdom; and
its observable that this Firmness faints often where Executions are Private;
however, this should prevail with a Wise Magistrate, never to make Religious
Opinions Criminal.

The true Cures then of this Disease seem to be, First, to endeavor to plant
Reason early and carefully in the Hearts of Young ones, or to recover it in
those of more advanced Years; for this is a more solid and effectual way, than
the immediate opposing, or offering to cure this Imperfection it self, will
prove; Men love their old and familiar Acquaintance; Traveling abroad conduces
much to this Cure; for such as converse only with those of their own
Persuasion, are daily warmed into new degrees of Zeal; whereas, when we see
that Men of true sense differ from us, we will be inclined from a Christian
Modesty and Humility, first to doubt our own Opinions, and then to hear
Instructions: The Orthodox Clergy should by their Pious Lives conduce to this
Cure; and even Laics should, by their serious and Devout Conversation,
convince them that Sincerity and Piety are not inseparable from such humorous
Conceits. These poor deluded People should consider what Mischiefs and
Desolations those Vulcanos of Zeal have brought upon this Island by their
dreadful Eruptions; there being but very few Families, in which some of their
Children have not been sacrificed to this Moloch: Nor can our Navies or Armies
secure us while this Enemy lodges within us, and is cherished by us. They
should also consider, that Religious Reason left to it self will at last
overcome those prejudices, which, like Meteors, may shine for a time, but will
at last vanish into the common and undistinguished Air. But the best of all
Remedies, is, to consider seriously the Doctrine and Practice of our Blessed
Savior (to form our Reason by which is the great design of this Essay) and
therefore they should remember, that our Savior foreseeing the
inconsequentialness of their Actions, did observe, that they did start at
Straws, and swallow Camels; that they tithed the Mint and Annise, but forgot
the great things of the Law. Our Savior's reasoning in the Parable of the
Publican and Pharisee, should humble all spiritual Pride; and his humble and
submissive Form of Prayer should bridle the indiscretion of all rude
Addressers; He suffered the Sons of Zebedee to call for Fire from Heaven, that
he might thereby instruct the World how unsuitable their Zeal was to his
Gospel; he reasoned against fighting Peter, that if his Kingdom were of this
Earth, his Servants would fight for him; and if he needed any Assistance, he
might call for Legions of Angels: Nor can I think, after this Instance, our
Savior would have trusted Peter, in his absence, with two Swords, since he was
so forward in his own presence, when he had but one: But if others will be so
blind as not to follow our Savior's way of reasoning, let us at least follow
it, in praying for them, because they know not what they are doing; yet I wish
both they and we would consider, that we resemble too much at this time the
unhappy Jews, who, by fighting amongst themsleves, for small matters, relating
to their Religious Rites, occasioned their being totally destroyed, and
extirpated by the Romans who besieged them.

I know no greater enemy to just thoughts or Reasoning than Raillery and
Satyrs, and the new way of reasoning by ridiculous Similies. Most Men are so
famous for this kind of arguing, and do by it confute and baffle so much all
who oppose it, that it passes for the stronger way of Reasoning, Victory being
still accounted the Effect as well as the Reward of strength: But yet this way
looks so silly to Men when they retire and are alone, that they begin to
wonder what it was that pleased them so before they left the conversation. And
therefore I think it worth my pains to search a little into the causes of this
vulgar error, why Men are so much pleased with raillery, and why it prevails
so in the World at this day?

The first cause of this, in my opinion, is, that Men naturally love Truth, as
the Eyes do Light, or Bruits Food; for Truth is indeed the Light and Food of
the Soul; yet missing it, after much enquiry, and a passionate search, they do
either conclude there is none, and so laugh at all others who seek it, or in
revenge, contemn it as a Cheat; and this breeds at first Raillery and Satyrs;
even as we see, that when Gallants are rebuked by a severe Mistress, they
please or revenge themselves in railing at her, or treating her in ridicule. As
Statesmen and Courtiers seldom fail, when thrown off, to use the Court and
Employments from which they are fallen, after the same manner. And since too
few seek after Truth it self, naked and unrewarded; others again weary of the
toils and severity required in true reasoning; rest on this, as the easiest;
even as Men content themselves with gilded Plate, when they cannot attain to
true Gold; and Raillery has become by this as ordinary as the false Jewels,
with which so many now please themselves, instead, of true ones; and at a
distance, and on the public Theater, even of business, the one appears brisker
than the other.

Raillery pleases also men's Self-love better than Truth; for Truth is too
severe to flatter our Vanity, and too honest to serve our Revenge; whereas
Raillery does tempt the Jester to flatter himself, and is an ordinary occasion
for others to flatter him as a formidable Wit: Nor can the World find so fit a
Tool for Revenge as Raillery; since few durst even for fear of checks of
Conscience stab their Neighbor, or for Honor wound him when his back is
turned, if it were not in a pleasant jest, which makes Malice pass for Wit, and
cheats the Satyrists into a belief that they design not to wrong him, but to
please the company: The Hearers also would hate such Enemies to Mankind, if
they were not so ravished with the way, that they had not time to think on the
Malice. This misfortune also attends it, that it tempts men to do or say many
things on which they would not otherwise adventure; presuming that their Wit,
which is so much admired, will also fright or bribe others from accusing or
punishing them.

Truth is a sober and equal Pleasure, free from all transports and hateing
them, and so seems dull and flat to young and warm Spirits; whereas that
passion which accompanies Raillery, either in Joy or Revenge, is more vigorous
and elevated; and it is indeed a wonder to think what force and energy there is
in the Soul, when the Sails of its Imagination are filled with the prosperous
gale of Applause, and by what secret springs the Fancy is able to raise it to
such heights when it is warmly pleased; or what infinite numbers of ravishing
Images appear to a strong Fancy: And how it creates so many pleasant notions
out of other Men's Infirmities: And what great variety and newness it constantly
produces, forming always various Scenes of Joy, to the wonder even of sober
men: I deny not, but some do from good Nature, and to please the Conversation,
scoff and jest, and, as I said formerly, some seeing it so much admired, think
it is truly good, it being a kind of modesty, to believe that good which
pleases others; and some seeing Victory attend it, think it is the strongest
way of arguing; and, thus this Weed rises and spreads, and we sit with delight
under the refreshing shades; and with these raptures of Malice or Pleasure,
Scoffers are so much taken, that they have not the leisure to think on what
they ought to do, or even on what they are doing; and thus they forget
frequently the duty they owe to great men, to whom they have access, and can
hardly keep themselves within that moderation in Conversation, Eating,
Drinking, and other Exercises that are requisite for preserving Health and
Quiet, or for observing the Rules of Decency and Discretion: I conclude, That
Jesting and Satyrs are so far from being a relaxation of Spirit to those who
are wearied with serious Employments, as is pretended, that they are oft-times
rather a new and studied toil, and most of these extravagancies could scarce be
pardoned; like bitter and sour Fruits which can hardly be eaten, except when
confected with great care and expense. But if we look further into the matter,
we shall find that nothing wrongs more both Reason and Piety, and is more
destructive to true Friendship, or more inconsistent with Sincerity.

For clearing whereof we may observe, that every Faculty of the Soul
contributes in a peculiar way to our reasoning: the Judgment does bring solid
Arguments, the Memory Instances, Examples, and Citations, the Fancy or
Imagination beautifies rather than illuminates its Objects with Similies,
Metaphors, and other Rhetorical Figures; so that Raillery neglecting the other
two, sports it self lightly amidst those Flowers, without minding the great
business; and I have observed, that few who have been once bewitched with this
way, ever minded any other. This suffers them not to penetrate further than the
outside of things, and so it is impossible, that they who use it as their
constant divertisement, can have any deep thoughts, or can search into the
bottom of Affairs.

I have also observed, that Raillery arises oft-times from an undervaluing of
all persons and things, and nothing can be more contrary to Religion or
Government than this is. To Religion, because, when a Man contemns all that God
has created, he undervalues what the Almighty himself was pleased with, and
rejoiced in, and scorns those great Exemplars of Piety and Devotion, whom God
has called his Friends, and Men after his own heart; and so in effect he
concludes, that God (blessed be his holy Name) made not good choice, and knew
not how to value men a-right. And therefore I stand astonished to hear Ballads
against Moses and David so much admired by such as confess there is a God, that
the Scriptures are his Dictates, and they the Penmen of these Scriptures, and
so Secretaries to God: Nor do such Scoffers make good Statesmen; for none are
such, save they who from a Principle of Conviction and Persuasion, manage
public Affairs to the advantage of those who employ them: Whereas they who
believe that nothing is worth their pains, can never do any thing with
affection and vigor; and since they care not for the things themselves, and
scorn such as employ them, they must never care for what Events attend them.
Have we not seen some of these great Wits prove the worst of all Statesmen in
our own days? and as far below the meanness in management as they were above
the wisest in Wit and Sharpness. What Friends also these prove is sufficiently
understood to those whom they have lost for a Jest, after all the services they
could have done them: And it is very observable, that if Three or Four of them
be in a Room, they who remain after such Conversations will fall on him who is
gone with all the malice imaginable; and we very seldom see two such Wits true
Friends.

I shall end these Reflections with this Addition, that generally Satyrs are
made up of Impiety, Malice or Baudery; the First, unworthy of a Christian; the
Second, of a Gentleman; and the last, of a sober Man; and in which Railers have
Atheists for their Masters, satirical Wasps for their Comrades, and oft-times
Fools and mad Men for their Superiors. Unhappy Men who do things that they
must be ashamed of, and whereof the pleasure is lessened in the present time by
checks of Conscience, and grows bitter afterward by fear of Torments; a
quality our Savior never countenanced, which his Favorites have ever
zealously decry'd, in which Buffoons and Players have exceeded the greatest
Kings, the most Renowned Hero's, and the Wisest men; a cowardly extravagancy
which ever attacks the Weak, and a merciless humor which triumphs over the
Unfortunate; upon which accounts all men make it their Interest to expose the
Scoffer, as finding in his Ruin their own Self-defence; and because they know
he cannot be pleased except they be miserable, therefore they conclude, that
they cannot be secured till he be humbled.

I design not by this to lessen the esteem due to true Wit, and that
pleasantness in conversation which arises from it as Flowers do from the Root.
The Almighty certainly designed to make all men happy, and there is no
happiness without pleasure; and as he rejoiced, when he saw that all that he
had made was good, so he was desirous that Man might find out this good, both
for making himself thereby happy, and for inviting him the more to magnify the
Creator, and therefore to sweeten the miseries which naturally imbitter humane
Life: God has illuminated some with a pleasantness of humor, which rejoices
the Society into which they come, as the Sun illuminates the Room into which it
enters; these are they who having peace of Conscience at home, are thereby
allowed to be glad; and who having Wit, employ it in turning the right side of
things to them, understanding as well to find out what is pleasant in any
Object as Artists do to find a Mine of Gold in a barren Mountain. This is the
true use of Wit; and if at any time they use it to treat Vice or Extravagancy
in ridicule, it is not from Malice to the Person, but from desire to reform
him, and Mankind by him. There is a justice in Scourging, Defaming, and
Banishing Vice; and this Jurisdiction is given by Heaven immediately to such as
have sense; of whom, upon that account, the greatest Rulers stand in awe; and
so much reverence is due to them, that the rest of Mankind bestow applause
according to their inclinations: Bitterness then, and sullen Moroseness in Wit
is the tyranny of this Jurisdiction: If it be insolent, it is but the wrong
side of this delicate Picture, a flashing Light, which at first dazles, but
thereafter blinds; a delicious Fruit corrupted into bitterness, and a beautiful
Face wrinkled by fretting humors.

The Ancients termed Wit a Salt; and that is not fit for Food, but for
Seasoning; it may be used plentifully in Conversation, moderately in Business,
but never in Religion.

They who enter into a Faction do not properly reason weakly: but desert Reason
altogether, as one does who leaves his own to go into another Country, whereof
the Laws Customs and Language are different. The design and center of Faction
is to drive on such a Project, and adhere to those who prosecute it. And
therefore nothing must be allowed or argued but with respect to these. Hence it
is that in vain you reason with them; for one may transubstantiate as soon as
convert them, all that their Friends say is unanswerable, and they contemn and
scorn what is said by their Adversaries when they cannot answer it; there is no
crime they dare not commit, for the Guilt seems but small when divided amongst
so many bearers, they warm themselves by clubbing into a kind of belief, and
they vote themselves into a shadow of Infallibility; whilst they cry out
against others as Slaves to the Government, they become really Slaves to the
Faction, their Liveries and Chains being seen by all, except themselves; but
the great Salary with which their Bondage is to be rewarded, is Applause from
their Friends, or it may be the Mob, to whom naturally their Appeal lies, and
the getting into the Government, where they will be abhorred for practicing
every thing they formerly decry'd, and so have that reputation for which they
toiled, blasted by their own old Arguments; this extravagancy is in it self so
unacceptable to all devout and reasonable men, that it is forced to use Railery
to baffle Religion by Bigotry, and Reason by Railery; and I believe that
Faction was the first introducer of the one into the Church, and of the other
into the State.

My chiefest wish then shall be, that God who has ennobled me with right
Reason, may make me happy in the right use of it; that I may neither sell it
for Money, nor barter it for Fame; and that it may never be dazzled by the
shining brightness of Favor, nor clouded by the black shadows of Fear; and
though the portion bestowed upon me be very small, that yet I may employ that one
precious Talent so, as that I may have from my Glorious Master that only
desirable Character, Well done, good and faithful servant, thou have been
faithful in a few things, enter thou into the joy of thy Lord, Matthew. 25. 23.

FINIS.

