THE Present Danger OF TANGIER: OR, An Account of its being Attempted By a
great Army of the Moors by Land, And under some Apprehensions of The FRENCH at
Sea.
In a LETTER from Cadiz, Dated the 29th of July (old style) 1679. To a Friend
in England.
WE are not a little afflicted to understand by the last News from England, of
the Distractions you labor under, by the disturbances occasioned by Popish
Traitors, and the Insurrection in Scotland, which we trust by this time may be
subdued and allayed, from those good Encouragements your Letter gave us to hope
so. But in return, I have nothing to send you, but the like Tidings of more
Disasters, and that is, of the great danger the Town and Garrison of Tangier
seems to be in at this time; being, it is credibly reported here, under a
Blockade, and in some Distress, for there are many thousand Moors lie against
it, some say Fifteen Thousand, others more; for indeed, they can bring down
what Multitudes they list, at an hours warning upon them; but hitherto there
have not passed many acts of Hostility between them; for they are now upon a
Treaty of Sixty days; which is said to be politickly proposed and held on foot
by the Town, in hopes that they may in that time receive some Supplies of
Provision, Ammunition, etc* from England; for they complain lamentably, That
they are very ill furnished in case of a Siege. During this Treaty, they
converse freely with the Moors, and some adventure to go amongst them, and
return without damage; but the Sixty days are now near expiring, and we do not
hear of any good Accommodation that is like to be concluded, nor any
extraordinary Succors come to the Garrison; but on the contrary, since we came
here, the Moors have been assisted from some English, (as it is confidently
related) with 1500 Barrels of Powder, Landed at Tangier, and so from thence,
clandestinely, and by Roguery, sold at very dear rates, and conveyed to them.
Thus it is too often the Custom of our Nation, to give away their Swords to
their Enemies, and then fight with their Teeth, and furnish our Foes with means
to Cut our Throats. What a cursed thing is this private Self-Interest! how many
brave Kingdoms has it destroyed! Whilst every one is much for himself, the
Devil fools us all. There are Men in the World, that would sell their King,
their Country, their Religion, their Souls and all, to Pope or Turk, or any
other Chapman, for ready Money. Let the Ship I sail in perish, provided out of
the Wrack I may get a Pleasure-Boat for my self. So a Villain gets an Estate,
what cares he how many poor Souls suffer by his Fraud, Treachery, or
Oppression? I cannot think of these base Dregs of Mankind, that are Betrayers
of their Countries Safety, Honor, Wealth, and Reputation, without just
Resentment, and some Emotion of Spirit. We all here are upon this news, in a
great deal of Pain and Trouble, concerning Tangiers Circumstances; for you know
of what considerable Importance it is to our Streights-Trade; and should it be
lost, our Merchants might in effect, take their leave of the Mediterranean,
especially if it should fall into some peoples Hands.

The French have now 40 sail of Galleys lying at Gibraltar, on what design we
cannot learn; which causes some apprehensions as if there might be some
Correspondence held by them with the Moors, to the prejudice of the place
beforementioned: But this is only a Suspicion amongst them who think it
prudence to provide for the worst. We hope they may be sufficiently relieved in
time, to put them in a condition able to dispel all these Fears.

Yours to Command, E. M.

From on board the Hopewel, Abraham Roavens Master. Directed to Will. Ellis, at
the three Pigeons in Creedlane; who received the same on Wednesday the 13th of
Aug. 1679.

FINIS.

