A Brief Examination OF SOME PASSAGES IN THE Chronological Part of a Letter,
WRITTEN TO Dr. SHERLOCK IN HIS VINDICATION.

In a Letter to a Friend.

London, Printed and Sold by Randal Tailor near Stationers' Hall.

A Brief Examination, etc.
SIR,
AS to the Letter which I mentioned in my last, I shall only reflect upon some
Passages in the Chronological part of it; the Examination of the whole I leave
to the Ingenious person, that is more especially concerned.

The Gentleman, that writ the Letter, manifests in one passage of it, that his
Chronology does according to his own Judgment depend much upon this, that the
Sanballat in Josephus is not the same with the Sanballat in Nehemiah. For page
19 speaking of the Convocation, (he says,) that by making his Sanballat (i.e.
Iosephus's) the same with Nehemiahs, it appears, that they follow Scaliger and
Calvisius in their Chronology: So that whosoever makes him to be the same
Sanballat that is mention^d in both, he, in this Gentleman's judgment, follows
Scaliger and Calvisius in their Chronology. Of which he gives this account,
page 18. They begin Daniel's 70 weeks in Darius Nothus his time, and make
Nehemiah's Artaxerxes to be Mnemon, instead of Longimanus, as the Darius
mentioned by him, they make not to be Nothus, but Cod^mannus, and the Priest,
that Nehemiah deprived, to be Manasses, the same that we read of in Josephus.
All this (says he) Scaliger and Calvisius are for, and he would persuade us,
that the Convocation are also for it, but he himself is against it.

As to the Convocation, I believe they do not say that Iosephus's Sanballat is
the same with Nehemiah's; but telling us out of Josephus, that Jaddus and
Manasses fell at variance, that Manasses married Sanballat's Daughter, and was
removed from the Priesthood, they set in the Margin, Neh. 13. 28. from whence
this Gentleman concludes, that they make his Sanballat the same with
Nehemiah's; and by their so doing (says he) it appears that they follow
Scalig^r and Calvisius in their Chronology. But against the necessity of this
consequence, I argue thus; If every one that makes Iosephus's Sanballat the
same with Nehemiah's, must follow Scaliger and Calvisius in their Chronology,
and so make Nehemiah's Artaxerxes to be Mnemon, not Longimanus; how comes it,
that so many excellently Learned Men, Bishop Montague, Functius, etc. do make
the same Sanballat to be spoken of in both, and yet hold, that Nehemiah^s
Artaxerxes was Longimanus? If they did not follow Scaliger and Calvisius
(notwithstanding that they held the aforesaid opinion, touching Sanballat) then
this Gentleman concluded too hastily, that the Convocation did follow them.
Besides, the only reason which this Gentleman gives, page 11. why, if we hold
Nehemiah and Josephus to speak of the same Sanballat, it is necessary to make
Nehemiah's Artaxerxes to be Mnemon, not Longimanus, is because the Sanballat,
that was the Adversary of the Jews in the 29th year of Longimanus, must have
been much above 120 years old in Alexander's time. But Bishop Montague answers
readily to this, by giving instances of several persons, that have lived to
much above 120 years.

Further, why should not this Gentleman have thought that the Convocation
followed Sulpitius Severus, rather than Scaliger and Calvisius? For it is
known, that Sulpitius, etc. begun Daniel's weeks in Darius Nothus his time,
(long before Scaliger did;) as also he referred Nehemiah's building the Walls
and Gates of the City, to the Reign of Artaxerxes Mnemon; and I believe that
the Reverend Clergy of the Convocation, studied such ancient Writers as
Sulpitius, more than they did Scaliger, or other Neotericks^ As to Calvisius,
they might not have seen his Chronology, yea, I question, whether it was
extant, when the Convocation-Book was finish^d, and then there is no reason why
they should be said to follow Calvisius. I have enlarged on this the more,
because I conceive that this Gentleman has made too bold with the Convocation
in this passage, (as both he and others have done in other things;) for by
making Iosephus's Sanballat the same with Nehemiah's, it does not appear, that
they followed either Scaliger or Calvisius.

To return to that which we were saying at first, since this Gentleman's
Chronology in his judgment depends much upon this, that Josephus's Sanballat is
not the same with Nehemiahs, it will not be amiss to examine what this
Gentleman has to say, page 11. against his being the same. Iosephas (says he)
describes him by those Characters, by which we may be sure that he was not the
same Sanballat. If you ask what Characters they are, (he says) First, that this
was a Chuthaean, of that race from which the Samaritans came; and f^rther, that
he was sent to be Governor of Samaria by the last Darius; whereas this
Gentleman tells us of this other Sanballat, that he was a Moabite of Horonaim,
whom Nehemiah found in Palestine 100 years before in Artaxerxes his time. But
first, The Scripture does not plainly say of Nehemiahs Sanballat, either that
he was a Moabite, or of Horonaim; it only calls him the Horonite, whether from
Horonaim, or from some other place, is uncertain. But to pass this, secondly,
He might be a Chuthaean originally, and yet his Habitation might have been for
the most part at Horonaim, and he thereupon called the Horonite. Thirdly,
Archbishop Usher, Grotius, and others think that he was Toparch, or
Deputy Governor of the Moabites; and it is in no wise improbable, that the
same person, who was constituted Governor of the Moabites by Artaxerxes,
should afterward be advanced to be Governor of Samaria by Darius. Fourthly,
As to that of 100 years, they who hold Nehemiah's Artaxerxes to be Longimanus,
must grant that Nehemiah found Sanballat in Palestine 100 years before the time
of the last Darius, (and they say that he lived to so great an age that that
might be,) but Sulpitius Severus, and those that follow him, must and do deny
it. Thus it appears, that we cannot be sure that he was not the same Sanballat,
either by the Characters by which Josephus describes him, or by any thing which
this Gentleman says.

As this Gentleman made bold with the Convocation, so he also makes bold with
the Jewish Chronologers, though I willingly grant that they deserve not that
regard which the Convocation does. He tells us, page 14. that they make the
whole time of the second Temple, till the sixth year of Alexander the Great (in
which sixth year they say he came up against Jerusalem) to be but 34 years, and
for this he cites Ganz, page 57, and 64. But indeed the Jewish Writers differ
among themselves about the time of the continuance of the Persian Empire, after
the finishing of the second Temple, yet Ganz expresses his Opinion very
plainly, viz that the time of the second Temple, to the first year of
Alexander, was 34 years, but till the sixth year of Alexander it was forty
years, and so we read in Iuchasin fol. 13. 2. that Alexander came to Jerusalem
forty years after the building of the Temple.

But this Gentleman makes more bold with the Jewish Writers, when he makes them
to say of Iaddus the High Priest, and all the Elders of Israel, that they made
a Covenant with Alexander, ( though Darius was then living,) for which he cites
Ganz, p. 59. But these are not Ganz his words; he only says that Alexander made
a Covenant with Jaddus, whom he calls Simeon the just: And I believe you will
be strangely surpised when I tell you from R. Abraham F. David his Cabala,
what that Covenant was: He covenanted (says he) with the High Priest, that
every Child that was born to any of the Priests that year, should be called
Alexander, after his name, and that they should begin their Era contractuum
from him.

Josephus, l. 11. c. 5, and 8. acquaints us, that both Nehemiah and Sanballat
lived to old age: and of Nehemiah, this Gentleman says, page 8. No doubt he
lived to a very great age, for he was Cupbearer to King Artaxerxes in the 20th
years of his Reign. We may suppose him to have been then about 25 years of age;
after that he lived to see the High Priesthood pass from Father to Son for four
Generations: And he saw a fifth coming in view, namely, Jaddua, whom we suppose
to have been then about 30 years old. All this might very well be, if Nehemiah
were born 470 years before Christ, and writ in the year 347 before Christ, then
he was about 104 years o^d. There are this Gentleman's own words out of which
we must pick his sense as well as we can; and when we have done our best, I
doubt we shall scarce understand, either how the things cohere, or how they
prove, that Nehemiah lived to a very great age.

1. I cannot see the coherence, particularly of that last passage, if Nehemiah
were born 470 years before Christ, and writ in the 347 th year before Christ,
then he was about 104 years old; for from the year 470 before Christ, to the
year 347 before him are 123 years; so that this Gentleman had expressed himself
more coherently, if he had said, Then he was about 124 years old. Some perhaps
will say, that 347 is the Printer's mistake for 374; for this Gentleman says,
page 1. that Nehemiah writ his Book Anno 374, before Christ. Well, we now then
suppose Nehemiah to have lived from the year 470 before Christ to the year 374;
but then he would not have been about 104 years old, but about 96; so that I
despair still of making things cohere. But then:

2. I cannot see how all together proves that Nehemiah lived to a very great
age; for 1. They are only Suppositions, which make up a great part of what is
said, and those can prove nothing. 2. There is nothing certain, but that after
Nehemiah came from Susa to Jerusalem, he lived to see the High Priesthood pass
from Father to Son for some Generations; but unless we were certain for how
many Generations, whether four or three, or only two; as also how many years
every Person enjoyed the High-Priest's Function, we cannot prove from thence,
to what age Nehemiah lived. 3. When this Gentleman says, that Nehemiah saw the
Priesthood pass from Father to Son for four Generations; his meaning is, that
it passed from Ioiakim to Eliashib from Eliashib to Ioiada, from Ioiada to
Johanan; and withal he begins his computation in the last year of Ioiakim, and
ends it in the first of Iohanan; so that the time of Eliashib's and Joiada's
enjoying the Priesthood, being added to the 25 years, which he is supposed to
have lived when he came from Susa to Jerusalem, is in effect all the time we
have to make up Nehemiah's age, according to this Gentleman.

He troubles himself much about the time of Nehemiah's writing his Book: 1. He
affirms, p. 6. that it was writ after the Death of Longimanus, and in or after
the time of his Successor Darius. This (says he) is certain, for in his Book he
mentions the Reign of Darius the Persian: But why may we not think,
notwithstanding this, that the rest of the Book was writ before the Death of
Longimanus, and that this touching the Reign of Darius, and a few other
passages, might be inserted by Nehemiah, or some other afterward. 2. He
insists upon it, page 7. that Nehemiah writ, when the Reign of Darius was
expired: The Hebrew words (says he) show it, for there (i.e. Neh.12. 22.) it is
said, that the heads of the Levites, and also the Priests were recorded (...)
over or throughout the Reign of Darius; Our Translation has, to the Reign of
Darius; other Translations, in the Reign, etc. but these not favoring, he
must, without Example or Warrant, to serve his Hypothesis, translate Over or
throughout the Reign of Darius. There is no question, but that (...) sometimes
signifies Over, as that is the same with Above; but he should have alleged
some other Text or Texts of Scripture, in which it signifies Over, in the sense
of his Throughout, or some Authority for it; and when he does this, he does
something. But let the words signify what they will, they must be understood
as he would have them, which appears (says he) by what follows in the next
verse, where it is said, that the Heads of the Levites were recorded in the
Book of the Chronicles, till the days of Johanan, i.e. till he came to be
High Priest. Yea, rather the contrary appears from thence, if we will acquiesce
in Archbishop Usher's judgment, for he (in his Annals A. M. 3589.) makes
Iohanan to have been High Priest in the Reign of Darius, i.e. Nothus; and if he
was so, then these words, till the days of Johanan, Neh. 12. 23. cannot prove
that the meaning must be Throughout the Reign of Darius, v. 22. but (if any
thing) the contrary.

Here and elsewhere I press this Gentleman with Archbishop Usher's Authority,
because he alleges him so often in his Letter; and declares his great esteem of
his judgment, The most Learned Primate was as well a great Chronologer as a
good Textuary; so. page 7. and page 9. when he had told how he supposed Iaddus
born at such a time in compliance with the most Learned Primate, he adds these
words, I attribute very much to his judgment in these matters. 3. This
Gentleman makes Nehemiah to have writ his Book when Johanan came to be
High Priest, (see page 7. also 9, and 10.) but if you demand his proof of this,
he only says, page 9. that he has very good ground for it; but he is not so
kind as to tell what it is. So that by all that he has said concerning
Nehemiah's age, and writing his Book, he has only demonstrated, that it cannot
be determined particularly to what age he lived, or at what time he writ.

This Gentleman also in page 7. troubles himself about Neh. 12. 22, 23. He
says, that Nehemiah in them tells us, that as for the Levites, that were in the
days of Eliashib, Joiada, Johanan and Jaddua, the heads of those Levites; and
also the Priests, all that were in the Reign of Darius Nothus, were recorded in
the Book of Chronicles: but afterward the Priests were not recorded, but only
the Heads of the Levites, and those only during the High Priesthood of Eliashib
and Joiada. By Afterward here, nothing can be meant, but after the Reign of
Darius Nothus; and so the Gentleman says Afterward, i.e. after the Reign of
Darius Nothus the Priests were not recorded, but only the heads of the Levites;
and then, when he adds, and those only during the High Priesthood of Eliashib
and Joiada; it cannot be avoided, but that he makes Eliashib to have been
High Priest after the Reign of Darius Nothus; being contrary herein (that I may
say nothing of Archbishop Usher) to himself; for page 10. he makes Joiada to
have succeeded Eliashib five years before the end of Darius's Reign. But to
pass this, the Gentleman says, that the heads of the Levites were recorded only
during the High Priesthood of Eliakim and Joiada, who were then dead, but not
of Johanan. But if the heads of the Levites in the days of Iohanan, and so in
the days of Iaddua were not recorded, I would gladly know why they are named,
v. 22. as well as those in the days of Eliashib and Ioiada. But his giving us
both so strange a translation of part of v. 22. and so strange an
Interpretation of the two verses proceeded from hence, that he thought the
Darius spoken of, was necessarily Darius Nothus.

Thence also proceeded that which follows in the same page 7. As for Jaddua, he
is mentioned both here (i e Neh. 12. 22.) and before in this Chapter, (i.e. v.
11.) not as being High Priest then, (how could he be in his Father's days?) but
only as being then living, and Heir apparent of the High Priesthood; so the
words are understood by the most Learned Primate: By Then, this Gentleman means
the time when the Book of Nehemiah was written, which he fancies was when
Jaddua's Father, Johanan, entered upon the High-Priest's Function; hence is that
Parenthesis, how could he be in his Father's days? But it has appeared
already, that it is a Groundless fancy, that Nehemiah writ his Book at that
time, and so all this that is buile upon it, falls of it self. As to the
Primate's judgment, I attribute very much to it; but this Gentleman that takes
leave to depart from it when he thinks fit, cannot reasonably deny the like
liberty to others.

Page 12. We are told concerning him that married the Daughter of Sanballat the
Horonite, that Nehemiah ( chapter 3. 28.) calls him one of the Sons of Ioiada,
the Son of Eliashib the High Priest, and that this is plain enough to show that
he was the younger Brother of Johanan the Father of Jaddus. But I deny that it
is plain enough to show it, and my Ground is from this Gentleman's own words:
Page 5. he says that Iohanan the High Priest is called the Son of Eliashib (
Neh. 12 23.) who indeed was his Grandfather, and his Father was Joiada, Neh.
12, 10. Just so here Iaddus's Brother is called one of the Sons of Joiada, who
indeed was his Grandfather, and his Father was Iohanan. It Is usual to call
Grandsons by the name of Sons: So that with the greatest part of the Learned
Men that have writ on this subject, we may still believe not the Uncle, but the
Brother of Iaddus to be the person spoken of, Neh. 13. 28. and that Josephus
his Narration concerning Manasseh, is an excellent comment upon that Text.

I willingly acknowledge, that I want some light to help me to discover the
necessity of those consequences, page 9. If Jaddus was but 30 years old when he
came to be High Priest, then the age of Joiakim when he dyed, must have been at
least 90 years, his Son Eliashib at least 62, his Son Joiada near 70, his Son
Johanan near 60, and each of these it is very probable much more; and four of
these must have been born when their Fathers were but 20 years old. How these
consequences can be made out, I do not apprehend.

It remains that we examine that view of the years of the Persian Kings, and
Jewish Highpriests, which he gives us page 10. and we shall quickly find that
his Chronology therein is as to a great part of it merely conjectural, or at
the best very uncertain. Of the time of Nehemiah's writing his Book, I have
showed the uncertainty above. This Gentleman tells us, page 9. that Jaddus
might have been born any year before his Father Johanan came to be High Priest,
and that he supposed him born 30 years before in compliance with the most
Learned Primate: Which Primates Judgment, he notwithstanding this, departs from
in other particulars of this view, (as to omit other instances) when the
Primate re^ers Nehemiah's coming from Sasa to Jerusalem, to the 454th year
before Christ, this Gentleman refers it to the 445th year before him.

As to the Persian Monarchs, the View out of Ptolemy's Canon, makes Darius
Nothus to have reigned 19 years, Artaxerxes Mnemon 46, Ochus 21, Arses. 2. But
Diodorus Siculus (whose Authority may at least counterbalance Ptolemy's) gives
only 43 years to Artaxerxes Mnemon, but 23 to Ochus, and speaks of Arses his
third year (see Diod. Sic. l. 13. l. 15, and l. 16.) Sulpitus Severus also
gives 23 to Ochus, and 3 to Arses. The same Sulpitius Severus allots 62 years
to Artaxerxes Mnemon, which Plutarch in Artaxerxes does also, and C^esias (who
had the greatest advantages of knowing, how long he reigned) gives to Darius
Nothus 35 years: So that the best Authors differing thus one from another how
can we determine how long they reigned. I have not Ptolemy's Canon by me, but
take it for granted, that he allots the number of years forementioned to these
Kings.

As for the High Priests, the View out of Georgius Syncellus assigns to
Eliashib 34 years; but the Chronicon Alexandrinum gives him 40 years, as the
(...) apud Scaliger. also does.

It is somewhat strange, that this Gentleman should refer the death of Ioiakim
to An. 445. before Christ, and yet refer his Son Eli^shib's being High Priest
to the year after: I had thought that the Son being Heir apparent to the High
Priesthood, had succeeded immediately upon the Father's Death. It is the more
strange because having said page 8. that it appears that Ioiakim dyed the same
year that Nehemiah Government began; he gives this reason for it, for his Son
Eliashib was High Priest at the time when the Wall of Jerusalem was building:
For I believe that the Wall of Jerusalem was building yea, was finished the
same year that Nehemiah's Government began. And if so, it is more certain, that
Eliashib was High Priest the same year that his Government began; than it is,
that Ioiakim dyed that year. Yea, but says this Gentleman, It is certain, that
Joiakim was High Priest within the time while Nehemiah was Governor. And this
he thinks may be proved from Neh. 12. 26. where the words are, These were in
the days of Joiakim, the Son of Jeshua, the Son of Jozadak, and in the days of
Nehemiah the Governor. Now it is certain from these words, that Joiakim was
High Priest within the time while Nehemiah was Governor; it is said in the
same Chapter, that all Israel in the days of Zerubbabel, and in the days of
Nehemiah, gave the portions of the Singers, Neh.12. 47. Is it certain from
hence, that Zerubbabel and Nehemiah governed for some time together? I say
then, that it is more certain (particularly from Neh. 3.1.) that Eliashib was
High Priest the same year that Nehemiah's Government began; than it is, that
Ioiakim dyed the same year.

This, Sir, may suffice to give you a taste of the Gentleman's Chronology. I
only add that I am

Your very Affectionate Friend and Servant.

FINIS.

