EIKONOKLASTS IN ANSWER To a Book Intitl'd EIKON ASILIK, THE Portrature of his
sacred Majesty in his Solitudes and Sufferings.

The AUTHOR J. M

PROVE. 28. 15, 16, 17. 15. As a roaring Lion, and a ranging Bear, so is a
wicked Ruler over the poor people.

16. The Prince that wants understanding, is also a great oppressor; but he
that hates covetousness shall prolong his days.

17. A man that does violence to the blood of any person, shall fly to the pit,
let no man stay him.

(...) Conjurat. Catilin. Regiam imperium, quod initio, conservandae
libertatis, atque augendae reipub. causa fuerat, in superbiam, dominationemque
se convertit.

Regibus boni, quam mali, suspectiores sunt; semperque his aliena virtus
formidolosa est.

Impune quaelibet facere, id est regem esse.

Idem Bell. Jugurth. Published now the second time, and much enlarged.

London; Printed by T. N. and are to be sold by Tho. Brewster and G. Moule at
the three Bibles in Paul's Churchyard near the West End, 1650.

The PREFACE.
TO descant on the misfortunes of a person fallen from so high a dignity, who
has also paid his final debt both to Nature and his Faults, is neither of it
self a thing commendable, nor the intention of this discourse. Neither was it
fond ambition, or the vanity to get a Name, present; or with Posterity, by
writing against a King: I never was so thirsty after Fame, nor so destitute of
other hopes and means, better and more certain to attain it. For Kings have
gained glorious Titles from their Fovourers by writing against private men, as
Henry the 8th did against Luther; but no man ever gained much honor by writing
against a King, as not usually meeting with that force of Argument in such
Courtly Antagonists, which to convince might add to his reputation. Kings most
commonly, though strong in Legions, are but weak at Arguments; as they who ever
have accustomed from the Cradle to use their will only as their right hand, their
reason always as their left. Whence unexpectedly constrained to that kind of
combat, they prove but weak and puny Adversaries. Nevertheless for their sakes
who through custom, simplicity, or want of better teaching, have not more
seriously considerd Kings, then in the gaudy name of Majesty, and admire them
and their doings, as if they breathed not the same breath with other mortal men,
I shall make no scruple to take up (for it seems to be the challenge both of
him and all his party) to take up this Gauntlet, though a Kings, in the behalf
of Liberty, and the Commonwealth.

And further, since it appears manifestly the cunning drift of a factious and
defeated Party, to make the same advantage of his Book, which they did before
of his Regal Name and Authority, and intend it not so much the defense of his
former actions, as the promoting of their own future designs, making thereby
the Book their own rather then the Kings, as the benefit now must be their own
more then his, now the third time to corrupt and disorder the minds of weaker
men, by new suggestions and narrations, either falsely or fallaciously
representing the state of things, to the dishonor of this present Government,
and the retarding of a general peace, so needful to this afflicted Nation,
and so nigh obtained, I suppose it no injury to the dead, but a good deed
rather to the living, if by better information given them, or, which is anough,
by only remembering them the truth of what they themselves know to be here
misaffirm'd, they may be kept from entering the third time unadvisedly into War
and bloodshed. For as to any moment of solidity in the Book it self, save only
that a King is said to be the Author, a name, then which there needs no more
among the blockish vulgar, to make it wise, and excellent, and admired, nay to
set it next the Bible, though otherwise containing little else but the common
grounds of tyranny and popery, dressed up, the better to deceiv, in a new
Protestant guise, and trimmly garnished over, or as to any need of answering,
in respect of staid and well-principl'd men, I take it on me as a work assigned
rather, then by me chos'n or affected. Which was the cause both of beginning it
so late, and finishing it so leasurely, in the midst of other employments and
diversions. And though well it might have seemed in vain to write at all;
considering the envy and almost infinite prejudice likely to be stirred up
among the Common sort, against what ever can be writt'n or gainsaid to the
Kings book, so advantageous to a book it is, only to be a Kings, and though it
be an irksom labor to write with industry and judicious pains that which
neither waigh'd, nor well read, shall be judged without industry or the pains
of well judging, by faction and the easy literature of custom and opinion, it
shall be ventured yet, and the truth not smothered, but sent abroad, in the
native confidence of her single self, to earn, how she can, her entertainment
in the world, and to find out her own readers; few perhaps, but those few,
such of value and substantial worth, as truth and wisdom, not respecting
numbers and bigg names, have bin ever wont in all ages to be contented with.

And if the late King had thought sufficient those Answers and Defenses made
for him in his life time, they who on the other side accused his evil
Government, judging that on their behalf anough also has been replied, the heat
of this controversy was in likelihood drawing to an end; and the further
mention of his deeds, not so much unfortunat as faulty, had in tenderness to
his late sufferings, bin willingly forborne; and perhaps for the present age
might have slept with him unrepeated; while his adversaries, calmed and
asswag'd with the success of their cause, had bin the less unfavorable to his
memory. But since he himself, making new appeal to Truth and the World, has
left behind him this Book as the best advocat and interpreter of his own
actions, and that his Friends by publishing, dispersing, commending, and almost
adoring it, seem to place therein the chief strength and nerves of their cause,
it would argue doubtless in the other party great deficience and distrust of
themselves, not to meet the force of his reason in any field whatsoever, the
force and equipage of whose Arms they have so oft'n met victoriously. And he
who at the Bar stood excepting against the form and manner of his Judicature,
and complained that he was not heard, neither he nor his Friends shall have
that cause now to find fault; being met and debated with in this open and
monumental Court of his own erecting; and not only heard uttering his whole
mind at large, but answered. Which to do effectually, if it be necessary that
to his Book nothing the more respect be had for being his, they of his own
Party can have no just reason to exclaim. For it were too unreasonable that
he, because dead, should have the liberty in his Book to speak all evil of the
Parliament; and they, because living, should be expected to have less freedom,
or any for them, to speak home the plain truth of a full and pertinent reply.
As he, to acquitt himself, has not spared his Adversaries, to load them with
all sorts of blame and accusation, so to him, as in his Book alive, there will
be used no more Courtship then he uses; but what is properly his own guilt, not
imputed any more to his evil Counselors, (a Ceremony used longer by the
Parliament then he himself desired) shall be laid here without circumlocutions
at his own door. That they who from the first beginning, or but now of late, by
what unhappines I know not, are so much affatuated, not with his person only,
but with his palpable faults, and dote upon his deformities, may have none to
blame but their own folly, if they live and dye in such a strook'n blindness, as
next to that of Sodom has not happ'nd to any sort of men more gross, or more
misleading. Yet neither let his enemies expect to find recorded here all that
has been whispered in the Court, or alleged op'nly of the Kings bad actions;
it being the proper scope of this work in hand, not to ripp up and relate the
misdoings of his whole life, but to answer only, and refute the missayings of
his book.

First then that some men (whether this were by him intended, or by his
Friends) have by policy accomplished after death that revenge upon their
Enemies, which in life they were not able, has been often related. And among
other examples we find that the last will of Caesar being read to the people,
and what bounteous Legacies he had bequeathed them, wrought more in that
Vulgar audience to the avenging of his death, then all the art he could ever
use, to win their favor in his lifetime. And how much their intent, who
published these overlate Apologies and Meditations of the dead King, drives to
the same end of stirring up the people to bring him that honor, that
affection, and by consequence, that revenge to his dead Corpse, which he
himself living could never gain to his Person, it appears both by the conceited
portraiture before his Book, drawn out to the full measure of a Masking Scene,
and set there to catch fools and silly gazers, and by those Latin words after
the end, Vota dabunt qua Bella negarunt; intimating, That what he could not
compass by War, he should atchieve by his Meditations. For in words which
admit of various sense, the liberty is ours to choose that interpretation
which may best mind us of what our restless enemies endeavor, and what we are
timely to prevent. And here may be well observed the loose and negligent
curiosity of those who took upon them to adorn the setting out of this Book:
for though the Picture set in Front would Martyr him and Saint him to befool
the people, yet the Latin Motto in the end, which they understand not, leaves
him, as it were a politic contriver to bring about that interest by fair and
plausible words, which the force of Arms denied him. But quaint Emblems and
devices begged from the old Pageantry of some Twelf-nights entertainment at
Whitehall, will do but ill to make a Saint or Martyr: and if the People
resolve to take him Sainted at the rate of such a Canonizing, I shall suspect
their Calendar more then the Gregorian. In one thing I must commend his op'nness
who gave the title to this Book, (...), that is to say, The Kings Image; and by
the Shrine he dresses out for him, certainly would have the people come and
worship him. For which reason this answer also is intitl'd Iconoclastes, the
famous Surname of many Greek Emperors, who in their zeal to the command of God,
after long tradition of Idolatry in the Church, took courage, and broke all
superstitious Images to pieces. But the People, exorbitant and excessive in all
their motions, are prone ofttimes not to a religious only, but to a civil kind
of Idolatry in idolizing their Kings; though never more mistak'n in the object
of their worship; heretofore being wont to repute for Saints, those faithful and
courageous Barons, who lost their lives in the Field, making glorious War
against Tyrants for the common Liberty; as Simon de Momfort Earl of Leicester,
against Henry the third; Thomas Plantagenet Earl of Lancaster, against Edward
the second. But now, with a besotted and degenerate baseness of spirit, except
some few, who yet retain in them the old English fortitude and love of Freedom,
and have testified it by their matchless deeds, the rest, imbastardiz'd from the
ancient nobleness of their Ancestors, are ready to fall flatt and give adoration
to the Image and Memory of this Man, who has offered at more cunning fetches
to undermine our Liberties, and putt Tyranny into an Art, then any British King
before him. Which low dejection and debasement of mind in the people, I must
confess I cannot willingly ascribe to the natural disposition of an
Englishman, but rather to two other causes. First, to the Prelates and their
fellow-teachers, though of another Name and Sect, whose Pulpit stuff, both
first and last, has bin the Doctrine and perpetual infusion of servility and
wretchedness to all their hearers; whose lives the type of worldliness and
hypocrisy, without the least tiue pattern of virtue, righteousness, or
self-denial in their whole practice. I attribute it next to the factious
inclination of most men divided from the public by several ends and humors of
their own. At first no man less beloved, no man more generally condemned then
was the King; from the time that it became his custom to break Parlaments at
home, and either wilfully or weakly to betray Protestants abroad, to the
beginning of these Combustions. All men inveighed against him; all men, except
Courtvassals, opposed him and his tyrannical proceedings; the cry was
universal; and this full Parliament was at first unanimous in their dislike and
Protestation against his evil Government. But when they who sought themselves
and not the Public, began to doubt that all of them could not by one and the
same way attain to their ambitious purposes, then was the King, or his Name at
least, as a fit property, first made use of, his doings made the best of, and
by degrees justified: Which begott him such a party, as after many wiles and
struglings with his in ward fears, imbold'n'd him at length to set up his
Standard against the Parliament. Whenas before that time, all his adherents,
consisting most of dissolute Swordmen and Suburb-roysters, hardly amounted to
the making up of one ragged regiment strong anough to assault the unarmed house
of Commons. After which attempt, seconded by a tedious and bloody war on his
subjects, wherein he has so far exceeded those his arbitrary violences in
time of Peace, they who before hated him for his high misgoverment, nay, fought
against him with displayed banners in the field, now applaud him and extol him
for the wisest and most religious Prince that lived. By so strange a method
amongst the mad multitude is a sudden reputation won, of wisdom by wilfulness
and subtle shifts, of goodness by multiplying evil, of piety by endeavoring to
root out true religion.

But it is evident that the chief of his adherents never loved him, never
honored either him or his cause, but as they took him to set a face upon their
own malignant designs; nor bemoan his loss at all, but the loss of their own
aspiring hopes: Like those captive women whom the Poet notes in his Iliad, to
have bewaild the death of Patroclus in outward show, but indeed their own
condition.

(...).
Hom. Iliad. (...).
And it needs must be ridiculous to any judgment uninthrall'd, that they who
in other matters express so little fear either of God or man, should in this
one particular outstripp all precisianism with their scruples and cases, and
fill men's ears continually with the noise of their conscientious Loyalty and
Allegiance to the King, Rebels in the mean while to God in all their actions
beside: much less that they whose professed Loyalty and Allegiance led them to
direct Arms against the Kings Person, and thought him nothing violated by the
Sword of Hostility drawn by them against him, should now in earnest think him
violated by the unsparing Sword of Justice, which undoubtedly so much the less
in vain she bears among Men, by how much greater and in highest place the
offender. Else Justice, whether moral or political, were not Justice, but a falls
counterfeit of that impartial and Godlike virtue. The only grief is, that the
head was not struck off to the best advantage and commodity of them that held
it by the hair; an ungrateful and pervers generation, who having first cried
to God to be delivered from their King, now murmur against God that heard their
prayers, and cry as loud for their King against those that delivered them. But
as to the Author of these Soliloquies, whether it were undoubtedly the late
King, as is vulgarly believed, or any secret Coadjutor, and some stick not to
name him, it can add nothing, nor shall take from the weight, if any be, of
reason which he brings. But allegations, not reasons are the main contents of
this Book, and need no more then other contrary allegations to lay the question
before all men in an eev'n balance; though it were supposed that the testimony
of one man in his own cause affirming, could be of any moment to bring in doubt
the authority of a Parliament denying. But if these his fair spok'n words shall
be here fairly confronted and laid parallel to his own far differing deeds,
manifest and visible to the whole Nation, then surely we may look on them who
notwithstanding shall persist to give to bare words more credit then to open
deeds, as men whose judgment was not rationally evinced and persuaded, but
fatally stupifi'd and bewitched, into such a blind and obstinate belief. For
whose cure it may be doubted, not whether any charm, though never so wisely
murmured, but whether any prayer can be available. This however would be
remembered and well noted, that while the K. instead of that repentance which
was in reason and in conscience to be expected from him, without which we could
not lawfully re-admitt him, persists here to maintain and justify the most
apparent of his evil doings, and washes over with a Courtfucus the worst and
foulest of his actions, disables and uncreates the Parliament it self, with all
our laws and Native liberties that ask not his leave, dishonours and attaints
all Protestant Churches, not Prelaticall, and what they piously reformed, with
the slander of rebellion, sacrilege, and hypocrisy; they who seemed of late to
stand up hottest for the Covenant, can now sit mute and much pleased to hear
all these opprobrious things uttered against their faith, their freedom, and
themselves in their own doings made traitors to boot: The Divines also, their
wizzards, can be so braz'n as to cry Hosanna to this his book, which cries
louder against them for no disciples of Christ, but of Iscariot; and to seem
now convinced with these withered arguments and reasons here, the same which in
some other writings of that party, and in his own former Declarations and
expresses, they have so oft'n heertofore endeavored to confute and to explode;
none appearing all this while to vindicate Church or State from these calumnies
and reproaches, but a small handful of men whom they defame and spit at with
all the odious names of Schism and Sectarism. I never knew that time in
England, when men of truest Religion were not counted Sectaries: but wisdom
now, valor, justice, constancy, prudence united and imbodied to defend Religion
and our Liberties, both by word and deed against tyranny, is counted Schism and
faction. Thus in a graceless age things of highest praise and imitation under a
right name, to make them infamous and hateful to the people, are miscalled.
Certainly, if ignorance and perverseness will needs be national and universal,
then they who adhere to wisdom and to truth, are not therefore to be blamed, for
being so few as to seem a sect or faction. But in my opinion it goes not ill
with that people where these virtues grow so numerous and well joined together,
as to resist and make head against the rage and torrent of that boistrous folly
and superstition that possesses and hurries on the vulgar sort. This therefore
we may conclude to be a high honor don us from God, and a special mark of his
favor, whom he has selected as the sole remainder, after all these changes and
commotions, to stand upright and steadfast in his cause; dignified with the
defense of truth and public liberty; while others who aspired to be the topp
of Zelots, and had almost brought Religion to a kind of trading monopoly, have
not only by their late silence and neutrality belied their profession, but
foundered themselves and their consciences, to comply with enemies in that
wicked cause and interest which they have too oft'n cursed in others, to
prosper now in the same themselves.

(...).
I. Upon the Kings calling this last Parliament.
THat which the King lays down here as his first foundation, and as it were
the head stone of his whole Structure, that He called this last Parliament not
more by others advice and the necessity of his affairs, then by his own chois
and inclination, is to all knowing men so apparently not true, that a more
unlucky and inauspicious sentence, and more betok'ning the downfall of his
whole Fabric, hardly could have come into his mind. For who knows not that the
inclination of a Prince is best known either by those next about him, and most
in favor with him, or by the current of his own actions. Those nearest to this
King and most his Favorites, were Courtiers and Prelates; men whose chief study
was to find out which way the King inclined, and to imitate him exactly. How
these men stood affected to Parlaments, cannot be forgott'n. No man but may
remember it was their continual exercise to dispute and preach against them;
and in their common discourse nothing was more frequent, then that they hoped the
King should now have no need of Parlaments any more. And this was but the copy
which his Parasites had industriously taken from his own words and actions, who
never called a Parliament but to supply his necessities; and having supplied
those, as suddenly and ignominiously dissolved it, without redressing any one
greevance of the people. Sometimes choosing rather to miss of his Subsidies, or
to raise them by illegal courses, then that the people should not still miss of
their hopes to be releiv'd by Parlaments.

The first he broke off at his coming to the Crown; for no other cause then to
protect the Duke of Buckingham against them who had accused him, besides other
heinous crimes, of no less then poisoning the deceased King his Father;
concerning which matter the Declaration of No more addresses, has sufficiently
informed us. And still the latter breaking was with more affront and indignity
put upon the House and her worthiest Members, then the former: Insomuch that in
the fifth year of his Reign, in a Proclamation he seems offended at the very
rumor of a Parliament divulged among the people: as if he had taken it for a
kind of slander, that men should think him that way exorable, much less
inclined: and forbidds it as a presumption to prescribe him any time for
Parlaments, that is to say, either by persuasion or Petition, or so much as the
reporting of such a rumor; for other manner of prescribing was at that time not
suspected. By which feirce Edict, the people, forbidd'n to complain, as well as
forced to suffer, began from thenceforth to despair of Parlaments. Whereupon
such illegal actions, and especially to get vast sums of Money, were put in
practice by the King and his new Officers, as Monopolies, compulsive
Knight-hoods, Cote, Conduct and Ship money, the seizing not of one Naboths
Vineyard, but of whole Inheritances under the pretense of Forest, or Crown
Lands, corruption and Bribery compounded for, with impunities granted for the
future, as gave evident proof that the King never meant, nor could it stand
with the reason of his affairs, ever to recall Parlaments; having brought by
these irregular courses the peoples interest and his own to so direct an
opposition, that he might foresee plainly, if nothing but a Parliament could
save the people, it must necessarily be his undoing.

Till eight or nine years after, proceeding with a high hand in these
enormities, and having the second time levied an injurious War against his
native Country Scotland, and finding all those other shifts of raising Money,
which bore out his first expedition, now to fail him, not of his own chois and
inclination, as any Child may see, but urged by strong necessities, and the
very pangs of State, which his own violent proceedings had brought him to, he
calls a Parliament; first in Ireland, which only was to give him four
Subsidies, and so to expire; then in England, where his first demand was but
twelve Subsidies, to maintain a Scotch War, condemned and abominated by the
whole Kingdom; promising their greevances should be considered afterward. Which
when the Parliament, who judged that War it self one of their main greevances,
made no have to grant, not enduring the delay of his impatient will, or else
fearing the conditions of their grant, he breaks off the whole Session, and
dismisses them and their greevances with scorn and frustration.

Much less therefore did he call this last Parliament by his own chois and
inclination; but having first tried in vain all undue ways to procure Money,
his Army, of their own accord, being beat'n in the North, the Lords Petitioning,
and the general voice of the people almost hissing him and his ill acted
regality off the Stage, compelled at length both by his wants, and by his
fears, upon mere extremity he summoned this last Parliament. And how is it
possible that he should willingly incline to Parlaments, who never was
perceived to call them, but for the greedy hope of a whole National Bribe, his
Subsidies, and never loved, never fulfilled, never promoted the true end of
Parlaments, the redress of greevances, but still put them off, and prolonged
them, whether gratified ot not gratified; and was indeed the Author of all
those greevances. To say therefore that he called this Parliament of his own
chois and inclination, argues how little truth we can expect from the sequel
of this Book, which ventures in the very first period to affront more then one
Nation with an untruth so remarkable; and presumes a more implicit Faith in the
people of England, then the Pope ever commanded from the Romish Laity; or else
a natural sottishness fit to be abused and ridd'n. While in the judgment of
wise Men, by laying the foundation of his defense on the avouchment of that
which is so manifestly untrue, he has given a worse foil to his own cause,
then when his whole Forces were at any time overthrown. They therefore who think
such great Service don to the Kings affairs in publishing this Book, will find
themselves in the end mistak'n: if sense and right mind, or but any mediocrity
of knowledge and remembrance has not quite forsak'n men.

But to prove his inclination to Parlaments, he affirms here To have always
thought the right way of them, most safe for his Crown, and best pleasing to
his People. What he thought we know not; but that he ever took the contrary
way we saw; and from his own actions we felt long ago what he thought of
Parlaments or of pleasing his People: a surer evidence then what we hear now
too late in words.

He alleges, that the cause of forbearing to convene Parlaments, was the
sparks which some men's distempers there studied to kindle. They were indeed
not tempered to his temper; for it neither was the Law, nor the rule by which
all other tempers were to be tried; but they were esteemed and chos'n for the
fittest men in their several Counties, to allay and quench those distempers
which his own inordinate doings had inflamed. And if that were his refusing to
convene, till those men had been qualified to his temper, that is to say, his
will, we may easily conjecture what hope there was of Parlaments, had not fear
and his insatiat poverty in the midst of his excessive wealth constrained him.

He hoped by his freedom, and their moderation to prevent misunderstandings.
And wherefore not by their freedom and his moderation? But freedom he thought
too high a word for them; and moderation too mean a word for himself: this was
not the way to prevent misunderstandings. He still feared passion and prejudice
in other men; not in himself: and doubted not by the weight of his own reason,
to counterpoyse any Faction; it being so easy for him, and so frequent, to
call his obstinacy, Reason, and other men's reason, Faction. We in the mean
while must believe, that wisdom and all reason came to him by Title, with his
Crown; Passion, Prejudice, and Faction came to others by being Subjects.

He was sorry to hear with what popular heat Elections were carried in many
places. Sorry rather that Court Letters and intimations prevailed no more, to
divert or to deterr the people from their free Election of those men, whom they
thought best affected to Religion and their Countries Liberty, both at that
time in danger to be lost. And such men they were, as by the Kingdom were sent
to advise him, not sent to be cavill'd at, because Elected, or to be entertaind
by him with an undervalue and misprision of their temper, judgment, or
affection. In vain was a Parliament thought fittest by the known Laws of our
Nation, to advise and regulate unruly Kings, if they, in stead of harkening to
advice, should be permitted to turn it off, and refuse it by vilifying and
traducing their advisers, or by accusing of a popular heat those that lawfully
elected them.

His own and his Childrens interest obliged him to seek and to preserve the
love and welfare of his Subjects. Who doubts it? But the same interest, common
to all Kings, was never yet available to make them all seek that, which was
indeed best for themselves and their Posterity. All men by their own and their
Childrens interest are obliged to honesty and justice: but how little that
consideration works in private men, how much less in Kings, their deeds declare
best.

He intended to oblige both Friends and Enemies, and to exceed their desires,
did they but pretend to any modest and sober sense; mistaking the whole
business of a Parliament. Which met not to receive from him obligations, but
Justice; nor he to expect from them their modesty, but their grave advice,
uttered with freedom in the public cause. His talk of modesty in their desires
of the common welfare, argues him not much to have understood what he had to
grant, who misconceav'd so much the nature of what they had to desire. And for
sober sense the expresion was too mean; and recoiles with as much dishonor
upon himself, to be a King where sober sense could possibly be so wanting in a
Parliament.

The odium and offenses which some men's rigor, or remissness iu Church and
State had contracted upon his Government, he resolved to have expiated with
better Laws and regulations. And yet the worst of misdemeanors committed by the
worst of all his favorites, in the hight of their dominion, whether acts of
rigor or remissness, he has from time to time continued, owned, and taken upon
himself by public Declarations, as oft'n as the Clergy, or any other of his
Instruments felt themselves over burd'n'd with the peoples hatred. And who
knows not the superstitious rigor of his Sundays Chapel, and the licentious
remissness of his Sundays Theater; accompanied with that reverend Statute for
Dominical Jiggs and May-poles, published in his own Name, and derived from the
example of his Father James. Which testifies all that rigor in superstition,
all that remissness in Religion to have issued out originally from his own
House, and from his own Authority. Much rather then may those general
miscarriages in State, his proper Sphere, be imputed to no other person chiefly
then to himself. And which of all those oppressive Acts, or Impositions did he
ever disclaim or disavow, till the fatal aw of this Parliament hung ominously
over him. Yet heerh ee smoothly seeks to wipe off all the envy of his evil
Government upon his Substitutes, and under Officers: and promises, though much
too late, what wonders he purposed to have don in the reforming of Religion; a
work wherein all his undertakings heretofore declare him to have had little or
no judgment. Neither could his Breeding, or his course of life acquaint him
with a thing so Spiritual. Which may well assure us what kind of Reformation we
could expect from him; either some politic form of an imposed Religion, or else
perpetual vexation, and persecution to all those that complied not with such a
form. The like amendment he promises in State; not a stepp further then his
Reason and Conscience told him was fit to be desired; wishing he had kept
within those bounds, and not suffered his own judgment to have binover-borne
in some things, of which things one was the Earl of Straffords execution. And
what signifies all this, but that still his resolution was the same, to set up
an arbitrary Government of his own; and that all Britain was to be tied and
chained to the conscience, judgment, and reason of one Man; as if those gifts
had been only his peculiar and Prerogative, intal'd upon him with his fortune
to be a King. When as doubtless no man so obstinate, or so much a Tyrant, but
professes to be guided by that which he calls his Reason, and his Judgment,
though never so corrupted; and pretends also his conscience. In the mean while,
for any Parliament or the whole Nation to have either reason, judgment, or
conscience, by this rule was altogether in vain, if it thwarted the Kings
will; which was easy for him to call by any other more plausible name. He
himself has many times acknowledged to have no right over us but by Law; and
by the same Law to govern us: but Law in a Free Nation has bin ever public
reason, the enacted reason of a Parliament; which he denying to enact, denies to
govern us by that which ought to be our Law; interposing his own private reason,
which to us is no Law. And thus we find these fair and specious promises, made
upon the experience of many hard sufferings, and his most mortified
retirements, being thoroughly sifted, to contain nothing in them much different
from his former practices, so cross, and so averse to all his Parlaments, and
both the Nations of this Island. What fruits they could in likelihood have
produced in his restorement, is obvious to any prudent foresight.

And this is the substance of his first section, till we come to the devout of
it, modeled into the form of a private Psalter. Which they who so much admire,
either for the matter or the manner, may as well admire the Archbishops late
Breviary, and many other as good Manuals, and Handmaids of Devotion, the
lip-work of every Prelatical Liturgist, clapped together, and quilted out of
Scripture phrase, with as much ease, and as little need of Christian diligence,
or judgment, as belongs to the compiling of any ordinary and salable piece of
English Divinity, that the Shops value. But he who from such a kind of
Psalmistry, or any other verbal Devotion, without the pledge and earnest of
suitable deeds, can be persuaded of a zeal, and true righteousness in the
person, has much yet to learn; and knows not that the deepest policy of a
Tyrant has bin ever to counterfeit Religious. And Aristotle in his Politics,
has mentiond that special craft among twelve other tyrannical Sophisms.
Neither want we examples. Andronicus Comnenus the Byzantine Emperor, though a
most cruel Tyrant, is reported by Nicetas to have bin a constant reader of
Saint Paul's Epistles; and by continual study had so incorporated the phrase and
style of that transcendent Apostle into all his familiar Letters, that the
imitation seemed to vie with the Original. Yet this availd not to deceave the
people of that Empire; who not withstanding his Saints vizard, tore him to
pieces for his Tyranny. From Stories of this nature both Ancient and Modern
which abound, the Poets also, and some English, have bin in this point so
mindful of Decorum, as to put never more pious words in the mouth of any
person, then of a Tyrant. I shall not instance an abstruse Author, wherein the
King might be less conversant, but one whom we well know was the Closet
Companion of these his solitudes, William Shakespeare; who introduces the
Person of Richard the third, speaking in as high a strain of piety, and
mortification, as is utterd in any passage of this Book; and sometimes to the
same sense and purpose with some words in this place, I intended, says he, not
only to oblige my Friends but mine enemies. The like says Richard, Act. 2.
Scen. 1,

I do not know that Englishman alive.
With whom my soul is any jott at odds,
More then the Infant that is borne to night;
I thank my God for my humility.
Other stuff of this sort may be read throughout the whole Tragedy, wherein
the Poet used not much license in departing from the truth of History, which
delivers him a deep dissembler, not of his affections only, but of Religion.

In praying therefore, and in the outward work of Devotion, this King we see
has not at all exceeded the worst of Kings before him. But herein the worst of
Kings, professing Christianism, have by far exceeded him. They, for ought we
know, have still prayed their own, or at least borrowed from fit Authors. But
this King, not content with that which, although in a thing holy, is no holy
theft, to attribute to his own making other men's whole Prayers, has as it were
unhallowed, and unchrist'nd the very duty of prayer it self, by borrowing to a
Christian use Prayers offered to a Heathen God. Who would have imagined so
little fear in him of the true allseeing Deity, so little reverence of the
Holy Ghost, whose office is to dictat and present our Christian Prayers, so
little care of truth in his last words, or honor to himself, or to his
Friends, or sense of his afflictions, or of that sad howr which was upon him,
as immediately before his death to popp into the hand of that grave Bishop who
attended him, for a special Relic of his saintly exercises, a Prayer stolen
word for word from the mouth a of Heathen fiction praying to a heathen God; and
that in no serious Book, but the vain amatorious Poem of Sr Philip Sidneys
Arcadia; a Book in that kind full of worth and wit, but among religious
thoughts, and duties not worthy to be named; nor to be read at any time without
good caution; much less in time of trouble and affliction to be a Christians
Prayer Book. They who are yet incredulous of what I tell them for a truth, that
this Philippic Prayer is no part of the Kings goods, may satisfy their own eyes
at leisure in the 3 d. Book of Sir Philips Arcadia p. 248. comparing Pammela's
Prayer with the first Prayer of his Majesty, deliverd to Dr. Juxion immediately
before his death, and Entititl'd, A prayer in time of Captivity Printed in all
the best Editions of his Book. And since there be a crew of lurking raylers,
who in their Libels, and their fitts of railing up and down, as I hear from
others, take it so currishly that I should dare to tell abroad the secrets of
their Aegyhtian Apis, to gratify their gall in some measure yet more, which to
them will be a kind of alms (for it is the weekly vomit of their gall which to
most of them is the sole means of their feeding) that they may not starv for
me, I shall gorge them once more with this digrsestion somewhat larger then
before: nothing troubled or offended at the working upward of their Sale-venom
thereupon, though it happ'n to asperse me; being, it seems, their best
livelihood and the only use or good digestion that their sick and perishing
minds can make of truth charitably told them. However, to the benesit of
others much more worth the gaining, I shall proceed in my assertion; that if
only but to taste wittingly of meat or drink offered to an Idol, be in the
doctrine of St. Paul judged a pollution, much more must be his sin who takes a
prayer, so dedicated, into his mouth, and offers it to God. Yet hardly it can
be thought upon (though how sad a thing) without some kindof laughter at the
manner, and solemn transaction of so gross a cousenage: that he who had
trampled over us so stately and so tragically should leave the world at last so
ridiculously in his exit, as to bequeath among his Deifying friends that stood
about him such a precious piece of mockery to be published by them, as must
needs cover both his and their heads with shame, if they have any left.
Certainly they that will, may now see at length how much they were deceived in
him, and were ever like to be hereafter, who cared not, so near the minute of
his death, to deceive his best and dearest friends with the trumpery of such a
prayer, not more secretly then shamefully purloind; yet given them as the
royal issue of his own proper Zeal. And sure it was the hand of God to let
them fall and be taken in such a foolish trapp, as has exposd them to all
derision; if for nothing else, to throw contempt and disgrace in the sight of
all men upon this his Idolized Book, and the whole rosarie of his Prayers;
thereby testifying how little he accepted them from those who thought no better
of the living God then of a buzzard Idol, fit to be so servd and worshipped in
reversion, with the polluted orts and refuse of Arcadia's and Romances, without
being able to discern the affront rather then the worship of such an ethnic
Prayer. But leaving what might justly be offensive to God, it was a trespass
also more then usual against human right, which commands that every Author
should have the property of his own work reservd to him after death as well as
living. Many Princes have bin rigorous in laying taxes on their Subjects by the
head, but of any King heertofore that made a levy upon their wit, and seisd it
as his own legitimat, I have not whom beside to instance. True it is I looked
rather to have found him gleaning out of Books writt'n purposely to help
Devotion. And if in likelihood he have borrowd much more out of Prayer-books
then out of Pastorals, then are these painted Feathers, that set him off so gay
among the people, to be thought few or none of them his own. But if from his
Divines he have borrowed nothing, nothing out of all the Magazin, and the
rheum of their Mellifluous prayers and meditations, let them who now mourn for
him as for Tamuz, them who howl in their Pulpits, and by their howling declare
themselves right Wolves, remember and consider in the midst of their hideous
faces, when they do only not cut their flesh for him like those ruefull
Priests whom Eliah mocked; that he who was once their Ahab, now their Josiah,
though faining outwardly to reverence Churchmen, yet here has so extremely set
at naught both them and their praying faculty, that being at a loss himself what
to pray in Captivity, he consulted neither with the Liturgy, nor with the
Directory, but neglecting the huge fardell of all their honycomb devotions, went
directly where he doubted not to find better praying, to his mind with Pammela
in the Countesses Arcadia. What greater argument of disgrace and ignominy could
have bin thrown with cunning upon the whole Clergy, then that the King among
all his Preistery, and all those numberles volumes of their theological
distillations, not meeting with one man or book of that coat that could
befreind him with a prayer in Captivity, was forced to robb Sr. Philip and his
Captive Shepherdess of their Heathen orisons, to supply in any fashion his
miserable indigence, not of bread, but of a single prayer to God. I say
therefore not of bread, for that want may befall a good man, and yet not make
him totally miserable: but he who wants a prayer to beseech God in his
necessity, it is unexpressible how poor he is; far poorer within himself then
all his enemies can make him. And the unfitness, the undecency of that
pitiful supply which he sought, expresses yet further the deepness of his
poverty.

Thus much be said in general to his prayers, and in special to that Arcadian
prayer used in his Captivity, anough to undeceave us what esteem we are to
set upon the rest. For he certainly whose mind could serve him to seek a
Christian prayer out of a Pagan Legend, and assume it for his own, might gather
up the rest God knows from whence; one perhaps out of the French Astraea,
another out of the Spanish Diana; Amadis and Palmerin could hardly escape him.
Such a person we may be sure had it not in him to make a prayer of his own, or
at least would excuse himself the pains and cost of his invention, so long as
such sweet rapsodies of Heathenism and Knighterrantry could yield him prayers.
How dishonorable then, and how unworthy of a Christian King were these ignoble
shifts to seem holy and to get a Saintship among the ignorant and wretched
people; to draw them by this deception, worse then all his former injuries, to
go a whooring after him. And how unhappy, how forsook of grace, and unbelovd of
God that people who resolv to know no more of piety or of goodness, then to
account him their chief Saint and Martyr, whose bankrupt devotion came not
honestly by his very prayers; but having sharkd them from the mouth of a
Heathen worshipper, detestable to teach him prayers, sold them to those that
stood and honored him next to the Messiah, as his own heavenly compositions in
adversity, for hopes no less vain and presumptuous (and death at that time so
imminent upon him) then by these goodly relics to be held a Saint and Martyr
in opinion with the People.

And thus far in the whole Chapter we have seen and considered, and it cannot
but be clear to all men, how, and for what ends, what concernments, and
necessities the late King was no way induced, but every way constrained to call
this last Parliament: yet here in his first prayer he trembles not to avouch as
in the ears of God, That he did it with an upright intention, to his glory,
and his peoples good: Of which dreadful attestation how sincerely meant, God,
to whom it was avowed, can only judge; and he has judged already; and has
writt'n his impartial Sentence in Characters legible to all Christ'ndom; and
besides has taught us, that there be some, whom he has given over to delusion;
whose very mind and conscience is defiled; of whom Saint Paul to Titus makes
mention.

II. Upon the Earl of Straffords Death.
THis next Chapter is a penitent confession of the King, and the strangest, if
it be well weighed, that ever was Auricular. For he repents here of giving his
consent, though most unwillingly, to the most seasonable and solemn piece of
Justice, that had bin don of many years in the Land: But his sole conscience
thought the contrary. And thus was the welfare, the safety, and within a
little, the unanimous demand of three populous Nations to have attended still on
the singularity of one man's opi nionated conscience; if men had bin always so
tame and spiritless; and had not unexpectedly found the grace to understand,
that if his conscience were so narrow and peculiar to it self, it was not fit
his Authority should be so ample and Universal over others. For certainly a
private conscience sorts not with a public Calling; but declares that Person
rather meant by nature for a private fortune. And this also we may take for
truth, that he whose conscience thinks it sin to put to death a capital
Offender, will as often think it meritorious to kill a righteous Person. But let
us hear what the sin was that lay so sore upon him, and, as one of his Prayers
given to Dr. Juxton testifies, to the very day of his death; it was his signing
the Bill of Straffords execution: a man whom all men looked upon as one of the
boldest and most impetuous instruments that the King had to advance any violent
or illegal design. He had ruled Ireland, and some parts of England in an
Arbitrary manner, had endeavored to subvert Fnndamental Laws, to subvert
Parlaments, and to incense the King against them; he had also endeavored* to
make Hostility between England and Scotland: He had counceld the King to call
over that Irish Army of Papists, which he had cunningly raised, to reduce
England, as appeared by good Testimony then present at the Consultation. For
which, and many other crimes alleged and proved against him in 28, Articles,
he was condemnd of high Treason by the Parliament. The Commons by far the
greater number cast him; the Lords, after they had bin satisfied in a full
discourse by the Kings Solicitor, and the opinions of many Judges delivered in
their House, agreed likewise to the Sentence of Treason. The People universally
cried out for Justice. None were his Friends but Coutiers, and Clergimen, the
worst at that time, and most corrupted sort of men; and Court Ladies, not the
best of Women; who when they grow to that insolence as to appear active in
State affairs, are the certain sign of a dissolute, degenerat, and
pusillanimous Commonwealth. Last of all the King, or rather first, for these
were but his Apes, was not satisfied in conscience to condemn him of High
Treason; and declared to both Houses, That no fears or respects whatsoever
should make him alter that resolution founded upon his conscience. Either then
his resolution was indeed not founded upon his conscience, or his conscience
received better imformation, or else both his conscience and this his strong
resolution struck sail, notwithstanding these glorious words, to his stronger
fear. For within a few days after, when the Judges at a privy Counsel, and
four of his elected Bishops had picked the thorn out of his conscience, he was
at length persuaded to sign the Bill for Straffords Execution. And yet perhaps
that it wrung his conscience to condemn the Earl of high Treason is not
unlikely: not because he thought him guiltless of highest Treason, had half
those crimes bin committed against his own private Interest or Person, as
appeared plainly by his charge against the six Members, but because he knew
himself a Principal in what the Earl was but his accessory, and thought nothing
Treason against the Commonwealth, but against himself only.

Had he really scrupled to sentence that for Treason which he thought not
Treasonable, why did he seem resolved by the Judges and the Bishops? And ifby
them resolved, how comes the scruple here again? It was not then, as he now
pretends, The importunities of some and the fear of many which made him sign,
but the satisfaction given him by those Judges and Ghostly Fathers of his own
choosing. Which of him shall we believe? For he seems not one, but double;
either here we must not believe him professing that his satisfaction was but
seemingly received and out of fear, or else we may as well believe that the
scruple was no real scruple, as we can believe him here against himself before,
that the satisfaction then received was no real satisfaction: of such a
variable and fleeting conscience what hold can be taken? But that indeed it was
a facil conscience* and could dissemble satisfaction when it pleased, his own
ensuing actions declared: being soon after found to have the chief hand in a
most detested conspiracy against the Parliament and Kingdom, as by Letters and
examinations of Percy, Goring, and other Conspirators came to light; that his
intention was to rescue the Earl of Strafford, by seizing on the Tower of
London; to bring up the English Army out of the North, joined with eight
thousand Irish Papists raised by Strafford, and a French Army to be landed at
Portsmouth against the Parliament and their Friends. For which purpose the King,
though requested by both Houses to disband those Irish Papists, refused to do
it, and kept them still in Arms to his own purposes. No marvel then, if being
as deeply criminous as the Earl himself, it stung his conscience to adjudge to
death those misdeeds whereof himself had bin the chief Author: no marvel
though in stead of blaming and detesting his ambition, his evil Counsel, his
violence and oppression of the people, he fall to praise his great Abilities;
and with Scolastic flourishes beneath the decency of a King, compares him to
the Sun, which in all figurative use, and significance bears allusion to a
King, not to a Subject: No marvel though he knit contradictions as close as
words can lie together, not approving in his judgment, and yet approving in
his subsequent reason all that Strafford did, as driven by the necessity of
times and the temper of that people; for this excuses all his misdemeanors:
Lastly, no marvel that he goes on building many fair and pious conclusions
upon false and wicked premises, which deceive the common Reader notwell
discerning the antipathy of such connexions: but this is themarvel, and may be
the astonishment of all that have a conscience, how he durst in the sight of
God (and with the same words of contrition wherewith David repents the murdering
of Uriah) repent his lawful compliance to that just act of not saving him,
whom he ought to have delivered up to speedy punishment; though himself the
guiltier of the two. If the deed were so sinful to have put to death so great
a malefactor, it would have taken much doubtless from the heaviness of his sin,
to have told God in his confession, how he labored, what dark plots he had
contrived, into what a league enterd, and with what Conspirators against his
Parliament and Kingdoms, to have rescued from the claim of Justice so notable
and so dear an Instrument of Tyranny: Which would have bin a story, no doubt
as pleasing in the ears of Heaven, as all these equivocal repentances. For it
was fear, and nothing else, which made him feign before both the scruple and
the satisfaction of hisconscience, that is to say, of his mind: his first fear
pretended conscience that he might be born with to refuse signing; his latter
fear being more urgent made him find a conscience both to sign and to be
satisfied. As for repentance it came not on him till a long time after; when he
saw he could have sufferd nothing more, though he had denied that Bill. For how
could he understandingly repent of letting that be Treason which the Parliament
and whole Nation so judged? This was that which repented him, to have given up
to just punishment so stout a Champion of his designs, who might have bin so
useful to him in his following civil Broiles. It was a worldy repentance not a
conscientious; or else it was a strange Tyranny which his conscience had got
over him, to vex him like an evil spirit for doing one act of Justice, and by
that means to fortify his resolution from ever doing so any more. That mind
must needs be irrecoverably depraved, which either by chance or importunity
tasting but once of one just deed, spatters at it, and abhorrs the relish ever
after. To the Scribes and Pharisees, woe was denounced by our Savior, for
straining at a Gnatt and swallowing a Camel; though a Gnatt were to be straind
at: But to a conscience with whom one good deed is so hard to pass down, as to
endanger almost a choking, and bad deeds without number though as bigg and
bulkie as the ruin of three Kingdoms, go down currently without straining,
certainly a far greater woe appertains. If his conscience were come to that
unnatural dyscra sie, as to digest poison and to keck at wholesome food, it was
not for the Parliament, or any of his Kingdoms to feed with him any longer.
Which to concele he would persuade us that the Parliament also in their
conscience escaped not some touches of remorse for putting Strafford to death,
in forbidding it by an after act to be a precedent for the future. But in a
fairer construction, that act implied rather a desire in them to pacify the
Kings mind, whom they perceav'd by this means quite alienated: in the mean
while not imagining that this after act should be retorted on them to tie up
Justice for the time to come upon like occasion, whether this were made a
precedent or not, no more then the want of such a precedent, if it had bin
wanting, had bin available to hinder this.

But how likely is it that this after act argued in the Parliament their least
repenting for the death of Strafford, when it argued so little in the King
himself: who notwithstanding this after act which had his own hand and
concurrence, if not his own instigation, within the same year accused of high
Treason no less then six Members at once for the same pretended crimes which
his conscience would not yield to think treasonable in the Earl. So that this
his subtle Argument to fast'n a repenting, and by that means a guiltiness of
Straffords death upon the Parliament, concludes upon his own head; and shows us
plainly that either nothing in his judgment was Treason against the
Commonwealth, but only against the Kings Person, a tyrannical Principle, or
that his conscience was a perverse and prevaricating conscience, to scruple
that the Commonwealth should punish for treasonous in one eminent offender,
that which he himself sought so vehemently to have punished in six guiltless
persons. If this were that touch of conscience which he bore with greater
regrett, then for any sin committed in his life, whether it were that proditory
Aid sent to Rochel and Religion abroad, or that prodigality of shedding blood
at home, to a million of his Subjects lives not valued in comparison of one
Strafford, we may consider yet at last, what true sense and feeling could be in
that conscience, and what fitness to be the master conscience of three
Kingdoms.

But the reason why he labors that we should take notice of so much
tenderness and regrett in his soul for having any hand in Straffords death, is
worth the marking ere we conclude. He hoped it would be someevidence before God
and Man to all posterity that he was far from bearing that vast load and
guilt of blood laid upon him by others. Which has the likeness of a subtle
dissimulation; bewailing the blood of one man, his commodious Instrument, put
to death most justly, though by him unwillingly, that we might think him too
tender to shed willingly the blood of those thousands, whom he counted Rebels.
And thus by dipping voluntarily his fingers end, yet with show of great remorse
in the blood of Strafford, whereof all men clear him, he thinks to escape that
Sea of innocent blood wherein his own guilt inevitably has plunged him all
over. And we may well perceave to what easy satisfactions and purgations he
had inured his secret conscience, who thaught, by such weak policies and
ostentations as these, to gain belief and absolution from understanding Men.

III. Upon his going to the House of Commons.
COncerning his unexcusable, and hostile march from the Court to the House of
Commons, there needs not much be said. For he confesses it to be an act which
most men, whom he calls his enemies cried shame upon; indifferent men grew
jealous of and fearful, and many of his Friends resented as a motion rising
rather from passion then reason: He himself, in one of his Answers to both
Houses, made profession to be convinced that it was a plain breach of their
Privilege: Yet here like a rott'n building newly trimmed over he represents it
speciously and fraudulently to impose upon the simple Reader; and seeks by
smooth and supple words not here only, but through his whole Book, to make some
beneficial use or other even of his worst miscarriages.

These Men, says he, meaning his Friends, knew not the just motives and
pregnant grounds with which I thought my self furnished; to wit, against the
five Members, whom he came to dragg out of the House. His best Friends indeed
knew not, nor could ever know his motives to such a riotous act: and had he
himself known any just grounds, he was not ignorant how much it might have
tended to his justifying, had he named them in this place, and not concealed
them. But suppose them real, suppose them known, what was this to that
violation and dishonor put upon the whole House, whose very door forcibly kept
open, and all the passages near it he besett with Swords and Pistols cockt and
menaced in the hands of about three hunderd Swaggerers and Ruffians, who but
expected, nay audibly called for the word of onset to beginn a slaughter.

He had discovered as he thought unlawful correspondencies which they had
used, and engagements to imbroile his Kingdoms, and remembers not his own
unlawful correspondencies, and conspiracies with the Irish Army of Papists,
with the French to land at Portsmouth, and his tampering both with the English
and the Scotch Army, to come up against the Parliament: the least of which
attempts by whomsoever, was no less then manifest Treason against the
Commonwealth.

If to demand Justice on the five Members were his Plea, for that which they
with more reason might have demanded Justice upon him (I use his own Argument)
there needed not so rough assistance. If he had resolved to bear that repulse
with patience, which his Queen by her words to him at his return little thought
he would have done, wherefore did he provide against it, with such an armed and
unusual force? But his heart served him not to undergo the hazard that such a
desperate scuffle would have brought him to. But wherefore did he go at all, it
behooving him to know there were two Statutes that declared he ought first to
have acquainted the Parliament, who were the Accusers, which he refused to do,
though still professing to govern by Law, and still justifying his attempts
against Law. And when he saw it was not permitted him to attaint them but by a
fair trial, as was offered him from time to time, for want of just matter which
yet never came to light, he let the business fall of his own accord; and all
those pregnancies, and just motives came to just nothing.

He had no temptation of displeasure or revenge against those men: None, but
what he thirsted to execute upon them, for the constant opposition which they
made against his tyrannous proceedings, and the love and reputation which they
therefore had among the People, but most immediately, for that they were supposed
the chief by whose activity those 12. protesting Bishops were but a week before
committed to the Tower.

He mist but little to have produced Writings under some men's own hands. But
yet he mist, though their Chambers, Trunks, and Studies were sealed up and
searched; yet not found guilty. Providence would not have it so. Good
Providence, that curbs the raging of proud Monarchs, as well as of madd
multitudes. Yet he wanted not such probabilities (for his pregnant is come now
to probable) as were sufficient to raise jealousies in any Kings heart. And
thus his pregnant motives are at last proved nothing but a Tympany, or a Queen
Mary's Cushion: For in any Kings heart, as Kings go now, what shadowie
conceit, or groundless toy will not create a jealousy.

That he had designed to assault the House of Commons, taking God to witness,
he utterly denies; yet, in his Answer to the City, maintains that any course
of violence had bin very justifiable. And we may then guess how far it was
from his design. However it discovered in him an excessive eagerness to be
avenged on them that crossed him; and that to have his will, he stood not to
do things never so much below him. What a becoming sight it was to see the
King of England one while in the House of Commons, by and by in the Guild Hall
among the Liveries and Manufactures, prosecuting so greedily the track of five
or six fled Subjects; himself not the Solicitor only, but the Pursivant and
the Apparitor of his own partial cause. And although, in his Answers to the
Parliament, he has confessed, first that his manner of prosecution was
illegal, next, that as he once conceived hec had ground anough to accuse them;
so at length that he found as good cause to desert any prosecution of them,
yet here he seems to reverse all, and against promise takes up his old deserted
accusation, that he might have something to excuse himself, instead of giving
due reparation; which he always refused to give them, whom he had so dishonored.

That I went, says he of his going to the House of Commons, attended with some
Gentlemen; Gentlemen indeed; the ragged Infantrie of Stews and Brothels; the
spawn and shiprack of Taverns and Dicing Houses: and then he pleads it was no
unwonted thing for the Majesty and safety of a King to be so attended,
especially in discontented times. An illustrious Majesty no doubt, so
attended: a becoming safety for the King of England, placed in the fidelity of
such Guards and Champions; Happy times; when Braves and Hacksters, the only
contented Members of his Government, were thought the fittest and the
faithfullest to defend his Person against the discontents of a Parliament and
all good Men. Were those the chos'n ones to preserve reverence to him, while he
enterd unassur'd, and full of suspicions into his great and faithful Council?
Let God then and the World judge whether the cause were not in his own guilty
and unwarrantable doings: The House of Commons upon several examinations of
this business declared it sufficiently proved, that the coming of those
soldiers, Papists and others with the King, was to take away some of their
Members, and in case of opposition or denial, to have fallen upon the House in a
hostile manner, This the King here denies; adding a fearful imprecation against
his own life, If he purposed any violence or oppression against the Innocent,
then, says he, let the Enemy persecute my soul, and tred my life to the
ground and lay my honor in the dust. What need then more disputing? He appealed
to Gods Tribunal, and behold God has judged, and don to him in the sight of
all men according to the verdict of his own mouth. To be a warning to all Kings
hereafter how they use presumptuously the words and protestations of David,
without the spirit and conscience of David. And the Kings admirers may here see
their madness to mistake this Book for a monument of his worth and wisdom, when
as indeed it is his Doomsday Book; not like that of William the Norman his
Predecessor, but the record and memorial of his condemnation: and discovers
whatever has befal'n him, to have bin hast'nd on from Divine Justice by the
rash and inconsiderat appeal of his own lips. But what evasions, what
pretenses, though never so unjust and empty, will he refuse in matters more
unknown, and more involved in the mists and intricacies of State, who, rather
then not justify himself in a thing so generally odious, can flatter his
integrity with such frivolous excuses against the manifest dissent of all men,
whether Enemies, Neuters, or Friends. But God and his judgments have not bin
mocked; and good men may well perceive what a distance there was ever like to
be between him and his Parliament, and perhaps between him and all amendment,
who for one good deed, though but consented to, asks God forgiveness; and from
his worst deeds don, takes occasion to insist upon his rightecusness.

IV. Upon the Insolency of the Tumults.
WE have here, I must confess, a neat and wellcouch'd invective against
Tumults; expressing a true fear of them in the Author, but yet so handsomely
composed, and withal so feelingly, that, to make a Royal comparison, I believe
Rehoboam the Son of Solomon could not have composed it better. Yet Rehoboam had
more cause to inveigh against them; for they had stoned his Tribute-gatherer,
and perhaps had as little spared his own Person, had he not with all speed
betak'n him to his Charret. But this King has stood the worst of them in his
own House without danger, when his Coach and Horses, in a Panic fear, have bin
to seek, which argues that the Tumults at Whitehall were nothing so dangerous
as those at Sechem.

But the matter here considerable, is not whether the King, or his Household
Rhetorician have made a pithy declamation against Tumults, but first whether
these were Tumults or not, next if they were, whether the King himself did not
cause them. Let us examine therefore how things at that time stood. The King, as
before has bin proved, having both called this Parliament unwillingly, and as
unwillingly from time to time condescended to their several acts, carrying on a
disjoynt and private interest of his own, and not enduring to be so crossed and
overswaid, especially in the executing of his chief and bold est Instrument,
the Deputy of Ireland, first tempts the English Army, with no less reward then
the spoil of London, to come up, and destroy the Parliament. That being
discovered by some of the Officers, who, though bad anough, yet abhorred so
foul a deed, the K. hard'nd in his purpose, tempts them the 2d time at Burrow
Bridge, promises to pawn his Jewels for them, and that they should be met and
assisted (would they but march on) with a gross body of horse under the E. of
Newcastle. He tempts them yet the third time, though after discovery, and his
own abjuration to have ever tempted them, as is affirmd in the Declaration of
no more addresses. Neither this succeeding, he turns him next to the Scotch
Army; and by his own credential Letters given to Oneal and Sr John Hinderson,
baits his temptation with a richer reward; not only to have the sacking of
London, but four Northern Counties to be made Scottish; with Jewels of great
value to be given in pawn thewhile. But neither would the Scots, for any
promise of reward, be bought to such an execrable and odious treachery; but
with much honesty gave notice of the Kings design, both to the Parliament and
City of London. The Parliament moreover had intelligence, and the people could
not but discern, that there was a bitter and malignant party grown up now to
such a boldness, as to give out insolent and threatening speeches against the
Parliament it self. Besides this, the Rebellion in Ireland was now broke out;
and a conspiracy in Scotland had bin made, while the King was there, against
some chief Members of that Parliament; great numbers here of unknown, and
suspicious persons resorted to the City; the King being returned from Scotland
presently dismisses that Guard which the Parliament thought necessary in the
midst of so many dangers to have about them; and puts another Guard in their
place, contrary to the Privilege of that high Court, and by such a one
commanded, as made them no less doubtful of the Guard it self. Which they
therefore, upon some ill effects thereof first found, discharge; deeming it more
safe to sit free, though without a Guard in open danger, then enclosed with a
suspected safety. The people therefore, lest their worthiest and most faithful
Patriots, who had exposed themselves for the public, and whom they saw now left
naked, should want aid, or be deserted in the midst of these dangers, came in
multitudes, though unarmed, to witness their fidelity and readiness in case of
any violence offered to the Parliament. The King both envying to see the Peoples
love thus devolved on another object, and doubting lest it might utterly
disable him to do with Parlaments as he was wont, sent a message into the City
forbidding such resorts. The Parliament also both by what was discovered to
them, and what they saw in a Malignant Party (some of which had already drawn
blood in a Fray or two at the Court Gate, and eev'n at their own Gate, in
Westminster Hall) conceaving themselves to be still in danger where they sat,
sent a most reasonable and just Petition to the King, that a Guard might be
allowed them out of the City, whereof the Kings own Chamberlain, the Earl of
Essex might have command; it being the right of inferior Courts to make chois
of their own Guard. This the King refused to do, and why he refused, the very
next day made manifest. For on that day it was, that he sallied out from White
Hall, with those trusty Myrmidons, to block up, or give assault to the House of
Commons. He had, besides all this, begun to fortify his Court, and entertaind
armed Men not a few; who standing at his Palace Gate, reviled, and with drawn
Swords wounded many of the People, as they went by unarmed, and in a peaceable
manner, whereof some died. The passing by of a multitude, though neither to
Saint Georges Feast, nor to a Tilting, certainly of it self was no Tumult; the
expression of their Loyalty and stedfastness to the Parliament, whose lives and
safeties by more then slight rumors they doubted to be in danger, was no
Tumult. If it grew to be so, the cause was in the King himself and his
injurious retinue, who both by Hostile preparations in the Court, and by actual
assailing of the People, gave them just cause to defend themselves.

Surely those unarmed and Petitioning People needed not have bin so formidable
to any, but to such whose consciences misgave them how ill they had deserved of
the People; and first began to injure them, because they justly feared it from
them; and then ascribe that to popular Tumult which was occasioned by their own
provoking.

And that the King was so emphatical and elaborat on this Theme against
Tumults, and expressed with such a vehemence his hatred of them, will redound
less perhaps, then he was aware, to the commendation of his Government. For
besides that in good Goverments they happ'n seldomest, and rise not without
cause, if they prove extreme and pernicious, they were never counted so to
Monarchy, but to Monarchical Tyranny; and extremes one with another are at most
Antipathy. If then the King so extremely stood in fear of Tumults, the
inference will endanger him to be the other extreme. Thus far the occasion of
this discourse against Tumults; now to the discourse it self, voluble anough, and
full of sentence, but that, for the most part, either specious rather then
solid, or to his cause nothing pertinent.

He never thought any thing more to presage the mischiefs that ensued, then
those Tumults. Then was his foresight but short, and much mistak'n. Those
Tumults were but the mild effects of an evil and injurious reign; not signs
of mischeifs to come, but seeking releef for mischeifs past; those signs were
to be read more apparent in his rage and purposed revenge of those free
expostulations, and clamours of the People against his lawless Government. Not
any thing, says he, portends more Gods displeasure against a Nation then when
he suffers the clamours of the Vulgar to pass all bounds of Law and reverence
to Authority. It portends rather his dispeasure against a Tyrannous King, whose
proud Throne he intends to overturn by that contemptible Vulgar; the sad cries
and oppressions of whom his Royalty regarded not. As for that supplicating
People they did no hurt either to Law or Authority, but stood for it rather in
the Parliament against whom they feared would violate it.

That they invaded the Honor and Freedom of the two Houses, is his own
officious accusation, not seconded by the Parliament, who had they seen cause,
were themselves best able to complain. And if they shook and menaced any, they
were such as had more relation to the Court, then to the Common wealth;
enemies, not patrons of the People. But if their petitioning unarmed were an
invasion of both Houses, what was his entrance into the House of Commons,
besetting it with armed men, in what condition then was the honor, and freedom
of that House?

They forbore not rude deportments, contemptuous words and actions to himself
and his Court.

It was more wonder, having heard what treacherous hostility he had designed
against the City, and his whole Kingdom, that they forbore to handle him as
people in their rage have handled Tyrants heertofore for less offenses.

They were not a short ague, but a fierce quotidian fever: He indeed may best
say it, who most felt it; for the shaking was within him; and it shook him by
his own description worse then a storm, worse then an earthquake, Belshazzars
Palsy. Had not worse fears, terrors, and envies made within him that
commotion, how could a multitude of his Subjects, armed with no other weapon
then Petitions, have shak'n all his joints with such a terrible ague. Yet that
the Parliament should entertain the least fear of bad intentions from him or
his Party, he endures not; but would persuade us that men scare themselves and
others without cause; for he thought fear would be to them a kind of armor,
and his design was, if it were possible, to disarme all, especially of a wise
fear and suspicion; for that he knew would find weapons.

He goes on therefore with vehemence to repeat the mischeifs don by these
Tumults. They first Petitioned, then protected, dictate next, and lastly overaw
the Parliament. They removed obstructions, they purged the Houses, cast out
rott'n members. If there were a man of iron, such as Talus, by our Poet
Spencer, is feigned to be the page of Justice, who with his iron flaile could
do all this, and expeditiously, without those deceitful forms and
circumstances of Law, worse then ceremonies in Religion; I say God send it don,
whether by one Talus, or by a thousand.

But they subdued the men of conscience in Parliament, backed and abetted all
seditious and schismatical Proposals against government ecclesiastical and
civil.

Now we may perceave the root of his hatred whence it springs. It was not the
Kings grace or princely goodness, but this iron flaile the People, that drove
the Bishops out of their Baronies, out of their Cathedrals, out of the Lords
House, out of their Copes and Surplices, and all those Papistical innovations,
threw down the High Commission and Star Chamber, gave us a Triennial Parliament,
and what we most desired; in revenge whereof he now so bitterly enveighs
against them; these are those seditious and scismatical Proposals, then by him
condescended to, as acts of grace, now of another name; which declares him,
touching matters of Church and State, to have bin no other man in the deepest
of his solitude, then he was before at the highest of his Sovrantie.

But this was not the worst of these Tumults, they played the hasty midwives,
and would not stay the ripening, but went straight to ripping up, and forcibly
cut out abortive Votes.

They would not stay perhaps the Spanish demurring, and putting off such
wholesome acts and counsels, as the Politic Cabin at WhiteHall had no mind to.
But all this is complained here as don to the Parliament, and yet we heard not
the Parliament at that time complain of any violence from the people, but from
him. Wherefore intrudes he to plead the cause of Parliament against the People,
while the Parliament was pleading their own cause against him; and against him
were forced to seek refuge of the people? It Is plain then that those confluxes
and resorts interrupted not the Parliament, nor by them were thought Tumultuous,
but by him only and his Court Faction.

But what good Man had not rather want any thing he most desired for the public
good, then attain it by such unlawful and irreligious means; as much as to
say, Had not rather sit still and let his Country be Tyrannized, then that the
people, finding no other remedy, should stand up like Men and demand their
Rights and Liberties. This is the artificialest piece of fineness to persuade
men into slavery that the wit of Court could have invented. But hear how much
betterthe Moral of this Lesson would befitt the Teacher. What good man had not
rather want a boundless and arbitrary power, and those fine Flowers of the
Crown, called Prerogatives, then for them to use force and perpetual vexation
to his faithful Subjects, nay to wade for them through blood and civil war?
So that this and the whole bundle of those following sentences may be applied
better to the convincement of his own violent courses, then of those pretended
Tumults.

Who were the chief Demagogues to send for those Tumults, some alive are not
ignorant. Setting aside the affrightment of this Goblin word; for the King by
his leave cannot coin English as he could Money, to be current (and it is
believed this wording was above his known style and Orthographie, and accuses
the whole composure to be conscious of some other Author) yet if the people were
sent for, emboldn'd and directed by those Demagogues, who, saving his Greek,
were good Patriots, and by his own confession Men of some repute for parts and
piety, it helps well to assure us there was both urgent cause, and the less
danger of their coming.

Complaints were made, yet no redress could be obtained. The Parliament also
complained of what danger they sat in from another party, and demanded of him
a Guard, but it was not granted. What marvel then if it cheered them to see
some store of their Friends, and in the Roman not the pettifogging sense, their
Clients so near about them; a defense due by nature both from whom it was
offered, and to whom; as due as to their Parents; though the Court stormed, and
fretted to see such honor given to them, who were then best Fathers of the
Commonwealth. And both the Parliament and people complained, and demanded
Justice for those assaults, if not murders don at his own doors, by that crew
of Rufflers, but he, in stead of doing Justice on them, justified and abetted
them in what they did, as in his public Answer to a Petition from the City may
be read. Neither is it slightly to be passed over, that in the very place where
blood was first drawn in this cause, as the beginning of all that followed,
there was his own blood shed by the Executioner. According to that sentence of
Divine justice, In the place where Dogs licked the blood of Naboth, shall Dogs
lick thy blood, eev'n thine.

From hence he takes occasion to excuse that improvident and fatal error of his
absenting from the Parliament. When he found that no Declaration of the Bishops
could take place against those Tumults. Was that worth his considering, that
foolish and self-undoing Declaration of twelve Cipher Bishops, who were
immediately appeacht of Treason for that audacious Declaring? The Bishops
peradventure were now and then pulld by the Rochers, and deserved another kind
of pulling; but what amounted this to the fear of his own person in the
streets? Did he not the very next day after his irruption into the House of
Commons, then which nothing had more exasperated the people, go in his Coach
unguarded into the City? did he receave the least affront, much less violence
in any of the Streets, but rather humble demeanours, and supplications? Hence
may be gathered, that however in his own guiltiness he might have justly
feared, yet that he knew the people so full of aw and reverence to his Person,
as to dare commit himself single among the thickest of them, at a time when he
had most provoked them. Besides in Scot-Land they had handled the Bishops in a
more robustious manner; Edinburrow had bin full of Tumults, two Armies from
thence had enterd England against him; yet after all this, he was not fearful,
but very forward to take so long a journey to Edinburrow; which argues first,
as did also his rendition afterward to the Scotch Army, that to England he
continued still, as he was indeed, a stranger, and full of diffidence; to the
Scots only a native King, in his confidence, though not in his dealing toward
them. It shows us next beyond doubting, that all this his fear of Tumults was
but a mere color and occasion taken of his resolved absence from the
Parliament, for some other end not difficult to be guessed. And those instances
wherein valor is not to be questioned for not scuffling with the Sea, or an
undisciplind Rabble, are but subservient to carry on the solemn jest of his
fearing Tumults: if they discover not withal, the true reason why he departed;
only to turn his slashing at the Court Gate, to slaughtering in the Field;
his disorderly bickering, to an orderly invading: which was nothing else but a
more orderly disorder.

Some suspected and affirmed, that he meditated a War when he went first from
White Hall. And they were not the worst heads that did so, nor did any of his
former acts weak'n him to that, as he alleges for himself, or if they had, they
clear him only for the time of passing them, not for what ever thoughts might
come after into his mind. Former actions of improvidence or fear, not with him
unusual, cannot absolve him of all after meditations,

He goes on protesting his no intention to have left White Hall, had these
horrid Tumults given him but Fair Quarter, as if he himself, his Wife and
Children had bin in peril. But to this anough has bin answered.

Had this Parliament as it was in its first Election, Namely, with the Lord and
Baron Bishops, sat full and free, he doubts not but all had gone well. What
warrant this of his to us? Whose not doubting was all good men's greatest doubt.

He was resolved to hear reason, and to consent so far as he could
comprehend. A hopeful resolution; what if his reason were found by often
experience to comprehend nothing beyond his own advantages, was this a reason
fit to be entrusted with the common good of three Nations?

But, says he, as Swine are to gardens, so are Tumults to Parlaments. This the
Parliament, had they found it so, could best have told us. In the mean while,
who knows not that one great Hogg may do as much mischief in a Garden, as many
little Swine.

He was sometimes prone to think that had he called this last Parliament to any
other place in England, the sad consequences might have bin prevented. But
change of air changes not the mind. Was not his first Parliament at Oxford
dissolved after two Subsidies given him, and no Justice received? Was not his
last in the same place, where they sat with as much freedom, as much quiet from
Tumults, as they could desire, a Parliament both in his account, and their own,
consisting of all his Friends, that fled after him, and suffered for him, and
yet by him nicknam'd, and casheer'd for a Mungrill Parliament that vexed his
Queen with their base and mutinous motions, as his Cabinet letter tells us?
Whereby the World may see plainly, that no shifting of place, no sifting of
members to his own mind, no number, no paucity, no freedom from tumults, could
ever bring his arbitrary wilfulness, and tyrannical Designs to brook the lest
shape or similitude, the lest counterfeit of a Parliament.

Finally instead of praying for his people as a good King should do, he
prays to be delivered from them, as from wild Beasts, Inundations, and raging
Seas, that had overborn all Loyalty, Modesty, Laws, Justice, and Religion. God
save the people from such Intercessors.

V. Upon the Bill for Trienniall Parlaments, And for settling this etc.
THe Bill for a Triennial Parliament was but the third part of one good step
toward that which in times past was our annual right. The other Bill for
settling this Parliament was new indeed, but at that time very necessary; and in
the Kings own Words no more then what the World was fully confirmed he might
in Justice, Reason, Honor, and Conscience grant them; for to that end he
affirms to have don it.

But whereas he attributes the passing of them to his own act of grace and
willingness, as his manner is to make virtues of his necessities, and giving to
himself all the praise, heaps ingratitude upon the Parliament, a little memory
will set the clean contrary before us; that for those Beneficial acts we ow
what we ow to the Parliament; but to his granting them neither praise nor
thanks. The first Bill granted much less then two former Statutes yet in force
by Edward the third; that a Parliament should be called every year, or ofter if
need were; nay from a far ancienter Law Book called the Mirror, it is affirmed
in a late Treatise called Rights of the Kingdom, that Parlaments by our old
Laws ought twice a year to be at London. From twice in one year to once in
three year, it may be soon cast up how great a loss we fell into of our ancient
liberty by that act, which in the ignorant and Slavish minds we then were, was
thought a great purchase. Wisest men perhaps were contented, for the present at
least by this act to have recoverd Parlaments, which were then upon the brink of
danger to be forever lost. And this is that which the King preaches here for a
special tok'n of his Princely favor, to have abridg'd and over reached the
people five parts in six of what their due was, both by ancient Statute, and
originally. And thus the taking from us all but a Triennial remnant of that
English Freedom which our Fathers left us double, in a fair annuity enrowl'd,
is set out, and sold to us here for the gracious, and over liberal giving of a
new enfranchisment. How little, may we think, did he ever give us, who in the
Bill of his pretended givings writes down Imprimis that benefit or privilege
once in three year given us, which by so giving, he more then twice every year
illegally took from us. Such givers as give single to take away sixfold, be to
our Enemies. For certainly this Commonwealth, if the Statutes of our Ancestors
be worth ought, would have found it hard and hazardous to thrive under the
damage of such a guilefull liberatie. The other act was so necessary that,
nothing in the power of Man, more seemed to be the stay and support of all
things from that steep ruin, to which he had nigh brought them, then that Act
obtained. He had by his ill Stewardship, and, to say no worse, the needless
raising of two Armies, intended for a civil War, beggered both himself and the
Public: and besides had left us upon the score of his needy Enemies, for what
it cost them in their own defense against him. To disingage him and the Kingdom,
great sums were to be borrowed, which would never have bin lent, nor could ever
be repaid, had the King chanced to dissolve this Parliament as heertofore. The
errors also of his Government had brought the Kingdom to such extremes, as were
incapable of all recovery without the absolute continuance of a Parliament. It
had bin else in vain to go about the settling of so great distempers, if he
who first caused the malady, might when he pleased reject the remedy.
Notwithstanding all which, that he granted both these Acts unwillingly, and as
a mere passive Instrument, was then visible eev'n to most of those Men who now
will see nothing.

At passing of the former Act he himself concealed not his unwillingness; and
testifying a general dislike of their actions, which they then proceeded in with
great approbation of the whole Kingdom, he told them with a maisterly Brow,
that by this Act he had obliged them above what they had deserved, and gave a
piece of Justice to the Common wealth six times short of his Predecessors, as
if he had bin giving some boon or begged Office to a sort of his desertless
Grooms.

That he passed the latter Act against his will, no man in reason can hold it
questionable. For if the February before he made so dainty, and were so loath
to bestow a Parliament once in three year upon the Nation, because this had so
opposed his courses, was it likely that the May following he should bestow
willingly on this Parliament an indissoluble sitting, when they had offended him
much more, by cutting short and impeaching of high Treason his chief Favorites?
It was his fear then, not his favor which drew from him that Act, lest the
Parliament, incensed by his Conspiracies against them about the same time
discovered, should with the people have resented too hainously those his
doings, if to the suspicion of their danger from him, he had also added the
denial of this only means to secure themselves.

From these Acts therefore in which he glories, and wherewith so often he upbraids
the Parliament, he cannot justly expect to reap aught but dishonor and
dispraise; as being both unwillingly granted, and the one granting much less
then was before allowed by Statute, the other being a testimony of his violent
and lawless Custom, not only to break Privileges, but whole Parlaments; from
which enormity they were constrained to bind him first of all his Predecessors;
never any before him having given like causes of distrust and jealousy to his
People. As for this Parliament, how far he was from being advised by them, as
he ought, let his own words express.

He taxes them with undoing what they found well done: and yet knows they undid
nothing in the Church but Lord Bishops, Liturgies, Ceremonies, High Commission,
judged worthy by all true Protestants to be thrown out of the Church. They
undid nothing in the State but irregular and grinding Courts, the maine
grievances to be removed; and if these were the things which in his opinion
they found well don, we may again from hence be informed with what
unwillingness he removed them; and that those gracious Acts whereof so
frequently he makes mention, may be englished more properly Acts of fear and
dissimulation against his mind and conscience.

The bill preventing dissolution of this Parliament he calls An unparalleled Act
out of the extreme confidence that his Subjects would not make ill use of it.
But was it not a greater confidence of the people to put into one man's hand so
great a power, till he abused it, as to summon and dissolve Parlaments? He
would be thankt for trusting them, and ought to thank them rather for trusting
him: the trust issuing first from them, not from him.

And that it was a mere trust, and not his Prerogative, to call and dissolve
Parlaments at his pleasure, And that Parlaments were not to be dissolved, till
all Petitions were heard, all greevances redrest, is not only the assertion of
this Parliament, but of our ancient Law Books, which averr it to be an unwritt'n
Law of common Right, so ingrav'n in the hearts of our Ancestors, and by them so
constantly enjoyed and claimed, as that it needed not enrouling. And if the
Scots in their Declaration could charge the King with breach of their Laws, for
breaking up that Parliament without their consent, while matters of greatest
moment were depending, it were unreasonable to imagine that the wisdom of
England should be so wanting to it self through all Ages, as not to provide by
some known Law writt'n or unwritt'n, against the not calling, or the arbitrary
dissolving of Parlaments; or that they who ordained their summoning twice a
year, or as often as need required, did not tacitly enact also, that as
necessity of affairs called them, so the same necessity should keep them
undissolv'd, till that were fully satisfied. Were it not for that, Parlaments,
and all the fruit and benefit we receave by having them, would turn soon to
mere abusion. It appears then that if this Bill of not dissolving were an
unparalled Act, it was a known and common Right which our Ancestors under
other Kings enjoyd as firmly as if it had bin grav'n in Marble; and that the
infringement of this King first brought it into a writt'n Act: Who now boasts
that, as a great favor don us, which his own less fidelity then was in former
Kings constrained us only of an old undoubted Right to make a new writt'n Act.
But what needed writt'n Acts, when as anciently it was esteemed part of his
Crown Oath not to dissolve Parlaments, till all greevances were considered;
whereupon, the old Modi of Parliament calls it flat perjury, if he dissolve them
before; as I find cited in a Book mentioned at the beginning of this Chapter,
to which and other Law-tractats I referr the more Lawyerlie mooting of this
point: which is neither my element, nor my proper work here; since the Book
which I have to Answer pretends reason, not Autoritys and quotations: and I
hold reason to be the best Arbitrator, and the Law of Law it self.

It Is true that good Subjects think it not just that the Kings condition should
be worse by bettering theirs. But then the King must not be at such a distance
from the people, in judging what is better and what worse; which might have bin
agreed, had he known (for his own words condemn him) as well with moderation to
use, as with earnestness to desire his own advantages.

A continual Parliament he thought would keep the Commonwealth in tune. Judge
Common wealth, what proofs he gave, that this boasted profession was ever in
his thought.

Some, says he, gave out that I repented me of that settling Act. His own
actions gave it out beyond all supposition. For doubtless it repented him to
have established that by Law, which he went about so soon after to abrogat by
the Sword.

He calls those Acts which he confesses, tended to their good, not more Princely
then friendly contributions. As if to do his duty were of courtesy, and the
discharge of his trust a parcel of his liberality; so nigh lost in his esteem
was the birthright of our Liberties, that to give them back again upon demand
stood at the mercy of his Contribution.

He doubts not but the affections of his People will compensate his sufferings
for those acts of confidence. And imputes his sufferings to a contrary cause.
Not his confidence, but his distrust was that which brought him to those
sufferings, from the time that he forsook his Parliament; and trusted them never
the sooner for what he tells of their piety and religious strictness, but
rather hated them as Puritans, whom he always sought to extirpat.

He would have it believed, that to bind his hands by these Acts argued a very
short foresight of things, and extreme fatuity of mind in him, if he had meant
a War. If we should conclude so, that were not the only Argument: Neither did
it argue that he meant peace, knowing that what he granted for the present out
of fear, he might as soon repeal by force, watching his time; and deprive
them the fruit of those Acts, if his own designs, wherein he put his trust,
took effect.

Yet he complains, That the tumults threatened to abuse all acts of grace and
turn them into wantonness. I would they had turned his wantonness into the
grace of not abusing Scripture. Was this becoming such a Saint as they would
make him, to adulterat those Sacred words from the grace of God to the acts of
his own grace? Herod was eat'n up os Worms for suffering others to compare his
voice to the voice of God; but the Borrower of this phrase gives much more
cause of jealousy that he lik'n'd his own acts of grace to the acts of Gods
grace.

From profaneness he scars comes off with perfet sense, I was not then in a
capacity to make War, therefore I intended not: I was not in a capacity,
therefore I could not have given my Enemies greater advantage then by so
unprincely inconstancy to have scattered them by Arms, whom but lately I had
settled by Parliament. What place could there be for his inconstancy in that
thing whereto he was in no capacity? Otherwise his inconstancy was not so un
wonted or so nice, but that it would have easily found pretenses to scatter
those in revenge, whom he settled in fear.

It had bin a course full of sin as well as of hazard and dishonor. True, but
if those considerations withheld him not from other actions of like nature, how
can we believe they were of strength sufficient to withhold him from this? And
that they withheld him not, the event soon taught us.

His letting some men go up to the Pinnacle of the Temple was a temptation to
them to cast him down headlong. In this Simily we have himself compared to
Christ, the Parliament to the Devil, and his giving them that Act of settling,
to his letting them go up to the Pinnacle of the Temple. A tottring and giddy
Act rather then a settling. This was goodly use made of Scripture in his
Solitudes. But it was no Pinnacle of the Temple, it was a Pinnacle of
Nebuchadnezzars Palace, from whence he and Monarchy fell headlong together.

He would have others see that All the Kingdoms of the World are not worth
gaining by the ways of sin which hazard the Soul; and has himself left
nothing unhazzarded to keep three. He concludes with sentences that rightly
scannd make not so much for him as against him, and confesses that The Act of
settling was no sin of his will, and we easily believe him, for it has bin
clearly proved a sin of his unwillingness.

With his Orisons I meddle not, for he appeals to a high Audit. This yet may be
noted, that at his Prayers he had before him the sad presage of his ill
success, As of a dark and dangerous Storm which never admitted his return to
the Port from whence he set out. Yet his Prayer Book no sooner shut, but other
hopes flattered him; and their flattering was his destruction.

VI. Upon his Retirement from Westminster.
THe Simily where with he begins I was about to have found fault with, as in a
garb somewhat more Poetical then for a Statist: but meeting with many strains
of like dress in other of his Essaies, and hearing him reported a more diligent
reader of Poets, then of Politicians, I begun to think that the whole Book
might perhaps be intended a piece of Poetry. The words are good, the fiction
smooth and cleanly; there wanted only Rhyme, and that, they say, is bestowed
upon it lately. But to the Argument.

I stayed at White Hall till I was driven away by shame more then fear. I
retract not what I thought of the fiction, yet here, I must confess, it lies
too open. In his Messages, and Declarations, nay in the whole Chapter next but
one before this, he affirms that The danger, wherein his Wife, his Children,
and his own Person were by those Tumults, was the maine cause that drove him
from White Hall, and appeals to God as witness: he affirms here that it was
shame more then fear. And Digby, who knew his mind as well as any, tells his
new-listed Guard, That the principal cause of his Majesty's going thence, was
to save them from being trodd in the dirt. From whence we may discern what
false and frivolous excuses are avowed sor truth, either in those Declarations,
or in this Penitential Book. Our forefathers were of that courage and severity
of zeal to Justice, and their native Liberty, against the proud contempt and
misrule of their Kings, that when Richard the Second departed but from a
Committie of Lords, who sat preparing matter for the Parliament not yet
assembled, to the removal of his evil Counselors, they first vanquished and put
to flight Robert de Vere his chief Favorite; and then coming up to London with
a huge Army, required the King then withdrawn for fear, but no further off then
the Tower, to come to Westminster. Which he refusing, they told him flatly,
that unless he came, they would choose another. So high a crime it was
accounted then, for Kings to absent themselves, not from a Parliament, which
none ever durst, but from any meeting of his Peers and Counselors, which did
but tend toward a Parliament. Much less would they have suffered that a King,
for such trivial and various pretenses, one while for fear of tumults, another
while for shame to see them, should leav his Regal Station, and the whole
Kingdom bleeding to death of those wounds which his own unskilful and pervers
Government had inflicted.

Shame then it was that drove him from the Parliament, but the shame of what?
Was it the shame of his manifold errors and misdeeds, and to see how weakly he
had played the King No; But to see the barbarous rudeness of those Tumults to
demand any thing. We have started here another, and, I believe, the truest
cause of his deserting the Parliament. The worst and strangest of that Any thing
which the people then demanded, was but the unlording of Bishops, and expelling
them the House, and the reducing of Church Discipline to a conformity with
other Protestant Churches: this was the Barbarism of those Tumults; and that he
might avoid the granting of those honest and pious demands, as well demanded by
the Parliament as the People, for this very cause, more then for fear, by his
own confession here, he left the City; and in a most tempestuous season forsook
the Helm, and steerage of the Commonwealth. This was that terrible Any thing
from which his Conscience and his Reason chose to run rather then not deny. To
be importuned the removing of evil Counselors, and other greevances in Church
and State, was to him an intolerable oppression. If the peoples demanding were
so burd'nsome to him, what was his denial and delay of Justice to them?

But as the demands of his people were to him a burd'n and oppression, so was
the advice of his Parliament esteemed a bondage; Whose agreeing Votes, as he
affirms, Were not by any Law or reason conclusive to his judgment. For the
Law, it ordaines a Parliament to advise him in his great affairs; but if it
ordain also that the single judgment of a King shall outballance all the
wisdom of his Parliament, it ordaines that which frustrats the end of its own
ordaining. For where the Kings judgment may dissent, to the destruction, as it
may happ'n, both of himself and the Kingdom, there advice, and no further, is a
most insufficient, and frustraneous means to be provided by Law, in case of so
high concernment. And where the main and principal Law of common preservation
against tyranny is left so fruitless and infirm, there it must needs follow
that all lesser Laws are to their several ends and purposes much more weak, and
uneffectual. For that Nation would deserv to be renownd and Chronicl'd for
folly and stupidity, that should by Law provide force against private and petty
wrongs, advice only against tyranny and public ruin. It being therefore most
unlike a Law, to ordain a remedy so slender and unlawlike, to be the utmost
means of all our safety, or prevention, as advice is, which may at any time be
rejected by the sole judgment of one man, the King, and so unlike the Law of
England, which Lawyers say is the quintessence of reason and mature wisdom, we
may conclude that the Kings negative voice was never any Law, but an absurd and
reasonless Custom, begott'n and grown up either from the flattery of basest
times, or the usurpation of immoderat Princes. Thus much to the Law of it, by a
better evidence then Rowles and Records, Reason.

But is it possible he should pretend also to reason, that the judgment of one
man, not as a wise or good man, but as a King, and often times a wilful, proud,
and wicked King, should outweigh the prudence, and all the virtue of an elected
Parliament? What an abusive thing were it then to summon Parlaments, that by the
Major part of voices greatest matters may be there debated and resolved, when
as one single voice after that, shalldash all their Resolutions?

He attempts to give a reason why it should, Because the whole Parliament
represents not him in any kind. But mark how little he advances; for if the
Parliament represent the whole Kingdom, as is sure anough they do, then does
the King represent only himself; and if a King without his Kingdom be in a
civil sense nothing, then without or against the Representative of his whole
Kingdom he himself represents nothing, and by consequence his judgment and his
negative is as good as nothing; and though we should allow him to be something,
yet not equivalent, or comparable to the whole Kingdom, and so neither to them
who represent it: much less that one syllable of his breath putt into the
scales should be more ponderous then the joint voice and efficacy of a whole
Parliament, assembled by election, and indu'd with the plenipotence of a free
Nation, to make Laws, not to be denied Laws, and with no more but No, a
sleevless reason, in the most pressing times of danger and disturbance, to be
sent home frustrat, and remediless.

Yet here he maintains To be no further bound to agree with the Votes of both
Houses, then he sees them to agree with; the will of God, with his just Rights
as a King, and the general good of his People. As to the freedom of his
agreeing or not agreeing, limited with due bounds, no man reprehends it; this
is the Question here, or the Miracle rather, why his only not agreeing should
lay a negative bar and inhibition upon that which is agreed to by a whole
Parliament, though never so conducing to the Public good or safety? To know the
will of God better then his whole Kingdom, whence should he have it? Certainly
Court-breeding and his perpetual conversation with Flatterers, was but a bad
School. To judge of his own Rights could not belong to him, who had no right
by Law in any Court to judge of so much as Felony or Treason, being held a
party in both these Cases, much more in this; and his Rights however should
give place to the general good, for which end all his Rights were given him.
Lastly to suppose a clearer insight and discerning of the general good,
allotted to his own singular judgment, then to the Parliament and all the
People, and from that self-opinion of discerning, to deny them that good which
they being all Freemen seek earnestly, and call for, is an arrogance and
iniquity beyond imagination rude and unreasonable: they undoubtedly having most
authority to judge of the public good, who for that purpose are chos'n out, and
sent by the People to advise him. And if it may be in him to see often the major
part of them not in the right, had it not bin more his modesty to have doubted
their seeing him more oft'n in the wrong?

He passes to another reason of his denials, Because of some men's hydropic
unsatiableness, and thirst of asking, the more they drank, whom no fountain of
regal bounty was able to overcome. A comparison more properly bestowed on
those that came to guzzle in his Wine-cellar, then on a freeborn People that
came to claim in Parliament their Rights and Liberties, which a King ought
therefore to grant, because of right demanded; not to deny them for fear his
bounty should be exhaust, which in these demands (to continue the same
Metaphor) was not so much as Broached; it being his duty, not his bounty to
grant these things. He who thus refuses to give us Law, in that refusal gives
us another Law, which is his will, another name also, and another condition; of
Freemen to become his vassals.

Putting off the Courtier he now puts on the Philosopher, and sententiously
disputes to this effect, that reason ought to be used to men, force and terror
to Beasts; that he deserves to be a slave who captivates the rational
soverantie of his soul, and liberty of his will to compulsion; that he would
not forfeit that freedom which cannot be denied him, as a King, because it
belongs to him as a Man and a Christian, thoughto preserve his Kingdom, but
rather dye enjoying the Empire of his soul, then live in such a vassalage as
not to use his reason and conscience to like or dislike as a King. Which words,
of themselves, as far as they are sense, good and Philosophical, yet in the
mouth of him who to engross this common liberty to himself, would tred down
all other men into the condition of Slaves and beasts, they quite loose their
commendation. He confesses a rational sovrantie of soul, and freedom of will
in every man, and yet with an implicit repugnancy would have his reason the
sovran ofthat sovranty, and would captivate and make useless that natural
freedom of will in all other men but himself. But them that yield him this
obedience he so well rewards, as to pronounce them worthy to be Slaves. They
who have lost all to be his Subjects, may stoop and take up the reward. What
that freedom is, which cannot be denied him as a King, because it belongs to
him as a Man, and a Christian, I understand not. If it be his negative voice,
it concludes all men who have not such a negative as his against a whole
Parliament, to be neither Men, nor Christians: and what was he himself then, all
this while that we denied it him as a King? Will he say that he enjoyed
within himself the less freedom for that? Might not he, both as a Man, and as a
Christian have raignd within himself, in full sovranty of soul, no man
repining, but that his outward and imperious will must invade the civil
Liberties of a Nation? Did we therefore not permit him to use his reason or his
conscience, not permitting him to bereave us the use of ours? And might not he
have enjoyed both, as a King, governing us as Free men by what Laws we our
selves would be governed? It was not the inward use of his reason and of his
conscience that would content him, but to use them both as a Law over all his
Subjects, in whatever he declared as a King to like or dislike. Which use of
reason, most reasonless and unconseionable, is the utmost that any Tyrant ever
pretended over his Vassals.

In all wise Nations the Legislative power, and the judicial execution of that
power have bin most commonly distinct, and in several hands: but yet the former
supreme, the other subordinat. If then the King be only set up to execute the
Law, which is indeed the highest of his office: he ought no more to make or
forbidd the making of any law agreed upon in Parliament, then other inferior
Judges, who are his Deputies. Neither can he more reject a Law offered him by
the Commons, then he can new make a Law which they reject. And yet the more to
credit and uphold his cause, he would seem to have Philosophy on his side;
straining her wise dictates to unphilosophical purposes. But when Kings come so
low, as to fawn upon Philosophy, which before they neither valued nor
understood, it is a sign that fails not, they are then put to their last Trump.
And Philosophy as well requites them, by not suffering her gold'n sayings
either to become their lips, or to be used as masks and colors of injurious
and violent deeds. So that what they presume to borrow from her sage and
virtuous rules, like the Riddle of Sphinx not understood, breaks the neck of
their own cause.

But now again to Politics, He cannot think the Majesty of the Crown of
England to be bound by any Coronation Oath in a blind and brutish formalitie,
to consent to whatever its Subjects in Parliament shall require. What Tyrant
could presume to say more, when he meant to kick down all Law, Government, and
bond of Oath? But why he so desires to absolve himself the Oath of his
Coronation would be worth the knowing. It cannot but be yielded, that the Oath
which binds him to performance of his trust, ought in reason to contain the
sum of what his chief trust and Office is. But if it neither do enjoin, nor
mention to him, as a part of his duty, the making or the marring of any Law or
scrap of Law, but requires only his assent to to those Laws which the people
have already chos'n, or shall choose (for so both the Latin of that Oath, and
the old English, and all Reason admits, that the People should not lose under a
new King what freedom they had before) then that negative voice so contended
for, to deny the passing of any Law which the Commons choose, is both against
the Oath of his Coronation, and his Kingly Office. And if the King may deny to
pass what the Parliament has chos'n to be a Law, then does the King make
himself Superior to his whole Kingdom; which not only the general Maxims of
Policy gainsay, but eev'n our own standing Laws, as has bin cited to him in
Remonstrances heertosore, that The King has two Superiors, the Law and his
Court of Parliament. But this he counts to be a blind and brutish formality,
whether it be Law, or Oath, or his duty, and thinks to turn itoff with wholesome
words and phrases, which he then first learnt of the honest People, when they
were so oft'n compelled to use them against those more truly blind and brutish
formalities thrust upon us by his own command, not in civil matters only but
in Spiritual. And if his Oath to perform what the People require, when they
Crown him, be in his esteem a brutish formality, then doubtless those other
Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, taken absolute on our part, may most justly
appear to us in all respects as brutish and as formal; and so by his own
sentence no more binding to us then his Oath to him.

As for his instance in case He and the House of Peers attempted to enjoyne the
House of Commons, it bears no equality; for he and the Peers represent but
themselves, the Commons are the whole Kingdom.

Thus he concludes his Oath to be fully discharged in Governing by Laws already
made, as being not bound to pass any new, if his Reason bids him deny. And so
may infinite mischeifs grow, and he with a pernicious negative may deny us all
things good, or just, or safe, whereof our ancestors in times much differing
from ours, had either no fore sight, or no occasion to foresee; while our
general good and safety shall depend upon the private and overweening Reason of
one obstinat Man; who against all the Kingdom, if he list, will interpret both
the Law and his Oath of Coronation by the tenor of his own will. Which he
himself confesses to be an arbitrary power, yet doubts not in his Argument to
imply, as if he thought it more fit the Parliament should be subject to his
will, then he to their advice, a man neither by nature nor by nurture wise. How
is it possible that he in whom such Principles as these were so deep rooted,
could ever, though restored again, have reigned otherwise then Tyrannically.

He objects That force was but a slavish method to dispell his error. But how
oft'n shall it be answered him that no force was used to dispell the error out
of his head, but to drive it from off our necks: for his error was imperious,
and would command all other men to ronounce their own reason and understanding,
till they perished under the injunction of his all-ruling error.

He alleges the uprightness of his intentions to excuse his possible failings;
a position falls both in Law and Divinity: Yea contrary to his own better
principles, who affirms in the twelfth Chapter, that The goodness of a man's
intention, will not excuse the scandal, and contagion of his example. His not
knowing, through the corruption of flattery and Court Principles, what he ought
to have known, will not excuse his not doing what he ought to have don: no more
then the small skill of him who undertakes to be a Pilot, will excuse him to be
misledd by any wandering Starr mistak'n for the Pole. But let his intentions be
never so upright, what is that to us? What answer for the reason and the
National Rights which God has given us, if having Parlaments, and Laws and the
power of making more to avoid mischief, we suffer one man's blind intentions to
lead us all with our eyes open to manifest destruction.

And if Arguments prevail not with such a one, force is well used; not to
carry on the weakness of our Counsels, or to convince his error, as he
surmises, but to acquitt and rescue our own reason, our own consciences from
the force and prohibition laid by his usurping error upon our Liberties and
understandings.

Never thing pleased him more then when his judgment concurred with theirs.
That was to the applause of his own judgment, and would as well have pleased
any selfconceited man.

Yea in many things he chose rather to deny himself then them. That is to say
in trifles. For of his own Interests and Personal Rights he conceavs himself
Master. To part with, if he please, not to contest for, against the Kingdom
which is greater then he, whose Rights are all subordinat to the Kingdoms good:
And in what concerns truth, Justice, the right of Church or his Crown, no man
shall gain his consent against his mind. What can be left then for a
Parliament, but to sit like Images, while he still thus either with incomparable
arrogance assumes to himself the best ability of judging for other men what is
Truth, Justice, Goodness, what his own, or the Churches Right, or with
unsufferable Tyranny restraines all men from the enjoyment of any good, which
his judgment, though erroneous, thinks not fit to grant them; notwithstanding
that the Law and his Coronal Oath requires his undeniable assent to what Laws
the Parliament agree upon.

He had rather wear a Crown of Thorns with our Savior. Many would be all one
with our Savior, whom our Savior will not know. They who govern ill those
Kingdoms which they had a right to, have to our Saviors Crown of Thorns no
right at all. Thorns they may find anow, of their own gathering, and their own
twisting: for Thorns and Snares, says Solomon, are in the way of the froward;
but to wear them as our Savior wore them is not given to them that suffer by
their own demerits. Nor is a Crown of Gold his due who cannot first wear a Crown
of Lead; not only for the weight of that great Office, but for the compliance
which it ought to have with them who are to counsel him, which here he terms
in scorn An imbased flexibleness to the various and often contrary dictates of
any Factions. meaning his Parliament; for the question has bin all this while
between them two. And to his Parliament, though a numerous and chois Assembly of
whom the Land thought wisest, he imputes rather then to himself, want of
reason, neglect of the Public, interest of parties, and particularitie of
private will and passion; but with what modesty or likelihood of truth it will
be wearisom to repeat so oft'n.

He concludes with a sentence fair in seeming, but fallacious. For if the
conscience be ill edifi'd, the resolution may more befitt a foolish then a
Christian King, to prefer a self-willed conscience before a Kingdoms good;
especially in the denial of that which Law and his Regal Office by Oath bids
him grant to his Parliament, and whole Kingdom rightfully demanding. For we may
observe him throughout the discourse to assert his Negative power against the
whole Kingdom; now under the specious Plea of his conscience and his reason,
but heertofore in a louder note, Without us, or against our consent, the Votes
of either or of both Houses together, must not, cannot, shall not, Declar. May
4. 1642.

With these and the like deceavable Doctrines he levens also his Prayer.

VII. Upon the Queens departure.
TO this Argument we shall soon have said; for what concerns it us to hear a
Husband divul^ his Household privacies, extolling to others the ver^tues of his
Wife; an infirmity not seldom incident to those who have least cause. But how
good she was a Wife, was to himself, and be it left to his own fancy; how bad
a Subject, is not much disputed. And being such, it need be made no wonder,
though she left a Protestant Kingdom with as little honor as her Mother left
a Popish.

That this Is the first example of any Protestant Subjects that have taken up
Arms against their King a Protestant, can be to Protestants no dishonor; when
it shall be heard that he first levied War on them, and to the interest of
Papists more then of Protestants. He might have given yet the precedence of
making war upon him to the subjects of his own Nation; who had twice opposed
him in the open Field, long ere the English found it necessary to do the like.
And how groundless, how dissembled is that fear, least she, who for so many
years had bin averse from the Religion of her Husband, and every year more
and more, before these disturbances broke out, should for them be now the more
alienated from that to which we never heard she was inclined. But if the fear
of her Delinquency and that Justice which the Protestants demanded on her, was
any cause of heralienating the more, to have gained her by indirect means had
bin no advantage to Religion; much less then was the detriment to loose her
further off. It had bin happy if his own actions had not given cause of more
scandal to the Protestants, then what they did against her could justly
scandalize any Papist.

Them who accused her, well anough known to be the Parliament, he censures for
Men yet to seek their Religion, whether Doctrine, Discipline, or good manners;
the rest he soothes with the name of true English Protestants, a mere
scismatical name, yet he so great an enemy of Scism.

He ascribes Rudeness and barbarity worse then Indian to the English Parliament,
and all virtue to his Wife, in strains that come almost to Sonnetting: How
fit to govern men, undervaluing and aspersing the great Counsel of his
Kingdom, in comparison of one Woman. Examples are not far to seek, how great
mischief and dishonor has befallen to Nations under the Government of
effeminate and Uxorious Magistrates. Who being themselves governed and
overswaid at home under a Feminine usurpation, cannot but be far short of
spirit and authority without doors, to govern a whole Nation.

Her tarrying here he could not think safe among them who were shaking hands
with Allegiance to lay faster hold on Religion; and taxes them of a duty rather
then a crime, it being just to obey God rather then Man, and impossible to
serve two Masters. I would they had quite shak'n off what they stood shaking
hands with; the fault was in their courage, not in their cause.

In his Prayer, he prays that The disloyalty of his Protestant Subjects may
not be a hindrance to her love of the true Religion; and never prays that the
dissoluteness of his Court, the scandals of his Clergy, the unsoundness of his
own judgment, the lukewarmness of his life, his Letter of compliance to the
Pope, his permitting Agents at Rome, the Popes Nuntio, and her Jesuited Mother
here, may not be found in the sight of God far greater hindrances to her
conversion.

But this had bin a subtle Prayer indeed, and well prayed, though as duly as a
Paternoster, if it could have charmed us to sit still, and have Religion and
our Liberties one by one snatched from us, for fear least rising to defend our
selves, we should fright the Queen a stiff Papist from turning Protestant. As
if the way to make his Queen a Protestant had bin to make his Subjects more
then half way Papists.

He prays next That his constancy may be an antidote against the poison of
other men's example. His constancy in what? Not in Religion, for it is op'nly
known that her Religion wrought more upon him, then his Religion upon her, and
his open favoring of Papists, and his hatred of them called Puritants, the
ministers also that prayed in Churches for her Conversion, being checked from
Court, made most men suspect she had quite perverted him. But what is it that
the blindness of hypocrisy dares not do? It dares pray, and thinks to hide
that from the eyes of God, which it cannot hide from the open view of man.

VIII. Upon His repulse at Hull, and the fate of the Hothams.
Hull, a town of great strength and opportunity both to sea and land affairs,
was at that time the Magazin of all those arms which the King had bought with
money most illegally extorted from his subjects of England, to use in a causless
and most unjust civil war against his Subjects of Scotland. The King in high
discontent and anger had left the Parliament and was gone toward the North; the
Queen into Holland, where she pawned and set to sale the Crown-Jewels (a crime
heretofore counted treasonable in Kings) and to what intent these sums were
raised, the Parliament was not ignorant. His going northward in so high a chafe
they doubted was to possess himself of that strength, which the storehouse and
situation of Hull might add suddenly to his malignant party. Having first
therefore in many Petitions earnestly prayed him to dispose and settle, with
consent of both Houses, the military power in trusty hands, and he as often
refusing, they were necessitated by the turbulence and danger of those times to
put the Kingdom by their own authority into a posture ofdefence; and very timely
sent sir John Hotham a member of the House, and Knight of that county, to take
Hull into his custody, and some of the Trained bands to his assistance. For
besides the General danger they had, before the Kings going to York, notice
given them of his private Commissions to the Earl of Newcastle, and to Colonel
Leg, one of those imploid to bring the Army up against the ParParlament; who
had already made some attempts, and the latter of them under a disguise, to
surprise that place for the Kings party. And letters of the Lord Digby were
intercepted, wherein was wished that the K. would declare himself, and retire to
some safe place; other information came from abroad, that Hull was the place
designed for some new enterprise. And accordingly Digby himself not long after,
with many other Commanders, and much foreign Ammunition landed in those parts.
But these attempts not succeeding, and that Town being now in custody of the
Parliament, he sends a message to them, that he had firmly resolved to go in
person into Ireland; to chastise those wicked Rebels (for these and wors words
he then gave them) and that toward this work he intended forthwith to raise by
his commissions, in the Counties near Westchester, a guard for his own person,
consisting of 2000. foot, and 200. horse, that should be armed from his Magazin
at Hull. On the other side, the Parliament forseeing the Kings drift, about the
same time send him a Petition, that they might have leave for necessary causes
to remoove the magazin of Hull to the Tower of London; to which the King
returns his denial; and soon after going to Hull, attended with about 400.
Horse, requires the Governor to deliver him up the Town; whereof the Governor
besought humbly to be excused, till he could send notice to the Parliament who
had entrusted him; whereat the King much incensed proclaims him Traitor before
the Town Walls; and gives immediate order to stop all passages between him and
the Parliament. Yet he himself dispatches post after post to demand justice, as
upon a Traitor: using a strange iniquity to require justice upon him whom he
then way laid and debari'd from his appearance. The Parliament no sooner
understood what had passed, but they declare that Sir John Hotham had don no
more then was his duty, and was therefore no Traitor.

This relation, being most true, proves that which is affirmed here to be most
falls; seeing the Parliament, whom he accounts his greatest Enemies, had more
confidence to abett and own what Sir John Hotham had don, then the King had
confidence to let him answer in his own behalf.

To speak of his patience, and in that solemn manner, he might better have
forborne; God knows says he, it affected me more with sorrow for others then
with anger for my self; nor did the affront trouble me so much as their sin.
This is read, I doubt not, and believed: and as there is some use of every
thing, so is there of this Book, were it but to show us, what a miserable,
credulous, deluded thing that creature is, which is called the Vulgar; who
notwithstanding what they might know, will believe such vain-glories as these.
Did not that choleric, and vengefull act of proclaiming him Traitor before due
process of Law, having bin convinced so late before of his illegallity with the
five Members, declare his anger to be incensed? does not his own relation
confess as much? and his second Message left him fuming three days after, and
in plain words testifies bis impatience of delay till Hotham be severely
punished, for that which he there terms an insupportable affront.

Surely if his sorrow for Sir John Hothams sin were greater then his anger for
the affront, it was an exceeding great sorrow indeed, and wondrous charitable.
But if it stirred him so vehemently to have Sir John Hotham punished, and not at
all, that we hear, to have him repent, it had a strange operation to be called
a sorrow for his sin. He who would persuade us of his sorrow for the sins of
other men, as they are sins, not as they are sinned against himself, must give
us first some testimony of a sorrow for his own sins, and next for such sins of
other men as cannot be supposed a direct injury to himself. But such
compunction in the King no man has yet observed; and till then, his sorrow for
Sir John Hothams sin will be called no other then the resentment of his
repulse; and his labor to have the sinner only punished, will be called by a
right name, his revenge.

And the hand of that cloud which cast all soon after into darkness and
disorder, was his own hand. For assembling the Inhabitants of Yorkshire, and
other Counties, Horse and Foot, first under color of a new Guard to his
Person, soon after, being supplied with ammunition from Holland, bought with
the Crown Jewels, he begins an open War by laying Seige to Hull. Which Town
was not his own, but the Kingdoms; and the Arms there, public Arms, bought
with the public Money, or not his own. Yet had they bin his own by as good right
as the private House and Arms of any man are his own, to use either of them in
a way not private, but suspicious to the Commonwealth, no Law permitts. But the
King had no propriety at all either in Hull or in the Magazin. So that the
following Maxims which he cites of bold and disloyal undertakers may belong
more justly to whom he least meant them. After this he again relapses into the
praise of his patience at Hull, and by his overtalking of it, seems to doubt
either his own conscience, or the hardness of other men's belief. To me, the
more he praises it in himself, the more he seems to suspect that in very deed
it was not in him; and that the lookers on so likewise thought.

Thus much of what he suffered by Hotham, and with what patience; now of what
Hotham suffered, as he judges, for opposing him. He could not but observe how
God not long after pleaded and avenged his cause. Most men are too apt, and
commonly the worst of men, so to interpret and expound the judgments of God,
and all other events of providence or chance, as makes most to the justifying
of their own cause, though never so evil; and at tribute all to the particular
favor of God toward them. Thus when Saul heard that David was in Keilah, God,
says he, has delivered him into my hands, for he is shut in. But how far
that King was deceav'd in his thought that God was favoring to his cause, that
story unfolds; and how little reason this King had to impute the death of
Hotham to Gods avengement of his repuls at Hull, may easily be seen. For while
Hotham continued faithful to his trust, no man more safe, more successful,
more in reputation then he. But from the time he first sought to make his
peace with the King, and to betray into his hands that Town, into which before
he had denied him entrance, nothing prosper'd with him. Certainly had God
purposed him such an end for his opposition to the King, he would not have
deferred to punish him till then when of an Enemy he was changed to be the
Kings Friend, nor have made his repentance and amendment the occasion of his
ruin. How much more likely is it, since he fell into the act of disloyalty to
his charge, that the judgment of God concurred with the punishment of man, and
justly cut him off for revolting to the King. To give the World an example,
that glorious deeds don to ambitious ends, find reward answerable, not to their
outward seeming, but to their inward ambition. In the mean while what thanks he
had from the King for revolting to his cause, and what good opinion for dying
in his service, they who have ventured like him, or intend, may here take
notice.

He proceeds to declare, not only in general wherefore Gods judgment was upon
Hotham, but undertakes by fancies, and allusions to give a criticism upon every
particular. That his head was divided from his body, because his heart was
divided from the King: two heads cut off in one family for affronting the head
of the Commonwealth; the eldest son being infected with the sin of his Father,
against the Father of his Country. These petty glosses and conceits on the
high and secret judgments of God, besides the boldness of unwarrantable
commenting, are so weak and shallow, and so like the quibbl's of a Court
Sermon, that we may safely reck'n them either fetched from such a pattern, or
that the hand of some household priest foisted them in; least the World should
forget how much he was a Disciple of those Cymbal Doctors. But that argument by
which the Author would commend them to us, discredits them the more. For if
they be so obvious to every fancy, the more likely to be erroneous, and to
misconceive the mind of those high secrecies, whereof they presume to determine.
For God judges not by human fansy.

But however God judged Hotham, yet he had the Kings pity; but mark the
reason how preposterous; so far he had his pity, as he thought he at first
acted more against the light of his conscience then many other men in the same
cause. Questionless they who act against conscience, whether at the bar of
human, or Divine Justice, are pitied least of all. These are the common
grounds and verdicts of Nature, whereof when he who has the judging of a Whole
Nation, is found destitute, under such a Governor, that Nation must needs be
miserable.

By the way he jerkes at some men's reforming to models of Religion, and that
they think all is gold of piety that does but glister with a show of Zeal. We
know his meaning; and apprehend how little hope there could be of him from such
language as this: But are sure that the piety of his prelatic model,
glister'd more upon the posts and pillars which their Zeal and fervencie
gilded over, then in the true works of spiritual edification.

He is sorry that Hotham felt the Justice of others, and fell not rather into
the hands of his mercy. But to clear that, he should have shown us what mercy
he had ever used to such as fell into his hands before, rather then what mercy
he intended to such as never could come to ask it. Whatever mercy one man
might have expected, it is too well known, the whole Nation found none; though
they besought it oft'n, and so humbly; but had bin swallowed up in blood and
ruin, to set his private will above the Parliament, had not his strength faild
him. Yet ctemenoy he counts a debt, which he ought to pay to those that crave
it; since we pay not any thing to God for his mercy, but prayers and praises.
By this reason we ought as freely to pay all things to all men; for of all that
we receive from God, what do we pay for, more then prayers and praises? we
looked for the discharge of his Office, the payment of his duty to the
Kingdom, and are paid Court payment with empty sentences, that have the sound
of gravity, but the significance of nothing pertinent.

Yet again after his mercy past and granted, he returns back to give sentence
upon Hotham; and whom he tells us he would so fain have saved alive, him he
never leaves killing with a repeated condemnation, though dead long since. It
was ill that sombody stood not near to whisper him, that a reiterating Judge is
worse then a tormentor. He pitties him, he rejoices not, he pitties him again,
but still is sure to brand him at the tail of his pity, with some ignominious
mark either of ambition or disloyalty. And with a kind of censorious pity,
aggravats rather then less'ns or conceals the fault: To pity thus is to
triumph.

He assumes to foreknow that after times will dspute whether Hotham were more
infamous at Hull or at Towerhill. What knew he of after times, who while he
sits judging and censuring with out end the fate of that unhappy Father and his
son at Towerhill, knew not that the like fate attended him, before his own
Palace Gate; and as little knew whether after times reserve not a greater
infamy to the story of his own life and reign.

He says but over again in his prayer, what his Sermon has Preached; How
acceptably to those in heaven we leave to be decided by that precept which
forbidds Vain Repetitions. Sure anough it lies as heavy as he can lay it,
upon the head of poor Hotham.

Needs he will fast'n upon God a piece of revenge as done for his sake; and
takes it for a favor, before he know it was intended him: which in his closet
had bin excusable, but in a Writt'n and published prayer, too presumptuous.
Ecclesiastes has a right name for such kind of Sacrifices.

Going on he prays thus, Let not thy Justice prevent the objects and
opportunities of my mercy. To folly, or to blasphemy, or to both shall we
impute this? Shall the Justice of God give place, and serve to glorify the
mercies of a man? All other men, who know what they ask, desire of God that
their doings may tend to his glory; but in this prayer God is required that his
justice would forbear to prevent, and as good have said to entrench upon the
glory of a man's mercy. If God forbear his Justice it must be, sure, to the
magnifying of his own mercy: How then can any mortal man, without presumption
little less then impious, take the boldness to ask that glory out of his hand.
It may be doubted now by them who understand Religion, whether the King were
more unfortunat in this his prayer, or Hotham in those his sufferings.

IX. Upon the listing and raising Armies, etc.
IT were an endless work to walk side by side with the Verbosity of this
Chapter; only to what already has not bin spok'n, convenient answer shall be
given. He begins again with Tumults; all demonstration of the Peoples Love
and Loyalty to the Parliament was Tumult; their Petitioning, Tumult; their
defensive Armies were but listed Tumults, and will take no notice that those
about him, those in a time of peace listed into his own House, were the
beginners of all these Tumults; abusing and assaulting not only such as came
peaceably to the Parliament at London, but those that came Petitioning to the
King himself at York. Neither did they abstain from doing violence and outrage
to the Messengers sent from Parliament; he himself either count nancing, or
conniving at them.

He supposes that His recess gave us confidence that he might be conquered.
Other men suppose both that, and all things else, who knew him neither by nature
Warlike, nor experienced, nor fortunate; so far was any man that discerned
aught, from esteeming him unconquerable; yet such are readiest to imbroile
others.

But he had a soul invincible. What praise is that? The stomach of a Child is
ofttimes invincible to all correction. The unteachable man has a soul to all
reason and good advice invincible; and he who is intractable, he whom nothing
can persuade, may boast himself invincible; whenas in some things to be
overcome is more honest and laudable then to conquer.

He labors to have it thought that his fearing God more then Man was the
ground of his sufferings; but he should have known that a good principle not
rightly understood, may prove as hurtful as a bad; and his fear of God may be
as faulty as a blind zeal. He pretended to fear God more then the Parliament;
who never urged him to do otherwise; he should also have feared God more then
he did his Courtiers and the Bishops, who drew him, as they pleased, to things
inconsistent with the fear of God. Thus boasted Saul to have performed the
Commandment of God, and stood in it against Samuel; but it was found at length
that he had feared the people more then God, in saving those fatt Oxen for the
worship of God, which were appointed for destruction. Not much unlike, if not
much wors, was that fact of his, who for fear to displease his Court, and
mungrel Clergy, with the dissolutest of the people, upheld in the Church of
God, while his power lasted, those Beasts of Amalec, the Prelates against the
advice of his Parliament and the example of all Reformation; in this more
unexcusable then Saul, that Saul was at length convinced, he to the howr of
death fixed in his false persuasion; and sooths himself in the flattering peace
of an erroneous and obdurat conscience, singing to his soul vain Psalms of
exultation, as if the Parliament had assailed his reason with the force of Arms,
and not lie on the contrary their reason with his Arms; which has bin proved
already, and shall be more hereafter.

He twitts them with his Acts of grace; proud, and unself-knowing words in the
mouth of any King, who affects not to be a God, and such as ought to be as
odious in the ears of a free Nation. For if they were unjust acts, why did he
grant them as of grace? If just, it was not of his grace, but of his duty and
his Oath to grant them.

A glorious King he would be, though by his sufferings: But that can never be
to him whose sufferings are his own doings. He faines a hard chois put upon him
either to kill his own Subjects or be killed. Yet never was King less in danger
of any violence from his Subjects, till he unsheathed his Sword against them;
nay long after that time, when he had spilt the blood of thousands, they had
still his person in a foolish veneration.

He complains, That civil War must be the fruits of of his seventeen years
reigning with such a measure of Justice, Peace, and Plenty, and Religion, as
all Nations either admired or envied. For the Justice we had, let the
Counsel-Table, Starr-Chamber, High Commission speak the praise of it; not
forgetting the unprincely usage, and, as far as might be, the abolishing of
Parlaments, the displacing of honest Judges, the sale of Offices, Bribery and
Exaction not found out to be punished, but to be shared in, with impunity for
the time to come. Who can number the extortions, the oppressions, the public
robberies, and rapines, committed on the Subject both by Sea and Land, under
various pretenses? Their possessions also taken from them, one while as Forest
Land, another while as Crown-Land; nor were their Goods exempted, no not the
Bullion in the Mint; Piracy was become a project owned and authorized against
the Subject.

For the peace we had, what peace was that which drew out the English to a
needless and disshonourable voyage against the Spaniard at Cales? Or that which
lent our shipping to a treacherous and Antichristian War against the poor
Protestants of Rochell our suppliants? What peace was that which fell to rob
the French by Sea, to the imbarring of all our Merchants in that Kingdom? which
brought forth that unblest expedition to the I Will of Rhee, doubtful whether
more calamitous in the success or in the design, betraying all the flower of
our military youth, and best Commanders to a shameful surprisal and execution.
This was the peace we had, and the peace we gave, whether to friends or to foes
abroad. And if at home any peace were intended us, what meant those Irish
billeted Soldiers in all parts of the Kingdom, and the design of German
Horse, to fubdue us in our peaceful Houses?

For our Religion where was there a more ignorant, profane, and vicious Clergy,
learned in nothing but the antiquity of their pride, their covetousnes and
superstition; whose unsincere and levenous Doctrine corrupting the people,
first taught them looseness, then bondage; loosning them from all sound
knowledge and strictness of life, the more to fit them for the bondage of
Tyranny and superstition. So that what was left us for other Nations not to
pity rather then admire or envy, all those seaventeen years, no wise man
could see. For wealth and plenty in a land where Justice reigns not, is no
argument of a flourishing State, but of a neerness rather to ruin or commotion.

These were not some miscariages only of Government, which might escape, but a
universal distemper, and reducement of law to arbitrary power; not through the
evil counsels of some men, but through the constant course and practice of all that were in highest favor: whose worst actions frequently avowing he took
upon himself; and what faults did not yet seem in public to be originally his,
such care he took by professing, and proclaiming op'nly, as made them all at
length his own adopted sins. The persons also when he could no longer protect,
he esteemed and favored to the end; but never, otherwise then by constraint,
yielded any of them to due punishment; thereby manifesting that what they did
was by his own Authority and approbation.

Yet here he asks whose innocent blood he has shed, What widows or Orphans
tears can witness against him? After the suspected Poisoning of his Father,
not inquired into, but smothered up, and him protected and advanced to the very
half of his Kingdom, who was accused in Parliament to be Author of the fact;
(with much more evidence, then Duke Dudley that falls Protector is accused upon
record, to have poisoned Edward the sixth) after all his rage and persecution,
after so many Years of cruel War on his People in three Kingdoms. Whence the
Author of Truths manifest, a Scotchman not unacquainted with affairs,
positively affirms That there has bin more Christian blood shed by the
Commission, approbation, and connivance of King Charles, and his Father James
in the latter end of their reign, then in the Ten Roman Persecutions. Not to
speak of those many whippings, Pillories, and other corporal inflictions
wherewith his reign also before this War was not unbloodie; some have died in
Prison under cruel restraint, others in Banishment, whose lives were shortn'd
through the rigor of that persecution wherewith so many years he infested the
true Church. And those six Members all men judged to have escaped no less then
capital danger; whom he so greedily pursuing into the House of Commons, had not
there the forbearance to conceal how much it troubled him, That the Birds were
flowne. If some Vultur in the Mountains could have op'nd his beak intelligibly
and spoke, what fitter words could he have uttered at the loss of his prey? The
Tyrant Nero, though not yet deserving that name, set his hand so unwillingly
to the execution of a condemned Person, as to wish He had not known letters.
Certainly for a King himself to charge his Subjects with high treason, and so
vehemently to prosecute them in his own cause, as to do the Office of a
Searcher, argued in him no great aversation from shedding blood, were it but to
satisfy his anger, and that revenge was no unpleasing morsel to him, whereof he
himself thought not much to be so diligently his own Caterer. But we insist
rather upon what was actual then what was probable.

He now falls to examine the causes of this War, as a difficulty which he had
long studied to find out. It was not says he, my withdrawing from White Hall;
for no account in reason could be given of those Tumults, where an orderly
Guard was granted. But if it be a most certain truth that the Parliament could
never yet obtain of him any Guard fit to be confided in, then by his own
confession some account of those pretended Tumults may in reason be given: and
both concerning them and the Guards anough has bin said already.

Whom did he protect against the Justice of Parliament? Whom did he not to his
utmost power? Endeavoring to have rescued Strafford from their Justice, though
with the destruction of them and the City; to that end expressly commanding the
admittance of new Soldiers into the Tower, raised by Suckling and other
Conspirators, under pretense for the Portugal; though that Ambassador, being
sent to, utterly denied to know of any such Commission from his Master. And
yet that listing continued. Not to repeat his other Plot of bringing up the two
Armies. But what can be disputed with such a King in whose mouth and opinion
the Parliament it self was never but a Faction, and their Justice no Justice, but
The dictates and overswaying insolence of Tumults and Rabbles; and under that
excuse avouches himself op'nly the general Patron of most notorious
Delinquents, and approves their flight out of the Land, whose crimes were such,
as that the justest and the fairest trial would have soonest condemned them to
death. But did not Catiline plead in like manner against the Roman Senate and
the injustice of their trial, and the justice of his flight from Rome? Coesar
also, then hatching Tyranny, injected the same scrupulous demurrs to stop the
sentence of death in full and free Senate decreed on Lentulus and Cethegus two
of Catilines accomplices, which were renewed and urged for Strafford. He
voutsafes to the Reformation by both Kingdoms intended, no better name then
Innovation and ruin both in Church and State. And what we would have learnt so
gladly of him in other passages before, to know wherein, he tells us now of his
own accord. The expelling of Bishops cut of the House of Peers, this was ruin
to the State, the removing them root and branch, this was ruin to the Church.
How happy could this Nation be in such a Governor who counted that their ruin,
which they thought their deliverance, the ruin both of Church and State, which
was the recovery and the saving of them both.

To the passing of those Bills against Bishops, how is it likely that the House
of Peers gave so hardly their consent, which they gave so easily before to the
attaching them of High Treason, 12. at once, only for protesting that the
Parliament could not act without them. Surely if their rights and privileges were
thought so undoubted in that House, as is here maintained; then was that
Protestation being meant and intended in the name of their whole spiritual
Order, no Treason: and so that House it self will become liable to a just
construction either of Injustice to appeach them for so consenting, or of
usurpation, representing none but themselves, to expect that their voting or
not voting should obstruct the Commons. Who not for five repulses of the Lords,
no not for fifty, were to desist from what in name of the whole Kingdom they
demanded, so long as those Lords were none of our Lords. And for the Bil
against root and branch, though it passed not in both Houses till many of the
Lords and some few of the Commons, either enticed away by the King, or overaw'd
by the sense of their own Maligna^cy not prevailing, deserted the Parliament, and
made a fair riddance of themselves, that was no warrant for them who remained
faithful, being far the greater number, to lay aside that Bill of root and
branch, till the return of their fugitives; a Bill so necessary and so much
desired by them selves as well as by the People.

This was the partiality, this degrading of the Bishops, a thing so wholesome in
the State, and so Orthodoxal in the Church both ancient and reformed; which the
King rather then assent to, will either hazard both his own and the Kingdoms
ruin, by our just defense against his force of arms, or prostrat our
consciences in a blind obedience to himself, and those men whose superstition
Zealous or unzealous would enforce upon us an Antichristian tyranny in the
Church, neither Primitive, Apostolical, nor more anciently universal, then some
other manifest corruptions.

But he was bound besides his judgment by a most strict and undispensable Oath
to preserve that Order and the rights of the Church. If he mean the Oath of his
Coronation, and that the letter of that Oath admit not to be interpreted
either by equity, reformation, or better knowledge, then was the King bound by
that Oath to grant the clergy all those customs, franchises, and Canonical
privileges granted to them by Edward the Confessor; and so might one day, under
pretense of that Oath, and his conscience, have brought us all again to popery.
But had he so well rememberd, as he ought, the words to which he swore, he
might have found himself no otherwise obliged there, then according to the
Laws of God and true profession of the Gospel. For if those following words,
Established in this Kingdom, be set there to limit and lay prescription on the
Laws of God and truth of the Gospel by man's establishment, nothing can be more
absurrd or more injurious to Religion. So that however the German Emperors, or
other Kings have levied all those Wars on their Protestant Subjects under the
color of a blind and literal observance to an Oath, yet this King had least
pretense of all; both sworn to the Laws of God, and Evangelic truth, and
disclaiming, as we heard him before, to be bound by any Coronation Oath, in a
blind and brutish formality. Nor is it to be imagined, if what shall be
established come in question, but that the Parliament should oversway the King,
and not he the Parliament. And by all Law and Reason that which the Parliament
will not, is no more established in this Kingdom, neither is the King bound by
Oath to uphold it as a thing established. And that the King who of his Princely
grace, as he professes, has so often abolisht things that stood firm by Law, as
the Starchamber, and High Commission, ever thought himself bound by Oath to
keep them up, because established, he who will beleiv, must at the same time
condemn him of as many perjuries as he is well known to have abolisht both Laws
and Jurisdictions, that wanted no establishment.

Had he gratified, he thinks, their Antiepiscopal Faction with his consent, and
sacrificed the Church government and Revennues to the fury of their
covetousness, etc. an Army had not bin raised. Whereas it was the fury of his
own hatred to the professors of true Religion, which first incited him to
persecute them with the Sword of War, when Whipps, Pillories, Exiles, and
impris'nments were not thought sufficient. To color which, he cannot find
wherwithall, but that stale pretense of Charles the fifth, and other Popish
Kings, that the Protestants had only an intent to lay hands upon
Church-revennues, a thing never in the thoughts of this Parliament, 'till
exhausted by his endless Warrupon them, their necessity seized on that for the
Common wealth, which the luxury of Prelates had abused before to a common
mischief.

His consent to the unlording of Bishops (for to that he himself consented, and
at Canterbury the chief seat of their pride, so God would have it) was from his
firm persuasion of their contentedness to suffer a present diminution of their
rights. Can any man, reading this, not discern the pure mockery of a
Royalconsent, to delude us only for the present, meaning, it seems, when time
should serve, to revoke all: By this reckning his consents and his denials come
all to one pass: and we may hence perceav the small wisdom and integrity of
those Votes which Voted his Concessions at the I Will of Wight, for grounds of a
lasting Peace. This he alleges, this controversy about Bishops, to be the true
state of that difference between him and the Parliament. For he held Episcopacy
both very Sacred and Divine. With this judgment and for this cause he withdrew
from the Parliament, and confesses that some men knew he was like to bring
again the same judgment which he carried with him. A fair and unexpected
justification from his own mouth afforded to the Parliament; who notwithstanding
what they knew of his obstinat mind, omitted not to use all those means and
that patience to have gained him.

As for Delinquents, he allows them to be but the necessary consequences of
his and their withdrawing and defending. A pretty shift to mince the name of a
delinquent into a necessary consequent: what is a Traitor but the necessary
consequence of his Treason, what a Rebel, but of his Rebellion? From this
conceit he would infer a pretext only in the Parliament to fetch in
Delinquents, as if there had indeed bin no such cause, but all the Delinquency
in London Tumults. Which is the overworn theme, and stuffing of all his
discourses.

This he thrice repeates to be the true State and reason of all that War and
devastation in the Land, and that of all the Treaties and Propositions offered
him, he was resolved never to grant the abolishing of Episcopal, or the
establishment of Presbyterian Government. I would demand now of the Scots and
Covnanteers (For so I call them as misobservers of the Covenant) how they will
reconcile the preservation of Religion and their liberties and the bringing of
delinquents to condign punishment, with the freedom, honor and safety of this
vowed resolution here, that esteems all the Zeal of their prostituted Covenant
no better then a noise and show of piety, a heat for Reformation, filling them
with prejudice and obstructing all equality and clearness of judgment in them.
With these principles who knows but that at length he might have come to take
the Covenant, as others, whom they brotherly admit, have don before him; and
then all, no doubt, had gone well, and ended in a happy peace.

His prayer is most of it borrowed out of David; but what if it be answered him
as the Jews, who trusted in Moses, were answered by our Savior. There is one
that accuses you, eev'n David whom you misapply.

He tells God that his Enemies are many, but tells the people, when it serves
his turn, they are but a faction of some few, prevailing over the Major part of
both Houses.

God knows he had no passion, design or preparation to imbroyle his Kingdom in
a civil War. True; for he thought his Kingdom to be Issachar a strong Ass
that would have couched down between two burd'ns, the one of prelatical
superstition, the other of civil tyranny: but what passion and design, what
close and open preparation he had made, to subdue us to both these by terror
and preventive force, all the Nation knows.

The confidence of some men had almost persuaded him to suspect his own
innocence. As the words of Saint Poul had almost persuaded Agrippa to be a
Christian. But almost in the work of repentance is as good as not at all.

God, says he, will find out bloody and deceitful men, many of whom have not
lived out half their days. It behoov'd him to have bin more cautious how he
tempted Gods finding out of blood and deceit, till his own years had bin
further spent, or that he had enjoyed longer the fruits of his own violent
Counsels.

But in stead of wariness, he adds another temptation, charging God, To know
that the chief design of this War was either to destroy his Person or to
force his judgment. And thus his prayer from the evil practice of unjust
accusing men to God, arises to the hideous rashness of accusing God before Men
to know that for truth, which all Men know to be most falls.

He prays That God would forgive the people, for they know not what they do.
It is an easy matter to say over what our Savior said; but how he loved the
People, other Arguments then affected sayings must demonstrat. He who so often
has presumed rashly to appeal the knowledge and testimony of God, in things
so evidently untrue, may be doubted what belief or esteem he had of his
forgiveness, either to himself, or those for whom he would so fain that men
should hear he prayed.

X. Upon their seiziug the Magazins, Forts, etc.
TO put the matter soonest out of controversy who was the first beginner of
this civil War, since the beginning of all War may be discerned not only by
the first Act of hostility, but by the Counsels and preparations foregoing, it
shall evidently appear, that the King was still foremost in all these. No King
had ever at his first coming to the Crown, more love and acclamation from a
people; never any people found wors requital of their Loyalty and good
affection: First by his extraordinary fear and mistrust that their Liberties
and Rights, were the impairing and diminishing of his regal power, the true
Original of Tyranny: Next by his hatred to all those who were esteemed
Religious; doubting that their principles too much asserted liberty. This was
quickly seen by the vehemence, and the causes alleged of his persecuting, the
other by his frequent and opprobrious dissolution of Parlaments; after he had
demanded more Money of them, and they to obtain their rights had granted him,
then would have bought the Turk out of Morea, and set free all the Greeks. But
when he sought to extort from us, by way of Tribute, that which had bin offered
him conditionally in Parliament, as by a free People, and that those extortions
were now consumed and wasted by the luxury of his Court, he began then (for
still the more he did wrong, the more he feared) before any Tumult or
insurrection of the People, to take counsel how he might totally subdue them to
his own will. Then was the design of German Horse, while the Duke raignd, and
which was worst of all, some thousands of the Irish Papists were in several
parts billeted upon us, while a Parliament was then sitting. The Pulpits
resounded with no other Doctrine then that which gave all property to the King,
and passive obedience to the Subject. After which, innumerable forms and
shapes of new exactions and Exacters overspre^d the Land. Nor was it anough to
be impoverished, unless we were disarmed. Our Trained Bands, which are the
trustiest and most proper strength of a free Nation not at war within it self,
had their Arms in diverse Counties taken from them; other Ammunition by design
was engrossed, and kept in the Tower, not to be bought without a License, and
at a high rate.

Thus far, and many other ways were his Counsels and preparations before hand
with us, either to a civil War, if it should happ'n, or to subdue us without a
War, which is all one, until the raising of his two Armies against the Scots,
and the latter of them raised to the most perfidious breaking of a solemn
Pacification: The articles whereof, though subscribed with his own hand, he
commanded soon after to be burnt op'nly by the Hangman. What enemy durst have
don him that dishonor and affront which he did therein to himself.

After the beginning of this Parliament, whom he saw so resolute and unanimous
to releeve the Commonwealth, and that the Earl of Strafford was condemned to
die, other of his evil Counselers impeached and imprisoned, to show there
wanted not evil counsel within himself sufficient to begin a war upon his
Subjects, though no way by them provoked, he sends an Agent with Letters to the
King of Denmark, requiring aid against the parliament; and that aid was coming,
when Divine providence to divert them, sent a sudden torrent of Swedes into the
bowels of Denmark. He then endeavors to bring up both Armies, first the
English, with whom 8000 Irish Papists raised by Strafford, and a French Army
were to join; then the Scots at Newcastle, whom he thought to have encouraged
by telling them what Money and Horse he was to have from Denmark. I mention not
the Irish conspiracy till due place. These and many other were his Counsels
toward a civil War. His preparations, after those two Armies were dismissed,
could not suddenly be too open: Nevertheless there were 8000 Irish Papists
which he refused to disband, though entreated by both Houses, first for reasons
best known to himself, next under pretense of lending them to the Spaniard; and
so kept them undisbanded till very near the Mounth wherein that Rebellion broke
forth. He was also raising Forces in London, pretendedly to serve the
Portugal, but with intent to seize the Tower. Into which diverse Canoneers were
by him sent with many fire works, and Granado's; and many great battering
pieces were mounted against the City. The Court was fortified with Ammunition,
and Souldiers-new listed, who followed the King from London, and appeared at
Kingston some hunderds of Horse, in a warlike manner, with Wagons of Ammunition
after them; the Queen in Holland was buying more, of which the Parliament had
certain knowledge, and had not yet so much as once demanded the Militia to be
settled, till they knew both of her going over sea, and to what intent. For she
had packed up the Crown Jewels to have bin going long before, had not the
Parliament suspecting by the discoveries at Burrow Bridge what was intended with
the Jewels, used means to stay her journey till the winter. Hull and the
Magazin there had bin secretly attempted under the Kings hand; from whom though
in his declarations renouncing all thought of War, notes were sent over sea
for supply of Arms: which were no sooner come, but the inhabitants of
Yorkshire and other Counties were called to Arms, and actual forces raised,
while the Parliament were yet Petitioning in peace, and had not one man listed.

As to the Act of Hostility, though not much material in whom first it began,
or by whose Commissions dated first, after such Counsels and preparations
discovered, and so far advanced by the King, yet in that act also he will be
found to have had precedence, if not at London by the assault of his armed
Court upon the naked People, and his attempt upon the House of Commons, yet
certainly at Hull, first by his close practices on that Town, next by his
seige. Thus whether Counsels, preparations, or Acts of hostility be considerd,
it appears with evidence anough, though much more might be said, that the King
is truly charged to be the first beginner of these civil Wars. To which may
be added as a close, that in the I Will of Wight he charged it upon himself, at
the public Treaty, and acquitted the Parliament.

But as for the securing of Hull and the public stores therein, and in other
places, it was no Surprisall of his strength; the custody whereof by Authority of
Parliament was committed into hands most fit, and most responsible for such a
trust. It were a folly beyond ridiculous to count our selves a free Nation, if
the King not in Parliament, but in his own Person and against them, might
appropriate to himself the strength of a whole Nation as his proper goods. What
the Laws of the Land are, a Parliament should know best, having both the life
and death of Laws in their Lawgiving power: And the Law of England is at best
but the reason of Parliament. The Parliament therefore taking into their hands that
whereof most properly they ought to have the keeping, committed no surprisal. If
they prevented him, that argued not at all either his innocence or
unpreparedness, but their timely foresight to use prevention.

But what needed that? They knew his chiefest Arms left him were those only
which the ancient Christians were wont to use against their Persecuters, Prayers
and Tears. O sacred Reverence of God, Respect and Shame of Men, whither were
ye fled, when these hypocrisies were utterd? Was the Kingdom then at all that
cost of blood to remove from him none but Prayers and Tears? What were those
thousands of blaspheming Cavaliers about him, whose mouths let fly Oaths and
Curses by the voley; were those the Prayers? and those Carouses drunk to the
confusion of all things good or holy, did those minister the Tears? Were they
Prayers and Tears that were listed at York, mustered on Heworth Moore, and
laid Seige to Hull for the guard of his Person? Were Prayers and Tears at so
high a rate in Holland that nothing could purchase them but the Crown Jewels?
Yet they in Holland (such word was sent us) sold them for Gunns, Carabins,
Morters-peeces, Canons, and other deadly Instruments of War, which when they
came to York, were all no doubt but by the merit of some great Saint, suddenly
transformed into Prayers and Tears; and being divided into Regiments and
Brigads were the only Arms that mischiev'd us in all those Battles and
Incounters.

These were his chief Arms, whatever we must call them, and yet such Arms, as
they who fought for the Commonwealth have by the help of better Prayers
vanquished and brought to nothing.

He bewailes his want of the Militia Not so much in reference to his own
protection as the Peoples, whose many and sore oppressions greeve him. Never
considering how ill for seventeen years together he had protected them, and
that these miseries of the people are still his own handy work, having smitt'n
them like a forked Arrow so sore into the Kingdoms sides, as not to be drawn
out and cured without the incision of more flesh.

He tells us that what he wants in the hand of power he has in the wings of
Faith and Prayer. But they who made no reckning of those Wings while they had
that power in their hands, may easily mistake the Wings of Faith for the Wings
of presumption, and so fall headlong.

We meet next with a comparison, how apt let them judge who have traveled to
Mecca, That the Parliament have hung the majesty of Kingship in any airy
imagination of regality between the Privileges of both Houses, like the Tomb
of Mahomet. He knew not that he was prophesying the death and burial of a
Turkish Tyranny, that spurned down those Laws, which gave it life and being so
long as it endured to be a regulated Monarchy.

He counts it an injury Not to have the sole power in himself to help or hurt
any; and that the Militia which he holds to be his undoubted Right should be
disposed as the Parliament thinks fit. And yet confesses that if he had it in
his actual disposing, he would defend those whom he calls His good Subjects
from those men's violence and fraud, who would persuade the World that none but
Wolves are fit to be trusted with the custody of the Shepherd and his Flock.
Surely if we may guess whom he means here, by knowing whom he has ever most
opposed in this controversy, we may then assure our selves that by violence
and fraud he means that which the Parliament has don in settling the Militia,
and those the Wolves, into whose hands it was by them entrusted: which draws a
clear confession from his own mouth, that if the Parliament had left him sole
power of the Militia, he would have used it to the destruction of them and their
Friends.

As for sole power of the Militia, which he claims as a Right no less
undoubted then the Crown, it has bin often anough told him, that he has no more
authority over the Sword then over the Law; over the Law he has none, either
to establish or to abrogate, to interpret, or to execute, but only by his
Courts and in his Courts, whereof the Parliament is highest, no more therefore
has he power of the Militia which is the Sword, either to use or to dispose;
but with consent of Parliament; give him but that, and as good give him in a
lump all our Laws and Liberties. For if the power of the Sword were any where
separate and undepending from the power of Law, which is originally seated in
the highest Court, then would that power of the Sword be soon master of the
law, and being at one man's disposal, might, when he pleased, control the Law,
and in derifion of our Magna Charta, which were but weak resistance against an
armed Tyrant, might absolutely enslave us. And not to have in our selves,
though vanting to be freeborn, the power of our own freedom, and the public
safety, is a degree lower then not to have the property of our own goods. For
liberty of person and the right of selfpreservation, is much nearer, much more
natural, and more worth to all men, then the propriety of their goods, and
wealth. Yet such power as all this did the King in open terms challenge to
have over us; and brought thousands to help him win it; so much more good at
fighting then at understanding, as to persuade themselves that they fought then
for the Subjects Liberty.

He is contented, because he knows no other remedy, to resign this power, for
his own time, but not for his successors. So diligent and careful he is, that
we should be slaves, if not to him, yet to his Posterity, and feign would leave
us the legacy of another war about it. But the Parliament have don well to
remove that question: whom as his manner is to dignify with some good name or
other, he calls now a many headed hydra of Government, full of factious
distractions and not more eyes then mouths. Yet surely not more Mouths, or
not so wide, as the dissolute rabble of all his Courtiers had, both he is and
she is, if there were any Males among them.

He would prove that to govern by Parliament has a monstrositie rather then
perfection; and grouuds his argument upon two or three eminent absurdities:
First by placing Counsel in the senses, next by turning the senses out of the
head, and in lieu thereof placing power, supreme above sense and reason; which
be now the greater Monstrosities? Further to dispute what kind of Government is
best, would be a long debate, it suffices that his reasons here for Monarchy
are found weak and inconsiderable.

He bodes much horror and bad influence after his ecclips. He speaks his
wishes: But they who by weighing prudently things past, foresee things to come,
the best Divination, may hope rather all good success and happiness by removing
that darkness which the mistie cloud of his prerogative made between us and a
peaceful Reformation, which is our true Sun light, and not he, though he would
be taken for our sun it self. And wherefore should we not hope to be Governed
more happily without a King, when as all our misery, and trouble has bin
either by a King, or by our necessary vindication and defense against him.

He would be thought enforced to perjurie by having granted the Militia, by
which his Oath bound him to protect the People. If he can be perjured in
granting that, why does he refuse for no other cause the abolishing of
Episcopacy? But never was any Oath so blind as to swear him to protect
Delinquents aagainst Justice, but to protect all the people in that order, and
by those hands which the Parliament should advise him to, and the protected
conside in; not under the show of protection to hold a violent and
incommunicable Sword over us, as ready to be let fall upon our own necks, as
upon our Enemies; nor to make our own hands and weapons fight against our own
Liberties.

By his parting with the Militia he takes to himself much praise of his
assurance in Gods protection; and to the Parliament imputes the fear of not
daring to adventure the injustice of their actions upon any other way of
safety. But wherefore came not this assurance of Gods protection to him, till
the Militia was wrung out of his hands? It should seem by his holding it so
fast, that his own actions and intentions had no less of injustice in them,
then what he charges upon others; whom he terms Chaldeans, Sabeans, and the
Devil himself. But Job used no such Militia against those enemies, nor such a
Magazin as was at Hull, which this King so contended for, and made War upon
us, that he might have wherewithal to make war against us.

He concludes, that Although they take all from him, yet can they not obstruct
his way to Heaven. It was no handsome occasion, by faining obstructions where
they are not, to tell us whither he was going: he should have shut the door,
and prayed in secret, not here in the High Street. Private prayers in public,
ask something of whom they ask not, and that shall be their reward.

XI. Upon the Nineteen Propositions, etc.
OF the Nineteen Propositions he names none in particular, neither shall the
Answer. But he insists upon the old Plea of his Conscience, honor, and Reason;
using the plausibility of large and indefinite words, to defend himself at such
a distance as may hinder the eye of common judgment from all distinct view and
examination of his reasoning. He would buy the peace of his People at any rate,
save only the parting with his Conscience and Honor. Yet shows not how it can
happ'n that the peace of a People, if otherwise to be bought at any rate,
should be inconsistent or at variance with the Conscience and Honor of a King.
Till then, we may receave it for a better sentence, that nothing should be more
agreeable to the Conscience and Honor of a King, then to preserve his Subjects
in peace; especially from civil War.

And which of the Propositions were obtruded on him with the point of the
Sword, till he first with the point of the Sword thrust from him both the
Propositions and the Propounders? He never reck'ns those violent and merciless
obtrusions which for almost twenty years he had bin forcing upon tender
consciences by all sorts of Persecution; till through the multitude of them
that were to suffer, it could no more be called a Persecution, but a plain
War. From which when first the Scots, then the English were constrained to
defend themselves, this their just defense is that which he calls here, Their
making War upon his soul.

He grudges that So many things are required of him, and nothing offered him in
requital of those favors which he had granted. What could satiate the desires
of this man, who being king of England, and Master of almost two millions
yearly what by hook or crook, was still in want; and those acts of Justice
which he was to do in duty, counts don as favors; and such favors as were not
don without the avaritious hope of other rewards besides supreme honor, and
the constant Revennue of his place.

This honor, he says, they did him to put him on the giving part. And spoke
truer then he intended, it being merely for honors sake that they did so; not
that it belonged to him of right. For what can he give to a Parliament, who
receaves all he has from the People, and for the Peoples good. Yet now he
brings his own conditional rights to contest and be preferred before the
Peoples good; and yet unless it be in order to their good, he has no rights at
all; reigning by the Laws of the Land, not by his own; which Laws are in the
hands of Parliament to change or abrogate, as they shall see best for the
Commonwealth; eev'n to the taking away of King-ship it self, when it grows too
Maisterfull and Burd'nsome. For every Commonwealth is in general defined, a
society sufficient of it self, in all things conducible to well being and
commodious life. Any of which requisite things if it cannot have without the
gift and favor of a single person, or without leave of his private reason, or
his conscience, it cannot be thought sufficient of it self, and by consequence
no Commonwealth, nor free; but a multitude of Vassalls in the Possession and
domaine of one absolute Lord; and wholly obnoxious to his will. If the King
have power to give or deny any thing to his Parliament, he must do it either as
a Person several from them or as one greater; neither of which will be allowed
him; not to be considered severally from them, for as the King of England can
do no wrong, so neither can he do right but in his Courts and by his Courts;
and what is legally don in them, shall be deemed the Kings assent, though he as
a several Person shall judge or endeavor the contrary. So that indeed without
his Courts or against them, he is no King. If therefore he obtrude upon us any
public mischief, or withhold from us any general good, which is wrong in the
highest degree, he must do it as a Tyrant, not as a King of England, by the
known Maxims of our Law. Neither can he as one greater give aught to the
Parliament which is not in their own power, but he must be greater also then the
Kingdom which they represent. So that to honor him with the giving part was a
mere civility, and may be well termed the courtesy of England, not the Kings
due.

But the incommunicable Jewel of his conscience he will not give, but reserve
to himself. It seems that his conscience was none of the Crown Jewels; for
those we know were, in Holland, not incommunicable to buy Arms against his
Subjects. Being therefore but a private Jewel, he could not have don a greater
pleasure to the Kingdom then by reserving it to himself. But he, contrary to
what is here professed, would have his conscience not an incommunicable, but a
universal conscience, the whole Kingdoms conscience. Thus what he seems to
fear least we should ravish from him, is our chief complaint that he obtruded
upon us; we never forced him to part with his conscience, but it was he that
would have forced us to part with ours.

Some things he taxes them to have offered him, which while he had the maistery
of his Reason he would never consent to. Very likely; but had his reason
maisterd him, as it ought, and not bin maisterd long ago by his sense and
humor (as the breeding of most Kings has bin ever sensual and most humored)
perhaps he would have made no difficulty. Mean while at what a fine pass is the
Kingdom, that must depend in greatest exigencies upon the fantasy of a Kings
reason, be he wise or fool, who arrogantly shall answer all the wisdom of the
Land, that what they offer seems to him unreasonable.

He preferrs his love of Truth before his love of the People. His love of Truth
would have ledd him to the search of Truth, and have taught him not to lean so
much upon his own understanding. He met at first with Doctrines of
unaccountable Prerogative; in them he rested, because they pleased him; they
therefore pleased him, because they gave him all; and this he calls his love of
Truth, and preferrs it before the love of his peoples peace.

Some things they proposed which would have wounded the inward peace of his
conscience. The more our evil happ, that three Kingdoms should be thus pesterd
with one Conscience; who chiefly scrupled to grant us that, which the parliament
advised him to, as the chief means of our public welfare and Reformation.
These scruples to many perhaps will seem pretended to others, upon as good
grounds, may seem real, and that it was the just judgment of God, that he who
was so cruel and so remorseless to other men's consciences, should have a
conscience within him as cruel to himself; constraining him, as he constrained
others, and insnaring him in such ways and counsels, as were certain to be his
destruction.

Other things though he could approve, yet in honor and policy he thought fit
to deny, lest he should seem to dare aeny nothing. By this means he will be
sure, what with reason, conscience, honor, policy, or puntilios, to be found
never unfurnisht of a denial: Whether it were his envy, not to be over
bounteous, or that the submissness of our asking stirred up in him a certain
pleasure of denying. Good Princes have thought it their chief happiness to be
always granting; if good things, for the things sake, if things indifferent,
for the peoples sake: while this man sits calculating variety of excuses how
he may grant least; as if his whole strength and royalty were placed in a mere
negative.

Of one Proposition especially he laments him much, that they would bind him to
a general and implicit consent for what ever they desired. Which though I find
not among the nineteen, yet undoubtedly the Oath of his coronation binds him
to no less; neither is he at all by his Office to interpose against a Parliament
in the making or not making of any Law; but to take that for just and good
legally, which is there decreed, and to see it executed accordingly. Nor was he
set over us to vie wisdom with his Parliament, but to be guided by them: any of
whom possibly may as far excel him in the gift of wisdom, as he them in
place and dignity. But much nearer is it to impossibility that any King alone
should be wiser then all his council; sure anough it was not he, though no King
ever before him so much contended to have it thought so. And if the Parliament
so thought not, but desired him to follow their advice and deliberation in
things of public concernment, he accounts it the same proposition, as if
Sampson had bin moved to the putting out his eyes, that the Philistims might
abuse him. And thus out of an unwise, or pretended fear least others should
make a scorn of him for yiedling to his Parliament, he regards not to give cause
of worse suspicion, that he made a scorn of his regal Oath.

But to exclude him from all power of denial seems an arrogance; in the
Parliament he means; what in him then to deny against the Parliament? None at
all, by what he argues: For by Petitioning they confess their inferioritie and
that obliges them to rest, if not satisfied, yet quieted with such an Answer as
the will and reason of their Superior thinks sit to give. First Petitioning, in
better English, is no more then requesting or requiring, and men require not
favors only, but their due; and that not only from Superiors, but from
Equals, and Inferiors also. The noblest Romans, when they stood for that which
was a kind of Regal honor, the Consulship, were wont in a submissive manner to
go about and beg that highest Dignity of the meanest Plebeians, naming them
man by man; which in their tongue was called Petitio consulatus. And the
Parliament of England Petitioned the King, not because all of them were inferior
to him, but because he was superior to any one of them, which they did of civil
custom, and for fashions sake, more then of duty; for by plain Law cited
before, the Parliament is his Superior.

But what law in any trial or dispute enjoynes a free man to rest quieted,
though not satisfied, with the will and reason of his Superior? It were a mad
law that would subject reason to superiority of place. And if our highest
consultations and purposed laws must be terminated by the Kings will, then is
the will of one man our Law, and no suttletie of dispute can redeem the
Parliament, and Nation from being Slaves, neither can any Tyrant require more
then that his will or reason, though not satisfying, should yet be rested in,
and determine all things. We may conclude therefore that when the Parliament
petitioned the King, it was but merely form, let it be as foolish and absurd
as he pleases. It cannot certainly be so absurd as what he requires, that the
Parliament should confine their own and all the Kingdoms reason to the will of
one man, because it was his hap to succeed his Father. For neither God nor the
Laws have subjected us to his will, nor set his reason to be our sovran above
Law (which must needs be, if he can strangle it in the birth) but set his
person over us in the sovran execution of such Laws as the Parliament establish.
The Parliament therefore without any usurpation has had it always in their power
to limit and confine the exorbitancie of Kings, whether they call it their will,
their reason, or their conscience.

But this above all was never expected, nor is to be endured, that a King, who
is bound by law and Oath to follow the advice of his Parliament, should be
permitted to except against them as young Statesmen, and proudly to suspend his
following their advice, until his seven years experience had shown him how
well they could govern themselves. Doubtless the Law never supposed so great an
arrogance could be in one man; that he whose seventeen years unexperience had
almost ruined all, should sit another seven years Schoolmaster, to tutor those
who were sent by the whole Realm to be his Counselers and teachers. And with
what modesty can he pretend to be a Statesman himself, who with his Fathers
Kingcraft and his own, did never that of his own accord which was not directly
opposite to his professed Interest both at home and abroad; discontenting and
alienating his Subjects at home, weakening and deserting his Confederats abroad,
and with them the Common cause of Religion. So that the whole course of his
reign by an example of his own furnishing has resembl'd Phaeton more then
Phoebus; and forced the Parliament to drive like Jehu; which Omen taken from his
own mouth, God has not diverted.

And he on the other side might have rememberd that the Parliament sit in that
body, not as his Subjects but as his Superiors, called, not by him but by the
Law; not only twice every year, but as often as great affairs require, to be
his Counselers and Dictators though he stomac it, nor to be dissolved at his
pleasure, but when all greevances be first removed, all Petitions heard, and
answered. This is not only Reason, but the known Law of the Land.

When he heard that Propositions would be sent him, he satt conjecturing what
they would propound; and because they propounded what he expected not, he takes
that to be a warrant for his denying them. But what did he expect? he expected
that the Parliament would reinforce some old Laws. But if those Laws were not a
sufficient remedy to all greevances, nay were found to be greevances
themselves, when did we loose that other part of our freedom to establish new?
He thought some injuries done by himself and others to the Common wealth were
to be repaired. But how could that be, while he the chief offender took upon
him to be sole Judge both of the injury and the reparation. He staid till the
advantages of his Crown considered might induce him to condescend to the
Peoples good. Whenas the Crown it self with all those advantages were therefore
given him, that the peoples good should be first considered; not bargained for,
and bought by inches with the bribe of more offertures and advantages to his
Crown. He looked for moderate desires of due Reformation; as if any such
desires could be immoderate: He lookd for such a Reformation, both in Church
and State as might preserve the roots of every greevance and abuse in both
still growing (which he calls The foundation and essentials) and would have
only the excrescencies of evil pruned away for the present, as was plotted
before, that they might grow fast anough between Triennial Parlaments, to
hinder them by work anough besides, from ever striking at the root. He alleges
They should have had regard to the Laws in force, to the wisdom and piety of
former Parlaments to the ancient and universal practice of Christian Churches.
As if they who come with full authority to redress public greevances, which
ofttimes are Laws themselves, were to have their hands bound by Laws in force,
or the supposition of more piety and wisdom in their Ancestors, or the practice
of Churches heertofore, whose Fathers, notwithstanding all these pretenses,
made as vast alterations to free themselves from ancient Popery. For all
antiquity that adds or varies from the Scripture, is no more warranted to our
safe imitation, then what was don the Age before at Trent. Nor was there need
to have despaired of what could be established in lieu of what was to be
annulled, having before his eyes the Government of so many Churches beyond the
Seas; whose pregnant and solid reasons wrought so with the Parliament, as to
desire a uniformity rather with all other Protestants, then to be a scism
divided from them under a conclave of thirty Bishops, and a crew of irreligious
Priests, that gaped for the same preferment.

And whereas he blames those propositions for not containing what they ought,
what did they mention but to vindicate and restore the Rights of Parliament
invaded by Cabin councels, the Courts of Justice obstructed, and the Government
of Church innovated and corrupted? All these things he might easily have
observed in them, which he affirms he could not find: But found those
demanding in Parliament who were looked upon before, as factious in the State,
and scismaticall in the Church; and demanding not only Tolerations for
themselves in their vanity, noveltie and confusion, but also an extirpation of
that Government whose Rights they had a mind to invade. Was this man ever likely
to be advised, who with such a prejudice and disesteem sets himself against his
chos'n and appointed Counselers; likely ever to admit of Reformation, who
censures all the Government of other Protestant Churches, as bad as any Papist
could have censured them? And what King had ever his whole Kingdom in such
contempt, so to wrong and dishonor the free elections of his people, as to
judge them whom the Nation thought worthiest to sit with him in Parliament, few
else but such as were punishable by Laws: yet knowing that time was, when to be
a Protestant, to be a Christian was by Law as punishable as to be a Traitor,
and that our Savior himself coming to reform his Church, was accused of an
intent to invade Caesar's right, as good a right as the prelat Bishops ever had;
the one being got by force, the other by spiritual usurpation: and both by
force upheld.

He admires and falls into an ecstasy that the Parliament should send him such a
horrid Proposition, as the removal of Episcopacy. But expect from him in an
ecstasy no other reasons of his admiration then the dream and tautology of what
he has so often repeated, Law, Antiquity, Ancestors, prosperity and the like,
which will be therefore not worth a second answer, but may pass with his own
comparison Into the common sewer of other Popish arguments.

Had the two Houses su'd out their Liverie from the wardship of Tumults, he
could sooner have believed them. It concernd them first to sue out their Livery
from the unjust wardship of his encroaching Prerogative. And had he also
redeemed his overdated minority from a Pupillage under Bishops, he would much
less have mistrusted his Parliament; and never would have set so base a
Character upon them as to count them no better then the Vassals of certain
nameless men whom he charges to be such as hunt after Faction with their Hounds
the Tumults. And yet the Bishops could have told him, that Nimrod, the first
that hunted after Faction is reputed, by ancient Tradition, the first that
founded Monarchy; whence it appears that to hunt after Faction is more
properly the Kings Game; and those Hounds, which he calls the Vulgar, have bin
oft'n hollowed to from Court; of whom the mungrel sort have bin enticed; the
rest have not lost their sent; but understood aright, that the Parliament had
that part to act which he had failed in: that trust to discharge, which he had
brok'n; that estate and honor to preserve, which was far beyond his, the
estate and honor of the Commonwealth, which he had imbezl'd.

Yet so far does self opinion or falls principles delude and transport him, as
to think the concurrence of his reason to the Votes of Parliament, not only
Political, but Natural, and as necessary to the begetting, or bringing forth of
any one complete act of public wisdom as the Suns influence is necessary to all
natures productions. So that the Parliament, it seems, is but a Female, and
without his procreative reason, the Laws which they can produce are but
wind-eggs. Wisdom, it seems, to a King is natural, to a Parliament not natural,
but by conjunction with the King: Yet he professes to hold his Kingly right by
Law; and if no Law could be made but by the great Counsel of a Nation, which we
now term a Parliament, then certainly it was a Parliament that first created
Kings, and not only made Laws before a King was in being, but those Laws
especially, whereby he holds his Crown. He ought then to have so thought of a
Parliament, if he count it not Male, as of his Mother, which, to civil being,
created both him, and the Royalty he wore. And if it has bin anciently
interpreted the presaging sign of a future Tyrant, but to dream of copulation
with his Mother, what can it be less then actual Tyranny to affirm waking,
that the Parliament, which is his Mother, can neither conceive or bring forth
any autoritative Act without his Masculine coition: Nay that his reason is as
Celestial and lifegiving to the Parliament, as the Suns influence is to the
Earth: What other notions but these, or such like, could swell up to Caligula
to think himself a God.

But to be ridd of these mortifying Propositions he leaves no Tyrannical
evasion unassaid; first that they are not the joint and free desires of both
Houses or the major part; next, that the choice of many Members was carried on
by Faction. The former of these is already discovered to be an old device put
first in practice by Charles the fifth since Reformation. Who when the
Protestants of Germany for their own defense joined themselves in League, in his
Declarations and Remonstrances laid the fault only upon some few (for it was
dangerous to take notice of too many Enemies) and accused them that under
color of Religion they had a purpose to invade his and the Churches right: by
which policy he deceav'd many of the German Cities, and kept them divided from
that League, until they saw themselves brought into a snare. That other cavil
against the peoples chois puts us in mind rather what the Court was wont to
do, and how to tamper with Elections: neither was there at that time any
Faction more potent, or more likely to do such a business, then they
themselves who complain most.

But he must chew such Morsels as Propositions ere he let them down. So let
him; but if the Kingdom shall taste nothing but after his chewing, what does he
make of the Kingdom, but a great baby. The streitness of his conscience will
not give him leave to swallow down such Camels of sacrilege and injustice as
others do. This is the Pharisee up and down, I am not as other men are. But
what Camels of Injustice he could devour, all his three Realms were wittness,
which was the cause that they almost perished for want of Parlaments. And he
that will be unjust to man, will be sacrilegious to God; and to bereave a
Christian conscience of liberty for no other reason then the narrowness of his
own conscience, is the most unjust measure to man, and the worst sacrilege to
God. That other, which he calls sacrilege, of taking from the Clergy that
superfluous wealth, which antiquity as old as Constantine, from the credit of
a Divine vision, counted poison in the Church, has bin ever most opposed by
men whose righteousness in other matters has bin least observed. He concludes,
as his manner is, with high commendation of his own unbiased rectitude and
beleives nothing to be in them that dissent from him, but faction, innovation,
and particular designs. Of these repetitions I find no end, no not in his
prayer; which being founded upon deceitful principl's and a fond hope that God
will bless him in those his errors, which he calls honest, finds a fit answer
of S. James; Ye ask and receave not, because ye ask amiss. As for the truth
and sincerity which he prays may be always found in those his Declarations
to the people, the contrariety of his own actions will bear eternal witness how
little careful or sollicitous he was, what he promised, or what he utterd
there.

XII. Upon the Rebellion in Ireland.
THe Rebellion and horrid massacher of English Protestants in Ireland to the
number of 1 54000. in the Province of Ulster only, by their own computation,
which added to the other three, makes up the total sum of that slaughter in
all likelihood fowr times as great, although so sudden, and so violent, as at
first to amaze all men that were not accessory, yet from whom, and from what
counsels it first sprung, neither was nor could be possibly so secret, as the
contrivers thereof blinded with vain hope, or the despair that other plots
would succeed, supposed. For it cannot be imaginable that the Irish, guided by
so many subtle and Italian heads of the Romish party, should so far have lost
the use of reason, and indeed of common Sense, as not supported with other
strength then their own, to begin a War so desperate and irreconcilable
against both England and Scotland at once. All other Nations, from whom they
could expect aid, were busied to the utmost in their own most necessary
concernments. It remains then that either some authority or some great
assistance promised them from England, was that whereon they chiefly trusted.
And as it is not difficult to discern from what inducing cause this
insurrection first arose, so neither was it hard at first to have applied some
effectual remedy, though not prevention. And yet prevention was not hopeles,
when Strafford either beleivd not, or did not care to believe the several
warnings and discoveries thereof, which more then once by Papists and by Friars
themselves were brought him; besides what was brought by depositition, diverse
months before that Rebellion, to the Arch bishop of Canterbury and others of
the Kings Counsel; as the Declaration of no addresses declares. But the
assurance which they had in private, that no remedy should be applied, was, it
seems, one of the chief reasons that drew on their undertaking. And long it was
ere that assurance faild them; until the Bishops and Popish Lords, who while
they sat and Voted, still opposed the sending aid to Ireland, were expelld the
House.

Seeing then the maine incitement and Authority for this Rebellion must be needs
derived from England, it will be next inquired who was the prime Author. The
King here denounces a malediction temporal and eternal, not simply to the
Author, but to the malicious Author of this blood-shedd; and by that limitation
may exempt, not himself only, but perhaps the Irish Rebels themselves; who
never will confess to God or Man that any blood was shed by them maliciously;
but either in the Catholic cause, or common Liberty, or some other specious
Plea, which the conscience from grounds both good and evil usually suggests to
it self: thereby thinking to elude the direct force of that imputation which
lies upon them.

Yet he acknowledges It fell out as a most unhappy advantage of some men's
malice against him: but indeed of most men's just suspicion, by finding in it no
such wide departure or disagreement from the scope of his former Counsels and
proceedings. And that he himself was the Author of that Rebelion, he denies
both here and elsewhere, with many imprecations, but no solid evidence. What on
the other side against his denial has bin affirmed in three Kingdoms being
here briefly set in view, the Reader may so judge as he finds cause.

This is most certain, that the King was ever friendly to the Irish Papists,
and in his third year, against the plain advice of Parliament, like a kind of
Pope, sold them many indulgences for Money; and upon all occasions advancing the
Popish party, and negotiating under hand by Priests who were made his Agents,
engaged the Irish Papists in a War against the Scotch Protestants. To that end
he furnished them, and had them trained in Arms; and kept them up, either
op'nly or under hand, the only army in his three Kingdoms, till the very burst
of that Rebellion. The Summer before that dismal October, a Committy of most
active Papists, all since in the head of that Rebellion, were in great favor
at White Hall; and admitted to many private consultations with the King and
Queen. And to make it evident that no mean matters were the subject of those
Conferences, at their request he gave away his peculiar right to more then five
Irish Counties, for the payment of an inconsiderable Rent. They departed not
home till within two Mounths before the Rebellion; and were either from the
first breaking out, or soon after, found to be the chief Rebels themselves. But
what should move the King, besides his own inclination to Popery, and the
prevalence of his Queen over him, to hold such frequent and close meetings with
a Committy of Irish Papists in his own House, while the Parliament of England
sat unadvised with, is declared by a Scotch Author, and of it self is clear
anough. The Parliament at the beginning of that Summer, having put Strafford to
death, imprisoned others his chief Favorites, and driven the rest to fly, the
K. who had in vain tempted both the Scotch and the English Army to come up
against the Parliament and City, finding no compliance answerable to his hope
from the Protestant Armies, betakes himself last to the Irish; who had in
readiness an Army of eight thousand Papists which he had refused so oft'n to
disband, and a Committy here of the same Religion. With them, who thought the
time now come, which to bring about they had bin many years before not wishing
only but with much industry complotting, to do some eminent service for the
Church of Rome and their own perfidious natures against a Puritan Parlmt. and
the hated English their Masters, he agrees and concludes that so soon as both
Armies in England were disbanded, the Irish should appear in Arms, master all
the Protestants, and help the King against his Parliament. And we need not doubt
that those five Counties were given to the Irish for other reason then the four
Northern Counties had bin a little before offered to the Scots. The King in
August takes a journey into Scotland; and overtaking the Scotch Army then on
their way home, attempts the second time to pervert them, but without success.
No sooner comm into Scotland, but he lays a plot, so says the Scotch Author,
to remove out of the way such of the Nobility there, as were most likely to
withstand, or not to further his designs. This being discovered, he sends from
his side one Dillon a Papist Lord, soon after a chief Rebel, with Letters into
Ireland; and dispatches a Commission under the great Seal of Scotland at that
time in his own custody, commanding that they should forthwith, as had bin
formerly agreed, cause all the Irish to rise in Arms. Who no sooner had
received such command, but obeyed; and began in Massacher; for they knew no
other way to make sure the Protestants, which was commanded them expressly; and
the way, it seems, left to their discretion. He who has a mind to read the
Commission it self, and sound reason added why it was not likely to be forged,
besides the attestation of so many Irish themselves, may have recourse to a
Book intitl'd The Mystery of Iniquity. Besides what the Parliament it self in
the Declaration of no more addresses has affirmed; that they have one copy of
that Commission in their own hands: attested by the Oaths of some that were
ey-witnesses, and had seen it under the Seal. Others of the principal Rebels
have confessed that this Commission was the summer before promised at London to
the Irish Commissioners, to whom the King then discoverd in plain words his
great desire to be revenged on the Parliament of England.

After the Rebellion brok'n out, which in words only he detested, but under
hand favored and promoted by all the offices of freindship, correspondence,
and what possible aid he could afford them, the particulars whereof are too
many to be inserted here, I suppose no understanding Man could longer doubt who
was Author or Instigator of that Rebellion. If there be who yet doubt, I referr
them especially to that Declaration of July 1643. with that of no addresses
1647. and another full volum of examinations to be set out speedily concerning
this matter. Against all which testimonies, likelyhoods, evidences, and
apparent actions of his own, being so abundant, his bare denial though with
imprecation, can no way countervaile; and least of all in his own cause.

As for the Commission granted them, he thinks to evade that by retorting,
that some in England fight against him and yet pretend his authority. But
though a Parliament by the known Laws may affirm justly to have the Kings
authority, inseparable from that Court, though divided from his Person, it is
not credible that the Irish Rebels who so much tenderd his Person above his
Authority, and were by him so well receavd at Oxford, would be so far from all
humanity as to slander him with a particular Commission signed and sent them
by his own hand.

And of his good affection to the Rebels this Chapter it self is not without
witness. He holds them less in fault then the Scots, as from whom they might
allege to have fetched their imitation; making no difference between men that
rose necessarily to defend themselves, which no Protestant Doctrine ever
disallowed, against them who threatened War, and those who began a voluntary
and causeless Rebellion with the Massacher of so many thousands who never meant
them harm.

He falls next to flashes, and a multitude of words, in all which is contained
no more, then what might be the Plea of any guiltiest Offender; He was not the
Author because he has the greatest share of loss and dishonor by what is
committed. Who is there that offends God or his Neighbor, on whom the greatest
share of loss and dishonor lights not in the end? But in the act of doing
evil, men use not to consider the event of their evil doing: or if they do,
have then no power to curb the sway of their own wickedness. So that the
greatest share of loss and dishonor to happ'n upon themselves, is no argument
that they were not guilty. This other is as weak, that a Kings interest above
that of any other man, lies chiefly in the common welfare of his Subjects;
therefore no King will do aught against the Common welfare. For by this evasion
any tyrant might as well purge himself from the guilt of raising troubles or
commotions among the people, because undoubtedly his chief Interest lies in
their sitting still.

I said but now that eev'n this Chapter, if nothing else, might suffice to
discover his good affection to the Rebels; which in this that follows too
notoriously appears; imputing this insurrection to the preposterous rigor, and
unreasonable severitie, the covetous zeal and uncharitable fury of some men
(these some men by his continual paraphrase are meant the Parliament) and
lastly, to the fear of utter extirpation. If the whole Irishry of Rebels had
fee'd some advocate to speak partially and sophistically in their defense, he
could have hardly dazzled better: Yet never the less would have proved himself
no other then a plausible deceiver. And perhaps, nay more then perhaps, for it
is affirmed and extant under good evidence, that those fained terrors and
jealousies were either by the King himself, or the Popish Priests which were sent
by him, put into the head of that inquisitive people, on set purpose to engage
them. For who had power to oppress them, or to relieve them being oppressed, but
the King or his immediate Deputy? This rather should have made them rise against
the King then against the Parliament. Who threat'nd or ever thought of their
extirpation, till they themselves had begun it to the English? As for
preposterous riger, covetous zeal, and uncharitable fury; they had more reason
to suspect those evils first from his own commands, whom they saw using daily
no greater argument to prove the truth of his Religion then by enduring no
other but his own Prelatical; and to force it upon others, made Episcopal,
Ceremonial, and Common Prayer Book Wars. But the Papists understood him better
then by the outside; and knew that those Wars were their Wars. Although if
the Commonwealth should be afraid to suppress open Idolatry, lest the Papists
thereupon should grow desperate, this were to let them grow and become our
persecuters, while we neglected what we might have don Evangelically, to be
their Reformers. Or to do as his Father James did, who in stead of taking
heart and putting confidence in God by such a deliverance as from the Powder
Plot, though it went not off, yet with the mere conceit of it, as some observe,
was hitt into such a Hectic shivering between Protestant and Papist all his
life after, that he never durst from that time do otherwise then equivocat or
collogue with the Pope and his adherents.

He would be thought to commiserat the sad effects of that Rebellion, and to
lament that the tears and blood spilt there did not quench the sparks of our
civil discord here. But who began these dissentions, and what can be more
op'nly known then those retardings and delays which by himself were
continually devised, to hinder and put back the releif of those distressed
Protestants, which undoubtedly had it not bin then put back might have saved
many streams of those tears and that blood whereof he seems here so sadly to
bewail the spilling. His manifold excuses, diversions and delays are too well
known to be recited here in particular, and too many.

But he offered to go himself in person upon that expedition; and reck'ns up
many surmises why he thinks they would not suffer him. But mentions not that by
his underdealing to debaush Armies here at home, and by his secret intercours
with the chief Rebels, long ere that time every where known, he had brought the
Parliament into so just a diffidence of him, as that they durst not leave the
Public Arms to his disposal, much less an Army to his conduct.

He concludes That next the sin of those who began that Rebellion theirs must
needs be who hindered the suppressing, or diverted the aides. But judgment
rashly given ofttimes involves the Judge himself. He finds fault with those
who threatened all extremity to the Rebels, and pleads much that mercy should be
shown them. It seems he found himself not so much concerned as those who had
lost Fathers, Brothers, Wives and Children, by their cruelty; whom in justice
to retaliat is not as he supposes unevangelical; so long as Magistracy and War
is not laid down under the Gospel. If this his Sermon of affected mercy were
not too Pharisaical, how could he permit himself to cause the slaughter of so
many thousands here in England for mere Prerogatives, the Toys and Gewgaws of
his Crown, for Copes and Surplices, the Trinkets of his Priests, and not
perceave his zeal, while he taxes others, to be most preposterous and
unevangelical. Neither is there the same cause to destroy a whole City for the
ravishing of a Sister, not don out of Villainy, and recompense offered by
Marriage; nor the same case for those Disciples to summon sire from Heaven upon
the whole City where they were denied lodging, and for a Nation by just War
and execution to slay whole Families of them who so barbarously had slain
whole Families before. Did not all Israel do as much against the Benjamits for
one Rape committed by a few, and defended by the whole Tribe? and did they not
the same to Jabesh Gilead for not assisting them in that revenge? I speak not
this that such measure should be meted rigorously to all the Irish, or as
remembering that the Parliament ever so Decreed, but to show that this his Homily
has more of craft and affectation in it, then of sound Doctrine.

But it was happy that his going into Ireland was not consented to: For either
he had certainly turned his raised Forces against the Parliament it self, or not
gone at all, or had he gone, what work he would have made there, his own
following words declare.

He would have punished some; no question; for some perhaps who were of least
use, must of necessity have bin sacrificed to his reputation, and the
conveniencie of his affairs. Others he would have disarmed, that is to say in
his own time: but all of them he would have protected from the fury of those
that would have drowned them, if they had refused to swim down the popular
stream. These expressions are too oft'n met, and too well understood for any
man to doubt his meaning. By the fury of those, he means no other then the
Justice of Parliament, to whom yet he had committed the whole business. Those
who would have refused to swim down the popular stream, our constant key tells
us to be Papists, Prelates, and their Faction: these, by his own confession here,
he would have protected against his Puritan Parliament: And by this who sees not
that he and the Irish Rebels had but one aim, one and the same drift, and
would have forthwith joined in one body against us.

He goes on still in his tenderness of the Irish Rebels fearing least our zeal
should be more greedy to kill the Bear for his skin then for any harm he has
don. This either justifies the Rebels to have don no harm at all, or inferrs
his opinion that the Parliament is more bloody and rapacious in the prosecution
of their Justice, then those Rebels were in the execution of their barbarons
cruelty. Let men doubt now and dispute to whom the King was a Friend most, to
his English Parliament, or to his Irish Rebels.

With whom, that we may yet see further how much he was their Friend, after that
the Parliament had brought them every where either to Famine, or a low condition,
he, to give them all the respit and advantages they could desire, without
advice of Parliament, to whom he himself had committed the mannaging of that
War, makes a Cessation; in pretense to relieve the Protestants, overborne
there with numbers, but as the event proved, to support the Papists, by
diverting and drawing over the English Army there, to his own service here
against the Parliament. For that the Protestants were then on the winning hand,
it must needs be plain; who notwithstanding the miss of those Forces which, at
their landing here, maister'd without difficulty great part of Wales and
Cheshire, yet made a shift to keep their own in Ireland. But the plot of this
Irish Truce is in good part discoverd in that Declaration of September 30th.
1643. And if the Protestants were but handfuls there, as he calls them, why did
he stop and waylay both by Land and Sea, to his utmost power, those Provisions
and Supplies which were sent by the Parliament? How were so many handfuls called
over, as for a while stood him in no small stead, and against our main Forces
here in England?

Since therefore all the reasons that can be given of this Cessation appear so
falls and frivolous, it may be justly feared that the design it self was most
wicked and pernicious. What remains then? He appeals to God, and is cast;
lik'ning his punishments to Jobs trials, before he saw them to have Jobs
ending. But how could Charity her self believe there was at all in him any
Religion, so much as but to fear there is a God; when as by what is noted in the
Declaration of no more addresses, he vowed solemnly to the Parliament with
imprecations upon himself and his Posterity, if ever he consented to the
abolishing of those Laws which were in force against Papists, and at the same
time, as appeard plainly by the very date of his own Letters to the Queen and
Ormond, consented to the abolishing of all Penal Laws against them both in
Ireland and England. If these were acts of a Religious Prince, what memory of
man writt'nor unwritt'n can tell us news of any Prince that ever was
irreligious? He cannot stand to make prolix Apologies. Then surely those long
Pamphlets set out for Declarations and Protestations in his Name, were none of
his; and how they should be his indeed, being so repugnant to the whole course
of his actions, augments the difficulty.

But he usurps a common saying, That it is Kingly to do well and hear ill.
That may be sometimes true: but far more frequently, to do ill and hear
well; so great is the multitude of Flatterers, and them that deifie the name of
King.

Yet not content with these neighbors, we have him still a perpetual preacher
of his own virtues, and of that especially which who knows not to be Patience
perforce.

He beleives it will at last appear that they who first began to embroyle his
other kingdoms, are also guilty of the blood of Ireland. And we believe so
too; for now the Cessation is become a Peace by publishd Articles, and
Commission to bring them over against England, first only ten thousand by the
Earl of Glamorgan, next all of them, if possible, under Ormond, which was the
last of all his transactions don as a public Person. And no wonder; for he
looked upon the blood spilt, whether of Subjects or of Rebels with an
indifferent eye, as exhausted out of his own veins; without distinguishing as
he ought, which was good blood and which corrup; the not letting-out whereof
endangers the whole body.

And what the Doctrine is ye may perceave also by the Prayer, which after a
short ejaculation for the poor Protestants, prays at large for the Irish
Rebels, that God would not give them over, or their Children to the
covetousness, cruelty, fierce and cursed anger of the Parliament.

He finishes with a deliberat and solemn curse upon himself and his Fathers
House. Which how far God has already brought to pass, is to the end that men
by so eminent an example should learn to tremble at his judgments; and not
play with Imprecations.

XIII. Upon the calling in of the Scots and their coming.
IT must needs seem strange, where Men accustom themselves to ponder and
contemplat things in their first original and institution, that Kings, who, as
all other Officers of the Public, were at first chos'n and installed only by
consent and suffrage of the People, to govern them as Freemen by Laws of their
own framing, and to be, in consideration of that dignity and riches bestowed
upon them, the entrusted Servants of the Commonwealth, should notwithstanding
grow up to that dishonest encroachment, as to esteem themselves Masters, both
of that great trust which they serve, and of the People that betrusted them:
counting what they ought to do both in discharge of their public duty, and for
the great reward of honor and revennue which they receave, as don all of mere
grace and favor; as if their power over us were by nature, and from themselves,
or that God had sold us into their hands. Indeed if the race of Kings were
eminently the best of men, as the breed at (...) is of ^orse, it would in some
reason then be their part only to command, ours always to obey. But Kings by
generation no way excelling others, and most commonly not being the wisest or
the worthiest by far of whom they claim to have the governing, that we should
yield them subjection to our own ruin, or hold of them the right of our common
safety, and our natural freedom by mere gift, as when the Conduit pisses Wine
at Coronations, from the superfluity of their royal grace and beneficence, we
may be sure was never the intent of God, whose ways are just and equal; never
the intent of Nature, whose works are also regular; never of any People not
wholly barbarous, whom prudence, or no more but human sense would have better
guided when they first created Kings, then so to nullify and tread to dirt the
rest of mankind, by exalting one person and his Lineage without other merit
looked after, but the mere contingencie of a begetting, into an absolute and
unaccountable dominion over them and their posterity. Yet this ignorant or
wilful mistake of the whole matter, had taken so deep root in the imagination
of this King, that whether to the English or to the Scot, mentioning what acts
of his Regal Office, though God knows how un willingly, he had passed, he calls
them, as in other places, Acts of grace and bounty, so here special
obligations, favors to gratify active spirits, and the desires of that party.
Words not only sounding pride and Lordly usurpation, but Injustice,
Partiality, and Corruption. For to the Irish he so far condiscended, as first
to tolerate in private, then to covenant op'nly the tolerating of Popery: So far
to the Scot, as to remove Bishops, establish Presbytery, and the Militia in
their own hands, preferring, as some thought, the desires of Scotland before his
own interest and Honor. But being once on this side Tweed, his reason, his
conscience, and his honor became so streitn'd with a kind of falls Virginity,
that to the English neither one nor other of the same demands could be granted,
wherewith the Scots were gratified; as if our air and climat on a sudden had
changed the property and the nature both of Conscience, Honor, and Reason, or
that he found none so fit as English to be the subjects of his arbitrary power.
Ireland was as Ephraim, the strength of his head, Scotland, as Judah, was his
Lawgiver; but over England as over Edom he meant to cast his Shoo; and yet so
many sober Englishmen not sufficiently awake to consider this, like men
enchanted with the Circaean cup of servitude, will not be held back from
running their own heads into the Yoke of Bondage.

The sum of his discourse is against settling of Religion by violent means;
which whether it were the Scots design upon England, they are best able to
clear themselves. But this of all may seem strangest, that the King who, while
it was permitted him, never did thing more eagerly then to molest and persecute
the consciences of most Religious men, he who had made a War and lost all,
rather then not uphold a Hierarchy of persecuting Bishops, should have the
confidence here to profess himself so much an Enemy of those that force the
conscience. For was it not he, who upon the English obtruded new Ceremonies,
upon the Scots a new Liturgy, and with his Sword went about to score a bloody
Rubric on their backs? Did he not forbidd and hinder all effectual search of
Truth, nay like a beseiging Enemy stopd all her passages both by Word and
Writing? Yet here can talk of fair and equal disputations: Where
notwithstanding, if all submit not to his judgment as not being rationally
convicted, they must submitt (and he conceales it not) to his penalty as
counted obstinate. But what if he himself and those his learned Churchmen, were
the convicted or the ostinate part long ago; should Reformation suffer them to
sit Lording over the Church in their fatt Bishoprics and Pluralities, like the
great Whore that sits upon many Waters, till they would voutsafe to be
disputed out? Or should we sit disputitg while they sat plotting and
persecuting? Those Clergimen were not to be driven into the fold like Sheep, as
his Simily runs, but to be driven out of the Fold like Wolves, or Thieves,
where they sat Fleecing those Flocks which they never fed.

He believes that Presbytery though proved to be the only Institution of Jesus
Christ were not by the Sword to be set up without his consent; which is
contrary both to the Doctrine, and the known practice of all Protestant
Churches; if his Sword threat'n those who of their own accord embrace it.

And although Christ and his Apostles, being to civil affairs but private men,
contended not with Magistrates, yet when Magistrates themselves and especially
Parlaments; who have greatest right to dispose of the civil Sword, come to know
Religion, they ought in conscience to defend all those who receave it
willingly, against the violence of any King or Tyrant whatsoever. Neither is it
therefore true; That Christianity is planted or watered with Christian blood;
for there is a large difference between forcing men by the Sword to turn
Presbyterians, and defending those who willingly are so, from a r fiousfu
inroad o bloody Bishops, armed with the Militia of a King their Pupil. And if
covetousness and ambition be an argument that Presbytery has not much of
Christ, it argues more strongly against Episcopacy; which from the time of her
first mounting to an order above the Presbyters, had no other Parents then
Covetousness and Ambition. And those Sects, Scisms, and Heresies, which he
speaks of, if they get but strength and numbers, need no other pattern then
Episcopacie and himself, to set up their ways by the like method of violence.
Nor is there any thing that has more marks of Scism and Sectarism then English
Episcopacy; whether we look at Apostolic times, or at reformed Churches; for
the universal way of Church government before, may as soon lead us into gross
error, as their universally corrupted Doctrine. And Government by reason of
ambition was likeliest to be corrupted much the sooner of the two. However
nothing can be to us Catholic or universal in Religion, but what the Scripture
teaches; whatsoever without Scripture pleads to be universal in the Church, in
being universal is but the more Scismatical. Much less can particular Laws and
Constitutions impart to the Church of England any power of consistory or
tribunal above other Churches, to be the sole Judge of what is Sect or Scism,
as with much rigor, and without Scripture, they took upon them. Yet these the
King resolves here to defend and maintain to his last, pretending, after all
those conferences offered, or had with him, not to see more rational and
religious motives then Soldiers carry in their Knapsacks; with one thus resolved
it was but folly to stand disputing.

He imagins his own judicious zeal to be most concernd in his tuition of the
Church. So thought Saul when he presumed to offer Sacrifice; for which he lost
his Kingdom; So thought Uzziah when he went into the Temple; but was thrust out
with a Leprosy for his opinion'd zeal, which he thought judicious. It is not
the part of a King, because he ought to defend the Church, therefore to set
himself supreme Head over the Church, or to meddle with Ecclesial Government, or
to defend the Church otherwise then the Church would be defended; for such
defense is bondage; nor to defend abuses, and stop all Reformation under the
name of New moulds fanct'd and fashioned to private designs. The holy things of
Church are in the power of other keys then were deliverd to his keeping.
Christian liberty purchased with the death of our Redeemer, and established by
the sending of his free Spirit to inhabit in us, is not now to depend upon the
doubtful consent of any earthly Monarch; nor to be again fettered with a
presumptuous negative voice, tyrannical to the Parliament, but much more
tyrannical to the Church of God: which was compelled to implore the aid of
Parliament, to remove his force and heavy hands from off our consciences, who
therefore complains now of that most just defensive force, because only it
removed his violence and persecution. If this be a violation to his conscience,
that it was hinderd by the Parliament from violating the more tender consciences
of so many thousand good Christians, let the usurping conscience of all Tyrants
be ever so violated.

He wonders, Fox wonder, how we could so much distrust Gods assistance, as to
call in the Protestant aid of our Brethren in Scotland; why then did he, if his
trust were in God and the justice of his Cause, not scruple to solicit and
invite earnestly the assistance both of Papists and of Irish Rebels? If the
Scots were by us at length sent home, they were not called to stay here always;
neither was it for the peoples ease to feed so many Legions, longer then their
help was needful.

The Government of their Kirk we despised not, but their imposing of that
Government upon us; not Presbytery, but Arch-Presbytery, Classical, Provincial,
and Diocesan Prebytery, claiming to it self a Lordly power and Superintendency
both over Flocks and Pastors, over Persons and Congregations no way their own.
But these debates in his judgment would have bin ended better by the best
Divines in Christ'ndom in a full and free Synod. A most improbable way, and
such as never yet was used, at least with good success, by any Protestant
Kingdom or State since the Reformation: Every true Church having wherewithal
from Heaven, and the assisting Spirit of Christ implored, to be complete and
perfet within it self. And the whole Nation is not easily to be thought so raw,
and so perpetually a novice after all this light, as to need the help and
direction of other Nations, more then what they write in public of their
opinion, in a matter so familiar as Church Government.

In fine he accuses Piety with the want of Loyalty, and Religion with the
breach of Allegiance, as if God and he were one Master, whose commands were so
oft'n contrary to the commands of God. He would persuade the Scots that their
chief Interest consists in their fidelity to the Crown. But true policy will
teach them to find a safer interest in the common friendship of England, then
in the ruins of one ejected Family.

XIIII. Upon the Covenant.
UPON this Theme his Discourse is long, his Matter little but repetition; and
therefore soon answered. First after an abusive and strange apprehension of
Covnants, as if Men pawned their souls to them with whom they Covenant, he
digresses to plead for Bishops; first from the antiquity of their possession
here, since the first plantation of Christianity in this Island, next from a
universal prescription since the Apostles, till this last Centurie. But what
availes the most Primitive Antiquity against the plain sense of Scripture;
which if the last Centurie have best followed, it ought in our esteem to be the
first. And yet it has bin oft'n proved by Learned Men, from the Writings and
Epistles of most ancient Christians, that Episcopacy crept not up into an order
above the Presbyters, till many years after that the Apostles were deceased.

He next is unsatisfied with the Covenant, not only for some passages in it
referring to himself, as he supposes, with very dubious and dangerous
limitations, but for binding men by Oath and Covenant, to the Reformation of
Church Discipline. First those limitations were not more dangerous to him, then
he to our Liberty and Religion; next, that which was there vowed, to cast out
of the Church an Antichristian Hierarchy which God had not planted, but
ambition and corruption had brought in, and fosterd to the Churches great
damage and oppression, was no point of controversy to be argued without end,
but a thing of clear moral necessity to be forthwith don. Neither was the
Covenant superfluous, though former engagements both religious and legal bound
us before: But was the practice of all Churches heertofore intending
Reformation. All Israel, though bound anough before by the Law of Moses, to all
necessary duties; yet with Asa their King entered into a new Covenant at the
beginning of a Reformation: And the Jews after Captivity, without consent
demanded of that King who was their Master, took solemn Oath to walk in the
Command'ments of God. All Protestant Churches have don the like,
notwithstanding former engagements to their several duties. And although his
aim were to sow variance between the Protestation and the Covenant, to
reconcile them is not difficult. The Protestation was but one step, extending
only to the Doctrine of the Church of England, as it was distinct from Church
Discipline; the Covenant went further, as it pleased God to dispense his light
and our encouragement by degrees, and comprehended Church Government; Former
with latter steps in the progress of well doing need not reconcilement.
Nevertheless he breaks through to his conclusion, That all honest and wise men
ever thought themselves sufficently bound by former ties of Religion; leaving
Asa, Ezra, and the whole Church of God in sundry Ages to shift for honesty and
wisdom from some other then his testimony. And although after-contracts absolve
not till the former be made void, yet he first having don that, our duty
returns back, which to him was neither moral nor eternal; but conditional.

Willing to persuade himself that many good men took the Covenant either
unwarily, or out of fear, he seems to have bestowed some thoughts how these good
men following his advice may keep the the Covenant and not keep it. The first
evasion is, presuming that the chief end of Covnanting in such men's intentions
was to preserve Religion in purity and the Kingdoms peace. But the Covenant will
more truly inform them that purity of Religion and the Kingdoms peace was not
then in state to be preservd, but to be restored; and therefore binds them, not
to a preservation of what was, but to a Reformation of what was evil, what was
Traditional, and dangerous, whether novelty or antiquity in Church or State. To
do this, clashes with no former Oath lawfully sworn either to God or the King,
and rightly understood.

In general he brands all such confederations by League and Covenant, as the
common rode used in all Factious perturbations of State and Church. This kind
of language reflects with the same ignominy upon all the Protestant
Reformations that have bin since Luther; and so indeed does his whole Book,
replenished throughout with hardly other words or arguments then Papists, and
especially Popish Kings, have used heertofore against their Protestant Subjects;
whom he would persuade to be every man his own Pope and to absolve himfelf of
those ties, by the suggestion of falls or equivocal interpretations too often
repeated to be now answered.

The Parliament, he says, made their Covenant like Manna, agreeable to every man's
Palate. This is another of his glosses upon the Covenant; he is content to let it
be Manna, but his drift is that men should loath it, or at least expound it by
their own relish, and latitude of sense; wherein least any one of the simpler
sort should fail to be his crafts master, he furnishes him with two or three
laxative, he terms them general clauses, which may serve somewhat to releeve
them against the Covenant taken: intimating, as if what were lawful and
according to the Word of God, were no otherwise so, then as every man fansi'd
to himself. From such learned explications and resolutions as these upon the
Covenant, what marvel if no Royalist or Malignant refuse to take it, as having
learnt from these Princely instructions, his many Salvo's, cautions, and
reservations, how to be a Covnanter and Anticovnanter, how at once to be a
Scot, and an Irish Rebel.

He returns again to disallow of that Reformation which the Covenant vows, as
being the partial advice of a few Divines. But matters of this moment, as they
were not to be decided there by those Divines, so neither are they to be
determined here by Essays and curtal Aphorisms, but by solid proofs of
Scripture.

The rest of his discourse he spends, highly accusing the Parliament, that the
main Reformation by them intended was to robb the Church, and much applauding
himself both for his forwardness to all due Reformation, and his aversness from
all such kind of Sacrilege. All which, with his glorious title of the Churches
Defender, we leave him to make good, by Pharaoh's Divinity, if he please, for
to Joseph's Piety it will be a task unsuitable. As for the parity and poverty of
Ministers, which he takes to be so sad of consequence, the Scripture reck'ns
them for two special Legacies left by our Savior to his Disciples: under which
two Primitive Nurses, for such they were indeed, the Church of God more truly
flourisht then ever after, since the time that imparitie and Church revennue
rushing in, corrupted and beleper'd all the Clergy with a worse infection then
Gehezi's; some one of whose Tribe rather then a King, I should take to be
compiler of that unsalted and Simonical prayer annexed. Although the Prayer it
self strongly prays against them. For never such holy things as he means, were
given to more Swine, nor the Churches Bread more to Dogs, then when it fed
ambitious, irreligious and dumb Prelates.

XV. Upon the many Jealousies, etc.
TO wipe off jealousies and scandals, the best way, had bin by clear Actions,
or till Actions could be cleared, by evident reasons; but mere words we are too
well acquainted with. Had his honor and reputation bin dearer to him then the
lust of Reigning, how could the Parliament of either Nation have laid so oft'n
at his door the breach of words, promises, acts, Oaths, and execrations, as
they do avowedly in many of their Petitions, and addresses to him: thither I
remitt the Reader. And who can believe that whole Parlaments elected by the
People from all parts of the Land, should meet in one mind, and resolution not
to advise him, but to conspire against him in a wors powder plot then
Catesbies, to blow up, as he terms it, the peoples affection toward him, and
batter down their loyalty by the Engines of foul aspersions: Water works rather
then Engines to batter with, yet those aspersions were raised from the foulness
of his own actions. Whereof to purge himself, he uses no other argument, then a
general and so oft'n iterated commendation of himself; and thinks that Court
holy water has the virtue of expiation; at least with the silly people. To
whom he familiarly imputes sin where none is, to seem liberal of his
forgiveness where none is asked or needed.

What ways he has taken toward the prosperity of his people, which he would
seem so earnestly to desire, if we do but once call to mind, it will be anough
to teach us, looking on the smooth insinuations here, that Tyrants are not more
flatterd by their Slaves, then forced to flatter others whom they fear.

For the peoples tranquillity he would willingly be the Jonah; but least he
should be taken at his word, pretends to foresee within Kenn two imaginary
winds never heard of in the Compass, which threaten, if he be cast overboard,
to increase the storm, but that controversy divine lot has ended.

He had rather not rule then that his people should be ruined; and yet above
these twenty years has bin ruining the people about the niceties of his
ruling. He is accurate to put a difference between the plague of malice, and
the ague of mistakes, the itch of noveltie, and the leprosy of disloyalty.
But had he as well known how to distinguish between the venerable gray hairs of
ancient Religion, and the old scurffe of Superstition, between the wholesome
heat of well Governing, and the fevorous rage of Tyrannizing, his judgment in
Statephysic, had bin of more authority.

Much he Prophesies, that the credit of those men who have cast black scandals
on him shall ere long be quite blasted by the same furnace of popular obloquie
wherein they sought to cast his name and honor: I believe not that a Romish
gilded Portrature gives better Oracle then a Babylonish gold'n Image could
do, to tell us truly who heated that Furnace of obloquy, or who deserves to
be thrown in, Nebuchadnezzar or the three Kingdoms. It gave him great cause to
suspect his own innocence that he was opposed by so many who professed singular
piety. But this qualm was soon over, and he concluded rather to suspect their
Religion, then his own innocence, affirming that many with him were both
learned and Religious above the ordinary size. But if his great Seal without
the Parliament were not sufficient to create Lords, his Parole must needs be
far more unable to create learned and religious men, and who shall authorize
his unlerned judgment to point them out?

He guesses that many well minded men were by popular Preachers urged to oppose
him. But the opposition undoubtedly proceeded and continues from heads far
wiser, and spirits of a nobler strain; those Priestled Herodians with their
blind guides are in the Ditch already; travailing, as they thought, to Sion,
but moored in the I Will of Wight.

He thanks God for his constancy to the Protestant Religion both abroad and at
home. Abroad, his Letter to the Pope, at home, his Innovations in the Church
will speak his constancy in Religion what it was, without further credit to this
vain boast.

His using the assistance of some Papists, as the cause might be, could not
hurt his Religion; but in the settling of Protestantism, their aid was both
unseemly and suspicious, and inferred that the greatest part of Protestants
were against him and his obtruded settlement. But this is strange indeed, that
he should appear now teaching the Parliament what no man, till this was read,
thought ever he had lernt, that difference of persuasion in religious matters
may fall out where there is the samenes of allegiance and subjection. If he
thought so from the beginning, wherefore was there such compulsion used to the
puritans of England, and the whole realm of Scotl. about conforming to a
liturgy? Wherefore no Bishop no king? Wherefore episcopacie more agreeable to
monarchy, if different persuasions in religion may agree in one duty and
allegiance? Thus do court maxims like court Minions rise or fall as the king
pleases.

Not to tax him for want of Elegance as a courtier, in writing Oglio for Olla
the Spanish word, it might be well affirmed that there was a greater Medley and
disproportioning of religions to mix Papists with Protestants in a Religious
cause, then to entertain all those diversifi'd Sects, who yet were all
Protestants, one Religion, though many Opinions.

Neither was it any shame to Protestants, that he a declared Papist, if his own
letter to the Pope, not yet renowne'd, belly him not, found so few protestants
of his religion, as enforced him to call in both the counsel and the aid of
papists to help establish protestancy, who were led on, not by the sense of
their Allegiance, but by the hope of his Apostasy to Rome, from disputing to
warring; his own voluntary, and first appeal.

His harkening to evil Counselers, charged upon him so oft'n by the Parliament,
he puts off as a device of those men who were so eager to give him better
counsel. That those men were the Parliament, and that he ought to have used the
counsel of none but those, as a King, is already known. What their civility
laid upon evil Counselers, he himself most commonly owned; but the event of
those evil counsels, the enormities, the confusions the miseries he transferrs
from the guilt of his own civil broiles to the just resistance made by
Parliament; and imputes what miscarriages of his they could not yet remove for
his opposing, as if they were some new misdemeanors of their bringing in, and
not the inveterat diseases of his own bad Government; which, with a disease as
bad, he falls again to magnify and commend; and may all those who would be
governed by his Retractions and concessions, rather then by Laws of Parliament,
admire his self- Encomiums, and be flattered with that Crown of patience to
which he cunningly exhorted them, that his Monarchical foot might have the
setting it upon their heads.

That trust which the Parliament faithfully discharged in the asserting of our
Liberties, he calls another artifice to withdraw the people from him, to their
designs. What piece of Justice could they have demanded for the people, which
the jealousy of a King might not have miscalled, a design to disparage his
Government, and to ingratiat themselves? To be more just, religious, wise, or
magnanimous then the common sort, stirrs up in a Tyrant both fear and envy;
and straight he cries out popularitie, which in his account is little less then
Treason. The sum is, they thought to limit or take away the Remora of his
negative voice, which like to that little pest at Sea, took upon it to arrest
and stopp the Commonwealth stearing under full sail to a Reformation: they
thought to share with him in the Militia, both or either of which he could not
possibly hold without consent of the people, and not be absolutely a Tyrant. He
professes to desire no other liberty then what he envies not his Subjects
according to Law; yet fought with might and maine against his Subjects to have
a sole power over them in his hand, both against and beyond Law. As for the
Philosophical Liberty which in vain he talks of, we may conclude him very ill
trained up in those free notions, who to civil Liberty was so injurious.

He calls the conscience Gods sovrantie, why then does he contest with God
about that supreme title? Why did he lay restraints, and force enlargements
upon our consciences in things for which we were to answer God only and the
Church? God bids us Be subject for conscience sake, that is, as to a Magistrate,
and in the Laws; not usurping over spiritual things, as Lucifer beyond his
sphere. And the same Precept bids him likewise for conscience sake be subject
to the Parliament, both his natural and his legal superior.

Finally, having laid the fault of these Commotions, not upon his own
mis-goverment, but upon the ambition of others, the necessity of some men's
fortune, and thirst after noveltie, he bodes himself much honor and reputation
that like the Sun shall rise and recover it self to such a Splendor, as Owls,
Batts, and such fatal Birds shall be unable to bear. Poets indeed use to vapor
much after this manner. But to bad Kings, who without cause expect future glory
from their actions, it happ'ns as to bad Poets; who sit and starve themselves
with a delusive hope to win immortality by their bad lines. For though men ought
not to speak evil of Dignities which are just, yet nothing hinders us to speak
evil, as often as it is the truth, of those who in their Dignities do evil; thus
did our Savior himself, John the Baptist, and Steev'n the Martyr. And those
black vailes of his own misdeeds he might be sure would ever keep his face from
shining, til he could refute evil speaking with well doing, which grace he seems
here to pray for; and his prayer doubtless as it was prayed, so it was heard.
But eev'n his prayer is so ambitious of Prerogative, that it dares ask away the
Prerogative of Christ himself, To become the head soon of the Corner.

XVI. Upon the Ordinance against the Common Prayer Book.
WHAT to think of Liturgies, both the sense of Scripture, and Apostolical
practice would have taught him better, then his human reasonings and
conjectures: Nevertheless what weight they have, let us consider. If it be no
news to have all innovations usherd in with the name of Reformation, sure it
is less news to have all reformation censured and opposed under the name of
innovation; by those who being exalted in high place above their merit, fear
all change though of things never so ill or so unwisely settled. So hardly can
the dotage of those that dwell upon Antiquity allow present times any share of
godliness or wisdom.

The removing of Liturgy he traduces to be don only as a thing plausible to
the People; whose rejection of it he lik'ns with small reverence to the
crucifying of our Savior; next that it was don to please those men who gloried
in their extemporary vein, meaning the Ministers. For whom it will be best to
answer, as was answered for the man born blind, They are of age let them speak
for themselves; not how they came blind, but whether it were Liturgy that held
them tongueti'd.

For the matter contained in that Book we need no better witness then King
Edward the sixth, who to the Cornish Rebels confesses it was no other then the
old Mass Book don into English, all but some few words that were expunged. And
by this argument which King Edward so promptly had to use against that
irreligious Rabble, we may be assured it was the carnal fear of those Divines
and Politicians that modeled the Liturgy no further off from the old Mass,
least by too great an alteration they should incense the people, and be
destitute of the same shifts to fly to, which they had taught the young King.

For the manner of using set forms, there is no doubt but that, wholesome
matter, and good desires rightly conceav'd in the heart, wholesome words will
follow of themselves. Neither can any true Christian find a reason why Liturgy
should be at all admitted, a prescription not imposed or practiced by those
first Founders of the Church, who alone had that authority: Without whose
precept or example, how constantly the Priest puts on his Gown and Surplice, so
constantly does his prayer put on a servile yoke of Liturgy. This is evident,
that they who use no set forms of prayer, have words from their affections;
while others are to seek affections fit and proportionable to a certain doss of
prepared words; which as they are not rigorously forbidd to any man's private
infirmity, so to imprison and confine by force, into a Pinfold of set words,
those two most unimprisonable things, our Prayers that Divine Spirit of
utterance that moves the^, is a tyranny that would have longer hands then those
Giants who threatened bondage to Heaven. What we may do in the same form of
words is not so much the question, as whether Liturgy may be forced, as he
forced it. It is true that we pray to the same God, must we therefore always use
the same words? Let us then use but one word, because we pray to one God We
profess the same truths, but the Liturgy comprehends not all truths: we read
the same Scriptures; but never read that all those Sacred expressions, all
benefit and use of Scripture, as to public prayer, should be denied us, except
what was barreld up in a Common-praier Book with many mixtures of their own, and
which is worse, without salt. But suppose them savoury words and unmixed,
suppose them Manna it self, yet if they shall be hoarded up and enjoynd us,
while God every morning raines down new expressions into our hearts, in stead
of being fit to use, they will be found like reserved Manna, rather to breed
worms and stink. We have the same duties upon us and feel the same wants;
yet not always the same, nor at all times alike; but with variety of
Circumstances, which ask variety of words. Whereof God has given us plenty;
not to use so copiously upon all other occasions, and so niggardly to him alone
in our devotions. As if Christians were now in a wors famine of words fit for
prayer, then was of food at the seige of Jerusalem, when perhaps the Priests
being to remove the show bread, as was accustomed, were compelled every Sabbath
day, for want of other Loaves, to bring again still the same. If the Lords
Prayer had bin the warrant or the pattern of set Liturgies, as is here
affirmed, why was neither that Prayer, nor any other set form ever after
used, or so much as mentioned by the Apostles, much less commended to our use?
Why was their care wanting in a thing so useful to the Church? So full of
danger and contention to be left undon by them to other men's Penning, of whose
authority we could not be so certain? Why was this forgott'n by them who declare
that they have revealed to us the whole Counsel of God; who as he left our
affections to be guided by his sanctifying spirit, so did he likewise our words
to be put into us without our premeditation; not only those cautious words to
be used before Gentiles and Tyrants, but much more those filial words, of which
we have so frequent use in our access with freedom of speech to the Throne of
Grace. Which to lay aside for other outward dictates of men, were to injure him
and his perfet Gift, who is the spirit, and the giver of our ability to pray;
as if his ministration were incomplete, and that to whom he gave affections, he
did not also afford utterance to make his Gift of prayer a perfet Gift, to them
especially whose office in the Church is to pray publicly.

And although the gift were only natural, yet voluntary prayers are less
subject to formal and superficial tempers then set forms: For in those, at
least for words and matter, he who prays, must consult first with his heart;
which in likelihood may stir up his affections; in these, having both words
and matter ready made to his lips, which is anough to make up the outward act
of prayer, his affections grow lazy, and com not up easily at the call of
words not their own; the prayer also having less intercours and sympathy with a
heart wherein it was not conceav'd, saves it self the labor of so long a
journey downward, and flying up in have on the specious wings of formalitie, if
it fall not back again headlong, in stead of a prayer which was expected,
presents God with a set of stale and empty words.

No doubt but ostentation and formalitie may taint the best duties: we are not
therefore to leave duties for no duties, and to turn prayer into a kind of
Lurrey. Cannot unpremeditated babbling be rebuked, and restraind in whom we find
they are, but the spirit of God must be forbidd'n in all men? But it is the
custom of bad men and Hypocrites to take advantage at the least abuse of good
things, that under that covert they may remove the goodness of those things,
rather then the abuse. And how unknowingly, how weakly is the using of set
forms attributed here to constancy, as if it were constancy in the Cuckoo to
be always in the same liturgy.

Much less can it be lawful that an Englisht Mass Book, composed for ought we
know, by men neither learned, nor godly, should justle out, or at any time
deprive us the exercise of that Heavenly gift, which God by special promise
powrs out daily upon his Church, that is to say, the spirit of Prayer. Whereof
to help those many infirmities, which he reck'ns up, rudeness, impertinencie,
flatness, and the like, we have a remedy of Gods finding out, which is not
Liturgy, but his own free spirit. Though we know not what to pray as we ought,
yet he with sighs unutterable by any words, much less by a stinted Liturgy,
dwelling in us makes intercession for us, according to the mind and will of
God, both in private, and in the performance of all Ecclesiastical duties. For
it is his promise also, that where two or three gathered together in his name
shall agree to ask him any thing, it shall be granted; for he is there in the
midst of them. If then ancient Churches to remedy the infirmities of prayer,
or rather the infections of Arian and Pelagian Heresies, neglecting that
ordained and promised help of the spirit, betook them, almost four hundred
years after Christ, to Liturgy their own invention, we are not to imitate
them, nor to distrust God in the removal of that Truant help to our Devotion,
which by him never was appointed. And what is said of Liturgy is said also of
Directory, if it be imposed: although to forbidd the Service Book there be much
more reason, as being of it self superstitious, offensive, and indeed, though
Englisht, yet still the Mass Book: and public places ought to be provided of
such* as need not the help of Liturgies or Directories continually, but are
supported with Ministerial gifts answerable to their Calling.

Lastly that the Common Prayer Book was rejected because it prayed so often for
him, he had no reason to Object: for what large and laborious Prayers were made
for him in the Pulpits, if he never heard, it is doubtful they were never heard
in Heaven. We might now have expected that his own following Prayer should add
much credit to set Forms; but on the contrary we find the same imperfections
in it, as in most before, which he lays here upon Extemporal. Nor does he ask
of God to be directed whether Liturgies be lawful, but presumes, and in a
manner would persuade him that they be so; praying that the Church and he may
never want them. What could be prayed wors extempore? unless he mean by wanting,
that they may never need them.

XVII. Of the differences in point of Church-Goverment.
THE Government of Church by Bishops has bin so fully proved from the
Scriptures to be vicious and usurped, that whether out of Piety or Policy
maintained, it is not much material. For Piety grounded upon error can no more
justify King Charles, then it did Queen Mary, in the sight of God or Man. This
however must not be let pass without a serious observation; God having so
disposed the Author in this Chapter as to confess and discover more of Mystery
and combination between Tyranny and falls Religion, then from any other hand
would have bin credible. Here we may see the very dark roots of them both
turned up, and how they twine and interweave one another in the Earth, though
above ground shooting up in two severed Branches. We may have learnt both from
sacred History, and times of Reformation, that the Kings of this World have
both ever hated, and instinctively feared the Church of God. Whether it be for
that their Doctrine seems much to favor two things to them so dreadful, Liberty
and Equality, or because they are the Children of that Kingdom, which, as
ancient Prophesies have foretold, shall in the end break to pieces and dissolve
all their great power and Dominion, And those Kings and Potentates who have
strove most to ridd themselves of this fear, by cutting off or suppressing the
true Church, have drawn upon themselves the occasion of their own ruin, while
they thought with most policy to prevent it. Thus Pharaoh, when once he began
to fear and wax jealous of the Israelites, least they should multiply and
fight against him, and that his fear stirred him up to afflict and keep them
under, as the only remedy of what he feared, soon found that the evil which
before slept, came suddenly upon him, by the preposterous way he took to shun
it. Passing by examples between, and not shutting wilfully our eyes, we may see
the like story brought to pass in our own Land. This King more then any before
him, except perhapps his Father, from his first entrance to the Crown,
harboring in his mind a strange fear and suspicion of men most religious, and
their Doctrine, which in his own language he here acknowledges, terming it the
seditious exorbitancie of Ministers tongues, and doubting least they, as he not
Christianly expresses it, should with the Keys of Heaven let out Peace and
Loyalty from the peoples hearts, though they never preached or attempted aught
that might justly raise in him such apprehensions, he could not rest, or think
himself secure, so long as they remained in any of his three Kingdoms unrooted
out. But outwardly professing the same Religion with them, he could not
presently use violence as Pharaoh did, and that course had with others before
but ill succeeded. He chooses therefore a more mystical way, a newer method of
Antichristian fraud, to the Church more dangerous: and like to Balac the Son of
Zippor, against a Nation of Prophets thinks it best to hire other esteemed
Prophets, and to undermine and wear out the true Church by a falls
Ecclesiastical policy. To this drift he found the Government of Bishops most
serviceable; an order in the Church, as by men first corrupted, so mutually
corrupting them who receave it, both in judgment and manners. He, by
conferring Bishoprics and great Livings on whom he thought most pliant to his
will, against the known Canons and universal practice of the ancient Church,
whereby those elections were the peoples right, sought, as he confesses, to have
greatest influence upon Churchmen. They on the other side finding themselves
in a high Dignity, neither founded by Scripture, nor allowed by Reformation,
nor supported by any spiritual gift or grace of their own, knew it their best
course to have dependence only upon him: and wrought his fancy by degrees to
that degenerat, and unkingly persuasion of No Bishop, no King. When as on the
contrary all Prelates in their own subtle sense are of another mind; according to
that of Pius the fourth, rememberd in the Trentine story, that Bishops then
grow to be most vigorous and potent, when Princes happ'n to be most weak, and
impotent. Thus when both Interests of Tyranny and Episcopacie were incorporat
into each other, the King whose principal safety and establishment consisted in
the righteous execution of his civil power, and not in Bishops and their wicked
counsels, fatally driven on, set himself to the extirpating of those men whose
Doctrine, and desire of Church Discipline he so feared would be the undoing of
his Monarchy. And because no temporal Law could touch the innocence of their
lives, he begins with the persecution of their consciences, laying scandals
before them: and makes that the argument to inflict his unjust penalties both
on their bodies and Estates. In this War against the Church if he has sped so,
as other haughty Monarchs whom God heertofore has hard'nd to the like
enterprise, we ought to look up with praises and thanksgiving to the Author of
our deliverance, to whom victory and power, Majesty, Honor, and Dominion
belongs for ever.

In the mean while from his own words we may perceave easily, that the special
motives which he had to endeere and deprave his judgment to the favoring and
utmost defending of Episcopacie, are such as here we represent them: and how
unwillingly and with what mental reservation he condescended against his
interest to remove it out of the Peers house, has bin shown already. The
reasons, which he affirms wrought so much upon his judgment, shall be so far
answered as they be urged.

Scripture, he reports, but distinctly produces none; and next the constant
practice of all Christian Churches, till of late years tumult, faction, pride,
and covetousness, invented new models under the Title of Christ's Government.
Could any Papist have spoke more scandalously against all Reformation? Well may
the Parliament and best-affected People not now be troubled at his calumnies and
reproaches, since he binds them in the same bundle with all other the reformed
Churches; who also may now further see, besides their own bitter experience, what
a Cordial and well meaning helper they had of him abroad, and how true to the
Protestant cause.

As for Histories to prove Bishops, the Bible, if we mean not to run into
errors, vanities, and uncertainties, must be our only History. Which informs
us that the Apostles were not properly Bishops; next, that Bishops were not
successors of Apostles, in the function of Apostleship: And that if they were
Apostles, they could not be preciselie Bishops; if Bishops, they could not be
Apostles; this being Universal, extraordinary, and immediate from God; that
being an ordinary, fixed, and particular charge, the continual inspection over
a certain Flock. And although an ignorance and deviation of the ancient
Churches afterward, may with as much reason and charity be supposed as sudden
in point of Prelatie, as in other manifest corruptions, yet that no example
since the first age for 1500 years can be produced of any settled Church,
wherein were many Ministers and Congregations, which had not some Bishops above
them, the Ecclesiastical story, to which he appeals for want of Scripture,
proves clearly to be a falls and over-confident assertion. Sczomenus who wrote
above Twelve hundred years ago, in his seventh Book relates from his own
knowledge, that in the Churches of Cyprus and Arabia, (places near to
Jerusalem, and with the first frequented by Apostles) they had Bishops in every
Village; and what could those be more then Presbyters? The like he tells of
other Nations; and that Episcopal Churches in those days did not condemn them.
I add that many Western Churches eminent for their Faith and good Works, and
settled above four hundred years ago in France, in Piemont and Bohemia, have
both taught and practiced the same Doctrine, and not admitted of Episcopacie
among them. And if we may believe what the Papists themselves have writt'n of
these Churches, which they call Waldenses, I find it in a Book writt'n almost
four hundred years since, and set forth in the Bohemian History, that those
Churches in Piemont have held the same Doctrine and Government, since the time
that Constantine with his mischeivous donations poisoned Silvester and the
whole Church. Others affirm they have so continued there since the Apostles:
and Theodorus Belvederensis in his relation of them, confesses that those
Heresies, as he names them, were, from the first times of Christianity, in that
place. For the rest I referr me to that famous testimony of Jerome, who upon
this very place which he only roaves at here, the Epistle to Titus, declares
op'nly that Bishop and Presbyter were one and the same thing, till by the
instigation of Satan, partialities grew up in the Church; and that Bishops
rather by custom, then any ordainment of Christ, were exalted above Presbyters:
whose interpretation we trust shall be received before this intricate stuff
tattl'd here of Timothy and Titus, and I know not whom their Successors, far
beyond Court Element, and as far beneath true edification. These are his fair
grounds both from Scripture-Canons and Ecclesiastical examples; how
undivinelike writt'n, and how like a worldly Gospeller that understands nothing
of these matters, posterity no doubt will be able to judge: and will but
little regard what he calls Apostolical, who in his Letter to the Pope calls
Apostolical the Roman Religion.

Nor let him think to plead, that therefore it was not policy of State, or
obstinacy in him which upheld Episcopacie, because the injuries and losses
which he sustained by so doing, were to him more considerable then Episcopacie
it self; for all this might Pharaoh have had to say in his excuse of detaining
the Israelites; that his own and his Kingdoms safety so much endangered by his
denial, was to him more deer, then all their building labors could be worth to
Egypt. But whom God hard'ns, them also he blinds.

He endeavors to make good Episcopacie not only in Religion, but from the
nature of all civil Government, where parity breeds confusion and faction. But
of faction and confusion, to take no other then his own testimony, where has
more bin ever bred then under the imparitie of his own Monarchical Government?
Of which to make at this time longer dispute, and from civil constitutions, and
human conceits to debate and question the convenience of Divine Ordinations, is
neither wisdom nor sobriety: and to confound Mosaic Preisthood with Evangelic
Presbytery against express institution, is as far from warrantable. As little
to purpose is it, that we should stand powling the Reformed Churches, whether
they equalize in number those of his three Kingdoms; of whom so lately the far
greater part, what they have long desired to do, have now quite thrown off
Episcopacie.

Neither may we count it the language or Religion of a Protestant, so to
vilify the best Reformed Churches (for none of them but Lutherans retain
Bishops) as to fear more the scandalizing of Papists, because more numerous,
then of our Protestant Brethren because a handful. It will not be worth the
while to say what Scismatics or Heretics have had no Bishops; yet least he
should be taken for a great Reader, he who prompted him, if he were a Doctor,
might have rememberd the forementioned place in Sozomenus; which affirms that
besides the Cyprians and Arabians who were counted Orthodoxal, the Novatians
also, and Montanists in Phrygia had no other Bishops then such as were in every
Village: and what Presbyter has a narrower Diocese? As for the Aerians we know
of no Heretical opinion justly fathered upon them, but that they held Bishops
and Presbyters to be the same. Which he in this place not obscurely seems to
hold a Heresy in all the Reformed Churches: with whom why the Church of
England desired conformity, he can find no reason with all his charity, but
the coming in of the Scots Army; Such a high esteem he had of the English.

He tempts the Clergy to return back again to Bishops, from the fear of
tenuity and contempt, and the assurance of better thriving under the favor of
Princes; against which temptations if the Clergy cannot arm themselves with
their own spiritual armor, they are indeed as poor a Carcass as he terms them.

Of Secular honors and great Revenues added to the dignity of Prelates, since
the subject of that question is now removed, we need not spend time: But this
perhaps will never be unseasonable to bear in mind out of Chrysostom, that
when Ministers came to have Lands, Houses, Farms, Coaches, Horses, and the
like Lumber, then Religion brought forth riches in the Church, and the Daughter
devoured the Mother.

But if his judgment in Episcopacie may be judged by the goodly chois he made
of Bishops, we need not much amuse our selves with the consideration of those
evils which, by his foretelling, will necessarily follow their pulling down,
until he prove that the Apostles having no certain Diocese or appointed place
of residence, were properly Bishops over those Presbyters whom they ordained,
or Churches they planted; wherein ofttimes their labors were both joint and
promiscuous: Or that the Apostolic power must necessarily descend to Bishops,
the use and end of either function being so different. And how the Church has
flourisht under Episcopacie, let the multitude of their ancient and gross errors
testify; and the words of some learnedest and most zealous Bishops among them;
Nazianzen in a devout passion wishing Prelaty had never bin; Basil terming them
the Slaves of Slaves; Saint Martin, the enemies of Saints, and confessing that
after he was made a Bishop, he found much of that grace decay in him which he
had before.

Concerning his Coronation Oath what it was, and how far it bound him, already
has bin spok'n. This we may take for certain, that he was never sworn to his
own particular conscience and reason, but to our conditions as a free people;
which required him to give us such Laws as our selves shall choose. This the
Scots could bring him to, and would not be baffled with the pretense of a
Coronation Oath, after that Episcopacy had for many years bin settled there.
Which concession of his to them, and not to us, he seeks here to put off with
evasions that are ridiculous. And to omit no shifts, he alleges that the
Presbyterian manners gave him no encouragement to like their modes of
Government. If that were so, yet certainly those men are in most likelihood
nearer to amendment, who seek a stricter Church Discipline then that of
Episcopacy; under which the most of them learnt their manners. If estimation
were to be made of Gods Law by their manners, who leaving Egypt, received it
in the Wilderness, it could reap from such an inference as this, nothing but
rejection and disesteem.

For the Prayer wherewith he closes, it had bin good some safe Liturgy, which he
so commends, had rather bin in his way; it would perhaps in some measure have
performed the end for which they say Liturgy was first invented; and have
hindered him, both here and at other times, from turning his notorious errors
into his Prayers.

XVIII. Upon the Uxbridge Treaty, etc.
IF the way of Treaties be looked upon in general, as a retiring from bestial
force to human reason, his first Aphorism here is in part deceav'd. For men may
Treat like Beasts as well as fight. If some fighting were not mar-like, then
either fortitude were no virtue, or no fortitude in fighting: And as
Politicians ofttimes through dilatory purposes, and emulations handle the
matter, there has bin no where found more bestialitie then in treating: which
has no more commendation in it then from fighting to come to undermining, from
violence to craft, and when they can no longer do as Lions, to do as Foxes.

The sincerest end of Treating after War once Proclaimed, is either to part
with more, or to demand less then was at first fought for, rather then to
hazard more lives, or wors mischiefs. What the Parliament in that point were
willing to have don, when first after the War begun, they Petitioned him at
Colebrook to voutsafe a treaty, is unknown. For after he had taken God to
witness of his continual readiness to Treat, or to offer Treaties to the
avoiding of bloodshed, had named Windsor the place of Treaty, and passed his
royal word not to advance further, till Commissioners by such a time were
speeded toward him, taking the advantage of a thick Mist, which fell that
evening, weather that soon invited him to a design no less treacherous and
obscure; he follows at the heels those Me engers of Peace with a train of
covert War: and with a bloody surprise falls on our secure Forces which lay
quartering at Brentford in the thoughts and expectation of a Treaty. And
although in them who make a Trade of War, and against a natural Enemy, such an
onset might in the rigor of Military Law have bin excused, while Arms were not
yet by agreement suspended, yet by a King, who seemed so heartily to accept of
treating with his subjects, and professes here, He never wanted either desire
or disposition to it, professes to have greater confidence in his Reason, then
in his Sword, and as a Christian to seek Peace and ensue it, such bloody and
deceitful advantages would have bin forborne one day at least, if not much
longer; in whom there had not bin a thirst rather then a detestation of civil
War and blood, and a desire to subdue rather then to treat.

In the midst of a second Treaty not long after, fought by the Parliament, and
after much ado obtained with him at Oxford, what subtle and unpeaceable
designs he then had in chase, his own Letters discovered: What attempts of
treacherous hostility successful and unsuccessful he made against Bristow,
Scarborow, and other places, the proceedings of that Treaty will soon put us in
mind: and how he was so far from granting more of reason, after so much of
blood, that he denied then to grant, what before he had offered; making no other
use of Treaties pretending Peace, then to gain advantages that might enable
him to continue War. What marvel then if he thought it no diminution of
himself, as often as he saw his time, to be importunate for Treaties, when he
sought them only, as by the upshot appeard, to get opportunities: and once to
a most cruel purpose, if we remember May 1643. and that Messenger of Peace from
Oxford, whose secret Message and Commission, had it bin effected, would have
drowned the innocence of our Treating, in the blood of a designed Massacher.
Nay, when treaties from the Parliament sought out him, no less then seven times,
often anough to testify the willingness of their obedience, and too often for the
Majesty of a Parliament to court their Subjection, he in the confidence of his
own strength, or of our divisions, returned us nothing back but denials, or
delays, to their most necessary demands; and being at lowest kept up still and
sustained his almost famishd hopes with the howrly expectation of raising up
himself the higher, by the greater heap which he sat promising himself of our
sudden ruin through dissension.

But he inferrs, as if the Parliament would have compelled him to part with
something of his honor as a King. What honor could he have, or call his,
joined, not only with the offense or disturbance, but with the bondage and
destruction of three Nations; whereof though he be careless and improvident, yet
the Parliament, by our Laws and freedom, ought to judge and use prevention; our
Laws else were but cobweb Laws. And what were all his most rightful honors, but
the peoples gift, and the investment of that luster, Majesty, and honor, which
for the public good and no otherwise, redounds from a whole Nation into one
person? So far is any honor from being his to a common mischief and calamity.
Yet still he talks on equal terms with the grand Representative of that
people, for whose sake he was a King; as if the general welfare, and his
subservient Rights were of equal moment, or consideration. His aim indeed has
ever bin to magnify and exalt his borrowd Rights and Prerogatives, above the
Parliament and Kingdom of whom he holds them. But when a King setts himself to
bandy against the highest Court and residence of all his Regal power, he then,
in the single person of a Man, fights against his own Majesty and Kingship, and
then indeed sets the first hand to his own deposing.

The Treaty at Uxbridge, he says, gave the fairest hopes of a happy composure,
fairest indeed, if his instructions to bribe our Commissioners with the promise
of Security, rewards, and places, were fair: What other hopes it gave no man
can tell. There being but three maine heads whereon to be treated, Ireland,
Episcopacy, and the Militia, the first was anticipated and forestalled by a
Peace at any rate to be hast'nd with the Irish Rebels, ere the Treaty could
begin; that he might pretend his word and honor past against the specious and
popular arguments (he calls them no better) which the Parliament would urge upon
him for the continuance of that just War. Episcopacy he bids the Queen be
confident he will never quitt: which informs us by what Patronage it stood;
and the Sword he resolves to clutch as fast, as if God with his own hand had
put it into his. This was the moderation which he brought; this was as far as
Reason, Honor, Conscience, and the Queen who was his Regent in all these,
would give him leave. Lastly for composure, in stead of happy, how miserable it
was more likely to have bin, wise men could then judge; when the English,
during Treaty, were called Rebels, the Irish, good and Catholic Subjects; and
the Parliament before hand, though for fashions sake called a Parliament, yet by
a Jesuitical slight not acknowledged though called so; but privately in the
Counsel Books inroull'd no Parliament: that if accommodation had succeeded upon
what terms soever, such a devilish fraud was prepared, that the King in his
own esteem had bin absolved from all performance, as having treated with Rebels
and no Parliament; and they on the other side in stead of an expected happiness,
had bin brought under the Hatchet. Then no doubt War had ended, that Massacher
and Tyranny might begin. These jealousies however raised, let all men see
whether they be diminished or allayed, by the Letters of his own Cabinet
opened. And yet the breach of this Treaty is laid all upon the Parliament and
their Commissioners, with odious Names of Pertinacy, hatred of Peace, Faction,
and Covetousness, nay his own Bratt Superstition is laid to their charge; not
withstanding his here professed resolution to continue both the Order,
Maintenance, and Authority of Prelates, as a truth of God.

And who were most to blame in the unsuccessfullness of that Treaty, his
appeal is to Gods decision: believing to be very excusable at that Tribunal.
But if ever man gloried in an unflexible stifness, he came not behind any: and
that grand Maxim, always to put something into his Treaties, which might give
color to refuse all that was in other things granted, and to make them
signify nothing, was his own Principal Maxim, and particular instructions to
his Commissioners. Yet all, by his own verdit, must be consterd Reason in the
King, and depraved temper in the Parliament.

That the highest Tide of success, with these principles and designs, set him
not above a Treaty, no great wonder. And yet if that be spok'n to his praise,
the Parliament therein surpassed him; who, when he was their vanquished and their
captive, his forces utterly brok'n and disbanded, yet offered him three several
times no wors proposals or demands, then when he stood fair to be their
Conqueror. But that imprudent surmise that his lowest Ebb could not set him
below a Fight, was a presumption that ruined him.

He presaged the future unsuccessfulness of Treaties by the unwillingness of
some men to treat: and could not see what was present that their unwillingness
had good cause to proceed from the continual experience of his own obstinacy
and breach of word.

His prayer therefore of forgiveness to the guilty of that treaties breaking, he
had good reason to say heartily over; as including no man in that guilt sooner
then himself.

As for that Protestation following in his Prayer, How often have I entreated for
peace, but when I speak thereof, they make them ready to War, unless he thought
himself still in that perfidious mist, between Colebrook and Houndslow, and
thought that mist could hide him from the eye of Heaven as well as of Man,
after such a bloody recompense given to our first offers of Peace, how could
this in the sight of Heaven without horrors of conscience be uttered?

XIX. Upon the various events of the War.
IT is no new, or unwonted thing for bad men to claim as much part in God as
his best servants; to usurp and imitate their words, and appropriate to
themselves those properties which belong only to the good and righteous. This
not only in Scripis familiarly to be found, but here also in this Chapter of
Apocrypha. He tells us much, why it pleased God to send him Victory or Loss
(although what in so doing was the intent of God, he might be much mistak'n as
to his own particular) but we are yet to learn what real good use he made
thereof in his practice.

Those numbers which he grew to from small beginnings, were not such as out of
love came to protect him, for none approved his actions as a King, except
Courtiers and Prelates, but were such as fled to be protected by him from the
fear of that Reformation which the pravity of their lives would not bear. Such a
Snowball he might easily gather by rolling through those cold and dark
provinces of ignorance and leudness, where on a sudden he became so numerous.
He imputes that to Gods protection, which, to them who persist in a bad cause,
is either his longsuffering, or his hard'ning; and that to wholesome
chastisement, which were the gradual beginnings of a severe punishment. For if
neither God nor nature put civil power in the hands of any whomsoever, but to a
lawful end, and commands our obedience to the authority of Law only, not to
the Tyrannical force of any person, and if the Laws of our Land have placed the
Sword in no man's single hand, so much as to unsheath against a foreign enemy,
much less upon the native people, but have placed it in that elective body of
the Parliament, to whom the making, repealing, judging, and interpreting of Law
it self was also committed; as was fittest, so long as we intended to be a
free Nation, and not the Slaves of one man's will, then was the King himself
disobedient and rebellious to that Law by which he reigned; and by authority of
Parliament to raise arms against him in defense of Law and Liberty, we do not
only think, but believe and know was justifiable both by the Word of God, the
Laws of the Land, and all lawful Oaths; and they who sided with him fought
against all these.

The same Allegations, which he uses for himself and his Party, may as well
fit any Tyrant in the world: for let the Parliament be called a Faction when
the King pleases, and that no Law must be made or changed either civil or
religious, because no Law will content all sides, then must be made or changed
no Law at all; but what a Tyrant, be he Protestant or Papist, thinks fit.
Which tyrannous assertion forced upon us by the Sword, he who fights against,
and dies fighting, if his other sins overweigh not, dies a Martyr undoubtedly
both of the Faith and of the Commonwealth: and I hold it not as the opinion,
but as the full belief and persuasion of far holier and wiser men then
Parasitie Preachers. Who, without their dinner-Doctrin, know that neither King,
Law, civil Oaths, or Religion, was ever established without the Parliament: and
their power is the same to abrogate as to establish: neither is any thing to be
thought established which that House declares to be abolisht. Where the
Parliament sitts, there inseparably sitts the King, there the Laws, there our
Oaths, and whatsoever can be civil in Religion. They who fought for the
Parliament, in the truest sense fought for all these; who fought for the King
divided from his Parliament, fought for the shadow of a King against all these;
and for things that were not, as if they were established. It were a thing
monstrously absurd and contradictory to give the Parliament a Legislative power,
and then to upbraid them for transgressing old Establishments.

But the King and his Party having lost in this Quarrel their Heaven upon Earth,
beginn to make great reckning of Eternal Life, and at an easy rate in forma
Pauperis Canonize one another into Heaven; he them in his Book, they him in the
Portrature before his Book: but as was said before, Stagework will not do it;
much less the justness of their Cause: wherein most frequently they died in a
brutish fierceness, with Oaths and other damning words in their mouths; as if
such had bin all the Oaths they fought for: which undoubtedly sent them full
Sail on another Voyage then to Heaven. In the mean while they to whom God gave
Victory, never brought to the King at Oxford the state of their consciences,
that he should presume without confession, more then a Pope presumes, to tell
abroad what conflicts and accusations, men whom he never spoke with, have in
their own thoughts. We never read of any English King but one that was a
Confessor; and his name was Edward: yet sure it passed his skill to know
thoughts, as this King takes upon him. But they who will not stick to slander
men's inward consciences, which they can neither see nor know, much less will
care to slander outward actions, which they pretend to see, though with senses
never so vitiated.

To judge of his conditions conquered, and the manner of dying on that side, by
the sober men that chose it, would be his small advantage: it being most
notorious, that they who were hottest in his Cause, the most of them were men
oftener drunk, then by their good will sober, and very many of them so fought and
so died.

And that the conscience of any man should grow suspicious, or be now convicted
by any pretentions in the Parliament, which are now proved falls, and unintended,
there can be no just cause. For neither did they ever pretend to establish his
Throne without our Liberty and Religion, nor Religion without the Word of God,
nor to judge of Laws by their being established, but to establish them by their
being good and necessary.

He tells the World He oft'n prayed that all on his side might be as faithful
to God and their own souls, as to him. But Kings, above all other men, have in
their hands not to pray only but to do. To make that prayer effectual, he
should have governed as well as prayed. To pray and not to govern is For a Monk
and not a King. Till then he might be well assured they were more faithful to
their lust and rapine then to him.

In the wonted predication of his own virtues he goes on to tell us, that to
Conquer he never desired, but only to restore the Laws and Liberties of his
people. It had bin happy then he had known at last, that by force to restore
Laws abrogated by the Legislative Parliament; is to conquer absolutely both
them, and Law it self. And for our Liberties, none ever oppressed them more,
both in Peace and War; first like a master by his arbitrary power; next as an
enemy by hostile invasion.

And if his best friends feared him, and he himself, in the temptation of an
absolute Conquest, it was not only pious, but freindly in the Parliament, both
to fear him and resist him; since their not yielding, was the only means to
keep him out of that temptation wherein he doubted his own strength.

He takes himself to be guilty in this War of nothing else, but of confirming
the power of some Men: Thus all along he signifies the Parliament, whom to have
settled by an Act he counts to be his only guiltiness. So well he knew that to
continue a Parliament, was to raise a War against himself; what were his actions
then and his Government the while? For never was it heard in all our Story,
that Parlaments made War on their Kings, but on their Tyrants; whose modesty and
gratitude was more wanting to the Parliament, then theirs to any of such Kings.

What he yielded was his fear; what he denied was his obstinacy; had he
yielded more, fear might perchance have saved him; had he granted less, his
obstinacy had perhaps the sooner deliverd us.

To review the occasions of this War will be to them never too late, who would
be warned by his example from the like evils: but to wish only a happy
conclusion, will never expiate the fault of his unhappy beginnings. It Is true on
our side the sins of our lives not seldom fought against us: but on their side,
besides those, the grand sin of their Cause.

How can it be otherwise when he desires here most unreasonably, and indeed
sacrilegiously, that we should be subject to him, though not further, yet as
far as all of us may be subject to God; to whom this expression leaves no
precedence. He who desires from men as much obedience and subjection, as we
may all pay to God, desires not less then to be a God; a sacrilege far wors
then meddling with the Bishops Lands, as he esteems it.

His Prayer is a good Prayer and a glorious; but glorying is not good, if it
know not that a little leven levens the whole lump. It should have purged out
the leven of untruth in telling God that the blood of his Subjects by him shedd
was in his just and necessary defense. Yet this is remarkable; God has here so
orderd his Prayer, that as his own lips acquitted the Parliament, not long
before his death, of all the blood spilt in this War, so now his prayer
unwittingly draws it upon himself. For God imputes not to any man the blood he
spills in a just cause: and no man ever begged his not imputing of that which
he in his justice could not impute. So that now whether purposely, or unaware
he has confessed both to God and Man the bloodguiltiness of all this War to
lie upon his own head.

XX. Upon the Reformation of the times.
THis Chapter cannot punctually be answered without more repetitions then now
can be excusable: Which perhaps have already bin more humored then was
needful. As it presents us with nothing new, so with his exceptions against
Reformation pitifully old, and tattered with continual using; not only in his
Book, but in the words and Writings of every Papist and Popish King. On the
Scene he thrusts out first an Antimasque of two bugbeares, Noveltie and
Perturbation; that the ill looks and noise of those two, may as long as
possible, drive off all endeavors of a Reformation. Thus sought Pope Adrian by
representing the like vain terrors, to divert and dissipate the zeal of those
reforming Princes of the age before in Germany. And if we credit Latimers
Sermons, our Papists here in England pleaded the same dangers and
inconveniences against that which was reformed by Edward the sixth. Whereas if
those fears had bin available, Christianity it self had never bin received.
Which Christ foretold us, would not be admitted without the censure of noveltie
and many great commotions. These therefore are not to deterr us.

He grants Reformation to be a good work, and confesses What the indulgence of
times and corruption of manners might have depraved. So did the forementioned
Pope and our Gransire Papists in this Realm. Yet all of them agree in one song
with this here, that they are sorry to see so little regard had to Laws
established, and the Religion settled.

Popular compliance, dissolution of all order and government in the Church,
Scisms, Opinions, Undecencies, Confusions, Sacrilegious invasions, contempt of
the Clergy and their Liturgy, Diminution of Princes: all these complaints are
to be read in the Messages and Speeches almost of every Legate from the Pope to
those States and Cities which began Reformation. From whence he either learnt
the same pretenses, or had them naturally in him from the same spirit. Neither
was there ever so sincere a Reformation that has escaped these clamours.

He offered a Synod or Convocation rightly chosen. So offered all those Popish
Kings heertofore; a course the most unsatisfactory, as matters have been long
carried, and found by experience in the Church liable to the greatest fraud and
packing: no solution, or redress of evil, but an increase rather; detested
therefore by Nazianzen and some other of the Fathers. And let it be produced
what good has bin don by Synods from the first times of Reformation.

Not to justify what enormities the Vulgar may committ in the rudeness of their
zeal, we need but only instance how he bemoanes the pulling down of Crosses
and other superstitious Monuments, as the effect of a popular and deceitful
Reformation. How little this savours of a Protestant, is too easily perceav'd.

What he charges in defect of Piety, Charity, and Morality, has bin also
charged by Papists upon the best reformed Churches: not as if they the accusers
were not tenfold more to be accused, but out of their Malignity to all endeavor
of amendment; as we know who accused to God the sincerity of Job; an accusation
of all others the most easy, when as there livs not any mortal man so
excellent, who in these things is not always deficient. But the infirmities of
best men, and the scandals of mixed Hypocrites in all times of reforming, whose
bold intrusion covets to be ever seen in things most sacred as they are most
specious, can lay no just blemish upon the integrity of others, much less upon
the purpose of Reformation it self. Neither can the evil doings of some be the
excuse of our delaying or deserting that duty to the Church, which for no
respect of times or carnal policies can be at any time unseasonable.

He tells with great show of piety what kind of persons public Reformers ought
to be, and what they ought to do. It Is strange that in above twenty years, the
Church growing still wors and wors under him, he could neither be as he bids
others be, nor do, as he pretends here so well to know; nay, which is worst of
all, after the greatest part of his Reign spent in neither knowing, nor doing
aught toward a Reformation either in Church or State, should spend the residue
in hindering those by a seven years War, whom it concernd, with his consent or
without it, to do their parts in that great performance.

It Is true that the method of reforming may well subsist without perturbation of
the State; but that it falls out otherwise for the most part, is the plain
Text of Scripture. And if by his own rule he had allowed us to fear God
first, and the King in due order, our Allegiance might have still followed our
Religion in a fit subordination. But if Christ's Kingdom be taken for the true
Discipline of the Church, and by his Kingdom be meant the violence he used
against it, and to uphold an Antichristian Hierarchy, then sure anough it is,
that Christ's Kingdom could not be set up without pulling down his: And they
were best Christians who were least subject to him. Christ's Government, out of
question meaning it Prelatical, he thought would confirm his: and this was
that which overthrew it.

He professes to own his Kingdom from Christ, and to desire to rule for his
glory, and the Churches good: The Pope and the King of Spain profess every
where as much; and both his practice and all his reasonings, all his enmity
against the true Church we see has bin the same with theirs, since the time
that in his Letter to the Pope he assured them both of his full compliance. But
evil beginnings never bring forth good conclusions: they are his own words, and
he ratified them by his own ending. To the Pope he engaged himself to hazard
life and estate for the Roman Religion, whether in complement he did it, or in
earnest; and God, who stood nearer then he for complementing minded, writ down
those words; that according to his resolution, so it should come to pass. He
prays against his hypocrisy and Pharisaical washings, a Prayer to him most
pertinent, but choaks it straight with other words which pray him deeper into
his old errors and delusions.

XXI. Upon His Letters taken and divulged.
THE Kings Letters taken at the Battle of Naesby, being of greatest importance
to let the people see what Faith there was in all his promises and solemn
Protestations, were transmitted to public view by special Order of the
Parliament. They discovered his good affection to Papists and Irish Rebels, the
straight intelligence he held, the pernicious and dishonorable peace he made
with them, not solicited but rather soliciting, which by all invocations that
were holy he had in public abjured. They revealed his endeavors to bring in
foreign Forces, Irish, French, Dutch, Lorrainers, and our old Invaders the Danes
upon us, besides his suttleties and mysterious arts in treating: to sum up
all, they showed him governed by a Woman. All which though suspected vehemently
before, and from good grounds believed, yet by him and his adherents
peremptorily denied, were, by the opening of that Cabinet, visible to all men
under his own hand.

The Parliament therefore to clear themselves of aspersing him without cause, and
that the people might no longer be abused and cajoled, as they call it, by
falsities and Court impudence, in matters of so high concernment, to let them
know on what terms their duty stood, and the Kingdoms peace, conceavd it most
expedient and necessary, that those Letters should be made public. This the
King affirms was by them don without honor and civilitie: words, which if
they contain not in them, as in the language of a Courtier most commonly they
do not, more of substance and realitie then complement, Ceremony, Court fauning
and dissembling, enter not I suppose further then the ear into any wise man's
consideration. Matters were not then between the Parliament and a King their
enemy in that state of trifling, as to observe those superficial vanities. But
if honor and civilitie mean, as they did of old, discretion, honesty,
prudence, and plain truth, it will be then maintained against any Sect of
those Cabalists, that the Parliament in doing what they did with those Letters,
could suffer in their honor and civilitie no diminution. The reasons are
already heard.

And that it is with none more familiar then with Kings, to transgress the
bounds of all honor and civility, there should not want examples good store,
if brevity would permit; In point of Letters this one shall suffice. The
Duchess of Burgundy and heir of Duke Charles, had promised to her Subjects
that she intended no otherwise to Govern, then by advise of the three Estates,
but to Lewis the French King had writt'n Letters, that she had resolved to
committ wholly the managing of her affairs to four Persons, whom she named.
The three Estates not doubting the sincerity of her Princely word, send
Ambassadors to Lewis, who then beseig'd Arras belonging to the Duke of
Burgondy. The King taking hold of this occasion to set them at division among
themselves, questioned their Credence; which when they offered to produce with
their instructions, he not only shows them the private Letter of their Duchess,
but gives it them to carry home, wherewith to affront her; which they did, she
denying it stoutly; till they, spredding it before her face in a full assembly,
convicted her of an open Iye. Which although Commines the historian much
blames, as a deed too harsh and dishonorable in them who were Subjects, and
not at War with their Princess, yet to his Master Lewis, who first divulged
those Letters, to the open shaming of that young Governess, he imputes no
incivilitie or dishonor at all, although betraying a certain confidence
reposed by that Letter in his royal secrecy.

With much more reason then may letters not intercepted only, but won in
battle from an enemy, be made public to the best advantages of them that win
them, to the discovery of such important truth or falsehood. Was it not more
dishonorable in himself to feign suspicions and jealousies, which we first
found among those Letters, touching the chastity of his Mother, thereby to
gain assistance from the King of Denmark, as in vindication of his Sister? The
Damsel of Burgundy, at sight of her own letter, was soon blank, and more
ingenuous then to stand outfacing; but this man whom nothing will convince,
thinks by talking world without end, to make good his integrity and fair
dealing contradicted by his own hand and seal. They who can pick nothing out
of them but phrases shall be counted Bees: they that discern further both there
and here, that constancy to his Wife is set in place before Laws and Religion,
are in his naturalities no better then Spiders.

He would work the people to a persuasion, that if he be miserable they cannot
be happy. What should hinder them? Were they all born Twins of Hippocrates
with him and his fortune, one birth one burial? It were a Nation miserable
indeed, not worth the name of a Nation, but a race of Idiots, whose happiness
and welfare depended upon one Man. The happiness of a Nation consists in true
Religion, Piety, Justice, Prudence, Temperance, Fortitude, and the contempt of
Avarice and Ambition. They in whomsoever these virtues dwell eminently, need
not Kings to make them happy, but are the architects of their own happiness; and
whether to themselves or others are not less then Kings. But in him, which of
these virtues were to be found, that might extend to the making happy, or the
well-governing of so much as his own household, which was the most tious and ill
governed in the whole Land.

But the opening of his Letters was designed by the Parliament to make all
reconciliation desperate. Are the lives of so many good and faithful men, that
died for the freedom of their Country, to be so slighted, as to be forgott'n in
a stupid reconcilement without Justice don them? What he fears not by War
and slaughter, should we fear to make desperate by opening his Letters? Which
fact he would parallel with Chams revealing of his Fathers nakedness: When he
at that time could be no way esteemed the Father of his Country, but the
destroyer; nor had he ever before merited that former title.

He thanks God he cannot only bear this with patience, but with charity
forgive the doers. Is not this mere mockery to thank God for what he can do,
but will not? For is it patience to impute Barbarism and inhumanity to the
opening of an Enemies Letter, or is it Charity to cloth them with curses in his
Prayer whom he has forgiven in his Discourse? In which Prayer to show how
readily he can return good for evil to the Parliament, and that if they take
away his Coat, he can let them have his Cloak also, for the dismantling of his
Letters he wishes They may be covered with the Cloak of confusion. Which I
suppose they do resign with much willingness, both Livery, Badge, and
Cognizance, to them who chose rather to be the Slaves and Vassals of his will,
then to stand against him, as men by nature free; born and created with a
better title to their freedom, then any King has to his Crown.

XXII. Upon His going to the Scots.
THe Kings coming in, whether to the Scots or English, deserved no thanks: for
necessity was his Counselor: and that he hated them both alike, his
expressions every where manifest. Some say his purpose was to have come to
London, till hearing how strictly it was proclaimed that no man should conceal
him, he diverted his course. But that had bin a frivolous excuse: and besides
he himself rehearsing the consultations had, before he took his journey, shows
us clearly that he was determined to adventure upon their Loyalty who first
began his troubles. And that the Scots had notice of it before, has bin long
since brought to light. What prudence there could be in it, noman can imagine;
Malice there might be, by raising new jealousies to divide Friends. For besides
his diffidence of the English, it was no small dishonor that he put upon them,
when rather then yield himself to the Parliament of England, he yielded to an
hireling Army of Scots in England, paid for their Service here, not in Scotch
coin, but in English Silver; nay who from the first beginning of these
troubles, what with brotherly assistance, and what with mounthly pay, have
defended their own Liberty and consciences at our charge. However it was a
hazardous and rash journey taken, to resolve riddles in men's Loyalty, who had
more reason to mistrust the Riddle of such a disguised yielding; and to put
himself in their hands whose Loyalty was a Riddle to him, was not the course to
be resolved of it, but to tempt it. What providence denied to force, he thought
it might grant to fraud, which he styles Prudence: But Providence was not
cozened with disguises, neither outward nor inward.

To have known his greatest danger in his supposed safety, and his greatest
safety in his supposed danger was to him a fatal Riddle never yet resolved;
wherein rather to have imployd his main skill, had bin much more to his
preservation.

Had he known when the Game was lost, it might have saved much contest: but the
way to give over fairly, was not to slip out of open War into a new disguise.
He lays down his Arms, but not his Wiles; nor all his Arms, for in obstinacy
he comes no less armed then ever, Cap a pe. And what were they but wiles,
continually to move for Treaties, and yet to persist the same man, and to
fortify his mind before hand, still purposing to grant no more then what
seemed good to that violent and lawless Triumvirate within him, under the
falsifi'd names of his Reason, Honor, and Conscience, the old circulating
dance of his shifts and evasions.

The words of a King, as they are full of power, in the authority and strength
of Law, so like Sampson, without the strength of that Nazarites lock, they have
no more power in them then the words of another man.

He adores Reason as Domitian did Minerva, and calls her the Divinest power,
thereby to intimate as if at reasoning, as at his own weapon, no man were so
able as himself. Might we be so happy as to know where these monuments of his
Reason may be seen, for in his actions and his writing they appear as thinly
as could be expected from the meanest parts, bredd up in the midst of so many
ways extraordinary to know something. He who reads his talk, would think he had
left Oxford not without mature deliberation: Yet his Prayer confesses that he
knew not what to do. Thus is verified that Psalm; He powers contempt upon
Princes and causes them to wander in the Wilderness where there is no way,
Psalm. 107.

XXIII. Upon the Scots delivering the King to the English.
THat the Scots in England should sell their King, as he himself here affirms,
and for a price so much above that, which the covetousness of Judas was
contented with to sell our Savior, is so foul an infamy and dishonor cast
upon them, as befitts none to vindicate but themselves. And it were but
friendly Counsel to wish them beware the Son, who comes among them with a firm
belief that they sold his Father. The rest of this Chapter he Sacrifices to
the Echo of his Conscience, out-babling Creeds and Ave's; glorying in his
resolute obstinacy, and as it were triumphing how evident it is now, that not
evil Counselors, but he himself has been the Author of all our troubles.
Herein only we shall disagree to the worlds end, while he who sought so
manifestly to have annihilated all our Laws and Liberties, has the confidence
to persuade us that he has fought and suffered all this while in their defense.

But he who neither by his own Letters and Commissions under hand and Seal,
nor by his own actions held as in a Mirror before his face, will be convinced
to see his faults, can much less be won upon by any force of words, neither he,
nor any that take after him; who in that respect are no more to be disputed
with, then they who deny Principles. No question then, but the Parliament did
wisely in their decree at last, to make no more addresses. For how unalterable
his will was, that would have bin our Lord, how utterly averse from the
Parliament, and Reformation, during his confinement, we may behold in this
Chapter. But to be ever answering fruitless Repetitions, I should become liable
to answer for the same my self. He borrows David's Psalms, as he charges the
Assembly of Divines in his twentieth Discourse, To have set forth old Catechisms
and confessions of faith new dressed. Had he borrowed David's heart, it had bin
much the holier theft. For such kind of borrowing as this, if it be not
bettered by the borrower, among good Authors is accounted Plagiarie. However,
this was more tolerable then Pammela's Prayer, stolen out of Sir Philip.

XXIV. Upon the denying him the attendance of his Chaplains
A CHAPLAIN is a thing so diminutive, and inconsiderable, that how he should
come here among matters of so great concernment, to take such room up in the
Discourses of a Prince, if it be not wonderd, is to be fmil'd at. Certainly by
me, so mean an argument shall not be writt'n; but I shall huddle him as he does
Prayers. The Scripture ownes no such order, no such function in the Church; and
the Church not owning them, they are left, for ought I know, to such a further
examining as the Sons of Sceva the Jew met with; Bishops or Presbyters we know,
and Deacons we know, but what are Chaplains? In State perhaps they may be
listed among the upper Servingmen of some great household, and be admitted to some
such place, as may style them the Sewers, or the Yeomen-Ushers of Devotion,
where the Master is too restie, or too rich to say his own prayers, or to
bless his own Table. Wherefore should the Parliament then take such implements of
the Court Cupbord into their consideration? They knew them to have bin the main
corrupters at the kings elbow: they knew the king to have bin always their most
attentive Scholar, and Imitator, and of a child to have sucked from them and
their closet work all his impotent principles of tyranny and superstition. While
therefore they had any hope left of his reclaiming, these sowers of Malignant
Tares they kept asunder from him: and sent to him such of the Ministers and
other zealous persons, as they thought were best able to instruct him, and to
convert him. What could religion her self have don more to the saving of a
soul? But when they found him past cure, and that he to himself was grown the
most evil Counseler of all, they denied him not his Chaplains, as many as were
fitting, and some of them attended him, or else were at his call to the very
last. Yet here he makes more Lamentationfor the want of his Chaplains, then
superstitious Micah did to the Danites, who had taken away his household Priest.
Ye have taken away my Gods which I made, and the Priest, and what have I more?
And perhaps the whole Story of Micah might square not unfitly to this Argument:
Now know I, says he, that the Lord will do me good, seeing I have a Levite to
my Priest. Micah had as great a care that his Priest should be Mosaical, as the
King had that his should be Apostolical; yet both in an error touching their
Priests. Household and private Orisons were not to be officiated by Priests; for
neither did public Prayer appertain only to their Office. Kings heertofore,
David, Solomon, and Jehosaphat, who might not touch the Priesthood, yet might
pray in public, yea in the Temple, while the Priests themselves stood and
heard. What aild this King then that he could not chew his own Mattins without
the Priests Oretenus? Yet is it like he could not pray at home, who can here
publish a whole Prayer Book of his own, and signifies in some part of this
Chapter, almost as good a mind to be a Priest himself, as Micah had to let his
Son be. There was doubtless therefore some other matter in it, which made him so
desirous to have his Chaplains. about him, who were not only the contrivers,
but very often the instruments also of his designs.

The Ministers which were sent him no marvel he endured not; for they Preached
repentance to him: the others gave him easy confession, easy absolution, nay
strength'nd his hands and hard'nd his heart by applauding him in his wilful
ways. To them he was an Ahab, to these a Constantine; it must follow then that
they to him were as unwelcome as Eliah was to Ahab, these as deer, and pleasing
as Amaziah the Priest of Bethel was to Jeroboam. These had learnt well the
lesson that would please; Prophecy not against Bethel, for it is the Kings
Chapel, the Kings Court; and had taught the King to say of those Ministers
which the Parliament had sent, Amos has conspired against me; the Land is not
able to bear all his words.

Returning to our first Parallel, this King looked upon his Prelates as Orphans
under the sacrilegious eyes of many rapacious Reformers: and there was as great
fear of Sacrilege between Micah and his Mother, till with their holy treasure,
about the loss whereof there was such cursing, they made a grav'n and a molt'n
Image, and got a Priest of their own. To let go his Criticizing about the sound
of Prayers, imperious, rude, or passionat, modes of his own divising, we are in
danger to fall again upon the flats and shallows of Liturgy. Which if I should
repeat again, would turn my answers into Responsories, and begett another
Liturgy, having too much of one already.

This only I shall add, that if the heart, as he alleges, cannot safely join
with another man's extemporal sufficiency, because we know not so exactly what
they mean to say, then those public Prayers made in the Temple by those
forenamed Kings, and by the Apostles in the Congregation, and by the ancient
Christians for above three hundred years before Liturgies came in, were with
the People made in vain.

After he has acknowledged that kings heertofore prayed without Chaplains,
eev'n publicly in the Temple it self, and that every private Believer is
invested with a royal Priesthood, yet like one that relisht not what he tasted
of the heavenly gift, and the good word of God whose name he so confidently
takes into his mouth, he frames to himself impertinent and vain reasons, why he
should rather pray by the officiating mouth of a Closet Chaplain. Their
prayers, says he, are more prevalent, they flow from minds more enlightn'd,
from affections less distracted. Admit this true, which is not; this might be
something said as to their prayers for him, but what availes it to their praying
with him? If his own mind be encumbered with secular affairs, what helps it
his particular prayer, though the mind of his Chaplain be not wandering, either
after new preferment, or his Dinner? The fervencie of one man in prayer, cannot
supererogate for the coldness of another; neither can his spiritual defects in
that duty be made out, in the acceptance of God, by another man's abilities. Let
him endeavor to have more light in himself: And not to walk by another man's
Lamp, but to get Oil into his own. Let him cast from him, as in a Christian
warrfare, that secular encumbrance which either distracts, or overloads him;
his load else will never be the less heavy, because another man's is light. Thus
these pious flourishes and colors examined thoroughly, are like the Apples of
Asphaltis, appearing goodly to the sudden eye, but look well upon them, or at
least but touch them, and they turn into Cinders.

In his Prayer he remembers what voices of joy and gladness there were in his
Chapel, Gods house, in his opinion, between the Singing men and the Organs;
and this was unity of spirit in the bond of peace; the vanity, superstition,
and misdevotion of which place was a scandal far and near: Wherein so many
things were sung, and prayed in those Songs, which were not understood: and yet
he who makes a difficulty how the people can join their hearts to extemporal
prayers, though distinctly heard and understood, makes no question how they
should join their hearts in unity to songs not understood.

I believe that God is no more moved with a prayer elaboratly pend, then men
truly charitable are moved with the penned speech of a Beggar.

Finally O ye Ministers, ye pluralists, whose lips preserve not knowledge, but
the way ever open to your bellies, read here what work he makes among your
wares, your Gally pots, your Balmes and Cordials in print, and not only your
sweet Sippets in widows houses, but the huge gobbets wherewith he charges you
to have devourd houses and all; the houses of your Brethren, your King, and
your God. Cry him up for a Saint in your Pulpits, while he cries you down for
Atheists into Hell.

XXV. Upon His penitential Meditations and Vows at Holmby
IT is not hard for any man, who has a Bible in his hands, to borrow good
words and holy sayings in abundance; but to make them his own, is a work of
grace only from above. He borrows here many penitential Verses out of David's
Psalms. So did many among those Israelites, who had revolted from the true
worship of God, invent to themselves instruments of music like David, and
probably Psalms also like his, and yet the Profet Amos complains heavily
against them. But to prove how short this is of true repentance, I will recite
the penitence of others, who have repented in words not borrowd, but their own
and yet by the doom of Scripture it self are judged reprobates.

Cain said unto the Lord, My iniquity is greater then I can bear, behold thou
have driven me this day from the face of the earth, and from thy face shall I
be bid.

And when Esau heard the words of his Father he cried with an exceeding bitter
cry, and said, Bless me eev'n me also O my Father; yet found no place of
repentance though he sought it carefully with tears, Heb. 12.

And Pharaoh said to Moses, The Lord is righteous, I and my people are wicked;
I have sind against the Lord your God and against you.

And Balaam said, Let me die the death of the righteous and let my last end be
like his.

And Saul said to Samuel, I have sinned, for I have transgressed the commandment
of the Lord; yet honor me now I pray thee before the Elders of my People.

And when Ahab heard the words of Eliah, he rent his clothes and put sackcloth
upon his flesh, and fasted, and lay in sackcloth, and went softly.

Jehoram also rent his clothes, and the people looked, and behold he had
Sackcloth upon his flesh, yet in the very act of his humiliation he could say,
God do so, and more also to me, if the head of Elishah shall stand on him this
day.

Therefore says the Lord, They have not cried unto me with their heart, when
they howled upon their beds. They return, but not to the most High. Hosea 7.

And Judas said, I have sind, in that I have betrayed innocent blood.

And Simon Magus said, Pray ye to the Lord for me that none of these things
come upon me.

All these took the pains both to confess and to repent in their own words, and
many of them in their own tears, not in David's. But transported with the vain
ostentation of imitating David's language, not his life, observe how he brings a
curse upon himself and his Fathers house (God so disposing it) by his usurped
and ill imitated prayer: Let thy anger I beseech thee le against me and my
Fathers house, as for these Sheep what have they don. For if David indeed sind
in numbering the people, of which fault he in earnest made that confession, and
acquitted the whole people from the guilt of that sin, then does this King,
using the same words, bear witness against himself to be the guilty person; and
either in his soul and conscience here acquitts the Parliament and the people,
or else abuses the words of David, and dissembles grossly to the very face of
God, which is apparent in the next line; wherein he accuses eev'n the Church it
self to God, as if she were the Churches enemy, for having overcom his Tyranny
by the powerful and miraculous might of Gods manifest arm: For to other
strength in the midst of our divisions and disorders, who can attribute our
Victories? Thus had this miserable Man no worse enemies to solicit and mature
his own destruction from the hast'nd sentence of Divine Justice, then the
obdurat curses which proceeded against himself out of his own mouth.

Hitherto his Meditations, now his Vows; which as the Vows of hypocrites use
to be, are most commonly absurd, and some wicked. Jacob Vowed that God should be
his God, if he granted him but what was necessary to perform that Vow, life and
subsistence: but the obedience profferd here is nothing so cheap. He who took
so hainously to be offered nineteen Propositions from the Parliament,
capitulates here with God almost in as many Articles.

If he will continue that light or rather that darkness of the Gospel, which is
among his Prelates, settle their luxuries, and make them gorgeous Bishops,

If he will restore the greevances and mische ifs of those obsolete and Popish
Laws, which the Parliament without his consent has abrogated, and will suffer
Justice to be executed according to his sense,

If he will suppress the many Scisms in Church, to contradict himself in that
which he has foretold must and shall come to pass, and will remove Reformation
as the greatest Scism of all, and Factions in State, by which he means in
every leaf the Parliament,

If he will restore him to his negative voice and the Militia, as much to say
as arbitrary power, which he wrongfully averrs to be the right of his
Predecessors,

If he will turn the hearts of his people to their old Cathedral and Parochial
service in the Liturgy, and their passive obedience to the King,

If he will quench the Army, and withdraw our Forces from withstanding the
Piracy of Rupert, and the plotted Irish invasion,

If he will bless him with the freedom of Bishops again in the House of Peers,
and of fugitive Delinquents in the House of Commons, and deliver the honor of
Parliament into his hands, from the most natural and due protection of the
people, that entrusted them with the dangerous enterprise of being faithful to
their Country against the rage and malice of his tyran nous opposition,

If he will keep him from that great offense of following the counsel of his
Parliament, and enacting what they advise him to, which in all reason, and by
the known Law, and Oath of his Coronation he ought to do, and not to call that
Sacrilege which necessity through the continuance of his own civil War has
compelld them to, necessity, which made David eat the Shewbread, made Ezechiah
take all the Silver which was found in Gods House, and cut off the Gold which
overlayd those doors and Pillars, and give it to Sennacherib; necessity, which
often times made the Primitive Church to sell her sacred utensils, eev'n to the
Communion Chalice,

If he will restore him to a capacity of glorifying him by doing that both in
Church and State, which must needs dishonor and pollute his name,

If he will bring him again with peace, honor and safety to his chief City,
without repenting, without satisfying for the blood spilt, only for a few
politic concessions which are as good as nothing,

If he will put again the Sword into his hand, to punish those that have
deliverd us, and to protect Delinquents against the Justice of Parliament,

Then, if it be possible to reconcile contradictions, he will praise him by
displeasing him, and serve him by disserving him.

His glory, in the gaudy Copes, and painted Windows, Miters, Rochets, Altars,
and the chanted Service Book shall be dearer to him then the establishing his
Crown in righteousness, and the spiritual power of Religion.

He will pardon those that have offended him in particular, but there shall
want no subtle ways to be eev'n with them upon another score of their supposed
offenses against the Commonwealth; whereby he may at once affect the glory of a
seeming justice, and destroy them pleasantly, while he faines to forgive them
as to his own particular, and outwardly bewailes them.

These are the conditions of his treating with God, to whom he bates nothing of
what he stood upon with the Parliament: as if Commissions of Array could deal
with him also. But of all these conditions, as it is now evident in our eyes,
God accepted none, but that final Petition which he so often, no doubt but by the
secret judgment of God, importunes against his own head; praying God That his
mercies might be so toward him, as his resolutions of Truth and Peace were
toward his People. It follows then, God having cut him off without granting
any of these mercies, that his resolutions were as fained as his Vows were
frustrat.

XXVI. Upon the Armies surprisall of the King at Holmeby.
TO give account to Royalists what was don with their vanquished King, yielded up
into our hands, is not to be expected from them whom God has made his
Conquerors. And for brethren to debate and rippe up their falling out, in the
ear of a common enemy, thereby making him the judge or at least the well
pleased auditor of their disagreement, is neither wise nor comely. To the King
therefore, were he living, or to his Party yet remaining, as to this action,
there belongs no answer. Aemulations, all men know, are incident among Military
men, and are, if they exceed not, pardonable. But some of the former Army,
eminent anough for their own martial deeds, and prevalent in the House of
Commons, touched with envy to be so far outdon by a new model which they
contemned, took advantage of Presbyterian and Independent names, and the
virulence of some Ministers to raise disturbance. And the War being then ended,
thought slightly to have discarded them who had faithfully don the work,
without their due pay, and the reward of their invincible valor. But they who
had the Sword yet in their hands, disdaining to be made the first objects of
ingratitude and oppression, after all that expens of their blood for Justice and
the common Liberty, seized upon the King their prisoner, whom nothing but their
matchles deeds had brought so low as to surrender up his Person: though he, to
stir up new discord, chose rather to give up himself a captive to his own
Countrymen, who less had won him. This in likelihood might have grown to some
hight of mischief; partly through the strife which was kindling between our
elder and our younger Warriors, but chiefly through the seditious tongues of
some falls Ministers, more zealous against Scisms, then against their own Simony
and Pluralities, or watchful of the common enemy, whose subtle insinuations
had got so far in among them, as with all diligence to blow the coals. But it
pleased God not to embroile and put to confusion his whole people for the
perverseness of a few. The growth of our dissension was either prevented or soon
quieted; the Enemy soon deceav'd of his rejoicing, and the King especially
disappointed of not the meanest morsel that his hope presented him, to ruin us
by our division. And being now so nigh the end, we may the better be at leisure
to stay a while, and hear him commenting upon his own Captivity.

He says of his surprisal that it was a motion eccentric and irregular. What
then? his own allusion, from the Celestial bodies, puts us in mind, that
irregular motions may be necessary on earth sometimes, as well as constantly in
Heaven* That is not always best, which is most regular to writt'n Law. Great
Worthies heertofore by disobeying Law, ofttimes have saved the Commonwealth:
and the Law afterward by firm Decree has approved that planetary motion, that
unblamable exorbitancy in them.

He means no good to either Independent or Presbyterian, and yet his parable,
like that of Balaam, is overul'd to portend them good, far beside his
inintention. Those twins that strove enclosed in the womb of Rebeccah, were the
seed of Abraham; the younger undoubtedly gained the heavenly birthright; the
elder though supplanted in his Similie, shall yet no question find a better
portion then Esau found, and far above his uncircumsised Prelates.

He censures, and in censuring seems to hope it will be an ill Omen that they
who build Jerusalem divide their tongues and hands. But his hope failed him with
his example; for that there were divisions both of tongues and hands at the
building of Jerusalem, the Story would have certifi'd him; and yet the work
prosper'd; and if God will, so may this; notwithstanding all the craft and
malignant wiles of Sanballat and Tobiah, adding what fuel they can to our
dissentions; or the indignity of his comparison that lik'ns us to those
seditious Zelots whose intestine fury brought destruction to the last Jerusalem.

It being now no more in his hand to be revenged on his opposers, he seeks to
satiat his fancy with the imagination of some revenge upon them from above; and
like one who in a drowth observes the Sky, he sits and watches when any thing
will dropp, that might solace him with the likeness of a punishment from Heaven
upon us: which he strait expounds how he pleases. No evil can befall the
Parliament or City, but he positively interprets it a judgment upon them for
his sake; as if the very manuscript of Gods judgments had bin deliverd to his
custody and exposition. But his reading declares it well to be a falls copy
which he uses; dispensing oft'n to his own bad deeds and successes the
testimony of Divine favor, and to the good deeds and successes of other men,
Divine wrath and vengeance. But to counterfeit the hand of God is the boldest of
all Forgery: And he, who without warrant but his own fantastic surmise, takes
upon him perpetually to unfold the secret and unsearchable Mysteries of high
Providence, is likely for the most part to mistake and slander them; and
approaches to the madness of those reprobate thoughts, that would wrest the
Sword of Justice out of Gods hand, and employ it more justly in their own
conceit. It was a small thing to contend with the Parliament about sole power of
the Militia, when we see him doing little less then laying hands on the weapons
of God himself, which are his judgments, to weild and manage them by the sway
and bent of his own frail cogitations. Therefore they that by Tumults first
occasioned the raising of Armies, in his doom must needs be chastn'd by their
own Army for new Tumults.

First note here his confession, that those Tumults were the first occasion of
raising Armies, and by consequence that he himself raised them first, against
those supposed Tumults. But who occasioned those Tumults, or who made them so,
being at first nothing more then the unarmed and peaceable concours of people,
has bin discust already. And that those pretended Tumults were chastised by
their own Army for new Tumults, is not proved by a Game at Tictack with words;
Tumults and Armies, Armies and Tumults, but seems more like the method of a
Justice irrational then Divine.

If the City were chast'nd by the Army for new Tumults, the reason is by
himself set down evident and immediate, their new Tumults. With what sense can it
be referrd then to another far-fetchd and imaginary cause that happ'nd so many
years before, and in his supposition only as a cause. Manlius defended the
Capitol and the Romans from their enemies the Gauls: Manlius for sedition
afterward was by the Roman throwns headlong from the Capitol, therefore Manlius
was punished by Divine Justice for defending the Capitol: because in that place
punishd for sedition, and by those whom he defended. This is his Logic upon
Divine Justice; and was the same before upon the death of Sir John Hotham. And
here again, Such as were content to see him driven away by unsuppressed
Tumults, are now forced to fly to an Army. Was this a judgment? was it not a
mercy rather, that they had a noble and victorious Army so near at hand to fly
to?

From Gods Justice he comes down to Man's Justice. Those few of both Houses who
at first withdrew with him from the vain pretense of Tumults, were counted
Desertors; therefore those many must be also Desertors who withdrew afterward
from real Tumults: as if it were the place that made a Parliament, and not the
end and cause. Because it is denied that those were Tumults from which the King
made show of being driven, is it therefore of necessity impli'd, that there
could be never any Tumults for the future? If some men fly in craft, may not
other men have cause to fly in earnest? But mark the difference between their
flight and his; they soon returned in safety to their places, he not till after
many years, and then a Captive to receive his punishment. So that their flying,
whether the cause be considered or the event, or both, neither justified him,
nor condemned themselves.

But he will needs have vengeance to pursue and overtake them; though to bring
it in, it cost him an inconvenient and obnoxious comparison, As the Mice and
Ratts overtook a German Bishop. I would our Mice and Ratts had bin as
Orthodoxal here, and had so pursued all his Bishops out of England; then vermin
had ridd away vermin, which now has lost the lives of too many thousand honest
men to do.

He cannot but observe this Divine Justice, yet with sorrow and pity. But
sorrow and pity in a weak and over-maister'd enemy, is looked upon no otherwise
then as the ashes of his revenge burnt out upon it self; or as the damp of a
coold fury when we say, it gives. But in this manner to sit spelling and
observing divine justice upon every accident and slight disturbance that may
happ'n humanly to the affairs of men, is but another fragment of his brok'n
revenge: and yet the shrewdest and the cunningest obloquy that can be thrown
upon their actions. For if he can persuade men that the Parliament and their cause
is pursued with Divine vengeance, he has attained his end, to make all men
forsake them, and think the worst that can be thought of them.

Nor is he only content to suborn Divine Justice in his censure of what is
past, but he assumes the person of Christ himself to prognosticate over us what
he wishes would come. So little is any thing or person sacred from him, no not
in Heaven, which he will not use, and put on, if it may serve him plausibly to
wreck his spleen, or ease his mind upon the Parliament. Although if ever fatal
blindness did both attend and punish wilfulness, if ever any enjoyed not
comforts, for neglecting counsel belonging to their peace, it was in none more
conspicuously brought to pass then in himself: and his predictions against the
Parliament and their adherents have for the most part bin verified upon his own
head, and upon his chief Counselors.

He concludes with high praises of the Army. But praises in an enemy are
superfluous, or smell of craft; and the Army shall not need his praises; nor
the Parliament fare worse for his accusing prayers that follow. Wherein as his
Charity can be no way comparable to that of Christ, so neither can his
assurance that they whom he seems to pray for, in doing what they did against
him, knew not what they did. It was but arrogance therefore, and not charity, to
lay such ignorance to others in the sight of God, till he himself had bin
infallible, like him whose peculiar words he overweeningly assumes.

XXVII. Intitil'd to the Prince of Wales.
What the King wrote to his Son, as a Father, concerns not us; what he wrote
to him, as a King of England, concerns not him; God and the Parliament having
now otherwise disposed of England. But because I see it don with some artifice
and labor, to possess the people that they might amend their present condition,
by his or by his Sons restorement, I shall show point by point, that although
the King had bin reinstall'd to his desire, or that his Son admitted, should
observe exactly all his Fathers precepts, yet that this would be so far from
conducing to our happiness, either as a remedy to the present distempers, or a
prevention of the like to come, that it would inevitably throw us back again
into all our past and fulfilled miseries; would force us to fight over again
all our tedious Wars, and put us to another fatal struggling for Liberty and
life, more dubious then the former. In which as our success has bin no other
then our cause; so it will be evident to all posterity, that his misfortunes
were the mere consequence of his perverse judgment.

First he argues from the experience of those troubles which both he and his
Son have had, to the improvement of their piety and patience: and by the way
bears witness in his own words, that the corrupt education of his youth, which
was but glanced at only in some former passages of this answer, was a thing
neither of mean consideration, nor untruly charged upon him or his Son: himself
confessing here that Court delights are prone either to root up all true virtue
and honor, or to be contented only with some leaves and withering formalities
of them, without any real fruits tending to the public good: Which presents
him still in his own words another Rehoboam, soft'nd by a far wors Court then
Salomons, and so corrupted by flatteries, which he affirms to be unseparable,
to the overturning of all peace, and the loss of his own honor and Kingdoms.
That he came therefore thus bredd up and nurtured to the Throne, far wors then
Rehoboam, unless he be of those who equaliz'd his Father to King Solomon, we
have here his own confession. And how voluptuously, how idly reigning in the
hands of other men, he either tyrannized or trifl'd away those seventeen years
of peace, without care, or thought, as if to be a King had bin nothing else in
his apprehension, but to eat and drink, and have his will, and take his
pleasure, though there be who can relate his domestic life to the exactness of
a diary, there shall be here no mention made. This yet we might have then
foreseen, that he who spent his leisure so remissly and so corruptly to his own
pleasing, would one day or other be wors busied and imployd to our sorrow. And
that he acted in good earnest what Rehoboam did but threat'n, to make his
little finger heavier then his Fathers loins, and to whip us with his two
twisted Scorpions, both temporal and spiritual Tyranny, all his Kingdoms have
felt. What good use he made afterward of his adversity, both his impenitence
and obstinacy to the end (for he was no Manasseh) and the sequel of these his
meditated resolutions, abundantly express; retaining, commending, teaching to
his Son all those putrid and pernicious documents both of State and of
Religion, instilled by wicked Doctors, and received by him as in a Vessel
nothing better seasond, which were the first occasion both of his own and all
our miseries. And if he in the best maturity of his years and understanding
made no better use to himself or others of his so long and manifold
afflictions, either looking up to God, or looking down upon the reason of his
own affairs, there can be no probability that his son, bred up, not in the
soft effeminacies of Court only, but in the rugged and more boistrous license
of undisciplined Camps and Garrisons, for years unable to reflect with
judgment upon his own condition, and thus ill instructed by his Father, should
give his mind to walk by any other rules then these, bequeathed him as on his
Fathers deathbed, and as the choicest of all that experience, which his most
serious observation and retirement in good or evil days had taught him. David
indeed by suffering without just cause, learnt that meekness and that wisdom by
adversity, which made him much the fitter man to reign. But they who suffer as
oppressors, Tyrants, violaters of Law, and persecutors of Reformation, without
appearance of repenting, if they once get hold again of that dignity and power
which they had lost, are but whetted and enraged by what they suffered against
those whom they look upon as them that caused their sufferings.

How he has bin subject to the scepter of Gods word and spirit, though
acknowledged to be the best Government, and what his dispensation of civil power
has bin, with what Justice, and what honor to the public peace, it is but
looking back upon the whole catalogue of his deeds, and that will be sufficient
to remember us. The Cup of Gods physic, as he calls it, what alteration it
wrought in him to a firm healthfulness from any surfeit, or excess whereof the
people generally thought him sick, if any man would go about to prove, we have
his own testimony following here, that it wrought none at all.

First, he has the same fixed opinion and esteem of his old Ephesian Goddess,
called the Church of England, as he had ever; and charges strictly his Son
after him to persevere in that Anti-Papal Scism (for it is not much better) as
that which will be necessary both for his souls, and the Kingdoms Peace. But
if this can be any foundation of the kingdoms peace, which was the first cause
of our distractions, let common sense be Judge. It is a rule and principle
worthy to be known by Christians, that no Scripture, no nor so much as any
ancient Creed, binds our Faith, or our obedience to any Church whatsoever,
denominated by a particular name; far less, if it be distinguished by a several
Government from that which is indeed Catholic. No man was ever bidd be subject
to the Church of Corinth, Rome, or Asia, but to the Church without addition, as
it held faithful to the rules of Scripture, and the Government established in
all places by the Apostles, which at first was universally the same in all
Churches and Congregations; not differing or distinguished by the diversity of
Countries, Territories, or civil bounds. That Church that from the name of a
distinct place takes authority to set up a distinct Faith or Government, is a
Scism and Faction, not a Church. It were an injury to condemn the Papist of
absurdity and contradiction, for adhering to his Catholic Romish Religion, if
we, for the pleasure of a King and his politic considerations, shall adhere to
a Catholic English.

But suppose the Church of England were as it ought to be, how is it to us the
safer by being so named and established, when as that very name and
establishment, by his contriving, or approbation, served for nothing else but to
delude us and amuse us, while the Church of England insensibly was almost
changed and translated into the Church of Rome. Which as every Man knows in
general to be true, so the particular Treaties and Transactions tending to that
conclusion, are at large discovered in a Book intitld the English Pope. But
when the people, discerning these abuses, began to call for Reformation, in
order to which the Parliament demanded of the King to unestablish that
Prelatical Government, which without Scripture had usurpt over us, strait, as
Pharaoh accused of Idleness the Israelites that sought leave to go and
sacrifice to God, he lays faction to their charge. And that we may not hope to
have ever any thing reformed in the Church either by him or his Son, he
forewarnes him, That the Devil of Rebellion does most commonly turn himself
into an Angel of Reformation: and says anough to make him hate it, as he worst
of Evils, and the bane of his Crown: nay he counsels him to let nothing seem
little or despicable to him, so as not speedily and effcteually to suppress
errors and Scisms. Whereby we may perceave plainly that our consciences were
destined to the same servitude and persecution, if not wors then before,
whether under him, or if it should so happ'n, under his Son; who count all
Protestant Churches erroneous and scismatical, which are not episcopal. His
next precept is concerning our civil Liberties; which by his sole voice and
predominant will must be circumscribed, and not permitted to extend a hands
breadth further then his interpretation of the Laws already settled. And although
all human laws are but the offspring of that frailty, that fallibility, and
imperfection which was in their Authors, whereby many Laws, in the change of
ignorant and obscure Ages, may be found both scandalous, and full of greevance
to their Posterity that made them, and no Law is further good, then mutable upon
just occasion, yet if the removing of an old Law, or the making of a new would
save the Kingdom, we shall not have it unless his arbitrary voice will so far
slack'n the stiff curb of his prerogative, as to grant it us; who are as free
born to make our own law as our fathers were who made these we have. Where are
then the English Liberties which we boast to have bin left us by our
Progenitors? To that he answers, that Our Liberties consist in the enjoyment of
the fruits of our industry, and the benefit of those Laws to which we our
selves have consented. First, for the enjoyment of those fruits, which our
industry and labors have made our own upon our own, what Privilege is that,
above what the Turks, Jews, and Mores enjoy under the Turkish Monarchy, For
without that kind of Justice, which is also in Argiers, among Thieves and
Pirates between themselves, no kind of Government, no Society, just or unjust
could stand; no combination or conspiracy could stick together. Which he also
acknowledges in these words: That if the Crown upon his head be so heavy as to
oppress the whole body, the weakness of inferior members cannot return any
thing of strength, honor, or safety to the head; but that a necessary
debilitation must follow. So that this Liberty of the Subject concerns himself
and the subsistence of his own regal power in the first place, and before the
consideration of any right belonging to the Subject. We expect therefore
something more, that must distinguish free Government from slavish. But in stead
of that, this King, though ever talking and protesting as smooth as now,
sufferd it in his own hearing to be Preached and pleaded without control, or
check, by them whom he most favored and upheld, that the Subject had no
property of his own Goods, but that all was the Kings right.

Next for the benefit of those Laws to which we our selves have consented, we
never had it under him; for not to speak of Laws ill executed, when the
Parliament, and in them the people have consented to diverse Laws, and, according
to our ancient Rights, demanded them, he took upon him to have a negative will,
as the transcendent and ultimat Law above all our Laws; and to rule us forcibly
by Laws to which we our selves did not consent, but complained of. Thus these
two heads wherein the utmost of his allowance here will give our Liberties
leave to consist, the one of them shall be so far only made good to us, as
may support his own interest, and Crown, from ruin or debilitation; and so far
Turkish Vassals enjoy as much liberty under Mahomet and the Grand Signor: the
other we neither yet have enjoyd under him, nor were ever like to do under the
Tyranny of a negative voice, which he claims above the unanimous consent and
power of a whole Nation virtually in the Parliament.

In which negative voice to have bin cast by the doom of War, and put to death
by those who vanquished him in their own defense, he reck'ns to himself more then
a negative Martyrdom. But Martyrs bear witness to the truth, not to themselves.
If I bear witness of my self, says Christ, my witness is not true. He who
writes himself Martyr by his own inscription, is like an ill Painter, who, by
writing on the shapeless Picture which he has drawn, is fain to tell
passengers what shape it is; which else no man could imagine: no more then how a
Martyrdom can belong to him, who therefore dies for his Religion because it is
established. Certainly if Agrippa had turned Christian, as he was once turning,
and had put to death Scribes and Pharisees for observing the Law of Moses, and
refusing Christianity, they had di'd a truer Martyrdom. For those Laws were
established by God and Moses, these by no warrantable authors of Religion, whose
Laws in all other best reformed Churches are rejected. And if to die for an
establshment of Religion be Martyrdom, then Romish Priests executed for that,
which had so many hundred years bin established in this Land, are no wors
Martyrs then he. Lastly, if to die for the testimony of his own conscience, be
anough to make him Martyr, what Heretic dying for direct blasphemy, as some
have don constantly, may not boast a Martyrdom? As for the constitution or
repeal of civil Laws, that power lying only in the Parliament, which he by the
verry law of his coronation was to grant them, not to debarr them, nor to
preserve a lesser Law with the contempt and violation of a greater, it will
conclude him not so much as in a civil and metaphorical sense to have di'd a
Martyr of our Laws, but a plain transgressor of them. And should the
Parliament, endu'd with Legislative power, make our Laws, and be after to
dispute them piece meal with the reason, conscience, humor, passion, fancy,
folly, obstinacy, or other ends of one man, whose sole word and will shall
baffle and unmake what all the wisdom of a Parliament has bin deliberatly
framing, what a ridiculous and contemptible thing a Parliament would soon be,
and what a base unworthy Nation we, who boast our freedom, and send them with
the manifest peril of their lives to preserve it, they who are not marked by
destiny for Slaves, may apprehend. In this servil condition to have kept us
still under hatches, he both resolves here to the last, and so instructs his
Son.

As to those offered condescensions of Charitable connivence, or toleration, if
we consider what went before, and what follows, they moulder into nothing. For
what with not suffering ever so little to seem a despicable scism, without
effectual suppression, as he warned him before, and what with no opposition of
Law, Government, or established Religion to be permitted, which is his following
proviso, and wholly within his own construction, what a miserable and suspected
toleration, under Spies and haunting Promooters we should enjoy, is apparent.
Besides that it is so far beneath the honor of a Parliament and free Nation,
to beg and supplicat the Godship of one frail Man, for the bare and simple
toleration of what they all consent to be both just, pious, and best pleasing
to God, while that which is erroneous, unjust, and mischeivous in the church or
State, shall by him alone against them all, be kept up and established; and they
censured the while for a covetous, ambitious, and sacrilegious faction.

Another bait to allure the people, is the charge he lays upon his Son, to be
tender of them. Which if we should believe in part, because they are his Heard,
his Cattle, the Stock upon his ground, as he accounts them, whom to wast and
destroy would undo himself, yet the inducement which he brings to move him,
renders the motion it self something suspicious. For if Princes need no
Palliations, as he tells his Son, wherefore is it that he himself has so oft'n
used them? Princes of all other men, have not more change of Raiment in their
Wardrobes, then variety of Shifts and palliations in their solemn actingsand
pretenses to the People.

To try next if he can ensnare the prime Men of those who have opposed him,
whom, more truly then his meaning was, he calls the Patrons and Vindicators of
the People, he gives out Indemnity, and offers Acts of Oblivion. But they who
with a good conscience and upright heart, did their civil duties in the sight of
God, and in their several places, to resist Tyranny, and the violence of
Superstition banded both against them, he may be sure will never seek to be
forgiven that, which may be justly attributed to their immortal praise; nor will
assent ever to the guilty blotting out of those actions before men, by which
their Faith assures them they chiefly stand approved, and are had in remembrance
before the throne of God.

He exhorts his son not tostudy revenge. But how far he, or at least they about
him, intend to follow that exhortation, was seen lately at the Hague, and now
lateliest at Madrid: where to execute in the basest manner, though but the
smallest part of that savage and barbarous revenge which they do no thing
elsbut study and contemplate, they cared not to let the world know them for
professed Traitors and assassinatersof all Law both Divine and human, eev'n of
that last and most extensive Law kept inviolable to public persons among all
fair enemies in the midst of uttermost defiance and hostility. How implacable
therefore they would be, after any terms of closure or admittance for the
future, or any like opportunity given them hereafter, it will be wisdom and our
safety to believe rather and prevent, then to make trial. And it will concern
the multitude, though courted here, to take heed how they seek to hide or
color their own fickleness and instability with a bad repentance of their
well-doing, and their fidelity to the better cause; to which at first so
cherfully and conscientiously they joined themselves.

He returns again to extol the Church of England, and again requires his
Son by the joint authority of a Father and a King, not to let his heart receive
the least check, or disaffection against it. And not without cause, for by that
means having sole influence upon the Clergy, and they upon the people, after
long search and many disputes, he could not possibly find a more compendious
and politic way to uphold and settle Tyranny, then by subduing first the
Consciences of Vulgar men, with the insensible poison of th ir slavish Doctrine:
for then the body and besotted mind without much Reluctance was likeliest to
admit the Yoke.

He commends also Parlaments held with freedom and with Honor. But I would
ask how that can be, while he only must be the sole free Person in that
number; and would have the power with his unaccountable denial, to dishonor
them by rejecting all their Counsels, to confine their Law-giving power, which is
the Foundation os our freedom, and to change at his pleasure the very name of a
Parliament into the name of a Faction.

The conclusion therefore must needs be quite contrary to what he concludes;
that nothing can be more unhappy, more dishonorable, more unsafe for all, then
when a wise, grave, and honorable Parliament shall have labourd, debated,
argued, consulted, and, as he himself speaks, contributed for the public good
all their Counsels in common, to be then frustrated, disappointed, denied and
repulsed by the single whiffe of a negative, from the mouth of one wilful man;
nay to be blasted, to be struck as mute and motionless as a Parliament of
Tapstrie in the Hangings; or else after all their pains and travel to be
dissolved, and cast away like so many Naughts in Arithmetic, unless it be to
turn the O of their insignificance into a lamentation with the people, who had
so vainly sent them. For this is not to enact all things by public consent, as
he would have us be persuaded, this is to enact nothing but by the private
consent and leave of one not negative tyrant; this is mischief without remedy,
a stifleing and obstructing evil that has no vent, no outlet, no passage
through: Grant him this, and the Parliament has no more freedom then if it sat
in his Noose, which when he pleases to draw together with one twitch of his
Negative, shall throttle a whole Nation, to the wish of Caligula in one neck.
This with the power of the Militia in his own hands over our bodies and
estates, and the Prelates to enthrall our consciences either by fraud or force,
is the sum of that happiness and liberty we were to look for, whether in his
own restitution, or in these precepts given to his son. Which unavoidably would
have set us in the same state of misery, wherein we were before; and have
either compelled us to submitt like bond slaves, or put us back to a second
wandering over that horrid Wilderness of distraction and civil slaughter, which,
not without the strong and miraculous hand of God assisting us, we have
measured out, and survived. And who knows, if we make so slight of this
incomparable deliverance, which God has bestowd upon us, but that we shall
like those foolish Israelites, who deposed God and Samuel to set up a King, Cry
out one day because of our King, which we have bin mad upon; and then God, as
he foretold them, will no more deliver us.

There remains now but little more of his discourse, whereof yet to take a short
view will not be amiss. His words make semblance as if he were magnanimously
exercising himself, and so teaching his Son, To want as well as to wear a
Crown; and would seem to account it not worth taking up or enjoying upon
sordid, dishonorable, and irreligious terms; and yet to his very last did
nothing more industriously then strive to take up and enjoy again his
sequesterd Crown, upon the most sordid, disloyal, dishonorable, and
irreligious terms, not of making peace only, but of joining and incorporating
with the murdrous Irish, formerly by himself declared against, for wicked and
detestable Rebels, odious to God and all good Men. And who but those Rebels
now, are the chief strength and confidence of his Son? while the Presbyter Scot
that wooes and solicits him, is neglected and put off, as if no terms were to
him sordid, irreligious and dishonorable, but the Scottish and Presbyterian,
never to be complied with, till the fear of instant perishing starve him out
at length to some unsound and hypocritical agreement.

He bids his Son Keep to the true principles of piety, virtue, and honor, and
he shall never want a Kingdom. And I say, People of England, keep ye to those
principles, and ye shall never want a King. Nay after such a fair deliverance
as this, with so much fortitude and valor shown against a Tyrant, that people
that should seek a King, claiming what this Man claims; would show
themselvesto be by nature slaves, and arrant beasts; not fit for that liberty
which they cried out and bellowed for, but fitter to be led back again into
their old servitude, like a sort of clamouring and fighting brutes, broke loos
from their copyholds, that know not how to use or possess the liberty which they
fought for; but with the fair words and promises of an old exasperated foe,
are ready to be stroak'd and tamed again, into the wonted and well pleasing
state of their true Norman villenage, to them best agreeable.

The last sentence, whereon he seems to venture the whole weight of all his
former reasons and argumentations, That Religion to their God, and loyalty to
their King cannot be parted, without the sin and infelicity of a People, is
contrary to the plain teaching of Christ, that No man can serve two Masters,
but, ifhe hold to the one, he must reject and forsake the other. If God then
and earthly Kings be for the most part not several only, but opposite
Masters, it will as often happ'n, that they who will serve their King must
forsake their God; and they who will serve God must forsake their King; which
then will neither be their sin, nor their infelicity; but their wisdom, their
piety, and their true happiness; as to be deluded by these unsound and subtle
ostentations here, would be their misery; and in all likelihood much greater
then what they hitherto have undergon: if now again intoxicated and moap'd
with these royal, and therefore so delicious because royal rudiments of bondage,
the Cup of deception, spic'd and temperd to their bane, they should deliver up
themselves to these glozing words and illusions of him, whose rage and utmost
violence they have sustained, and overcomm so nobly.

XXVIII. Intitl'd Meditations upon Death.
IT might be well thought by him who reads no further then the Title of this
last Essay, that it required no answer. For all other human things are
disputed, and will be variously thought of to the Worlds end. But this business
of death is a plain case, and admitts no controversy: In that center all
Opinions meet. Nevertheless, since out of those few mortifying howrs that
should have bin intirest to themselves, and most at peace from all passion and
disquiet, he can afford spare time to enveigh bitterly against that Justice
which was don upon him, it will be needful to say something in defense of those
proceedings; though briefly, in regard so much on this Subject has been
Writt'n lately.

It happn'd once, as we find in Esdras and Josephus, Authors not less believed
then any under sacred, to be a great and solemn debate in the Court of Darius,
what thing was to be counted strongest of all other. He that could resolve
this, in reward of his excelling wisdom, should be clad in Purple, drink in
Gold, sleep on a Bed of Gold, and sit next Darius. None but they doubtless who
were reputed wise, had the Question propounded to them. Who after some respit
given them by the King to consider, in full Assembly of all his Lords and
gravest Counselors, returned severally what they thought. The first held that
Wine was strongest; another that the King was strongest. But Zorobabel Prince
of the Captive Jews, and Heir to the Crown of Judah, being one of them,
proov'd Women to be stronger then the King, for that he himself had seen a
Concubin take his Crown from off his head to set it upon her own: And others
besides him have lately seen the like Feat don, and not in jest. Yet he proov'd
on, and it was so yielded by the King himself, and all his sages, that neither
Wine nor Women, nor the King, but Truth, of all other things was the strongest.
For me, though neither asked, nor in a Nation that gives such rewards to
wisdom, I shall pronounce my sentence somewhat different from Zorobabel; and
shall defend, that either Truth and Justice are all one, for Truth is but
Justice in our knowledge, and Justice is but Truth in our practice, and he
indeed so explaines himself in saying that with Truth is no accepting of
Persons, which is the property of Justice; or else, if there be any odds, that
Justice, though not stronger then truth, yet by her office is to put forth and
exhibit more strength in the affairs of mankind. For Truth is properly no more
then Contemplation; and her utmost efficiency is but teaching: but Justice in
her very essence is all strength and activity; and has a Sword put into her
hand, to use against all violence and oppression on the earth. She it is most
truly, who accepts no Person, and exempts none from the severity of her
stroke. She never suffers injury to prevail, but when fashood first prevails
over Truth; and that also is a kind of Justice don on them who are so deluded.
Though wicked Kings and Tyrants counterfeit her Sword, as some did that Buckler,
fabl'd to fall from Heaven into the Capitol, yet she communicates her power to
none but such as like her self are just, or at least will do Justice. For it
were extreme partiality and injustice, the flat denial and overthrow of her
self, to put her own authentic Sword into the hand of an unjust and wicked Man,
or so far to accept and exalt one mortal person above his equals, that he
alone shall have the punishing of all other men transgressing, and not receive
like punishment from men, when he himself shall be found the highest
transgressor.

We may conclude therefore that Justice, above all other things, is and ought to
be the strongest: She is the strength, the Kingdom, the power and majesty of
all Ages. Truth her self would subscribe to this, though Darius and all the
Monarchs of the World should deny. And if by sentence thus writt'n it were my
happiness to set free the minds of English men from longing to return poorly
under that Captivity of Kings, from which the strength and supreme Sword of
Justice has deliverd them, I shall have don a work not much inferior to that
of Zorobabel. who by well praising and extolling the force of Truth, in that
contemplative strength conquered Darius; and freed his Country, and the people
of God from the Captivity of Babylon. Which I shall yet not despair to do, if
they in this Land whose minds are yet Captive, be but as ingenuous to
acknowledge the strength and supremacy of Justice, as that heathen king was,
to confess the strength of truth: or let them but as he did, grant that, and
they will soon perceave that Truth resignes all her outward strength to
Justice: Justice therefore must needs be strongest, both in her own and in the
strength of Truth. But if a King may do among men whatsoever is his will and
pleasure, and notwithstanding be unaccountable to men, then contrary to this
magnified wisdom of Zorobabel, neither Truth nor Justice, but the King is
strongest of all other things: which that Persian Monarch himself in the midst
of all his pride and glory durst not assume.

Let us see therefore what this King has to affirm, why the sentence of Justice
and the weight of that Sword which she delivers into the hands of men, should
be more partial to him offending, then to all others of human race. First he
pleades that No Law of God or man gives to subjects any power of judicature
without or against him. Which assertion shall be proved in every part to be
most untrue. The first express Law of God given to mankind, was that to Noah,
as a Law in general to all the Sons of men. And by that most ancient and
universal Law, whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed;
we find here no exception. If a king therefore do this, to a King, and that by
men also, the same shall be don. This in the Law of Moses, which came next,
several times is repeated, and in one place remarkably, Numb. 35. Ye shall take
no satisfaction for the life of a murderer, but he shall surely be put to
death: the Land cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shedd therein, but by
the blood of him that shed it. This is so spok'n, as that which concerned all
Israel, not one man alone to see performed; and if no satisfaction were to be
taken, then certainly no exception. Nay the King, when they should set up any,
was to observe the whole Law, and not only to see it don, but to do it; that
his heart might not be lifted up above his Brethren, to dream of vain and
reasonless prerogatives or exemptions, whereby the Law it self must needs be
founded in unrighteousness.

And were that true, which is most falls, that all Kings are the Lords Anointed,
it were yet absurd to think that the Anointment of God, should be as it were a
charm against Law; and give them privilege who punish others, to sin
themselves unpunishably. The high Priest was the Lords anointed as well as any
King, and with the same consecrated oil: yet Solomon had put to death
Abiathar, had it not bin for other respects then that anointment. If God
himself say to Kings, Touch not mine anointed, meaning his chos'n people, as is
evident in that Psalm, yet no man will argue thence, that he protects them
from Civil Laws if they offend, then certainly, though David as a private man,
and in his own cause, feared to lift his hand against the Lords Anointed, much
less can this forbidd the Law, or disarm justice from having legal power
against any King. No other supreme Magistrate in what kind of Government soever
lays claim to any such enormous Privilege; wherefore then should any King, who
is but one kind of Magistrate, and set over the people for no other end then
they?

Next in order of time to the Laws of Moses, are those of Christ, who declares
professedly his judicature to be spiritual, abstract from Civil managements,
and therefore leaves all Nations to their own particular Laws, and way of
Government. Yet because the Church has a kind of Jurisdiction within her own
bounds, and that also, though in process of time much corrupted and plainly
turned into a corporal judicature, yet much approved by this King, it will be
firm anough and valid against him, if subjects, by the Laws of Church also, be
invested with a power of judicature both without and against their King, though
pretending, and by them acknowledged next and immediately under Christ supreme
head and Governor. Theodosius one of the best Christian Emperors having made
a slaughter of the Thessalonians for sedition, but too cruelly, was
excommunicated to his face by Saint Ambrose, who was his subject: and
excommunion is the utmost of Ecclesiastical Judicature, a spiritual putting to
death. But this, ye will say, was only an example. Read then the Story; and
it will appear, both that Ambrose avouch'd it for the Law of God, and
Theodosius confessed it of his own accord to be so; and that the Law of God was
not to be made void in him, for any reverence to his Imperial power. From
hence, not to be tedious, I shall pass into our own Land of Britain; and show
that Subjects here have exercised the utmost of spiritual Judicature and more
then spiritual against their Kings, his Predecessors. Vortiger for committing
incest with his daughter was by Saint German, at that time his subject, cursd
and condemnd in a British Counsel about the year 448; and thereupon soon
after was deposed. Mauricus a King in Wales, for breach of Oath and the murder
of Cynetus was excomunicated, and cursed with all his offspring, by Oudoceus
Bishop of Landaff in full Synod, about the year 560; and not restored, till he
had repented. Morcant another King in Wales having slain Frioc his Uncle, was
feign to come in Person and receave judgment from the same Bishop and his
Clergy; who upon his penitence acquitted him, for no other cause then lest the
Kingdom should be destitute of a Successor in the Royal Line. These examples
are of the Primitive, British, and Episcopal Church; long ere they had any
commerce or communion with the Church of Rome. What power afterward of deposing
Kings, and so consequently of putting them to death, was assumed and practiced
by the Canon Law, I omit as a thing generally known. Certainly if whole
Councels of the Romish Church have in the midst of their dimness discerned so
much of Truth, as to decree at Constance, and at Basil, and many of them to
avouch at Trent also, that a Council is above the Pope, and may judge him,
though by them not denied to be the Vicar of Christ, we in our clearer light
may be ashamed not to discern further, that a Parliament is, by all equity, and
right, above a King, and may judge him, whose reasons and pretensions to hold
of God only, as his immediate Vicegerent, we know how far fetched they are,
and insufficient.

As for the Laws of man, it would ask a Volume to repeat all that might be
cited in this point against him from all Antiquity. In Greece, Orestes the Son
of Agamemnon, and by succession King of Argos, was in that Country judged and
condemned to death for killing his Mother: whence escaping, he was judged
again, though a Stranger, before the great Counsel of Areopagus in Athens. And
this memorable act of Judicature, was the first that brought the Justice of
that grave Senate into fame and high estimation over all Greece for many ages
after. And in the same City Tyrants were to undergo Legal sentence by the
Laws of Solon. The Kings of Sparta, though descended lineally from Hercules
esteemed a God among them, were oft'n judged, and sometimes put to death by the
most just and renowned Laws of Lycurgus; who, though a King, thought it most
unequal to bind his Subjects by any Law, to which he bound not himself. In Rome
the Laws made by Valerius Publicola soon after the expelling of Tarquin and his
race, expelled without a writt'n Law, the Law being afterward writt'n, and
what the Senate decreed against Nero, that he should be judged and punished
according to the Laws of their Ancestors, and what in like manner was decreed
against other Emperors, is vulgarly known; as it was known to those heathen,
and found just by nature ere any Law mentiond it. And that the Christian Civil
Law warrants like power of Judicature to Subjects against Tyrants, is writt'n
clearly by the best and famousest Civilians. For if it was decreed by
Theodosius, and stands yet firm in the Code of Justinian, that the Law is
above the Emperor, then certainly the Emperor being under Law, the Law may
judge him, and if judge him, may punish him proving tyrannous: how else is the
Law above him, or to what purpose. These are necessary deductions; and
thereafter has bin don in all Ages and Kingdoms, oftener then to be here recited.

But what need we any further search after the Law of other Lands, for that
which is so fully and so plainly set down lawful in our own. Where ancient
Books tell us, Bracton, Fleta, and others, that the King is under Law, and
inferior to his Court of Parliament; that although his place to do Justice be
highest, yet that he stands as liable to receave Justice, as the meanest of his
Kingdom. Nay Alfred the most worthy King, and by some accounted first abolute
Monarch of the Saxons here, so ordained: as is cited out of an ancient Law Book
called the Mirror, in Rights of the Kingdom, p. 31. where it is complained on,
As the sovran abuse of all, that the King should be deemed above the Law,
whereas he ought be subject to it by his Oath: Of which Oath anciently it was
the last clause, that the King should be as liable, and obedient to suffer
right, as others of his people. And indeed it were but fond and senseless, that
the King should be accountable to every petty suit in lesser Courts, as we all
know he was, and not be subject to the Judicature of Parliament in the main
matters of our common safety or destruction; that he should be answerable in
the ordinary course of Law for any wrong don to a private Person, and not
answerable in Court of Parliament for destroying the whole Kingdom. By all this,
and much more that might be added as in an argument overcopious rather then
barren, we see it manifest that all Laws both of God and Man are made without
exemption of any person whomsoever; and that if Kings presume to overtopp the
Law by which they reign for the public good, they are by Law to be reduced
into order: and that can no way be more justly, then by those who exalted them
to that high place. For who should better understand their own Laws, and when
they are transgrest, then they who are governed by them, and whose consent
first made them: and who can have more right to take knowledge of things don
within a free Nation, then they within themselves?

Those objected Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy we swore, not to his Person,
but as it was invested with his Authority; and his authority was by the People
first given him conditionally, in Law and under Law, and under Oath also for
the Kingdoms good, and not otherwise: the Oaths then were interchang'd, and
mutual; stood and fell together; he swore fidelity to his trust (not as a
deluding ceremony, but as a real condition of their admitting him for King; and
the Conqueror himself swore it ofter then at his Crowning) they swore Homage,
and Fealty to his Person in that trust. There was no reason why the Kingdom
should be further bound by Oaths to him, then he by his Coronation Oath to us,
which he has every way brok'n; and having brok'n, the ancient Crown-Oath of
Alfred above mentioned, conceales not his penalty.

As for the Covenant, if that be meant, certainly no discreet Person can imagine
it should bind us to him in any stricter sense then those Oaths formerly. The
acts of Hostility which we received from him, were no such dear obligements
that we should ow him more fealty and defense for being our Enemy, then we
could before when we took him only for a King. They were accused by him and
his Party to pretend Liberty and Reformation, but to have no other end then to
make themselves great, and to destroy the Kings Person and authority. For which
reason they added that third Article, testifying to the World, that as they
were resolvd to endeavor first a Reformation in the Church, to extirpat
Prelacy, to preserve the Rights of Parliament, and the Liberties of the Kingdom,
so they intended, so far as it might consist with the preservation and defense
of these, to preserve the Kings Person and Authority; but not otherwise. As far
as this comes to, they Covenant and Swear in the sixth Article to preserve and
defend the persons and authority of one another, and all those that enter into
that League; so that this Covenant gives no unlimitable exemption to the Kings
Person, but gives to all as much defense and preservation as to him, and to him
as much as to their own Persons, and no more; that is to say, in order and
subordination to those maine ends for which we live and are a Nation of men
joynd in society either Christian or at least human. But if the Covenant were
made absolute, to preserve and defend any one whomsoever, without respect had,
either to the true Religion, or those other Superior things to be defended and
preserved however, it cannot then be doubted, but that the Covenant was rather a
most foolish, hasty, and unlawful Vow, then a deliberate and well-waighd
Covenant; swearing us into labyrinths, and repugnances, no way to be solved or
reconciled, and therefore no way to be kept: as first offending against the Law
of God, to Vow the absolute preservation, defense, and maintaining of one Man
though in his sins and offenses never so great and heinous against God or his
Neighbor; and to except a Person from Justice, whereas his Law excepts none.
Secondly, it offends against the Law of this Nation, wherein, as has bin
proved, Kings in receiving Justice, and undergoing due trial, are not
differenced from the meanest Subject. Lastly, it contradicts and offends
against the Covenant it self, which Vows in the fourth Article to bring to open
trial and condign punishment all those that shall be found guilty of such
crimes and Delinqnencies, whereof the King by his own Letters and other
undeniable testimonies not brought to light till afterward, was found and
convicted to be chief actor, in what they thought him at the time of taking
that Covenant, to be overrul'd only by evil Counselers. And those, or
whomsoever they should discover to be principal, they vowed to try, either by
their own supreme Judicatories, for so eev'n then they called them, or by others
having power from them to that effect. So that to have brought the King to
condign punishment has not broke the Covenant, but it would have broke the
Covenant to have saved him from those Judicatories, which both Nations declared
in that Covenant to be Supreme against any person whatsoever. And besides all
this, to swear in covenant the bringing of his evil counselers and accomplices
to condign punishment, and not only to leave unpunisht and untoucht the grand
offender, but to receive him back again from the accomplishment of so many
violences and mischeifs, dipped from head to foot and staind over with the blood
of thousands that were his faithful subjects, forced to their own defense
against a civil War by him first raised upon them, and to receive him thus, in
this goarie pickle, to all his dignities and honors, covering the ignominious
and horrid purple-robe of innocent blood that sat so close about him, with the
glorious purple of Royalty and Supreme Rule, the reward of highest excellence
and virtue here on earth, were not only to swear and covenant the performance
of an unjust Vow, the strangest and most impious to the face of God, but were
the most unwise and unprudential act as to civil government. For so long as a
King shall find by experience that do the worst he can, his Subjects, overaw'd
by the Religion of their own Covenant, will only prosecute his evil instruments,
not dare to touch his Person, and that whatever has bin on his part offended
or transgressed, he shall come off at last with the same reverence to his
Person, and the same honor as for well doing, he will not fail to find them
work; seeking far and near, and inviting to his Court all the concours of
evil counselers or agents that may be found: who tempted with preferments and
his promise to uphold them, will hazard easily their own heads, and the chance
of ten to one but they shall prevail at last, over men so quelled and fitted
to be slaves by the false conceit of a Religious Covenant? And they in that
Superstition neither wholly yiedling, nor to the utmost resisting, at the
upshot of all their foolish War and expense, will find to have don no more but
fetchd a compass only of their miseries, ending at the same point of slavery,
and in the same distractions wherein they first begun. But when Kings themselves
are made as liable to punishment as their evil counselers, it will be both as
dangerous from the King himself as from his Parliament, to those that
evilcounsel him, and they who else would be his readiest Agents in evil, will
then not fear to dissuade or to disobey him, not only in respect of
themselves and their own lives, which for his sake they would not seem to value
but in respect of that danger which the King himself may incurr, whom they
would seem to love and serve with greatest fidelity. On all these grounds
therefore of the covenant it self, whether religious or political, it appears
likeliest, that both the English Parliament, and the Scotch Commissioners thus
interpreting the Covenant (as indeed at that time they were the best and most
authentical interpreters joined together) answered the King unanimously, in
their Letters dated Jan. 13th 1645. that till security and satisfaction first
given to both Kingdoms for the blood spilt, for the Irish Rebels brought over,
and for the War in Ireland by him fomented, they could in no wise yield their
consent to his return. Here was satisfaction, full two years and upward after
the Covenant taken, demanded of the King by both Nations in Parliament, for
crimes at least Capital, wherewith they charged him. And what satisfaction could
be given for so much blood, but Justice upon him that spilt it? Till which don,
they neither took themselves bound to grant him the exercise of his regal
Office by any meaning of the Coynant which they then declared (though other
meanings have bin since contrived) nor so much regarded the safety of his
person, as to admit of his return among them from the midst of those whom they
declared to be his greatest enemies; nay from himself as from an actual enemy,
not as from a king, they demanded security. But if the covenant all this not
with standing swore otherwise to preserv him then in the preservation of true
religion and our liberties, against which he fought, if not in arms, yet in
resolution to his dying day, and now after death still fights against in this
his book, the covenant was better brok'n, the^ he saved. And god has testified
by all propitious, and the most evident signs, whereby in these latter times
he is wont to testify what pleases him; that such a solemn, and for many Ages
unexampl'd act of due punishment, was no mockery of Justice, but a most
grateful and well-pleasing Sacrifice. Neither was it to cover their perjury as
he accuses, but to uncover his perjury to the Oath of his Coronation.

The rest of his discourse quite forgets the Title; and turns his Meditations
upon death into obloquie and bitter vehemence against his Judges and accussers;
imitating therein, not our Savior, but his Grandmother Mary Queen of Scots, as
also in the most of his other scruples, exceptions and evasions: and from whom
he seems to have learnt, as it were by heart, or else by kind, that which is
thought by his admirers to be the most virtuous, most manly, most Christian,
and most Martyr-like both of his words and speeches here, and of his answers
and behavior at his Trial.

It is a sad fate, he says, to have his Enemies both accusers, Parties, and
Judges. Sad indeed, but no sufficient Plea to acquitt him from being so judged.
For what Malefactor might not sometimes plead the like? If his own crimes have
made all men his Enemies, who else can judge him? They of the Powderplot against
his Father might as well have pleaded the same. Nay at the Resurrection it may
as well be pleaded, that the Saints who then shall judge the World, are both
Enemies, Judges, Parties, and Accusers.

So much he thinks to abound in his own defense, that he undertakes an
unmeasurable task; to bespeak the singular care and protection of God over all
Kings, as being the greatest Patrons of Law, Justice, Order, and Religion on
Earth. But what Patrons they be, God in the Scripture often anough has expressed;
and the earth it self has too long groaned under the burd'n of their injustice,
disorder, and irreligion. Therefore To bind their Kings in Chains, and their
Nobles with links of Iron, is an honor belonging to his Saints; not to build
Babel (which was Nimrods work the first King, and the beginning of his Kingdom
was Babel) but to destroy it, especially that spiritual Babel: and first to
overcome those European Kings, which receive their power, not from God, but from
the beast; and are counted no better then his ten horns. These shall hate the
great Whore, and yet shall give their Kingdoms to the Beast that carries her;
they shall committ Fornication with her, and yet shall burn her with fire, and
yet shall lament the fall of Babylon, where they fornicated with her. Rev. 17.
and 18. chapt.

Thus shall they be too and fro, doubtful and ambiguous in all their doings,
until at last, joining their Armies with the Beast, whose power first raised
them, they shall perish with him by the King of Kings against whom they have
rebelled; and the Fowls shall eat their flesh. This is their doom writt'n, Rev.
19. and the utmost that we find concerning them in these latter days; which we
have much more cause to believe, then his unwarranted Revelation here,
prophesying what shall follow after his death, with the spirit of Enmity, not
of Saint John.

He would fain bring us out of conceit with the good success which God has
voutsaf'd us. We measure not our Cause by our success, but our success by our
cause. Yet certainly in a good Cause success is a good confirmation; for God
has promised it to good men almost in every leaf of Scripture. If it argue
not for us, we are sure it argues not against us; but as much or more for us,
then ill success argues for them; for to the wicked, God has denounced ill
success in all that they take in hand.

He hopes much of those softer tempers, as he calls them, and less advantaged
by his ruin, that their consciences do already gripe them. It Is true, there be a
sort of moodie, hot-brained, and always unedify'd consciences; apt to engage
their Leaders into great and dangerous affairs past retirement, and then, upon
a sudden qualm and swimming of their conscience, to betray them basely in the
midst of what was chiefly undertak'n for their sakes. Let such men never meet
with any faithful Parliament to hazard for them; never with any noble spirit
to conduct and lead them out, but let them live and die in servil condition and
their scrupulous queasiness, if no instruction will confirm them. Others there
be in whose consciences the loss of gain, and those advantages they hoped for,
has sprung a sudden leake. These are they that cry out the Covenant brok'n, and
to keep it better slide back into neutrality, or join actually with
Incendiaries and Malignants. But God has eminently begun to punish those,
first in Scotland, then in Ulster, who have provoked him with the most hateful
kind of mockery, to break his Covenant under pretense of strictest keeping it;
and has subjected them to those Malignants, with whom they scrupled not to be
associats. In God therefore we shall not fear what their falls fraternity can
do against us.

He seeks again with cunning words to turn our success into our sin. But might
call to mind, that the Scripture speaks of those also, who when God slew them,
then sought him; yet did but flatter him with their mouth, and ly'd to him with
their tongues; for their heart was not right with him. And there was one, who in
the time of his affliction trespassed more against God; This was that King Abaz.

He glories much in the forgiveness of his Enemies; so did his Grandmother at
her death. Wise men would sooner have believed him had he not so oft'n told us
so. But he hopes to erect the Trophies of his charity over us. And Trophies of
Charity no doubt will be as glorious as Trumpets before the alms of
Hypocrites; and more especially the Trophies of such an aspiring charity as
offers in his Prayer to share Victory with Gods compassion, which is over all
his works. Such Prayers as these may happly catch the People, as was intended:
but how they please God, is to be much doubted, though prayed in secret, much
less writt'n to be divulged. Which perhaps may gain him after death a short,
contemptible, and soon fading reward; not what he aims at, to stir the
constancy and solid firmness of any wise Man, or to unsettle the conscience of
any knowing Christian, if he could ever aim at a thing so hopeless, and above
the genius of his Cleric elocution, but to catch the worthles approbation of an
inconstant, irrational, and Image-doting rabble; that like a credulous and
hapless herd, begott'n to servility, and enchanted with these popular
institutes of Tyranny, subscribed with a new device of the Kings Picture at his
prayers, hold out both their ears with such delight and ravishment to be
stigmatized and board through in witness of their own voluntary and beloved
baseness. The rest, whom perhaps ignorance without malice, or some error, less
then fatal, has for the time misledd, on this side Sorcery or obduration, may
find the grace and good guidance to bethink themselves, and recover.

THE END.

