A SERMON AT THE FUNERAL OF Mrs. ELIZABETH FISHER, Sister to the Honorable Sir
WILLIAM DAWES, Bar. D. D. And Wife to the Reverend Dr. PETER FISHER.

Preached at Bennington in Hertfordshire, June the 2d. School.

By WILLIAM MILNER, Vicar of Shephall in Hertfordshire.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Speed, at the Three Crowns, near the Royal Exchange
in Cornhill. MDCLXXXXVIII.

To the Honorable the Lady ELIZABETH BENET, WIFE OF Sir Richard Benet, Bar. Of
Babram in Cambridgshire.
Madam,
THE honest Plainness, and Truth of the following Discourse found such
acceptance with the Relations and Friends, of that Excellent Person, whose
immature and much lamented Death, was the sad Occasion of it, That They have
prevailed with me to make it more public, than I at first intended: Believing
it would be as acceptable to your Ladyship in the Reading, as it was to them,
when they heard it. I was the more willing to comply with their Desire, not
only that it might be a public acknowledment, of my great Obligation to Your
Family, and to Your Ladyship in particular, for Your many great and lasting
Favors toward me, but because I am sensible the Subject is such, as will
recommend it to Your Favor. Your Ladyship was a Witness, and a Lover of the
many great Virtues of Your Dear and Excellent Friend. Her affectionate care and
concern for Your Good, the Sincerity of her Friendship, the Piety and Prudence
of her Counsels, the great Usefulness and Advantage of her Example, at such a
time, when you stood most in need of it, by the otherwise irreparable loss, of
Your truly Pious, and most tenderly Affectionate Mother, had deservedly
endeared her to You: and I persuade my self, just Allowances being made, for
the difference of Your respective Condition and Circumstances, You will always
imitate, whatsoever was Excellent, Amiable, and Praiseworthy in Her. This will
recommend You to the esteem of such as are Wise and Good: Hereby You will be an
Ornament to Your Own Family, and add a Luster to That, into which, by the
successful Care, and Endeavors of Your Dear deceased Friend, You are so
happily transplanted. If what I now offer, may contribute any thing toward so
great and good an End, it will be the greatest accession, to all the other
Favors You have shown to,

Madam, Your Ladyships Most Obliged, and Obedient Servant. W. MILNER.

A SERMON AT THE FUNERAL OF Mrs. ELIZABETH FISHER.
Rev. 14.13. I heard a voice from Heaven, saying unto me. Write, Blessed are
Dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth: Yea, says the Spirit, that they
may rest from their labors; and their works do follow them.


Whosoever shall consider these words in their more immediate Connection with
the foregoing parts of the Chapter, will see great reason to conclude, that in
their Original and Primary intention they were delivered by the Blessed Spirit,
and by him commanded to be written for the support and comfort of the Church,
under that severe Persecution which should befall it. But since the Wisdom and
Piety of our own Church, has thought fit ^o insert the Words into her Office
for the Burial of the Dead, I shall at this time consider them in a greater
Lati^ude, as of general use to the Church of God in all Ages, and under all
circumstances, holding forth this great and comfortable Truth; Viz. That all
Good Christians immediately upon their dissolution, or departure out of this
Life are in a blessed or happy condition. A Truth which deserves our more
serious and attentive ^egard and meditation, because delivered by an audible
Voice from Heaven, expressly commanded to be written, and confirmed by the
solemn asseveration of the Spirit. And therefore for the more distinct and
proffitable handling of the Words, give me leave to exercise your Meditation
and Patience upon these following things.

1. Let me inquire what it is to die in the Lord?

2. In what respect, or upon what accounts such as die in the Lord, are
pronounced Blessed.

3. Let me touch at the time from whence their Blessedness commences: And then
I shall apply the whole for the directing our Practice, and in particular to
temper, and alleviate our grief upon the Mournful occasion of our present
meeting together. And,

1. Let me inquire what it is to die in the Lord: And this will be dispatched
in a few words. Now though this Phrase to die in the Lord, if considered with
respect to the particular occasion of the Words, may signify only to die for
the Lord, i. e. for his sake, and in his cause, and so may relate to the case
of such who suffer Martyrdom for the sake of Christ; Yet, I doubt not, but in
the more general and ultimate sense of the Words, to die in the Lord, is the
same, as to die in the Faith, and Fear, and Favor of God, and Jesus Christ
whom he has sent. To die Christians: Christians both in Faith and Practice,
adhering to God through Jesus Christ, by an Uniform and Constant Obedience to
his Will, and a steadfast Faith and Hope of Redemption and Salvation by him. For
i^ to be in Christ, and to be alive to God through Jesus Christ, and to live to
him who died for us, and rose again, are forms of Speech denoting the sincere
Belief and Practice of Christianity, and the Participation of the Grace and
Privileges of the Gospel in consequence of such Faith and Practice, I think,
their can be no reason to doubt, but that these Phrases, of Sleeping in Christ
and Dying in the Lord, must likewise be understood in the same sense, so as to
imply our Perseverance in such Belief and Practice to our lives end. And
Blessed are they who thus die in the Lord; continuing steadfast, without
wavering, even to the end, in all holy Faith, and Obedience. Which leads me to
the Second thing I am to account for, Viz.

2. To inquire in what respect, and upon what accounts, they who die in the
Lord are pronounced Blessed: Or in other words to point at the Nature of that
Blessedness which Holy Souls enjoy in their state of Separation from their
Bodies. But before I enter upon this, permit me to premise a few things.

1. That as yet we are very much in the dark as to our future State: I do not
mean as to the certainty of such a State, for Life and Immortality is brought
to light through the Gospel. But we are left to uncertainties, as to the distinct
nature, and complete degrees and measures of its Happiness. And,

2. We have just reason to believe, that the Blessedness of departed Holy
Spirits in their State of Separation, is less perfect in Quality and Degree,
than it will be at the Resurrection, when their Souls and Bodies shall be
reunited by the most intimate Vital Union: But nevertheless, there is enough
revealed concerning their present Happiness, to convince us, that it is very
great, far beyond any of the transitory, mixed, perishing Pleasures of this
Life; enough to engage good Men to aspire and pant after it, at least to make
them neither afraid, nor unwilling to die. And,

3. Lastly, I add, That whatsoever we know concerning this matter is
principally, if not wholly owing to Revelation: and therefore it becomes none
of us, to pretend to be wise above what is written. We should not exercise our
selves, with curious, perplexed, and useless inquiries, but rest contented with
what we find plainly delivered in Holy Scripture, striving always so to order
our whole Conversations, as that we may be found worthy to be received, when we
depart hence, into those Mansions, our Blessed Lord is gone before to prepare
for us. These things being thus premised, let us proceed to consider wherein
the Text has placed the Blessedness of departed Holy Spirits. Now this it tells
us lies in these two things. They are Blessed;

1. Because they rest from their Labors.

2. Because their works follow, or accompany them into their future State.
(...).
The meaning and importance of which things must be the subject of the
following Discourse.

1. They are Blessed in that they rest from their Labors. i. e. They are
completely delivered from all the Troubles and Sorrows, all the Evils and
Calamities, Infirmities and Miseries of this frail, Mortal State: I say, all,
which either have their Foundation in the very texture and constitution of the
Human Body, or proceed from the Folly and Frenzy, the Envy or Malice of
Others. In this Vale of Tears and Misery Good Men, as well as others, are
liable to Pain and Sickness, to Difficulties and Dangers, to Poverty, Reproach
and Persecution, and all the sad effects of their own infirm crazie Bodies, and
the inordinate Appetites and Passions of others. Nay, the Sons of Violence too
often make them the Marks of their Displeasure and Vengeance, for no other
reason, but because their Works are Righteous. And is it not a blessed thing to
be delivered from such a deplorable and wretched State? Why this is the happy
state of such who die in the Lord. They are safe out of the reach of all these
their Enemies. No Smart or Anguish can afflict them: No Wrath or Malice
overtake them. To allude to that of Moses concerning the Egyptians, Exodus 14.13.
when good Men shall have once past through this Red Sea, they may stand still
upon the Shore, and look back with Pleasure and Triumph upon all these their
Enemies, saying we shall see them again no more for ever. As Job has it, Chap.
3. v. 18.19. In the grave the Wicked cease from troubling, and there the weary
are at rest; There the Prisoners rest together, they hear not the voice of the
Oppressor, the small and great are there, [upon the same level, none greater
than other] and the servant is free from his master. So that the words of
Solomon, if understood with reference to departed Saints are strictly true.
That the day of a man's death, is better than the day of his birth: Eccles. 7.1.
The day of his Birth being the beginning of a life, attended with continual
Care and Sorrow, the day of his Death, being his Birthday into a Blessed
Immortal Life of uninterrupted Peace and Pleasure. This for the First.

2. The Second thing wherein the Text places the Blessedness of those who die
in the Lord is this; They are blessed because their Works accompany, or follow
them. By which we are to understand these Two things.

I. The Grateful and Pleasant Remembrance. II. The Glorious and happy Fruits
and Effects, or the Reward of their Good Works follows them.
1. The Grateful Remembrance of their good Works follows them. Now that this is
a real Foundation and Ground of Peace and Blessedness to Holy Spirits in their
state of separation from their Bodies, may be reasonably inferred from the
Consideration of our selves, how it is with us here in our state of Discipline
and Trial. For if good Men reflecting upon the course of their past Lives, and
finding that they have behaved themselves piously with regard to God, and
Inoffensively and Charitably toward Men; do from this Testimony of their
Consciences receive a very sensible and inward Pleasure, a Pleasure greater
than the World can give, which none can comprehend but such as have felt it:
What an Unspeakable, Transporting, Inconceiveable Pleasure, may we reasonably
suppose will spring up in departed Holy Souls, when all the good Works of their
whole Lives shall be had in remembrance, and set in order before them, and
represented at one view with greater force and advantage than we can suppose
they are in this Earthly State? How will such Blessed Spirits, upon such
recollection even melt away, and be dissolved and swallowed up in the greatest
Transports and highest Ecstasies of Complacency and Delight!

2. The Fruits and Effects, or Reward of their good Works accompanies or
follows them into their future State. But Blessed God! What Tongue can
describe, what Heart conceive the good things which thou have prepared for all
those who Die in thy Fear and Favor! It Is impossible for us fully to represent
the Happiness and Glory of the Saints in their future State: yet, to excite our
Love to God, and to quicken our desires after the Enjoyment of Him, it can
neither be useless, nor unseasonable to point at some few things which are the
happy Effects and Reward of the Good Works of Holy Men in the other Life. And
therefore,

1. Good Men are completely delivered from Sin, as well as Sorrow and Trouble.
They are no longer liable to Temptation or Danger, from any of the Enemies of
God's Glory and their own Salvation. Whilst they are here upon Earth, the
Devil and his Agents, lie in wait to Ensnare them, and even their own Flesh,
which encompasses them about, sollicits them to a multitude of Sins and
Follies. They daily find a Law in their Members, warring against the Law of
their Minds, the Flesh lusting against the Spirit, the Animal and Carnal,
struggling with the Rational and Spiritual Powers; which Conflict, is the ground
and occasion of much Dejection and Disquietness of Soul, filling even good Men
with many Misgivings, and Fears, and Perplexities concerning their present
Sincerity, and future Happiness. How in the bitterness of their Souls do they
lament their evil Propensities and Inclinations, their Slips and Failings,
their Mistakes, and sometimes more notorious Transgressions? They find no rest
by reason of their Spiritual Enemies, and their Hearts too often fail them. But
it is not thus with the Dead, with them who Die in the Lord. He that is once
entered into his Rest, Heb. 4.10. Romans 6.7.
ceases from his own Works, the works of Sin and the Flesh. He that is dead is
freed from Sin: from the fear and danger, and possibility of offending God: No
subtle malicious Serpent can insinuate himself into the Paradise of Holy
Souls; this Earth is the Scene of Satan's Temptation, and the place of Trial.
Or, if we may suppose that the Evil Spirit should creep in amongst them; yet,
he will find nothing in them, so as to fix a Temptation upon them: For being
delivered from the burden of the Flesh, from the Body of this Death, as the
Apostle calls it, all those sparks of a corrupt Nature, which so easily took
fire here, are for ever extinguished, that Root of Bitterness is plucked up,
and can never spring again into any rebellious Inclinations or Actions: Now,
how great a Happiness this is, can be thoroughly understood by none but such as
have duly considered the Malignity and Demerit of Sin, or felt the Sad and
Dismal Effects of it in a Wounded Conscience. The Saints doubtless will look
upon this as the most Inestimable Privilege; as that, without which it is
impossible to be Easy or Happy. How will they Rejoice and Triumph when they
shall find in themselves no Disposition at all to the least Evil, no
possibility of ever incurring the Guilt of it!

2. As the Blessed Spirits will find in themselves a total freedom from all
Sin, so they will be absolutely and perfectly determined to every thing that is
best, always choosing, approving, and delighting in that which is Good. They
will find themselves entr'd upon a State of Divine Contemplation, Love, and
Imitation, being wholly taken up in Adoring the Infinite Perfections of the
Divine Nature, and will be surpised at those Great and Mavelous Things which
God has done for them: They will Obey with Vigor, and Praise with Cheerfulness,
and Love without Measure, and Trust without Dispondency, and Fear without
Torment; and all this without any Reluctance, Weariness, or Intermission: In a
word, they will perceive a Divine Nature wrought in themselves, that they are
like God in point of Purity as well, as Immortality: And how Blessed, how
Infinitely Blessed are they who are in such a State!

3. Another great and Essential Ingredient of the Happiness of the Saints
departed is this, That they are entered into a State of perfect Peace and
Friendship: They are admitted into the Society of Saints and Angels, where
there is no fear, or possibility of any future Discord and Contention: Where
there is no Selfishness or Envy, no contrary Humors, or divided Interests; but
all of them Love God above all, and every one loves each other as himself. It Is
the sense of mutual Friendship, which makes this World a tolerable Habitation;
and it is the sense of universal immutable Friendship which will render that
other World a State of Incomparable Pleasure and Blessedness. But,

4. Another Fruit, or Effect of good Works in respect of Holy Souls, in their
state of separation from their Bodies, may reasonably be supposed to be HOPE
[Which I the rather mention, because it was the Opinion of many Ancient Fathers
of the Church, and is since received by Protestants of Eminence and Worth V.
Lud. Capel. de Stat. Anim. post mortem.
] By which, they did not understand such a Hope, as Men have here upon Earth: a
Hope which ebbs and flows, a fluctuating, wavering, inconstant Hope; founded
upon uncertain Opinion, and probable Conjectures, mixed with fear and
diffidence, attended with impatience, discontent and weariness. No, The Hope of
the Saints departed this Life, is a firm, secure, unshaken, immutable, certain
Hope; without any mixture of suspicion, murmuring or fear of Disappointment,
founded in much clearer Apprehensions, and larger Communications of God's Love
and Favor to them, and assurance of their love to Him, than are either
vouchsafed, or are attainable in this frail Mortal State. The Principal Object
of which Hope, or the thing hoped for, They supposed, to be the Resurrection of
the Body at the Last Day, when they should be admitted to the Beatifick Vision,
in the Highest Heaven, the place of the more immediate Residence of the Divine
Majesty and Glory: where they should behold God and Christ, not (...), as some
of them speak, as in a Vision, or through a Cloud at a distance, but face to
face, as he is, receiving the fullest Communications of his Love and Glory. And
this they collected from all those passages of Holy Scripture, which speak of
the Great and Final Day of Judgment, as the Greatest and Joyful Day, the Day of
Mercy and Forgiveness, Rest and Refreshing, Joy and Gladness, Redemption and
Salvation, Rewards and Crowns. And indeed, though there be no doubt, that the
Saints rest in Hope of a Glorious Resurrection, and an Immortal Crown, and
though from such Texts, it may with great probability be inferred, That the
Happiness of departed Souls is but initial and partial, and less perfect than
it will be at the Resurrection, and after the Final Judgment, when they shall
be Clothed upon with their Heavenly House, Bodies fashioned like to Christ's
most Glorious Body, Yet, with submission, I conceive, such passages do not
necessarily prove, that the Spirits of Just Men, are not immediately admitted
into Heaven, as it imports not only a State, but a place of Magnificence and
Transcendent Glory, But suppose this alone should be the principal part of
their Blessedness, yet even this in the account of every good Man will appear
very great, such as exacts our best Care and Endeavors to attain to it. To
rest in Hope, a Hope which cannot be disappointed of a Glorious Resurrection to
an Immortal Crown: To have as it were, the Glistering Morning Rays of that
Blessed Day, breaking in upon them, and to have the prospect of that Bright
Eternal Crown, which at that Day shall be set upon their Heads, represented to
them; will fill the Blessed Spirits with present Exultancie, and Incessant
Triumph, causing them to break out into Halelujahs and Songs of Praise to the
God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1.3, 4.
who according to his abundant mercy has begotten them again to a lively Hope,
by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, to an inheritance
incorruptable, and undefiled, that fades not away, reserved in Heaven for them.

5. Lastly, The Works of good Men do so follow, or accompany them into their
Future State, as through the Mercy of God in Christ, to procure them an
immediate Admittance into Heaven, the Palace of the Great King of the World, a
Place of Unspeakable Majesty and Glory, Solace and Delight, where they are made
to Drink of those Rivers of Pleasure which are at God's Right Hand for
evermore. And in this, I think, I speak agreeably to the tenor of Holy
Scripture, the more general belief of the Ancient, and the sense of the best
Reformed Protestant Churches, our own Church in particular, which has expressly
taught us, That V. Hom. against the fear of Death.
, Death delivering us from our Bodies, sends us straight home into our Country,
and makes us to dwell presently with God for ever, in Everlasting Rest and
Quietness. And again, V. Hom. of Prayer.
As the Scripture teaches, let us think, that the Soul of Man passing out of
the Body, goes straitway either to Heaven or else to Hell: Which Doctrine is
grounded upon several passages of the Apostle St. Paul, the Parable of Lazarus,
and the example of the Penitent Theif upon the Cross. But this leads me to the
last thing I proposed, viz.

3. To touch at the time from whence the Blessedness of good Men commences: and
in this I have already in great measure prevented my self, and therefore shall
be very short upon it. I doubt not therefore, in a word, to affirm that it
begins immediately after the dissolution of Soul and Body. Which whether it may
be justly inferred from the particular force of the Greek word (...), which we
translate henceforth, I shall not now dispute: For however that be, the thing
it self is sufficiently clear from many other places of Scripture. The whole
Scope of the Parable of Dives and Lazarus is a convincing and undeniable
Testimony. Luke 16.19, etc. 1 Phil. 2.23. 2 Cor. 5.6, 8.
The Apostle St. Paul has assured us, that to depart out of this Life is to be
with Christ, and that to be at home in the Body, is to be absent from the Lord,
and to be absent from the Body, is to be present with the Lord. Which Places
are so clear, and full to the purpose, that more need not be added: And
therefore, I shall now proceed to the Application of what I have said, so as to
influence our general Belief and Practice, and in particular to temper and
allay our Grief, which this Melancholy Solemnity is so apt to excite in us. And,

1. From what has been said, I might take occasion to show the gross absurdity
and falsehood of that conceit which some have entertained concerning the Sleep
of the Soul, as they call it, supposing it in its separate State entirely
bereft, and stripped of all Vital Energy or Operation: Which how it can be
reconciled with those Scriptures which assert the immediate Blessedness of the
Saints departed, I cannot see, unless a state of perfect inactivity, and stupid
senslessness, either is, or may be accounted a Blessed State.

2. I might likewise represent what a direct contradiction the Doctrine of
Purgatory, as it is taught in the Church of Rome, is to the words of the Text.
Says the Text, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord: No, says the Church
of Rome, they are consigned for many Years (no body knows how many) to
Purgatory, i. e. as they explain themselves to a place whose Torments are very
exquisite, little less than the pains of Hell, to suffer (as they speak) the
Temporal Punishment of those Sins, for which they have not completely satisfied
in this Life. Can an immediate rest from their Labors, and suffering very
exquisite Pains and Torments consist together? And then,

3. From hence also, I might show how vain and useless it is, to pray for the
Saints who are departed this Life. Their Sins and Sorrows are at an end, They
rest from their Labors, They are Blessed, and wherein can our Prayers Profit
them? Is it not absurd to pray for what they already enjoy? Though the Words give
just occasion to discourse upon all these things, yet I shall choose rather to
insist upon what is plainer, and more practical. And therefore,

1. Are they who die in the Lord Blessed, from hence you see the great
Necessity, the Reasonableness and Advantages of Christian Faith and Practice.
What greater Motive and Encouragement to live well, than to be assured that if
we do so, we shall be happy, by an abundant entrance into the joy of our Lord.
Blessed are the Dead, says the Text, but then it is with this Restriction, who
die in the Lord. Which plainly shows, that Blessedness appertains to them, to
them alone, exclusively of all others. Unless we live the Life of the
Righteous, it will be impossible for us to die the Death of the Righteous:
Unless we live to the Lord, resigning our Selves, Soul, Body and Spirit,
entirely to his Will and Pleasure, we can never die in the Lord, never die in
his Favor, nor partake with him in his Glory. The constant exercise of Faith
and good Works, will give us courage and confidence at the time of our
dissolution, and after death also. If these go before or accompany us, they
will assure our Hearts, and plead our Cause, and through the Merits of Christ,
procure a full approbation, and an ample reward. But without Holiness no man
shall see the Lord. Tribulation, Anguish, and Horror, and black invincible
Despair will be the portion of the Ungodly after their Dissolution. The end of
this life will be to them, the beginning of a life of eternal Misery and
Torment. Impure, wicked Souls, will be so far from the end of their Labors,
that they will just then, enter upon Labors infinitely more vexatious and
insupportable than any they groaned under in this Life. Their Works, as well
as, the Works of the Righteous will follow them into their future State: But
for this reason to enhance and aggravate their Shame and Misery. For then the
unreasonableness, the folly and turpitude, and horrid baseness of their
behavior, will be represented to their guilty Minds, with such Force and
Efficacy, and the impossibility of undoing their Evil Deeds, or making any
Satisfaction for them, be so clearly impressed upon them, that they will lie down
in everlasting Confusion, Astonishment and Despair, expecting the Resurrection
of Damnation, Joh. 5.29.
and cursing their own obstinate Folly, as the only cause of their ruin. And
since it is thus, we plainly see how much it is our Duty, and our Interest, to
live in the sincere Belief and Practice of our Holy Religion, that so at the
time of our Dissolution, we may receive the exceeding great, and glorious
rewards of it.

2. From hence we may draw a very powerful Argument to lessen our Opinion of
this World, and to animate and fortify us against the fear of Death. What is
there in this World that we should be over fond of it? What is there in Death
that should make us either afraid or unwilling to die? Is not this World a
place of Injustice and Violence, of Subtiltiy and Deceit, full of noise and
brawling, of Strife and Contention? Are we not daily exposed to Detraction and
Reproach? The Peevishness of some, the Stubbornness of others, the Treachery
and Ingratitude of Friends, the Hatred and Injuries of Enemies, the contempt of
Superiors, the jealousy of Equals, the envy of the Meaner sort, the different
Humors, the divided and contrary Interests of those we converse with, do
perplex, and almost distract and confound us: Are not our best Counsels too
often rejected, our faithfulest Reproof scorned, our well-lay'd Designs
defeated? Is not every thing subject to mutability and a ground of Care and
Vexation? And since it is thus, since this is the State, the Guise, and manner
of this World, Why do we admire, and dote upon it? Why so unwilling to leave
it? Especially since Death will put an everlasting end to all this Labor and
Sorrow, and vexation of Spirit. Can a good Man readily go to a worse place? Can
he lose by the change of his Habitation? No certiainly! He will be an infinite
gainer by it. Death removes him far above, from the wrath of Man, and the
strife of Tongues: above the Waves and Winds, the Storms and Tempests, the
Tossings and Instabilities of these Lower Regions; out of the reach either of
Envy or Malice, Force or Subtilty: It delivers from all the tumult, disorder
and fury, and evil effects either of our own, or other Men's Unreasonable
Appetites or Passions. Or, if it should be said, That Death does deprive us of
some things, which it must be confessed, in a qualified sense, and in their due
place, are valuable Blessings, things truly amiable and pleasant: Yet at the
same time, it puts us into the Possession of greater Good Things, Pleasures
more Manly and Substantial, Pure, Unmixt, Durable, Satisfying Pleasures,
suitable to our Natures, and commensurate to the Capacities of our Souls. It
transmits us to the Society of Saints and Angels, God and Christ, who are
Friends indeed, Faithful and never failing Friends: fills us with clear and
constant Impressions of God's Love to us, and our Love to God, which is the
highest pitch of Felicity. Why then do we fear Death, which puts us into the
Possession of so many, so great and inestimable Privileges? Why do we not
rather, with submission, aspire after this Happy State? A natural fear of
Death, it is true, there will be; this is hardly ever totally extirpated in the
best: But I am sure the Consideration of that great Blessedness, which the
Saints enjoy in their future State, immediately upon the Dissolution of Soul
and Body, is sufficient, to arm and fortify good Men against the unreasonable
and immoderate fears of it; and that is the thing I aim at.

3. Lastly, What has been said is of great force, and singular use to temper,
and mitigate our Sorrow, upon the Death of our Christian Friends. To have
little or no concern upon us, upon such sad Occasions, is Unatural, and more
than Brutish Stupidity: But to be over concerned and excessive in our Grief is
indecent, a thing unbecoming true Christians. It becomes us, it is our Duty to
Mourn, but then, we must Mourn as those, which have Hope: Hope that our Friends
are gone to their Rest, and that we our selves, when our appointed time comes,
shall rest together with them, in a full assurance of a Glorious Resurrection
to an Immortal Crown at the Last Day.

Which brings me to the particular Application of what has been said, to allay
and mitigate the Sorrow, which this grave and mournful Solemnity excites in us?
It Is true, we have reason to weep for our selves, in that we are deprived of so
bright and noble a Pattern of unaffect'd Piety and true Goodness, which our
Deceased Sister set before us. But our Loss, is her Gain. There Is no reason to
weep upon her account: She is entered into her Rest. Her Sorrows are at an end,
and her Joys begun: Joys which are satisfying and will be Eternal. This, I say,
we have great reason to believe, as will appear when I have laid something of
her true Character before you.

It pleased Almighty God, the Wise Author of our Beings, to bless her with an
admirable Sagacity, and quickness of Apprehension, a discerning Mind, and a
strong Memory, which together with a serious and composed frame and temper of
Spirit, made her capable of receiving and retaining the wisest and best
Instructions, and fitted Her for an unaffected and rational Devotion, and those
great Excellencies and Perfections, our Holy Religion was designed to Inspire
and Work in us. Which advantages of nature were very early and happily improved
by the pious Care of her tender Mother (a Lady of singular, I had almost said
inimitable Virtues) and the joint endeavors of those Incomparable Ladies, the
Lady Nottingham, and her Sister the Lady Mary, whose Memory is Honorable and
Precious amongst all those who had the Honor and Happiness, to be acquainted
with them.

These Excellent Ladies, from her Childhood Trained her up in the Way she
should go, and in her riper years, she did not depart from it. Their First and
Principal Care, as it ought to be, was to sow in her Heart the Seeds of an
early and sincere Piety and Devotion toward God: to teach her the true
knowledge of God, through Jesus Christ, and her Duty to Him: to Inspire her
with an Awful Regard, to her Great Creator, and Merciful Redeemer, and her
Infinite Obligations to them both: and this, before she could receive, or
imbibe any Prejudices which might occasion any aversness or dislike to
Religious Meditations, and Exercise. Which being done, no Care was wanting, to
let her soon into the Art of Civility, and all the Decencies of a Graceful and
Genteel Behavior, without any mixture of those Impertinencies and Follies,
which too often disguise and shelter themselves under that Amiable Name. The
good Effects of which Pious Care and Pains appeared in her whole Conversation.

As for her Devotion toward God, nothing could be more Regular, Uniform, and
Constant; both as to her Closet Retirements, and Public Worship. Neither
Pleasure nor Business could hinder it, because to Serve God was always her
Chief Pleasure, and Greatest Business. Of her due Attendance upon the Public
Worship, this is a Remarkable Instance, that she was never known to omit any
fit opportunity of receiving the Holy Sacrament from the sixteenth Year of her
Age: and would not go out of the World without this Viaticum, or as the
Ancients sometimes style it, her (...), or Medicine of Immortality, which she
received from the Hands of her truly Honorable Brother, with all becoming
Seriousness, Devotion, and Thankfulness. Her Devotion was not made up of sudden
Heats and Raptures, Intermissions and Pauses; but was Steady, Judicious, and
Rational, and Well Governed, free from Ostentation, Superstition, and any
affected Singularities: Which as it showed the Soundness of her Judgment, so it
contribut'd to the Ease and Comfort of her Life, by delivering her from those
Vexatious, Doubts and Fears, and Scruples, which so often disquiet, and torment
weaker Minds.

None who knew her, but must be sensible of the Native Sincerity, great
Openness, and Honest Plainness of her Heart: which made her always speak as she
thought: which taught her to despise the Dissimulation and Flatteries of
others, and to abhor the thoughts of Dissembling with, or Flattering any with
whom she Conversed.

Her Gratitude was Great and Exemplary toward all who had shown any kindness
to her. Especially toward those, who had charged themselves with the Care of
her Education. She was so sensible of the great Advantages she had received by
it, that whenever she mentioned their Names, which she often did, she did it in
such Terms and Expressions as implied the highest Respect, Honor, and Love to
their Memory.

What an Admirable Instance was she of a Self-denying Temper! There was no
present Satisfaction so great, which she would not fore-goe, when to do it,
would serve any Wise and better Purpose. Though she longed for nothing so much as
the Enjoyment of her Husband and Children in the privacies of her own House,
yet this she declined when she was sensible she could not gratify her own
Inclinations, without being wanting to an Excellent Young Lady, who was left to
her more immediate Care, and who, I doubt not, retains very Grateful
Impressions of her Love, and owes much, to the Pious and Prudent Example and
Instructions, which she always laid before her.

What an Illustrious and Noble Pattern did she set us of a great and generous
Contempt of the Vain Pleasures, and Useless Divertisements, Foolish Mirth, and
Impertinent Recreations, with which Youth is especially Ensnared: (which have a
tendency to corrupt the Mind, and bewitch and steal away the Heart, and often
prove of very Fatal Consequence.) And this when Youth and Opportunity conspired
to gratify her in a high Degree. She was always above them, they were either
Insipid or Distastful. She aspired chiefly after the Pleasures of Religion and
Virtue, and a good Conscience, which is a continual Feast. These were more
charming, sensible, and transporting Pleasures. Not that she was Cynical or
Morose, or an Enemy to the Innocent Pleasures of Conversation, or Censorious of
others, who took a greater liberty than she indulged to her self. It Is true,
she was not fond of these things, but yet made all reasonable and fit
allowances for others: she sometimes gave way, but when she did, she kept the
Reins in her Hands, and would not be prevailed with to exceed the bounds of
Modesty and Sobriety.

If we consider her in her conjugal Relation, I had almost applied the words of
the Wise Man, in the Close of that Chapter, which she so often made the Subject
of her delightful Meditation, and daily Practice: Many Daughters have done
virtuously, Prove. 31.29.
but thou excellest them all. Never was any Wife, more tenderly Affectionate
toward her Husband, and more obsequiously Observant of him, and rejoiced more
in him, than she did. She always suited her Carriage, with the greatest Ease
and Cheerfulness, to the gravity of his Character and Sacred Function. Nay, she
has been often heard to speak of it, as one of the greatest Blessings of her
Life, that God in his wise and good Providence had so ordered it, that she
should be a Clergy-man's Wife. And this she did for that very reason, for which
too many are so forward now adays, to despise not only our Persons but our
Function: because it might be a check upon her, from that outward adorning, as
St. Peter calls it, of plaiting the hair, and wearing of gold, and putting on
of apparel, and might be a more particular engagement, to put on that Modesty,
and Gravity, and Sobriety, and Meekness, and Spiritual Ornaments, with which
the Apostle requires the Wives of such, who Minister in that Sacred Office,
should in a more particular manner Adorn themselves.

As to her Conversation among her Neighbors, they must, and I am persuaded
will do her that right, as to testify, that it was very Kind and Courteous
toward all, Compassionate and Tenderhearted toward them in their distress.
She was faithful in her Friendship, unwearied in her Diligence, and prudent in
her Conduct; her Speech was Savoury, and Behavior Graceful: she was an
Ornament and a Crown to her Husband, a Blessing to her Family, and whole
Neighborhood, and a Pattern to her Sex.

If we take a view of her in her last lingering, tedious, and oftentimes painful
Sickness, we have an illustrious example of the due Exercise of all those
Graces and Virtues which are peculiar and proper to such a Condion, an
invincible patience and fortitude of Mind, attended with a profound and entire
Resignation to the Will of God. She was never heard to complain or murmur: Was
easy in her self and to those about her, and thankful for the assistance they
gave her. Never expressed any great desire of Life. I once heard her say, with
great modesty and temper, she should have been glad, if it would have pleased
God, to have entrusted her with the Education of her dear and hopeful Children,
that she might have taken the same Pious Care of them, which her Relations and
Friends had done of her: however she was content, knowing they were safe in the
Hands of God, and committed them to his Good Providence, under the pious,
affectionate, and prudent Care of her dearest Husband, of which she was
entirely satisfied. When she had the quickest and most sensible Apprehensions
of Death, she said she was neither afraid, nor unwilling to Die, having nothing
upon her Mind to trouble her. How great an argument of Integrity and Innocence!
Guilt, if there be any, usually manifesting itself at such a time, in Persons
of Pious Principles and Education. But she could not charge her self. And it
pleased our Wise and Good God to reward her Innocence with a calm and
comfortable Death. It pleased him to release her out of the Troubles and
Miseries of this World, the last Lord's Day, with great hopes of keeping an
Everlasting Sabbath with Him in that Glory which he has prepared for all those
who Love Him in Sincerity and Truth.

And thus have I very imperfectly given you something of the Character, and
Conversation of that Excellent Person whose Remains are here before us. I have
not been sollicitious of any Method, or used any Art to deceive, and am
persuaded that nothing but mere Malice can accuse me of Insincerity or
Flattery: And the sum of all is this, That our Deceased Sister, was Blessed with
as many truly Noble and Great Accomplishments, and had as few defects and
imperfections as any of her Sex, and must be reckoned amongst the best and
brightest Patterns of a Refined and Exalted Virtue.

And now should not the Consideration of so Early and Exemplary a Piety and
true Goodness, which made her too good for this World, and qualified her for a
better: incline us to wipe our Eyes, at least not to Mourn immoderately at this
our Loss, which is her unspeakable Gain. If Natural Affection must, and will
have a vent, yet we must govern it by Reason and Religion: We must remember
what great and just Grounds we have to believe she died in the Lord, and is
Blessed in a rest from her Labors, and that the happy Fruits, Effects, and
Reward of her Works follow Her, and must comfort our selves with such
Considerations,

Above all, since in the established Method of the Divine Wisdom and Goodness,
there is an impossibility she should return to us again, let us strive so to
order our Conversation, that when our appointed time comes, we may go to her,
and all our Christian Friends, to the General Assembly of Saints, and Spirits
of just Men made perfect, without any future possibility of ever parting with
them again: and give me leave to say, that the best and kindest thing we can do
to the Memory of our departed Friends is to Copy after them, to Transcribe
their Piety and Goodness into our own Practice. To imitate their Virtues is
most Honorable to them, and Profitable to our selves: this shows a true Love
and Value for them, and will at length Transmit us to them again, where we
shall partake with them in their Blessedness. If amongst them there be (...),
any sense or knowledge of our Affairs, we can do nothing so Grateful, and
Delightful to them. By so doing we stand up in their Room, and supply their
Places, and present and future Generations will call Us, as well as Them
Blessed; and we shall enter into our Rest, as they have entr'd into theirs, and
be for ever with the Lord. Amen.

FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for, and Sold by Thomas Speed, at the Three Crowns near the
Royal Exchange in Cornhill.
THE Duties of the Closet, being an earnest Exhortation to private Devotion,
120. Price 1 s. 6 d.

A Sermon Preached before the King at White Hall Nov. 5th. 96. By Sir William
Dawes, Baronet, D. D. and Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty. Published by his
Majesty's special Command. The Second Edition Quarto, Price 6 d.

A Sermon Preached before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor and Aldermen at
Guild Hall Chapel, on Sunday, April the 11th. By Sir William Dawes, Baronet,
D. D. and Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty, Quarto. Price 6 d.

A Sermon at the Funeral of Mrs. Elizabeth Fisher, Sister to the Honorable Sir
William Dawes, Baronet, D. D. And Wife to the Reverend Dr. Peter Fisher,
Preached at Bennington in Hertfordshire. June 2d. School. By William Milner,
Vicar of Shiphall in Hertfordshire. Quarto. Price 6 d.

Of the Happiness of the Saints in Heaven: A Sermon Preached before the Queen
at White Hall, October the 12th. 90. By William Beveridge, D. D. Rector of St.
Peter's Cornhill. The Third Edition, Quarto. Price 6 d.

A Sermon at the Funeral of the Reverend Mr. Thomas Gray, Late Vicar of Dedham
in Essex; Preached in the Parish Church of Dedham, Feb. 2d. 92. With a short
Account of his Life, By Joseph Powel, M. A. Rector of St. Mary on the Wall in
Colchester, Quarto. Price Sixpence.

The Death of Good Josiah Lamented. A Sermon occasioned by the Death of our
late most Gracious Sovereign

(...)
