A Short DISSERTATION Concerning the four last Kings of Judah. Occasioned by a
small Tract, Entitled, Iosephi Scaligeri judicium de Thesi quadam
Chronologica. And more especially, By some passages in Lud. Cappellus's Notes
upon the Twelfth Table of his Chronologia Sacra.

Licensed, Aug. 12. 1689. I. F.

LONDON, Printed for Charles Brom, at the Gun, at the West End of St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1689.

A Short DISSERTATION Concerning the four last Kings of Judah.
JOseph Scaliger, amongst others, has observed some difficulties in the
History of the four last Kings of Judah, viz. Iehoahaz, Iehoiakim, Iehoiakin,
and Zedekiah. Particularly, he does this in a short Tract, Entitled, Iosephi
Scaligeri judicium de thesi quadam Chronologica, (which we have after his
Prolagomena to his Canones Isagogici) in which he desires, that some studious
person would undertake the solution of those difficulties. Many have since
endeavored it, particularly Lud. Cappellus, in his Notes upon the twelfth
Table of his Chronologia Sacra. There are sundry passages in those Notes
relating to the Kings beforementioned, which I could not but take more
especial notice of; but I shall examine only two of them.

1. He asserts that Iehoahaz was the younger Brother of Iehoiakim, though he
reigned before him. See Note 7th. 2. He suspects, that when they began to
Reign, Iehoahaz was but thirteen years old, and Iehoiakim only fifteen. So in
Note 8th.
The Learned Cappellus was (it seems) so secure of the truth of that assertion,
that Iehoahaz was the younger Brother, that he offers nothing at all in way of
confirmation of it. But others have attempted to prove it by the arguments
following; the validity of which we shall briefly examine.

Arg. 1. If Iehoahaz was not the younger Brother, why did they Anoint him, 2
Kings, 23.30. for the eldest Sons of their Kings were not Anointed?

Answ. 1. It is not true, that none but the younger Sons were Anointed; Iehoash
was not a younger Brother when he was Proclaimed King for all his brethren were
slain, at least, six years before, 2 Kings, 11.1, 2, 3.) and yet he was
Anointed, v. 12.

2. Suppose that they did not ordinarily Anoint the eldest, yet they did it in
the case of Iehoahaz, that by this Solemnity they might confirm him in the
Kingdom, in opposition to Pharaoh-nechoh, or any that he might obtrude upon
them. Or by Anointing him they declared, That the Kingdom being disturbed, by
the Arms of the Egyptian, they delivered it to Iehoahaz ( tanquam de integro)
as it was a new.

Arg. 2. Iehoahaz was the same with Shallum mentioned, 1 Chronicles. 3. Now Shallum
is there said to be the fourth Son of Josiah, and so he was, of necessity,
younger Brother to Iehoiakim, who was Iosiahs second Son (for 1 Chronicles. 3.15.
the Sons of Josiah are reckoned thus, The first born Iohanan, the second
Iehoiakim, the third Zedekiah, the fourth Shallum;) that Iehoahaz was Shallum,
there mentioned, they think to be manifest from Ier. 22.11.

Answ. That, which they say, is not manifest from Ier. 22.

1. It is not manifest that the Shallum, Jer. 22. was Iehoahaz.

2. If it was, yet it is not manifest that the Shallum, Jer. 22. was the same
with the Shallum mentioned, 1 Chronicles. 3. Some think that by Shallum, Jer. 22.
was meant Iehoiakim. Flamin. Nobilius tells us, that the 72, according to one
Edition, have (...) instead of (...). It is probable that (...) being found in
the Margin (some having set it there as an interpretation of (...)) crept from
thence into the Text. Others have interpreted the Shallum, Jer. 22. to be
Zedekiah, for the Kingdom of Judah had an end, or was overthrown, when he was
King. And so (say they) he was rightly named Shallum, which signifies a
consummation or finishing. Of this opinion was R. Solomon; yea, it seems, by R.
Kimchi, that this was the generally received opinion among the Jewish Doctors;
see them both in Ier. 22. Finally, Kimchi himself was of opinion that Shallum,
Jer. 22. was Iehoiakim. And I have not met with any Jewish Writer, that
interprets Shallum to be Iehoahaz, but Ab. Ezra. So that from all this, we may
conclude that it is not so manifest that Shallum, Jer. 22. was Iehoahaz, as
some bear us in hand.

But 2dly. Suppose it was manifest that Shallum, in Ier. 22. was Iehoahaz, yet
it is not manifest that that Shallum in Ier. 22. was the same with the Shallum
mentioned Chron. 3. and so it appears not that Iehoahaz was that Shallum;
especially, if the Hebrew Writers, ap. S. Hieron, say truly that Shallum was a
common name to all the Sons of Josiah. Yea, it seems impossible that Iehoahaz
should be that Shallum. That Shallum was the fourth and youngest Son of Josiah,
and consequently Iehoahaz (if he was that Shallum) was the younger Brother of
Zedekiah, Iosiahs third, as well as of Iehoiakim the second Son. Now it seems
impossible that Iehoahaz should be the younger Brother of Zedekiah, and must
seem so to every one that compares their ages when they began to reign.
Iehoahaz was twenty three years old when he began his reign, 2 Kings. 23.31.
when Zedekiah was only twenty one years of age, when he entered upon his, 2
Kings, 24.18. and that was above eleven years after the beginning of Iehoahaz's
reign; for Iehoiakims eleven years reign was between theirs. See 2 Kings,
23.36. Now is it possible, that he who was twenty three years old, should be
the younger Brother of one that was but twenty one years old above eleven years
after? Could Hamutal bring forth the elder Brother thirteen years after that
she was delivered of the younger? Scaliger acknowledges this to be a difficulty
which he could not assoil, but wishes others to do it for him ( Quaerent
studiosi, so he.) Let us see then how others have endeavored to solve it.

1. Some say that the Shallum, 1 Chronicles. 3. was indeed Iosiahs third Son, and
elder than Zedekiah. It is true, he is called the fourth, but (say they) that
is not in respect of age, but because of the shortness of his reign, his
unworthy demeanor in it. But this needs no confutation, Scaliger himself calls
it futilis solutio. 2. Others say that Zedekiah was made King while his Father
lived, and reigned together with him three years. And that when it is said that
he was twenty one years old when he began to reign, the meaning is, When he
began to reign with his Father three years before his death; at which time
Iehoahaz was only twenty years of age, and consequently younger than Zedekiah
by one year.
But 1. The sense of the Text, 2 Kings. 24.1. is plainly that Zedekiah was but
the age of twenty one years when he was made King by Nabuchadnezzar, Iehoiakim
being carried Captive to Babylon.

2. How appears it that Zedekiah ever reigned with his Father? It is a thing so
improbable in it self, that Josiah should pass by the other, and take his third
Son to reign with him, that it requires very good proof. And yet all the proof
that is offered is from Ier. 27.1, 2, 3. where we read, that in the beginning
of the reign of Iehoiakim, the Prophet was commanded to prepare Bonds and
Yokes, and to send them to certain Kings, by the hands of the Ambassadors that
came to Jerusalem to Zedekiah King of Judah. The neighboring Kings who had
understood that Zedekiah was made King three years before his Fathers Death,
did think that he reigned still after his Fathers decease, and so sent their
Ambassadors to him. Thus Ab. Ezra in Dan. 1. But this Interpretation is
manifestly very far fetched, and therefore much time needs not be spent in the
examination of it.. All the stress lies upon this, That Ambassadors were sent
unto Zedekiah as King of Judah, in the beginning of the reign of Iehoiakim,
which cannot be proved from that Text. Some have thought that when it is said,
In the beginning of the reign of Iehoiakim, V. ^. Iehoiakim, by the Scribes
negligence, has crept into the Text instead of Zedekiah. Or however that, by
Iehoiakim we are to understand Zedekiah, for they say that Iehoiakim was a
common name to all the Sons of Josiah. S. Hieron was of opinion, That that v.
1. belongs to the foregoing Chapter, viz. The twenty sixth, and in no wise to
that which follows in chap. 27. As he also observes, that it was not found in
the Copies of the 72, which they had then, as it is wanting in some Editions of
that Translation now. But I shall wave all this, and suppose that the contents
of the former part of chap. 27, were delivered to the Prophet in the beginning
of Ieboiakim's reign, yet it will not follow that Ambassadors were sent to
Zedekiah, as King of Judah, at that time. For 1. That might be given in charge
to the Prophet, in the time of Iehoiakim, which he was not to execute till the
reign of Zedekiah. He might receive a command in the time of the one, what he
should do and say in the reign of the other; see v. 12. of that chap. 27. 2.
Some have thought that the Prophet did then presently execute some part of that
which was given him in charge, i. e. He did put the Bonds and Yokes upon his
Neck, and did carry them (though not constantly, yet at certain times) during the
reigns of Iehoiakim and Iehoiakin, and to the fourth year of Zedekiah; even
fifteen years (says R. Solom. in Loc.) till Hananiah broke them from his Neck,
Ier. 28.10. I cannot dismiss this Interpretation without remarking that Kimchi
takes notice of it, and expressly alleges Ab. Ezra for it; and yet does not
assent to it, but gives a quite other exposition of Ier. 27.1, 2, 3. as well as
R. Solom. does.

3. Some think to Solve the aforesaid difficulty, by saying that the Zedekiah
who succeeded Iehoiakin, and was then only of the age of twenty one years, was
the Zedekiah mentioned in 1 Chronicles. 3.16. (where we read the Sons of Iehoiakim,
Ieconiah his Son, Zedekiah his Son) and not Zedekiah the Son of Josiah, spoken
of v. 15. That he were Zedekiah mentioned v. 16. they prove from 2 Chronicles.
36.10. where he is called the Brother of Iehoiakin. But to this the answer is
easy, it being known and acknowledged that the word Brother, in Holy Writ, is
taken very frequently in a larger sense, viz. for any Kinsman. Thus the
Zedekiah, who succeeded Iehoiakin, was his Brother, i. e. his near Kinsman, for
he was indeed his Uncle or Fathers Brother. We have sufficient warrant for this
Interpretation from 2 Kings, 24.17. where this Zedekiah is expressly called his
Fathers Brother; yea, the seventy two and Sir. (not to mention the Vulg.) read
not his Brother, but his Uncle or Fathers Brother, even in 2 Chronicles. 36.10.
Besides, if this Zedekiah was the Zedekiah mentioned 1 Chronicles. 3.16. and the
Brother of Iehoiakin (as these men pretend) they will acknowledge that he was
his younger Brother, and then (unless they will admit a vacancy or interregnum
of three or four years, betwixt Iehoiakin and Zedekiah) he could not be twenty
one years old when he began his reign; for Iehoiakin was but eighteen years old
when he began to reign, 2 Kings, 24.8. and reigned only three months and ten
days. Add hereto, that the Zedekiah which succeeded Iehoiakin was the Son of
Hamutal, 2 Kings, 24.17. that Hamutal undoubtedly, which was the Mother of
Iehoahaz, 2 Kings, 23.31. Finally, can words express more clearly what Zedekiah
it was that reigned after Iehoiakin or Coniah, than those do Ier. 37.1? And
King Zedekiah, the Son of Josiah, reigned instead of Coniah the Son of
Iehoiakim.

Arg. 3. Iehoahaz was only twenty three years old when he began his reign, 2
Kings, 23.31. and but three months after, we find Iehoiakim to have been twenty
five years old, 2 Kings, 23.31, 36. therefore Iehoiakim was elder than Iehoahaz.

Answ. It does not appear that Iehoiakim was so old three months after that
Iehoahaz began his reign. Iehoiakim was twenty five years old when he began to
reign, i. e. (say some) when he began to reign in his own right, which he could
not do until his Brother Iehoahaz was dead. But suppose we grant that those
words, When we began to reign, do refer to the time when he was first made King
by Pharaoh nechoh, there might be an interval of time between Nechohs removing
Iehoahaz, and substituting Iehoiakim in his place. When he had removed Iehoahaz
from the Kingdom, he either took him along with him from Jerusalem to Riblah,
or sent for him thither. Riblah, according to St. Hieron. in Ezekiel. 47. was
Antioch in Syria, and accordingly the Targ. Ionath. and Ierus. in Number. 34.11.
interpret Riblah to be Dophne; as also others tell us, that Antioch was built
out of the ruins of an ancient City called Riblah. Now Antioch was at a
considerable distance from Jerusalem, and a proportionable time must be allowed
for Iehoahaz's journey from Jerusalem thither, and the same time (if not more)
for Nechoch's march from thence to Judea, to order the affairs of the Country;
also some time for the settling those affairs (and how long he might stay at
Riblah after Iehoahaz's coming thither we know not.) All this may make it
reasonable to believe, that a considerable space of time did intervene between
Iehoahaz's removal from, and Iehoiakims entrance upon the Kingdom, which is
mentioned only after Iehoahaz's being bound in Riblah, and the settling the
Tribute in Judea: See 2 Kings, 23.33, 34. The Thesis of which, Scaliger gives
his judgment in the small Tract beforementioned, is this, That between the end
of Iehoahaz's reign, and the beginning of Iehoiakims, there intervened the
space of two years more or less. This position he endeavors to overthrow by
sundry arguments, but the answering them will not require much time or pains.
In the first, he only begs the thing in question, viz. That after that Iehoahaz
had continued three months in the Kingdom, Nechoh presently appointed Iehoiakim
to succeed. The third and fourth Arguments depends upon this, That there must
be a Septenary number of years between Hezekiahs fourteenth year, and the
destruction of the Temple; as also between Moses's death and the destruction of
it. To us therefore, who acknowledge no necessity of a Septenary number of
years, these arguments signify as little as the first. His second Argument
only remains, which is this: The fourth year of Iehoiakim was the twenty third
from the thirteenth of Josiah, Jer. 25.1, 3. from which, to the beginning of
the reign of Iehoahaz, were nineteen complete years; from thence, to the
beginning of the fourth year of Iehoiakim, complete three years; and so from
the thirteenth of Josiah, to the beginning of Iehoiakims fourth year, were
twenty two complete; therefore the twenty third year, Ier. 25. was only
current. But if an interregnum of two years had intervened, it had not been the
twenty third year but the twenty fifth: thus he. For answer, Scaliger tells us
not what ground he had to reckon complete nineteen years, from the thirteenth
of Josiah to the beginning of the reign of Iehoahaz. Josiah reigned 31 years;
substract 13 out of 31, and there remains 18. Reckon then 18 years to the
beginning of Iehoahaz's reign; two from the beginning of his to the beginning
of Iehoiakims, and then (as Scaliger himself computes) three years to the
beginning of Iehoiakims fourth year, and you have exactly the number of twenty
three years, according to Ier. 25. I only add, that though Scaliger would by no
means allow of any Interregnum between Iehoahaz and Iehoiakim, yet the learned
Cappellus was not so averse from admitting one: For he allots a whole year to
Iehoahaz, although the Scripture says that he reigned only three months, viz.
He conceived that there was a vacancy or interregnum of nine months.

Having thus examined the Arguments that are brought to support Cappellus's
assertion, I shall now propose one or two on the other side, to prove that
Iehoahaz was the elder Brother.

Arg. 1. If Iehoahaz was the same with Iohanan; then he was certainly the elder
Brother, for of Iohanan it is said expressly, 1 Chronicles. 3.15. that he was the
first born. Some say that he is called the first born, not in respect of birth
but of dignity, because he was thought most worthy to succeed his Father in the
Kingdom. But this needs no confutation; or, if it did, Tostatus in 1 Chronicles. 3.
has refuted it sufficiently. As to Iehoahaz's being the same with Iohanan, a
late writer says that all Commentators are agreed in it. But I must not say
that, partly because I have not consulted all Commentators as (it seems) that
Author has, partly because I have met with sundry Commentators that are of a
different opinion. Yet I could easily produce several very judicious
Expositors, both Christian and Jewish, that have thought Iehoahaz to be
Iohanan. But I shall rather choose to prove it by this plain argument, Iehoahaz
being the son of Josiah, must of necessity be either Iohanan or Shallum (this
Scaliger urges); but it has been proved above, that he could not be Shallum,
and so he must be Iohanan.

Arg. 2. He that succeeds his Father in the Kingdom, should by the Law of
Nations be the eldest son (this Scaliger grants) but Iehoahaz succeeded his
Father in the Kingdom.

Having thus considered the arguments on both sides, as diligently and
impartially as I can, I judge it most agreeable to the Scripture-history, to
say that Iehoahaz was the eldest son of Josiah, as being the same with Iohanan.
All the difficulty that this puts us upon, is, The admitting an Interregnum of
a year and nine months between the end of Iehoahaz's three months, and the
beginning of the reign of Iehoiakim; or of not so much, if Iehoahaz's twenty
three years, 2 Kings, 23.31. were complete, and Iehoiakims twenty fifth year,
v. 36. was only current. This seems to me not comparable to the insupportable
difficulties that attend the other opinion.

The second passage in the Learned Cappellus, which we shall examine (but more
briefly) is this: When Iehoahaz is said to to be twenty three years old, and
Iehoiakim twenty five, he suspects that thirteen should be read instead of
twenty three, and fifteen instead of twenty five. His reason is, because if
Iehoiakim had been twenty five years old when he began to reign, he must have
been born when his Father was but fifteen years of age, and conceived when he
was but fourteen; accordingly, if Iehoahaz had been twenty three years of age,
his Father must have been only of the age of sixteen when he was born. Now it
seemed to him very inconsistent with Iosiahs piety, to begin to beget Children
so soon.

Answ. 1. I cannot but judge it very agreeable to that good Kings Piety, to
make use of the proper remedy against means to subdue youthful Lusts. Some have
believed that Solomon was neither fifteen nor fourteen years of age when he
begat Rehoboam; whether they had firm grounds for their belief I shall not
dispute; see St. Hieron. epist. ad Vitale. 2. Cappellus in saying that Josiah
was but fourteen years old when he begat Iehoiakim, proceeds upon his former
mistake, that Iehoiakim was elder than Iehoahaz; but according to our
Hypothesis, Iehoiakim was not conceived till Iosiahs fifteenth year, or the
beginning of his sixteenth:

FINIS.

