THE STATE OF Church Affairs In this Island of Great BRITAIN Under the
Government of the ROMANS, AND BRITISH KINGS.

LONDON, Printed by NOT. THOMPSON for the Author, and are to be Sold by the
Booksellers of London, Anno MDCLXXXVII.

THE STATE OF CHURCH AFFAIRS IN THIS ISLAND UNDER THE Romans and British KINGS
Before the Coming of St. AUGUSTINE.
THe Britains, who were the first known Inhabitants of this Island, were led
blindfold by their blind Guides the Druides into the most pernicious Idolatry,
and by Them instructed in Rites and Ceremonies most horribly Impious and
Inhumane, so as this Island at that time might be truly esteemed the School and
Nursery of Devilish and Barbarous Mysteries, and the miserable Inhabitants no
other then Bondslaves and Captives to Satan, the common enemy of mankind.
Julius Caesar first discovered this our Island to the more Civilized World, and
made some little Entrance into it, for the Allconquering Romans to proceed by
Degrees in the more ample Conquest of it. It was indeed a Happy Conquest to
those wretched Britains, occasioning their Redemption from the Bondage of the
Devil, and bringing in so great Knowledge and illustrious Light amongst them,
that this our Island soon became the School of True Religion and Virtue, the
Nursery of Saints, and Refuge of Persecuted Christians. This Entrance of
Caesar's was before the Birth of our Blessed Savior, which happened not until
the 43d. year of Augustus, when Cunobelin is said to Reign, who is likewise
said to be the Son of Cassibelaun, whose Seat was Camolodunum, now Maldon in
Essex.

The Romans made little advantage of this beginning of Caesar's, until the time
of the Emperor Claudius, who by Aulus Plantius his General, Invaded this
Island with a great Army, and soon after in his own Person, and by his said
General prosecuted the War more vigorously; Insomuch, as not long after,
Caractacus, a Prince Renowned amongst the Britains, being perfidiously yet
betrayed by some of them, was with his Wife and Daughter sent Prisoners to
Rome, where his Noble and Generous Carriage was such, as procured wonder from
his Spectaters, and obtained Favor, Respect and Compassion from the Emperor:
By this time, through the dissension of the Britains, the Romans got good
footing in this Island, but met with a dismal check from Boadicea a British
Queen, whom they provoked by their Cruelty and Avarice; who yet was at last
crushed by the Invincible Power of the Romans.

What little glimmering of Learning or Knowledge the Britains in those days
had, dropped only from the Lips of their Druids and Bards, they were Priests and
Prophets to that be-wildred People; by Them they were taught what Deities to
Worship, and with what execrable Rites, they were to Worship them: Their
Principal Gods were Belinus, Baal or Bell; Diana or the Moon; Camulus or Mars;
Andate, or Adraste, whom Boadicea is Recorded to have invoked, when her last
Battle was shaken by the Roman Forces, with a number more of petty Dieties,
which the Land of Egypt, (the very Fountain of Theology) never thought of; and
yet Caractacus beforementioned, in gratitude for his release from Captivity,
and Restitution to his Throne, consecrated a new Altar to his Royal Benefactor
the Emperor of Rome, which he erected in Cama'odunum, with this Inscription,
The Altar of Eternal Domination, and might indeed have greater Obligations to
this his Mortal Deity, then to any of his Ancient (Falsely) called Gods, which
he and the rest of the Britains had so long Adored with Unmanly and Slavish
Superstition, as they were directed by their blind Priests and Druides; For,
they ordered both public and private Sacrifices, they dispensed Rewards and
Punishments, determined all Controversies; and who ever refused to obey their
Decrees, were forbidden to be present at the Sacrifices, and consequently were
avoided and abandoned, as most Impious and detestable persons.

Most of their Rites and Ceremonies were vain and foolish, such as they used in
gathering of Mistletoe from the Oak, to which they ascribed great Virtue, but
many of them Barbarous and Excerable; by which to Divine of future Events they
would make their Altars flow with Humane Blood, and consult their Cruel Gods by
searching into Entrails of Innocent Men; Insomuch as Claudius himself, (though
a Heathen,) thought fit by rigorous Edicts to Interdict this Execrable Religion
to his Romans, but could not weed it out of the Hearts of the Besotted
Britains. But what the Authority of the Roman Emperors could not effect, the
Power of Almighty God soon brought to pass, sending a new Caelestial Light to
dissipate that more than Egyptian Darkness, wherein this our Country had been
so long involved.

This our Island, (though divided from the rest of the World,) yet perceived
the bright Beams of the Sun of Righteousness to dawn in it, sooner then many
other Countries nearer approaching to that place where this ever Blessed Sun
arose. If we may believe our Ancient Gildas, This day Star sprung from on high,
visited us soon after the Assension of our Savior, toward the end of the Reign
of Tiberius Caesar; by which this Ancient Historian might mean, at least, that
about that time many zealous Apostolical persons were then in preparation for
their Journey into Britain, though perhaps it might be before they could arrive
hither; The Attestation of other Credible Writers to this of our Gildas, may
induce us to believe without any violence to our Reason, that the Zeal of some
Primitive Christians might very early carry them as far as this our Country, to
divulge the Blessed Tidings of Salvation, then forthwith to be Preached
indifferently to all Nations; and likely to be most welcome to them; Two great
advantages these forward Missioners had for their Entrance into this Island, to
which a way was opened bythe Roman Conquest.

1st. The coming of St. Peter at that time from Antioch to Rome.

2dly. The being of Caractacus with his Queen, Brethren and Family, and
consequently a multitude of Attendants then at Rome. The former is attested by
Eusebius and others, with the intent of St. Peter's coming thither, in pursuit
of Simon Magus, and to take his Apostolical Chair in the Metropolis and
principal City of the Roman Empire, from whence the Christian Doctrine might be
the more easily dispersed over the whole World. The latter is confirmed by
Learned Writers, and in particular that a Noble British Virgin, either
Attendant to Caractacus, (or as some say, his Daughter,) became a Disciple to
St. Peter, and by her Virtue and Christian Piety, proved a more Illustrious
Ornament to our Country, than Caractacus himself by his Heroic Magnanimity;
This Lady, it may seem, after Married Rufus a Noble Roman, and changed her
British Name into Claudia Ruffina after the Roman Dialect, and was the same
which Martial so highly Celebrates in a short Epithalamium upon her Marriage,
with one he calls Pudens, who by Tradition, is said to have Entertained St.
Peter in his House, which was after erected into a Church: True it is, St. Paul
in his 2d. Epistle to Timothy sent to him from Rome, (amongst other
Salutations,) joins Pudens and Claudia. And a late Learned Writer has
demonstrated out of Antiquity, that this our Claudia Ruffina sprang from the
Royal Blood of Britain, and was the Wife and Mother of Glorious Saints. And our
Ancient Histories report that Timotheus the Eldest Son of Pudens, came into
this our Island, and Converted many to the Faith, and at least disposed King
Lucius to his succeeding Conversion; And the reason of such his coming hither
might be, the Love and regard he had to his Mother a British Lady.

It is pretended that Pomponia Graecina the Wife of Plantius General of the
Army under Claudius in this Island, was a Christian and Devout Saint; but this
may be doubtful, though it be clear by Tacitus, that she was Accused of a
strange Religion forbidden by the Roman Laws, which might be the Christian
Religion, to the knowledge whereof she might attain by her Acquaintance with
Claudia Ruffina. But we have more unquestionable Records of one Mansuetus,
Companion of St. Clemens, which Mansuetus was a Northern Britain, who went to
Rome either with Adminius, a Prince of Britain, or Bericus a Nobleman thereof,
or as Attendant upon Caractacus, where the said Mansuetus might be Converted by
St. Peter, and be by him constituted Bishop of Toul in Lorrain, upon a Miracle
by him done, in restoring to Life and Health a Son of the Governor of that
City, whose said Son fell down from a high Tower; the effect of which Miracle
was the Conversion of the said Governor, his whole Family, and a great number
of his Citizens; Insomuch, as after the word had a free course, not only in
that City, but in the Country thereabouts, Priests were Ordained, and a Church
erected, and Consecrated to the Holy Trinity.

About this time, one Beatus of this Island, was converted to the Christian
Faith, and went to Rome for further instruction therein by S. Peter, and after
became the Apostle of the Helvetians, and died amongst them, illustrious for
his exemplary Piety, and great Miracles.

Thus early did it please God to enlighten this our native Country with his
Divine Truth, and to transform the Barbarous Inhabitants thereof into Apostles,
and Messengers of Salvation to other Countries also. And as it appears by
ancient Monuments, it pleased our good God to send his Prime Apostle S. Peter
into this Island, to establish and confirm what other Persons (though of great
Honor and Holiness) had begun, yet for want of the Episcopal Character could
not establish Order and Government in this new planted Church, as the Apostles
could, and did do.

Unquestionable ancient Authors have Recorded, that when the World was divided
by Lot amongst the Apostles; the West became the Portion of S. Peter, and that
from Rome he came to Britain, and made a long abode there, constituting
Churches, and ordaining Priests and Deacons; this Truth has been confirmed by
many Holy and Primitive Popes, by many of our British and Saxon Kings, by the
Vision of S. Peter to Edward the Confessor; Nay, our late King James the First
of ever Blessed Memory, did not doubt in a public Audience, to affirm, that
Rome was the Mother of all Churches. In what particular year this coming of S.
Peter was, is not easy to determine; whether upon the Emperor Claudius's
Edict to Banish all Jews from Rome, or in the beginning of Nero's Reign, is
doubtful; But that he was absent from Rome when S. Paul wrote his Epistle to
the Romans, is more than probable, since he omitted S. Peter out of his
Salutations. Certainly, a freer scope was allowed in this Island at that time
for Divine Verities, than in other places.

First, Because Nero's Persecution never extended hither.

Secondly, For that the power of the Romans here was a little limited by the
British Princes, who were at least civil to Christians.

Thirdly, The great distance betwixt Rome and this Island, as may appear by the
quiet and un-interupted solitude of Glastonbury, where was erected the first
School of Contemplation, and which continued the glorious Habitation of a World
of Saints, even to late years.

It may be found in a very ancient Author, who Writes of Church Affairs, in the
first Century, that he mentions the exaltation of the British Church under
Nero, adding that many Churches were built in this Island by S. Peter; and it
is agreed of on all hands, that the cruelty of Nero toward the Christians,
drove S. Paul out of Rome, even as far Westward as Britain, where, though he
was had in high Veneration, yet we never read that the Church here planted was
called the Seat of St. Paul, but often the Chair of St. Peter; Insomuch as
Gildas inveighing against some of the British Clergy in his time, tells them,
They usurped the Chair of St. Peter with impure feet; Thereby intimating that
the whole Ecclesiastical Order here, received their Original Priesthood by a
right Succession from St. Peter. Howbeit our English Martyrology deservedly
reckons St. Paul among the Apostles of Britain: And so was Aristobulus also,
one of the 70 Disciples, and a Follower of St. Paul, Ordained a Bishop here,
and here also died a Martyr in the second year of Nero, or at least a Confessor
in his very Old Age, after he had spent some time in Solitude at Glastonbury,
the common Retiring place of many Eminent Saints. It was certainly meant by St.
Paul in his Epistle to the Romans, when he Salutes the Household of Aristobulus,
omitting him, being then absent in this Country, or in his Journey toward it.

This progress had the Gospel in this Island before the Death of St. Peter or
St. Paul, and was mightily advanced by the coming of Joseph of Arimathea and
his Companions, about the end of Nero's Reign, making up the number of Twelve
Persons with himself, one of which Twelve is said to be his Son of his own
Name: The coming and Preaching of Joseph and his Companions has been publicly
alleged in several General Councels by the English Orators, as an Argument of
Precedence in those Councels, taken from the early approach of the Gospel to
this Nation; and further affirmed by other Ancient Records, and especially by
that Illustrious Charter of King Henry the II. to the Abbey of Glastonbury,
signifying his intention to Rebuild that Monastery, not long before Consumed by
Fire; and to renew all the Privileges conferred on it by his Predecessors King
William the I. and II. and by more Ancient Kings St. Edgar the Father of St.
Edward, King Edmond and his Father, Edward and his Grandfather Alfred, by King
Brithwald, Hentwyn, Baldred, Ina, the famous King Arthur, Cantred and many
other Christian Kings; and even by Kenwalla a Pagan King of Britain: And
further affirming, that he the said Henry the II. caused a diligent Inquisition
to be made of the said Charters and Privileges, which were presented and Read
in his Presence, all which he Confirmed and Renewed to the same Church,
anciently styled, The Mother and Tomb of Saints, because it had been Built by
the immediate Disciples of our Lord, and to him Dedicated, as Venerable
Antiquity does testify: All which considered, to deny so great a Blessing
conferred on our Nation, must savor of Passion and un-excusable Partiality.

The time and occasion of St. Joseph's Arrival here, and the particular Acts of
him and his Companions, after so many years of change and alteration, cannot
befully accountable: The time in all likelihood, was when Suetonius Paulinus
was Praetor here, and when Policletus Favorite to Nero came hither with his
Retinue; the occasion of his coming is less certain; Some write that St. Joseph
was sent hither by St. Philip the Apostle or Evangelist, grounding their
opinion from Procalphius who speaks little to that purpose: Tradition informs
us, that St. Joseph at his first coming Addressed himself to Arviragus, then
King of the Britains, and said to be the Founder of the University of Oxford,
by the help of an Augur or Prophet named Olenus Calenus, from whom it was first
called Calena: And although Arviragus did not submit to the Doctrine of St.
Joseph, yet he gave him leave to publish it in Peace; so well was he prepared
to the Entertainment of Divine Truth, by humane Education: Nay, he was also
pleased to afford Joseph and his Companions a place of Retreat, not only
commodious for their Devotions, but sufficient for their Sustenance; called by
the Britains the Glassey-Island, or Avallonia, in which certain Lands were
alloted, both by Arviragus and his Son Marius, containing about 12 Hydes for
the Nourishment of those Godly persons; being the first of ground in this
Island Dedicated to the Service of God, and after called Godney.

The first thing these new Inhabitants undertook, was to build and Consecrate a
Church for the Worship of God; which they Dedicated to the Honor of the most
Blessed Virgin Mary: And as is affirmed amongst other things relating to
Glastonbury Monastery, in an Epistle of St. Patrick, who died there, was
Consecrated Miraculously by our Blessed Lord himself, to the Honor of his
Mother: This wonderful Consecration is more fully declared by the Testimony of
the Illustrious Bishop of St. David, the Extirpator of Pelagianisme out of
Britain; as has been Collected out of the Antiquities of Glastonbury by
William of Malmsbury, to this effect following. That St. David with other
Bishops coming to Glastonbury, invited by the Sanctity of the place; resolved
to Consecrate the Church there, formerly erected to the Honor of the Mother of
God; and having provided all things necessary for that purpose, the night
before his intended Ceremony; our Blessed Lord appeared to St. David in his
sleep, and demanded the cause of his coming thither, which St. David forthwith
declared; whereupon our Lord taking him by the Hand, told him, That he himself
many years before had Dedicated the said Church to the Honor of his Mother,
and that That Holy Ceremony was not to be Profain'd by any man's repeating: And
having said this, with his Finger pierced through the Bishops Hand; telling him
this should be a sign, that what himself had formerly Anticipated, ought not
again to be Renewed; and withal promised him, that when the said Bishop the
next day at the Canon of the Mass should pronounce the words, Per ipsum, and
cum ipso, and in ipso^^, His Hand should be restored sound to him: The Bishop
awaking, found his Hand pierced; and others saw and touched the Wound with
great Admiration; and the Preparation for the Consecration was laid aside; and
during the Celebration of Mass, the Bishops Hand became Sound.

The sum of what has hitherto been here related, is repeated by St. Augustine
the Convertor of our Nation in an Epistle of his to St. Gregory the Great, and
by Copgrave in the Life of St. Joseph; and is further testified by an Ancient
Inscription cut in Brass, fastened to a Pillar in the same Church, declaring in
effect what has been said already: This Inscription is recorded by Sir Henry
Spelman in his Collection of Councels, and yet by him pretended to be Fabulous.

First, He doubts whether any Christian Churches were Erected so early. Which
doubt is certainly groundless, unless he mean such Magnificent Structures as
have been built since Christianity has been publicly cherished and
countenanced; but that even under the Harrows of Persecution the Christians
made shift to Erect or Assign places to meet in, and perform the Rites and
Duties of Religion, is Attested by all Ecclesiastical Histories.

Secondly, If Churches were Built, yet they were not Encompassed with ground
for Burial before St. Cuthbert 's time; Burial within Cities being forbidden by
the Roman Laws. Sure this is a false conceit, for King Ethelbert and his Bishop
St. Augustine before St. Cuthbert's days, were Buried in the Church of St.
Peter and St. Paul at Canterbury. Constantine the first Christian Emperor, was
buried amongst the Relics and Bones of the Apostles and Martyrs: And as for
the Roman Law forbidding Burials in Cities, it was antiquated long before this;
however Glastonbury was no City, scarce a Village, rather a Desert far from
Rome, and under the Dominion of British Princes, well-wishers to Christianity,
and the simplicity thereof in those days.

Thirdly, Dedication of Churches was not then in use: Doubtless many Ceremonies
and Solemnities have been added by the Church, but as certainly the Houses, or
Places which the most Primitive Christians assigned for the Worship of God,
were by some Ceremonies Dedicated to that use; as by erecting a Title, fixing a
Cross, etc. as the most ancient Records testify.

But lastly, That which most displeases Sir Hen. is the Dedication of this
Church to the Blessed Virgin, for he thinks such a kind of Devotion, was not
thought of until many Ages after; but then he must forget the Tradition of
Spain, attested in all their Liturgies, and many of their Councils, that from
the first entrance of Christianity into that Kingdom, several Churches have
been erected to the Honor of that Blessed Virgin; witness that most Famous
Temple at Saragosa, called Dell Pilar, Celebrated above 1000 years since, by
St. Maximus Bishop of that City, in several Hymns by him composed, in Honor of
that Venerable House, called Angelical, because the Pillar on which the Virgins
Statue was fixed, is thought to be brought thither by the Ministry of Angels.

After the Death of Arviragus, Marius his Son succeeds him in the British
Throne, resembling his Father, as in Courage, and other Prince-like Virtues; so
also in his kindness to these holy Strangers. This Marius is reported to have
had a great Victory over the Picts, who were doubtlesly no other than the
Northern Britains then unconquered, and consequently unciviliz'd by the Romans,
but who remaining in their Barbarous custom of painting their Bodies, got a new
name of Picts.

After the Death of this Marius, in the Reign of Coilus his Son, our St. Joseph
is said to end his Labors and Mortality, in the 82 of our Lord, and second
year of the Reign of the Emperor Titus. After the Death of Nero, Cruel to
himself, his own Mother, the poor Christians, and indeed to all Mankind, and
the barbarous extinguisher of those two most Glorious Lights then shining in
the World St. Peter and St. Paul; the Family of the Caesar's failing, four
Emperors were set up and pulled down within the space of two years, Vespasian
only excepted, who becoming Conqueror, at last settled the Empire and restored
Peace; The Romans in Britain were unconcerned in these Broils, and were well
affected to Vespasian, who by his Deputy Frontinus, placed a Legion in Caerleon.

St. Joseph after a Solitary Life led at Glastonbury, where he seems to
Institute a Monastical Profession with his said Companions, and such other Holy
Persons as his and their Labors had Converted to the Faith, Died their about
the said 82 year of our Lords Incarnation, and was Buried at Glastonbury, as
his Companions also were, in or near the Church Built by him; where since
innumerable Converts and Christians have been Interred: It is thought the Body
of this Renowned Saint was deposited in a Cave, over which a Chapel was after
Built to his Honor, as this Epitaph there found imports.

Ad Britones veni post quam Christum Sepelivi.
Dorni requievi.
His Relics not having been discovered, some Devout persons in the days of
Edward the III. obtained leave to search for them: The Patent for that purpose
is yet extant to this effect.

That a supplication having been made by John Blome of London, wherein he
affirms, that he had received a command from Heaven, diligently to seek till he
could find the Body of the Noble Councellor Joseph of Arimathaea, which reposes
in Christ within the limits of Glastonbury Monastery, and which for the Saints
Honor was to be discovered in those times. And for that it appeared by Ancient
Records that his Body was there buried: The said King, if so, desirous to
bestow due Honors to the Monument and Venerable Relics of him, who expressed
so great Piety and Charity to our dying Redeemer, that he took his Body from
the Cross, and placed it ina New Monument which he had built for himself, and
hoping that by the revealing of his Holy Relics greater Grace and Favor
should be showed by God to him and his Kingdom; did give and grant permission,
as much as in him lay, to the said John Blome to dig where he should find it
expedient within the precincts of the said Monastery, in order to the searching
out of the said precious Relics, according to the Injunction and Revelation
made unto him, provided he did it with the consent of the Abbot, and without
prejudice to the Monastery. What was found upon this search does not appear,
but the Piety and Devotion of the King may be easily collected.

The same Monuments which inform us of the Life, Death and Burial of St. Joseph
at Glastonbury, as an unquestionable Tradition in all Ages, agreed unto by
Britains, Saxons, Danes and Normans; do likewise testify, That he brought with
him into Britain two Silver Vessels filled with the Blood of our Savior
Christ, which were buried with him in his Tomb; Several Proofs hereof were
extant even to the days of Queen Elizabeth; amongst others the Narration of
William Good a Jesuit, who was born in the Reign of Henry the 8th. and bred up
in his Childhood at Glastonbury, and affirms, That in his time certain
Brass-plates were Engraven to perpetuate the memory of these things, as also
Chapels, Grots, Crosses, Arms, and the observation of the Festival of St.
Joseph on the sixth of the Calends of August, which remained as long as the
Monks enjoyed the Charters of their Munificent and Royal Benefactors, but are
now buried in the ruins of the place. He confesses, never any Monk knew the
certain place of this Saints Sepulcher: The common report was, it was extremely
deep under ground, somewhere in or about Hambdenhill; but when ever the Saints
Body shall be found, multitudes would resort to it, invited with the great and
innumerable Miracles which should be there wrought: He remembers, to have seen
upon a Stone-Cross, which was demolished in Queen Elizabeth's days, a Plate of
Brass, on which was written: That in the 30th. year after the Passion of our
Lord, Joseph of Arimathaea with 11 or 12 Companions came into Britain, and were
permitted by King Arvitagus to abide at Glaston then called Avallonia, like
Solitary men; and that he brought with him two small Silver Vessels of the
Sacred Blood and Water which flowed out of Christ's side after his death. And
that a Cross was there Erected many years before, to show the length of the
Chapel which St. Joseph built of wailed Rods of the most Holy Virgin, on the
outside of the Wall of which Chapel were Engraven in Ancient Characters JESUS
MARIA.

There were then other Remarks and Footsteps of these Truths to be there found:
Now that St. Joseph and Nicodemus also, with due veneration gathered the Blood
of our Lord, which for many Ages was Piously Worshipped by Devout Christians
both in the East and West, is testified by diverse Ancient Histories and
Martyrologies; and to this purpose it is remarkable what Matthew Paris has
related in the year of our Lord God 1247. Namely, That then the Master of the
Temple and Hospital of St. John of Jerusalem sent a certain portion of the
Blood of our Lord shed upon the Cross, in a most Beautiful Crystal Glass, by a
Brother of the Temple; which Present was confirmed by the then Patriarch of
Jerusalem, by Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, and other Prelates and Noblemen
then dwelling in the Holy Land: The said Historian further declaring at large,
With what Honor and Reverence this Holy Treasure was entertained by King Henry
the III. and his whole Clergy and Nobility.

And at the same time (to give satisfaction to doubting Minds,) Robert
Grosthead Bishop of Lincoln, the Glory of that Age for Piety and Learning,
affords us a large Narration of the Fact, to the effect following: That Joseph
of Arimathaea a Noble Counselor, and one of the Hearers of Jesus, or his
Disciple rather, out of tender compassion, was very sollicitous how his
venerable Body might be preserved from the rage of the Jews; Howbeit, both He
and Nicodemus and other rich men, though most cordial Lovers of Jesus, yet
concealed their Affection for fear of their Estates; Nevertheless when Jesus
was Crucified, Joseph went boldly to Pilate and begged the Body of Jesus, and by
Pilat 's permission (notwithstanding the murmuring of the Jews) with all due
Honor and Reverence took down the most Holy Body from the Cross, all mangled
and bloody, and with a fine Linnen-cloath Devoutly and carefully wiped the
Sacred Wounds as yet moist and distilling, and having drawn the Nails out of
the Wounds he wiped and cleans'd them at the Cross, and then carrying the Body
from Golgotha, he laid it in a new Tomb where never any body had been laid; and
which was decently cut out of a Rock, as provided and intended for Joseph
himself. But before our Saint would bury the Body, he washed it, for it was
covered with Blood. First, in regard of his late Bloody-Sweat. Secondly, by
reason of his Cruel Scourging. Thirdly, The pressing of a Crown of Thorns upon
his Head. Fourthly, The Nails in his Hands and Feet. Lastly, The Soldiers
Spear which did not only Wound, but open a wide passage into his side. Joseph
also washed this Sacred Body in order to the Embalming of it: He washed it
(says Grosthead) with an intention and Religions design to appropriate the
same Blood to his own devout use, as a most precious Treasure and Medicine for
his Soul: The Water tinctured with the Blood, he would not cast away, but kept
it in a clean Vessel; and the pure Blood distilling from the Wounds of his
Hands and Feet, he reserved with more Reverence; But above all, with more then
ordinary Devotion and Holy Fear he received into a most precious Vessel, the
Blood mixed with Water, which he carefully pressed out of his Right side; and
which he judged to issue from his Heart; This he esteemed a Treasure
invaluable, to be reserved for himself and his Successors: This was the
Discourse, and these the Sentiments of that Venerable Prelate, upon the
forementioned occasion.

It may seem strange, that Joseph accounting this Blood so inestimable a
Treasure, should yet ordain it to be put into the Grave with him, as it is said
he did; He may be thought to do it, least in such a time when Paganism
prevailed, the Holy Relick might be Profaned; and if Christianity ever came to
be uppermost, Devout Christians might know whither to resort for it; or perhaps
he might have the same design with the Emperor Constantine, who carefully
collected the Relics of the Apostles, and after they were richly adorned,
commanded they should be laid up in his Tomb; To the end (as Eusebius tells us)
that being dead, he might be made partaker of the Prayers, which there in
Honor of the Apostles should be offered unto God.

After the death of S. Joseph, S. Phagan succeeded in the Prefecture of this
Holy Place, and continued in it about 30 years, and under him and other his
Successors, who enjoyed the Possessions bestowed upon them by the British
Kings, a Monastical Conversation was upheld, until the Reign of King Lucius, at
which time the public Preaching of the Gospel, was not only permitted, but
encouraged: So as these Holy men in all likelihood were invited, and by Charity
compelled to leave God for God, to forsake their Solitude, and employ their
Devotion and Labors in Converting and Saving the Souls of others; by reason
whereof, it is reported, that this place became Desolate; Howbeit, not long
after, the memory of St. Joseph stirred up Devout Christians, to visit and
enlarge the Church here Dedicated to the Blessed Virgin, as the Fountain and
Original of Christian Religion in this Island.

A little before the death of St Joseph, Julius Agricola was sent Praetor into
Britain in the last year of Vespasian, and was entertained with Opposition in
Wales, which with extraordinary diligence he resisted, and made his Victory
complete at the Isle of Anglesey, from whence Paulinus had lately been
re-call'd by the Dreadful Rebellion of the forementioned unhappy Queen of the
Trinobantes Boadicea. Agricola after took care to govern the Province in Peace,
to restrain the Avarice of the Roman Soldiers, to defend the Natives from
injuries, and by his Courtesy and Civility invited them to delight in Peace.
Thereupon he encourag^d them to conform to the Roman Fashion of Life, by
building Houses, Temples, and Marketplaces: He caused their Children to be
instructed in Arts and good Literature, Applauding their Wits and Natural
Endowments, so as thereby the Roman Tongue became Familiar to the Britains, and
the Roman Eloquence in request amongst them.

In the third year of his Pretorship he Marched Northward, and wasted the
Country as far as Tweed, and the Summer following he extended his Conquests as
far as Bodotria, now Edinborough Frith, Eastward, and Glotta now the Frith of
Dunbritton Westward, and strengthened the narrow space between them with Forts
and Garrisons: So as the only Enemies remaining unconquered, were the
Caledonian Britains, at a Town thereabouts, now called Abercurven; an Ancient
Structure is at this day extant, all of square Stones, which the inhabitants
call Julius's Hoft, and fancy to have been built by Julius Caesar, but more
probably was raised by this Julius Agricola, as a Monument of his Conquests.

In the fifth year of his Expedition, he pierced into the Northwest Provinces
toward Ireland, as if he had an intent to pass over thither; and indeed he is
said to be invited over by a Petty Prince of that Island, who compelled by his
Rebellious Subjects thereunto, made some Addresses unto him.

The following year he spent in a March from Edinborough Northward, to sind out
the limits of the Country, the Romans as yet not knowing whether Britain were
an Island or not; in which march of his, he caused his Navy to keep pace with
his Land-Army, both for his Security and Supply, but to the great Terror of
the poor Britains, who to free themselves from this danger, attempted the ninth
Legion, separated from the rest of the common Army, yet were defeated, but
after under the Conduct of Galgacus, eminent both for Nobility and Courage,
resolved to put all to the hazard of a Battle; and assembling all their Forces
upon the mountain Grampus, after a Cruel and Bloody Fight, were entirely
Defeated; This Battle was Fought in the last year of Agricola's Government: For
in the beginning of the year following, which was the 5th. of Domitians Reign,
he returned to Rome; where (after some show of Honor,) he became the object of
that Tyrants Envy, and not long after the Sacrifice of his Cruelty.

After the departure of Agricola, it does not clearly appear who succeeded;
some say Cneus Trebellius, others Salustius Lucullus, whom Domitian put to
Death, because he framed new fashioned Lances, and called them after his own
Name; this is all is mentioned in the Roman Histories during the remainder of
Domitians Reign and his two Successors Nerva and Trajan; little more is written
concerning the state of Christianity in these times, here in Britain, save only
that the Church of Britain, in the year of Grace 100. sent a Legation to St.
Clement Bishop of Rome, desiring him to communicate unto them, the Order and
Rites of Celebrating Divine Service; and it is delivered by Tradition, that St.
Clement set down the Order of offering Sacrifice instituted by St. Peter, which
was after used, with some Addition throughout the whole Western Church.

In Trajan's time, Britain was divided only into two Provinces, called the
first and second, greater and less, or the upper and lower Britain; the former
contained the Southern part, as far as the River-Thames, first possessed by the
Romans, the latter the Western Provinces, as Cornwall, Wales, etc. Toward the
latter end of Trajan's Reign, some of the Britains attempted to shake off the
Roman yoke, but were neglected by the Emperor, engaged in other Affairs of
more concern; It is not certain which of the Britains made this attempt; Coelus
is then said to be King of the Britains, not perhaps the sole King, but most
considerable for Power and Wealth, to whom the rest yielded Honor and some
kind of Subjection, as some of the British Princes in former Ages are said to
have done to Cassibelan; and as after in the time of the Heptarchy, to him who
was styled Rex Anglorum: This King Coelus is described in History, to be a
Prince of a Benign and Peaceable Nature, and well affected to the Romans, as
having been trained and brought up amongst them from his tender years, and
consequently not likely to join in any Rebellion against them. Now though
Trajan had not leisure to reduce these Tumultuous Britains, yet his Successor
Adrian neglected them not, as may appear by several Coins, where on are
Imprinted the British Army, with three Roman Soldiers, importing the three
Legions in Britain, viz. the second called Augusta, the fourteenth called
Victrix, and the twentyth called Victrix and Britanica; And this it seems was
done to admonish the Britains that this new Emperor was mindful of their
Disorders, which about three years after he came himself in person to chastise;
Julius Severus was now Praetor under Adrian, but did little, as to the
suppressing the Tumults here, especially in the Southern parts, where Coelus
was King. Howbeit Adrian in his third year began his Progress for the
rectifying Disorders, composing Seditions, and restoring Discipline to his
Armies every where; He began with Germany, from thence took a view of France,
and the following year passed over into Britain, where his first Exploit was,
to separate such as Peaceably lived in subjection to the Roman Empire, from
such as refused to submit to its yoke.

Now whereas the Northern Britains since they were overthrown by Agricola, had
broken through the Fortifications he had made in the narrow Isthmus between the
Friths of Edenborough and Dunbritton; yet Adrian thought not fit to hazard his
Army, in repelling them within those former bounds, but contented himself to
raise a Wall or Rampire more Southerly, which he continued the space of 80
Miles between Solway-Frith on the West, and Tinmouth on the East side of the
Isle, it was made of Turf, and strengthened with Timber; and in after Ages was
called, The Picts Wall, when that Northern Nation became to be termed Picts, as
aforesaid.

The next year Adrian was called out of Britain, to compose Sedition raised in
Alexandria in Egypt: When Adrian was near thereabouts, the Jews and Gentiles
were loud in their Complaints against the Christians in Palestine, from whence
that Holy Religion sprang; the number of them was then great in that Country,
by reason of the continual resort of Believers to that Sacred place from every
quarter of the World, to celebrate the memory both of our Saviors Actions and
Passions there: Upon these Complaints, he renews the Persecution began by his
Predecessor, and imagining that he could destroy Christian Religion, by a
Malicious Defacing the Place where it began, he erected Idols of Devils in the
most Sacred place of our Lords Passion, Jupiter in Mount Calvary, Venus where
the Cross had been fixed, Adonis at Bethlehem, conceiving the memory of the
Christian Religion would be soon blotted out by the Worship of these Idols: And
indeed this Holy Place lay in this desolation, until Helena the Mother of
Constantine, thought it worth her Pains to search out the Cross, as is
hereafter more fully related.

The Learning, Patience and Constancy of the Christians, through the
intercession of Noble and Considerable Persons on their behalf, caused Adrian
at last to publish an Edict, that none should be punished for their Belief, if
free from other Crimes.

About the beginning of this Emperor's Reign, died our King Coelus, leaving
for his Successor his Son Lucius, a Child of Ten years old, resembling his
Father in Virtue, and consequently beloved of his Subjects; his Fathers
affection to the Romans, procured him a Roman Name derived from Light, the
Britains upon the same account called him Lever Maur, or a great Brightness,
for the Joy he brought to the whole Kingdom, especially to his Father, being
born to him in his Old Age, and 37th. year of his Reign; perhaps this Name
foreshew'd a greater Light of Divine Truth, which in this Princes time, and by
his care and procurement, was communicated to the whole Kingdom. This Blessing
arrived not all at once, he did not presently quit the Superstition of his Fore
fathers, though he continued his Father's Kindness to the Christians, his heart
was to be prepared and cultivated by little and little for the Heavenly Seed,
by many Dispensations of Providence hereafter occurring.

Gildas and Nennius mention a Message sent to the Britains by Pope Evaristus in
the latter end of Trajan's Reign, exhorting them to the embracing of the
Christian Faith; the advantage or occasion of this Message might be from
mitigating that persecution of the Christians; therefore that Holy Bishop might
lay hold of that opportunity to recommend a Religion, the Innocence whereof was
approved by its greatest Persecutors: Nay, a late German Author, affirms, that
our King Lucius obtained from Pope Alexander, the Successor of Evaristus, that
the Christian Faith should be Preached in this Isle; which no doubt the Pope
would easily grant, as may appear by the coming of S. Timotheus and S.
Marcellus with others into Britain about this time, of whom more hereafter:
Moreover, in the most Ancient Monuments of Burton-Abbey, we may find, That in
the year of our Lord 149. nine Doctors and Scholars were Baptized at Granta or
Cambridge; and it is confidently affirmed by Gildas, That the Christian Faith
did from the beginning, entirely remain in Britain, until Dioclesian 's time,
which was by him well observed, least any should think the Religion brought in
by the Apostles and their Disciples, had been utterly extinguished.

To Adrian succeeded Antoninus Pius, who sent Lollius Vrbicus to repel the
Incroaching Britains, who soon drove them back within their former bounds; yet
found work enough to compose the Differences and Dissentions which broke out
afresh in the formerly subdued Provinces, between the Brigantes and Ordovices;
these Tumults were of such danger and hazard, that the happy quieting them gave
the addition of Britanicus to Antoninus.

In the 19th. year of this Emperor, Pope Pius the first established by Decree
the observation of Easter, or the Feast of our Lords Resurrection upon a
Sunday, in opposition to such Judaizing Christians, who pretending a Tradition
from St. John the Evangelist, kept it precisely on the 14th. day of the first
Moon in March. Our Ancient Ecclesiastical Monuments make mention about this
time of one Marcellus, a Britain born, and a Zealous Preacher of the Faith in
Britain, of whom our English Martyrology testifies, That he gathered into a
Flock the remainder of those, who had been Converted by St. Joseph of
Arimathaea and his Companions, consirming them in the same Faith. This St.
Marcellus was afterward ordained Bishop of Tongres and Triers, these two
Cities being governed at that time by one Bishop: In the Annals of which Church
we read, That Lucius King of Britain was made a Christian, and Baptized by this
Marcellus a Teacher of the Inhabitants of Triers: Yet there are more Authentic
Testimonies demonstrating, That he was Baptized by Fugatius and Damianus sent
by Pope Eleutherius. This Holy Bishop Marcellus, was the first Britain who
suffered Martyrdom out of this Island, as St. Alban was the first who suffered
within it; his Sufferings were in a great Persecution raised by Marcus Aurelius
the Successor of Antoninus.

Together with Marcellus, there came from Rome another Illustrious Saint, of
Noble Birth and Plentiful Fortunes, which yet he relinquished, that with the
more freedom, he might Preach Christ Crucified: This Timotheus was the Son of
Pudens, a Roman Senator, and of his Wife supposed to be the famous Claudia the
British Lady forespoken of; He was also Brother of Novatus, as also of S.
Pudentiana and Praxedes, whose memories are Anniversarily celebrated by the
Catholic Church: His coming hither is a considerable proof that his Mother was
a Britain: It may be collected out of the Ecclesiastical Offices, that
Pudentiana a Virgin, with her Sister Praxedes the Daughters of Pudens,
practicing the Duties of Christian Religion, with admirable Piety, Sold her
Patrimony, and distributed to the Poor the Money thence arising; giving her
self wholly to Fasting and Prayer; by her Zeal and endeavors her whole Family
consisting of 96. persons was Converted to the Faith, and Baptized by Pope
Pius: And the public Sacrifices being forbidden by Antoninus, the Holy Pope
Celebrated the Divine Mysteries, with other Christians in the House of
Pudentiana, who afforded those Holy Persons all necessary Sustenance; and being
thus employed in such Offices of Piety, she died the 14th. of the Calends of
June, in the year of our Lord 161. and was buried in the Coemetery of
Priscilla, in the Salarian way.

Her Brother Novatus died the year following, concerning whose Death there is a
Letter yet extant (from Pastor a Holy Priest) from Rome, to Timotheus then
employed in his Apostolic Office in Britain, signifying unto him, That the
venerable Virgin Praxedes was in great affliction for the death of her Sister
Pudentiana; Pope Pius and many Honorable Christians came to comfort her, and
amongst the rest her Brother Novatus, who, about two months after he departed
from his Sister Praxedes fell sick, and was forthwith visited by the Holy Pope
and Praxedes, as also by other godly persons to his great Comfort. That Novatus
in the presence of those persons, declared his Will, and bequeathed all his
Estate to Timotheus and Praxedes, and shortly after departed in the Lord. And
by this Letter Pastor desired, To know of Timotheus how he would have the
Estate of his Brother Novatus disposed, to the end, that what the said
Timotheus directed might be observed therein.

To which Letter Timotheus is said to give this Pious Answer, Persum'd with
Christian Charity; wherein, after a Salutation, savouring of the Holy
simplicity of that Age, and desire to be recommended to the Memory and
Intercession of the Holy Apostles, the Prelate of the Apostolic See, and all
Saints, he signifies his desire, That what ever share was given to him by his
Brother Novatus, should be at the dispose of his Holy Sister Praxedes, and the
Holy Priest Pastor, to whom he returned his Answer: Which was after shown to
Pope Pius, who gave thanks to the Father Almighty; and after, at the request of
Praxedes Dedicated a Church in the Baths of Novatus at Rome in the
Bricklayers-street, where the Holy Pope also constituted a Roman Title, and
consecrated a Font for Baptism. Those Titles were for the most part signified
by Crosses, and were first in the nature of particular Parishes, by Pope
Evaristus assigned to the cure of particular Priests: The Bathes which are here
named from Novatus, have elsewere their denomination from Timotheus, and were
situated upon the mountain called Viminal: And in Truth the Christians
privately resorted to this place for the celebration of their Divine Mysteries
before any Church was Solemnly Consecrated there, as may be found in the Acts
of Justin the Philosopher, who calls it the Timothean Bath: The same year that
Novatus died, the Emperor Antoninus ended his Life, after him succeeded Marcus
Aurelius and Lucius Verus, jointly governing the Empire with equal Authority.

In the second year of these Emperors, died the Holy Virgin Praxedes, the
particulars of whose death are recorded by Pastor in this manner. Two years and
18 days after this Church was Dedicated, there was a great Persecution raised
against Christians, to enforce them to Worship Idols, and many were Crowned
with Martyrdom: Now the Holy Virgin Praxedes; fervent in the Holy Ghost,
secretly concealed many good Christians in the said Title or Church, whose
bodies she strengthened with Food, and their minds with Exhortations proceeding
from Gods spirit; Insomuch, as notice was given to Aurelius that Christian
Assemblies were made in her House; he then sent his Officers thither, who laid
hold on Symitrius a Priest and 22 persons more, all which the Cruel Emperor
commanded to be put to Death in the same Title, without any Examination; their
Bodies Praxedes took by night, and buried in the Coemetery of Priscilla; but
soon after afflicted for the suffering of the Saints, with many Groans she
Prayed that she might pass out of this Life; her Prayers found access unto our
Lord Jesus, for in the 44th. day after the Martyrdom of the forementioned
Saints, she went unto the Lord, and Pastor the Priest buried her Body in her
Fathers Coemetery of Priscilla upon the Salarian-way: This Persecution was
begun at the Instigation of Heathen Philosophers, especially of the beastly
Cynicks, particularly of Crescence, that infamous Wretch mentioned with
indignation by Justin Martyr.

Thus much is delivered concerning the Holy Children of Pudens the Roman
Senator, in the Acts of whom our Nation had an Interest, partly in regard their
Mother was a British Lady, and that Timotheus was their Brother, who exercised
his Apostolic Office in this Island, and no doubt had a great influence in
disposing the mind of King Lucius toward the Christian Faith; of Timotheus
little more is written, saving, that after the Death of his Sister Praxedes, he
returned to Rome, where he became a Prey to those Sensual Philosophers, and
ended his Life by Martyrdom with his worthy Companion Marcus, as appears by an
Epistle of Pope Pius; wherein, amongst other things he declares, S. Timotheus
and Marcus to have ended their Lives by a Happy Conflict; And he concludes his
Letter to the Bishop unto whom it was directed, thus, Take care dear Brother
that thou follow these Saints, in imitating their zeal, and freeing thy self
from the Chains of this World: Make have to obtain with the Holy Apostles the
everlasting Palm of Victory, that Palm which St. Paul attained by a world of
Sufferings, and St. Peter also, from whom the Cross it self could not take the
love of Christ; Soter and Eleutherius Salute thee, Salute the Brethren who live
with thee in our Lord: Cerinthus Satan's prime Minister, seduces many from the
Faith; may the Grace of Christ dwell for ever in thy heart. We may see by this
Epistle the Solicitude and Care of this Holy Pope for the Salvation of Souls,
not in Rome only, but elsewere; as also in another Epistle of his to Justus,
wherein he recommends, The Decent Interring of the Bodies of Martyrs, and a due
Veneration of their Relics.

In the 18th. year of Marcus Aurelius and L. Verus, the Northern Province of
the Ottadini, about Berwick broke out into Rebellion, for reducing of whom
Calphurnius Agricola was sent into this Island, upon whose approach the Rebels
quickly submitted: A little before this time Pius the first departed this Life,
about the year of our Lord 166. and was succeeded by St. Annicetus, and him
after 9 years succeeded St. Soter, who having for the space of five years
filled the Chair of St. Peter, had for his Successor St. Eleutherius, in the
year of our Lord 180. In whose third year our King Lucius, then an old man,
after he had reigned 58 years, by Gods Grace had his Youth renewed as an Eagle,
and was born again by Baptism, and made an Heir of an everlasting Kingdom. It
may seem strange perhaps he should hold out so long against the Power of Truth;
But if we consider the tenaciousness of Humane Nature to inveterate Customs, so
agreeable to Flesh and Blood, and the horrible Scandals and Prejudices then
cast upon Christian Religion, it can appear no less then Miraculous, that a
great King in his old Age should have the courage to submit his Crown and
Scepter to the Spiritual Scepter of Christ's Kingdom. The Motives which might
induce him hereunto, besides his long experience of the Innocence, Patience and
Peaceable Dispositions of his Christian Subjects. May be

First, The Powerful Preaching and Persuasion of many Apostolic Preachers,
such as were St. Aristobulus, St. Marcellus, St. Timotheus, etc.

Secondly, The Testimony of the Emperors themselves to the Christian Faith,
and the Professors of it; though otherwise Enemies to it.

Thirdly, The Testimony of God himself, in his miraculous rescue of the then
reigning Emperor from unavoidable Ruin, by the Prayers of his Christian
Soldiers.

As to the Testimony of the Emperors, not such as Nero, Vitellius and
Domitian, whose favor to Christians would have been disgraceful, but of
Princes Venerable in the World for Prudence and Courage, yet zealous for their
own Superstition, such as Nerva, Trajan, Hadrian, Antoninus Pius and Marcus
Aurelius; and what their Testimony of the Christians was, may be collected out
of the Edict of Antoninus, as follows.

The Emperor Caesar, Titus, Aelius Hadrianus, Antoninus Pius, Angustus highest
Priest, this 15th. time possessed of the Tribunitial Power, and this third time
Consul Father of his Country. To the People of Asia Health; I am assured that
the Gods will not permit those men to lie hid in obscurity, who refuse to pay
due Honor and Worship to them, for they themselves will far more severely
punish such, then you can. And you do not consider, that by Molesting and
Tormenting those men, whom you call Impious, and charge as Enemies to the Gods,
you do thereby the more confirm and increase their Religion; for to them it is
a thing more desirable to be accused as Criminal, to lay down their Lives for
their God, then to enjoy the present Life with worldly Contentment. Hence it is
that by exposing their Lives in this manner, they obtain over you a more
Glorious victory, then if they should perform whatever you require. Now as
concerning the Earthquakes, which both in late times, and at this present also
do happen; I judge very reasonable to give you some Admonition: Whenever such
Calamities befall you, ye are presently disheartened and in despair, you impute
it straight to their Religion, as if it alone were the cause of all misfortunes
happening to you: On the other side, whenever any such Accident befalls them,
they are thereby incited to a more constant and firm Trust in God: Whereas all
that while, you either loose all knowledge of God, and utterly despise all
Sacred Duties; not only refusing to pay the Worship and Service due to the
Deity, but grievously vexing, and to death pursuing those who do observe and
reverence him. Now several Magistrates and Governors of our Provinces, have
heretofore written Letters to our most Holy and Deify'd Father Hadrian, to whom
his Answer and Rescript was, That no further trouble should be given to those
men, except they should be otherwise guilty of any Crime, or had a design
prejudicial to the Roman Empire. Many also have written to me in their favor,
to whom my Answer was, That I assented to the Ordinance and Will of my late
Father; And my pleasure is, that if any shall hereafter offer any Injury or
Vexation to any Christian, as a Christian, the person so persecuted, though
found indeed to be a Christian, shall be presently Acquitted, and his Accuser
undergo just and due punishment.

This Edict, though directed particularly to Asia, yet had influence over the
whole Roman World; and what could more advantageously recommend the Christian
Religion, than what this Heathen Emperor here published of it; and certainly
the Testimony of such an Enemy, who was of so great Authority, could not but
impress mightily upon the Hearts of moderate Heathens, much more upon King
Lucius, who from his Parents inherited a Spirit of kindness and liberality
toward the Christians.

But as for the Powerful Testimonies, which Almighty God himself at this time
signally gave to all Mankind, by delivering not only the Roman Emperor, but
the Empire it self from inevitable Destruction, by the Prayers of his Christian
Servants. Let Dio a Roman Historian living in those times, and a bitter Enemy
to the Christians, proclaim in his own words. The Emperor Marcus (says he)
after many Battles fought, and dangers undergone in Germany, in subduing the
Marcomanni and Jaziges, was enforced to a new and sharp War against the Quadi,
from which ensued a Victory happy to the Romans beyond their hope, obtained
indeed by the miraculous favor of God; for the Romans in the midst of the
Battle, being brought in extreme danger, were saved after a wonderful manner,
and merely a special Divine assistance: They were narrowly enclosed on all
sides by the Quadi, yet in places commodious fought valiantly; but the
barbarous enemy craftily forbore to come to a general Engagement, hoping
without that hazard, to see the Romans destroyed before their faces with
extremity of Heat and Thirst, whom by their Multitudes they had shut so in,
that they could come by no Water. Now the Romans brought to these extreme
difficulties, and tormented with Wounds, Diseases, Thirst, and the burning Heat
of the Sun, could neither Fight, nor draw off from the place, nor expect any
remedy; when behold on a sudden there was a gathering together of many Clouds,
from which descended great showers of Rain, to the great comfort and
Refreshment of the Romans; who being thus encouraged by an unexpected
assistance from Heaven, set upon their Enemies, (astonished at such a Miracle,)
and forced them to flee; and seeing many of them in their flight killed with
Lightning and Thunderbolts from Heaven, so as it was notorious to all the
World, that this so great Deliverance and Victory was the work not of Men but
God only. Now though Dio was by clear conviction enforced to the Confession of
Divine Goodness, yet his malice and envy against the Christians provoked him to
attribute this clear Miracle to Magic, or some false God, rather than to the
true God of Christians: For he adds in the Conclusion of his Discourse, That
the report then was, that a certain Egyptian Magician, called Arnuphis, then
attending on the Emperor, did by Magical Arts invoke Mercury; especially that
Deity who rules in the Air, and other Demons, and by their assistance forcibly
procured those showers.

But Xiphilin the Abridger of Dio's History, evidently convinces this
Imposture, showing first, that this Emperor was never addicted to the
delusions of Magic, or affected to the Professors of such Arts; and afterward
declaring the true circumstances of the matter to this effect. Marcus (says
he) having in his Army one Legion, consisting of Soldiers which came from
Armenia, and were all Worshipers of Christ, the Prefect of the Pretorian Bands
came to him when he was in great fear, what would become of his Armies, and at
a loss what course to take; and told him, there was nothing so difficult, but
those who were called Christians could obtain from God; of which Profession,
there was then in the Army one entire Legion: Marcus thus informed, desired the
Christians to make Supplication to their God, in behalf of the Army; which as
soon as they had done, God immediately granted their Prayers, and with the same
Showers refreshed the Romans, and destroyed their Enemies: Marcus wonderfully
astonished with these Events, by a public Edict honored the Christians, and
called that Legion, the Thundering Legion; as by an Epistle of that Emperor
extant at this day may appear; and by the Apologies also of Apollinaris, St.
Gregory Nissen, and Tertullian, etc. is made also manifest.

The forementioned Epistle follows in these words. The Emperor Caesar, Marcus
Aurelius, Augustus, etc. High Priest, in the 28th. year of our Tribunitial
Power, and our third Consulship, Father of our Country, Pro-Consul to the
Senate and People of Rome, sends Health; I have given you Information touching
the greatness of our present Design and Resolution, and all the Occurences
which successively happened to me in Germany, both in our Combats and Sieges.
Truly when I was at Cornutum, our Scouts informed us, that there approached
within the space of nine Miles, no fewer then 74 Ensigns of our Enemies; and
the same thing did Pompeianus our General declare to us, which our selves
likewise saw. Now having in our Army only four Legions, the First, the Tenth,
the Twin Legion, and that of the Ferentarii; and there being in our Enemies
Camp no sewer then 977000. when I compared our small Forces with the vast
multitudes of our Barbarous Foes, I addressed my Prayers and Vows to our Roman
Gods; But when I saw that was neglected by them, and that the Enemy began to
over-charge us; I sent to call the Christians, which were not a few in our
Army, whom both by Prayers and Threats also I urged to assist us, but Threats
were neither needful, nor indeed seemly, as I perceived afterward, when I
found how Powerful they were: For they undertaking our Defense, did not take
care to provide themselves Weapons, or to make use of Arms or Trumpets; for to
put their trust in such things, is not acceptable to that God, whose Name,
Cause and Honor they always carry in their Hearts. Therefore it is just, that
we should acknowledge those to be safely protected by God, whom formerly we
esteemed to be Impious, and Enemies to him. For having cast themselves
Prostrate to the ground, they offered their Prayers, not only for Me, but for
the whole Army, that some remedy might be sent us, to assuage the Hunger and
Thirst with which we were tormented: For by the space of five days, we had
Drank no Water, there being none left amongst us, nor means to procure any, we
being closed round about with Mountains in the very heart of Germany: Now as
soon as these Christians had cast themselves on the ground, and Addressed their
Prayers to that God, of whom I was ignorant, immediately there fell from Heaven
abundance of Rain, which to us was Cool and Refreshing; but to the Enemies, was
accompanied with Hail in the likeness of Fire, and with Thunderbolts: Thus
that God who cannot be overcome, or resisted, was in a wonderful manner
Propitious to their Prayers and Supplications. For this reason, let us freely
permit such as these to be what they Profess, Christians, least we force them
by their Prayers to obtain such Weapons against us from Heaven: My Judgment
and Sentence therefore is, that none be questioned, or called into Judgment
upon the Charge that he is a Christian; So that if any one be found to lay this
as a Crime against any one, that he is a Christian, let it be made known to the
person so accused, that he is to be presently dismissed and acquitted, in case
no other Crime be objected against him; and let Him who accused such Christian,
be Burnt Alive: Whosoever therefore professes himself a Christian, is hereby
freed from any danger in that regard threatened against him: Neither let the
Magistrate who governs the Province, endeavor to make him renounce his
Profession, or any ways abridge his Liberty. And my Sentence moreover is, That
this Edict be further Established by Decree of the Senate, and publicly
exposed in the Common place of Trajan, that any one may Read it; let Vetrusius
Pollio likewise Prefect of the City, take order that this Constitution be sent
into all Provinces; neither let any one be prohibited to take a Copy, or make
use of it, Farewell.

The Emperor not content with so much advange to Celebrate the wonderful Power
and Goodness of the true God by Edicts and Writings published to the whole
World, proceeded to a yet more Illustrious Expression of his gratitude: And
because Edicts were only in force for the present age, He, to Eternize the
memory of so great a Deliverance, raised up, in a spacious place at Rome, a
vast Pillar, on which was engraved the whole History, to be read in all future
times.

Certainly such a Confession of the Debility of the Roman Deities, and the
Omnipotence of the True God Worshipped only by the Christians, made by the most
Wise, Learned and Virtuous Emperor of the Romans, must needs have a strange
influence on the minds of many men throughout the whole Empire, to incline them
to conform themselves to his Judgment, though his Practice were otherwise, for
Worldly respects; and indeed it produced a number of Christians, not only out
of the Vulgar Rank, but of Honorable and Noted Persons; Insomuch, as
Tertullian (a Christian Writer of the next Age,) declares to the Romans, That
though they counted Christians as Externs, yet (says he) we fill all your
places, your Cities, Isles, Castles, Free-Towns, Camps, Tribes, Corporations,
Palaces, Senates, etc. No wonder then if our British King Lucius prepared as
aforesaid, and informed by Trebellius and Pertinax, principal Officers sent
into Britain, not only of the said Miraculous Deliverance, but what numbers of
the Roman Nobility and Senators had thereupon given up their Names to Christ:
No wonder if Lucius thus convinced in Judgment, and not detered by the Roman
Civil Power, at last submitted his neck to the same easy yoke.

As for our Bale's conceit that Trebellius and Pertinax were both Christians,
and wrought upon Lucius; there is no ground in History for it: And as to the
manner and order of this Kings Conversion, it might have been more clearly
published to the World, had not the Ancient History of Elevanus, who lived in
the time of Pope Eleutherius, been lost; Nevertheless, what may be gleaned out
of Primitive Records, as Relics of Ancient Tradition, shall not be omitted,
especially if approved by modern Authors: Amongst the rest thus writes Bale,
Lucius (as he conjectures) was scandalized at the meanness and poverty of
Christ, as the Jews were: For though Christian Religion had for the space of
more than 100. years been propagated in Britain, yet it seemed to be deprived
of its due splendor, because hitherto Administered by simple, poor and
contemptible persons, and wanted the Authority of the Empire to support it.
Therefore as soon as the said King was informed by the Emperor's Lieutenants,
that upon the ceasing of Persecution, many Illustrious Romans had embraced the
Christian Faith, he then began to entertain a more worthy conceit of it; and
now seriously comparing this Holy Faith, with what he had learned from his
Druids, the Simplicity and Sanctity of the one, with the foul and barbarous
Superstitions of the other, and considering the inestimable Promises of Eternal
Glory and Happiness, proposed and assured in and by the Gospel, to any share
whereof his own Priests never pretended the least claim, he grew weary of his
former Errors, and was willing to be further instructed in those Verities,
with a few Beams whereof he had been formerly Enlightened.

And therefore though there wanted not such as had skill enough to satisfy
this King, in the Truth of Christian Religion, especially Elvanus before
mentioned, and Medwinus among the Belgae; yet the prudent King (by their
advice, no doubt,) thought himself obliged to implore a greater Authority, for
the Establishing a new Church, and settling the common Affairs of Religion
amongst his Subjects. However, though in his neighboring Kingdom of Gaul,
many renowned and learned Bishops were then living, especially St. Iraeneus
Bishop of Lions; yet to none of these had Lucius particular recourse, but sent
two Messengers through that Nation, directing them to St. Eleutherius, a worthy
Successor of St. Peter in the Apostolic Chair, which He, with the whole
Christian World took to be the Fountain of all Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction:
This he might well learn from St. Iraeneus against Heresies; who declares, That
every Church, and all Christians wherever dspers'd, should have recourse to
the Roman Church, by reason of its more Powersul Principality. Tertullian also,
then an Eminent Priest, would have given the same advice, for thus he bespeaks
his Readers, Who ever thou art, (says he) who would better employ thy
Curiosity in the business of thy Salvation, take a view of the Principal
Churches founded by the Apostles. If Italy be nearest to thee, thou may
repair to Rome, from whence our Authority in Africa is likewise derived; a
Church it is happy in its constitution: To which the chief Apostles, together
with their Blood, shed forth the whole Doctrine of Christianity. And as for St.
Iraeneus, he gives a Catalogue of all the Bishops of Rome, to the time of
Eleatherius, with whom he was Contemporary; and with his Catalogue, this
Assertion. By making known the Faith of that chiefest and most Ancient Church
of Rome, renowned throughout the whole World, founded and constituted by the
most glorious Apostles St. Peter and St. Paul, and by an un-interrupted
Succession of Bishops derived to our times, we confound all those who any way
either by an unlawful self-love, vain glory, blindness, or perversity of
Opinion, make separated congregations professing other Doctrine.

Therefore to Elutherius Pastor of this Church, King Lucius addressed himself
to obtain Laws and Ordinances necessary for the constitution of a well ordered
Church in this Kingdom; what his Message was, our Bishop Usher has declared
out of an Ancient Book belonging to the Monastery of Abingdon, namely, That
King Lucius having heard the Fame of the Sanctity of Preachers at that time in
Rome, sent his Messengers with public Letters in great Expedition, most
devoutly and earnestly beseeching the venerable Pope Eleutherius, that by his
Order and Will he might be made a Christian. It is true, the Bishop will by no
means attribute this to the Primacy of the Roman Bishop, but to the Commerce
and strict Alliance between the Conquered Britains and that Imperial City;
contrary to the plain Judgments of Irenaeus and Tertullian beforementioned,
and the Traditionary practice of all Ages. In the Protestant Author of the
British Antiquities, we may find who were this Kings Messengers, namely Elvanus
and Medwinus beforementioned, and what their Message was more particularly,
viz. To request the Roman Bishop, that he would be pleased to direct his
Legates, with order to Baptize him, being already endued with Christian
Doctrine, and that they might bring the Roman Laws with them, according to
which he might Order and Establish both the Ecclesiastical and Civil State of
his Kingdom. The Pious Bishop Eleutherius, much more zealous to propagate the
Divine Doctrine, than to Illustrate his own Fame, signified to the King his
inexpressible joy for the gaining of so great a King to the Obedience of
Christ, but for the Civil ordering of his Kingdom, thought his interessing
himself therein, would be to little purpose; for those Laws were not necessary
for the constitution of a Christian Commonwealth, and that by them many things
were established, which ought not to be observed by those who profess the
Christian Faith, etc.

Saint Bede mentioning these requests of the King to Pope Eleutherius, adds
presently, That he obtained the effect of his Pious Petition, as to so much
thereof as concerned his further instruction in Christian Religion; As may
appear by the Pope's Answer, preserved to this day by Matthew of Westminster,
as follows; Your request to Us is, that we would transmit to you a Copy of
the Roman and Imperial Laws, which it seems you desire to make use of in your
Kingdom of Britain: But you must be informed, that the Roman Laws, and such as
are Enacted by the Emperor, are not of such obligation, but they may be at any
time rejected, which the Law of God in no Case must be. Now by the Divine Mercy
you have of late submitted your self in your Kingdom of Britain, to the Law and
Faith of Christ, so that you have already with you both the Old and New
Testament, out of Them therefore, by Gods Inspiration, and with the common
Council of your Kingdom collect and frame a Law, and by it (through the Divine
assistance) govern your Kingdom of Britain. You are Gods Deputy in your
Kingdom, according as the Kingly Prophet says, The Earth is our Lords and the
fullness of it, the round World and all that dwell in it: And again, the same
Kingly Prophet says, Thou have loved Righteousness, and hated Iniquity,
Therefore thy God has Anointed thee with the Oil of Gladness above thy
Fellows; And again, Give thy Judgments to the King, and thy Justice, etc. He
says, thy Judgment, not the Judgment and Justice of Caesar, for the
Christian Nations and People of your Kingdom, who live under your peaceable
Protection, are the Children of God, under his care, who according to the
Gospel, Protect them as a Hen, gathering her Chickens under her Wings, etc. The
Nations therefore of your Kingdom are your People, which being hitherto
divided, you ought to gather into one unanimous Congregation to the Obedience
of the Faith and Law of Christ, constituting of them one Church, which you must
Cherish, Maintain, Protect and Govern, that so you may Reign with Christ for
ever, whose Deputy you are in the said Kingdom.

Some modern Writers add, indeed some other passages incoherent and impertinent
to it, most likely to be Fictitious, as perhaps the whole Epistle may be
thought to be, did not the credit of Matthew of Mestminster somewhat support
it: Be the Objections against it, or the Additions to it what they will, sure
it is the Conversion of St. Lucius does not much depend upon it. Doubtless,
this, or some such like Answer was brought back by Elvanus and Medwinus, and
with them came two other Holy men, Commissioned by Eleutherius, not only to
Instruct and Baptize the King, and those who by his imitation embraced the
Christian Faith, but to order and establish all Ecclesiastical Affairs in the
Kingdom; the Names of those two Commissioners were Fugatius and Damianus,
accounted well qualified for their Mission, and of the degree of Bishops or
Preiates, that they might be able to Consecrate Churches, Erect Bishoprics,
Dispense Orders, and the like.

Concerning Elvanus and Medwinus good Authors write, that the first was
Consecrated Bishop at Rome, and the other Preacher or Doctor of the Christian
Faith; Though there be others, who upon little or no ground, suppose them only
Cathecumens when they went thither, and consequently incapable of such
Preferment: Whereas it is very probable that they were eminent Preachers of the
Christian Faith to King Lucius and others; and as appears by Ancient Monuments,
they were Disciples of Joseph of Arimathaea, bred up at Glastonbury, full of
Zeal to Gods Glory according to knowledge, and accustomed to a Contemplative
Life in Prayer and Mortification.

Fugatius and Damianus admitted to the Presence of King Lucius, and acquainting
him from whom they were sent, and upon what Errand; forthwith the King, and his
whole Family, with many others, received Baptism, according to the Rites and
Ceremonies of the Roman Church: The name of the Queen to King Lucius is not
recorded, but his Sister Baptized with him, in Ancient Records, is Named
Emerita, of whose Holiness and Constancy in Martyrdom, more is to be said
hereafter: As for the particular form this King was Baptized in, it was
certainly done according to the Roman Church, conformable no doubt to the
Ordinances of the Apostles, as St. Justin Martyr, Irenaeus and Tertullian,
living all in or about that Age, do confidently Affirm, Now, though to the
Essence of Baptism, nothing is more required than due matter, which is Water, a
due form of Words, and a right intention of him who confers it: Yet even in
these Primitive times, other Sacred and Ceremonious Rites were subjoined, the
more effectually to apply and imprint the force and virtue of that Sacrament in
the minds of the Receivers, as is most evident from Tradition, and the Writings
of those times; and this by the prescription even of the Apostles themselves
and their immediate Successors; But if not so, who can deny the Authority of
the Church, as to the creating such Ceremonies as may make the Celebration of
the Holy Sacraments more Solemn and August, especially considering what our
Lord has pronounced concerning his Church, He that hears (or obeys) you,
hears me. Of these Additional Rites, the principal are these.

First. The Arming the Baptized person with the Sign of the Cross.

Secondly. The Anointing his Head with Holy Oil and Chrism.

Thirdly. The Blessing of the Water designed for Baptism.

Fourthly, The using of Exorcisms and Holy Prayers, to drive away the Enemy of
Mankind.

All these Rites were practiced in the Primitive times, as may be proved by a
cloud of Faithful Witnesses in several Ages, by constant Tradition, as St.
Basil fully demonstrates. After the administration of Baptism to the King,
those Holy men Fugatius and Damianus together with Elvanus and Medwinus wholly
employed themselves in Preaching the Gospel of Christ, through all the
Provinces of the Kingdom; in disputing against the Superstition of the Druids,
and demonstrating the vanity of their Idols, and the abominableness of their
Horrible Sacrifices: And being attended with the Kings Authority and Zeal, they
broke in pieces those Idols, and easily persuaded the Britains to renounce
their Ancient Superstitions: So that in a short space, the Christian Faith and
Worship of the only true God, came generally to be had in Honor and
Admiration. Matthew of Westminster adds, That these Blessed Teachers having in
a great measure defaced Idolatry through all Britain, they Dedicated to the
Honor of one God and his Saints, those Temples which had been founded to the
Worship of many false Gods, filling them with Assemblies of Lawful Pastors.
Saying further, That in diverse Cities of the Kingdom they constituted, or at
least designed 28 Bishops, subject to three Archbishops, or Metropolitan Sees,
the prime whereof was London, to which Cornwall and all the Provinces on the
South of Severn and Wales were actually subjected, or designed so to be. The
Second was York, to which was laid Deira and Albania divided from Loegria, or
the former part by the River Humber. The third, the City of Legions, which had
Dominion over Cambria or Wales, severed from Loegria by the River Severn. This
City was called Caerleon, and situate upon the River Osca or Vsk, as by the
ruins there may appear: At the first indeed Bishops did not confine themselves
to one place, but exercised their Pastoral Duties from one place to another, as
they had occasion; but after their Flocks incrcasing, each Bishop was limited
to his peculiar Flock, and seated themselves in the eminent Cities, then in
number about 28. and consequently so many Bishops were ordained.

We find in the Ancient Book belonging to the Monastery of Abingdon, to this
effect, That Eleutherius sent his Missioners Faganus and Divianus, Learned and
Holy men to King Lucius, who Baptized the King, and his People embraceing the
Christian Faith, destroyed Idols, and built Churches, and decreed that in those
Cities, where formerly resided Arch-flamens, according to the Pagan
Superstition, there Archbishops should be established, and where ordinary
Flamens were, there Bishops should succeed, the chief Cities then were London,
York and Caerleon, which became the Seats of three Archbishops. Possibly the
Title of Flamens and Arch-flamens was given to these Druid Priests by the
Romans, who might be distinguished amongst themselves by some other Name.

The Names of these 28 Cities have been collected out of History. I. Cair
Gumeguir, which perhaps is Norwich, by the Britains called Cair Guntius, or
perhaps rather Winwick in Lancashire, some say Winchester. II. Mincip or
Municip, which is Verulam near St. Albans. III. Cair Lualid Luguballia, now
Caerleil. IV. Mediolanum at this day Meivod in Montgomery-shire. V. Cair Colon
or Colonia, now Colchester. VI. Cair Ebranc, now York. VII. Cair Custeint near
Carnarvan, by Antonine called Seguntium, and Cair Custeint, because Constantius
the Father of Constantine was there buried, and his Body there found in the
time of Edward the First after the Conquest, and by him Honorably Interred.
VIII. Cair Caratauc, or Caradoc in the borders of Shropshire, between the
Rivers Teindus and Colunus, where Caractacus was Defeated by Ostorius. IX. Cair
Grant, now Cambridge upon the River Grant. X. Maucguid, Mancunium in Lancashire
as some think, Manduessedum or Manchester in Warwickshire as others. XI. Cair
Londein, or Cair Lud, now London. XII. Cair Guorthigirn in Radnorshire, where
King Vortigern hid himself from Divine Justice, but could not escape it, but
was Burnt by Lightning in and with that City. XIII. Cair Ceint now Canterbury,
formerly Dorbernia. XIV. Cair Guorangon Branonium, now Worcester. XV. Cair
Peris or Portcester, now Portsmouth. XVI. Cair Daun or Danus, now Doncaster in
Yorkshire. XVII. Cair Legio of the 20th. Legion there quartered, now Chester.
XVIII. Cair Guaricon, or Guarvinc of Guarth, a Garrison in the British Tongue,
now Warwick. XIX. Cair Segesut, or the City of the Segontiaci, the first People
of this Island, who yielded to Caesar, since called Silchester in Hampshire.
XX. Cair Leon, from the second Legion, or Vsk, from the River; it was seated in
Monmouthshire, and is now ruined. XXI. Cair Guent, or Venta Belgarum now
Winchester. XXII. Cair Brito, now called Bristol. XXIII. Cair Lerion, by the
Saxons Legecestria, now Leicester. XXIV. Cair Draiton, which Bishop Usher
thinks to be that which is now called Draiton in Shropshire. XXV. Cair
Pentavelcoit seated upon the River Ivel in Somersetshire, now Ilchester; yet
the said Learned Bishop thinks it should be written Pensavelcoit, supposing it
to be Pentsey in Sussex, where William the Conqueror first landed. XXVI. Cair
Vervac, or Vriconium, now Wroxcester in Shropshire. XXVII. Calemion, or Calion,
which Cambden takes to be Comelet in Somersetshire, where Roman Coins are
frequently found, and where are the footsteps of a Camp. XXVIII. Cair Luitcoit,
or Lindcoit, or Lindum, now Lincoln: These were the 28 Cities, perhaps not all
extant in the days of King Lucius, at least under those Names, which were
designed then for the Seats of Archbishops and Bishops; though perhaps some
other might be designed for that purpose: And it may be the Name of
Archbishops was not then used, yet the jurisdiction was alike, under the Name
of Metropolitans, from the Metropolis, or most Eminent Cities. How many of
these Cities were supplied with Bishops, is not certain, Records only mention,
besides Elvanus Consecrated at Rome, Theanus only, a Britain and first
Metropolitan Bishop of London, where our Devout King Lucius built a Church in
Cornhill, Consecrated to St. Peter, the Truth whereof is manifested by an
Inscription on an Ancient Table not long since hanging in the said Church, to
this effect following, In the year of our Lord 179. Lucius the first Christian
King of this Land, founded the first Church at London, namely the Church of St.
Peter in Cornhill: He established there an Arch-Episcopal See, it was the prime
Church of the Kingdom, and so continued for 400. years until the coming of St.
Augustine the Apostle of England: Some make Theanus Founder of this Church,
assisted therein by Ciranus the Kings Cup Bearer: How long Theanus governed in
this See, is uncertain, however he was succeeded by St. Elvanus, though
Malmsburiensis makes it doubtful in what place the Arch-Episcopal jurisdiction
was fixed, during the time of the Britains.

Fugatius and Damianus after their three years successful Labors in this new
Vineyard of our Lord, (as Historians witness,) returned to Rome, to give an
account to St. Eleutherius, how affairs stood in Britain. As to this, Matthew
of Westminster expresses himself most fully, affirming, That in the year of
Grace 186. the Blessed Prelates, Fugatius and Damianus returned to Rome, and
obtained from the Holy Pope Eleutherius, a confirmation of all they had done in
Britain, and then came back again, accompanied with many others: By whose
Instructions the British Nation being confirmed in the Faith of Christ, became
Illustrious; the Names and Acts of these Holy men may be found in the History
of our Gildas, concerning the Victory of Aurelius Ambrosius.

It was the practice of Christian Churches to have frequent recourse to the
Chair of St. Peter, and about this very time the Church of Lions in France,
sent Irenaeus to St. Eleutherius for the resolving of questions about
Ecclesiastical Affairs, as St. Jerome witnesses; and of the same Errand, before
this time, went St. Beatus to Rome, as is beforementioned. This has been
frequently done in a due Subordination to the Supreme Tribunal of the Church,
and for the preservation of Unity, the Center whereof the Chair of St. Peter
was ever accounted.

When Fugatius and Damianus came back into Britain, they presented the King
with a Crown Blessed by that Holy Pope, with many Divine Admonitions, more
acceptable than the Crown, relating to the Government of his Civil State, and
his Defense of Holy Church: It is said the Pope also prescribed the limits of
his Kingdom so far Northerly, that some conjecture, that from thence it is,
that so many of those Northern Provinces became subject to the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction of the Metropolitan Church of York.

Other Churches were afterward built; as first at Westminster in the place of
an Idol Temple consecrated to Apollo, which in the Reign of Antoninus Pius was
by an Earthquake cast to the ground; This Church from the days of King Lucius,
was designed for a Burying place of our Kings, as at this day, and after it was
Re-edify'd by St. Edward the Confessor. A second Metropolitan Church was about
this time erected in the City of York, esteemed in that Age the prime City and
Church of Britain. The third Metropolitan Church was then also built at Landaff
or Caerleon upon Vsk, in which City, (now ruined,) were three Noble Churches;
one bearing the Title of the Holy Martyr Julius, Beautified with a Monastery of
Virgins Consecrated to God. A second founded by the Name of his Companion St.
Aaron; And a third famous for being the Metropolitan See of all Cambria;
although Dubritius is mentioned in History to be the first Archbishop of the
Welsh Britains; concerning the Church of Landaff, and the Superiority of it,
something may be gathered out of the Protestation of Vrbanus before Calixtus
the second, in the Council of Rhemes. However, sure it is, that after the
coming of St. Augustine the Monk, the Bishop of Landaff has always been
subject to the Sea of Canterbury.

This King Lucius built another Church also at Dover, in Honor of our Blessed
Savior and his Glorious Mother, and some other Churches elsewhere: As this
King showed himself Munificent in Building of Churches, so also was he Liberal
in his Endowments and Privileges bestowed upon them, by transferring the
Possessions of Idol-Temples to Christian Churches, and further Enriching them
with more Lands and greater Immunities; so that some Malefactors might have
refuge within their Precincts, which benefit of Sanctuary has been continued
and increased by most succeeding Princes; neither were the Revenues belonging
to Pagan Temples inconsiderable, for that Religion was very costly; for it is
certain, that the Pagan Flamens in London Sacrificed yearly 40000. Cows,
100000. Sheep, innumerable sorts of all Fowl, besides 30000. Savage Beasts, as
Staggs, and other Beasts of the Forest. Besides all this, King Lucius in the
6th. year after his Conversion, Founded a Church and Monastery at Winchester,
which he plentifully Endowed; it is said to be a Church of vast Dimensions, and
Adorned with an Episcopal Palace, the Possessions of it extended 12. Miles
round about the City: This Church was Dedicated to the Honor of our Savior by
Fugatius and Damianus, and Devotus a Monk by them Constituted the first Abbot;
from this time, until the time of Dioclesian, the Monks here quietly served
God; after the Rule and Order prescribed by St. Mark the Evangelist, and first
Bishop of Alexandria, which Rule is thus described by Cassianus, saying, These
Monks did not content themselves to retain the order of living, practiced by
the Primitive Christians, whereof we read in the Acts of the Apostles, That
they had all things in common, accounted nothing their own, sold their
Possessions and laid the price at the Apostles feet, to be divided amongst such
as had need: But these Monks aspired to practices more sublime, for retiring
them to the most secret places, they led a Life of unparalled Abstinence and
Austerity, in Reading of Holy Scripture day and night, in fervent Prayer, and
continual Labor of their Hands, without regard of Food or Sustenance, save
only that every second or third day they would receive some slender Sustenance
for necessity, not for the satisfaction of their Apetite, and not then until
after Sunset: The Light they spent in Labor or Holy Exercises, Darkness
sufficed for the care of their Bodies. Under the Persecution of Dioclesian,
this Holy Fraternity was dissipated, but not long after again restored, and
their Church Consecrated by Constantius Bishop of Winchester, in the year of
Grace 309. taking a new Name from St. Amphibolus, who with St. Alban was
Crowned with Martyrdom; and by this Name Gildas calls it in his relation of the
Sons of Mordred, Murdered by Constantine in this place. It suffered a second
Eclipse, when the Infidel Saxons laid waste all Holy places in this Island;
Howbeit no sooner did the Saxons embrace the Faith of Christ, but they repaired
this Church and Monastery, after called de Hida, and restored it to greater
Splendour and Magnificence then it had before; in which Splendour and Beauty it
continued fortified by Charters of Kings and Bulls of Popes, until all
Religious Houses were swallowed up by the sury and Avarice of Henry the VIII.
So as St. Edward the Confessor in his Charter to the Monastery of Westminster
proved a Prophet, who declared, The same Charter should continue in force, so
long as the love of Christianity should remain in this Nation.

Our Devout and Wise King Lucius, did not only endow Churches and Monasteries
for the present Worship of God, but provided Seminaries of Learning and Piety,
for the future increase thereof; the most Famous of which was the School and
Monastery of Bangor in North Wales: It is said to be the first College of
Christian Philosophers, but is in some Authors mistaken, for another of that
Name in Vlster, from whence proceeded the famous Bishop St. Malachias, whose
Life is elegantly written by St. Bernard. However this famous Monastery, it
seems, prosper'd so well for a long time, that at the coming of St. Augustine
into England, more than 2000. Monks were found in it. This King was not only
careful to plant and settle the Christian Faith within his own Kingdom, but as
many Ancient and Credible Records testify, personally sowed the Seeds of
Christianity in Germany and other Foreign parts, and as some say there ended
his days, as his Virgin Sister and Martyr also did.

Fugatius or Phaganus and Damianus being informed of St. Joseph and his
Companion's retirement to Glastonbury, and their deaths there, visited the
place, which they found reduced to little better then a Covert of Wild-Beasts,
so little encouragement or countenance had the Christian Faith received; yet by
Divine conduct, they discovered an Ancient Church built by St. Joseph and his
Companions, and Consecrated as aforesaid, by God himself, they also found the
Holy-Cross, with several Writings and other Tokens, declaring the place to have
been formerly an Habitation of Christians, and receptable of those prime
Disciples. They therefore added another Oratory built of Stone, Dedicated to
the Honor of St. Peter and St. Paul, and on the Top of the Tor or Mountain,
raised a Chapel to the Honor of St. Michael the Archangel; And lastly to
continue the Service of God which had been interrupted, they established a
succession of 12 Devout persons in memory of St. Joseph, and the first 12.
which Succession continued till the coming of St. Patrick (the Apostle of
Ireland) unto this place. These two Holy men made this place their Retirement
for the space of nine years, and there died, and were buried, as is believed,
about the year of our Lord 199. After the Death of Lucius, which happened in
the 7th. year of Severus, none of the British Race were permitted to reign, but
Legates from the Emperor, commanding the Roman Army. In the time of Commodus,
little more of moment is mentioned concerning the British Affairs, save that in
his time Vlpius Marcellus drove back the Caledonian Britains, who had made
Irruptions into the Roman Territories in Britain.

The Conversion of Britain was so famous in the Church of God, that Origin
takes notice of it; and the Faith of Christ spread it self even unto the
Northern parts of this Island within two years after the Death of Lucius,
insomuch as Tertullian, who lived about these times, cries out, That those
Provinces of Britain, into which the Roman Armies were not able to pierce, yet
willingly submitted to the Faith of our Blessed Savior.

Donaldus then King of those Northern quarters, rejected the Worship of Devils,
embraced the Faith of Christ, and obtained of Pope Victor the 15th. after St.
Peter, several Learned and Illustrious men to be sent into those Northern parts
to Baptize himself, his Wife and Family, with many of his Nobility: Fulgentius
a Kinsman of Lucius, was certainly the first who instilled the love of
Christian Verities into the mind of Donaldus, and advised him to send to Victor
for more perfect Instructions: By the conduct and Courage of this Fulgentius,
Donaldus obtained a great Victory over the Romans: Severus himself was sain to
engage his own Presence and Authority, to repair this loss by a formidable
Army; this great exploit of the Emperor obtained him and his Sons the Title of
Britanicus: Fulgentius not long after ended his Life at York, then the Imperial
City. Severus after this Victory built a new Wall, with frequent Towers, and a
vast deep Trench, and then retired with his Army to York, but by the way was
met and daunted with an Ethiopian Soldier, Cole-black and Crowned with
Cypress, who told him, He had been all, and overcame all, and bid him, now be a
God: This was an ill Omen, which, with others of like sort, are said to presage
his Death, and indeed it followed soon after, in that City where he was with
exquisite Ceremonies made a God, but his Ashes with Costly Odours were gathered
into a precious Box, and with great veneration carried to Rome.

It is observed that these Caledonian Britains, used no Garments, but marked
their Bodies with Pictures and Figures of Beasts, as their chief bravery, and
from thence no doubt came to be called Picts, or a Painted People.

In the fourth year of Antoninus Bassianus died Donaldus, who Coined Silver and
Gold, marking it on the one side with the Figure of the Saving-Cross, on the
other side with his own Face, thereby to propagate the memory of the Christian
Faith, first embraced by him, among all the Kings of that Nation; he was buried
in a field with Christian Ceremonies and Solemnities, the same field having
been Consecrated with accustomed Prayers for the Burial of Christians. By this
the present Inhabitants of Scotland may discern the difference between the
Christianity of this their first Christened King, and that which they have
lately chosen instead of it: He would not rest after Death, but in a place
Consecrated by the Devotions of Holy Priests, who celebrated his Obsequies
according to the Primitive Christian Usage, by making Oblations for him, and
offering the most Holy Sacrifice for the Refreshment of his Soul, as St.
Cyprian who lived not long after, describes the manner or Ancient Christian
Burial, and justly charge Bishop Martialis, With Burying the Children of this
Donaldus in the profane Sepulchers of the Heathen. Among other Ceremonies of
Christian Burials, this was one, That a Cross was erected upon their Monuments.

Young Amphibalus born at Caerleon upon Vsk, was from his tender years bred up
in good Literature; and about this time instructed in the Christian Religion,
afterward he traveled to Rome, where he spent his time, principally in
Reading and Understanding Holy Scriptures, and the Doctrine of Christian
Religion, till the beginning of the Cruel Persecution raised by Dioclesian:
This young man was ordained a Priest at Rome, and sent back by the Pope into
Britain, and there became (as some say, Bishop of the Isle of Man.

In the year of Grace 221. Pope Zephyrin died, and was succeeded by Calistus,
in whose time, one Cadorus is said to be Bishop of London. The Emperor
Alexander Severus, a Virtuous Prince, no Enemy to Christianity, which some
conceive to have been professed by his Mother Mammaea, was in the 14th. year of
his reign slain by the Treason of Julius Maximinus, who succeeded in his place:
When Maximinus began his reign, Christian Religion flourished, not only in the
Southern parts of Britain, but among the Caledonians also, where reigned
Chrathilintus a Christian Prince, Successor of Donaldus, he was instructed by
Amphibalus; returning about this time from Rome, (as some say.) At this time
St. Pontianus Bishop of Rome governed the Church of God. Now the Tyrant
Maximinus raising the sixth Persecution, sharpened it especially against
Bishops and Teachers of the Christian Faith; by his command St. Pontianus
suffered Martyrdom, being beaten to death with Clubs: To him succeeded St.
Antherus a Grecian born, who the year following was likewise put to Death by
the same Tyrant Maximinus, who was slain in his fourth year, and the Holy Pope
Fabianus sat in the Chair of St. Peter; and about this time, while Gordianus
the younger reigned, the Christian Church enjoyed great Tranquillity, in which
calm the Bishops propagated the Faith, many Churches and Altars were erected,
and no doubt in this Island; also Obinus Bishop of London, and Conanus his
Successor, were careful to imitate the Zeal of other Bishops: Nonnius Philippus
being Governor of Britain about this time, Gordianus being in his 6th. year
was slain by the Treason of Julius Philippus, who succeeded him; Julius himself
was also slain by his own Guards: Howbeit, before his death, by the Grace of
God, he washed away his Sins by Baptisin and Penance; he was persuaded to
embrace Christianity by St. Pontianus, a man of high Dignity; yet because
Philip was known to be guilty of many Crimes, he was not presently permitted to
enter the Church, until he had modestly condeseended to place himself among the
Penitent, and confessed his sins with Reverent fear, and Pious affection.

Now though after the death of Lucius, no Britain generally was allowed the
Name of King, yet several Princes of the British Blood exercised a Kingly
jurisdiction, amongst the rest Coelus had that Title over the Trinobantes,
Iceni and others, and was the Father of Helena, the Mother of Constantine the
Great. She is said to be born in Colchester, the prime City of that Province,
which in memory of the Holy Cross found by her, bears in its Arms, A Cross
between four Crowns.

Decius after the death of the two Philips, extended his rage to the Religion
by them Professed; in whose time many Glorious Martyrs, amongst the rest St.
Fabianus Bishop of Rome, who sealed the firmness of their Religion with their
Blood, although some redeemed themselves from Sacrificing to Idols, obtained
Libels, falsely declaring they had Sacrificed, and from those Libels were
called Libellatici Lapsi, and Apostates, as they well deserved. When afterward
St. Cornelius possessed St. Peter's Chair, the Novatian Heresy arose, Novatus
an African was the Author of it, who coming to Rome, linked himself with
Novatianus, swelling with envy against the Election of St. Cornelius: They
excluded the Libellatici and other Criminals from all hope of Pardon, though
they submitted themselves to due Penance. Gildas calls this Novatus, A black
Swine, who trod under-foot our Lords Pearl. St. Augustine concerning the
followers of Novatus, bids us, Beware of those, who deny the Church of God
Power to forgive all sins, and will not understand how in St. Peter God has
established a Rock, and given the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven to his Church.
These are they which boast themselves to be Cathari, more pure than the
Doctrine of Christ requires.

Decius being betrayed and slain, was succeeded by Gallus and Volusianus, and
by their Cruelty St. Lucius who succeeded St. Cornelius in the Roman See, was
Crowned with Martyrdom; these Emperors were soon slain by their own Soldiers,
and were succeeded by Valerianus and his Son Gallienus: In the beginning of
whose reign, Stephanus the Successor of St. Lucius in the Apostolic See,
instructed, Baptized and Ordained St. Mallo or Melanius, a glorious Ornament of
our British Nation: He was sent out of Britain to Rome to pay the Emperor
Tribute, where, hearing the Doctrine of the Holy Pope Stephen, he renounced
Paganism, and became a Christian, and after Bishop of Rouen in France. With St.
Mallo were Baptized many others by this Pope: After he had Catechized them, and
appointed a Fast, and examined their Faith: It is observable by how Stupendous
a Miracle St. Mallo came to be designed Bishop of Rouen; whilst on a certain
day St. Stephen the Pope was celebrating Mass, both He and St. Mallo saw an
Angel standing at the right side of the Altar, when Mass was finished, the
Angel having a Crosier or Pastoral Staff in his hands, gave it to St. Mallo,
saying, Receive this Staff, with which thoushalt govern the Inhabitants of the
City of Rouen; and though the Labors of a course of life yet unexperienced by
thee, may prove burdensome, fear not yet to undertake it, for our Lord Jesus
Christ will protect thee under the shadow of his wings: St. Mallo in his
journey toward Rouen at Auxerre in Gaul, having in his hand the Staff given
him by the Angel, by his fervent Prayer restored to Health a man whose foot was
cut in two pieces by an Axe: No sooner was St. Mallo arrived at Rouen, but he
began to Preach the Name of Christ to the Inhabitants, with such efficacy of
Speech, and Power of Miracles, enforced by the Sanctity of his Life, that in
short time he brought the whole City to the obedience of Christ. This great
change is said to be wrought, especially at a time when most of the People were
Assembled to perform an abominable Sacrifice to one of their false Deities; for
St. Mallo coming amongst them, enflamed with a Heavenly Zeal, reproved their
Stupidity, in Worshipping a Senseless Stock for a God: He calls upon the Name of
Christ, makes the triumphant sign of the Cross, immediately down tumbles the
Idol in the sight of them all, so that with the word of his mouth alone, he
broke it in pieces, and by this means a great multitude thus astonished,
received his instruction, embraced the Doctrine of Faith, and were Purified by
the Water of Baptism.

In the same place from whence this Saint thus expelled the Devil, he built a
Church in Honor of the Holy Trinity, where the People Assembled every Sunday,
and were instructed in the perfect Worship of God, where the unbloody Sacrifice
was offered, and the means of attaining Salvation were Communicated: He also
built there other Churches for the like Holy purposes; and having begotten many
thousand Souls to Christ in the year of Grace 280. ended his Life and Labors,
and departed to his Eternal rest.

Valerian at first seeming to favor the Christians, raises afterward the
8th. Persecution against them, wherein the Holy Pope S. Stephen was Crowned
with Martyrdom; him succeeded St. Sixtus, the second of that Name, who in the
same year tasted of the same Cup; and in Sixtus's place sat St. Dionysius.
Valerian soon after was taken Prisoner by Sapores King of Persia, where he
lived many years in Slavery, and died in great misery; his Son Gallienus
succeeding him in the Empire, and yet never going about to redeem him; perhaps
he wanted Power; for in his short reign, no fewer than 30 Tyrants assumed the
Title of Emperor in several Provinces of the Roman World, after he had reigned
about five years Luxuriously and Slothfully, he was slain by the Treachery of
Claudius his next Successor, with his Brother and Children.

This Claudius was highly esteemed of the Romans for his Courage, Wisdom and
moral Virtues; yet was he a Persecutor of Christians. After his death his
Brother Quintillus for some few days made a bustle as Emperor, but was soon
slain by his Soldiers: Howbeit this misfortune of that Flavian Family, was in
some sort recompensed, in that Crispus another Brother of Claudius, had a
Daughter called Claudia, Mother to Constantius Chlorus, who established the
Empire in his Family for many Generations.

Of all the late Usurpers of the Roman Empire, there remained only two when
Aurelianus came to be Emperor, Zenobia in the East Queen of Palmyrene, and
Tetricus in the West; Aurelianus began with Zenobia, a Lady of Masculine
Courage, yet with much difficulty he subdued her, and led her in Triumph to
Rome, where she and her Offspring lived in a private, but Splended Estate.
Then marched the Emperor against Tetricus, with whom also conspired the
British Army, yet he afterward surrendered himself to the Emperor, and was
not only permitted to live, but entrusted with Government. In this Expedition,
Aurelianus was accompanied with Constantius Chlorus, who here laid the
foundation of bringing the Empire into his own Family; for by his Courage and
Conduct in relieving Ausburg, and deseating the Germans who Besieged it, he
gained such favor from the Emperor, that he was trusted with an Army into
Britain, then unquiet and disaffected; yet did Constantius so well prosper
there, that he Married the British Lady St. Helenae, and laid the grounds of
strange Revolutions, not only in his own Family, but in the Church of God; For
now it was that the Glorious Emperor Constantine the Great was born, and
Educated by his Holy Mother, at least in the love of Christianity, if not in
the Profession of it; so as in a few years, the Catholic Church was by him,
not only freed from Persecution, but made to triumph over Pagan Idolatry, and
the Kingdom of Hell.

Paulus Samosatenus having broached a most execrable Heresy, by which he
denied the Divinity of the Son of God, was in a Synod of Eastern Bishops
reduced from his Error; But upon his relapse was Excommunicated and Deposed
from his Bishopric of Antioch: This Arch-Heretick refusing to relinquish his
See, the Bishops gave an account of his Obstinacy to Dionysius Bishop of Rome,
The Emperor Aurelianus was desired to pronounce Sentence therein, who in a
manner like a Christian Decreed, That the possession of the said Bishopric,
should be given to such, to whom the Bishop of Rome and other Western Bishops
should assign it; And so Paulus was utterly expelled from his Church.

Two Voyages of Constantius Chlorus are mentioned in Story; The first, in the
fourth year of Aurelian's reign, he was then only a Senator, or Patrician, but
sent with an Army to reclaim the Britains, who were too apt to adhere to such
Tyrants who Usurped the Empire, yet was with all quietness received as the
Emperor's Lieutenant; his Voyage into Britain was prosperous, Victory rather
expected him there, then accompanied him thither, he made himself welcome by his
Mercy and Clemency, in forbearing to Insult over his Conquered Enemies, by his
Justice in awarding restitution to such as were Pillaged, by his Providence in
gaining the Affections of the Inhabitants, by giving liberty to the Captives,
and forbearing to punish Offenders, and winning them to Repentance. He applied
himself more particularly to Coelus before-nam'd, and entering into a firm
League with him, Espoused his Daughter Helena, not long after which Marriage
Coelus died, and Constantius in the right of his Wife, became possessed of her
Fathers Principality. The year after this happy Marriage, and as a Blessed
effect thereof, was born Constantine the Great; Great not only in subduing the
Enemies of Rome, and reducing the Empire to a Peaceable and flourishing Estate,
but also in destroying the Power of Satan, and advancing the Kingdom of God
over prevailing Idolatry.

That this great Emperor was born in this Island, is acknowledged and proved
by the most credible Authors; the particular place of his Birth is more
questioned, some say it was York, some London, but most think Colchester, where
Helena and her Father usually resided; that Town being girt with a Wall at the
Costs of Helena. Some Greek Authors will have Constantine to be born elsewhere;
but their fancy therein has been proved by the most Learned and Impartial
Authors fond and improbable, especially by the Testimony of our Glorious Bishop
St. Adelm, who lived not above 300. years after Constantine; and in his
excellent Treatise of Virginity, expressly affirms, That St. Helena was a
British Lady; And his Treatise, having been highly extolled by Saint Bede, gives
great advantage to our Assertion. However St. Helena has been disgracefully
spoken of by some Authors, as the Concubine, and not the Wife of Constantine,
yet it may be easily proved that they constantly Co-habited as Man and Wife, in
a Lawful and Chaste Marriage, by the uncontested Succession of Constantine
their Son in the Empire, and by other undeniable Testimonies: And Barronius
concludes, We are of necessity compelled to agree, that Helena was the Lawful
Wife of Constantius: Insomuch as the Emperor Justinian made a Decree in her
Honor, wherein he sets forth, How much she was Honored by her Pious Son
Constantine, and how much the Church of God has been beholding to her, for
finding our Blessed Saviors Cross. True it is, that as some have cast
imputations upon this Holy Woman, as to her Birth, and the Lawfulness of her
Marriage; so some also have questioned the Integrity of her Religion: All
which, notwithstanding her Birth, her Marriage, her Devotion, her Zeal and
Piety in seasoning her Son in Christian Principles, are clearly attested by the
sincerest and gravest Authors.

Aurelianus whilst he lived, was an Inhumane adversary of Gods Truth, and
raised the ninth Persecution, Britain only remained free from Violence, under
the moderate Government of Constantius, not averse from Christianity* After
seven years reign Aurelianus was slain by his own Soldiers; him Tacitus
succeeded, who dying after six months; Probus renowned for Military Virtues was
chosen; It is said the Senate wished him, and the Army chose him, and the
People with Acclamations approved his Election: During his Reign, by the
re-calling of Constantius, many Troubles arose in Britain, especially from
Bonosus of British extract. Probus after five years reign, was slain by his own
Army, and Carus Manlius Aurelius chosen in his stead, who created his two Sons
Carinus and Numerianus Caesarus; Carus was killed by Lightning, Numerianus and
Carinus by Treachery.

Doclesian after the Death of Carus, was pronounced Emperor by the Army, and
proved the Author of the last, but longest and most dreadful Persecution, that
ever the Church of God suffered: Carinus being slain, Dioclesian assumed
Maximianus as his Companion in the Empire; they conspired in a resolution to
extirpate Christianity, and defend the Adoration of their Pagan Gods: There
never was given a stronger proof of the Churches being founded upon a Rock,
then the unsuccessfulness of the rage of these two Emperors against it: They
had the whole Power of the World in their Hands, they were eminent for Valor,
Wisdom and Policy, they governed the Empire above 20 years, employed all their
time, without relaxation, in suppressing the Truth of Christ: They omitted no
Temptations by Favors or Terrors, to withdraw the Servants of Jesus from
Worshipping him, no Torments were wanting, public and private persons were
Armed to destroy the poor Christians, not only singly, one by one, but whole
Armies of them were Butchered together; to Disgrace the Christians, and to
oppress them, was the ready way to Preferment; yet with all this the Christian
Religion was so far from being destroyed, that it gained more Souls to Christ,
than the Sermons of the Devoutest Preachers could do, in times of Peace;
Insomuch, as these two vainglorious and malicious Princes, seeing all their
endeavors against Christ to become fruitless, through Despair deposed
themselves from the Government of the World, which they had undertaken
principally in design to destroy the Truth of Christ.

This Island of Britain divided from the World, and so exempted from
Persecutions, yet smarted under the Cruelty of these Bloody Emperors, and by
the Martyrdom of St. Albanus, St. Amphibalus, St. Julius, St. Aaron and their
Associats, afforded a Glorious Example, of Conquering the World and Hell it
self by Faith and Patience. By all circumstances these Holy Martyrs suffered
about the beginning of Dioclesians reign, in the year of our Lord 286. as Saint Bede expressly testifies. Edicts for the persecution of the Christians were
about this time first sent into Britain, which might perhaps occasion
Amphibalus to return a second time into his Native Country, to Convert men in
the Faith of Christ. He is said first to six at Verulam, in the House of
Albanus, an eminent Citizen there, and descended of an Illustrious Roman
Family, and the Emperor's Questor or Treasurer. He received St. Amphibalus,
though a stranger to him, with great Kindness and Liberality; but understanding
he was a Christian, privately questioned him How he could pass safely to that
City through so many Regions of Gentiles? The question was pertinent, and thus
answered by Amphibalus, Our Lord Jesus Christ, Son of the living God, (says
he) preserved me safe from all dangers, and sent me into this Province for the
Salvation of many, that by Preaching his Faith, I might prepare a People
acceptable to him. Who is this Son of God, (replied Albanus?) Can God be said
to be born, these are strange Speeches, which I never heard of before? I desire
to know your Opinion of these matters? The Holy man answered, Our Faith
teaches us to acknowledge the Father to be God, and the Son also to be God,
who in Infinite Mercy vouchsafed to take our slesh upon him, for the Salvation
of Mankind, that he might redeem us by suffering Death. And then discoursed at
large of the Birth, Passion, Resurrection and Ascension of Christ. Concluding,
If you, O Albanus, will believe these things to be true, you will receive
Power, by calling on the Name of Christ, to Cure any Infirm or Sick person. And
the Truth is, I am come to this City on purpose to Preach to you, the healthful
Doctrine of our Lords Passion, because our merciful God will reward your kind
Offices of Humanity and Hospitality, to which you frequently addict your self,
which is the inestimable recompense of Eternal Happiness. Then Albanus asked
him, What Honor and Worship must I exhibit to Christ, in case I embrace the
Faith? The other answered, Believe this, that our Lord Jesus, together with the
Father and the Holy Ghost, is one God, and thou will have performed a work of
high esteem in his sight. Then Albanus replied, What is all this; sure thou art
mad, thou know not what thou say? no Humane understanding or Reason can
apprehend these things: But be sure of this, that if the Inhabitants of this
City come to know, thou mak^st such discourse of Christ, without delay they
will put thee to a cruel death. For my own part I am very sollicitous on thy
behalf, for fear some mischief befall thee, before thou departest from hence.
Having said this, he went away much disturbed: As for St. Amphibalus, he spent
the night alone in watching and Prayer: The same night a wonderful Vision from
Heaven was presented to Albanus sleeping; with which being awaked he went to
his Guest, and said to him, Friend, if those things which thou told'st me
lately concerning Christ be true; I pray thee, to tell me freely the meaning of
my Dream.

Me thought I saw a certain man come down from Heaven, and presently an
innumerable multitude of men laid hold of him, and tormented him all the ways
they could devise; they bound his Hands with Chains, they tore his Flesh most
grievously with Whips, they hung him on a Tree, stretching his Hands across; he
was quite naked, not having Shoes on his Feet; his Hands and Feet were fastened
to the Wood with Nails, his side was pierced through with a Spear; and from his
Wound, as it seemed to me, there flowed both Blood and Water; in his right Hand
they put a Reed, and on his Head they put a Crown of Thorns: And after this
barbarous Cruelty, they insult over him with despiteful Speeches, saying to
him, Hail King of the Jews, if thou art the Son of God, come down from the
Cross, and we will believe in thee: And although they continued a long while
thus reviling him, the young man answered never a word, but at last cried out
with a loud voice, and said, Father into thy Hands, I commend my Spirit: And so
Expired; His lifeless Body was afterward taken down from the Cross, the Blood
issuing abundantly out of it: They then laid him in a Sepulcher of stone,
sealing the Monument, and setting Guards to watch it: But then followed a
wonderful thing, for the Bloodless Carcass returned to Life, and re-suming
former strength, came out of the Sepulcher Sealed as aforesaid: I my self with
my own Eyes, saw him how he rose again. Then came from Heaven certain men
clothed with Vestments white as Snow, and taking the Man with them, returned
from whence they came, attended by an infinite number of others in like
Garments, which all the way ceased not to sing Praises, Blessing the Father. I
not knowing who he was, with his Son, saying, Blessed be God the Father, with
his only begotten Son. They expressed such wonderful joy, as nothing could be
compared to it: These things I saw, with many others, which I neither will, or
ought to declare; I beseech thee tell me what is signified by these things thus
represented to me; fear not any danger to your self, but speak freely?

The Holy man Amphibalus having heard this, sensibly felt his Heart visited by
our Lord with all joy, and presently taking out a Crucifix, which he had about
him secretly, said to Albanus, Behold in this Figure and Image thou may
manifestly perceive, the meaning and importance of thy last nights Vision; for
the Man which came from Heaven is this Jesus my Lord, who refused not to
undergo the punishment of the Cross, that by his Blood, he might free us from
the guilt, which we had contracted, by the Transgression of our first Father
Adam. Now these men which laid violent hands upon him, and so afflicted him,
were his own People the Jews: For though they had a promise from God, that he
would send unto them from Heaven his own Son; yet when He whom they so much,
and so long expected, was come, they would not acknowledge him, to be the
Author of their Salvation, but contradicted him in every thing; returned to him
Evil for Good, and Hatred for his Love. And at last stirred up with extreme envy
and malice against him, they broke out into such horrible Impiety, that they
laid hold on him, Crucified and Murdered him. Thus it was that our Lord
redeemed us with the price of his own Blood: Thus by Dying he became victorious
over death; For being raised upon the Cross, he drew all to him; for descending
voluntarily to the enclosures of Hell, he freed from captivity his own Servants
detained there, and binding the Devil in everlasting Chains, he cast him into
utter darkness.

Then Albanus filled with wonder, broke out in these words, All that thou have
said of Christ is most true; for the last night I evidently perceived, and with
mine own eyes saw, how Christ overcame the Devil, how he bound him, and thrust
him down into the bottom of Hell, where the damnable wretch lies fast bound
with Chains: So that knowing what has been told by thee is true, from this
moment I profess, I will be thy most obedient Disciple. Tell me therefore, for
I know thou art Ignorant of nothing, how I must behave my self to the Father
and Holy Ghost, now that I profess my self a servant of the Son? Amphibalus at
this question, gave thanks to our Lord Jesus Christ, for that Albanus of
himself had the knowledge to pronounce those three Adorable Names, and bid him,
believe firmly, and profess faithfully, that those three persons so expressed by
him in their proper Names, are one only God. I believe, (says St. Albanus) and
my firm Faith is, that there is no other God, besides my Lord Jesus Christ, who
for the Salvation of Mankind, took our Nature upon him, and suffered death upon
the Cross. He, together with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, is one only God,
and besides him there is no other. And having said this, he often cast himself
Prostrate before the Crucifix, as if he had seen our Lord Jesus himself hanging
on the Cross, carnestly begging Pardon for his sins: He often affectionately
kissed his Saviors feet and places of his Wounds, as if he had seen him
Crucified; Tears with Blood flowed abundantly from his Eyes upon the venerable
Cross, and these words from his mouth, I renounce the Devil, and detest all the
Enemies of our Lord, to whom I wholly resign myself. Amphibalus then bad him be
of good Courage, saying, Our Lord is with thee, whose Grace will never be
wanting to thee: The saving Faith which others attain by the Ministry of men,
thou have learned by the Revelation of Christ himself; And therefore being
assured of thy constancy, my purpose is to leave thee, and Travel further, that
I may show the way of Truth to other Gentiles also.

But Albanus prevailed with him, to stay a week longer, that he might be more
perfectly instructed in the Faith by him. This Narration of St. Alban's
Conversion, is attested by a very Ancient and Credible Author: We shall now
proceed to the History of his glorious Martyrdom.

He having been thus Instructed, Baptized and Confirmed in the Faith by
Amphibalus, was at last contented with his departure, but exhorted him to take
care of his safety; and in order thereunto, disguised him in his own Military
Vestment, woven with Gold, that he might the more safely pass through the
Soldiers: Early in the morning Amphibalus takes his slight Northward, conducted
part of the way by Albanus; at last they parted with Tears, Amphibalus hastens
into Wales. Albanus returns into the City, clothed with the Caracalla, or long
Ecclesiastical Robe of Amphibalus, and now left alone made great have in his
journey to Immortality: All the enticements of the World became odious to him,
he found no pleasure but in Prayers and Tears at the foot of our Lords Cross;
he burned with a desire to requite the Love of Christ by dying for him. His
Domestics and Neighbors observing the wonderful change in his manner of Life,
began to suspect, and quickly found out the true cause of it; so that in a
short time he is publicly known for a Deserter of Heathenish Superstition, and
therefore complained of unto, and convened before the Roman Magistrate, to whom
a certain Gentile had discovered what ever passed between St. Albanus and St.
Amphibalus; This Magistrate thus Incensed commanded they should both be brought
before him; St. Amphibalus being departed, the Soldiers found only St. Albanus
in his strange Habit, at his Prayers with naked feet before the Cross of our
Lord, and asked him, where the Clark was, whom he had entertained? He answered,
That the Holy man was under the Protection of God, and feared not the Threats
of Men: When they heard this, they laid hands on him, bound him with Chains,
and violently drew him away, some pulling at his Garments, some at his Hair: He
had still upon him the Vestment of his Master, knowing the sight of it was
enough to make him odious; he carried also in his hand the Image of our Lord,
that he might only appear a Servant of the Cross: Being come before the Judge,
he was examined in many particulars, but all his Answer was, That he was
Albanus, and a Christian; which he professed with great liberty of Speech: The
Judge inquired of him, What became of the Clark who was sent by one called
Christ, to delude and seduce the People of this City. Had he not (says the
Judge) had a guilty Conscience, and been distrustful of his own Cause, this
worthy Master of yours, would have freely presented himself before us, to
defend both Himself and his Disciples; But by his own Carriage, he makes known
the falseness and Fraudulence of his Doctrine, since he deserts thee, and is
Cowardly run away from thee; whom, if his Cause had been good, he ought to have
justified, though with hazard of his Life: So as I suppose thou now perceiv'st
how silly a Fellow he was, who seduced thee into Errors, and brought thee by
his idle suggestions into such a Frenzy, as not only to renounce all worldly
Advantages, but to contemn the immortal Gods; the injury against whom, since we
ought not to leave unpunished, my purpose was to have revenged it by the death
of the profane Delinquent: But seeing humane frailty is such, that there is
none, but are obnoxious to Error, thou may yet by Repentance escape the
indignation of the Gods, and make them propitious to thee, if thou will now
renounce this abominable Sect.

Hereto Albanus Answered, It were a very easy matter to declare how vain and
impertinent this long discourse of yours is; for if it had seemed good or
agreeable to either of us; That Holy Clark would not have failed to have been
here: But I confess his stay here could not be pleasing to me, who well know
how prone to mischief this People has ever been: The Doctrine taught by that
good man, I have heartily embraced, neither can I repent me of it; for the
Faith which I profess will be proved to be Holy and Divine, by the Testimony of
Sick and Infirm People, who by virtue thereof shall receive Health. I will no
longer Sacrifice to your Gods, nor fear your Threats or Torments, being secure
under the protection of my good Lord.

This being said, at the command of the Judge, he was Cruelly Scourged by the
Officers for refusing to Sacrifice; during which Torment, he lifted up his Eyes
to our Lord, and with a cheerful countenance said, O Lord Jesus Christ, I
beseech thee keep this mind and good resolution, which thou have given me, firm
and stable: My desire is, O my God, to offer up my Soul a whole Burnt Sacrifice
to thy Glory, and with my Blood to Seal thy Truth. But when the Officers were
weary with tormenting him, the Holy man was thrust into a deep Dungeon, where
he continued six Months. All the Elements soon bare witness of the injury done
unto him; and from the time of his Apprehension to his Death, neither Rain nor
Dew refreshed the Earth, the Winds were whist, and the Region thereabout
parched with excessive Heat of the Sun, even in the nightime the stifing heat
was intolerable, neither Fields nor Trees produced any Fruit, so that the
whole World fought in the quarrel of this just man against his Impious Enemies;
insomuch as this excessive Heat and Drought, Heathens themselves took notice
of, though they applied it to other purposes.

The Infidel Judge expected that the Constancy of the Holy Martyr would have
been broken and spent, by a tedious and painful Imprisonment; whereas on the
contrary, his solitude, which gave him opportunity to unite himself to God by
Prayer, increased and strengthened his Courage. The Author of his Life has thus
exemplified one of his Prayers, O Lord Jesus Christ, do not permit the Devils
malice so much to prevail, as by his cuning machinations, and this Peoples
relenting, my suffering for thee may be hindered.

Not long after being come out of Prison to suffer, and addressing his Speech
to the unbelieving People, who flocked to see him, he told them, He was an
irreconcilable Enemy of their False Gods, the works of men's Hands, unworthy of
Honor, as having no Divinity, they themselves could not but observe, that
these their Idols, neither See, Hear nor Understand any thing, and that it
could be no other then detestable vanity to expect Life from them which have no
Life, to pray to those who could not Hear, to expect safety or Happiness from
them, which were not sensible of the least good to themselves: He therefore
protests, that whoever Honors such dead Idols, must renounce all reason, for
whom can be more desperately miscrable, than he who suffers himself to be
enslaved to Puppets of his own fashioning. Woe therefore to Idels, but greater
Woe to their Adorers.

From hence may easily be observed, that this Holy Martyr who thus earnestly
inveighs against Idolatry, yet with great Devotion Venerates the Cross of our
Lord, so far is the respect and Honor given by the Catholic Church to Sacred
things from any taint of Idolatry: And Tertullian in his Apology for
Christians, testifies, That although they Adored the Cross, yet Idols, and all
their Ornaments were detested by them, and abominable unto them.

When these invectives against Idols were uttered by St. Alban, Sentence of
Death was pronounced against him, and he was led to Execution, to a place
called Holmburst, a Plain clothed with all sorts of Flowers, a fit Theater for
so Glorious a Martyr: Albanus being thus led to his Death, came to a River,
which with a swift Torrent ran between a Wall on the one side, and a
Sandy-shore on the other, where the Holy Martyr was to be Beheaded; there he
saw great multitudes of all Conditions, Ages and Sects, which no doubt by
Divine instinct, were assembled to Honor his Death; and they so choked the
passage of the Bridge, that before night they could not all have passed over:
As for the Judge, he had no intention of any respect to the Martyr, but stayed
behind in the City. St. Albanus therefore enflamed with a Devout desire of a
speedy Martyrdom, approached near the River, and lifting up his Eyes with
Prayer to God, the River became presently dry, so as the Water gave free way to
the passengers, by the Prayer of the Martyr to this effect, O Lord Jesus
Christ, from whose most Holy side, I my self, in a Vision, saw both Water and
Blood to flow; I beseach thee, to cause these Waters to be diminished, and the
flood to return back, that the People without prejudice or danger, may be
present at my Sufferings. He had no sooner prayed thus, but the Channel was
immediately dry, his Tears left no other water in the River, the Power of his
Prayer emptied the Torrent and cleared a safe passage for the People.

The Officer who conducted St. Alban to his Death, by the merits of the Holy
Martyr obtained Eternal Happiness; for seeing the Miracles, he threw away his
Sword, and casting himself at the Holy Martyr's feet, begged his pardon; which
when the People saw, they laid hold on the Man, beat out his Teeth, and in a
manner broke all his Bones. This Pagan Soldier thus of a Persecutor, changed
into a Lover of the true Faith, and willing to die for and with St. Alban, the
other Officers were at a stand and knew not what to do.

It is further related, That the Holy Martyr ascending the Hill, the People at
the top thereof, were tormented with extremity of Thirst; the Martyr kneeling
down Prayed to God, The People might receive no harm by his occasion; Upon
which brake presently forth a Fountain at his Feet, and with a rapid course
flowed down the Hill, so that all the Peoples Thirst was satisfied. In the mean
time another Executioner was appointed, who to his great Unhappiness discharged
that Impious Office, and with his Sword cut off the Holy Martyr's Head kneeling
in Prayer to God, and Kissing the Crucifix which he held in his Hand: And
immediately, O wonderful! Almighty God by the sudden loss of this Executioners
Eyes, testified the Holy Martyr's Innocence; for together with the Martyr's
Head, those remorseless Eyes sell to the ground.

With St. Alban the poor Converted Soldier was also Beheaded, who by Divine
Instinct refused to put the Holy Confessor to Death; and doubtless, though this
new Convert was not outwardly cleansed with the water of Baptism, yet being
washed in the Laver of his own Blood, he became worthy to be admitted into the
Kingdom of Heaven. His Name is said to be Heraclius; of whom it is further
reported, That being left half dead, by the Peoples Strokes, as aforesaid, and
creeping on his hands and feet toward the Crowd, he was mocked by one of the
Judges, And bid to address himself to his Patron Albanus, (then newly Executed)
and Pray him to restore Soundness to his bruised Limbs; Run, (says the
Scoffing Judge) make have, join thy Patrons Head to his Body; no doubt, thou will not fail of Health; Bury the dead Carcass, and thou may be sure, whilst
it is in thy Hands it will afford a Cure. The Soldier replied, I do verily
believe, that this blessed Saint by his merits, can restore unto me my perfect
Health: So that what you speak in Derision, may in earnest be fulfilled to me.
Having said this, he embraced the Martyr's Head, and adjoining it to the Body,
became immediately sound. When the Infidels saw this, they were filled with
Envy, and bound him with Chains, tearing his Body with several sorts of
Tortures, and in the end cut off his Head.

How acceptable to Almighty God these Martyrdoms were, was presently declared
from Heaven in a wonderful manner; for behold, the night following their
Sufferings, a Pillar of Light was seen to raise it self from the Grave of St.
Alban up to Heaven, by which Angels ascended and descended, spending the whole
night in Hymns and Praises to God, repeating also these words, The Illustrious
Albanus is now a glorious Martyr of Christ. As Venantius in his Poem for that
purpose Elegantly sets forth.

Who this Author of St. Alban's Life was, is unknown, he was certainly of more
Antiquity than Saint Bede; his Book was found in the Monastery of St. Alban; and
concerning the Persecution thus raised in Britain by Dioclesian, gives us this
Account. That Almighty God, who is willing all men should be saved; to magnify
his Mercy to this our Country, least it should be invellop'd in Darkness, was
pleased to Enlighten it, with the shining Lamps of his Holy Martyrs; the places
of whose Sufferings, and the Sepulchers of whose Bodies, might inflame us with
Divine Love, were not an access to those places, denied us by our Barbarous
Enemies; the place I mean, where repose the Bodies of St. Alban at Verulam, St.
Aaron and Julian at Caerleon, and many others in several Quarters, who have
stood up Courageously in our Lords Army; of which the first St. Alban, after he
had with much Charity, entertained in his House, and secured from danger the
Holy Confessor St. Amphibalus, offered himself to persecution with wonderful
Miracles, was in his Confession glorified by God, walked with thousands after
him dry-foot over the River, while the waters stood as a Rock on both sides of
them; by which wonder his designed Executioner from a Woolf became a Lamb, and
valiantly received the Triumphant Palm of Martyrdom.

It will not be amiss to show here, with what Piety and Reverence Christians in
all Ages behaved themselves to ward the Ashes and Sacred Relics of our Holy
Martyrs: The Persecuting Infidels knowing this well, used all manner of
despite to these Holy Relics, endeavoring all they could to hide or consume
them with Fire, and cast the Ashes before the wind. The Body of Sebastiane, who
suffered soon after St. Alban, they cast into a common Sink, least the
Christians should make him their Martyr. And again, three years after the
President threatened St. Tharacus, That he would not dispatch him at once. but
would make an end of him by piecemeal; and that the remainder of his Carcass
should be devoured by Beasts: Tharacus bid him, Do what he did quickly; To whom
the President replied, Thou think Villain, that after thy death silly Women
shall Embalm thy Body with Rich Unguents and Spices, but I will destroy thee
and thy Relics, least foolish Women should Honor thee so.

And concerning the Martyr Andronicus, that President who condemned him,
Decreed, He should be consumed to Ashes, least some of his Consorts, or foolish
Women, should gather up any of them and preserve them, as if they were some
precious or holy Thing: Yet for all this, when some Devout Christians
endeavored to find their Ashes by night, mingled and confounded with other
Malefactors, three bright Torches, like Stars appeared over their Bodies, and
conducted those Devout Christians to discover those Ashes and Relics, and
decently to inter them. This was the practice of Christians in those days, but
condemned by the Manicheans as Superstitious: St. Augustine confutes their
Error, by distinguishing the Veneration due to Saints, which he calls Doulia,
from the supreme Degree of Adoration due only to God, which he terms Latria.

Our Gildas having thus related the Martyrdom of our Proto-Martyr St. Alban,
shows what a change happened in Britain nine years after, when the fury of this
Persecution ceased, For then (says he) all the devout Soldiers of Christ, with
joyful Eyes beheld and received the Calm and Lightsomness following so tedious
a Winters-night. Then they began to restore demolished Churches, they new
founded Sacred Temples, Consecrated to the Honor of Holy Martyrs; these they
Adorn, and in them Celebrate public Festivities and Pure Sacrifices, as
manifest Trophies after their Victory: This Happy change began soon after the
Tyrants Carausius and Alectus were vanquished by Constantius, who in the year
of Grace 292. was Created Caesar, and received the Government of Britain.
Gregory the Great was not then the first who brought into Britain the Custom of
Dedicating Churches to the Honor of Martyrs; for Germanus and Lupus, before
the Entrance of the Saxons, came into this Island, there to root out the
Pelagian Heresy, and found here Erected to the Honor of St. Alban, in the
place where by shedding his Blood he so Triumphed, a Famous Church, which with
great Devotion he Visited, and there paid his Thanks to God, for his Victory
over the Pelagian Heresy: He opened the Holy Martyr's Sepulcher, and as an
Honor to him, Reposed in it, several Relics of Apostles and Martyrs, which
he brought over out of France with him; and because he would not depart,
without the Holy Martyr's protection, he took a lump of Earth from the place
where the Martyr's Blood was shed; and at his return into France, carried it to
his own See, from whence the Veneration of St. Alban spread it self over all
France, and after into Germany also.

By a contest between the Monks of St. Alban and Ely, in Edward the II's. time,
it is put out of doubt, that the Body of this Holy Martyr was Buried at St.
Albans; for the Monks of Ely contending before that King, that the said Martyrs
Body lay among them; the King commanded his pretended Tomb there should be
opened; which being done, nothing was found in it, but a course Hair-garment,
sprinkled with Blood in the upper part of it, as fresh as if it had been lately
shed, which Garment questionless was the Caracalla beforementioned: It is no
wonder this poor Garment should with Veneration be preserved by these Monks of
Ely, for God has declared this to be acceptable to him by many Miracles,
witness St. Gregory Nazianzen, who has thus written, That a little portion of
Dust, a particle of Bones, a little Hair, part of the Vestment, the sprinkled
marks of a Martyr's Blood, ought to have as much Veneration as the whole Body:
He adds further, That he had known where only the Name of a Martyr attributed
to a place, had produced the same Virtue, that his whole Body would have done;
and then he cries out, O wonful! the Memory alone of a Martyr is sufficient in
my Opinion to confer Health.

The first that here followed St. Alban in his rough way of Martyrdom, was St.
Amphibalus, who first showed him the way to Heaven: The constancy of St. Alban,
the Miracles before and after his Death stirred up diverse, of those who were
Spectators of his Death, or amazed with the wonders which accompanied it, to
abandon their Idols, and seek out St. Amphibalus, that from his Lips the
Doctriue of Christ might be instilled into their Hearts; To that purpose they
undertook a journey into Wales, where they found him Preaching the Word of
Life, to the people of that Region; to him they presented the Cross which he
had given to his Disciple St. Alban, and which was sprinkled with his fresh
Blood, and so was a manifest token of his late Martyrdom; and upon which St.
Amphibalus, after he had given Thanks to God, made a Sermon of Christian
Religion to his Auditors, in number about 1000. who having heard the Sermon
embraced his Doctrine, and cheerfully received from his Sacred Hands, as a Seal
of their Faith, the Holy Baptism: The departure of so great a Multitude from
Verulam, raised so great an Animosity against those Deserters of their Religion
and City in the Hearts of the Infidels, that they resolved to pursue them with
Armed Forces, hoping to find Amphibalus in their Company, which they soon did,
and took him in his usual Office of Preaching to his new Converts: Such was
their rage, that without distinction of Sex or Age, they Mercilesly put all
their Contrymen to the Sword, Neighbors, murdering Neighbors; Friends,
Friends; and Kinsmen, Kinsmen; and all of them rushing with violence upon
Amphibalus, they check him, With deceiving the People, and teaching them to
trample under-foot the Laws Imperial, and contemn the Gods, Of which Reproaches
the Holy Man takes no notice, but with joy recommends the Souls of his Murdered
Converts unto the living God.

Where the place of this Slaughter was, is uncertain, some say amongst the
Silures, others say at Litchfield, lying in the way from Verulam toward Wales;
wherever it was, St. Amphibalus was from thence driven on his bare feet, with
his Arms strait bound, back again to Verulam; by the way, although thus
Hampered, he had yet the Power to loose a Sick person from the bands of his
Infirmity, Calling upon him for help, and declaring that he firmly believed,
his Health should be restored unto him, if Amphibalus the Servant of the most
high God, would vouchsafe to intercede for him in the Name of Christ. Which he
soon did, and behold in the sight of them all the sick person immediately arose
perfectly recovered.

When the Holy man, after his tedious and painful journey, came to the Confines
of Verulam, his Cruel Persecutors stripped him of his Garments, and fastening a
Stake in the ground, they with a Sword ripped up his Belly, and tying the end of
his Guts about the Stake, with Cruel Whipping, they forced the Holy Martyr to
walk about it, and so enwrap it with his Bowels; and yet not content with this
Cruelty, they Inhumanely mangled the rest of his Body with Knives and Lances.
The man of God all this while stood with a cheerful Countenance, as if he had
suffered nothing, the more he was tortured, the more constant he appeared; when
the wonder was, he should remain yet alive: This constancy of his stirred up
many of the Spectators to renounce their Idols, and submit to the Faith of
Christ, beseeching the Holy man to Pray to God for them, that they might
partake of Eternal Happiness, for the obtaining whereof, they were ready to lay
down their lives: The chief Magistrate perceiving this, commands the Officers
to put all these new Converts to Death, which they soon performed, to the
number of about 1000. persons, whose Souls the Blessed Martyr in the midst of
his Tortures recommended to our Lord.

One of the Bystanders, louder then the rest, thus upbraided the man of God, O
pityless wretch, (said he) why have thou deceived these simple People with thy
fraudulent Specehes, withdrawing them from the Worship of the Gods; by thy
persuasion we have lost our Friends and Parents: Although thou have above
measure incensed both Gods and Men, yet now at last by thy Repentance, thou
may receive their Pardon and Favor: Signify thy repentance, by renouncing
that impious Sect, which hitherto thou have followed, and yet adore the
Omnipotent Gods, which perhaps through Ignorance thou have offended; which if
thou will do, those all-powerful Deities, will restore to Life those whom thou
have Murdered. To whom the Holy man of God thus Answered, O Infidel, whilst
thou endeavour'st to extol thy Gods, assure thy self thou offendest the True
God; for it is Jesus Christ my Lord, who alone has Power to raise, and give
Life to the Dead: As for those whom ye Worship as Gods, and think them Powerful
in Heaven, they now suffer horrible torments in Hell, with Adulterers, Unjust
persons, Slanderers, and such as by their Reprobate actions here, rendered
themselves like to Devils: And thou Pagan, and all such as worship Idols,
except you renounce their Worship, and Convert your selves to the Faith of
Christ, will incur the same Punishments in Hell; But despair not of the Mercy
of God, break off your evil ways, make haste to partake of the Grace of
Baptism, by which all sins are forgiven, and Heaven is opened unto men, thereby
becoming new Creatures, divested of their former wicked dispositions; For those
who before Baptism by their sins were the Children of the Devil, become
afterward the Sons of God. Run therefore to this Grace for refuge, that you
may escape everlasting Torments.

Upon these Speeches the Infidels were so enraged that they labored with all
their force to dispatch the Holy Martyr with multitudes of Stones, who still
remained unmovable in Prayer, not stiring any way from the place where he
stood: But the hour approaching wherein he was to surrender his victorious
Spirit unto God; he lifted up his Eyes to Heaven, and saw our Lord Jesus
standing at the right Hand of his Father, and also heard an Harmonious consort
of Angels, amongst whom he spied his Beloved Disciple St. Alban, whose help and
Prayer he invoked, that God might send his good Angel to meet and protect him
from the accursed Fiend, who would be too ready to hinder his passage to
Immortality. Forthwith two Angels appeared gloriously shining with Celestial
Splendor, and a voice was heard by all the Company, uttering these words,
Verily I say unto thee, thou shall be in Paradise with thy Disciple: The Pagans
stood amazed at this wonderful voice. And the Holy Angels took the Martyrs Soul
shining with Brightness as white as Snow, and with Hymns and Praises carried it
into Heaven, whilst in the mean time the more than Barbarous Infidels ceased
not to overwhelm his Lifeless Body with Stones, which afterward a Devout
Christian privily took away, and carefully buried in Redbourn, about three
Miles from Verulam; for as some Authors affirm, There remained for a long time
in that Village, great Knives with which the Martyr was slain. And in the way
betwixt It and Verulam, a Tree stood enclosed within walls, where it is thought
the Post was fixed, to which the Holy Martyr was tied, and where his Bowels
were torn out, or rather where his Body was buried, and that with such
Secrecy, as until the year of Grace 1178. it could never be discovered.

But in that year, (as Matthew of Westminster writes) the Blessed Martyr St.
Alban was seen visibly to go out of the Church to him Dedicated, and came to an
Inhabitant of St. Albans, whom he desired to follow him: The poor man seeing
the brightness of the Martyr, was sore afraid, but yet followed him Northward;
the very high way shone with the brightness of his Conductor: As they walked,
the poor man asked, who he was? and was Answered, That he was St. Alban the
first Martyr of Britain, and that he was now leading him to the Sepulcher of
St. Amphibalus, by whose Preaching, he was Converted to our Lord, and so became
a Martyr. They thus talked like Friends together, until St. Alban showed the
man the place where Amphibalus was obscurely buried, that his bones might be
removed Reverently to a more Decent place; The man took diligent notice of the
place, by setting Stones in such Order there, that it might easily be found
again; soon after the Sacred Body was translated to the Church of St. Alban,
and many Miracles were there continually wrought, through the intercession of
the Blessed Amphibalus, who suffered in the year of our Lord 287.

Although the place of this Saints Burial, was long obscured, yet as appears by
Gildas, his memory was precious; for within ten years after he suffered, a
Church was erected to his Honor; and in the year of our Lord 309. another
Church was Consecrated to this Saint at Winchester, which being after Rebuilt
by the Saxons, was Dedicated to St. Peter. When the Body of this Holy Man was
discovered, other Bodies were found lying by it, conjectured to be those who
suffered with him.

Much about this time, two famous Martyrs, Julius and Aaron, beforementioned,
Citizens of Caerleon, and Disciples of St. Amphibalus, are recorded to have
suffered for the Faith of Christ. These two had a long time addicted themselves
to the Holy Faith, and were also diligent in the study of Arts and Humane
Learning, both at Rome and elsewhere: They suffered (says Saint Bede) with many
others of both Sexes intoller able Torture, their Members being torn asunder
with unheard of Cruelty; at last consummating a Glorious Martyrdom, their Souls
were received into the joys of the Heavenly City. Their Memories were preserved
and Honored by Erecting Altars and Churches in their Names; each of them had a
famous Church Erected to their Honor in Caerleon, for three Magnificent
Churches are said to have been Built of Old time in that City; one of the
Martyrs, St. Julius, adorned with a Choir and Convent of Religious Virgins; a
second Dedicated to the Honor of his Companion St. Aaron, and Graced with a
Noble Choir of Canons; the third was the Metropolitan Church of all Cambria,
and was after Translated by the Holy Bishop St. David, with the concurrence of
the Pope's Legate; and all this long before the coming of the Saxons: Besides
these, the memory is Celebrated of two Noble Britains, Disciples of St.
Amphibalus, who suffered Martyrdom in the same Persecution of Dioclesian, their
Names were Stephanus and Socrates, to whose Honor two Churches were built in
the Province of the Silures. To this time also is referred the Murdering of all
the Monks in the Monastery of Winchester, built by King Lucius: During the rage
of this Persecution in Britain, many Christians withdrew themselves from the
fury of it, as Gildas reports; which, considering the frailty of Mankind, was
not imprudently done; for it was thought fit, that such as had not the courage
to sustain the weight of Martyrdom, might at least hold fast the Grace of
Confession.

This flight of Christians in Britain, gave occasion to the Persecutors to
extend their rage upon Churches and Monasteries; all which by such their rage,
were so utterly destroyed, that in this Island few marks remained of Christian
Religion: This Desolation continued until the Happy return of Constantius, by
whose Clemency, the Christian Faith and Worship flourished again in Britain,
sooner than in other places, Which Mercy of God, (as Bede says) was the rather
extended toward the Britains, because they only preserved among them their
Primitive (Faith received in the days of King Lucius) entire and inviolate,
until the reign of Dioclesian.

The Tyranny of the Roman Empire against Christians, God was pleased to
revenge, by permitting another Tyrant to rise against them in Britain, namely
Carausius, a man Vigilant and Active both in Council and Execution, Employed by
the Emperor to scowre the Seas of Pirates. This Employment Carausius made use
of, rather to Enrich himself, than Benefit the Empire: and thereby became so
suspected, that the Emperor Maximianus commanded him to be put to Death; for
the avoiding whereof, he assumed the Imperial Purple, and possessed himself of
Britain. Maximianus prepared to oppose him, but his attempts proving vain, he
was forced to make a Peace with Carausius; who after subdued the Caledonian
Britains, and raised a new Rampire to enclose them more Northward, than any had
been before, with a Triumphal Arch in memory of his Victory: He governed here
quietly, until the year 293. when Constantius made his Expedition against him.

Now, though in the time of Carausius, Persecution against Christians abated,
yet by the Rapine of his Soldiers, most of the Churches and Monasteries were
destroyed or Spoiled, among the rest those of Winchester and Westminster; the
latter Converted into a Temple of Apollo.

In those days the Roman Empire on all sides was greatly shaken, both by open
Invasions and Civil Dissentions; to appease which two new Caesar's were chosen,
Constantius, by Maximianus; and Galerius, by Dioclesian; in whom,
notwithstanding the Supreme Authority and Majesty of the Empire resided; the
better to strengthen this Association, Dioclesian gave his Daughter Valeria to
Galerius, Maximianus his Daughter Theodora to Constantius, who thereupon was
compelled to a Divorce from his former Wife Helena, so as she was after
esteemed his Concubine, or at least his Wife, in the second or inferior place:
However, this pretended Divorce did not it seems prejudice their Son
Constantine, who born before in Marriage, enjoyed his right of Primogeniture,
and succeeded his Father in the Empire, although he had other Sons by Theodora:
How Helena was disposed of after this Divorce, is controverted; The best
Opinion is, that she was placed at Triers, where Constantius built her a
Magnificent Palace, and where she was Honored with the Title of Augusta: In
the mean time her Son Constantine was received into the Family of Dioclesian,
and there remained Uninfected with the Vices of the Court, in great Favor with
Dioclesian, highly Graced by him; and acceptable to all that saw him, for his
Beauty, Gracefullness and Modesty, especially to the best sort of Men for his
Virtue and Piety.

Constantius being Created Caesar, made an Expedition into Gaul, with intent to
pass over into Britain against the Tyrant Carausius: In Gaul he took the
Sea-Town Gessoriacum or Buloign, which the Tyrant had strongly Fortified: In
the mean time Carausius was Murdered in Britain by a new Tyrant Alectus,
General of the Forces of Carausius; Alectus to secure himself assumed, the
Title of Emperor: Against him Constantius the year following sailed into
Britain, and landed without opposition, though he was waylaid by a strong
Fleet placed in the Isle of Wight, by Alectus. When he was landed, he set his
Ships on Fire, and divided his Army; one part he led himself, the other he
committed to the Conduct of Asclepiodorus, Prefect of the Praetorian Band:
Alectus avoiding Constantius, chose to try his Fortune with Asclepiodorus, by
whom he was easily defeated and slain: Howbeit a great part of his Army,
consisting of Strangers, Franks and Battavians, seeing their Prince Dead, fled
toward London, hoping to Enrich themselves by the Spoils of that City; But
Constantius coming on them unawares, preserved the City, and cut those Rovers
in pieces; if any escaped, they became Captive to the Londoners.

By this return of Constantius, the poor oppressed Britains, to their great
joy, were freed from Slavery and shameful Indignities, and restored to the
Roman Government, under a Prince of great Clemency, and Allied to them, by his
Marriage with Helena, from whom they expected a Prince of their own Blood,
young Constantine, then in Egypt with Dioclesian, where he gave Illustrious
Marks of his Courage in Battles, being a very young man, and inclined to the
Christian Faith; insomuch as Dioclesian began to envy him, fearing least he
should prove a destroyer of the Pagan Errors; and thereupon by subtilty
designed his Death, but almighty God preserved him; the Tyrant no doubt, knew
the young man had been nourished from his Infancy with Christian Milk, and with
evil Eyes beheld what Cruelties were inflicted on the Christians: He was
therefore watched and detained under strict Guards, and probably in danger of
further mischief.

About this time he took to Wise Minervina, by whom he had his Eldest Son
Crispus. The clemency and countenance of Constantius, encouraged the Christians
to repair, and new build Churches to the Honor of the Martyrs, and publicly
to Celebrate the Divine Mysteries and Solemn Festivals, contrary to the Report
of some Scottish Authors; For as Eusebius affirms, Of the four persons
conjoined in the Government of the Roman World, Constantius only clave to the
living God, and was displeased with the practices of the other three; For
whereas they wasted the Churches of God, and defiled their Provinces with the
Innocent Blood of Christians; He on the contrary procured Tranquillity to his
Subjects, and as an Indulgent Father allowed them the free exercise of the
Christian Religion.

Constantius after three years abode in Britain, was obliged to pass over into
Gaul to oppose a German Nation, which infested that Country; he was accompanied
with a great number of Britains, and with their help obtained a signal Victory.

In the year 300. Stephanus the VII. Bishop of London is said to have ended his
Life by Martyrdom; not that he was put to death for the Christian Religion, but
for that the former Persecution he had suffered during the rage of Dioclesian,
which made his Life miserable, and might perhaps hasten his Death.

In the year 302. Constantius seems to have returned into Britain upon the
Death of Asclepiodorus, whom he left his President here: Still he establishes
Peace in the Church here, whilst in all other Provinces, Rivers of Christian
Blood were poured out with great inhumanity. The Bounty, Clemency and Piety of
this Prince, rendered him Admired and Beloved throughout the whole Empire; the
moderation of his Government, and Liberality, the mutual Affection between him
and his Subjects, is declared by this illustrious Example.

The Emperor Dioclesian having been informed, that Constantius by his
negligence and profuse Liberality, had wasted his public Treasure, by
Messengers sent on purpose, sharply reproved him for it. Constantius promised
the Messengers in a few days to give them his Answer; and in the mean time gave
notice throughout his Dominions, especially to the most wealthy of his
Subjects, that he stood in great need of Money, and that they could never have
a fitter opportunity to testify their Affection and Duty to him: Hereupon,
without any delay, and with great cheerfulness, each contended with other, who
should send most; so that in short time his Treasure was filled with
innumerable sums of Money. This being done, Constantius invites the Messengers
to be Spectators of his Wealth, desiring them to tell the Emperor what they
had seen: And when they were gone, the bountiful Emperor returned all that
Mass of Treasure to the respective Owners, with an Affectionate resentment of
their Duty and good Will to him.

It is further related of him, That finding his Court and Family distracted
into Faction by various Sects and Religions, he published an Edict, That
whoever would continue in his Service, should conform himself to the Worship of
the Roman Gods, for no other should stay in his Court; however they might enjoy
their Liberty and Possessions, but they must avoid his presence. This Ordinance
much troubled the Christians, especially those who ambitiously affected worldly
Honor, for they preferring Mammon before God, relinquished their Profession,
to conform themselves to Caesar's Religion: But several others, sincere and
genuine Disciples of Christ, showed themselves willing rather to forsake their
Princes, service than Gods; which being observed by Constantius, he chased from
his Court all those faint-hearted Hypocritical Dissemblers, saying, They would
never preserve their Fidelity to him, who had so basely betrayed their Faith to
God; So that he preferred to Dignities, and committed the care of his safety to
them, whom he found constant. From hence it came that the Britains, who were
generally Christians, became Guards both to Him and other Emperors, whom they
usually encompassed with long Halberts.

The Faithfulness of Christians, probably moved Constantius to forsake
Idolatry, and willingly to acknowledge the only true God Governor of all the
World, and firmly to establish his Authority by the Prayers and assistance of
Holy men, and so he passed the remainder of his Life, with great Glory and
Tranquillity. To this happy change, no doubt but St. Helena his Wife much
contributed; so that his Court seemed little to differ from the form of a
Church, in which the Ministers and Servants of God offered daily Prayers and
Sacrifice for him.

In the year of Grace 304. the Emperors Dioclesian, and Maximianus, after 20
years Reign, weary of their fruitless Cruelty, deposed themselves from the
Empire: Galerius succeeded in the Government of the Eastern, and Constantius of
the Western Empire, especially in France and Britain, not affecting to heap up
Treasure for himself, but to Enrich his Subjects.

In the year 305. his young Son Constantine accompanied Galerius in his War
against the Sarmatians, where he undertook a single Combat by the Emperor's
Consent, with their chief Leader, whom by Divine assistance he overcame, and
led Prisoner to the Emperor, and so obtained Glory by that, which perhaps was
intended for his Destruction. This year, as is Credibly reported, St. Augulus
Bishop of London, received the reward of his constant Confession, having been
long persecuted for the Cause of Christ; to him succeeded Iltutus, or rather
perhaps Restitutus, who assisted at the first Council, and subscribed his Name
thereunto.

The next year, Constantius after he had quieted the Picts or Northern
Britains, returned to York, and there being Old, was assaulted by his last
Sickness: The absence of his Son Constantine, who was detained in manner of a
Pledge by Galerius, much afflicted him, though he had other Sons with him by
Theodora, which gave him little satisfaction, considering their want of Spirit
and Courage. Constantine observed, how much he was both feared and envied, and
in danger of mischief, whilst he remained in the Emperors hands, and
endeavored to secure himself by flight; to contrive which, with the more
security, he gave command that all the public Posthorses should be Killed,
and by that means arrived in Britain, with so Prosperous a Voyage, as if he had
been brought thither not by Posthorses, but mounted and flying in a Heavenly
Chariot: Upon his approach to his Father, he was received by him with great
joy, and devout Thanksgiving to God. The dying Emperor was now willing to
embrace death, and bequeathed the Inheritance of the Empire to his beloved and
first born Son Constantine, and so with comfort departed this Life. He was
buried in the City of York with Princelike Solemnity, and by the Heathenish
Romans Deify'd with the Title of Divine. Cambden reports, That when the Houses
of Monks there were in our Fathers memory demolished, a Lamp was found burning
in a little Vaulted Chapel, in which by Tradition, Constantius is thought to
have been buried. The Ancients had doubtlesly an Art to maintain a flame for
many Ages, by Gold dissolved into a kind of Oil. Then certainly Matthew of
Westminster must be mistaken, who writes, that the Body of Constantius was
found in another place, and from thence by the then Kings command, translated
to Caernarvon, which must be understood of some other Constantius.

Now, notwithstanding Constantius had Sons by Theodora, yet passing them all
by, he left the Empire to his Eldest Son Constantine only, and his disposal
therein was Ratified by the Suffrages and Acclamations of the Army: Howbeit,
such was the moderation and prudent caution of Constantine, that he contented
himself with the Title of Caesar, refusing that of Augustus or Emperor;
Insomuch, as when the Soldiers, with great Affection would have cast on him the
Imperial Purple, he set Spurs to his Horse, and fled from them. In truth he had
reason for this Caution, for though Dioclesian and Maximianus had relinquished
the administration of the Empire; yet had they by Councels and Authority, a
great influence upon the State, for by them Galerius, Maximinus and Severus,
were chosen Caesar's and Successors, who had possession of Italy and the Eastern
Empire, so as Constantine being young, and at so great distance, might well
think it dangerous, without their consent, to assume the Supreme Authority.

His first attempt therefore was, to gain the Affection and Consent of
Maximianus, from whom his Father had received the Purple Robe, and who had then
a Daughter Marriageable, called Fausta; Her Constantine demands in Marriage,
presuming the Empire should be her Dowry. In the mean time, he finished his
Fathers Victories in Britain, and was therein assisted by King Erocas, by whose
Councels he was much guided; afterward he passed over with a great Army into
France, and there suppressed two Barbarous Princes, who filled the Country with
Faction, inciting the Gauls to Rebellion. Then he began to treat with
Maxentius, who a year before hearing of the death of Constantius, possessed
himself of Rome, and usurped the Title of Emperor, by the help of the
Pretorian Soldiers, and upon the hopes that Maximianus, whose Daughter he had
Married, would favor him in his Ambition, the conceit whereof made him slight
all motions of Concord with Constantine.

Howbeit, Maximinian having heard of the Noble Victories and Exploits of
Constantine, bestowed his Daughter Fausta upon him, and with Her the Imperial
Purple. But soon after this Marriage, Maximinianus discovers his Treacherous
intention to re-possess himself of the Empire, which he had voluntarily
resigned, and bound himself by Solemn Oath in the Capital, never to resume.
This intention he first made known to his Daughter Fausta before the Marriage;
in pursuance whereof he Sollicits the Armies, with Promises of great Rewards to
stick to him: All these Designs Fausta reveals to Constantine, and withal,
informs him, That the intended Marriage, was but to make him secure, that her
Father might the sooner deprive him of the Empire, and perhaps of his Life
also. This intention of Maximinian soon appears, for he forthwith publicly
assumes the Name and Authority of Emperor, at Arles, from whence retiring to
Marseilles, he was there Besieged by Constantine, and soon made his Prisoner,
and afterward Executed upon himself the just vengeance of Perjury and Treason,
for he strangled himself with a Halter; such a deserved and ignominious end had
this Tyrant, who defiled the Western Empire with the Blood of so many
Christians. Constantine thus Victorious, prosecuted his Victories in Germany,
where he built a Bridge over the Rhine, and subdued several Rebellious Nations.

He had, as is said, several Noble Britains in his Army with him, amongst which
three Unckles of his Mother Helena are Named, Johelin, Traer and Marius. At
this time, although Constantine were not a Christian, yet he afforded the
Christians the like Peace which they enjoyed under his Father; Monasteries were
Replenished and Built, those of Abingdon and Winchester being the principal;
the first whereof was speedily Finished, and Consecrated to the memory of St.
Amphibalus; and for the space of 200 years prosper'd, till the time of Cerdicus
the West Saxon, who then destroying the Monks, turned it into a Temple of
Idolatry. As for that in Abingdon, if the Chronicle of that place may be
Credited, Constantine himself in his younger days had his Education there. To
this Monastery belonged 500. Monks, who got their living by their Labor
abroad, but every Sunday resorted to their Monastery to perform their
Devotions, sixty more were constantly Resident, attending in the Recital of
Psalms and Christian Sacrifices.

It was now that Almighty God in revenge of the Innocent Blood of the
Christians shed by the Tyrant Galerius, visited him with an inward and
Incurable Rottenness, whereof he died, having for a long time consumed him by
piecemeal with great Stench and Torment; neither could he appease the wrath of
God, although, but too late, he acknowledged the Justice of God, and sent out
Edicts in favor of the Christians. Thus ended the furious Persecution first
raised by Dioclesian.

There yet remained four persons who Supremely and Independently governed their
several Provinces; Constantine in Gaul and Britain, Maxentius in Italy and
Africa, Maximinus in the East, and Licinius in the Pannonia, Greece, Illyrium
and Thrace; all which Provinces in a short time became united under the
Monarchy of Constantine.

The 112th. year of Christ was now come, Prosperous to the Church of God: Happy
was it for Christians that Maxentius refused agreement with Constantine, such
were the manifold Vices, Oppressions, Murders, Adulteries and great Enormities
of Maxentius, that Constantine was in a manner enforced, not only for his own
safety, but the general good of Mankind to free the World of such a Monster,
odious not only to Christians, but to Pagans also, to conclude a War against
the Tyrant, though stronger then himself, Constantine therefore had recourse to
Divine assistance; but such a multitude of Gods were Worshipped in the World,
that he was uncertain, to which of them he should Address himself: After
serious consideration, calling to mind how former Emperors had been abused to
their own ruin, by false Oracles, Incantations and Inhumane Sacrifices offered
to their Heathen Gods, he resolves to put his Confidence in that only true God,
which his Mother Helena Worshipped all her Life, and his Father Constantius
toward his end: To that God he offered Zealous and Devout Prayers, That he
would discover to him, who he was, and how he would be Worshipped, and would
protect him in his present condition of danger. His Devotion was not in vain,
for by a stupendous Miracle, in the sight of the whole Army, God declared his
acceptance of his Supplicants Prayers, for he saw over the Sun, then beginning
to decline, the Sign of the Cross in Heaven, figured by a resplendent light,
together with these words inscribed, (...), By this be Victorious; Which
Spectacle caused great admiration, both to himself and his Army. Artemius, one
of the Spectators, afterward relates this Miracle to Julian the Apostate, and
Vouches many of his then present Soldiers for Spectators, and further Witnesses
thereof, some writers add, That many Angels were seen with this Apparition, who
encouraged constantine, and promised him Victory by that Sign; and that he
himself saw an Armed Horseman, who bore in his Hands the sign of the Cross as
an Ensign. The Christians in Constantine's Army were Encouraged by this
Celestial Vision, but the Pagans looked upon it as a Fatal and Ominous Sign,
until the succeeding Victory proved it otherwise: Nay at first the good
Emperor himself, was in great doubt what this strange Vision should Portend,
until at night our Lord appeared to him in his Sleep, bearing the same Sign
with him, and commanded Constantine, To cause a Draught or Copy thereof to be
framed, and to be made use of by him, as a Guard and Protection in all his
Battles. Accordingly Constantine instructed his most cunning Workmen to make a
Banner in imitation thereof, Adorned with Gold and Precious Stones, which he
perpetually had carried before him in his Army: He caused likewise innumerable
representations of the Cross to be fixed in several public and Private places,
especially in several parts of his own Palace, where it was for the most part
framed of Gold, Jewels and Precious Stones. No wonder then if the veneration of
the Holy Cross, every day more and more increased amongst Christians, a
practice used from the most Primitive times, and now Authorized by our Lord
himself from Heaven, as it has been sure confirmed by innumerable Miracles
wrought in several Ages by it.

Constantine encouraged by this Promise of Divine assistance, and Armed with
this Glorious Sign of the Cross, makes toward Italy, Conquers several Nations,
reduces several Cities, and overcomes all Resistance; and having cleared all
the Provinces behind him, marches Courageously to Rome it self; where the
Tyrant for more than six years had exercised all manner of Wickedness. He had
not Courage to Issue out of the City, or oppose Constantine's Progress,
stupify'd with his Lusts, and afrighted with Prodigies, and the Divination of
his South-sayers: But when Constantine approached the City, Maxentius was
enforced to draw out his Army, consisting of 17000 Foot, and 1800. Horse; these
numerous Forces he ranged beyond the Milvian Bridge, so that they were shut out
of the City by the River. The Tyrant used this Stratagem also, he caused the
Bridge to be so framed, that at his pleasure he might dissolve it: Constantine
having ranged his Army on the other side, himself with great Courage gave the
onset; by which he immediately broke his Enemies Ranks, so as little
resistance was made, except by the Praetorian Soldiers, who having Created
Maxentius Emperor, expected no Pardon, and covered the ground with the dead
Bodies: Those who endeavored flight, found it unsuccessful, being hindered by
the straitness of the Bridge; the slaughter was exceeding great, there being no
other way to avoid the Sword, but plunging into the River, wherein great
multitudes were swallowed. The Tyrant himself casting off the marks of
Authority, adventured into Tyber, and being hurried down the Stream was
drowned; his Body being cast upon the shore, the People found, and cut off his
Head, which with great Joy and Triumph, they carried up and down the City
fastn'd to a Pole.

It is affirmed, that since Rome was built, never was a day Celebrated with
greater or more universal Joy, than the day whereon Constantine Triumphed for
this Victory: His Triumphant Chariot, was attended not with Conquered Princes
or Generals but with the Nobility of Rome, freed from Dungeons and Chains; Rome
did not indeed Enrich her self with Spoils of Enemies, but ceased to be the
Spoil of an Inhumane Tyrant. However this Pious Emperor, would have this
common Joy and Applause, ascribed not to himself, but to God only, by virtue of
the Holy Cross, to whom only he gave the Praise and Honor of this Victory: At
his Triumphal entrance into the City, he caused the Cross to be carried before
his Army, that Rome might see by what Arms, she had been freed from Slavery; he
also enjoined the People and Senate to Prostrate themselves before that
Triumphant Sign, and to Adore the Name of Christ, who had Enobl'd the same.

It is therefore a narrow conceit of some, who will not acknowledge that the
Cross was ever Honored or Venerated by this Emperor, or his Command, when it
is most manifest by undeniable Testimony; for it is well known, that
Constantine Dedicated a Church to the Honor of the Holy Cross. This Honor of
the Cross Prudentius thus sounds forth.

Vex illum Crucis summus Dominator Adorat. And not only so, but the said
Emperor signifies his will that all the World should also do so. This Prince
also, further to Honor this Sign of our Salvation, causes his Statue to be
set up in Rome, holding a Cross in the right Hand with this Inscription. By
this saving Sign, the Emblem of Fortitude, I delivered your City from the yoke
of Tyranny; and having given perfect Liberty to the Senate and People of Rome,
I restored them to their Ancient Greatness and Splendor. There was another
Inscription Engraven in Stone by the Decree of the Senate of like purport with
the former, wherein the Victory is ascribed, contrary to the Roman custom, to
one True God, and not to the many Gods there Adored.

After this signal Victory, Constantine sent for Licinius the Emperor to
Millain, and there gave him to Wife his Sister Constantia, and procured an
Edict from him for free Liberty to profess the Christian Religion: what
belonged to Churches, was restored unto them. Both Constantine and Lacinius
join in their request to Maximinus the Eastern Emperor, to grant the like
freedom within his Dominions; to which request Maximinus with much
unwillingness yielded: Matthew of Westminster affirms, That about this time
Constantine chose into the Senate his three Uncles beforementioned, which
might perhaps give occasion to Julian the Apostate, afterward to darken the
memory of this Glorious Emperor, as a perverter of the Ancient Roman Laws, in
being the first who Adorned Barbarous Strangers with Consular Robes.

In the year of Grace 314. Silvester succeeded Melchiades in the Popedom. It
was this Melchiades who ordained, that of the Oblations offered by the People
in the Church, the Bishop or Priest should Consecrate Loaves of Bread, cut into
small parcels, and kept in a pure Vessel, that after the Solemnity of Mass,
such as had not Communicated, should partake of them on all Sundays and Feasts.
These Morsels of Bread thus Blessed, were called Eulogia, and intended to be
Symbols of unity in Faith and Charity, and were made of common Bread. This year
whilst Constantine fought prosperously against the Germans, a certain King of
the Gevissi in the Western part of Britain called Octavius, made an
Insurrection against the Pro-Consul, whom Constantine had entrusted with the
Government of the Country; against whom the Emperor sent his Uncle Traer, who
landing about Portsmouth, soon took it; Octavius having notice thereof, comes
against Traer with strong Forces, and put him to flight, but in a second Battle
in Westmorland, Octavius is totally vanquished, and put to flight into Albania
to King Humbert for Succor. The alteration of Government in Britain might well
occasion this Rebellion of Octavius, in regard the Britains were now governed
by a Vicar of the Prefect of Gaul, where Constantine made his usual abode, and
was disquieted more by the Faction of Schismatics, than any other Commotions,
so as Constantine was enforced to procure a General Assembly, or Synod at
Arles, for composing the Sedition raised by the Donatists, to which Synod the
British Bishops were called, and the proceedings thereof are as follows.

Although Persecution was somewhat abated, yet the Enemies of Christians to
give them still disturbance, endeavored to divide them into Factions. The
first public Infamous Scene, of which scandal was Carthage in Africa, the
occasion this. Caecilianus Archdeacon of the place, had reprehended Lucilla a
Spanish woman living in that City, for that before receiving the Holy
Sacrament, she had with Veneration kissed the Head of a certain person,
esteemed by her a Martyr, but not acknowledged for such by the Bishop: The
Woman being Wealthy and Powerful, studied revenge against Caecilianus, who was
newly chosen Bishop; and required restitution of certain Vessels of Silver and
Gold belonging to the Church, which in the late Persecution, had by his
Predecessor been recommended to the Fidelity of some Elders of that City. They
to avoid restoring of these Vessels, joined themselves to the Faction of Botrus
and Celesius, who had ambitiously sought after the said Bishopric, but were
rejected: This repulse incited them to question the Election of Caecilianus;
Lucilla betook her self to this Faction, who withdrew themselves from the
Communion of their Bishop, and by means whereof a most horrible Schism was
raised in Africa, the slame whereof could not be extinguished in many Ages.

These Factious persons invited to Carthage several African Bishops, who were
convicted to be Traditors, such as for fear of Persecution had delivered up to
Heathen Magistrates, the Books and Vessels belonging to the Church, of which
Bishops the principal was Secundus Primate of Numidia; they were in all 17. and
kept their Assemblies at Carthage separate from Caecilianus; and presumed
Sacrilegiously to ordain another Bishop of Carthage, one Majorinus, who had
been Lectorer formerly to Caecilianus, and was now a Domestic of Lucilla.
These Bishops, though they were themselves manifest Traditors, yet questioned
the Ordination of Caecilianus, because he received it from Felix, and others,
whom they falsely accused of their own Crime. They further wrongfully charge
Caecilianus, with denying necessary Provision to several Martyrs in Prison.
Notwithstanding all which Calumnies, he was acknowledged Lawful Bishop, by the
Bishop of Rome, and all other Catholic Bishops.

Now though this Schism was chiefly forged by Botrus and Celesius, with the
said Elders and Lucilla, and increased by Secundus and other Traditor Bishops,
yet it took its Name from Donatus who succeeded Majorinus in the Schism, and
not from that Donatus, who being Bishop of Casae nigrae, by the instigation of
Lucilla withdrew himself from the Communion of Caecilianus, and was condemned
by Pope Melchiades. This unhappy Schism gained such strength in a short space,
that in three years, joining themselves unto other Traditor Bishops, and
drawing into their Communion most of the Numidians, they assembled a Council of
no fewer than 270. Bishops, who continued together 75 days, and repeating their
former Constitutions, made a Decree in favor of the Traditors. When
Constantine had overcome Maxentius, the Donatists obtained Letters from
Anulinus Governor of Africa, to write Letters to the Emperor in Gaul, full of
Calumnious Accusation against Caecilianus; and some of these Schismatical
Bishops made a Voyage to the Emperor, whom they requested, to appoint some
Judges of their Cause; He gave them this Answer with indignation, You require a
Secular Judgment from me, who my self expect the Judgment of Christ. Yet at
last, with extreme importunity, they wrested from him for their Judges
Materinus Bishop of Colonia Aggrippina, Rhetitius Bishop of Austim, and Marius
Bishop of Arles: Howbeit, soon after considering the Authority of the Roman
Bishop, he commanded both Parties to attend the said Judges at Rome, that the
difference might be debated and concluded before Melchiades, to whom the
Emperor wrote, to the end that the Contestants might receive their Judgment
from Him, and the other Judges; As you know (says he) the Holy Law of God
requires a Synod; Therefore being Assembled at Rome, the result of it was, that
Donatus Bishop of Casaenigrae was condemned, and Caecilianus acquitted: From
this Judgment they impudently appealed to the Emperor, who cried out, O the
rabid impudence of these men's fury; they have presumed to interpose an Appeal,
as the custom is among Heathens in Secular Causes: Yet after all this, the
Donatists were so shameless, as to boast that Constantine had given Judgment
for them; and to deprave the Judgment of Pope Melchiades, they traduce him for
a Traditor.

Still they continue their Tumults in Africa, and principally direct their
malice against Felix, who ordained Caecilianus, and whom they accused of being
a Traditor; Constantine left the determination of this difference to Aelianus
Pro-Consul of Africa, who detecting many Lies and Frauds of the Donatists,
legally pronounced the Innocence of Felix: Yet once more they Appealed to the
Emperor, to whose Court many of their Bishops repaired, complaining that many
of their most weighty Allegations had not been taken into consideration by
Aelianus. Whereupon as St. Augustine says, not daring to become a Judge, of a
Judgment given by the Bishop of Rome, he referred the matter to a Synod of all
the Western Bishops, appointed to meet at the City of Arles, whose Charges were
defrayed by the Emperor's order: In this Council 200. Bishops met, who in the
first place re-examin'd the Cause of Felix, and declared him guiltless of the
Crime of Traditor: And this Cause being determined, they thought fit to frame
several Canons touching Ecclesiastical Discipline, to be observed throughout
the whole Church.

First they Ordained, That the Feast of Easter should in all Churches be
Celebrated upon the same day, in opposition to the Quarto decimani, who
observed it according to the Jewish custom, upon the 14th. day of the first
Moon in March, which practice began to prevail more and more in the East: To
this Canon the British Bishops then of this Council subscribed. Another Canon
of this Council is worthy consideration, namely, That all such should be
removed from the Order of the Clergy, who in time of Persecution, had delivered
up to the Pagans the Holy Scriptures, or the Lords Vessels deputed for the
Christian Sacrifice, as by the 20th. Canon of this Council appears, which
commands, That a place to offer Sacrifice, should be afforded to a Stranger
Bishop, with Vessels for that purpose; And thereupon Restitutus a British
Bishop, who subscribed to that Council, did there offer Sacrifice accordingly.
Some pretend a Canon in this Council, That Deacons in their Ordination,
protesting their resolution to Marry, might lawfully do it. If any such Canon
be foysted into late Copies, giving Deacons any such privilege; yet seeing
Priests were not therein mentioned, it is strongly implied, that they were
forbidden Marriage.

At the conclusion of this Synod, a Letter was written in the Name of the whole
Assembly to Pope Silvester, Desiring his Care and Diligence in the Observation
of their Decrees in all Churches: The British Subscribers to this Council were
these that follow, Eborius Bishop of York, Restitutus beforenam'd Bishop of
London, famous in the year of Grace 350. the third Adelfus Bishop of
Camolodunum, or Maldon. About this time a public Disputation was held before
the Emperor and his Mother Helena, between some Christian Bishops, whereof
Pope Silvester was chief, and twelve Scribes and Pharisees, principal Masters
amongst the Jews; in which conflict the Holy Pope by Scriptures and Miracles,
so confirmed the Faith, that he obtained a Noble Victory; insomuch as the Jews
fell into a slat Rebellion against the Emperor; But being suppressed, were
carried up and down, with their Ears cut off, as stigmatized Slaves, that all
men might be Witnesses of their Crime, and deterred from the like presumption:
Some impute the said Disputation to Helena, as if she were a favourer of the
Jews, and no Christian before her Sons Conversion, and so only by his Example,
contrary to the Truth of all Authentic Story. It may indeed be true, that her
Piety was much increased by the Apparition of the Holy Cross to her Son:
Howbeit, there is no doubt but she was a sincere Christian long before,
whatever Aspersions may be cast upon her, by ill-willers.

In the year 317. Licinius forgetful of his Covenant with Constantine, began a
Persecution against the Christians, and a War against Constantine, who after
two Battles obtained a complete Victory, accompanied with the Death of
Licinius. This success, Constantine himself, under God, attributed to his
Sacred Ensign of the Cross; whereof Licinius was so afraid, that he commanded
his Soldiers, not so much as to look toward it; for it was observed, that
whoever bore that Ensign, could never be Wounded, the Darts cast by the Enemy
still remaining six'd to the Staff supporting the Cross: And now Constantine
betook himself to Enrich and Adorn the Church, and confer Immunities upon
Churchmen, he published a Law that all Clerks and Clergymen, should be
excused from all Civil Offices and Duties, that by the ill will or malice of
any they might not be withdrawn from the Service of God. Nay, (says Sozomen)
by this Emperor's Decree, if any Clergyman were called into Judgment by
Civil Magistrates, they might Appeal to the Judgment of Bishops, whose
Sentence was to be Ratified, as if pronounced by the Emperor himself.

Moreover, whereas the Roman Laws were severe against Celibacy, so as Unmarry'd
persons were incapable of Inheritances; Constantine considering how prejudicial
this was to Christian Religion, wherein many professed Virginity and Single
lives, preferring the Love of Christian Philosophy and Perfection, before the
Sensual Pleasures of Matrimony, and Consecrating themselves both Soul and Body
to the Service of God, in a Poor and Chaste Life; for that reason, utterly
abolished those Ancient Laws, showing withal great Honor and Admiration to
the Convents of Consecrated Virgins. And if we will believe Sozomen, He so far
priviledg'd all persons Male or Female, who Consecrated themselves to
Virginity, that though they were under Age, yet they should have Power to
dispose of their Estates by Will, contrary to the custom of the Romans. He
further also ordained, That a measure of Wheat should yearly be given to
Widows, and those who observed a Virgin Life, (two thirds whereof Julian the
Apostate not long after took from them) He commanded public rest on the Lords
day, and prescribed a form of Prayer on that day for all persons, especially
his Soldiers: Part whereof was in these words, We acknowledge thee, the only
God, we prefess thee our Sovereign King; we invoke thee our Helper, by thee we
obtain Victories, and vanquish our Enemies; we acknowledge that from Thee we
have obtained present Felicity, and hope to obtain future: We bescech thee many
years to preserve safe and victorious Constantine our Emperor, with his Pious
Children. He likewise in memory of our Saviors Cross and Passion, ordained,
That upon Fridays, some time should be spent in Prayers to God. Lastly, He not
only Enriched the Church by his own Bounty, but by a Law opened the Purses of
others to Endow it, by giving License to all persons to bequeath what they
thought sit to the Church.

By one Action indeed he stained the Purity of his Faith, for being at Sardis,
and having notice, that his Palace at Rome was struck with Lightning, an
Ominous Sign to the Pagan Romans, and by their Ancient Laws to be averted by
many Superstitious Lustrations; he condescended to the importunity of the
Magistrates to Consult the Soothsayers, what the meaning of it might be; but
commanded them to abstain from Domestical Sacrifices. This unlawful compliance
of the Emperor, turned to the prejudice of the Christians; for by color
thereof, (at the instigation of the Soothsayers) the Heathen Magistrates would
compel the Christians to join in the public Expiatory Sacrifices, so as many
chose rather to leave the City; and amongst the rest, the Holy Pope Silvester.
Constantine informed hereof, publishes an Edict, That if any should go about to
compel any Christian to Celebrate Heathenish Lustrations, he should, (if a mean
person,) be publicly beaten with Clubs; if otherwise, he should be grievously
Fined.

In the year 324. after our Saviors Incarnation, according to the Tradition of
the Western Church, confirmed by many Proofs; Constantine received Baptism at
Rome by the Hands of Pope Silvester; upon this occasion, Constantine had rashly
put to death Licinius his Sisters Son, falsely accused of a design to Rebel; and
Crispus his own Son, adorned with many Virtues, and famous for many Victories,
yet accused by Fausta his Mother-in-Law, to have attemptod her Chastity; which
accusation appearing after to be false, and invented by Fausta maliciously,
because the young man would not yield to her Lust; she was by Constantine's
order stifled in a Hot Bath. After which Crimes and Calamities, as appears by
the second General Council of Nice: Almighty God struck Constantine with a
Leprosy: anxious to find a remedy; the Soothsayers told him, The only way to
be restored, was by a Bath of Infants Blood: This detestable Medicine being
abhorred by Constantine, God was pleased to instruct him by a Vision of St.
Peter and St. Paul, in his sleep, That it would be a certain remedy for him to
receive Baptism at the hands of the Pope; Which he did accordingly with great
Solemnity: In the place where he was Baptized, he Erected a Magnificent
Chapel; wherein was a Font of Porphyrie covered with Silver, and over it hung
a Phiale of Pure Gold, wherein yearly 200 l. of Balsom was Burned; on the brink
of the Font, was placed a Lamb of pure Gold, weighing 30 l. and pouring forth
water into the Font: At the right side of the Lamb stood the Statue of our
Savior, all of pure Silver, weighing 170 l. On the left side was placed St.
John Baptist, holding a Scroul, whereon was written, Behold the Lamb of God,
Behold him who takes away the sins of the World, etc. The Emperor according to
the Churches custom, being for seven days, clothed in White, Consecrated each
of the said days with some Signal act of Piety. On the first day he published a
Law, That Christ is the true Lord, who cleans'd him from his Leprosy, and whom
he commanded to be Adored through the whole Empire, On the second day he
Decreed, Severe Punishments on those who by Word or Deed should Dishonor him.
On the third day he Decreed Like Penalties against those who should Persecute
or Molest any Christians. On the fourth day, He conferred on the Roman Churches
Imperial Privileges. On the fifth day, He granted Immunities to all other
Churches. On the sixth and seventh, he added many other Gists to Ecclesiastical
Persons. And the day after he appeared in public, perfectly cleans'd from his
Sins and Leprosy, and coming to the Confession of St. Peter, He took his
Diadem from his Head, and putting off his Impertal Robes, with a Spade opened
the Earth for a Foundation of a new Church; and in Honor of the 12 Apostles,
carried on his Shoulders 12 Baskets of Earth; and with great joy receiving the
Bishop into his Chariot, he returned to his Palace.

After all this, he extended his Munificence to Gods Church all the Empire
over; and sent Letters to the Eastern Bishops, encouraging them to Build
Churches, supplying them out of his public Treasure; which Churches he caused
to be Consecrated to the Honor of the Apostles and Martyrs, whose solemn
Feasts he commanded to be observed even by the Pagans with Honor and
Veneration.

And as for the Christians they repaired thither with great Zeal, and as
Supplicants there, demanded the intercession of those Martyrs; a practice then
used, not only by the meaner sort, but by persons of the highest rank also: As
St. Chrysostom witnesses, He who wears the Imperial Robe (says he) comes
hither, he embraces the Sepulchers of the Martyrs, and laying aside all
haughtiness and pride, stands before them in the Posture of a Supplicant,
beseeching them to intercede on his behalf.

This so public and zealous Profession of a new Religion, rendered Constantine
displeasing to some of the Senate, who could not with Patience endure the decay
of their Ancient Superstition: For this cause he grew weary of Rome, and made a
Progress into the Eastern Provinces; where he established a new seat of the
Empire at Bizantium, after from his Name called Constantinople; and this he did
the rather to compose the Tumults raised by the Blasphemous Heresy of Arius,
who denied the Divinity of the Son of God; affirming, That time was, when he
was not; though he was first of all Creatures: In which Heresy, not a few
Bishops joined with him to the great disturbance and scandal of the Christian
Church; Alexander Bishop of Alexandria, first admonished, then Excommunicated
Arius. Constantine by Exhortations and Letters treated with both of them, for
the composing of their differences; but finding no means available, caused a
Council of the whole Church to be assembled at Nicaea in Bythinia, consisting
of 318 Bishops, who desided the Controversy, from Scripture and Tradition,
determining, That the Son was (...), Consubstantial with the Father.

It is observable; with what Meekness, Charity and Respectfulness the Pious
Emperor behaved himself toward the Bishops; how he refused to judge of their
Recriminations, how he fortified the Determinations of the Synod by his
Authority, commanding submission thereunto; and how he banished the
Arch-Heretick Arius. In this Council was further Order made, For the universal
Observation of Easter, upon the first Sunday following the 14th. day of the
first Moon after the Vernal Equinox; for the better finding out of which, it
was recommended to the care of the Patriarch of Alexandria, every year to give
notice to the Bishop of Rome, upon what day Easter was to be observed, and this
was to be communicated unto all remoter Churches; and during Mass on the
Epiphany, a Deacon with a loud voice declared the following Easter, whereby
Lent, and all other moveable Feasts, were regulated: And accordingly the
British Churches also were guided, until recourse from Rome was interrupted by
Domestic Broils, and the invasion of the Saxons; and when by such interruption
the Britains varied from the Western Churches, they kept not Easter as the
quarto decimani, precisely upon the 14th. day of the Moon, after the Jewish
mode; But if that 14th. day hapen'd upon a Sunday, they did not defer the
Observation until the Sunday following, as other Catholic Christian Churches
used to do.

Soon after this Council of Nice, Helena the Mother of Constantine being near
80. years old, had the Courage to undertake a Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, to visit
the Holy places sanctified by our Lords Actions and Sufferings, and to Adore
his Footsteps: to which tedious Journey she is said to be incited by Divine
Admonition: The Sepulcher of our Lord she most ardently desired to see, which
the flagitious Impiety of the Pagans, had endeavored to hide from the World,
so that it cost incredible Labor to remove that vast heap of Earth, wherewith
it had been covered; on the top whereof a Temple to Venus was Erected: But the
place being cleans'd, Constantine caused a most Magnificent Temple to be
Erected upon it: Besides which, his Mother began the building of two other
Sumptuous Churches, one at Bethlehem where our Lord was born, another on Mount
Olivet, where he ascended into Heaven, both which, after her Death, were
finished by her Son.

In the Mount was yet extant the Impression of our Lords Feet, which this
Devout Empress Honored with due Veneration: The Prophet Zacharias long before
Prophesied, saying, And in that day his feet shall stand upon the Mount Olivet
over against Jerusalem to the East: And St. Jerome testifies, That the same
footsteps of our Lord imprinted on the ground, were shown in his time, so as
though the Earth were continually taken away by the Devotion of Christians, yet
these Holy footsteps did receive and retain their former state. Sulpitius
Severus relates a strange story, namely, That the place where our Lords feet at
his Ascension stood, could not be continued to the rest of the Pavement about
it, for whenever Marble was laid on it, the Earth refused to receive it,
casting the Stones often times upwards in the Faces of those which applied them;
and the footsteps of our Lord there seen, are a lasting Monument, that the Dust
there had been trod on by our Savior. To this Beda adds, That whereas the
Temple built over this place, consisted of three Stories, the uppermost whereof
were Vaulted with Arches; that which was the lowest and most inward, could by
no Art or Labor be closed with a Vault.

The Holy Empress was now in earnest quest of the Holy Cross on which our Lord
perfected the Redemption of Mankind, by the Apparition of which her Son had
been lately drawn to Faith and Baptism: A Rumor there was, that it was still
extant, and hid up in some of those Holy places, but where to find it was the
difficulty; several places thereabout were dig'd, but all in vain; at last the
Religious Lady was by a Celestial Admonition informed where it lay. Whereupon
causing all the Rubbish to be removed, she found under ground three Crosses in
a confused order, whereby her joy was diminished, by the uncertainty which was
the true one; there was also found with them the Title which had been written
by Pilate in Greek, Latin and Hebrew Letters; but being separated, gave no
token to discern which was our Lords Cross: In this doubtfulness, the only
remedy was by Prayer to beg a Divine Testimony: At the same time, there was in
the City a Woman of quality, who lay Sick of a Grievous Disease, ready to
Expire; Macarius Bishop of Jerusalem seeing the Empress so sollicitous to
discover the true Cross, commanded that all-three should be brought, not
doubting but that God would discover the true one; and being entered with the
Empress into the Sick Woman's Chamber, Prayed, That God would be pleased to show
unto them, which of those three Crosses was employed to glorisie our Lord, and
which for the punishments of the Malefactors, and that this discovery might be
made by the restoring of the Woman half dead, upon the touches of the True
Cross. The first and second were applied without any avail or effect; but as
soon as the third was applied unto her, she opened her Eyes, and rose up in
perfect Health, and went about her House with great alacrity, Praising and
Glorifying the Power of God.

And thus was the Empress satisfied in her longing desire, by the Attestation
of many Ecclesiastical Writers, so as in memory of this saving sign, she
Dedicated a peculiar Church; and for the Cross it self thus found, she sent
part of it to the Emperor, to be Honorably bestowed in his Palace; the
remainder she enclosed in a Box of Silver, and gave it to the Bishop of
Jerusalem, to be reserved as a Monument of our Salvation; and for many years
after, upon the day of our Lords Resurrection, it was produced with Veneration
by the Bishop, and exposed also to the People to be by them likewise Venerated.
That part which was sent to Constantine, he enclosed in a Statue of his own,
which was placed on a mighty Pillar of Porphyry in the Marketplace of
Constantinople, and was by him esteemed as a mighty Bulwark of his Empire: The
Nails which pierced our Saviors Sacred flesh, were artificially enclosed in
the Emperor's Helmet, as a Guard for his Head. One of them indeed in a great
Tempest the Empress threw into the Adriatic Sea, and by that means, as is
presumed, saved her self and Company from Shipwreck.

Our Helena being a British Princess, drawing near the end of her Life,
increased in her Zeal and Piety; her Humility and Devout respect to Holy
Virgins Consecrated to the Service of God, appeared by this example, That she
invited some of them to Dinner, and thought it not enough that her Maids should
attend upon them, but girding her self after the manner of a waiting Maid, set
Meat upon the Table, gave them Drink, and poured Water on their Hands: Thus,
though an Empress, she esteemed her self no better than a a Servant and
Handmaid of Christ and his Virgins: In all her Progress through the Eastern
Provinces, she largely expressed her wonderful Munificence, giving innumerable
Gifts, not only to particular Persons, but to whole Cities; she largely
relieved the Poor, such as were condemned to work in Mines, or perpetual
Imprisonment, she set at liberty, the Oppressed she delivered from fraud and
injury, and the Banished she restored to their own Country.

In her return out of Palestine into Greece, she passed by Drepanum in
Bithynia, where reposed the Body of the Glorious Martyr Lucianus; as soon as
she saw his Relics neglected, without any mark of Honor or Reverence, she
caused a Sumptuous Church to be Built over them, and enlarged the place into a
City with Walls and Bulwarks, called by her Son after her Name Helenopolis.
Moreover, this Holy Empress in her Progress through the East, having been
informed where the Bodies of the three Wise men who came to Bethlehem to Adore
our newborn Savior, reposed, brought them with her to her Son Constantine,
who Reverently laid them in the chief Church of his new City, from whence they
were translated to Milan, and from thence to Colen, where they now are
Celebrated with great Veneration. In such Pious Works did this Holy Empress
conclude her Worldly Pilgrimage.

It is most probable she Deceased at Rome, Aged above 80 years, and was there
Honorably Interred; her occasion of returning thither, was after the laudable
custom of Christians in those days to visit the Sepulchers of the two chief
Apostles: She brought with her to Rome a part of the Holy Cross, which, with
great Veneration she placed in a Church there Built at her Request by her Son,
called by the Title of the Holy Cross. It is reported, She spent her last days
in great Devotion, and approaching to her Death, after her receiving the
Sacraments of the Church, she was comforted with a Vision of our Lord Jesus,
encompassed with a multitude of Angels, and holding his Cross, shining with
inexpressible Brightness. Eusebius testisies, That her Son Constantine with all
humble respect attended her in her Sickness, and was present at her Death;
having received many Devout Exhortations, and the Benediction of a Parent from
her: Such was the Emperor's Piety and Respect to his Mother, that she is said,
To have reigned as Empress with him, to be styled Augusta, to be transferred
into the Flavian Family; so that many Golden Coins were made and stamped with
her Image.

After her Death, her Son Constantine built unto her Honor a Magnificent
Sepulcher or Mausoleum, where in a Tomb of Porphyry he laid her Blessed Body,
situate in the Highway, called Lavicana, between two Lawrel-Trees, her Body
afterward, if we will believe the Gallican Martyrology, was removed into a
Monastery in France, and there continued Illustrious by many Miracles. In the
Church of the Holy Cross at Rome, Anciently called, The Church of St. Helena;
an Illustrious Monument was Erected in memory of her, and the like is to be
seen in Naples.

This Island wherein this Noble Empress was born, has not been ungrateful to
her Memory. The Monuments of her and all others raised by the Britains, have
been consumed by Age; but even the Saxons, when once Converted to Christianity,
left many Monuments and Expresses of their Devout respect to this British Lady,
by Consecrating Churches in memory of her, witness Hellenstone in Barkshire,
and several Churches Dedicated in this Saints Name in London, and many other
places.

Constantine continues his Zeal against Pagan Idolatry, and made severe Laws
against Heathenish Sacrifices, overthrowing the most Celebrated of the
Idol-Temples; neither was he wanting to establish the Churches Peace, by
publishing severe Edicts against all sorts of Heretics and their Assemblies,
mingled with such persuasive Exhortations, that many of them acknowledging
their Errors, returned to the Communion of the Catholic Church: Yet this Holy
Emperor being seduced by the Craft of Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, the Pillar
of the Arrian Faction, he began to be displeased with St. Athanasius then
Bishop of Alexandria. His Sister Constantia checked him at her Death with his
Severity to the Arrians, whom she accounted Innocent persons; upon this the
Emperor wrote a threatening Letter to Athanasius, enjoining him to receive
Arrius; but being after informed, that this Arrius still persisted in his
Heresy, and without any Repentance opposed the Council of Nice, the good
Emperor no longer insisted upon his Reception; and not only stuck to
Athanasius against the Miletians, but turned his Anger against the said
Eusebius, his chiefest Enemy, whom he banished with other Confederate Bishops
from their Sees; though soon after, upon the Inauguration of his new City
Constantinople, as objects of his Clemency, he thought fit to restore them.

This City is said to be Consecrated to our Lord and his Immaculate Mother,
with the offering of the unbloody Sacrifice and Prayers; and then a Statue was
erected for Constantine in a public place upon a Pillar of Porphyry, holding
in his right Hand a Golden Apple, on which was placed the Holy Cross, with this
Inscription, To thee, O Christ, our Lord, I commend this City. Eusebius writes,
That Constantine adorned his new City, especially with Magnisicent Churches,
Consecrated to Holy Martyrs, the chief whereof were St. Moscus, St.
Agathonicus, St. Mennas and St. Acatius. One Church he built in a place there
formerly Dedicated to Vesta, and called it St. Michael, from an Apparition of
that Holy Archangel: In which, by virtue of the Holy Cross there erected, many
Miracles are said to have been wrought; one of which I cannot omit, viz. That a
Soldier of the Emperor's Guards, Probianus by Name, afflicted with grievous
Torments in his feet, not only received ease in that place, but was also
honored with a wonderful and Divine Vision. He was converted to Christianity,
and thoroughly satisfied with all points of that Religion; yet he could never
be persuaded that the Holy Cross could be any wise instrumental to the
Salvation of mankind: Being thus persuaded, the Image of the Cross was
presented to him in a Vision, as it was usually set on the Altar of that
Church; and in the same Vision it was declared to him manifestly, that what
thing soever had been performed either by Angels or Holy men, for the public
or private profit of men, since Christ was Crucified, were not rightly
performed, but by Virtue of the Saving Cross.

Constantine was not wanting richly to Endow the Churches he had built, he
caused Copies of the Holy Scriptures to be Curiously writ in Parchments, richly
adorned, which he dispersed and placed in his said Churches; he encourages the
Professors of all Arts and Sciences, so as Learning flourished in his City; he
endeavored to make it equal with old Rome, by placing Senators there with the
same Honor and Authority, and many of them Professors of Christianity.

In the midst of this Serene Calm, a sharp storm sell upon the good Athanasius,
principal Defender of the Nicene Faith; for the restless malice of the Arrians,
pricked them on to accuse him falsely, Of breaking a Chalice, of Murder, of
Enchantments with his dead Hand, of Adultery by Violence, etc. His Cause was
examined in a Synod of Bishops assembled at Tire, by whom, to the great
astonishment of Conslantine, the good Athanasius, though in all particulars his
Innocence was evidently declared, was yet unjustly condemned; and by the
importunity of Constantius the Emperor's Son, infected with that Poisonous
Arrian Heresy, banished into the West, or rather advisd to withdraw himself,
to avoid the impetuous clamor of the Arrians against him: For he retired to
Triers in France, where by the Emperor's order, he wanted nothing. Now that
this was not consented unto by Constantine, as in any wise wavering in the
Faith, may appear by this following Relation, Constantine desiring to be
satisfied what the Opinion of Arrius truly was, asked him, whether he did
approve the Decrees of the Nicene Council: He presently with a cheerful
countenance, answered, That he approved them: The Emperor not satisfied with
this Affirmation, urged him to confirm it by an Oath; to which likewise he
complied; But all this was impious Craft and subtilty; for whilst he made this
Profession and Oath, he had in his bosom a Paper containing his Heresy, and
swore from his Heart he believed what he had written, reserring still to that
Paper; Constantine never the less warned him, that if his Faith were true and
Orthodox, he had sworn well; but if otherwise, God (said he) may condemn thee
for thy Perjury. However Constantine being deluded with this Equivocation, sent
to the Pishop of Alexandria to receive the Hypocrite into Communion: But we
shall presently see how God discovered miraculously the Impiousness of Arrius,
and true Faith of Constantine.

For Alexander Bishop of Constantinople, not willing to admit the
Arch-Heretick, but sollicitous for the True Faith, more than for his
Bishopric, which some threat ned to deprive him of; lay prostrate several days
and nights before his Altar, and prayed to God, that if the Opinion of Arrius
were true, he might die before the day of Disputation came; But in case the
Faith which he professed were true, then that Arrius, the Author of all those
Calamities, might suffer just punishment for his Impiety: Which Prayer it seems
was soon heard; for Arrius in his way to the Church, using many vain and
boasting Bablings, was on a sudden sorc'd to retire to a common Privy to ease
himself; where, as is written of Judas, he fell on his Face to the ground and
burst asunder in the middle, and was in that manner deprived both of Life and
Communion: This struck the Eusebian Faction with wonderful Terror and
consternation, the Fame whereof soon spread it self over the whole World, and
confirmed the Emperor's Faith, and the Nicene Decrees.

This year died the Holy Pope Marcus, Successor of Silvester, and in his stead
Julius succeeded in the last year of our Renowned Emperor, one of whose last
Acts of Devotion, was the building of a most Magnificent Temple at
Constantinople in Honor of all the Apostles, that he might Eternize their
memory among all Nations. In this Temple, he placed twelve Honorary
Repositories, which should be as so many Pillars, in memory of the twelve
Apostles, and caused his own Tomb to be placed in the midst of them, enclosed
on each side with six of them, having an opinion, That their memory would
procure much profit to his Soul, by being so made partaker of their Prayers,
which would there be offered in Honor of the Apostles. As many other British
and Saxons Kings, in erecting Churches and Monasterres have since done, for the
Redemption of their Souls; and so expressed themselves in several Charters of
their Foundation.

This Emperor it seems so Happily enjoyed his faculties and strength of
Reason, in such perfection, that till the extremity of his Age, he still
continued to write Orations, and to Minister Advice to his Friends, well
becoming a good Christian. He also published good Laws, expedient for Humane
Society; and not long before his Death, he recited a Funeral Oration in the
usual place, wherein he Discoursed, Of the Immortality of Souls, of the Rewards
of Pious men, and the Miseries of such who lived ungodly lives. This he
pronounced with such Gravity and Constancy, that one of his Domestique Servants
(a Pagan) and pretender to Wisdom, being asked what he thought of the
Emperor's Oration, Answered, though with some unwillingness, That the things
spoken seemed to be true, especially commending that part of the Oration which
decry'd a multitude of Gods. It is said, that a Comet of an unusual bigness,
appeared in the Heavens, as portending his death; for he soon after fell into
some Distemper, which enforced him to use Hot Baths; and being removed to his
Mothers City Helenopolis in Bythinia, he continued some considerable time, in
the Church Consecrated to the Holy Martyr St. Lucianus, there offering his
Prayers and public Vows to God; and there considering his last day, he fell
humbly upon his Knees in this Church, confessing his sins, and craving pardon
for them; and then it was that he first became worthy to receive Absolution by
imposition of Hands and Prayer, in imitation of the Saving Laver of Baptism:
After these and such like Holy Mysteries were performed, he was clothed with
Kingly Robes, shining bright as the Light, and then laid in a Bed of a most
pure Whiteness; his Imperial Purple he rejected, and never made use of it
afterward: Then with a clear distinct voice he Prayed, and gave Thanks to God,
declaring, He was now assured of Happiness and Immortality, being made partaker
of Divine Light. With great detestation he bewailed the miserable state of
Pagans, in that they were deprived of all Divine Blessings. To his great
Officers who stood about him, and deplored their unhappiness in the loss of
such an Emperor, wishing him a long Life; he answered, That he had now
attained true Life indeed, and he himself understood his own Happiness, and
therefore he longed for his departure to God. And having made his Will, and
given Honorable Pensions to the Inhabitants of his new City, and left his
Empire as a Patrimony to his Children; during the Solemnity of Pentecost, he
departed this Life in Glory and Renown.

The universal Mourning and Sorrow of his People, and the Solemnities of his
Funeral are set forth at large by many Authors: Great multitudes of the People,
with the Priests, ceased not to pour forth their Prayers to God with Tears and
Groaning for the Soul of their departed Emperor; his memory was also so
precious amongst the Britains, that they built Temples in Honor of him, one
whereof still remains of his Name in North Wales, which was erected after they
were driven by the Saxons into those quarters.

Constantine at his death, divided the Roman Empire amongst his three Sons, so
that his Eldest Son Constantine enjoyed Gaul, Spain, Britain, and all the
Conquered Countries on this side the Alps. Constantius his second Son, only
present at his Fathers Death, possessed himself of the Eastern Regions and
Egypt. And the youngest Son Constans had the Government of Italy and Africa.

Now as touching the second Constantine, within whose Jurisdiction our Country
is comprised: His Reign was short, not lasting full four years; sure it is He
and his Brother Constans stuck close to the Catholic Faith Established in the
Nicene Council, so as all the Western Churches were by their means secured from
the infection of Heresy, which miscrably defaced the Eastern parts, in regard
Constantius there suffered himself to be perverted by the Arrian Heretics:
Constantine the younger, in proof of his Orthodoxy, and in performance of his
Fathers Will, restored Athanasius from his banishment at Triers, where he had
continued above two years, to his Church at Alexandria; his banishment was the
easier to him, in regard he was sent thither by Constantine the Father in order
to his safety, and entertained there with all Honor and Liberality by
Constantine the Son, whose constant residence was in Gaul, and who governed
Britain by a Deputy, never coming thither himself.

In the 4th. year of his Reign, he passed over into Italy, upon what design is
uncertain; However he was soon there Traytorously slain by his Brothers
Soldiers, if not by his Order. By the Death of this Constantine, the whole
Western Empire became the Dominion of Constans, who placed Vetranio as his
Lieutenant in Britain, where after a few years, he usurped the Title of
Emperor. About this time there flourished in Britain a Holy Bishop of great
fame, called St. Gudwall, who was born of Noble Parents, and largely
communicated to others those Treasures of Heavenly Wisdom, which he had been
gathering from his youth; his Instructions Enlightn'd many, so as they were
enabled to inflame others with Divine Love, the Odor of his Holy Conversation
declaring in him the operations of Heavenly Grace, was pleasant to all both
Clergy and Laity: The Patrimony he received from his Parents, was very ample;
yet despising worldly Riches, he gave it all to the Church: And perceiving his
Pastoral Office, engaged him in Worldly Cares and Solicitudes, and willing to
disburden himself thereof; he recommends his Church to a worthy Successor, and
retires himself into a Monastery within his own Diocese, where he led a perfect
Monastical, or rather Angelical Life: His Monastery was placed near the Sea, in
a Bay where-of the Holy man observing a certain vast Rock, or Promontory
shooting forth, retired thither, that he might attend on God without
interruption; into which place he gathered to him about the number of 180.
Disciples. It is reported, That the place being too strait for so many, the
Blessed man having recourse to God, in whose Power and Goodness he placed his
confidence, when the Sea at low ebb had left the shore for a great space, with
a Rod which he had in his Hands, made impressions in several places of the
Sands, and commanded the waters in the Name of Christ, not to pass those
bounds, upon which the Sea was observed to restrain its own violence and
swelling, insomuch, as to this day, it has never presumed to pass those
prescribed limits.

Thus the Holy man is said to bid adieu to all his Friends, to the Vanities of
this World, and to all obstacles to Perfection, Mortifying all his Sensual
Desires; and yet not contented, resolved to leave his Native Country, and
accompanied with his Brethren, landed in a Province of Belgic Gaul, inhabited
by a People called the Morini, to whom he Preached the Christian Faith,
instructing many in the Perfection of a Holy Life. About those parts there then
lived a Prince called Mevorus, at or near a place called at this day Cormon:
This Prince professed Christianity, and having notice of the arrival of St.
Gudwall within his Consines, kindly received him. Mevorus and his Wife were
much stricken in years, and had no Children; St. Gudwall in a Dream appeared to
the Matron, and promised her she should have a Son, which should be called
Simeon: Mevorus being informed by his Wife of this her Dream, promised that
this Son when born, with all his Hereditary Possessions, should be assigned to
the Church and Monastery which this Holy Bishop and Hermit, with the Treasure
of Mevorus was then building, probably near Ipre, where a Village called
Ghelwelt seems to afford some Marks of St. Gudwall's Name.

The Son thus Promised, soon after was born, and called Simeon, brought up in
Learning by St. Gudwall, made a Monk, and his Possessions conferred on the
Monastery. It is said this Holy Bishop, after all his Labors, rested in our
Lord about the year of Christ 403. It is written, that before his death an
Angel of our Lord appeared to him with a Pleasant Countenance, saying, O worthy
Soldier of God, may the joy of our Lord always increase in thee, and his Peace
continually remain with thee; be prepared, for e're long God will call thee out
of this World, and thou shall meet thy Heavenly King with a Palm of Victory:
This Celestial Messenger stayed a good space, filling his Soul with Spiritual
Sweetness, known only to God.

After this another Angel appeared to him, and said, I am Michael the
Archangel, sent to thee from our Lord, to acquaint thee, That the hour of thy
departure is at hand; for after ten days, thou shall joyfully issue out of thy
fleshly Prison, and escape out of the Dungeon of this World, and with
unspeakable gladness thou shall meet thy Heavenly King, into whose presence we
will bear thee; he will receive thee with Glory, and enroll thee among the
Courtiers and Citizens of his Kingdom. Some say the Mother and Sisters of this
Holy man were present and assisting at his Death, invited thither by the Fame
of his Miracles, and after his departure carried his Body back with them into
Britain; But when the Pagan Saxons demolished Christian Sepulchers here, it
was transported again into Flanders: The place of his Burial here, is said to
be the Isle of Plet, or Plecit, where it remained many years, Illustrious by
many Miracles, until it was transported to the place aforesaid; where not being
entertained with due Honor, it was by a Noble Marquess named Arnulphus, after
by Gods appointment, removed to the Monastery of ^landinium in Gaunt, together
with the precious Relics of the famous Confessor Bertulphus, when Clotharius
reigned in France; his Body is yet carried in Procession yearly, and each
Procession renowned by Miracles.

In the year of our Lord 342. great Commotions arose in Gaul by the coming in
of the Franks, which were soon suppressed; but Britain following the motions of
Gaul, and being in disorder, Constans was enforced to pass over thither in the
Winter Season, and by his unlooked for presence there, soon frighted the
Rebellious Islanders into Obedience.

Four years after this, an unhappy Schism was like to break forth between the
Eastern and Western Churches; for the Eastern Bishops of the Faction of
Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, chief Pillar of the Arrians, had condemned St.
Athanasius in two Synods at Tire and Antioch: On the contrary Julius, Bishop of
Rome, in a Synod of Italian Bishops received him into his Communion,
notwithstanding the intercession of the Orientals, who sent their Decree of
Condemnation to Rome. To prevent this Schism, Constans being Orthodox,
solicited his Brother Constantius to join with him in caling a General
Council, thereby to preserve entirely the Heritage of their Fathers Piety, by
which he had subdued many barbarous Nations, destroyed Tyrants, and established
the Empire.

Hereupon a Synod was Assembled at Sardica in Illyrium, to which came out of
the Western Empire about 300. Bishops, and out of the East 76. only. Some of
the Western Bishops came out of Britain; Restitutus Bishop of London was
certainly one, who before at the Council of Nice, consented to the Faith of the
Consubstantiality of the Son of God. It will not be therefore impertinent to
say something of this great Council, that the Conformity of the British
Churches in those days, to the Faith and Discipline of the Catholic Church,
may the better appear. This Synod first established the Faith of the Nicene
Council, next declared the Innocence of Athanasius and other Orthodox Bishops
persecuted by the Arrian Faction, and the Condemnation of their Adversaries and
other Eastern Bishops, who deserted the Synod, and made a Schismatical Assembly
at Philopolis, and in it published contradictory Decrees.

This Synod, as to matters of Discipline, Decreed this especially, That Appeals
be made in Case of Contention, to St. Peter 's Chair, ultimately to be
determined by the Pope, or such as he should appoint in that behalf. Now it is
certain, that the Donatists not long after, in Envy to the Sea of Rome,
endeavored to suppress the Acts of this famous Synod as much as they could, as
St. Augustine testifies: The Decrees of this Synod were after confirmed by the
Council in Trullo. Another Decree was made, To restrain the Appeals of Deacons
sent by their Bishops to the Emperor's Court, appointing them to present their
Petitions to the Bishop of the Roman Church, to be by him examined whether just
or not

This Synod being dissolved, the Emperor Constans used his utmost diligence
and Authority for the Execution of these Decrees; his chiefest care was about
the Restitution of St. Athanasius, whose return the Factious Bishops of the
East opposed: Constans wrote to his Brother for his Restitution, mingling
Threats, if he were not complied with, insomuch, as that Constantius advised
with many Eastern Bishops about it: Who resolved him, It was better to allow of
Athanasius, then hazard a Civil War.

The year following, Athanasius returned into the East, and was at first
received by Constantius with some Kindness, and permitted to return to his See
at Alexandria. But the year following the Arrian Bishops becoming boundless in
their Power and Malice by the death of the Orthodox Emperor Constans, who by
the Conspiracy of Magnentius Chrestius and Marcellinus was Traytorously slain,
at Helena a Town in France: It is said he had a Prediction, That he should die
in his Grand-Mothers Lap. His death was greatly bewailed by St. Athanasius, who
foresaw the danger was like to ensue unto the Catholic Faith by the loss of
Constans, and the evil of the sole remaining Emperor, who was yet at present,
very much encumbered by two Tyrants, the one was Vetranio, who had once
governed in Britain, and was after Proclaimed Emperor in Illyricum, but was
soon deposed by Constantius, who yet not only spared his Life, but suffered him
to spend the remainder of his Life in Retirement full of Pleasure and
Abundance. The other Tyrant was Magnentius, who took the Title of Emperor at
Augustodunum in France, and held it three years, and then after the loss of a
Battle, was forced to kill himself.

After this Victory, Constantius would be called the Emperor of the whole
World, and assumed the Impious Title of his Eternity; and then extended all his
Pride and Power to oppress the Catholic Faith, and establish the Arrian
Heresy even in the Western Churches also; commanding a Council to be Assembled
at Arles in France, where he extorted the Suffrages of the Bishops, in favor
of his Heresy, and condemnation of St. Athanasius, drawing in the Legate of
Pope Liberius, who had newly succeeded Julius. Howbeit Liberius more than once
solicited the Emperor by Legates and Epistles on the behalf of St.
Athanasius; complaining, That the Suffrages of Bishops were mercenarily sold
according to the Princes inclination.

Whereupon Constantius perceiving the endeavors of Liberius rendered the
Sentences of his packed Synods invalid, sought to win him by Promises and
Favors to his Party; that proving ineffectual, he sent for him; when Liberius
was come to him, he stoutly protested, He would suffer any thing, rather than
being a Christian, to become an Arrian: At which the Emperor being offended,
sent him into Banishment to Beraea a City of Thrace; whereto he cheerfully
submitted, rejecting 500 Crowns which the Emperor sent for his Maintenance: In
his place was substituted a certain Roman Priest called Felix, one, who though
in judgment a Catholic, yet complied with the Arrians.

Liberius wanting constancy, and weary of his Banishment, after two years
returned from it, with as much Infamy, as he had submitted to it with glory,
yielding at last to the condemnation of St. Athanasius, and subscribing to a
Confession of Faith framed in a Synod at Sirmium; wherein, though there was
nothing Haeretical, yet the word Consubstantiality being left out, his
subscription to it was scandalous, and argued an unlawful compliance with the
Arrians. After all this returning again to Rome, he breaks off all Communion
with the Arrians, and joins himself in Communion with Athanasius, to whom he
thus writes, Our Confession beloved Athanasius, is that the Word is the Son of
God, being according to his Nature begotten of God his Father, not created; he
is God, his Fathers Colleague in his Empire, and obtains an endless Kingdom for
infinite Ages, Amen.

Whilst Constantius in the West thus afflicted the Catholic Church and Faith,
Gratian Father of Valentinian afterward Emperor, was Pro-Praetor of Britain:
He was raised from a vile Original to this high degree for his Courage and
Virtue; in his younger Age, he is said to have been a Seller of Ropes, such was
his strength, that five Soldiers were not able to wrest a Rope out of his
Hands; for his favoring Magnentius, he was deprived both of Office and Estate.
Martinus succeeded him in his Pro-Praetorship of Britain, who governed this
Island with great Justice and Kindness to the Britains, his Government was
shortened upon this unhappy occasion; Constantius being a Prince very
Suspicious, employed Officers to search out such as were practicing against
him; One Paul a Notary was very much esteemed of him, for his Malicious
Sagacity in such matters, and therefore sent by him into Britain, to bring over
in Chains such Soldiers as had intermedled in the Conspiracy of Magnentius;
Paul executed this Authority with such Cruelty and Injustice, that the
Pro-Praetor, to prevent the Miseries of so many Innocents, first intercedes by
way of Entreaty, and being therein unsuccessful, protested he would leave the
Province, rather than behold such Oppression. This Paul for his Subtilty called
Catena; being thus thwarted in his Cruelty, Craftily involves the Pro-praetor
himself in a Suspicion of the same Guilt and Treason, so as he presumes to
seize upon him, and put him in Fetters with the rest: Martinus betakes himself
to his Sword in defense of himself, and therewith wounds Paul, but not
Mortally; and thereupon turns his Sword upon his own Breast, and so died
lamented of all men.

In the year of our Lord 359. the Church of God was exposed to great danger and
infamy by the Council of Ariminum then Assembled by the Authority of the Arrian
Emperor Constantius, with design to abolish the Faith of the Consubstantiality
of the Son of God. He commanded his Prefect Taurus, That when the Bishops were
met together, he should not permit them to depart, till they had all consented
in one Faith: It is said, that out of Illyricum, Italy, Africa, Spain and Gaul,
and out of Britain also, under the notion of Gaul, he gathered together more
than 400 Bishops: The Emperor commanded allowance of Necessaries to these
Bishops; but those of Gaul and Britain refused it, as an unseemly thing, and
chose rather at their own Costs to maintain themselves, Three only out of
Britain excepted, who being destitute of Subsistence out of their own Sees,
made some use of the Emperor's Liberality, and perhaps were not to be
disprais'd for it. These Bishops being assembled, were prescribed what they
should do by the Emperors Letters, and severely enjoined to determine nothing
which might touch the Eastern Bishops; and when they had finished their
Decrees, they were to send them to Court by two Bishops.

In these Letters it is observed, that he Subscribes himself Constantine, not
Constantius: Notwithstanding all which, the Holy Bishops Courageously performed
their Duties, for they confirmed the Nicene Creed, sorbidding any addition or
diminution thereof; and protesting, They would never depart from the Faith
which they had received from God the Father by the Prophets and our Lord Jesus
Christ, which the Holy Spirit taught in the Gospels, according as was delivered
by Tradition of the Fathers succeeding the Apostles to the times when this
Controversy was debated at Nicaea, against an Heresy which then arose. All
the Catholic Bishops in the Synod, unanimously subscribed to this definition,
wherein it is observable, that although it was grounded on the Holy Scriptures,
yet those Scriptures were interpreted by the successive Tradition of the
Church: Whereas, what the Faction of the Arrians separately Decreed; according
to the practice of other Heretics, agreed only with the bare words of
Scripture by themselves interpreted.

For as Athanasius writes, in a Creed made by them, They profess the Son of God
to be like the Father who begat him, whose Generation, according to the
Scriptures, no man knows but the Father only. As for the word Substance, it
being simply set down by the Fathers, not understood by the People, and
occasioning great Scandal, in as much as it is not expressly contained in the
Scriptures, they Decreed that it should be quite abolished; and that for the
future no mention should be made of the Substance of God, because the Holy
Scriptures never mention the Substance of the Father and the Son; but they say,
That the Son is in all things like the Father, as the Scriptures in their
judgment teach.

Now when the Arrian Bishops, of whom Valens and Vrsacius were chief, saw that
they could not impose upon the Western Bishops, they separated themselves from
the rest of the Council, and were thereupon pronounced by the unanimous
Suffrages of the Orthodox Bishops to be Heretics, and excluded from the
Communion of the Church; which done, the Council by common Letter informed the
Emperor of all these things. And whereas the Arrian Bishops to induce the
Catholics to comply with them, argued, That Peace and Unity would be restored
to the Church, in case Catholics should relinquish that one word Substance.
They therefore in their said Letter inserted, That it was not as Valens and
Ursacius affirmed, that Peace would follow, by the subversion of things just
and true; but that rather more contention would arise, both at Rome and other
Cities: They therefore Prayed, that the Council might be dissolved, considering
the Poverty, Age and Infirmity of many Bishops in it.

Constantius thus frustrated in his design of introducing his Arrian misbelief
into the Western Churches, broke forth into open Tyranny; some of the Catholic
Bishops he shut up in Prison, others he afflicted with Famine and all manner of
despightful usuage, not suffering any to depart, until they had subscribed a
form of Faith; wherein, though nothing Heretical was expressed, yet the True
Faith was at least dissembled; consequently the Arrian Faction prevailed in
Power, through the whole Empire. Constantius creates Gallus his Uncles Son
Caesar, and three years after Beheads him for his Cruelties and enormous
Crimes, and the next year assumes into the same Dignity and Succession of the
Empire, Julian, younger Brother to Gallus, called the Apostate; Him he sent
into Gaul to repress the Irruptions of the Franks.

In the fourth year of his Government, troubles arising in Britain, by the
Excursions of the Picts and Scots; he sent over Lupicinus to compose them, who
in the midst of Winter went with his Army to London, but could not perform any
considerable Exploit against his Enemies; for that Julian, who was proclaimed
Emperor by his Army, was jealous of him, least he should hinder his
proceedings; and therefore re-call'd Lupicinus, and sent Gumobarius in his
place, to be General of the British Army, who did little worthy of memory; for
notwithstanding any thing he could do, the Scots a (barbarous People,) first
mentioned about this time, coming out of Ireland, rooted themselves so firmly
in the Northern parts of this Isle, that they established a Kingdom there to
themselves and their Posterity to this day.

It is written, that when N^le obtained the Monarchy of Ireland, which was in
the time of this Constanttus; the six Sons of Mured King of Vlster, passing
over with a considerable Fleet, possessed themselves of the Northern parts of
Britain; and it is likely that the Eldest of those six Sons, was that Reuda
mentioned by Beda, and his People from him called Dalreudini. They at first
possessed themselves of a Corner of this Island, but after encroaching upon the
Picts, enlarged their Seats; until at last, about the time when the Kingdom of
Northumberland was in a manner ruined by Civil Contentions, and the Incursions
of the Danes, they almost wholly consumed the Picts, and destroyed their name
and memory, introducing to those Nothern parts the name of Scotland.

It is not likely that Arrianism ever took any great footing in this Island,
for when St. Hilary was banished into Phrigia by the false suggestions of
Saturninus the Arrian Bishop of Arles, he wrote Letters to the British Bishops,
especially to the Aged Restitutus Bishop of London; Congratulating and
Commending their firmness in the Faith, that notwithstanding the attemps of
Saturninus to infect them, yet their constancy was famous over all the Empire;
insomuch, as some of the Eastern Bishops became thereby ashamed of their
Heresy. Howbeit, about this time this Restitutus being full of years, died,
and is worthily counted amongst the Illustrious British Writers, and many
Letters to St. Hilary are reckoned to be of his writing.

A further proof of the Orthodoxy of the British Church was St. Kebius,
Sir-nam'd Corinius, Son of Solomon Duke of Cornwall, who took a Journey into
Gaul to St. Hilary, after his return from Exile, to be by him instructed more
perfectly in the Catholic Faith: Copgrave in the Life of this Saint, says,
That he abode several years with S. Hillary, improving himself in Learning and
Sanctity; whereunto God gave Testimony, by conferring on him the Grace of
Miracles, so that he gave Sight to the Blind, Cleans'd the Leprous, Cured those
which were Dumb, Healed the sick of the Palsy, and those who were possessed
with Devils. Afterward being admonished thereunto by an Angel, having been
Consecrated Bishop by St. Hilary, he returned into his own Country, and placed
his See in the Isle of Anglesey; and by his good Example and sound Doctrine,
instructed the Northern People of Wales.

It is He who was requested to take the Principality of Cornwall, but refused
to accept of any Worldly Authority; and not long after, he is said, To descend
with ten Monks, who were his Disciples, into a Meadow of King Ethelic, pitching
his Tents there; wherewith, when the King was acquainted, he went with Company
to cast these Monks out of his Country; by the way he fell from his Horse,
which died immediately, and both He and his Followers were stricken with
blindness: Thereupon the King prostrates himself before St. Kebius, devoting
himself to God and the Saint, by whose Prayers they were all presently Healed.
After this the King gave to the man of God two Churches, and he giving the King
his Benediction, retired to Menevia, afterward called St. David's; from whence
he sailed into Ireland, and having built a Church remained there four years:
Very probable it is, that this St. Kebius, was that British Priest who Baptized
the Irish St. Albeus; for in his Life written by Bishop Usher: It is related,
That Lachanus gave the Holy Child to certain Britains, who carefully brought
him up, and gave him the Name of Albeus, because he was found alive under a
Rock, the Grace of God being with him. Not long after this, St. Kebius came
into those parts, sent thither by the Sea Apostolic, many years before St.
Patrick, to sow the Faith of Christ there; but the Irish being Pagans, he was
received by few: He then went into Munster, where he found this Holy Child
Albeus, Praying in the open Air, with his Eyes raised up toward Heaven, that
the true Faith might be revealed unto him, and saying, His desire was to know
the Creator of all things, and to believe in him who made Heaven and Earth; and
declaring that the Elements could not be made without a skilful Workmaster, nor
be produced by any man: These things being heard by this Holy Priest, he not
only saluted, but instructed this Holy Child, Baptizing him, and continuing the
same Name of Albeus to him. Several other Persons were Converted, and Baptized
by him, as Meclarus and Kiaxanus, who proved eminent for Sanctity, and were
after exalted to Episcopal Dignity, before the arrival of St. Patrick.

After some years abode in Ireland, the Holy Bishop Kebius returned to his See
in Anglesey, where he died in the year of Grace 370. The place of his Burial
seems to be in Denbighshire; for in the Story of St. Winefred, we read, That
she was buried near the Sepulchers of Chebaeus and Senanus, called Gwethern;
Which Chebaeus was certainly our Kebius, whose memory remains still, (says
Cambden in Anglesey;) where the Promontory called Holyhead, is by the Natives
named Caer Gubi, from Kebius a Disciple of St. Hilary, whose memory is also
there preserved by another Promontory called Hilary-point.

The same year in which St. Kebius repaired to St. Hilary, then newly returned
from banishment, was illustrious for the Birth of the great Apostle of Ireland
St. Patrick, as most Authentic Authors agree; the place of his Birth is agreed
to be in Britain by the Irish themselves. He is said to be born in
Pembrokeshire, of Calphurnius and his Wife Conchessa, Sister or Sisters
Daughter to St. Martin Bishop of Tours. After this Birth Calphurnius became a
Priest or Deacon, and professed Continency, as many others did.

Now Constantius dying of a Feavour in Cilicia, Julian having been created
Caesar succeeded him in the Empire, which he polluted by his infamous Apostasy:
He was from his Infancy bred in the Profession of Christianity, and inscribed
in the Ecclesiastical degree of a Lectorour; but being of an inconstant curious
disposition, and unfortunately becoming acquainted with Pagan Philosophers and
Magitians, he was by them perverted; and though during the Life of Constantius,
he dissembled his change, yet being in possession of the Empire, he publicly
declared his defection from Christianity, and an implacable hatred of it, with
a resolution to employ all the Power of Earth and Hell for its destruction: The
first proof hereof he gave, in taking away that famous Labarum, or Imperial
Ensign of the Cross, which in his Predecessors times, had given them assured
Victories: In place whereof, he restored the Images of Heathen Gods or Devils,
with the representation of Eagles, Vultures, Minotaurs, etc. which the Soldiers
were commanded to Adore.

All the Monuments of the Holy Cross he endeavored to abolish, insomuch as he
caused a Representation of Constantinople to be dig'd up, on the top whereof
Constantine had fixed the Cross, to denote the Felicity of his new City. He
usually objected to Christians by way of Ignominy, That they left off to Adore
and Worship the Ancilia which Jupiter let fall from Heaven, as a pledge of his
Protection of their City; instead of which they Adored the Wood of the Cross,
painting Images thereof in their Forcheads, and before their Doors. Thus
scoffing Julian censures the Rites of the Ancient Church, and of the Faithful
in his time, for their Veneration of that Blessed Instrument of our Redemption:
All other Sacred Images and Statues erected in memory of Divine Benefits,
together with the Relics of Saints and Martyrs, this Apostate endeavored to
abolish; in particular, he caused that Miraculous Statue of our Savior to be
thrown down, which the devout Woman who had been Cured of her Bloody-Issue, had
raised at Caesarea Philippi; and in the place thereof erected his own, which
not long after was divided in the midst, and the upper-half thereof thrown all
black to the ground, where it remained so for a long time.

This Impious Emperor consulting an Oracle at Daphne near Antioch, and
perceiving the Devil in it to remain mute, save only that he was able to
declare, That the Body of the Holy Martyr Babylas, hindered his Speech; Caused
the Sacred Body to be removed into the City, which was done by the Christians
with great Solemnity, in Singing Psalms, especially such as derided Idolary;
which so incensed the Cruel Emperor, that he caused many of them to be
Tormented; Howbeit, by the intercession of the Holy Martyr, their Torments were
miraculously Converted, and melted into Pleasure.

A War against the Persians interrupted his rage against the Christians, whose
Extirpation he threat'ned at his return from that Expedition. In the heat of
this War, Libanius a Heathen Sophister, in derision of our Savior, Asked a
Christian, what the Carpenters Son was then doing, who answered, He is
preparing a Cossin for Julian. The event made the words Prophetical, for the
wicked Emperor received from an unknown hand a Wound Mortal to himself, but
Healthful to all the World besides: In his place the Army chose Jovian
Emperor, which Honor he refused, professing, That being a Christian, he
neither would, nor could govern an Army poisoned with Heathenish Idolatry:
Whereupon all the Army cried out, That they also were Christians: So that it
seems the two years Reign of Julian, could not extirpate the good Seed sown in
their Roman Hearts.

Jovian thus chosen, restored the Christian Faith, reducing the Church to its
former Splendor: He published a Law, by which, In all Cities a proportion of
Wheat was contributed to Sacred Virgins by Vow Consecrated to God: Another
which inflicted Death on any who should Ravish, or but attempt their Chastity.
There is extant an Epistle of St. Athanasius, in answer of one from this
Emperor to him, wherein, He desired the Judgment of the Saints, who among the
divided Sects of Christians retained the Orthodox Faith. Several Nations are
mentioned in this Epistle, as constantly Persevering in the Faith of our
Saviors Divinity established in the Council of Nice; and amongst the rest, St.
Athanasius makes an Honorable mention of the British Churches. This Pious
Emperor enjoyed his Sovereignty but one year, and Valentinian equally Orthodox
was his Successor, yet unhappily he made his Brother Valens Partner in his
Empire; He, infected with the Arrian Heresy, proved Impiously Zealous in the
promoting of it.

In the first year of Valentinian's Reign, the barbarous Nations on all sides
of the Roman Empire, as if universally excited by a Trumpet, broke their
limits, amongst the rest the Picts, Saxons, Scots and Attacotti vexed the
Britains with incessant Calamities: Who the Picts and Scots were, has been
before-declar'd; the Saxons as yet infested the Sea-shores, but who the
Attacotti were, St. Jerome tells us, They were (says he) a Savage People upon
the Northern Mountains of Scotland, who neglecting Beeves and other Cattle fed
themselves with Humane Flesh as their principal Delicacies, living without Law
or Government; and who had promiscuous Wives and hildren in common; These were
easily induced to join with the Scots and Picts against the Civil Britains.

The Emperor ( Valentinian to suppress these Incursions,) leaving his Brother
Valens to govern in the East, made an Expedition into Gaul, where, having
composed great Troubles, he met with very ill News from Britain; so as he sent
one of his Principal Officers to remedy those Disorders there; at last more
horrible Rumors increasing, he made choice of Theodosius to go General
thither, a Man Famous for many Martial Exploits; who attended with Courageous
Legions, prosecuted the Expedition with a Noble Confidence: The Saxons not only
Infested the British Coasts, but made an impression even to London; To remedy
which injuries, the vigilant General Theodosius being landed near Sandwich in
Kent, with his Co-horts, marched straight to London, and dividing his Army into
several Squadrons, set upon the straggling Enemies laden with Spoils, and
dispersing them, Rescued the Prisoners with the Cattle and other Prey, which he
restored to the miserable Natives; except some small part of it, that was
bestowed upon his wearied Soldiers: He then entered the City in Triumph, and
was joyfully received by the People recovered from their Misery by his Valor;
while he stayed there, having intimation that so many fierce Nations could not
be better suppressed than by subtilty; to divide them therefore, he published
Edicts, promising Pardon to such as would submit: Those which came in, he
dispersed into Quarters severally, well providing for them, which encouraged
many more to submit.

He sent to the Emperor, that Civilis might be sent over as his
Deputy Governor in Britain, and Dulcitius as his Lieutenant in Martial
Affairs, and well skilled therein: And two years after he marched Northward,
and put to flight several Nations, who invaded the Roman Provinces, and
restored Peace to many Cities which had been vexed with many troubles: There
was then in Britain one Valentinus a Pannonian, banished into Britain for great
Crimes, who had like to have circumvented Theodosius by Treason after all his
Conquests; for this Valentinus being of an ambitious and turbulent Spirit,
solicited many of the Soldiers to Conspire against him; But this design being
discovered, the good General, contented himself with the Death of Valentinus
and his nearest Associates, least by searching too far into the Conspiracy, he
might stir up a Mutiny in his Army. This danger escaped, he so successfully
prosecuted the War, that he recovered all the Provinces from the Enemies, and
secured them by strong Garrisons, and a particular Governor.

So that now, so much of Britain as was under the Roman Dominion, became
divided into five Provinces; The first called Britania prima, containing all
the Southern parts from the Sea and Thames to the Severn; the second, Britania
secunda, comprehending all Wales; the third called Flavia Caesariensis
(probably from the Son of this Theodosius, afterward Emperor of the Flavian
Family) embracing all the Regions to the River Humber; the fourth called Maxima
Caesariensis, reaching from Humber to the River Tine: Lastly, Theodosius having
repelled the Picts and Scots out of all the Provinces beyond Tine, as far as
Dunbritton and Edinburgh, called the fifth Province Valentia, wherein a Roman
Legion Wintered to repress the Incursions of the Scots.

Theodosius having thus Happily settled Britain, was two years after recalled
by the Emperor to Rome, and made General of the Horse; as also Honored with a
Statue of Brass by the Senate, and at last by his eminent Exploits, recommended
his Son to the Empire.

The year after the departure of Theodosius from this Island, our
Ecclesiastical Monuments Commemorate St. Ninias his Journey to Rome, there to
be instructed in the Orthodox Faith; and whither it is probable he attended
Theodosius: Which Faith afterward, with great efficacy, he communicated to his
Countrymen. This Ninias was born in Britain of a Princely Stock in Cumberland,
who then had its peculiar King; his Father was a Christian: In Childhood he was
Sober, sparing of his Tongue, diligent in Reading, Grave in Conversation,
careful to subject the Flesh to the Spirit; He also showed great Devotion to
Churches: At the last, by a forcible instinct of Gods Spirit, despising the
World and Carnal Affections, he Traveled into Italy, and so to Rome, and there
addressed himself to Pope Damasus and declared the Cause of his Journey;
whereupon the Holy Bishop appointed him Teachers in the wholesome sense of
Scriptures, by whom he was instructed in true Wisdom, to the Comfort and Profit
of others.

To this time is referred the memory of St. Augulus, born in London, Bishop and
Martyr; as also of St. Moses, said also to be born in Britain, Famous for many
Miracles; who, after a Solitary Life in the Desert, was made Bishop of the
Saracens; and after he had Converted many of that Nation to the Orthodox Faith,
he there died in Peace.

To Valentinian succeeded his Son Gratian, who nine years before had been named
Augustus by his Father, and about six days after his younger Brother
Valentinian was saluted Emperor by the Soldiers, with the Consent of Gratian.
And now the Picts and Scots began to make Incursions into Britain again, in one
of which they led Captive with them the Child of Calphurnius, Socher called
afterward Patrick in the 16th. year of his Age, whom they Sold to a Nobleman
in the Northern parts of Ireland, called Milchu; he Employed the Holy Youth in
keeping his Swine, to be tried betimes in the Furnace of Affliction; for six
years the Devout Youth spent in this Slavery; in which time, nevertheless God
wrought great Miracles by him. St. Patrick's Employment withdrawing him from
Conversation of men, afforded him the more space to attend upon God: He is said
to address his Prayers to God a hundred times a day, and as often by night; to
his Prayers he added Fasting for the Mortification of his Senses, with these
two wings he mounted to such Perfection, that he enjoyed a frequent
Conversation of Angels; insomuch, as an Angel called Victor frequently visited
him, and told him, He did well to Fast, and that e're long he should return
into his Country. Let no man wonder at this unusual Name of an Angel, for as
St. Gregory observes, Angels are designed by particular Names, to signify
their particular Virtucs and Operations; And this of Victor might intimate to
St. Patrick, that first he should Conquer his own Tribulations, and then the
Power of the Devil in that Idolatrous Nation.

The Patience and Virtues of this Young man, moved the goodness of God, to free
him from this Captivity; for after six years, Patrick by notice from an Angel,
found under a Turf, a sum of Gold, by which he redeemed himself from his
Slavery, and returned to his Parents and Country, which he gloriously
Illustrated with the admirable Sanctity of his Life.

About this time Valens the Arrian Emperor suffered a severe Punishment for
his Persecution of the Orthodox Faith; for the Goths and Hunns, fierce Northern
Nations, entering into Thrace, put the Eastern Empire in great danger; Valens
thereupon required Aid of Gratian, who came on with the Holy Sign of the Cross,
in the Name of the true God to his Assistance; but Valens not staying his
coming, out of envy, least he should partake any glory in the Victory, would
needs hazard Battle alone with the Barbarians, by whom his Army was discomfited
and himself wounded with a Dart, and flying with his chief Officers into a
House, his pursuing Enemies set it on fire, which consumed him and his Company:
In his place the Emperor Gratian and Valentinian, unwilling to leave the West,
assumed Theodosius, the worthy Son of that famous Theodosius who settled
Britain and repressed its Enemies into a part of the Empire, and committed to
him the care of defending the Eastern Regions against the insulting Goths.

At this time Flavius Clemens Maximus, descended probably of the Imperial
Family of Constantine, challenged part in the Empire, or at least made himself
King instead of Governor of Britain, and indeed exercised Tyranny against the
Empire; some say he was born in Britain, for Gildas calls him, A sprig of the
British Plantation; however surely he was a Prince of admirable Valor and
Conduct: The Scottish Writers confess him successful against the Scots, and
that he slew their King Eugenius, and drove their chiefest Nobles into Norway
and Ireland, over which he had a kind of Dominion, although in Truth it is
believed Ireland was hardly ever attempted by Roman Armies.

Thus Maximus having subdued both Scots and Picts, and thereby achieved great
Glory, being vexed at the promotion of the younger Theodosius to the Empire,
began to incense the Soldiers against the Emperor, and received from them the
Imperial Purple: Had he not attained this Title against his Oath and Fidelity,
he was a Prince so Just and Courageous, he might have been thought worthy to
have been Emperor.

Being thus advanced, he passed over into Gaul, which passage proved fatal to
this Island, from whence he transported, not only the Roman Armies, but the
flower also of the British youth, which never returned, so as Britain, thus
dispoil'd of Military Forces, became exposed to the miserable and cruel
Incursions of their Northern Enemies, the Scots and Picts: Maximus attended
with so great a force, quickly subdued both Gaul and Spain, and by a
Treasonable Stratagem slew the Emperor Gratian at Lions, and marched straight
into Italy against Valentinian.

It seems now was the time when Britain became infected with Herefie and greedy
of Novelties; the occasion might be, the severe dealing of Maximus in Gaul
against the Arch-Heretick Priscillian and his Companions Justantius and
Tiberianus: These Heretics revived a new Heresy out of the dregs of the
Ancient Gnostics and Manichees, which at first infected Spain, then attempted
Italy, and being there rejected by Pope Damasus at Rome, and by St. Ambrose at
Milan: The Infection began to spread in Gaul; Complaint being made to Maximus
by the Gallican Bishops, a Synod was Assembled at Bordeaux, by which Justantius
was Deposed; Priscilian Appealed to the Emperor, who at the instigation of
some Bishops, became severe against the Heretics; but by the intercession of
St. Martin grew more mild, abstaining from shedding of Blood; yet afterward
Priscilian Convicted of Magic, and many filthy Doctrines and Practices, As
Praying Naked in a meeting of Women at night, etc. was Condemned with other his
Associates, to loose his Head, only Justantius is said to be banished to the
Isle of Silly, with Tiberianus.

The Teachers of this Impure Heresy being placed so near the Confines of
Britain, no wonder if Doctrines favoring the Inclinations of corrupt Nature,
did quickly insinuate into unwary Minds, affected with Novelties. And indeed
this Scandalously severe judgment, hitherto unpractic'd in the Church, was so
far from cutting off the Heresy, that it rather gave strength; for his
followers Honored him as a Holy man, and Worshipped him as a Martyr.

The Emperor Maximus, for that Title Theodosius allowed him after the Death of
Gratian, was so zealous in defense of the Catholic Faith, that he wrote an
efficacious Letter in the behalf of St. Ambrose to the Emperor Valentinian,
(who by the instigation of his Mother Justina, persecuted the Holy Bishop,) and
denounced War against him, unless he would desist from his unjust persecution.
Maximus with his Wife also, had a great respect for the Blessed Bishop of Tours
St. Martin; some have thought this Lady, (who so much Honored St. Martin,) was
of British Extract, and the rather therefore is she here mentioned.

After this, Maximus not content with so large a Portion of Empire in Gaul,
Spain and Britain, marched with his Army into Italy, at whose approach
Valentinian fled into Illyricum, and then learned by experience, how unhappy he
was in following his Mothers advice against the Holy Bishop St. Ambrose.

There is a Letter extant written by Maximus to Siricius who succeeded Damasus,
wherein he professes the Orthodox Faith, wherein he was Baptized, and soon
after Proclaimed Emperor; and in this Letter he inveighs against the
Priscillianites, whom he calls Manichces, Whose abominable Doctrines and Crimes
were so Enormous, even by their own Confession, in judgment, that Modesty
forbids the further relation of them.

Theodosius solicited by Valentinian, whose Sister Galla he had Married, came
with an Army into the West, preparing himself for the War by Earnest Prayerand
Fasting; and having heard of a certain Monk in the Deserts of Egypt, a Servant
of God, who had the Spirit of Prophecy, sent to him, and received from him an
assurance of Victory, which he soon obtained against Maximus, who only wanted a
good Cause; thus Conquered he was brought before Theodosius, who had a mind to
pity him, to prevent which, the Soldiers removed him from the Emperor's
Presence, and slew him, and so expiated the death of the Innocent Gratian, whom
his Son Victor soon followed to the Grave, after he had been made Caesar.

It will afford us a clear prospect of the judgment and practice of the
Ancient Church, if somewhat be shortly related from the Mouth and Pen of St.
Augustine, which happened about two years before he was Converted and Baptized
by St. Ambrose; Who being under the severe Persecution of Justina the Arrian
Empress, it pleased God in a Vision then to discover to that Holy Bishop, the
place wherein the Bodies of the Martyrs Protasius and Gervasius reposed, and
had been there preserved incorrupt for many years, by which discovery the rage
of this Empress was much restrained. For these Holy Bodies being with due
Honor translated to the Ambrosian Church, not only many vexed with unclean
Spirits, were healed, but a Citizen of Milan who had been blind many years,
hearing the noise and acclamations of the People, desired to be led to the said
Church, and there obtained leave with his Handkercheif to touch the Coffin of
those Martyrs, and wiping his Eyes with the said Handkercheif, they were
immediately opened, so as he saw clearly, to the joy and astonishment of the
Beholders and whole City; and although the fame hereof did not heal the Empress
fully of her Spiritual Blindness, yet it allayed her fury against the Holy
Bisohp. St. Augustine himself then at Milan gives a large testimony of these
Miracles, as also does St. Ambrose himself, who further also declares, That the
Devils themselves upon this occasion cast out, confessed it to be done by the
Power and Virtue of the Martyrs, which they were not able to resist, but to
their excessive torment.

Not long after this, St. Augustine is said to have returned to his own Country
in Africa, but by the way at Ostia, to have lost his Blessed Mother Monica, of
whom in his Confessions he writes, That when the day of her Dissolution was at
hand, she made it her request that Commemoration should be made of her at Gods
Altar, from whence she knew the Holy Sacrifice and Victim was dispensed, and by
which she hoped to blot out the Handwriting against her, and joyfully to
Triumph over the Devil.

After the death of Maximus, Theodosius left Valentinian Emperor of the West,
adding to his Government Gaul, Britain and Spain infested with Tyrants: But
before he entrusted him with this great Charge, the Pious Emperor Theodosius
instructed him in the Orthodox Faith, which he the more easily did, in regard
Justina Valentinian's Mother, was then lately dead: The year following broke
forth an Heresy, since renewed by Luther, Justifying such as renounced their
Monastical Profession, and approving the Incestuous Embraces of Consecrated
Nuns: Jovinian an Apostate Monk, was the Author of this Heresy, and publicly
was declared an Heretic for it by Pope Siricius. St. Hierom, St. Ambrose and
St. Augustine wrote against this Heresy in particular, St. Hierom terms it,
Venomous Doctrine in three respects.

First, For that it affirms, Virgins, Widows and Married Women, being Baptized
to be of the same merit, in case they differ not in other works.

Secondly, That those who with a complete Faith have been Regenerated by
Baptism, cannot afterward be subverted by the Devil.

Thirdly, That there is no difference in point of Merit, between Fasting from
Meats, and receiving them with Thanksgiving.

Siricius in his Epistle to the Church of Milan gives this Character of
Jovinian, That he was an Imitator of the Devil, an Enemy of Chastity, a Teacher
of Luxury, a hater of Abstinence, and lover of Gluttony. In opposition to which
Doctrine, a Synod is assembled by the same Holy Pope, wherein is declared, That
the Vows of Marriage are not to be disparaged, yet greater Honor is to be
attributed to the Spiritual Marriage of Virgins: That Jovinian 's opinion was
contrary to the Christian Law, and Tradition of the Church; and therefore
Jovinian and all his Accomplices were condemned of Heresy and Blasphemy by this
Synod, and by their Sentence cast out of the Church.

And St. Ambrose in a Synodical Answer of the Church of Milan to the Pope,
tells him, That those Heretics who then fled to Milan, were avoided by all, as
if they had been infected with the Plague, and thrust out of the City like
Vagabonds. And St. Augustine reciting the Positions of this Heresy, concludes,
That Holy Church had most Fruitfully and Courageously resisted this Monster.
And in truth it was soon extinguished; neither does this Heresy ever appear to
have crept into this Island in those times, so precious and Venerable was
Virginity, especially here, that Fasting and Abstinence were frequently used,
and Seminaries of Chastity in great numbers Erected and Plentifully Endowed.

The young Emperor Valentinian, after a troublesome reign of four years, was
slain near I yons; before his death he desired Baptism, but lived not to obtain
it. After his Death the Tyrant Eugenius invaded the Western Empire: He
pretended to be a Christian, but was indeed addicted to Heathenish
Superstitions; he was soon slain by Theodosius, who prepared himself to
encounter this Tyrant; not so much by Force of Arms, as with Prayer and
Fasting: He kept watch rather in the Church then the Camp, lying prostrate, in
the Company both of his Priests and People, before the Monuments of the
Apostles and Martyrs covered with Sackcloth, and begging Divine assistance.
The General employed in this Expedition was Stilico, called out of Britain,
after he had freed the Country from the incursions of Scots and Picts, and
planted a Roman Legion to secure the Northern Borders.

The Holy young man St. Ninian before mentioned, about this time, showed forth
the Glorious Fruits of his Pious Education under the Holy Popes Damasus and
Siricius. for he then was newly Consecrated Bishop, and sent back into his own
Country, to Preach the Saving Truths of Christ's Gospel to the rude Nation of
the Southern Picts, seated between Cumberland and the Bay of Dunbritton: This
man of God in his return from Rome, was desirous to visit the Glorious Bishop
St. Martin at Tours, by whom he was Honorably received, and very much
esteemed, as a person of extraordinary Sanctity, and like to prove a Happy
Instrument of Salvation to many: Being dismissed by St. Martin, he arrived at
the place where he designed to settle, and there found a great concourse of
People, who it seems had notice of his return, and readily received him with
great Joy and Devotion, as a great Prophet. He first began to root up their ill
planted Superstitions, to disperse their long gathered wicked Customs, and to
demolish their impious Idolatries; and having so purged their minds from
Error, he instructed them in all the Duties belonging to good Christians, and
by his works and example, showed them a pattern of all Virtue and Piety,
confirming all by frequent Miracles: He chose for his seat of Episcopal
residence, a place afterward called Witehern seated near the Sea, by which
almost encompassed, it has only one passage to it toward the North, and as
(says Cambden) Is in the Province of the Novantes, now called Galloway: This
Episcopal Seat by the Latin Writers, is named Candida Casa, or the White-house,
and was here Erected by Ninianus in the time of this Theodosius. And thus as
Saint Bede also confirms, The Southern Picts received the true Faith by the
Preaching of this Holy man.

Many years he spent in his Apostolical Office, for his death ensued not, till
38 years, after his first entrance: He Consecrated Bishops, ordained Priests
dividing the Country into Parishes. More will be said of him hereafter, when
his Death is to be related; observing this only by the way, that Galloway at
that time belonged to the jurisdiction of the Britains, not of the Scots.

The Labors of St. Ninianus, were no doubt much eased by the Arrival of
another Saint, who by Divine inspiration came thither out of Achaia, bringing
with him the precious Relics of the Apostle St. Andrew. This Saint named St.
Regulus, as Hector Boethius relates, Watching one night at the Monument of St.
Andrew, was admonished from Heaven to take off the Holy Apostles Arm, three
Fingers, and as many Joints of one of his Feet, and laying them Decently in a
Vessel, to carry them to the Island of Albion or Britain, seated in the
Confines of the World; because in future times, there would live a People,
which would give great Veneration to that Apostle, and by his Intercession
receive great Graces and Benefits, both Earthly and Heavenly through the Divine
goodness. In compliance with which admonition, the Holy man undertook that
tedious Journey: The Report of his arrival with that Sacred Treasure, being
spread through the Regions of the Picts, inflamed the minds of many to see and
venerate those Holy Relics, Insomuch that (as Boethius relates) the People
flocked together from all quarters, bringing Gifts and Offerings to the Holy
Apostle.

Hergustus or Hungas their King, invited with the fame of these things, came
also to visit this Holy man Regulus, who received him with a Solemn Procession,
in which Priests and Monks Sang Hymns and Praises to God. The King (as the same
Author writes) falling Prostrate on the the ground, with great veneration
kissed the Sacred Relics; and when all the Holy Rites were performed after the
Christian manner, he freely bestowed his Royal Palace, to the Honor of St.
Andrew upon Regulus and the Priests with him; and also built a Church not far
from thence, Dedicated to the same Apostle, for the performance of Divine
Service: This is the place, where in followiug Ages the Primates of Scotland
established their Arch-Episcopal See. Which place (says Cambden) the Ancients
called Regimont, or Regulus his Mount, where Ungus King of the Picts built the
principal Church of his Kingdom, called to this day St. Andrews.

Boethius describes the Ornaments, with which this Pious King Enriched this his
new built Church, viz. Pattens, Copes, Chalices, Basins, Lavers, etc. framed of
Silver and Gold: Some modern Writers question the Truth of this Story, out of
an aversion perhaps to Sacred Relics; However Pope Boniface the VIII. in an
Epistle to Edward the I. writes plainly thus, Your Royal Highness may please to
understand, that the Kingdom of Scotland was Converted to the Unity of the
Catholic Faith by the venerable Relics of St. Andrew the Apostle: Such (says
he) was the great goodness of Almighty God. The Picts called the Priests which
came with St. Regulus Coldei or Colidei, Worshipers of God; To these others
from among the Picts and Britains joined themselves, leading a Solitary life;
With such fame of their Sanctity (says Buchanan) that being dead, their Cells
were Converted to Churches: Although in Truth, if we speak of the prime
Original of these Coldei, they began in the times of Persecution under
Dioclesian. The Gests of this St. Regulus are Celebrated in the English
Martyrology, which some mistake only as to the time of his death.

In the year of Grace 395. the Glorious Emperor Theodosius died, for whose
Soul St. Ambrose Devoutly Prayed, the Prince Honorius assisting at the Altar.
He left the Eastern Regions to his Eldest Son Arcadius, the Western to his
youngest Honorius of tender years, under the Tuition of Stilico, whose Daughter
he had Married; Stilico not content with this Honor, attempted to Establish
his own Son, and to that end permitted Barbarous Nations to waste the Empire,
which were at last the ruin of it.

In the IV. year of Honorius, Pope Siricius died, to whom succeeded Anastasius,
Aman (says St. Hierom) of rich Poverty and Apostolic Solicitude; He mainly
opposed the Error of Origin, then creeping into Rome, and made an Edict,
directed especially to the Vicar of Britain, That although he utterly forbad
the Offering of Pagan Sacrifices, yet his pleasure was, that the Ornaments of
public Works, though representing Pagan Superstititions, should be preserved.
This Island at this time, seems to sit at ease; secured from the Violence of
its Northern Enemies by a Roman Legion quartered in the Borders, and governed
by Marcus a Roman General, sent thither by Honorius: The Poet Claudian in his
Panegyric to Stilico, gives testimony of this then Peaceable estate.

But alas this Calm lasted but a little while, for the Troubles arising in
Italy, occasioned the Forces which defended Britain to be called home; and
these troubles were caused by the Invasion of Alaricus King of the Goths, to
which Stilico gave some stop, vanquishing the Goths in a Battle to their utter
ruin; if Stilico to promote his Ambitions designs, had not permitted them to
retire back into Pannonia, that he might continue in possession of the
Emperor's Forces: And indeed upon a second Invasion of these Barbarous
Enemies, another Battle was fought by Stilico, who once more overcame them; and
to this Battle the Roman Legions which defended Britain were drawn from thence.

About these times Pope Anastasius dying, Innocentius first of that Name
succeeded, a sincere oppugner of Pelagianism; the founder of which Heresy,
Pelagius is said to be Born in Britain, and therefore termed the British
Serpent, St. Hierom takes him to be a Scot, others affirm him to be Abbot of
the famous Monastery of Bangor, where 201 Monks, got their Living by the Labor
of their Hands. Certain it is he was a Monk, for St. Augustine tells us, This
Heresy was not invented by Bishops or Priests, but by a Monk; And as St.
Isidore assures us, By a stupid vain straggling Monk, Incorrigible, smelling
Feasts, and Fawning on Magistrates for their good Cheer, having taken up his
Graceless Heresy, in his Old and almost doting Age: He taught, that man might
be saved by his Merits without Grace. That every one is directed by his own
Natural free will to the attaining of Justice; That Infants are born without
Original sin, and as Innocent as Adam before his Fall; that they are Baptized,
not that they should be free from sin, but that by Adoption, they may be
admitted into the Kingdom of God; and that although they were not Baptized, yet
they should enjoy an Eternal and Happy Life, though excluded from the Kingdom
of God.

These Heresies began to appear in public about the years 404, and 405. notice
thereof being taken by Pope Innocentius: Pelagius prepared a Letter of
Purgation, presented to Zosimus Successor of Innocentius: His Doctrines being
every where reproved, he Appealed to the Judgment of a Lawful Synod, but one
of the Bishops appointed to Accuse him falling sick, and so not able to appear
at Lidda, where the Synod was Assembled; Pelagius gave such Cautelous Answers
to the Proposals of the Bishops there present, that he escaped Censure, and was
accounted Orthodox: Howbeit, at the same time his prime Disciple Caelestius was
Condemned for his Heresies at Carthage, in a Synod there held; from which he
Appealed to the Roman See, but not daring to pursue his Appeal, he fled into
Asia, where by fraud he obtained the degree of a Priest.

These Errors were afterward condemned at a Synod held at Milevis in Numidia,
and both Condemnations were approved by Pope Innocentius, who Excommunicated as
well Pelagius as Caelestius; yet so as upon their revoking their Errors, they
might be restored to Catholic Communion: Nevertheless their Heresies still
spreading, the African Bishops of both Councels, deputed St. Augustine to
confute them, which Charge he performed to his great Renown.

Both these Heretics cloak'd their Doctrines in Ambiguity of words and
endeavored to surprise the Popes by a dissembled submission to their
Judgments; but their fraud being detected, and their Tergiversations at last
discovered, Pope Zosimus again Condemned their Doctrine, and Excommunicated
their Persons; which Sentence was Solemnly pronounced by Sixtus a Roman Priest,
not long after Pope, whom the Pelagians esteemed their Patron, but without
cause.

Now this Heresy having been Proscribed by so many Synods, and more than once
by the Roman See; the Emperor Honorius published an Imperial Sanction, by
which he not only Banished Caelestius and Pelagius out of Rome, but ordained,
That the Teachers thereof should incur the same Punishment. Notwithstanding
all this care, yet inregard this so execrable an Heresy, favored the
Corruption of Nature, and Humane Pride, and Sensuality; it continued in many
Countries, especially in Britain, so as the Churches of Gaul thought fit to
send two Eminent Bishops thither.

At the same time another Infamous Heretic Vigilantius, infected Gaul also;
St. Hierom would rather have him called Dormilantius, for that being full of an
unclean Spirit, he went about to Combat against the Spirit of Christ, by
teaching, That the Sepulchers of Martyrs were not to be venerated,, and
condemning the Devout Vigils Celebrated before the Festivals of Gods Saints: He
likewise with Jovinian, Declaimed against Fasting, preferred Riches before
voluntary Poverty, and Marriage before Virginity; which Errors, says St.
Jerome, Were detested by the whole Catholic World.

In the year of Grace 406. the Picts and Scots wasted the Confines of Britain;
Marcus was then Governor, whom on a sudden the Army Saluted Emperor; but the
inconstant Soldiers finding his Incapacity, as suddenly deposed him, and chose
Gratianus born in this Island: Him also within four Months they slew; which
being divulged abroad, Scots, Norwegians and Danes marched Cross the Island,
wasting all with Fire and Sword.

In this extremity the British Army proclaimed a Soldier called Constantine
Emperor, not for merit, but the fancy of his Name, as if the present ruins
could not be repaired but by another Constantine: Geffery of Monmouth tells
another Story of the Election of this Constantine, as if he had been Brother to
a King of Armorica or Little-Britain of British Extract; this indeed is little
better then a mere Fiction.

For first this Constantine, as Bede witnesses, was chosen, Ex infima Militia,
out of the lowest rank of the Army.

Secondly, He directed Messengers to Honorius, to excuse himself, as compelled
by the Soldiers to accept the Title.

Howbeit this Constantine passes over into Gaul, where gathering an Army, he
subdued all the Regions on this side the Cottian Alps, and then accounted his
possession of the Empire secure; So as he drew his Son Constans out of his
Monastical Solitude, and created him Caesar: He placed the seat of his Empire
at Arles, planted Guards upon the River Rhine, and broke the Forces of the
Vandals and other Nations, who had wasted those Provinces: Constans proved
successful in Spain, and for his good success there, was pronounced Emperor by
his Father, to whom he repaired, leaving Gerontius General in Spain; but the
year following Constans was sent back into Spain, attended by Justus a famous
Captain; which so offended Gerontius, that he took sides with the Barbarous
Soldiers in Gaul, so as Constantine could not repress them; which caused both
in Gaul and Britain a Revolt from the Roman dependence; although some Authors
insinuate, That Honorius himself by his Letters exhorted the Britains to shift
for themselves: Gerontius hereupon assumes the Title of Emperor, and Invests
Maximus, whom he left in Spain, with the same Purple: Afterward he marches
against Constantine, whom he Besieged at Arles.

Honorius sent an Army into those parts, upon the approach whereof, the
Soldiers of Gerontius forsook him, and the remaining Spaniards attempt to kill
him, setting the House on fire in which he was; whereupon having first killed
his Wife, he kills himself. Constantine afterward having been Besieged, and
past hope of Relief, devests himself of the Imperial Purple, and flying for
refuge to a Church, was there Consecrated a Monk, and after slain with his Son
Julian in his passage to Italy: A year before whose death, Rome was sacked by
the Goths, and not only the Immense Wealth of that City, but the Ornaments of
Churches also became a Prey to the Barbarous Soldiers.

About this time mention is made of Melorus a young British Martyr: He was the
Son of Metianus Duke of Cornwall, dispossessed of his Dukedom, and slain by
Rinaldus his Brother. Melorus at his Fathers Death was not above seven years
old: The Cruel Uncle to secure himself in his unlawful possession, designs the
death of the Child; a whole Synod of Bishops there Assembled intercede for the
Life of it, so as the Tyrant contented himself with the cutting off the Child's
Right Hand and Left-foot; in place whereof were framed a Hand of Silver and
Foot of Brass. Melorus thus maimed, was Educated in a Monastery of Cornwall,
till he was fourteen years Old, spending his time in Reading Holy Scripture,
and every day growing in Innocence, Virtue and Piety. Rinaldus at last by many
Gifts and Promises, tempted the Child's Guardian to cut off his Head, which he
sent to Rinaldus; the Messenger who carried it, by the just judgment of God,
fell from the Castle-Wall with the Head in his Hands, and broke his own Neck.
It is said, That the Child's Nurse coming to the place where the Body lay, there
she saw a Vision of Angels and Heavenly Lights shining with unspeakable
Brightness.

The Body was after Buried in a Decent place, but the day following found above
ground; three several times it was Buried, and still the same accident
happened: By common advice therefore the Body was laid upon a Cart, to which
were fastened too young Bulls never used to the yoke: These were permitted to go
at liberty without any Leader, whether Gods Providence should direct them: The
Bulls becoming Tame, carried the Body to a certain place, and then stood still;
but the Company attending the Cart not liking the place, as not fit for the
Child's Burial, used all means by forcing the Wheels and otherwise, to drive the
Cart further, but found it so fixed by Divine Power, that it could be no means
be moved, and therefore giving Thanks to God, buried the Sacred Body with great
Solemnity in that place: And thither many Devout people repairing, and
imploring the Martyrs help and intercession in their Afflictions and
Infirmities, have frequently with Joy obtained their desired remedy: The Head
of the Martyr was carried as aforesaid to Rinaldus, who handled the same, but
died miserably three days after; he being thus dead the Bishops and Clergy
carried the Head and Buried it with the Body. The Coffer wherein these Sacred
Relics lay, some time after were carried through several places to Ambrosbury,
and their laid upon an Altar, where the Saint and his Relics were in a special
manner Venerated, as Bishop Usher affirms; This Ambrosbury is situate in
Wiltshire, not far from Winchester.

Britain not forsaking its obedience to the Roman Empire, was now governed by
Victorinus, a man grateful to the Britains, but formidable to the Picts and
Scots; but he being too soon recalled and the Roman Legion with him, the poor
Britains became immediately exposed to the Cruelty of their Barbarous Enemies.
Bonifacius succeeded Zosimus in the Apostolic Chair, who is said by Prosper,
To make use not only of Apostolic but of Imperial Edicts also, for the
suppressing the Pelagians, the Affronters of Divine Grace. In the time of this
Boniface, this Island was poisoned with their Presumptuous Doctrines,
especially by Agricola the Son of a Bishop: Yet were there then several Bishops
full of Piety and Learning, who opposed this Heresy, the most Famous whereof,
was Fastidius Priscus Archbishop of London, a man skilful in Holy Scriptures,
and a zealous Preacher of Divine Truth, Illustrious in Holy Conversation, and
Famous for his Sharpness of Judgment and Elocution; it is not certain when he
died, or when it was that Voadinus succeeded him in that Bishopric.

As Britain was now infected with the Suggestions of Heretics, so was it
infested with the Incursions of the Scots, Picts and Norwegians: In which
necessity says Gildas, The poor Britains sent humble Petitions to Rome for
assistance, vowing their Eternal subjection to the Roman Empire, so as their
Cruel Enemies might be repelled: In compliance with which Request, a Legion
well Supplied was sent, which soon drove the Barbarous Nations out of the
Borders, and freed the Britains from vexation and slavery: Who the Roman
General was under whom this Victory was gained is not mentioned; probably it
was Chrysanthus the Son of Marcianus, afterward Bishop of Constantinople, as
Socrates seems to intimate: Whoever was General, both he and the Legion were
soon recalled; But before their departure (says Gildas) they gave order to the
Britains to raise a Wall between the two Seas Glotta and Bodotria, to restrain
the Enemies and defend Themselves: It began toward the West, about two Miles
from a Monastery called Aebercurnig, in a place named in British Penvahel, or
Penvelton, and going Eastward it ends near the City of Aciluth; from this
word Penvahel, Cambden infers, that the Picts were a British Nation, for in
Welsh at this day Pengual signifies, The Head of a Rampire: But so useless was
this ill built Wall most part of Turfe, that before it was finished the Scots
and Picts broke in again, as Gildas observes, Like ravenous Woolves enraged
with hunger, on all sides encompassing the Sheepfold in the absence of the
Shepherd; so they with Oars and Full-blown Sails invaded the Island, broke
into the Borders, and laid all waste in their way, mowing down and treading
underfoot the wretched Britains like ripe Corn.

They therefore again send Messengers in a deplorable manner, with rent Garment
and Ashes on their Heads, to implore Aid from the Romans; endeavoring like
fearful Chickens to shroud themselves under their Mothers Wings: They earnestly
beg the rescue of their miserable Country, and the freeing the Roman Name from
the contempt of Foraign Nations: This woeful Petition was addressed to the
Famous Roman General Aetius Prefect of Gaul, under whom Britain was also
subject: He moved with Pity sent Forces under the Conduct of Gallio a Citizen
in Ravenna, who once more Conquered the Enemies; but having done this, declares
the Emperors pleasure to the Britains, That for the future they must rely upon
their own strength, and expect no more assistance from Rome; which at so great
a distance, and amidst so many Distractions, could not attend to so remote a
Province. He advised them to exercise themselves in Military Affairs, to Build
Fortifications in Convenient places, especially toward the Sea, and to
strengthen their Cities with Walls. This was the last Farewell of the Romans to
the discouraged Britains; however, before they went, they joined with the
Britains in Repairing the Wall, which they made stronger than formerly, both by
public and Private Expenses.

THE Church History Under the BRITISH KINGS.
THe Romans having thus forsaken this Island, two Kingdoms seem to have gained
a firm establishment in the Northern parts thereof, those I mean of the Picts
and Scots; for though other Kings and Princes are mentioned in other parts, yet
were they subject to the Romans, and in a manner under their Allegiance: The
Picts being indeed no other then the remainder of the Unconquered Britains,
were so disturbed by the Romans, that they could not before this time, come to
any Settlement: As for the Scots, they were at the best but Auxiliaries to the
Picts mingled with them in all their Invasions, and often by the Romans driven
back into Ireland from whence they came. Now being rid of the Romans, these
Scots fixed their Habitations, and Erected a Kingdom in the Northern Coasts of
Britain, under Fergusius their King: Of these two Nations and Kingdoms, the
principal in this Age was that of the Picts, who possessed the Provinces about
Edinburgh confining to the Wall, Anciently called the Picts Wall; the Scots
inhabiting the Provinces next to Ireland, but after turning their Arms against
the Picts, they utterly destroyed their Kingdom and Name, and gave to the whole
Country, the Appellation of Scotland.

In the year of Grace 423. the Emperor Honorius died, in whose place succeeded
Valentinian the III. and in the Eastern Empire Reigned the younger Theodosius:
The same year died Pope Bonifacius, and after him was chosen Pope Caelestinus,
to whom our Islands of Britain and Ireland have an Eternal Obligation, for by
him they were preserved from Error, and effectually Converted to, or Confirmed
in the Christian Faith: By him St. Palladius was sent to the Scots, whom he
freed from their Barbarous Idolatry. By him St. Patrick was directed an
Apostolic Teacher into Ireland, where he wrought the like effect; and by him
St. Germanus and St. Lupus, two Holy and Learned Bishops of Gaul, were employed
to Cure Britain of the Pestilent Infection of Pelagianism there spread by
Agricola.

Now since Patricius the great Apostle of Ireland, did both begin and end his
days in Britain, it will be little or no Excursion here to insert some of his
Principal Gests: He Conversed here in Britain, by his Holy example inviting
his Countrymen to the imitation of his Virtue and Piety. St. Germanus and Lupus
encouraged him to go into Ireland, and that especially upon this occasion. On a
day St. Patrick in his sleep saw a man coming to him out of Ireland, with many
Letters in his Hand, one of which he gave to the Saint, who read it. In the
beginning of it was written, This is the voice of the Inhabitants of Ireland:
As soon as St. Patrick had read these words. He heard the voices of many
Infants, crying to him, as out of their Mothers wombes in several Provinces of
Ireland; Holy Father, come and converse amongst us: St. Patrick having heard
this, felt great Compunction in his Heart, but could read no more of the
Letter: As soon as he awaked, he gave Thanks to God, being assured by this
Vision, that our Lord had called him to be an Instrument of the Salvation of
those who thus cried unto him: It is written, That St. Patrick hereupon asking
Council of our Lord touching this Affair, and by the means of the Angel Victor,
received this Divine Oracle: That forsaking his Country and Parents, he should
pass over into Gaul, there to be more perfectly instructed in the Christian
Doctrine and Discipline.

Palladius sent into Britain by Pope Caelestine, being as yet but a Deacon,
sound the Civiller part, formerly under the Roman Jurisdiction, defiled with
Heresy, and the Northern parts under the Scots, wholly buried in the mists of
Paganism: Of this he sent notice to the Pope, who re-call'd him, to advise of
Remedies for both these mischiefs: To oppose the Pelagian Heresy, he directed
Germanus and Lupus; to rescue the Northern parts of the Island from Paganism,
he sent back Palladius, after he had exalted him to an Episcopal Degree, as his
Legate, and Apostle of the Scottish Nation, as Prosper more at large relates:
It is said that Palladius attempted the Conversion of the Irish, but in vain,
so that the British Scots were the peculiar objects of his care and endeavors;
and this appears the more clearly, for that Servanus and Tervanus, the two
principal Disciples of Palladius, are reckoned among the Learned Teachers of
Britain, of whom the former was sent to instruct the Inhabitants of the
Orcades, and the other to the Picts, over whom he was created Archbishop, and
as some say succeeded St. Ninianus.

The labors both of Servanus and Tervanus were very prosperous; but Palladius
is thought not to have lived above a year after he was made Bishop. Soon after
the first Voyage of Palladius into Britain, the People thereof being neither
willing to receive that perverse Doctrine which Blasphemed the Grace of Christ,
nor able to refute the Subtilties of those who maintained it; by common advice,
craved assistance from the Gallican Bishops, who in a Synod for that purpose
assembled, made choice of St. Germanus and St. Lupus, one Bishop of Auxerre,
and the other of Troyes, to pass over into Britain, to confirm the Faith of
Celestial Grace. All which was done, as appears by Prosper, with the Consent
and by the Direction of Pope Caelestine: Germanus was born at Auxerre,
descended from Illustrious Parents, brought up in good Literature; wherein he
so advanced himself, that he became an Ornament to his Country; and that
nothing might be wanting to the perfecting of his Learning; after he had
frequented the Gallican Schools, where he was taught the Liberal Sciences, he
went to Rome, where he enriched his Mind with the perfect knowledge of the
Imperial Laws: At his return he was made Governor of the City and Territories
of Auxerre the place of his Nativity.

While he was Governor there, Amator the Bishop of that City, a Holy man,
preparing himself in the Church to perform his Office, and perceiving Germanus
their Prefect, entering with a Body and Mind composed to Modesty and Piety;
commanded immediately that the Doors should be fast Locked: And then
accompanied with many of the Clergy and Nobility, laid hold on Germanus, and
devoutly calling on the Name of the Lord, cut off his Hair, and devesting him
of his Secular Ornaments, respectfully clothed him with a Religious Habit; and
said thus to him, Now my Dear Brother, it is our Duty to be diligent in
preserving this Honor committed to thee, without stain: For as soon as I am
dead, Almighty God commits to thee the Pastoral Charge of this City: Amator
shortly after died, in whose place Germanus succeeded, about the year of Grace
418. From the first day in which he undertook the Episcopal Office, to the end
of his Life, he never used Wine, Vinegar, Oil, nor so much as Salt to give a
Relish to his Meat: At his Refections, he first took Ashes into his Mouth, and
after that Barley-bread, and this so slender and ungrateful Diet, he never used
till toward Sunset sometimes; and as is said he would Fast half a Week, yea
seven whole days, without any satisfaction given to his craving Stomach; his
Bed was hard Boards covered over with Ashes, and to prevent any profound sleep,
he would admit no Pillow under his Head: He spent indeed whole nights in
continual Sighing, and incessantly watered his hard Couch with his Tears: He
was a zealous observer of Hospitality, and when ever any poor, or Strangers,
came to him, he would prepare for them a Plentiful Feast, while himself Fasted;
yea with his own Hands he would wash their Feet, Kissing and sometimes Bedewing
them with showers of Tears. He built a Monastery, into which he often retired
feeding and refreshing his Mind there with the wonderful sweetness of
Caelestial Contemplation.

St. Lupus was born at Toul, a City of the Leuci, of a Noble Family, after his
Fathers death he was sent to School, and there imbew'd in the study of
Rhetoric, he Married the Sister of St. Hilarious Bishop of Arles; she was
inflamed with the Love of Chastity from her youth: Hence it was that after
seven years spent in Marriage, by Divine Inspiration both of them exhorted one
another to a state of Conversion; Lupus by a strong impulse from Heaven was
moved to visit the Blessed St. Honoratus, first Abbot of the Famous Monastery
of Lerins, to whose Discipline he humbly submitted himself in continual
Watchings, Fastings and Mortifications, and intending to Sell his Possessions,
and distribute the Money to the Poor, he was on a sudden compelled to take
upon him the Bishopric of Troyes, where he behaved himself so well, that he
was styled the Father of Fathers, Bishop of Bishops, and a second Jacob of his
Age.

These two Holy men, under the conduct of our Lord, took upon them to be the
Apostolic Reformers of the British Churches, their Humility and Austerity of
Life, had a proper and specific Virtue to oppose the Pride and Sensuality of
the Pelagian Heretics. What befell them at Sea, would not be omitted.

At first their Ship was carried with favorable Winds from the Gallick Coasts,
'till they came into the midst of the Sea, where no Land could be discovered,
but presently after the fury of a whole Legion of Devils, envying their design
for the Salvation of Souls, is said to have assailed them; dangers appear on
every side, Storms are raised, Darkness covers the Heavens, and that Darkness
becomes more terrible, by the fearful swelling of the Sea, and rage of the Air,
no longer are the Sails able to sustain the fury of the Winds, nor the Boat
able to resist the Mountains of Waters dashing against it, so that the Ship was
carried forward rather by their Prayers, than the skill or force of the
Mariners: The prime Pilot St. Germanus was then securely composed in sleep, and
the Ship ready to sink, so that St. Lupus and the Company were fain to awake
the Old man; who was only able to withstand the fury of the enraged Elements.
He not at all astonished at the danger, Addresses his Prayers to our Lord, and
his Threats to the unruly Ocean; To the raging storm he opposes the cause of
Religion, which invited them to that Voyage; and presently with a little
quantity of Oil, which he Blessed in the Name of the Holy Trinity, and then
sprinkled upon the Waves, he overcame their fury: His Colleague he admonished,
the rest he encouraged, so that with one breath and clamor Prayers were poured
forth to our Lord, and immediately the Divine Virtue showed it self present,
the Infernal Enemies were dissipated, a calm tranquillity ensued, the Winds
and Waves became serviceable to the Voyage, and all things concurred to their
safe Arrival in a quiet and secure Haven: Several examples of the like effects,
wrought by common Oil, Blessed in this manner, may be found in several Authors.

These two Holy men being Landed, great multitudes from several quarters met to
receive them, having as is said, been informed of their coming, by the
Predictions of Wicked Spirits, who were afrighted thereat, and declared openly
their tampering by Tempests and otherwise, to hinder the Passage of these Holy
Men; and that by their Power and Sanctity, they had at last been vanquished and
disappointed: These Venerable Bishops soon filled the whole Island with their
Fame, Preaching and Miracles; they were so over-press'd with multitudes
resorting to them, that they Preached Gods Word, not only in Churches, but in
Lanes and Highways, whereby Catholics were confirmed in the Faith, and those
who had been depraved reduced to the Church: The Authority of their Holiness,
the Eminence of their Learning, the wonder of their Miracles, gave them the
esteem and Honor of Apostles, and reduced the whole Island to the
acknowledgement of their Doctrine: The promoters of the contrary persuasion,
crept into dark Holes, vexed as the wicked Spirits were, to see the People
freed from their Snares: Yet at last after long study and meditation, they
presumed to enter into a Dispute with these Apostolic men.

The Pelagians are said to come Pompously attended by their flattering
Disciples, and rather chose to run the hazard of a conflict, than by their
Silence confess they had an ill Cause: Infinite numbers were assembled, with
their Wives and Children, to hear this Dispute: The Disputants stood on each
side, of much different condition; on the one side was placed Divine Authority,
on the other Humane presumption, here Orthodox Faith, there Perfidious Error;
here Christ was Author, there Pelagius: The Holy Bishops gave free scope of
disputing to the Pelagians, who vainly spent the time, and tired the Auditory
with empty Verbal Discourses: But after them the Venerable Bishops poured forth
the torrent of their Eloquence, accompanied with Evangelical thunder, with
their own Discourses, Texts of Divine Scripture, the word of God giving witness
to their Assertions: And thus vanity became convinced, and Perfidiousness
confuted; so as the Heretics by their inability to reply, acknowledged their
guilt; and the People standing by as Judges, could scarce contain their Hands
from violence toward them, and with Clamours resounded the Victory.

Immediately a Tribune of the Army with his Wife, leading in their hands their
young Daughter about ten years Old, being Blind, came into the midst of the
Assembly, and presented their blind Child to the Bishops, desiring their help
for her Cure: They had formerly offered her in vain to the adverse Party; who
likewise stricken with a guilty Conscience, join with the Parents in their
entreaties to the Holy Prelates in behalf of the Child: They perceiving the
expectation of the People, and the Conviction of their Adversaries, address
themselves to God by short Prayer: Then St. Germanus full of the Holy Ghost,
invoked the Blessed Trinity, and taking from his Neck a little Box full of Holy
Relics, in the sight of the whole Multitude, he applied it to the Eyes of the
young Maid, which immediately loosing their former Darkness, were filled with a
new Light from Heaven: At this so apparent Miracle the Parents rejoice, and the
People tremble: After this day all men's minds were so clearly purged from this
impious Heresy, that with thirsting desire they received the Doctrine of these
Holy Bishops.

Perverse Heresy thus repelled, and the Authors of it confuted; the Holy
Bishops repaired to the Sepulcher of St. Albanus, intending to give Thanks to
God by his intercession, and having with them Relics of all the Apostles and
diverse Martyrs; after Prayer made, commanded the Sepulcher to be opened, and
there with great Reverence laid up those precious Gifts; thinking it convenient
that the same Repository should contain the Members of many Saints, out of
diverse Regions, whom Heaven had received and Crowned for the equality of their
Merits: St. German then caused to be dig'd up from the place where the Blessed
Martyr St. Alban had shed his Blood, a Mass of dried Earth, which he intended
to take with him; in which were then extant Marks of the Martyrs death, and the
Paleness of his Persecutors: These things being thus performed, an innumerable
multitude, is said to be that day Converted to our Lord: The little Box of
Sacred Relics, it is reported, after St. Germans death, came to the Hands of
the Empress (Galla Placidia) as Heir only of his Benediction.

The malicious Enemy of mankind, busy to entrap the Holy Bishop St. German in
some mischief, found out the means by a casual Fall, to put his Foot out of
Joint: Now while by reason of this Infirmity he was constrained to abide in a
certain Lodging, a Fire happened to break out in some Houses not far from it,
which being covered with Thatch, were quickly devoured, and the Fire driven
forward by Wind, soon approached to his Lodging, whereupon a great concourse of
People came to the Venerable Bishop in a great fright, intending to take him in
their Arms, and carry him out of danger; but he reprehended them, and refused
to remove, having a firm Faith that no evil should happen to him: The multitude
then despairing of his Safety, endeavor to stop the Progress of the flames:
Howbeit Almighty God to exalt his own Power, and his Servants Faith, so ordered
that whatever the People endeavored to preserve was consumed, only the place
where the sick Saint lay was preserved, for the flames, as if afraid to touch
him, flew quite over his lodging; though on each side of it, they raged with
violence, but left it untouched: The multitude seeing this rejoiced, and were
well pleased that their Labors and Endeavors had been over-master'd by Divine
Power.

Whilst this Holy man lay there, he was watched and attended by a numberless
multitude, some seeking Health for their Souls, some for there Bodies: The
wonderful Miracles which our Lord wrought by his Servant, were so many, they
can scarce be re-counted; he being infirm himself, gave Health and Strength to
others, neither would he suffer any remedy to be applied to his Infirmity; but
on a certain night, he saw a person standing before him in White Garments, who
stretching forth his Hand, seemed to raise him up from his Couch, commanding
him to stand firmly; after which his pain passed away, and his strength was so
restored, that the day following he confidently undertook to pursue his journey.

At this time the Picts and Saxons with joint Forces made War upon the
Britains, who were therefore drawn together in a Body; but being distrustful of
their Ability to resist such Powerful Enemies, they humbly implore the
assistance of these Godly Bishops, which they cheerfully promised, and
hastening into the British Army, so increased the Courage and Resolution of the
Britains, as if a new Army had been joined unto them; so as our Lord himself by
the Ministry of these his Captains, seemed to be General of the Army: It was
now the Holy time of Lent, which the presence of these Holy Bishops caused to
be observed with the greater Devotion, and their daily Preaching invited many
to partake of the Sacrament of Baptism. A Church was thereupon prepared against
the Solemnity of Easter; and though the place was no other then open Fields,
yet it was ordered, as if it had been in a City: The Army went in Procession,
moistened with the waters of Baptism, and being inslam'd with the fervor of
Holy Faith, they contemned the Guard of outward Weapons, and expected a more
sure Protection from Heaven.

This Posture of the British Army came to the Enemies knowledge, who not
doubting of Victory against Unarmed People, with great cheerfulness hast'ned to
set upon them: The Britains had notice of their march, and as soon as the
Solemn Feast of our Lords Resurrection was past, the greater part of the Army
being newly Baptized, betook themselves to theirs Arms, and prepared for
Battle: St. German being their General, he made choice of a Band of Light Armed
men, and takes a view of the Country round about, observing also a Valley
compassed with Mountains directly in the Enemies way, he leads part of the Army
into that Valley. The fierce Enemies approaching, and being discovered by those
who lay in Ambush; St. German their Leader gave order to all his Soldiers, That
with loud clamor they should repeat the words by him pronounced; And
immediately while the Enemies thought to fall on, presuming they had not been
discovered; the Holy Bishop three times cried out aloud Allelujah, whereupon
the rest of the Army with one voice Thundered out likewise Allelujah, the noise
whereof was Terrible, multiplied and increased by the Echo from the Mountains
round about.

The sound alone of this Sacred Word, sufficed to terrify the Enemies Army,
which fell a trembling, as if not the Rocks only, but Heaven it self had fallen
on their Heads, insomuch as they all betook themselves to a general flight in
all haste, casting away their Weapons, and glad to escape with their Naked
Bodies: Great numbers of them in their Headlong flight were swallowed up by a
River, through which a little before they had marched with confidence and
leisure enough: The main body of the British Army without striking one stroke,
was a cheerful Spectator of the Vengeance of Almighty God, to whom only they
gave the Glory of the Victory.

The Holy Bishops indeed Triumphed, to see the Enemies defeated without
Bloodshed; they Triumphed for a Victory obtained, not by Arms, but Faith only:
And having thus every way settled this Rich Island in Security, both from the
Pelagians and Saxons, they prepared themselves for their return, to the great
Grief of the whole Nation. The place of this unbloody Battle, is said to be a
Town called Mold in Flintshire, where is a Field called from St. German, in the
British Tongue Maesgarmon; there is also the little River Alen which runs hard
by, wherein probably the Picts and Saxons were drowned; besides, the place
being near the Sea, it lay fit to set on board the Saxon Armies; St. Gregory
the great in expounding the words of Job, makes mention of this Allelujah
resounded thus by the Britains.

The Blessings conferred on this Island, were in some degree recompensed by
their safe and prosperous return, which they are said to have ascribed to the
Intercession of our Tutelar Saint and Protomartyr Alban: Their absence from
home and residence here in Britain, was little more than the space of a year,
in which time many wonderful things were wrought by them; during the time that
St. Germanus remained in Britain.

St. Patrick then 68 years of Age, inseparably adhered to him, having learned
from him many instructions in Christian Doctrine and Discipline, and received
many examples of Virtue and Piety for imitation: By him likewise he was
encouraged to undertake the Conversion of the Irish Nation, but with all
admonished, To expect a Commission from the Sea of Rome to execute that
Apostolic Office. For which purpose he accompanied St. Germanus to Gaul, from
whence the next year he went to Rome, being desirous to have his Journey into
Ireland confirmed by Authority from Pope Caelestinus.

St. Patrick took with him a Priest named Sergetius, a Devout Servant of our
Lord, as a Companion in his Travels; when he came to Rome, he committed himself
to the Praebends of the Roman Church, to be the more perfectly instructed in
their Institutes: He repaired also to the Holy Pope Caelestinus, and humbly
casting himself at his feet, besought him, To employ his care for the
Conversion of the Pagan Irish Nation; The Petition was very acceptable to the
Pope, who changed this Holy man's Name, from Magonius to Patricius, as
Prophesying, That he should be the Father of many Souls: His Name thus changed,
he was promoted to Episcopal Dignity, and then directed to his Voyage into
Ireland: St. Patrick himself in one of his Epistles, transcribed out of a Copy
in the Abbey of Glastonbury, which Epistle is mentioned here before, makes all
this clear: Together with the Episcopal degree, the Pope bestowed on St.
Patrick 12 years Indulgence.

He was accompanied in his Legation with 20 Eminent Persons for his assistance,
one of which was Sergetius before mentioned: He diverted in his return to his
Instructor St. Germanus, from whose Liberality he received Chalices, Priestly
Vestments and store of Books, with many other things proper for his Ministry.
Long before St. Patrick came into Ireland, by the Magicians and Pagan Prophets
there, intimation was given of his coming; their Prophcy was to this effect,
That a man would come thither with his Wood, whose Table should be placed in
the Eastern side of his House, and some persons standing behind, together with
others from the Table, will Sing, and the Congregation will Answer them,
saying, AMEN. When this man comes, he will destroy our Gods, subvert our
Temples, destroy Princes which resist him, and his Doctrine shall remain and
prevail here for ever. With such words these blind Prophets incensed both the
Prince and People against St. Patricius.

They composed a certain Rhyme, importing, That a Head of Art and Skill, with
his Crooked Staff would come, from that hour every House shall be bored through
the Top: He will chant an abomination from his Table at the forepart of the
House; and his whole Family will answer, So be it, So be it. The meaning of
this dark Rhyme is, That the Master of Wisdom would come with the Sign of the
Cross, by which the hearts of all men would feel Compunction, and from the
Altar of the Holy Mysteries he would Convert Souls unto Christ, so as all
Christian People should Answer, Amen. And then our Pagan Kingdom shall fall; as
in truth it afterward did: This piece of Wood is by most taken for the Cross,
others affirm it to signify, A certain wonderful Staff which St. Patrick
before his Journey received from a Holy Hermit, and was called the Staff of
Jesus. The Author of St. Patrick's Life, relates the Story of the Staff to this
effect.

That St. Patrick by Divine Revelation passed over to a certain Solitary
Hermit, living in an Island of the Tyrrhen Sea, whose Name was Justus, a man of
a Holy Life and great Fame; this man of God gave to St. Patrick the
forementioned Staff, affirming seriously, That he had received it immediately
from the Hand of our Lord Jesus Christ, who had appeared to him. There were
other men in the same Island at some aistance, who also led Solitary Lives:
Some of these St. Patrick observed to be very Fresh and Youthful, others very
Decrepid and Old, were the Children of them who appeared so Youthful; at which
the Saint being astonished, and enquiring the occasion of so great a Miracle,
was thus Answered, We from our Childhood, by Divine Grace, have been much
addicted to Works of Mercy, our doors stood ever open to Travelers, demanding
Meat or Lodging: On a certain night it happened, that a Stranger with a Staff
in his Hand was Entertained by us, and used with all the Courtesy we could;
the morning he gave us his Benediction, telling us he was Jesus Christ, and
saying to us, You have often hitherto ministered unto my Members, and this night
Entertained me in my own Person; this said, He gave the Staff in his Hand to a
man of God, our Father both Spiritually and Carnally, commanding him to keep
it, Till in succeeding times a stranger Named Patrick should come to visit him,
and then to give it to that Stranger; and having said this, he ascended up into
Heaven. From that day, those Hermits told St. Patrick, They had remained in the
same state of Youthful Comeliness and Vigor; whereas their Children, who were
then little Infants, were, as he saw, become decrepid Old men. This Story of
St. Patrick and his Staff, is reported by Jocelinus Author of his Life. Now
what Credit soever this Story may find in the minds of the Readers, certain it
is, that a Staff believed to have belonged to St. Patrick, and named the Staff
of Jesus, was for many Ages in great Veneration among the Irish. And St.
Bernard in the Life of St. Malachias an Irish Bishop, mentions and describes
this Staff, and the great esteem it had in that Nation; and if we will believe
Giraldus Cambrensis, It was the Vulgar Opinion, that with this Staff, St.
Patrick cast out of the Island all Venomous Beasts.

He seems to have entered into Ireland in the year 432. as Bishop Usher
computes. The Inhabitants of the Country having advice of his Landing, flocked
to him from all Parts, especially the common People came joyfully to him, as if
he had been of their own Nation: He had indeed many Qualities which invited
their good Will toward him: He was of a Comely Personage, very Civil in
Conversation, and though extremely Grave, yet without Morosity: Besides this,
he spoke Irish perfectly, and from his Youth had informed himself of their
Natural Dispositions, so as he presently became one of them: But God was the
principal cause of conciliating their Affections to him, and by his special
Grace great multitudes in a short time yielded their Assent and Obedience to
his Christian Doctrine.

For St. Patrick like a good Shepherd, carefully watched over his new flock,
informing them daily in all Duties of Piety, convincing the Pagans of their
Errors, and confounding the Magicians which opposed him. The Conversion of one
Irishman is specially taken notice of, whose Name was Dicon, whom St. Patrick
gained, as he was passing through his Land, to submit to the Doctrine of our
Lord; and of a Wolf in a wonderful manner changed him into a Lamb; For Dicon
coming suddenly with Weapons, intended to have killed St. Patrick and his
Companions; but as soon as he saw his face, he was pricked in his Heart; our
Lord immediately turning his Thoughts, so as he meekly led him to his House,
where the Holy Bishop resided sometime, Preaching to him the Faith of Christ so
effectually, that he became the first of all the Island, who believed with all
his Family.

Nevertheless another Ancient Author cited by Bishop Usher, mentions the
Conversion of one Sinel, as the first of all, his words are, St. Patrick sent
by Pope Caelestinus landed at the mouth of the River Dee, but an impious Count
called Nathi, who formerly had resisted St. Palladius, contradicted St. Patrick
and his Doctrine: However Sinel the Son of Finchado, by the Preaching of St.
Patrick, believed in Almighty God: and was the first among the Irish Scots who
was Baptized by the Holy Bishop, upon whom and his Seed St. Patrick bestowed
his Benediction. By which it appears that St. Patrick first landed in the
Province of Leinster, and from thence went to Vlster, where, having Converted
Dicon, he obtained a Field called Sabbul, two Miles distant from the City of
Down. His particular Journeys, Laborious Preaching, Pious Actions, and
Admirable Miracles, are Copiously related by the Ecclesiastical Writers of
Ireland. It is said that Carantacus or Cernac, thirty years before the Birth of
St. David, began to Preach the Gospel in Ireland: He was a Britain born, Son of
Keredec, Prince of the Province of Cardigan; (Cereticae Regionis) Amongst many
other Children Keredic had this Carantac, a Child of good Disposition,
beginning early to do those things, which he thought pleasing to God.

In those days the Scots grievously vexed Britain, so that his Father unable to
sustain the weight and troubles of Government, would have resigned the Province
to Carantac; but he loving the Caelestial King, more than an Earthly Kingdom,
fled away; and having bought a Wallet and Staff of a poor man, by Gods Conduct
was brought to a Pleasant place, where he reposing himself built an Oratory,
and spent his time in the Praises of God: At last he passed over into Ireland,
invited by his Affection to St. Patrick; when he came thither it was agreed
between them, that one of them should travel Preaching the Gospel toward the
Right Hand, and the other toward the Left: In their company many
Ecclesiastical persons attended them, and they all agreed to meet once a year
at an appointed place: Where ever this Holy man Carantac went, an Angel of our
Lord in the likeness of a Dove accompanied him, and changed his Name into
Cernach, being an Irish Appellation; All along his Voyage he wrought great
Miracles, for the Confirmation of the Faith he Preached, Healing many thousand
of their Diseases. The grace at first given to the Apostles, is said to have
been plentifully bestowed on him; He was counted an admirable Soldier and
Champion of Christ, a Spiritual and Devout Abbot, refusing to Preach Saving
Truth unto none: He spent many years in that Island, where he brought an
incredible number to wash away their sins by Penance, by day and night
offering innumerable Prayers to God; and having Converted many People to our
Lord, who wrought many Miracles by him; He at last returned to his Native
Country, where he retired to his former Cave, accompanied with many Disciples:
There having built a Church, he determined to abide; but not long after being
admonished by a Voice from Heaven, he returned into Ireland; where, in a good
Old Age, and full of good Works, he rested in Peace, and was buried in his own
City, from him called Cherach.

I shall here add the Gests of another British Saint, and Companion of St.
Patrick into Ireland, called Luman, Son of Gollitus a Britain, and Nephew to
St. Patrick by his Sister Tigridia: He was the Founder of the Church of Trim in
Ireland; the occasion and manner whereof is thus related by Bishop Usher. St.
Luman came to the Ford of Truim, which runs before the Castle of Fiedilmed Son
of Loiguor: And early in the morning Froitchern Son of Fiedilmed, found him
Preaching the Gospel of Christ, who wondering at the Doctrine taught by him,
presently believed, and was Baptized in Christ by Luman, at a Fountain arising
in the same place, and stayed with him until his Mother who sought after him
came to the same place: She was overjoyed at the sight of the Holy man,
because she also came out of Britain, and being instructed by him likewise
believed; and returning Home, told her Husband what had happened to her self and
her Son: Fiedelmed was much joy'd at the arrival of Luman, because his Mother
called Schotnoesa, had been the Daughter of a British Prince. Fiedilmed
therefore went to him, and Saluted him in the British Language, questioning him
in particular touching his Descent and Doctrine, who answered, That his Name
was Luman a Britain, a Christian, and Disciple of the Holy Bishop S. Patrick,
sent, as he said, by God to Convert the Inhabitants of that Country to the
Faith of Christ, and Baptize them; Fiedilmed immediately believed with his
whole Family, and offered him and St. Patrick his whole Territory with his Son.
Fiedilmed removed his Habitation beyond the River Boindeo, but Luman with
Froitchern, stayed at the Ford of Truim, 'till St. Patrick came thither, where
they jointly erected a Church, about 12 years, before the Church of Armagh
(Attimachae) was founded; the beginning of which Arch-Episcopal Church, the
Annals of Ulster ascribe to the year of Grace 444.

We may now not unfitly treat of St. Benignus, as his Story may be found in the
Antiquities of Glastonbury, The Venerable Bishop St. Patrick Preaching the
Gospel through the Provinces of Ireland, came to a plain called Brey or Breg
very Spacious and Beautiful, with which being delighted, he determined there to
Celebrate the Feast of Easter, then at hand: His first Acquaintance and
Familiarity in that Province, was with a man whom he had newly Converted to the
Faith, with him St. Patrick Lodged: This man had a Young Child called Beonna,
who bore a tender Affection to the Saint, he would often play with him, and
Kiss his Foot; the Child would not sleep, but when he lay with the Holy Bishop:
He therefore Prophetically perceiving the great Grace, which the Divine Bounty
would confer upon the Child, vouchsafed to take him to his Bed, and gave him
the Name of Benignus. When the Holy Bishop was ready to proceed in his Journey,
the Child with Pitiful cries, begged to go along with him, so as the Bishop was
forced to receive him into his Wagon, and Prophesied, that he should be his
Successor in the Bishopric, which accordingly came to pass. This was the first
Solemnity of Easter which the Holy Bishop Celebrated in Ireland, and he did it
by imitating the Son of God, who at his last Supper with his Disciples,
Consecrated his Body and Blood for the Redemption of Mankind: The day before
this great Feast of our Lords Resurrection, St. Patrick, according to an
Ecclesiastical Rite, as Probus observes then in use, Kindled the Holy fire, the
Flame whereof shone brightly about the place. According to the custom of that
Country, it was, it seems, Unlawful for any to Light a Fire, before it was
kindled in the Kings Palace: The King whose Name was Logorius, perceiving the
brightness of the Flame, in great indignation threatened Death to him who had
infringed that custom in his Kingdom: His Magicians about him, to incense him
further, told the King, That the Fire which had so been kindled against Law,
unless presently extinguished, would never cease to the Worlds end, but obscure
all the Fires which they kindled according to their custom; and that the man
who lighted it, would be the destruction of his Kingdom.

While St. Patrick with great success thus labored in the Gospel, Britain was
Illustrated with the Memory of another great St. Winwaloc, the Son of a Noble
Person, called Fracan, Cousin-German of a British Prince Named Coton. This St.
Winwaloc is said to have been from his Childhood inflamed with an earnest
desire of Heavenly things, to despise Worldly Allurements, and to live to God
only; wherefore he besought his Parents, that he might be commended to the care
of a certain Religious man, to be by him imbew'd in the knowledge of the Holy
Scriptures and Documents of Piety, his request being obtained, he made
wonderful progress in Virtue and Holiness under that Religious man's Discipline;
insomuch, that when he was but seven years Old, he became an example of all
Piety and Goodness: In process of time having undertaken a Monastical
Profession, Divine Graces shone more brightly in him, so as he became withal
enriched with the Gift of Prophecy. Many Miracles God wrought by him, in
performance whereof; having a firm Faith, he made use only of the Sign of the
Cross, and Oil which had been Blessed: Among which Miracles, the most
stupendous was, His raising a Young man to Life.

At this time the Glory of the most Holy Prelate St. Patrick was famous in Gods
Church, who like a bright Star Illustrated all Ireland; and the report of his
admirable Virtues, kindled in St. Winwaloc so great an affection toward him,
that he endeavored to pass over to him, and be subject to his direction in
Piety. Behold, while the Holy man's thoughts were busied about this design; St.
Patrick in a Vision presented himself to him, with an Angelical Brightness, and
a Golden Diadem on his Head, telling him, He was the same Patrick whom he so
earnestly desired to Visit: But (says he) to prevent a dangerous Journey by
Sea and Land, our Lord has sent me to thee, to fulfill thy desire, so as thou
may enjoy both my Sight and Conversation: He further told St. Winwaloc, That
he should be a Guide and Director of many in Spiritual Warfare: for which end
he gave him many wholesome Instructions: Exhorting him to desire from his
Master some Companions, and with them to remove to another place. No sooner was
this Vision vanished, but St. Winwaloc went to the Cell wherein the Father of
the Monastery was, attending on Divine Meditation, to whom St. Winwaloc
declared the Vision; whereupon the Father told him with a joyful Countenance,
That he had been Honored with a Divine Visitation and Revelation, and
forthwith he assigned the Saint eleven Disciples, such as were most fervent in
Gods Service: With these he passed over into a certain Island, and for the
space of three years, there led an Hermetical Life; but the place being exposed
to Violent Tempests, and incommodious for its Barrenness, St. Winwaloc Prayed
God to direct him to a more Convenient Habitation, God heard his Prayers, and
showed him a place near the Sea, but there being no Ship ready, the Saint is
said to have renewed his Prayers; which done, He bad his Companions be
Courageous and firm in Faith, saying to them, As you see me lead this Brother
by the Hand, so do every one of you take his next Fellows Hand and follow one
another: Then invoking the Name of our Lord, with his Pastoral Staff he struck
the Sea, upon which it pleased God to repeat the Miracle of the Red Sea, For
the Sea opened a Passage for them; so that taking one another by the Hand, and
himself marching in the Front, they all walked securely over the dry Sands, the
Waters on both sides standing like Walls; and as they passed thus, they sang to
our Lord a Hymn of Praise and Joyfulness.

It is said this Saint from the 20th. year of his Age to his Death, was never
seen to sit in the Church; never exceeded Moderation in any thing, never was
dejected with Sadness, nor dissolved in Mirth; never Angry or Turbulent, but
Kind and Affable to all: He repeated the Psalms every day; sometimes standing
with his Arms stretched out in figure of a Cross, and sometimes falling on his
Knees: From the time that he began to build his Habitation, he never used any
Woollen or Linen Garment, but what was made of Goat Skins only: In his Bed he
neither had Feathers or Clothes; instead of Feathers, he strewn under him
Nut-shells; and instead of Blankets, he covered himself with Sand mingled with
Pebbles; two great Stones were his Pillows; day and night he wore the same
Garments: Wheaten Bread he never Eat; a small proportion of Barley Bread
contented him, wherewith was mingled an equal measure of Ashes: He took his
Refection once only in two, sometimes in three days; his other Diet was a
mixture of Meal and Cabbage without any Fat; upon Saturdays and Sundays, he
would add a little Cheese Sodd in water; and at Easter a few small Fishes: It
was his usual custom daily to visit a Church about a Mile distant from his
Monasteries, attended by a Deacon named Egbin, and there to offer Sacrifices to
God for the Living and Dead: Such was his diligence and Devotion at the Holy
Altar, that he is said to have there merited the reward of everlasting
Happiness.

One day an Angel is said to have appeared unto him, saying, Reverend Father,
the Heavenly Citizens desire thee for their Companion, and soon shall thou be
delivered from thy painful Exercises. After this he presently called his
Brethren together, and bad them prepare, For (says he) as soon as I have Sung
Mass, and Communicated the Body and Blood of our Lord, at the sixth hour of the
day, our Lord will receive me out of this Mortal Body: And so having Celebrated
Mass, as he stood at the Altar between two Monks which sustained him on each
side, and was Singing with his Brethren, he rendered his Soul to God, as
untouched by Corporal Sickness, as it was free from any Carnal stains. Some say
his Body was translated from his Monastery at Tauriacum, and laid in the
Blandin Monastery at Gaunt: Others contend that his Sacred Relics repose at
Monstrueil, where they likewise show his Chasuble, Alb, and Stole; and there is
a Church Dedicated to his memory, in French called St. Waley: Now though St.
Winwaloc died out of Britain, yet there are not there wanting Monuments of his
Memory and Sanctity; a Town there is in Shropshire called after his Name,
Wenlock, and so was named in the Saxons time, where the Holy Virgin Milburga
founded a Monastery for Religious Virgins, as may hereafter be declared.

The forementioned Deacon Egbin or Ethbin, is also renowned for his Sanctity,
he over-liv'd his Master, and went over into Ireland, where, in a Wood called
Neeten he built a Monastery in which he lived and died: He was as is
above-noted, chosen by St. Winwalock to attend him daily to the little Church
beforementioned. Going one day thither together, one met them veiled in the
Figure of a miserable Leaper, with a lamentable voice beging their assistance;
Ethbin with great Compassion and Charity Embraced and Kissed the Leaper, the
same also at his monition did St. Winwaloc: Our Lord accepted their Office of
Charity with great Kindness, for he delights to be cherished in his poor
Members; therefore he was pleased to give each of them a present reward of
their unfain'd Charity; for flying from their Embraces, our Lord immediately in
a Cloud with great Glory, and with Gracious words assured them, that their
Names were already written in the Book of Life, and that with his Saints they
should be partakers of his Kingdom. This most Happy assurance Ethbin ascribed
to the Merits of St. Winwaloc, esteeming vilely of himself; and on the other
side St. Winwaloc, moved with the same Humility and Charity, cast the Merit on
Ethbin.

This year 432. is remarkable for the Happy Death of St. Ninianus
beforementioned: This Holy man wonderful for Miracles, and Illustrious for
many Virtues, at last approached to the Happy day, in which God Graciously
called him out of this Mortal Life: So as being perfect in Grace and Piety, and
mature in Age, he Happily mounted to Heaven; his Body was buried in the Church
Dedicated to St. Martin, built by himself from the Foundation: The
Centuriatours add this to his Story, That he was a Venedocian, Teacher of
Christian Verities, of a desert more than ordinary; To his Old Age he largely
communicated the Talent, wherewith God had entrusted him, among the Britains,
Scots and Southern Picts. He was a man Assiduous in Reading the Holy Scripture,
Merciful to Orphans, Widows and the Poor; Illustrious in Miracles and
Sanctity: By his Pious Industry the Nation of the Picts, first of all
relinquishing their Idolatry, embraced the true Faith of Christ: He was the
first Bishop of Candida Casa, and died among the Picts in the Province of
Galloway.

I may further observe, that he was very Devout in giving Respect and
Veneration to Gods Saints, in whose Honor he built Churches, and in particular
to the Honor of S. Martin, who died about 30 years before him: The example of
St. Ninian, was imitated by the British Church near the same Age; for when St.
Augustine the Monk came into Britain to Convert the Saxons, He found (says Saint Bede) in the City of Canterbury a Church Dedicated to the Honor of St. Martin,
which had been built in the times of the Romans. St. Ninian before he died,
divided the Provinces of the Picts into Parishes, he Ordained Priests there,
and Consecrated Bishops, by the Authority of the Roman Bishop, from whom he
received his Mission.

He being famous for Miracles, it may not be amiss to reckon up one. In the
Region of the Picts, there was a Prince named Tudwal, a man of a proud and high
Spirit; he contemning the Admonitions of this man of God, and derogating from
his Doctrine and Life, resisted him openly: Being one day more then ordinarily
troublesome and rude; God the supreme Judge, would not any longer suffer the
injuries offered to his Holy Servant, to pass unrevenged, but struck this proud
man with an intolerable pain in his Head, by the violence whereof those lofty
Eyes of his became utterly Blind; so that he who had before impugn'd the Light
of Divine Truth, deservedly lost this Worlds Light. But upon better
consideration he sent a Message to the Holy Bishop, humbly beseeching him, in
imitation of our Lords Benignity, to return to him good for evil, and love for
hatred: The Venerable Bishop hereupon, first sharply reproved the Prince, and
then touching him, imprinted on his Eyes the Sign of the Cross; when
immediately his pains ceased, and his Blindness was dissipated. Afterward this
Prince highly Honored the Holy Bishop, and readily granted whatsoever he asked
of him.

Our Countryman Alcuinus, in an Epistle not Printed, but now extant in Bishop
Vshers Antiquities; Testifies the great Fame which this Holy Bishop had, for
Sanctity and Miracles. This Epistle is directed to the Religious Priest, then
living at Candida Casa. While Alcuinus lived, this following Miracle happened
to a Devout Priest Celebrating Mass at this Saints Monument, named Plegils, he
frequently Solemnized Mass at the Body of St. Ninian; and living a Holy and
Virtuous Life, began frequently to beseech our Lord, That he would please to
show visibly to him, the Nature and Verity of the Body and Blood of Christ, in
the most Blessed Sacrament: This Prayer he made, not for want of Faith, in the
Truth of the Mystery, but out of an Affection of Devotion and Piety: For the
Author says, That to his great Consolation, our Lord appeared to him in the
Sacrament in the form of a young Child.

Three years after the death of St. Ninianus, St. Germanus was once more
invited into Britain, to perfect the good Work which he had formerly began, in
rooting out of the Pelagian Heresy, there spreading it self again, the
Relation whereof we must borrow from the Learned Priest Constantius, a Writer
of those times, and of most perfect Integrity and Sincerity. By a Message from
Britain addressed to St. German, he was advertised that that Pestilent Heresy
began to enlarge it self there, and entreated him once more to come over, and
maintain the Cause of Divine Grace: The Holy Bishop readily complied with this
Petition, being delighted to spend his strength in the Service of Christ: There
was joined to him for his Companion Severus Bishop of Triers, a person of
Consummate Sanctity: In the mean time three Infernal Spirits flying through the
whole Island, foretold the return of St. Germanus, being forced so to do
against their Will: Insomuch as one Elaphius, a Principal person of the
Country, without any other notice hast'ned to meet the Holy Bishops: His Son
went with him, upon whom, from the flower of his Youth, a lamentable Infirmity
had seized, for all his Members were withered, and the Hamm of his Leg was so
drawn together, that by reason of the dryness of his Thigh he could not set his
Foot upon the ground; Elaphius was attended by almost the whole Province: As
soon as they were met together, an Episcopal Benediction was conferred on the
People, and the Words of Truth Preached to them. St. Germanus perceived that
the generality of the People persever'd constant in the Doctrine which he left
among them, and that the fault lay upon a few buisie persons, who were
presently condemned. As for Elaphius, he humbly kneeling kissed the Bishops
Hands, presenting to him his Lame Son, so miserable a Spectacle, that he moved
compassion in all, especially in the Holy Bishops mind; St. German therefore
presently commanded the young man to sit down, then handled his contracted Ham,
and with his right Hand stroak'd all the infirm Members; immediately perfect
Health and Strength attended that wholesome Touch; the withered Members
recovered their natural Moisture, and his Sinews their Office and Agility. Thus
in the sight of all, the young man was restored to his Father, as if he had
been new made; the People are astonished at this Miracle, and the Catholic
Faith is perfectly confirmed in their minds.

The Holy Bishop spent his time in Preaching up and down, and the Hearers were
every where Converted or Confirmed: So that by a Universal Consent, the Authors
of the Perverse Doctrine, were brought before the Holy Bishops, and then
banished out of the Island, and the Orthodox Faith remained uncorrupted; and
all things being thus well composed, the Holy Bishops returned with a
Prosperous Voyage.

Howbeit, during his stay here, St. German is recorded to have called a Synod,
and taking notice that many Churches wanted Pastors, by which means the People
became wavering in their Faith; by common advice he selected Learned and Pious
men, whom he ordained Bishops, and placed in several Churches: In particular,
over all the Britains; toward the Southern parts, he promoted the Blessed man
Dubricius an Eminent Doctor, to be Archbishop, who was made choice of by King
Mouricus and the whole Diocese: They constituted his Arch-Episcopal See at
Landaff with the Kings Consent, where a Church was Built, and Dedicated to the
Honor of the prime Apostle St. Peter. That an Arch-Episcopal See was here thus
planted, may be some mistake; for when that See was transplanted to Caerleon,
an Arch-Episcopal See indeed was Established there; so that it may rather seem
that only an Episcopal See was Erected at Landaff by Mouricus, who is said to
be Son of Theodoric Prince of Morgannia, or Glamorganshire; which Prince, as
Bishop Godwin relates, Resigned his Principality, and embraced a Monastical or
Hermitical Life: But after, when the Saxons invaded the Land, he was drawn out
of his Cell, to be Leader of an Army, and Courageously rushing among the
Enemies, received a Mortal Wound, for which Merit he was Enrolled in the number
of Martyrs.

St. German's next care, after Ordaining Bishops, was to Visit the Schools, the
Sources of Learning; and he is said to have Studied, or rather Taught for
sometime in Oxford, and Established good Orders there, concerning which we may
find an Illustrious Testimony of our Learned Countryman Asserius, who lived
about 800. years since, and treating of the Controversy between the Students of
Oxford and Grimbaldus, whom King Alfred had called out of France to govern that
University, affirms, That the Scholars proved by unquestionable Testimonies of
Ancient Annals, that the Orders and Institutes of that place, which Grimbaldus
sought to change, had been Established by Pious and Learned men, As Gildas,
Melkin, Nemri, Kentigern and others, who all grew Old in their Studies there,
and Administered all things in Peace and Concord, affirm, They further showed,
that St. Germanus came to Oxford, and abode there half a year, approving
wonderfully their Orders and Institutions: Whether this be not a later Addition
to Asserius, is suspected by some.

It will not be amiss a little to enquire, what Doctrines were taught by St.
Germanus to whom this Country of ours, was so much beholding: For by this
enquiry it may appear whether St. Augustine the Monk sent by St. Gregory the
Great in the following Age to Convert the Saxons, taught them a Religion
differing from that which St. German professed; we need go no further in this
enquiry then to Mr. Seldom, well known to be Learned in Antiquity: The sixth
Chapter of this Treatise, called, Analecta Anglo-Britanica, touching the
Practices of Ecclesiastical Discipline wherewith Germanus and Lupus Bishops,
imbew'd the Britains, may easily satisfy us in this particular; where he tells
us, That Germanus Bishop of Auxerre, and Lupus Bishop of Troyes in Gaul came
into Britain to restore Christian Religion depraved by the Heresy of Pelagius
and Errors of Pagans: The Doctrines (says he) taught by them, as the Fame is,
which also Giraldus Cambrensis testifies, were as follows.

First, Of every Loaf of Bread set before them, one Corner they gave to the
Poor.

Secondly, They sat three together at Dinner in memory of the Trinity.

Thirdly, If any met a Religious Monk or Clergyman in the way, or any one in a
Religious Habit, he would presently lay aside his Weapons, and with a low
inclination of his Head, demand his Benediction.

Fourthly, Generally all the People earnestly demanded Episcopal Confirmation,
and Inunction with Holy Chrism, by which the Holy Ghost is conferred.

Fifthly, They sometime bestowed the Tithe of all their Substance, Cattle and
Sheep, either when they Married, or undertook some long Pilgrimage, or by the
Churches Order submitted to some extraordinary Penance for their Sins: This
they call the great Tithes, and two parts thereof they bestowed on the Church
where they were Baptized; the third they gave to the Bishop of the Diocese.

Sixthly, Beyond all other External Labors of Mortification, they were most
Devoted to Pilgrimages undertaken to Rome, to Visit the Monuments of the
Apostles.

Seventhly, Beyond any other Nation they expressed a Devout Reverence to
Churches and Churchmen, to Relics of Saints, to Portable Bells, Sacred Books,
and the Holy Cross; and this Devotion has been rewarded with greater Peace,
than any other Churches enjoyed.

Eighthly, Entire security was observed in regard of Beasts seeding not only in
the Churchyards, but beyond them through all Grounds enclosed with Ditches,
which Bishops design for observation of Peace and Indemnity: And greater
Churches, to which Antiquity always afforded greater Reverence, have power to
grant and enjoin the observation of such Peace and Security for Cattle, whilst
in the Morning they go, and at Evening they Return from their Pastures.

This Peace is preserved so inviolable, that if any one should incur the Mortal
Indignation of his Prince, and seek Refuge in a Church, he may enjoy the Fruit
of this Peace, both for his Person and Goods: Though indeed from such large
Immunities beyond the Ancient Canons, (which in such cases allow safety of Life
to a man's Body) occasion of great Abuses have been taken: Scarce any one of
these Christian practices, but was allowed by St. Augustine. Yet is St.
Augustine by some in those days condemned, and St. German Absolved.

Our Ancestors indeed to testify their high esteem of the Venerable Bishop St.
German's Sanctity, approved by Miracles; after his Death built Chapels and
Churches to his Honor; on one of which Cambden thus writes, In Cornwall, near
the River Liver, there is a Village Named from St. German, to which, during the
Danish Tumults, the Episcopal See of that Province was transferred, out of fear,
as to a place more remote and secure: There a Church had been Erected, and
Consecrated to the Honor of St. Germanus, who Extirpated the Pellagian Heresy
arising a new among the Britains. In Yorkshire likewise a famous Monastery was
Consecrated to him: The River Owse Waters Selby a Town well Peopled; there King
William the I. Founded a Church in memory of St. German, who is said, To have
wounded to Death the many Headed Hydra of Pelagianism, often quelled, and often
reviving again: The Abbots of this Monastery, and of St. Mary's at York, were
the only Northern Abbots, which had Seats in Parliament.

The memory of St. German is also much Celebrated among the Silures in
North Wales; for from him a part of Radnor-shire is called Guarthenian; for as
Nennius relates, Vortimer the Son of Vortigern, to satisfy for injuries done by
his Father to St. German, Dedicates that part of the Country to him, where he
had been chiefly wronged, in memory whereof it took the name of Guartheny;
which in the British Language, signifies, A Calumny justly retorted.

Hitherto since the Romans relinquished their care of Britain, the Provinces of
the Island had been governed by Petty-Princes, Independent one of another: But
in the year 438. by reason of the frequent inroads of their Cruel Enemies the
Picts and Scots, by common agreement of the Provinces, a general Captain of the
whole Nation was chosen, after the manner of their Ancestors in the days of
Julius Caesar, and the Kingdom established in that Captains Line: The choice
unhappily fell upon Vortigern, born for the destruction of his Country; He was
a man void both of Courage and Council, addicted wholly to Carnal Pleasures,
the Slave of most Vices, especially of Avarice, Pride and Luxury: He
solicited, and with the hopes of making her a Queen, Deflowered his own
Daughter, and of her got a Son, who by Miracle, notwithstanding his Incestuous
Birth, through Divine Grace became a Saint, and was named St. Sanctus. The Wife
of Vortigern, was equal to him in Birth, but unlike in Disposition; by her he
had three Sons, Vortimer, Catigern and Pascentius: While she lived he governed
with Moderation; but after her Death he loosed the Reins to all wickedness: For
which being reproved by St. German, and in a Synod Excommunicated, he Revenged
himself, by inflicting the forementioned Injuries and Calumnies upon the Holy
Bishop: Before his Election to the Universal Government of Britain, he was
Prince of the Danmonii, or as others write, Consul of the Gevissei Inhabitants
of the South-Western parts about Cornwall or South Wales; which Principality it
seems he had governed well enough, to be preferred before his fellow Princes:
Though indeed the men of that Age, which Gildas terms, Atramentum aetatis,
afforded so little choice, that a Prince not Profligately Vicious, might
deserve some Reputation. However, this unworthy King is recorded a Restorer of
the City of Oxford.

To leave him a while, we may take notice, that among the Benefactions conferred
by St. German on Britain, the Election and Consecration of St. Dubritius to the
Bishopric of Landaff was not the least: This Dubritius was by Nation a
Britain, born in the Province of the Dunetae, or West-Wales; He was Sir-nam'd
Gainius, from a River which runs by the place where he was born; His Mothers
Name was Evedila, famous for her Virtues; and being a Child, had his mind
imbew'd with good Literature, so as in few years he made such proficiency in
Learning, that not the Ignorant only, but such as had acquired a good degree in
Knowledge, repaired to him, to increase their Skill, among whom were St.
Theliaus. St. Sampson and St. Aidanus: In the Soil of his Nativity, near the
River Vaga, he chose a fit Seat, for his own and his Disciples Studies, and
there he spent many years in the Charitable Communication of his Learning to
others. Afterward having by the command of an Angel built a Church there, he
Preached, and Taught the people wholesome Christian Doctrine, and by imposing
his Hands, he often Cured many Infirmities; and being thus qualified, he was
advanced by St. German to the degree of a Bishop: He lived to a very Old Age
for many years after this, he was Translated by Aurelius Ambrosius to the
Archbishopric of Caerleon in the Province of Monmouth, so as he will once more
occur in our History; in the mean time we must not omit to say something of
another Disciple of St. German, named St. Briocus a Britain, afterward a
Bishop in Armorica, so famous that the Sea of his Bishopric, Suffragan to
Tours, is to this day from his Name called St. Brieu: He was descended of a
Noble Stock, and brought by St. German out of Britain into Gaul, and by him
there instructed in the Discipline of Piety: being enriched with such saving
Doctrine, he returned into his own Country, and there informed his Parents in
the true Faith, which he likewise Preached with great success in the Country
about. After (desirous to employ our Lords Talents more Copiously,) he came
over into Armorica, where having shed the Beams of Evangelical Light, into the
mind of his Kinsman Cenanus Count of Triguier, he afterward cleans'd him in
the Laver of Baptism; then assembling several devout persons, aspiring to the
Perfection of a Religious Life, he built a Monastery, and there by the
Liberality of the said Count, he laid the Foundation of an Episcopal See: And
being Consecrated Bishop by the Archbishop of Tours; He, with an admirable
Splendor of Virtue and Piety, governed the said Diocese the space of 30 years:
Not long after, being in a Journey, he breathed forth his spotless Soul; his
Body was carried back to the Church which himself had built; and there with
great Honor Interred, and frequent Miracles are said to be wrought at his
Relics: Thus, as he gave his Name to the Monastery, Town and Mother Church of
that Diocese, so he also afforded continual Protection to them.

In the year of Grace 439. St. Patrick had spent 8 years in Ireland, and then
returned into Britain, having fixed his Episcopal Chair at Armagh; after that,
he is said to repair to the Apostolic See, to ratify his Proceedings, as he
was advised by an Angel of our Lord: After his return from thence, he retired
to the Monastery of Glastonbury, and there ended his days, as St. Fugatius and
Damianus before him had done. What were his special Exercises after such his
Retirement, is recorded in History, viz. Attendance upon Prayer, Fasting and
Purity of Life, instituting Rules for a Monastical Profession in Glastonbury,
amongst such Religious men, as were there Successors of St. Joseph of
Arimathaea: These St. Patrick reduced from an Eremetical to a Caenobitical
course of Life, giving them Institutes which he had received from his Uncle St.
Martin of Tours; who long since had clothed him with the Monastical Habit,
which was a White Cowle of the natural color of the Wool, over his other
Garments, by which Purity and Innocence were denoted. This fashion was
instituted by the British and Irish Monks, before the coming of St. Augustine;
who, to distinguish himself from them, assumed a Black Cowle, so as his
Successors were styled Black Monks.

In Glastonbury it was, where St. Patrick wrote his Famous Chart
beforementioned, wherein he particularly describes the Isle then called
Ynswitrin, where was an Ancient Chapel Consecrated to the Honor of the most
Blessed Virgin; where he found 12 Hermits Successors of the Disciples of St.
Phaganus and Diruvianus, in which Chart was contained, That they had received
from Pope Eleutherius ten years Indulgence; and that by a Revelation from our
Lord, they had built a Church to the Honor of St. Michael the Archangel: How
likewise it was signified to St. Patrick, by a Vision, That he was to Honor
the Blessed Archangel in that place, for the certainty of which Vision, his
Left Hand Withered, and was not restored, 'till he had acquainted his Brethren,
with what he had seen. This Chart St. Patrick left with two Devout Irish Monks
Arnulphus and Ogmar his Companions, who resolved to attend on that Chapel.

The Holy Bishop further relates, That he conferred an Indulgence of 100. days
on those who by cutting down Wood cleared a Passage for the Devout Visitants of
the Chapel, Consecrated by our Lord himself to the Honor of his most Blessed
Mother. At his return from Rome, St. Patrick brought with him some Relics of
the Holy Apostles St. Peter and St. Paul, and of St. Stephen the Blessed Deacon
and Martyr, with a Linnen-Cloath, sprinkled with the Blood of our Savior Jesus
Christ, which Holy Relics were reserved there behind the Altar of St. Patrick:
These Relics are said to have been brought from Jerusalem by Eudocia the Wife
of Theodosius, and laid up in the Church of St. Lawrence the Martyr, and there
Piously Venerated by Devout Christians. St. Patrick is reported after his
return from Rome, to have Founded many Monasteries, which he filled with
Religious men, who willingly fubmitted themselves to the form of a Religious
Life, then prescribed unto them. He is said, To have foretold many
Unfortunate, and many Prosperous things, which should bef all Britain;
particularly the Sanctity of St. David, then enclosed in his Mothers Womb; By
all which is confirmed St. Patrick's long abode in Britain after he had
Converted the Irish Nation.

Among the British Disciples of St. Patrick, the memory of St. Bachiarus, whom
some affirm to be the same with Marcaeus or Morthaeus, is Celebrated. He
addicted himself to the Study of good Literature at Caerleon; and became an
Excellent Poet and Mathematician, in the Studies whereof in his younger years
he entirely employed himself; but afterward he had the Character of a man
excellently versed in Christian Philosophy; for the preservation of his
Integrity and Chastity, he is said, To have forsaken his Country, and
undertaken a long Pilgrimage; The Britains instructed by Germanus, accounting
Pilgrimages, especially to Rome, amongst the works of Piety: This Holy man
might likewise absent himself from his Country, in regard the Enormous Vices
then and there reigning, could not but afflict his Righteous Soul, and give him
cause to fear the Miseries soon ensuing, and desire a Happy opportunity of
imploring the Divine assistance, for the relief of his afflicted Country. Yet
he wanted not Detractours, who charged him with Levity and Vanity, or worse; so
as he was forced to declare by writing, That he undertook those Travels for the
Love of God, his own Soul, and his Distressed Country. He directed this his
Defense especially to St. Leo the first Pope of that Name, as the common Father
of all Christians: There is also extant a Learned and Elegant Epistle of his
written on this occasion.

He had heard that a certain Priest by the Devils suggestion had violated a
Consecrated Virgin, for which he was cast out of the Church without hope of
being restored: The Holy man was deeply afflicted both for the Enormity of the
Crime, and Severity of the Punishment; whereupon he wrote the said Epistle,
replenished as well with Divine Learning as Compassionate Charity: This Epistle
he gave to a Priest called Januarius; him he entreats and strongly Evinces for
the Restitution of the Offender, showing, That in the most fruitful Field of
Gods Church, there grew Herbs Medicinal to every Wound: Then addressing his
Speech to the Guilty Priest, He powerfully exhorts him to Penance in an
enclosed Monastery, there to expiate his Crime by Fasting and Prayer, and to
beg the Intercession of the Saints on his behalf; and fearing least he should
accumulate his sin by joining Marriage to his Incest; he terrifies him, by
showing, The abominable Excess of Marrying one, who was Espoused and
Consecrated to our Lord, when she took the Vail of her Religious Profession: By
which, as in a Mirror, the state of Ecclesiastical Discipline, in those times,
and the inviolableness of Caelebacy and Religious Vows, may be seen. He lived
to a very Old Age, dying in the year 460. or as some say, long after that.

In these times the Vandals by their Incursions and numerous Armies grievously
oppressed the Roman Empire; and upon this opportunity the Scots and Picts broke
their limits, and wasted the Provinces of Britain, which had been subject to
the Romans, this happened in the 8th. year of Vortigern's Reign. The next year
they continued their Invasion with such extreme violence, that after much
Bloodshed, the Britains sostn'd with Luxury, addressed their humble and
Passionate Petition to the Romans; In these lamentable Expressions recorded by
Gildas. To Aetius third time Consul: The Groans of the Britains; Our Barbarous
Enemies drive us to the Sea, the Sea beats us back upon our Barbarous Enemies:
Between these two, we are exposed either to be Slain by the Sword, or Drowned;
to avoid both, we find no remedy. These Letters availed nothing, the Romans had
enough to do to secure their own Empire, so as the Britains wanting Hearts and
Arms, became daily a Prey to their Enemies. With this Calamity, says Saint Bede,
another more terrible was joined, The extremity of Famine, forcing many of
them, to render themselves Slaves to their Enemies for Bread; Only a few by
these miseries being taught the Wisdom to seek Aid from Heaven, retired into
accessible Mountains and Caves; from whence they look Courage, oftentimes with
good success to set upon their Enemies, buisy in heaping Spoils, and drive them
back into their own quarters: But no sooner were they freed from their Enemies,
and that the Island began to abound with Provisions, but their Luxury also
abounded, accompanied with all sorts of Vice, especially hatred of Divine
Truth, and Cruelty one toward another, etc.

The Patience of the all-good God being wearied, by a People to be prevailed
with, neither in Prosperity nor Adversity, brought upon them Enemies far more
Savage and Barbarous than either the Picts or Scots, or rather so besotted the
Reprobate Britains, that they themselves invited new Enemies from a remote
Country, to Consume them, the Saxons, Angles and Jutes, Nations of Germany,
Terrible for their undaunted Courage and Agility, formidable even to the
Romans, because most sudden and Violent in their Enterprises, esteemed the
most Warlike Nations among the Germans for strength of Body, Courage of Mind,
and Patience in suffering Corporal Labors and Incommodities. Before we relate
these dismal Tragedies, some more special occurrences happening about the same
time, and relating to Ecclesiastical Affairs, require first a dispatch.

St. Patrick, though for his particular Consolation, he had retired himself
into the secure repose of a Monastery, was yet resolved, when any Emergent
pressing necessity of Gods Church required his Care and Presence, he would quit
the Office of Mary sitting at our Lords Feet, and exchange it for that of
Martha 's Ministry, in attending, and providing supply to his necessities in
his Members: And indeed some Disorders in his new-Founded Irish Church broke
forth, which after ten years quiet repose, drew him from his Solitude: What
this Disturbance was, is not known particularly, yet may it perhaps be picked
out of some one or more of those Canons or Decrees which in a Synod, at his
return into Ireland by him Assembled, were constituted: These Decrees for many
Ages lay concealed, and negligently exposed to Dust and Mothes, but have of
late by the Industry of Sir Henry Spelman, rescued and restored to Light,
though in several places defaced: Some of them we shall here select, for the
discovery of the Ecclesiastical Discipline practiced in those times; It was
there ordained, That if any Ecclesiastical person, from the Doorkeeper to the
Priest, shall not for Decency wear a Tunick, and have his Hair cut after the
Roman manner, or shall permit his Wife to go abroad Vnvail'd, he should be
separated from the Communion. That a Monk and Consecrated Virgin, shall not
abide in the same Lodging, nor Travel in the same Chariot: That if a Monk shall
neglect the Divine Office, or wear long Hair, he shall be Excommunicate. That
the Alms of Excommunicate Persons or Pagans, shall not be received. That if
any Christian shall be guilty of Manslaughter, Fornication, or consulting
Southsayers, he shall perform Penance for each Crime, the space of a year: And
he that is guilty of Stealing, half a year, of which 20 days he shall eat Bread
only, and be withal obliged to Restitution: That if any Christian shall
believe Spirits may be presented in a Glass, he shall be Anathematized, etc.
That if any Consecrated Virginshall Marry, she shall be Excommunicated, 'till
she be Converted, and forsake her Adulteries; which having done, she is to
perform due Penance, after which they are not to live in the same House or
Town. That if any Priest shall build a Church, he must not offer Sacrifice in
it, before it be Consecrated by the Bishop. That if a Clergyman be
Excommunicated, he must say his Prayers alone, and not in the same House with
his Brethren; neither must he presume to Offer or Consecrate 'till he be
Absolved: That a Bishop may not Ordain in another Bishops Diocese without his
Consent, only upon Sundays he may offer Sacrifice. That a Clark coming from
Britain into Ireland without a Testimonial, be not suffered to Minister.

There is no mention made of this, or any other Irish Synod in any Author,
except only the Authors of St. Patrick's Life, where this general Passage may
be found. The most Holy Bishop St. Patrick, together with three other Bishops,
and many Clarks, came to a Fountain called Debach, which flows from the side
of Crochon toward the East, there to Celebrate a Synod touching Ecclesiastical
Affairs, and they sat near the Fountain; when behold two Daughters of King
Legaren came early in the morning, to wash in the same Fountain, as Women there
usually did; and there found the Holy Synod with St. Patrick near the Fountain.
The Inscription of this Synod runs thus, Thanks be given to God the Father, Son
and Holy Ghost, Patricius, Auxilius and Isserninus to the Priests, Deacons and
whole Clergy, Health: It is better we should premonish those who are negligent,
then blame things just; for Solomon says, It isbetter to Reprove then to be
Angry: The Tenor of our Definition begins thus, If any Captive, etc.

Another Holy Bishop and Disciple of St. Patrick is once more to be
Commemorated, St. Albeus, who when he heard that St. Patrick had Converted to
our Lord Engus King of Munster (Momonensium) and was with him in the Royal City
Cassel, came to Salute them: Now the King and St. Patrick joyfully received
him: And the Holy man Reverently Entertained his Master St. Patrick, for he was
very Humble. After which this King Engus and St. Patrick ordained, that the
Arch-Episcopal See of all Munster, should be for ever placed in the City and
Chair of St. Albeus. The Conversion of King Engus was after this manner: When
St. Patrick had Sown the Faith of Christ in Lemster, he Prosecuted his way to
the limits of Munster; where the King with great Joy met him, having an earnest
desire to Believe and be Baptized, and with much Reverence conducted him to his
Royal City Cassel, and having been instructed, Believed, and received Baptism.
Three years after this, St. Patrick Consecrated St. Benignus Archbishop of
Armagh, and there quitting his Solicitude for others, returned into Britain,
to his much desired Solitude of Glastonbury, where he ended his days.

His Successor St. Benignus, after seven years spent in Care of his Province,
Thirsting after Solitude, and willing to see his Beloved Master, and desirous
also to receive from him a most perfect Rule of Monastical Discipline, by the
Admonition of an Angel came to Glastonbury; and there demanded of St. Patrick,
What place he should make choice of to live in Union with God alone, divided
from Humane Society? St. Patrick's answer was, That he should pursue Happily
his well begun purpose, saying, Go my beloved Brother, and take only your Staff
with you; and when you shall be arrived at the place appointed by God for your
Repose, wheresoever it be, having fixed your Staff in the ground, you shall see
it slourish, and grow Green, there know you must make your abode. Both of them
being thus comforted with mutual Discourses, St. Benignus accompanied only with
a Youth named Pincius, began his Journey through Woody and Moorish places; but
as soon, as he was arrived at an Island, where he saw a Solitary place, and
which he judged sit for his Habitation, he presently fixed his Staff in the
ground, which without delay wonderfully grew Green, and brought forth Leaves:
There therefore St. Benignus resolved to abide until Death in the Service of
God alone: And for many years after the same Tree, as a witness and sign of the
Blessed man's Sanctity, remained flourishing with Green Boughs, over his
Oratory. Now though that Solitary place, separated from Worldly Conversation,
was very proper for the attending God in Divine concerns; yet one Incommodity
it had, that no Water was near, so that young Pincius was compelled every day
to fetch Water almost three Miles off: Whence it came to pass, that partly
through Weariness, but principally through suggestions of wicked Spirits, he
grew dis-heartned, which the Holy man perceiving, oft-times endeavored to
Comfort and Encourage him. At last taking compassion of his Labors, he
Prostrating himself on the ground, Humbly and Heartily besought our Lord, to
open for his Servant a Spring of Water, which might sufficiently supply his
Necessities: After which, admonished by an Angelick Vision, he gave his Staff
to young Pincius, commanding him to go to a certain place, full of Reeds, and
their striking the ground with his Staff, he should without doubt find water,
so earnestly desired by them: The Child obeyed, went to the place, and in the
Name of the Blessed Trinity struck the ground three times, making three Holes
in it, with the end of the Staff, which he had no sooner done, but immediately
a Fountain gushed forth, from whence to this day a Brook, and that no small one
is supplied, being not only productive of Fish, but Sanative also of many
Infirmities.

This Island is said to have the Name of Ferramere: Bishop Usher seems to agree
that this Holy Bishop four years before his Death, came into Britain, and
relinquished his Arch Episcopal See, for his retirement as aforesaid. He is
supposed to have ended his Life about the year of Christ 455. And 630 years
after, His Sacred Body was translated to Glastonbury by the direction and care
of Thurston then Abbot.

The Example of St. Patrick and St. Benignus, was imitated by many other Irish
Saints, who, to enjoy perfect vacancy from Worldly Affairs, retired into
Britain, to Consecrate themselves unto God in a Life of Austerity and
Contemplation; Cornwall was the Province to which they most frequently betook
themselves: In so much as Cambden had just ground to say, That the People of
Cornwall have always born such Veneration to the Irish Saints that retired
thither, that almost all the Towns in that Province, have been Consecrated to
their Memory: There is St. Buriens Dedicated to an Irish Religious Woman of
that Name; to the Church whereof King Ethelstan in the year 936. gave
privilege of Sanctuary: There is the Town of St. Jies, so called from St. Jia,
a Woman of singular Sanctity. who came thither from Ireland: There is St.
Colomb, so named from an Irish Saint Columba: There is St. Merven, St. Erben,
St. Eval, St. Wenn, St. Enedor, and many other places, all which took their
Names from Irish Saints: But one special Irish Saint is there Venerated, called
St. Piran, by the Irish St. Kiacan, concerning whom Bishop Usher writes, That
he hearing that in Rome Christian Religion was most purely taught, and
Faithfully practiced, forsook Ireland and Traveled thither, where being
arrived, he was instructed in the Christian Faith, and Baptized; and there he
remained 20 years, reading Divine Scriptures, and learning Ecclesiastical Rules
with all diligence. He adds further, That at Rome he was ordained Bishop, and
sent into Ireland 30 years before St. Patrick: So that by some Irish Writers he
is called the first born of their Saints: Howbeit in the Roman Martyrology, St.
Patrick is said to be the first, who Preached Christ in Ireland; probable it is
that this Saint was one of the first 12 Bishops Consecrated by St. Patrick to
propagate the Faith first Preached in Ireland by him, and was by his Example,
as many others were, so inflamed with Divine Love, that they forsook all
Worldly things, and led an Hermetical Life; for it is Reported that St. Piran,
calling his Disciples together, and other People, told them, It was the Divine
Will that he should forsake Ireland, and go into Cornwall, there to expect the
end of his days; And having thus dismissed them, he sailed into Cornwall, where
he built a Mansion for himself; and after many Miracles which God had there
wrought by him, an Infirmity of Body seized upon him, of which Languishing, he
called his Brethren together, whom he Copiously instructed in the concerns of
Gods Kingdom, and commanded his Grave to be made ready; which done, he went
down into it, and there rendered up his Soul to God, which, with great Glory
was received into Heaven. His Sacred Body Reposes in Cornwall toward the
Northern Sea, 15 Miles from Padstow or Petrockstow, and 25 Miles from
Mousehole; Cambden mentions a Chapel Dedicated to St. Piran, seated in a Sandy
place, He was (says he) a Holy man, which came from Ireland; and if we may
believe the Legend, fed ten Irish Kings and their Armies, with his three Cowes,
raised to Life dead Men and dead Pigs, and in that place divested himself of
his Mortality.

During the Reign of the Infamous King Vortigern, when the Britains were so
Effeminated with Vice; that being unable to resist the Tyranny of their
Neighbors, they called in from a remote Country more Cruel Tyrants: God to
blot out the shame and Cowardice of the former Armies, raised another British
Army of Virgins, conducted by a Royal and Saintly Virgin St. Vrsula. Some
assign this story to former times, but for many very considerable reasons, it
will suit with no other times then we are now upon, viz. When Attila King of
the Huns, truly Sir-nam'd Gods scourge, wasted Italy and the Western Regions,
with Germany and Gaul, burning the City of Metz, Massacring Priests before the
Holy Altars; insomuch as we read, That the Holy Bishop St. Lupus was led
Captive by Attila from Troyes to the Rhine. Now whereas in the Gests of these
Holy Virgins, mention is made of the Tyrant Maximus; it cannot be intended of
that Maximus who slew the Emperor Gratian, but of a younger Maximus, descended
perhaps from the stock of the former, and who also invaded the Empire, after
the death of Valentinian.

And indeed if we consider the then present state of Britain, the Martyrdom of
these Virgins cannot so properly be ascribed to any other times then to this,
when the poor Britains were distressed on every side, as well by their Revolted
Friends the Saxons, as by their Enemies the Scots and Picts; It was then but
lately that Vortigern had called in the former against the latter, and Hengist
with his Brother Horsa at first Fought successfully against them: But soon
after those Valiant Captains despising their Friends for their Vices and
Cowardice, they wrought upon the Luxury of Vortigern, seeking to entrap him
with the Beautiful Rowena, Daughter of the Deceitful Hengist. Vortigern thus
ensnared, bought Rowena at no less price than the whole Province of Kent.

Then the Saxons begin to pick a quarrel with their Benefactors, and making
Peace with the Picts and Scots, turn their Arms against the poor Britains,
threatening to lay the whole Island waste; which Threats they soon Executed with
all Inhumanity, and in a dismal manner, took revenge of all the Crimes
committed by the Britains against God and his Religion, by them professed:
During these Miseries and Troubles, a world of Britains of both Sexes, forsook
their Country, forsaken by God, and fled into strange Regions, whilst others
submitted to perpetual slavery under the Saxons. Gildas expresses this
Calamity thus, saying, That very many passed over Sea, with grievous Howling
and Lamentation; and in their Voyage, jointly with Mournful Voices, repeated
these Words of the Psalmist, Thou have, O Lord, given us up as Sheep to be
devoured, and have dispersed us among the Nations: This Complaint suits best
with the weaker Sex, especially those Virgin Martyrs whose Relics were
dispersed among all the Nations of Christendom: Having thus settled the time of
their Martyrdom; Without all Controversy they were all Britains, though some
Writers, would have them to be Irish, without any solid reason.

The constant opinion is, that they were no less in number then 11000. This
appears by the Hymn used in the Church of Colen, for the Celebration of their
memory: The cause why so many Virgins departed into Foreign parts, is thus
related by Trihemius, though he err in point of time.

The number of Soldiers (says he) which under their Captain Conanus, went out
of Britain into Armorica, was 30000 Fighting-men, and 100000 Plebeibians to
Till the ground; of these many were unmarry'd: Now Conanus and his Company
being Christians, would not take Wives of the Idolatrous Pagans: At that time
there was a Prince in that part of Britain which is opposite to Armorica, named
Dionatus a prudent man, who succeeded his Brother Caradoc in that Principality.
He had a Daughter named Vrsula, the most Beautiful amongst all the Virgins of
Britain, and withal very Devout to our Lord.

Conanus the ninth Prince of Armorica sent Letters to this Dionatus Prince of
Cornwall, entreating him to send her for his Wife, and with her a certain
number of Virgins, to be Espoused to his Soldiers according to their qualities.
Dionatus at this request of Conanus, gathered out of all the Provinces of
Britain 11000 Maids of Noble Blood, and of Inferior fort 60000 Women, partly
Maids, and partly such as had been Married; all these he commanded to be
Transported for the purpose aforesaid: These are said to be ordered, and
distributed into Ranks under several Leaders.

Of the 11000 Virgins, St. Vrsula was Queen, and Captain General, over the
whole Army; to her were joined four other Virgins, who had also a General
command; their Names were Pinnosa, Cordula, Eleutheria and Florentia: Under
these were appointed eleven others, each of which was to govern a 1000.

This story has been so corrupted with Prodigious Fictions, that the very
Truth of it would have been questioned, if not lost, had not Revelation and
extraordinary Providence rescued and preserved it. True it is, that neither
Gildas or Bid make any express mention of this Story, the first aiming chiefly
to inveigh against the Vices of the Britains; the latter, to relate the Affairs
of the Saxons; yet both of them give us some intimations of this matter, and
Saint Bede twice expressly mentions the Celebration of the memory of these 11000
Virgin Martyrs, suffering for their Faith and Chastity at Colen. The plain and
simple Narration of their Gests is this.

In the year of our Lord 453. St. Vrsula and her forementioned Companions for
the purposes before rehearsed, sailed out of their Port in Britain toward
Armorica; but were so driven, and disturbed in their course, by contrary Winds
and Tempests, that they were forced to shelter themselves at the entrance of
the Rhene into the Sea: At this time infinite numbers of Hunns, Gepids and
Russians, and other Barbarous Nations of the North, by Land and Sea vexed both
Germany and Gaul. By Gods special Providence, who intended to match these Holy
Virgins to a Spouse incomparably better than their parents had designed for
them; in the same station where they took Harbor, a great Navy of those Savage
Pirates lay floating, so that there was no possibility to escape them: The poor
Virgins are soon seized on by those Pirates, who were mingled with many of the
old Enemies of Britain, the Picts; for the chief Captains of this Fleet were
Gaunus a Hun, and Melga a Pict. Being thus become Captives, they were in Boats
conveyed up the Rhene as far as Colen; when they were arrived there, and
encompassed with innumerable multitudes of Savages, hating Christian Religion,
and Brutish in their Sensual Lusts, both the Faith and Chastity of these Holy
Virgins were at once assaulted; so as no means either by Allurements or Threats
were left un-attempted to expugn their Chaste Breasts. In this extremity St.
Vrsula with flaming words, exhorts her Companions, to contemn Death, and to
Sacrifice their Chaste Souls and Bodies to their Caelestial Bride groom, and
willingly to follow him who called them to receive Eternal Crowns of Glory. She
tells them, Though their Enemies be never so many, strange, and Cruel, yet they
should be unconquerable; unless they would willingly yield up the Victory: With
these Exhortations the minds of these Holy Virgins became so full of Courage,
that they think their Executioners delay their Death too long; insomuch, as
amongst so vast a multitude of tender Maids, not one single person was found,
which either out of Hope or Fear, yielded to the Wills of the Barbarous
Soldiers.

They all willingly offer their Necks and Breasts to the Enemies Swords, which
with unheard of Cruelty were Employed to exterminate from the Earth so many
immaculate Souls, who by a Miraculous care of Almighty God, would not suffer
any Violation in their Bodies: Only one there was among them, who though she
would not yield, yet through a Natural fear of Death, sought by hiding her self
to avoid it: Her Name was Cordula; yet she the next morning came to the place
where her Companions Bodies lay Massacred, and condemning her former
Cowardliness, willingly offered her self to her Persecutors, professing
publicly her Faith and Chastity; so as though she came late to receive her
Crown, yet her Courage seemed now greater, in that she opposed her self single,
to an innumerable multitude of Savage Enemies.

Her memory is thus particularly Celebrated in the Roman Martyrology, the day
following the Martyrdom of St. Vrsula and the rest; such a Sacrifice as this
had never before, nor has since been offered to God by his Church. We read of
St. Agnes, St. Katharine and St. Lucia, with a few other Miraculous examples of
Courage and Chastity in tender Virgins; but they were single persons, neither
is it un-usual with God, to show the Power of his Grace, in some particular
Favorite of his, to exalt the Faith, and confound Unbelievers: There have
likewise been recorded Illustrious Examples of multitudes of men, who have
freely without resistance suffered Martyrdom, as the Thebaean Legion, etc. But
such Courage in men, especially in Soldiers, who daily look death in the face,
is not very extraordinary: Whereas here we find, a far more numerous Army,
consisting of Young Timorous, tender Virgins, offering themselves to
innumerable Swords; not one single Soul yields to the Flatteries or fury of
their Enemies, one only delays her Suffering, the space of one single night;
and then animated as it were, with the united Spirits of all her Companions,
next day sollicits the fury of innumerable Enemies, against her self alone, and
joyfully triumphing over the rage of Men, and Hell, is joyfully received
amongst her Companions.

The fame of these Virgins Courage, was no sooner spread abroad in the World,
but all Countries and Churches became suitors to be Enriched with a portion of
their Sacred Relics, which have been since dispersed through Germany, Gaul,
Italy, Britain, yea Asia, Africa, and of late India it self, to the sulfilling
of St. Vrsula's Canticle. Thou, O God, have given us as Sheep to be devoured,
and have dispersed us among the Nations. Not above ten years after this
Glorious Martyrdom, about the year of Grace 463. Solinus Archbishop of Colen,
in Reverence to the memory of the Holy Virgins, enclosed with Walls the Sacred
place of their Martyrdom, in which was Erected a Church Consecrated to their
Chief Captain St. Vrsula, which remains to this day; by the access of which
place, the City of Colen was much enlarged: He took out of the ground, as
carefully as he could their Sacred Bones, which he again Reverently buried in
Chests Hewn out of stone: Neither did Britain long delay to testify her
Veneration of those her Blessed Children, for Cambden treating of Maidenhead,
has this Observation, The Thames (says he) winds back to a little Town
formerly called Southlington, afterward Maidenhead, from the Superstitious
Reverence there given to the Head, of I know not what Holy Virgin; one of the
11000. British Martyrs, which under the conduct of St. Ursula, returning from
Rome into their Country were Martyred by Attila, called the scourge of God,
near Colen in Germany.

I shall only here set down the Names of such of these Virgins, as have escaped
Oblivion, and adjoyn the Churches where many of them are Venerated, in regard
their Holy Relics there repose: St. Vrsula divided her Innocent Army into
several Squadrons; first she gave a general Authority over all under her, to
these Virgins St. Cordula, St. Eleutheria, St. Florentia and St. Pinnosa; next
she assigned the Care and Inspection to each of these, viz. St. Benedicta, St.
Benigna, St. Carpophora, St. Celindes, St. Clementia, St. Columba, St. Laeta,
St. Lucia, St. Odilia, St. Sapientia, and St. Sybilla; other particular Virgins
Names are recorded, St. Agnes, St. Antonina, St. Areaphila, St. Babraria, St.
Baldina, St. Candida, St. Caradumea, St. Christina, St. Columbina, St. Corona,
St. Cunera, St. Deodata, St. Flora, St. Florina, St. Florentina, St. Gratia,
St. Honorata, St. Honoria St. Hostia, St. Languida, St. Margarita, St.
Margaria, St. Oliva, St. Pampheta, St. Pamefrides, St. Pavia, St. Paulina, St.
Pharanina, St. Pisona, St. Sambaria, St. Sancta, St. Semibaria, St. Terentia
and St. Valeria. The Body of St. Vrsula is still preserved at Colen, but her
Head was translated to Paris, where the Illustrious College of Sorbon
acknowledge her their Patroness: At St. Denis in France there is a
Commemoration of Panefredis, Secunda, Gemibaria, Florina and Valeria, whose
Relics Repose there: At Huy in Germany is Celebrated the Translation of St
Odilia, famous for frequent Miracles: The Monastery of Marcian in Flanders,
possesses some part of the Body of St. Cordula: The Monastery of Good-hope,
belonging to the Premonstratenses, enjoys the Relics of St. Terentia, St.
Marguarita, St. Baldina, St. Sambaria and St. Margaria, Translated thither when
Reinaldus was Archbishop of Colen: The Monastery of St. Martin in Tourney
Glories in the Bodies of St. Honor at a and Florina, and some part of the
Relics of St. Vrsula: The Monastery of St. Amand in Pabula, preserves the
Bodies of three of those Virgins, whose Names are unknown: At Andain in
Arduenna, repose the Bodies of St. Grata, St. Hostia and St. Areaphila: An
Hospital in Tourney possesses St. Languida; at Arras, the Bodies of St. Beata
and St. Sancta are said to repose in the Cathedral Church; four of these Holy
Virgins are Celebrated in the Monastery of St. Bertini in St. Aumar: At the
Church of St. Salvius, the Relics of St. Pavia and St. Caradumea are
Venerated: The Norbertines at Vicorne possess the Bodies of St. Corona, St.
Pharanina, St. Babcaria, St. Margarita, and another of the same Name St.
Benedicta, St. Cordula, St. Sambaria, St. Deodata, St. Pampheta, St.
Christiana: The Canons of Tongres Venerate the Heads of St. Pannosa and St.
Oliva: The Nunns of Mays Venerate the Relics of St. Paulina, St. Florentina,
and Eight other of the said Holy Virgins: In the Town of Rheune, in the Diocese
of Vtrecht, is Celebrated the memory of St. Cunera, who it is said, was a while
concealed by a certain Noble Matron, but being discovered had her neck broken:
But the Belgic Writers say, She was by a Nobleman in Compassion taken from
the rest, and conveyed to his House, where his Lady stirred up with Jealousy,
Murdered her, and hid her Body in the Stable; into which the Lords Horses at
his return, would by no means enter, by reason whereof the Murder was
discovered: The Nuns of St. Belian Honor the Body of St. Honoria, Translated
thither long since: At Pobletum in Catalonia rests the Body of St. Columbina:
And at Dertosa are Venerated the Relics of St. Candida: In all the Religious
Houses of the Jesuits throughout all Portugal, some part of the Bodies of these
Virgin Martyrs are Reverently reposed; and the Feast of St. Vrsula after a
particular manner Solemnized over all that Kingdom.

Lastly A Father of the same Society named F. Gomez, carried with him into the
East Indies the Head of one of those Virgins, by whose Intercession the Ship
and Passengers escaped from, otherwise unavoidable dangers.

To conclude this Story, with the observation of a Learned Writer upon it, How
great a measure of Christian Fortitude (says he) has been implanted in the
Hearts of the Women of that Northern Island, since the time that St.
Eleutherius Bishop of Rome sent into Britain St. Fugatius and St. Damianus; may
be evidently seen by this one Example: For, from all Antiquity of the Church
through the whole World, cannot be produced an example, equalling the Virtue
and Courage of these Holy Kirgin-Martyrs.

The purpose of Almighty God began now to appear to root out the Incorrigible
Britains, and in their room plant the Saxons, who were at first more numerous
than their Companions, either the Jutes or the Angli; and from them, having
prevailed, this Country was called Saxonia transmarina, though after it took
its denomination from the Angli, who became numerous and Powerful: The Saxons
were a Nation derived from the Sacae, a Powerful People of Asia, who
disburthening themselves by sending Colonies abroad, settled in the Coasts of
Germany toward the Northern Sea, from the Rhene as far as Denmark, so as their
Teritories were Anciently much larger than the Duchy of Saxony: The Angli came
out of a Region called Anglia, situate between the Saxons and the Jutes; their
Capital City in the Saxon Tongue, is called Sleswick, and by the Danes Haitby;
from these the greatest part of Britain is called England: From these also came
their prime Captains, Hengist and Horsa, and in truth the precise Seat of our
Progentiors the Angli, is a small Province in Denmark, at this time called
Angel: The Jutes or Goots were Anciently seated on the Northern Coast of the
Cimbrian Chersonesus, called by the Danes to this day Jutland: They were
probably derived from the Gutti, placed by Ptolomy in Scandia, and their seat
is still called Gothland; yet are they not the same Goths or Getes, who, with
their Victories heretofore measured all Europe; for their Habitation was near
the Euxine Sea: In what particular Provinces of Britain these Jutes seated
themselves, it does not appear, nor is there any mention of any Principality
they had in this Island, as the Saxons and Angli had, to whom the Jutes were
rather to be accounted Accessaries in mingled Companies; though some think,
they possessed themselves of the Kingdom of the South Saxons and the Isle of
Wight.

They are all generally comprehended under the Title of Saxons, and are
described to be of the most Robustious Bodies, and most Agile of all the
Germans: Witchindus the Monk, treating of them, says, The Franks wondered to
see such men of Tall Stature, Invincible Courage, of unwonted Habits, wearing
their long Hair spread over their Shoulders and Arms; but especially they
admired their undaunted Courage: They wore short Coats, and were Armed with
long Lances, and their Posture was to lean upon their Shields, having great
Daggers behind upon their Reins. Impatient were they of any Scorn or Dishonor;
insomuch, as when Symmachus being Consul at Rome, had prepared great numbers of
them to Fight as Gladiators for the Entertainment of the People, the night
before they were to be brought upon the Theater, 24 of them without any Ropes
strangled themselves.

Their principal Exercise and Skill was in Pyracy, in small Flat-bottom'd
Boats, so nimble and manageable, that with them they vexed the Coasts of Gaul,
Spain and Britain; so as the Romans were obliged all along the Coasts to
appoint Soldiers and Officers, for their Guards, who were called, Counts of
the Saxon Coasts.

Their Religion is thus described, viz. That in a Temple of theirs, called in
their Language Vbsola, adorned with Gold throughout, the People Adore the
Statues of three Gods; the most Powerful, they call Thor, who is placed in the
midst, and on each side are set the Statues of Woden and Fricca: Thor they
conceived to preside in the Air, to send Thunders, Lightnings, Showers and
Serene Seasons, and to govern the Fruits of the Earth. Woden signifies Valiant,
he disposes of Wars, and administers Courage to them against their Enemies;
Fricca bestows Peace and Pleasure on men; to her Statue is adjoined a huge
Priapus. Woden they Carved in Arms, as the Romans did Mars; and Thor with a
Scepter, answering Jupiter: From these three Deities they named three days of
the Week; from Woden, whom some interpret to be Mercury, Wednesday took its
Appellation; from Thor, Thursday, from Fricca or Frea, supposed to be the Wife
of Woden, Friday; Tuesday had its Name from Tuisco, Founder of the German
Nation, who thence are Named Tuitsch or Dutch: The Month of April they usually
called Easter Month, the Solemnity of our Lords Resurrection, usually falling
on that Month: To Woden they usually offered Humane Sacrifices chosen from
their Captives.

Yet among all these Abominations, those Ancient Saxons had some qualities very
commendable, especially their Chastity; Tacitus has observed, That their
Marriages were severe, and such Christ exactly observed amongst them; that they
were almost the only Barbarians, who contented themselves with single Wives,
their Wives are confined to their Houses, kept from the sight of impure
Spectacles, and provocations of Intemperate Feasts: Salvian also has Honored
the Saxons for their Chastity, though he blames them for their Cruelty. And
after that time St. Boniface writes thus of them, That in old Saxony, where was
no knowledge of Christ; if either a Maid or Wife be guilty of Adultery, they
force her to strangle her self, and then burn her Body; or else, after they
have cut off her Garment to the Waste, the Chaste Matrons whip her out of their
Confines; and there fresh Women meet her with Whips, or prick her with Knives;
and thus they use her till they have killed her.

Upon this Foundation of Chastity the Saxon Churches amongst us continued
stable for many Ages: Hence were derived so many numberless swarms of Virgins,
and Religious men, despising all Carnal Temptations and Pleasures: In no Nation
or Church such frequent Examples have been afforded of Princes; willingly and
by Vow abstaining from Lawful and Matrimonial Pleasures; of Virgins willingly
exposing their Lives to preserve their Purity; yea Disfiguring themselves, for
their appearing Odious to those who otherwise would have violated their
Chastities: But now alas Chastity is not so much esteemed.

It will not here be amiss to take a view of the Britains of that Age, that we
may see, God did not forsake them, till they had filled up the measure of their
sins by all manner of Impieties: A more convincing witness whereof cannot be
found then their own British Historian Gildas, who seems to have his Pen
directed by God, on purpose to write, like another Jeremias, the heavy
Judgments inflicted on his Country; and the more heavy Crimes, from Heaven
exacting those Judgments: The whole Nation generally, is by him acknowledged
guilty of all manner of Vices, joined with extreme Ingratitude to God; for
whereas after the Incursions of the Picts and, Scots there ensued such
wonderful Plenty of all things, as no former Age coul parallel; the Britains
turned this into wantonness, abounding more then ever, in all manner of
Uncleanness and Luxury; which Filthiness was accompanied with hatred of the
Truth; so that if any one in Conversation, showed any sign of a Christian Life,
the general hatred of the Britains soon pursued him: From this contempt of
Divine Benignity, God sought reclaim them, by his scourges of Pestilence and
Famine, by which such multitudes perished, that the Living were not able to
bury the Dead. Princes (says Gildas) were Anointed, but not by our Lord, for
those were made choice of to reign, who were most Eminent for their Cruelty,
and presently after Murdered by their Anointers, and others more Feirce and
Savage were Elected.

By the way we may hence perceive, that in those Ancient times, the Solemn
Ceremony of Anointing Kings was in use: This is also confirmed by St. Gregory,
who declares, That in his time, what Prince soever was raised to the height of
Royal Dignity, received the Sacrament of Unction. The manner how this Unction
was administered, is still extant in the Book called Ordo Romanus: Seldom indeed
will needs have this passage in Gildas to be taken Metaphorically, contrary to
the constant succeeding Practice among the Saxons: To show what little hopes
our Historian had of any amendment amongst the Britains; he further charge
the Ecclesiastics of those times, who should have been Correctors of others,
to have been yet more corrupt than the Laity: For, (says he) those Enormous
sins were not only committed by Secular men, but by Gods own flock and the
Pastors thereof: Those who ought to have been Examples of Piety to the People,
were most of them, dissolved with Wine, and all manner of Excess: Animosities,
Contentions, Envy against one another, tore them into Factions; Insomuch, as
Gildas Compiled a particular Treatise, called, The Correction of the Clergy,
which he begins thus, Britain has Priests, but many of them Impudent; It has
Clergymen, but great numbers of them Covetous Oppressors, Deceitful Pastors,
or rather Wolves to destroy the Souls of their flock, having no regard to the
Spiritual good of their People; but only seeking to fill their own Bellies:
They possess the Houses of the Church for Lucres sake only: If they teach the
People, they render that Instruction fruitless, by their ill Example: They
seldom Sacrifice, and more seldom approach the Altars with Pure Hearts, etc. He
further charge the Clergy with Simony, Purchasing Livings and Bishoprics
with Money, of the then Ruling Tyrants, etc.

Hence we may plainly perceive, why the Nation was delivered over to the Sword;
and the Barbarous Nations which came for its Punishment, were for their reward
called to embrace the Christian Faith: Neither was Britain alone thus punished,
but all the Provinces of Europe, were made Desolate by innumerable Armies of
Barbarous People from the North; and the Church of God so afflicted, as if our
Lord had cast off all care of his flock: But if we consider consequents, we
shall find that the Catholic Church, thereby received a great increase both in
the number of Professors, and the Zeal of their Profession; for though those
Barbarous Nations for a while Persecuted the Church, yet e're long our Lord
subdued their Minds, and those strong Natural Passions of theirs were employed
in advancing Gods Church; insomuch, as the Apostles time and Primitive Age
could scarce afford such Heroical Examples of Christian Zeal, Magnanimity and
Contempt of the World, as those Barbarous People once Converted did: So
Healthful is the Severity of God toward his People.

Many Historians accuse the Cowardly Sloth of King Vortigern, as if he weary of
the Troubles of War, chose rather with his Money to Hire Stipendiary Strangers,
than to train up his own Subjects to resist his Enemies; and therefore invited
the Saxons to Fight for the Britains: But as Beda says, This was done by the
common advice of the Nation; For a meeting was assembled, wherein it was
thought best by all, as well as by the King, to demand Aid of the Saxons:
Which resolution, doubtless was ordered by Divine Providence, to punish the
Impious Britains, as the event declares; for Gildas reflecting on the madness
of this Consultation, thus exclaims, O the profound Blindness of the Britains
minds! O the Stupidity of their Senses! These Saxons at whose Names they
trembled, when they were absent, are now by the foolish Princes, invited to
live in their own Houses, so senseless was their Council: How senseless soever
it was, Ambassadors were sent into Germany, men of the highest repute, and such
as might most worthyly represent their Country: Witchindus thus describes the
order of this Embassage. Fame (says he) loudly proclaiming the Prosperous
Victories of the Saxons, the Britains sent Messengers to them to beg their
assistance, who did it in these words, viz. O Noble Saxons, our miserable
Countrymen the Britains, wearied and even consumed with the frequent
Incursions of their Enemies; having heard of your glorious Victories, have sent
us humbly to implore your Aid; in recompense whereof, they offer to you a
Province Spacious and Abounding with all things: We have hither to lived
Happily under the Protection of the Romans; after them, we know no Nation
better than your selves, to whom we may have recourse; we therefore desire to
shelter our selves under the Wings of your Courage, etc. It may be doubted
whether this Oration were delivered in so submiss a style, for they were sent
to hire the Saxons with a large Stipend, not to yield up the Country to them.
However, sure it is, the Saxons in their Answer, assured the Britains, They
would be Faithful Friends to them, ready always to assist them in their
Necessities, and to do them all Offices of Kindness. With which Answer the
Ambassadors returned home well satisfied, and were joyfully received by their
Countrymen: This satisfactory Message was returned in the year of our Lord
448. and the year following an Army of Saxons under their chief Conductors
Hengist and Horsa, landed in Britain; whose coming Gildas in his Angry style
thus describes, mingling with it a Prophecy among the Saxons, relating to it:
Then (says he) a drove of Whelps rushing out of the Barbarous Lyonesses, came
hither in three Ships with full sails, and an ominous Course; encouraged by a
Prophecy certainly believed among them, that for the space of 300 years, they
should Possess the Country; toward which they directed the Prow of their Ships,
and that in half of that time, they should often lay it waste: They first
fast'ned their terrible Nails, by order of the unhappy Tyrant Vortigern, on the
Eastern part of the Island, with a pretense to defend, but with an intent to
subdue the Country: There may be some shadow of Truth in this Prophecy, for the
Saxons for 300 years may be said to be Possessors of the Island, under the
Title of Saxony beyond the Sea.

After the Angli gave their own Name to it: Besides, after 150 years, by the
coming of St. Augustine, they became Christians; and of Wasters of the Country,
became more Gentle and Civil Inhabitants thereof: They first possessed
themselves of the Ille of Thanet in Kent, and there first landed at a place
called Wipped-fleet, from Wipped a Saxon Commander there, after slain: They
being thus landed, about the year of our Lord 450. the Scots and Picts invaded
Britain with a mighty Army, wasting the Provinces as they came along: Vortigern
gathers his Soldiers and Auxiliary Saxons together, and marched beyond the
River Humber; when they came to a Battle, the Britains had little need to
Fight, for the Saxons Combated with such Courage, that the Enemies, formerly
accustomed to Victory, soon turned their backs, and fled: Vortigern therefore
having by their Valor obtained the Victory, increased his Liberality to them,
and gave to Hengist their Captain great Possessions in Lyndsey, part of
Lincolnshire, sufficient to maintain him and his Soldiers. Huntingdon will
needs have this Battle at Stanford in the Southern parts of the same Shire;
adding, That the Picts and Scots had marched so far without opposition; and
that they were only Armed, and Fought with Darts and Lances; but the Saxons
with Battle-Axes and long Swords, whose force and weight their Enemies not
being able to sustain, were soon put to flight.

Now as touching the Land thus given to Hengist, Cambden gives us this Relation
out of our Annals: Hengist having subdued the Picts, besides large Possessions
conferred on him in other places, requested Vortigern to bestow upon him in
that Province, so much ground as he could encompass with an Oxes-Hide, which
being obtained, he cut it into Thongs extremely Thinn, and with it encompassed
a great Territory, in the midst of which he built a Castle; which by the Name
perpetuates the memory thereof; for it is called Thong-Castle: As Carthage for
many Ages remained a witness of Dido's Fraud; for by the same slight she
obtained the Seat where she built that City; so does this Castle, still offer
to our memories the Simplicity of the Britains, and Craft of the Saxons; such a
gift could not satisfy the Ambition of Hengist, whose aim was to be Master of
the whole Island. The subtle man therefore presuming of the Kings Friendship
and easiness, thus addressed to him, My Lord the King, you see how your Enemies
disquiet you on all sides; if you please, therefore we will send into our
Country, for the increase of our numbers with new Recruits. The King commanded
him to do so withour delay, that he might be freed from the fear of his
Enemies: Hengist sends Messengers accordingly, who quickly returned with 18
Ships laden with Soldiers; and not with Soldiers only, but with a fair Lady,
the Daughter of Hengist, whose Beauty and Flatteries so bewitched the King,
that to please her, he betrayed both his Faith and Kingdom. Malmsburiensis
reports this Rowena the Daughter of Hengist, To be for Beauty the Miracle of
Nature, admired by all that looked on her.

Hengist commands a Magnificent Feast to be provided for the Entertainment of
his newly arrived Soldiers, to which the King is Invited: He appoints his
Daughter to perform the Office of Cup Bearer to the King, that he might surfeit
his Eyes with her Beauty. The design took effect, for the King being a Slave to
Beauty, was presently wounded with the Gracefulness of the Maids looks, and the
Elegancy of her Gestures nourishing in his mind a hope to enjoy her: Without
delay he demands her for his Wife. The Crafty Father pretends such a Marriage
would be too mean for so great a Prince, but with great importunity, yields his
unwilling willing consent; to reward which, and for a Dowry to his Daughter,
the King gives him the whole Province of Kent, some writers say, This Feast and
Marriage were Celebrated at Thong-Castle, where Rowena was instructed by her
Father to Drink a Health to Vortigern after the German manner: However, certain
it is, that besides the infinite Damage to the Kingdom by Alienating so
considerable a Member as Kent, so convenient for the harboring of new Forces:
this Marriage was in a high degree Pernicious, because the King had another
Wife, and for that being a Christian, he had joined himself to a Pagan
Idolatress.

Presently after this unhappy Marriage, the Voyage and Martyrdom of St. Vrsula
and her Companions happened, whose Heroical Constancy, might help to wipe out
that stain, which the Lust of this King had cast upon the Nation: Hengist
having thus Prostituted his Daughter to the King, who Prostituted his Country
to Hengist; the Saxons began to swell with ambitious Thoughts, and knowing the
Nation generaily dis-approv'd the Kings Marriage, and cooled in Affection and
Duty to him, began to pick quarrels with him, and contemned him for his Vices:
They therefore sought occasions of War against the Britains, whom God had
ordained to be punished for their Crimes; so that Hengist boldly required of
his Son-in-Law the King, a more Plentiful supply of Provisions, otherwise he
would renounce the League between them, and lay waste the whole Island; which
Threats were presently attended with dismal Effects: For the Saxons entering a
League with the Picts, gathered an innumerable Army, which, without resistance,
spoiled the whole Country.

Thus a flame kindled by the hands of these Pagans, proved a just revenge of
the Crimes of this Nation; which Crimes were the less Pardonable, because
committed by those who professed themselves the People of the True God: No
wonder was it, that the Saxons met with so little resistance, seeing the Kings
Marriage with an Infidel Lady, his Divorce from his Lawful Queen, and the
delivering up so considerable a part of his Kingdom to Strangers, had raised
high Discontents against him among his Subjects: However, by common consent,
they besought him to take Pity on his Country, ready to Perish, at least not to
neglect his Faith and the Church of God, in danger to be destroyed by Heathen
Miscreants; which if it should happen by his default, and that the Diabolical
Worship of Idols should prevail against Gods true Religion, it would be
punished, by his own and his Peoples Eternal Misery.

The Bishops and Clergy repeated these Admonitions to him, but all in vain:
wherefore, Vortigern became deserted of all his Subjects, and the Nobility by
unanimous consent, raised into his Throne his Son Vortimer. No writers affirm
that Vortigern was Deposed, but Deserted by his Subjects, as a Prince given up
to his Pleasures, and therefore incapable to resist the Ambitious Designs of
Hengist; against whom the whole Nation was resolved to join all their Forces to
expel him out of the Kingdom. Vortimer was an earnest Incendiary of the War
against these Saxons, being resolved to endure their Boldness and Ambition no
longer: And for this reason most of the Britains followed him; not that the
Nobles deprived Vortigern of his Royal Authority, or Created Vortimer King; as
a late Calvinistical Writer insinuates: However this Change could not but work
Divisions in the Kingdom, for Vortigern for the space of sixteen years, having
had possession of the Kingdom, could not want some Adherents to take his part;
so as those Divisions could not but give too great advantage to the Progress of
the Ambitious Saxons.

Vortimer being thus exalted, either as Associate with his Father in the
Throne, or as General of the British Forces; hastened to give proof of his
Country-mens good advice in their Election of him; and taking notice of the
Craft and Ambition of the Saxons, studied how to drive them out of the Nation,
vehemently urging his Father to attempt it; so that an Army was soon raised,
this happened the seventh year after their first entrance: Great preparations
were made on both sides; at last they came to a Battle, which was fought in the
Fields of Eglestirpe, now called Alesford, a Town in Kent washed by the River
Medway: On the Britains side were three chief Captains, who led each a third
part of the Army; Ambrosius Aurelianus led the first Division, Vortimer the
second, and Catigern a younger Brother of Vortimer led the third: The Saxon
Army was Conducted by Hengist and Horsa: In the beginning of the Battle, Horsa
set upon the Army of Catigern with such Vigor, that it was disperss'd like
Dust before the Wind, and Catigern the Kings Son was slain; but his Brother
Vortimer a Prince of admirable Courage, falling side-ways into Horsa's
Squadrons, routed them, and killed Horsa, the most Valorous of the Saxons; the
remainder of his Forces fled to Hengist, who then was Fighting with Invincible
Courage against Ambrosius, so as the whole weight of the Combat lay upon
Hengist, who being Assaulted, and brought into great straits, by the Accession
of Vortimer's Forces, after he had a good while sustained the impression of the
whole British Army, was at last overcome, and compelled to fly, which he had
never done before.

Yet this Victory cost the Britains dear, for great numbers of them were slain;
nay some Authors affirm, That Hengist obtained the Victory: The Body of Horsa
was Buried at a place not far from the Battle, in memory of him called
Horstead; Catigern's Body is supposed to have been Buried at Aylsford, by the
Saxons called Eglesford, by the Britains Saisseneag-Haibail, because the Saxons
were there overcome. To testify which Victory, there still remain four great
Stones standing upright, after the manner of Stonehenge in Wiltshire, which
from Catigern are vulgarly and imperfectly called Keith-cotyhouse. Horsa thus
dead, the Saxons exalted Hengist to the Title of the King of Kent. The same
year he is reported to have Fought three Battles against the Britains; but
being unable to resist the Valor of Vortimer, he was forced to retire into the
Isle of Thanet, where he was daily Assaulted with British Ships: At last the
Saxons leaving their Wives and Children in Thanet, returned to Germany, to call
in greater Forces.

The year after, died the Glorious King Vortimer, the fourth year after he was
assumed to the Participation of the Regal Authority. Some Writers affirm, He
died a Natural Death; others say, He died by Poison, administered to him by his
Mother-in-Law Rowena, into whose mind the Devil suggested, to cause a Servant
of his to give him Poison; which he having drunk, and perceiving the approach
of Death, he divided his Treasures among his Soldiers, earnestly exhorting them
to Fight Courageously for their Country. Moreover, He commanded a Pyramid of
Brass to be made, and placed in the Haven where the Saxons usually landed, upon
which Pyramid his Body should be laid; that the Enemies seeing the Body of so
Valorous a Prince, might be frighted back into their own Country. More probable
it is, that he intended his Statue should be placed on the Pyramid; for being a
Christian Prince, he was Decently and Solemnly Buried after the Christian
manner: And it is said, He was Buried in the City of the Trinobantes, now
London, and with him was Buried the Crown and Glory of the British Nation.
Beside his Courage, he is said to be Eminent in other Virtues, especially
Piety; and some say, In his War against the Saxons, he bore in his Ensign the
Image of our Lord Jesus Christ; To which Devotion of his, we may impute his
Victories, or at least to his Pious and Charitable care in restoring the
Churches destroyed by the Saxons.

The year after Vortimer's death, Hengist returned out of Germany with greater
Forces, and took a firmer possession of his Kentish Kingdom, and for the better
Establishment of his Family therein, joined his Son Aesca with him in the Regal
Power. To oppose them the Britains invade his Country with a great Army;
consisting of four great Bodies, Conducted by four Valiant Captains; but when
the Conflict was begun at Creganford, the Britains found themselves too weak
for the Saxons; which were new Recruited with great numbers of chosen
Robustious Soldiers, who with their Swords and Battle-Axes, cleft asunder the
Bodies of the Britains: Yet did they not give ground, till their four Captains
were slain; but afterward were so terrified, that they fled as far as London,
and never after had the Courage to bring an Army into Kent again, so that
Hengist and his Son quietly enjoyed that Kingdom, fixing their Palace at
Canterbury: Thus began this new Kingdom of Kent in the eighth year after the
Arrival of the Saxons in Britain.

It is not probable that this exalting of Vortimer, was any Deposal of his
Father; for Vortimer being Dead, his Father continued King, and for a while
gave proof of his Courage in repressing the Ambition and Violence of Hengist,
though after he returned to his former Licentious Slothfulness.

Now during these Wars, Hengist is recorded to have exercised extreme Cruelty
in all places where his Armies came, and especially in Kent, against Priests
and Holy Virgins, great numbers of which he caused to be Massacred, Demolishing
Churches, and Profaning Altars. Among the Victims of his Barbarous Cruelty, the
memory of Voadinus Archbishop of London only remains in our English
Martyrology; who being a man of great Sanctity, reproved Vortigern, for
repudiating his Lawful Wife, and Marrying an Infidel; which so inflamed Hengist
with rage, that he commanded the Holy Bishop with many other Priests and
Religious men to be slain; Gildas declares, That great numbers of Bishops and
Priests were Massacred by this Saxon King: And Saint Bede relates more
particularly the Rapines, Cruelties and Devastations of this Impious King,
wherewith he miserably filled the whole Island.

The year of Grace 461. is noted with an Act of most Perfidious Cruelty;
perpetrated by this Barbarous Prince: His Ambition was not satisfied with the
Kingdom of Kent, so as he resolved to enlarge his bounds in Britain by any
means; and finding that by exercise of War, the British Courage increased; he
therefore turned his Thoughts, to invent some Stratagem for the compassing his
Designs. He insinuates himself into the minds of Vortigern and his Nobility,
as if he were desirous of Peace and Amity with them, which if they would grant,
he would turn his Arms against the Picts and Scots, and drive them out of the
Island; quickly did he obtain belief from the easy Nature of Vortigern;
whereupon a meeting is appointed between the Britains and Saxons, with this
caution, that each King should be attended with 300 only, and those un-arm'd;
and at this meeting they were to treat of the Conditions of Peace: The place
appointed for this Fatal Assembly, was a Plain near Sorbiodunum, or Old
Salisbury, a City seated in the Province of the Belgae; wherein remains a
Monument of a Dire Tragedy; for both sides being met, a great Feast was
prepared for the Britains, at which the Articles of Agreement were to be
ratified, by mutual Promises and Oaths: Toward the end of this Feast, when
they were dissolved in Wine, Hengist on a sudden, called aloud, To Arms, which
was the Watchword agreed among the Saxons, who immediately drew out short
Swords, concealed under their Clothes, and quickly slew their Un-arm'd Guests
the Britains: Howbeit, which is remarkable, Eldol the Valiant Consul or
Governor of Gloucester, snatching up a stake, by Chance lying near, with it
slew seventy of the Treacherous Saxons. A Monument of this Barbarous Tragedy,
not long after raised by the Britains, continues to this day, and is Vulgarly
called Stone-henge, Upon Salisbury-Plain; where, in a space of ground compassed
with a Ditch, are placed, as in a threefold Crown, Stones of an incredible
vastness, some of them 28 foot in hight, and 7 in breadth; over many of which,
other great Stones are placed across; Cambden believes, That this Monument was
raised, in memory of this Treachery by Ambrosius Aurelianus, or his Brother
Vterpendragon, by the help and Art of Merlin the famous Magician; though others
deliver, that it was a Magnificent Sepulcher, raised for Ambrosius himself
slain near this place, from whom the Town of Ambresbury-not far distant took
its Name.

In this Slaughter the Saxons took Vortigern Prisoner, and the year following
bound him with Chains, threatening Death, unless he would deliver up 38 of his
Cities and Strongholds: Vortigern to save his Life, quickly yielded to their
demands; which being confirmed by Oath, they gave him his Liberty: And first
they seized upon the City of London, then York and Lincoln, and then
Winchester: All which adjoining Provinces they wasted, killing the Inhabitants:
They Levelled with the ground all Churches, and Buildings belonging to
Ecclesiastical Persons, killed the Priests near the Altars, burned all Books of
Holy Scripture, and heaped Earth on the Sepulchers of Martyrs: Religious men to
escape their fury, were sain to fly into Deserts, Woods and Rocks, carrying
with them the Relics of Saints. And as for Vortigern, seeing this horrible
destruction, he retired into the North part of Wales, and there enclosed
himself in a Town called Genorium. Now the three Provinces, with which
Vortigern redeemed his Life, are with more probability expressed by
Malmsburiensis in this manner. Of old, (says he) the Eastern and Southern
Saxons, with the Eastern Angli, were Subjects to the King of Kent; for those
Provinces Hengist the first King of Kent obtained of Vortigern, not by open
War, but Treachery: And in truth those People beforementioned, did at last
obtain for their Habitation five Counties, Essex, Sussex, Surrey, Norfolk and
Suffolk, the Inhabitants whereof in the Romans time, were the Trinobantes,
Regni, and Ireni: The same year wherein Britain became thus dismembered, God
recompensed that loss to the British Church, by the Birth of St. David, one of
the greatest Lights that ever the Church enjoyed, as well for his Sanctity of
Life, as Vigor of Authority, and Zeal in suppressing Heresy, with the
Exaltation of Ecclesiastical Discipline. His Birth was attended with several
Wonders, denoting his Eminency: For St. Patrick, before his going into Ireland,
being in the Valley of Rosma, in the Province of Dimetae, (Northwest-Wales)
meditating on his Mission into that Island, had a Revelation by an Angel, That
after 30 years, a Child should be born in that Province, which should give a
great Luster to that Country. To this Prophecy regard was had, in this Collect,
repeated Anniversarily in the Ancient Church of Sarum on St. David's Feast, O
God, Who by an Angel did foretell the Nativity of thy Blessed Confessor St.
David 30 years before he was born, Grant unto us we beseech thee, that
Celebrating his memory, we may by his intercession attain to joys everlasting.
Thirty years being finished after the said prediction, the King of the Region
called Ceretica traveling to Dunetia, met by the way a Religious Virgin Named
Nonnita of great Beauty, which he Lusting after, by Violence Deflour'd; she
hereby Conceived a Son, but neither before nor after had ever knowledge of any
man; but persevering in Chastity both of Mind and Body, and sustaining her self
only with Bread and Water, from the time of her Conception, led a most Holy
Life.

The King thus Father of St. David, is called Xanthus, and his Mother by some
Named Melaria: The eminent Sanctity of this Child, the Fruit of his Holy
Mothers Fasting Chastity and Prayer, was by another Divine Oracle foretold, a
little before his Birth: For when Gildas Albanius was from the Pulpit teaching
a great Congregation, on the sudden he became dumb and un-able to speak, but
afterward broke forth into these words; A Holy Woman called Nonnita, now
present in this Church, is great with Child, and shall shortly be brought to
Bed of a Son, full replenished with Grace: It was in regard to him that I was
hindered from speaking, by a Divine Power restraining my Tongue. This Child
shall be of so Eminent Sanctity, that none in these our parts are comparable to
him; I will surrender this Region to him, who will from his Infancy by degrees
increase in Grace and Sanctity: An Angel Gods Messenger has revealed this unto
me. This Holy Child not long after born, was Baptized by Albeus Bishop of
Munster, who at that time by Divine Providence arrived there, at a place called
Portcleu: During his Childhood, he was Educated at a place named the Old Bush,
by the Cambrians Henmenen; and by the Latins Menevia; he grew every day
replenished with Grace, and being of a perspicacious wit, proceeded in the
Study of Learning, far beyond all other Children of his Age: This Child after,
became the first Bishop of Menevia, to which place he translated the Bishopric
of caerleon, and which from him was called St. David's, for his Learning,
Sanctity and Miracles, worthily Celebrated by the British Church.

Whilst Vortigern lurked Ingloriously in the Mountains of Wales, busy in
building a Castle for his Security; the middle Provinces of Britain, lest
un-guarded, were exposed to the fury of the Saxons: This Castle had the Name of
Genorium, afterward of Caer Vortigern: It is placed (says Cambden) in a vast
Solitude, fearful for the Horror of Mountains, and narrow turnings of the
passage to it: To this place Vortigern the Plague of his Country, withdrew
himself, to seek refuge for his own person, and there spent his time in
consulting South-sayers, especially his Magician Merlin: Hereupon the Britains
thus deserted by their King, were compelled to seek one abroad, and therefore
send Messengers into the lesser Britain beyond Sea, to Aurelius Ambrosius and
his Brother Vterpendragon, who for fear of Vortigern were retired thither. Them
they beseech to return into their own Country, that having expelled the Saxons
and their hated King Vortigern, they might receive the Crown of Britain. These
Brothers now of ripe Age, prosecute their Journey accordingly, attended with
Ships and Armed Soldiers: All Authors speak of Ambrosius, as a Modest Prince,
who alone of the Roman race, had remained alive, after so great a Tempest of
Wars and Changes, in which his Parents, who had worn the Royal Purple were
slain: It may be presumed, that he was the Son of Constantine, who about 50
years before, pretended to the Roman Empire, and in that attempt was slain in
Gaul, for that Constantine had other Children besides Constans, who is said to
be his Eldest Son when Vortigern was chosen; this Ambrosius was a Competitor
with him for the Crown, and failing therein, was compelled to quit his Right
and Country, and to retire himself into little Britain; from whence
notwithstanding, in the Generous Vortimer's time, he returned; and Fought for
him Valiantly against the Saxons, as is beforementioned, but after his Death it
seems, retired to his former refuge: The return of these Princes, wrought a
greater dread in Vortigern, then the Saxons.

I shall omit the Fable of the two Dragons coming out of the Lake, and how the
Red Dragon was destroyed by the White, and proceed to the Gests of our
Aurelius, quickly set upon by the Saxons after his Landing.

For King Hengist and his Son Esca, in the 17th. year after the first coming of
the Saxons, and in the year of Grace 465. gathered an Invincible Army: On the
other side the Britains uniting all their Forces, opposed them with an Army
gallantly ranged into twelve Bodies: The Battle was fought near the famous Port
of Rochborow; the Fight continued long, and with little advantage; until at
last, Hengist having slain the twelve Leaders, forced the Britains to fly, but
himself lost great numbers of his Soldiers and Principal Officers; amongst the
rest a great Prince of his Nation, called Whipped, in memory of whom the place
of the Battle took the Name of Whippedstede: So that the Saxons themselves
bewailed this Victory, neither did they after that time, take the confidence to
enter into the Britains Border, nor the Britains to Invade Kent.

The year following produced no Wars from the Saxons, so as Aurelius Ambrosius
had leisure to convert his Arms against the Author of all those present
miseries, the unhappy King Vortigern: He marches therefore to the Castle
Genorium, and Besieges it, but found the King so strongly Fortified there, that
by no force or cunning he could expugn it. At last by Fire, whether coming from
Heaven, or cast in by Ambrosius, is uncertain, both the King and his Castle
were consumed, so as his Body was never after seen: Vortigern thus removed, the
whole Power of the Kingdom was devolved upon Ambrosius by the Unanimous Consent
of the whole Nation: For which purpose (says Sir Henry Spelman,) a Council or
Assembly was called about the Mountains of Erir in North Wales, by which he was
exalted to the Royal Dignity: In the year 465, or in the year following.

How Happy this change was, will appear by what follows; for Ambrosius, as soon
as he was placed in the Throne, employed himself in repairing Churches, which
had been ruined: He was indeed a Prince, Magnificent in his Gifts, Sedulous in
the Worship of God, averse from Flatteries, a Valiant Soldier, and very Skilful
in Commanding an Army; and for these Virtues was famous in far distant Regions,
and being so renowned a Prince, he may possibly be the same Ambrosius mentioned
by Eugypius in the Life of St. Severine, wherein he intimates, That the Holy
Bishop finding favor from Odoacer, whose Reign in Italy, he had foretold,
requested the King to free a person called Ambrosius from Banishment: And truly
Baronius citing this passage, is of the same opinion; several years passed
after Ambrosius attained the Throne, either in Peace, or without any
considerable War between the Britains and Saxons.

During this calm, St. Patrick who many years before returned out of Ireland,
died in his Solitary retreat at Glastonbury; in the Antiquities whereof we may
find, That after the Death of Vortigern, Aurelius Ambrosius reigned; and then
it was that St. Patrick the Apostle of Ireland, and first Abbot of Avallonia;
after he instructed his Brethren in Regular Discipline, and competently
enriched that Monastery with Possessions, procured from Kings and Princes,
yielded to nature in the 39th. year after his return to that Island, and was
buried in the Old Church on the Right Hand of the Altar, by direction of an
Angel, a great flame in the sight of all, breaking forth in the same place. The
Irish Writers will needs have it, that St. Patrick's Body reposes in the Church
of Down-Patrick in Ireland; on whose side St. Bernard seems to be, in his Life
of St. Malachias, where he intimates, That St. Patrick 's Body rests in the Sea
of Armagh, accompanied with those of St. Columbanus and St. Bridget: The
difference may easily be decided, for no doubt but some considerable Relics of
his Sacred Body at the request of the Irish, have been deposited at Down
aforesaid; a world of Examples of the like Error being extant in
Ecclesiastical History.

The space of eight years being complete after the Battle of Whippedsflet:
Hengist took up Arms against the Britains, and once more discomfited them,
carrying away immense Spoils: The Truth is, in these days sometime the
Britains, and sometime their Enemies had the Victory, so that Hengist
perceiving, that with those Forces which he had, he could make little progress
against so Valiant a Captain as Ambrosius, nor hardly maintain the Provinces
given to him by Vortigern, sent for new and greater Supplies out of Germany;
whereupon a famous Saxon called Ella with his three Sons Cymen, Pleting and
Cissa, and a numerous Army took Sea, and by the direction of Hengist bent their
course toward Sussex, and landed at Cymen-Shore, so called from Ella's Eldest
Son.

Now while the Saxons were landing, the Britains raised a loud Cry, at which a
World of People repaired to them from the places adjacent; and straight a
Combat began; the Saxons, men of great Stature and Courage received the
Britains Politickly, and they as Imprudently set upon their Enemies; for coming
in loose Companies, one after another, they were easily slain by the Saxons,
who kept themselves together in close Bodies: So as the Britains, who still
came in to Aid their Countrymen, were suddenly discouraged, by the noise they
heard of the formers Defeat. They were all therefore put to flight, as far as a
Wood called Andredsleige, so as the Saxons possessed themselves of the
Seacoast of Sussex, every day by little and little enlarging their limits,
until the ninth year after their coming.

In which ninth year, whilst Ella and his company boldly entered further into
the Country; the Princes and Nobles of the Britains met in Arms at a place
called Mercredeburn, and Fought against the Saxons: The Victory was doubtful,
for on both sides the Armies were much impaired and broken. So as each of them
retired back to their own quarters; Matthew of Westminster says, That Ella and
his Sons were forced to forsake the Field; and fearing his strength not enough,
to make good his present Conquests, much less to enlarge them, sent into
Germany for new Supplies; which being arrived, he continued his Progress in
gaining more Territories, 'till he established a new Kingdom of South Saxons:
Now while Aurelius Ambrosius employed his Forces in repressing those
Southern-Saxons; Hengist having left his Kingdom of Kent well guarded, took a
Journey into the Northern Provinces, where joining with the Picts and Scots, he
took many Cities and Towns before the Britains could oppose him; and for
Security of his Conquests, he built many Castles and Strongholds, but
demolished all Churches wheresoever he came. King Ambrosius being informed
hereof, with great Courage, as in Gods Cause, marched after him, and beholding
as he passed on his Journey, the Towns laid waste, and the lamentable ruins of
the Churches, with the Miseries of the poor People, he could not, as is said,
refrain from Weeping: Whereupon by Vow, He promised Almighty God, that if he
Would render him Victorious over the Saxons, all the ruined Churches he would
re-build and restore. How this Pious Vow was approved by God, let the success
demonstrate; Ambrosius now resolved to provoke the Saxons to a Combat, found
Hengist with his Forces beyond Humber; who intended to set upon the Britains in
a Field called Maisbely, through which Ambrosius was to pass, whom he hoped to
find unprovided: But the British King had notice of this design, and prevented
it: However the two Armies met in good order, and a fierce Battle began between
them, much Blood was shed on both sides: At last Hengist perceiving his Army to
give ground, and the Britains to prevail, fled to a Town named Cair-conan, now
Cuningsbury; but considering the weakness of that Town, he betook himself to
the Swords and Spears of his Soldiers, Ambrosius pursued him, and by the way
put all the Saxons he found to the Sword; and having obtained a great Victory,
gave devout Praise and Glory to the God of Heaven: Hengist indeed Fortified his
Camp the best he could near the said Town, but in a few days, was forced to
come to a Battle before his Camp, which proved fatal to him and his, for the
greatest part of his Army was cut in pieces, and himself taken Prisoner, and
Beheaded by the Britains. This Battle was Fought on the bank of the River Don.

The manner how Hengist was taken, is thus related, The Valorous Duke or Consul
of Gloucester, Eldoll, was very desirous to cope with Hengist, and therefore
with the Forces under his command furiously piercing into the Enemies
Squadrons, found him at last, and laying hold on the forepart of his Helmet,
with main force drew him within his own Troops; saying, God has at last
fulfilled my desire; He it is who has given us the Victory: Upon this the
Saxons fled, Octa the Son of Hengist, to York; Esca, and not a few with him,
betook themselves to the City of Acluid: After this Victory Ambrosius took the
City Caerconan, which he entered Triumphantly: Then Ambrosius calling his
Captains together, commanded them to Decree what should become of Hengist;
whereupon Eldad Bishop of Gloucester and Brother of Eldol, imposed Silence on
them all, and gnashing his Teeth for rage, told them, Though all there present,
had a desire to set him free, I my self would cut him in pieces: Why ( says
he) do you delay, O Effeminate Britains; did not Samuel a Prophet having taken
the King of Amalec Prisoner in Battle, cut him in pieces, one Limb after
another, saying, As thou have made many Mothers Childless, so will I make thy
Mother Childless this day: Do you therefore deal in the same manner with this
Barbarous King, who is another Agag, and has deprived a world of British
Mothers of their Children. When Eldad had thus said, He drew his Sword, and
leading Hengist out of the City, cut off his Head, sending his wretched Soul to
Hell.

Whether this Speech or Action became a Christian Bishop, I must leave to
Graver Judgments: Ambrosius thus Triumphing, was not unmindful of his Vow, but
took care to repair the Houses of God, which had been lately destroyed, and
placing in them Priests and other Clergymen, he reduced the Divine Service to
its Pristine order; and where ever he found any Idols or Temples of False Gods,
he defaced them utterly out of the memory of men He Studiously observed Justice
and Peace, especially as to Ecclesiastical persons, on whom he liberally
conferred Revenues, injoyning them to Pray for the King, and state of Gods
Church. Hengist thus dead, his Son Aesca, by Bid, named Oisc, succeeded in the
Kingdom of Kent, and from him, his Successors were called Oisckings: what
became of his Brother Otta, who was said to fly to York, can no where be found
in any Ancient Writer, and therefore little Credit is to be given to what is
reported of him by some late Writers; That Ambrosius should bestow upon him the
Province of Galloway in Scotland, which was not in his disposal.

The same year wherein Hengist was slain, the Holy Virgin St. Bridget came out
of Ireland into Britain, to obtain some Relics of her Dear and Honored Patron
St. Patrick, whose Disciple she had been, and a great admirer of his Sanctity:
She stayed here some years in a small Island near Glastonbury, called Bekery,
where was an Oratory Consecrated to the Honor of St. Mary Magdalen; afterward,
leaving behind her Scrip Chain Bell, and other Vestments of her own wearing,
which for the memory of her Sanctity were there reposed; she returned to
Ireland; where, not long after she rested in our Lord, and was Buried in the
City of Down: Concerning her we may thus read in the Martyrologies, This day
(the first of February) is Celebrated the memory of the Blessed Virgin St.
Bridget, who in Testimony of her Virginity, having touched the Wood of an
Altar, it became presently green. She is said to have outlived St. Patrick
only 30 years.

In the English Martyrology there is a Commemoration of a British Martyr,
called St. Sophias, whose death is assigned to the 490 year of our Lord, He was
the Son of Guilleicus, Prince of the Ordovices or North Wales, and undertook a
Monastical Profession in a Monastery Built by himself in the same Province: He
had such Devotion to our Lords Passion, that he made three Pilgrimages to
Jerusalem to visit the Marks and Footsteps of it: A great Veneration also he
had for Rome, and those places which had been Consecrated by the Blood of the
two Princes of the Apostles. Being at Rome, he was by the Bishop thereof,
Consecrated Bishop of Beneventum, which See he governed with Prudence and
Sanctity, till at last he was slain by an Impious Pagan, at the Holy Altar,
while he was Celebrating the Mystery of our Redemption.

No less famous at this time was the Holy British Virgin St. Keyna; Illustrious
she was for her Birth, being the Daughter of Braganus, Prince of that Province
in Wales, which from him was called Brecknokshire; but more Illustrious for her
Zeal to preserve her Chastity, for which she was called in the British Tongue
Keynvayre, that is, Keyna the Virgin: This Prince Braganus, or Brachanus, is
said to have had twelve Sons, and as many Daughters by his Lady called Macella
Daughter of Theodoric Son of Tethphalt Prince of Garthmatrin, afterward named
Brecknock; their first born Son was St. Canoc, of whom more hereafter; their
eldest Daughter was Gladus, Mother of Cadocus by St. Gunley a Holy King of the
Southern Britains; their second Daughter was Melaria or Nonita, the Mother of
the Holy Archbishop St. David; mention will be made hereafter of Almedha
another of their Daughters: As for St. Keyna, when she came to ripe years, many
Noble persons sought her in Marriage, but she utterly refused that state,
having Consecrated her Virginity to our Lord by a perpetual Vow; at length she
determined to forsake her Country, and find out some Desert place where she
might attend to Contemplation; wherefore directing her Journey beyond Severn,
and coming to certain Woody places; She requested the Prince of that Country,
that she might be permitted to serve God in that Solitude: The Prince was
willing to grant her request, only he told her, The place did so swarm with
Serpents, that neither Men nor Beasts could inhabit in it; To which she
replied, That her Trust was fixed in the Name and Assistance of Almighty God,
and therefore she doubted not to drive all that Poisonous brood out of that
Region: Hereupon the place was readily granted to the Holy Virgin, who
prostrating her self to God in fervent Prayer, obtained of him to change all
the Serpents and Vipers there into Stones; so as to this day the Stones in that
Region, resemble the Windings of Serpents, through all the Fields and Villages;
as if they had been so framed by the Hand of the Engraver: Cambden gives some
account of this Miracle: On the Western Banks of Avon (says he) is seen the
Town of Cainsham, some are of Opinion that it was named so, from Keyna, a most
Holy British Virgin; who according to the Credulous persuasion of former Ages,
is believed to have turned Serpents into Stones, for that such like Miracles of
sporting Nature, are there sometimes found in the Quarries. I my self (says
he) saw a Stone brought from thence representing a Serpent rolled up into a
Spire: The Head of it stuck out in the outward Surface, and the end of the Tail
terminated in the Center. Many years having been spent by this Holy Virgin in
this Solitary place, and the fame of her Sanctity every where divulged, many
Oratories also built by her; her Nephew St. Cadoc performing a Pilgrimage to
the Mount of St. Michael, met there with his Blessed Aunt St. Keyna to his
great joy, and would have had her back to her own Country; but the Inhabitants
of that Region would not permit it.

Howbeit, afterward by the Admonition of an Angel, the Holy Maid returned to
the place of her Nativity; where on the Top of a Hillock, seated at the foot of
a high Mountain, she made a little Habitation for her self; and by her Prayers
to God, obtained a Spring there out of the Earth; which by the Merits of the
Holy Virgin afforded help in diverse Infirmities. One night when the time of her
Consummation approached, by the Revelation of the Holy Ghost, she saw in a
Vision, as it were a Fiery Pillar, the Base whereof was fixed in her Bed, which
was no other then a Pavement strewn over with a few Branches of Trees. In this
Vision two Angels appeared to her, one of which approaching respectfully to
her, seemed to take off the Sackcloth wherewith she was covered, and instead
thereof, to put on her a Smock of Fine-linnen, over that a Tunick of Purple;
and last of all a Mantle all woven with Gold, and then bid her prepare her self
to come with them, that they might lead her into her Heavenly Fathers Kingdom.
Hereupon she wept with excessive joy, and endeavoring to follow the Angels,
awaked, and found her Body inflamed with a Fever, by which she perceived her
end was near: Sending therefore for her Nephew St. Cadoc, she said thus to him;
This is the place above all others beloved by me, here my memory shall be
perpetuated: This place I will often visit in Spirit, if it may be, and I am
sure it shall be permitted; for our Lord has granted me this place as an
Inheritance: The time will come when this place shall be inhabited by a sinful
People, which notwithstanding, I will violently root out of this seat. My Tomb
shall lie a long time unknown, 'till the coming of other People, whom by my
Prayers I shall bring hither; them will I protect and defend, and the Name of
our Lord shall in this place be Blessed for ever. After this, her Soul being
ready to depart out of her Body, she saw standing before her, a Troop of
Heavenly Angels, ready with joy to receive her Soul, and to transport it safe
from her Spiritual Enemies: She had no sooner related this Comfortable Vision
to the standers by, but her Blessed Soul was freed from the Prison of her Body:
In this her Dissolution her face smiled, and was all of a Rosy color; and from
her Sacred Virgin Body, so sweet a Fragrancy proceeded, that those who were
present thought themselves in the joys of Paradise: St. Cadocus Buried her in
her own Country, where for many years, she had led a most Holy Mortified Life,
very acceptable to God.

To the Gests of this Holy Virgin St. Keyna, we may here adjoyn what is
reported of her Sister Almedha, and her Brother St. Cadocus: Many Churches are
dispersed through several Provinces of Cambria, Illustrated by the Names of the
Children of Braganus; of these, one is seated in the top of a certain Hill in
the Region of Brecknock, not far distant from the principal Castle of
Aberhoden, which is called the Church of St. Almedha; who rejecting the
Marriage of an Earthly Prince, and Espousing her self to the Eternal King,
Consummated her Life by a Triumphant Martyrdom: The place of her Solemnity, is
yearly Celebrated the first of August, whereto great numbers of Devout People
from far distant parts, used to Assemble, and by the Merits of that Holy
Virgin, receive their desired Health from diverse Infirmities: One special thing
hap'ning usually in the Solemnity of this Blessed Virgin, seems very
remarkable: For you may there oftentimes see Youngmen and Maids sometimes in
the Church, sometimes in the Churchyard, and sometimes while they are Dancing
in an even ground encompassing it, to fall down on a sudden to the ground; at
first they lie quiet, as if they were wrapped in an Ecstasy; but presently they
will leap up, as if possessed with a Frenzy, and with both their Hands and Feet
before the People, they will represent whatsoever Servile work, they unlawfully
performed upon Feast days of the Church; one will walk as if holding the Plow,
another as if driving Oxen with a Goad, and both of them in the mean time
Singing some rude Tune, as if to ease their Toil; one will act the Trade of a
Shoemaker, another of a Tanner; a third, of one which were Spinning: Here you
may see a Maid busily Weaving, and expressing all the Postures usual in that
work: After all which being brought with Offerings to the Altar, you would be
astonished to see how suddenly they will return to their Senses again. Hereby,
through Gods Mercy, who rejoices rather in the Conversion, then Destruction of
sinners; it is certain, that very many have been corrected and induced to
observe the Holy Feasts with great Devotion.

Touching their Brother Cadoc, the Fame of his Sanctity was most eminent among
the Silures, his Name is consigned in our English Martyrology, on the 11th. of
February; and that he flourished in all Virtues in the year of Christ 492. To
him in all probability is to be referred that which is reported of the Wreath
(Torquis) of St. Canauc: The Inhabitants of that Country esteem this Wreath, to
be a precious Relick, and of wonderful Virtue; insomuch, As when any one is to
give a Testimony by Oath, if that Wreath be placed in sight, he dares not
presume to commit Perjury.

In the same year mention is made of the Martyrdom of a King of Brecknock,
called Clitanc, or Clintanc, a Prince very observant of Peace and Justice among
his Subjects; who became a Martyr adorned with a Caelestial Crown, for his
Virtues and Merits, especially his Chastity and Purity from Carnal Delectations.

In the year 491. is most aptly placed the beginning of the Kingdom of the
South Saxons; which as it began more early than most of the rest, so did it
soonest fail, and was the last that embraced the Christian Faith: Ella had a
long time held the Kingdom of Sussex in great Power: He received great Recruits
out of Germany; so that being consident of his Forces, in the third year after
the death of Hengist, he laid Siege to the City of Andredecester; the Britains
gathered infinite numbers to raise this Siege, and both day and night, vexed
the Besiegers with Ambushes and Incursions; but they, nothing discouraged, gave
continual Assaults on the City, and in every Assault the Britains set on their
backs, throwing Arrows and Darts upon them, so as they were forced to give over
the Assault, and turn their Forces against the Britains, who being more nimble,
quickly run into the Woods; and when the Saxons return to the Walls, they also
return upon their backs: By this means the Saxons were extremely Harrass'd, and
great slaughters made of them; till at last the Saxons were compelled to divide
their Army into two parts, and to employ one part in expugning the City, while
the other was in readiness to Fight with the Britains from without: Then indeed
the Besieged weak'ned with Famine, could no longer resist the Saxons, by whom
they were all consumed with the Sword; moreover, in revenge of the great losses
sustained by the Saxons during this Siege, they demolished the City, so as it
was never built again: There only remains the mark of a place where once a
Noble City had been seated. We find mention made of a Provost of a Company of
Soldiers under the Count of the Saxon-shore, placed at Anderida, as the Romans
called it, to defend the Coasts from Saxon Rovers: There is left now no
footsteps of this great City, only a great Forest, called by the Saxons
Andraedwald, and by the Britains Lord Andred; which being Antently seated near
where the said City of Anderida stood, continues the name of it.

About this time Ambrosius is said to have come to the Mount of Ambri, near
Caer Carec, now Salisbury, where Hengist Treacherously slaughtered so many
Princes, for whom he intended to raise a Famous Monument. There also he is said
to have constituted two Metropolitans, St. Sampson at York, and St. Dubritius
at Caerleon. The second year after the Erection of the Kingdom of South Saxons,
was Illustrious for a great Victory obtained by the Britains against the Saxons
at the Hill Badonicus, as Bede writes, The Britains conducted by their famous
King Ambrosius, took Courage, and provoking the Victorious Saxons to Combat, by
the Divine Favor, obtained a Victory over them; after which sometimes the
Britains, sometimes the Saxons prevailed, until the Saxons were Besieged in the
Mountain Badonicus, and a great slaughter was made of them: Polydore Virgil
will have this mountain between Yorkshire and the Bishopric of Durham; but
Cambden with greater probability, makes the Territory of the Ancient City of
Bath, the Scene of this Battle and Victory. By the Britains it was called Caer
Badon: The City (says he) was Besieged by the Saxons, but by the coming of the
Warlike Prince Arthur, they were forced to retire to the Mountain Badonicus,
where, after a long and desperate Fight, they were overcome, and great numbers
of them slain: This Mountain seems to be that which is now called Bannesdown,
at the foot whereof is seated a little Village, called Bathstone, where to this
day are seen Rampires and Trenches, the marks of a Camp. This Victory is
principally to be ascribed to Ambrosius, under whom the said Arthur his Nephew,
Son to his Brother Vterpendragon, was indeed a principal Officer, and is said
often to have repressed the Haughty Saxons, swelling with the Pride of their
Conquests. This is that Arthur, of whom the Britains, have wrote so many
trissing Fables: A Prince worthy to be magnified by the Truth of History, and
not to be made the subject of idle Dreams; since by his own admirable Courage
he sustained his declining Country, and incited the Heartless Britains to
reassume their Courage.

One thing is remarkable in this Prince, that in the Siege of this Mountain
Badonicus; confiding in the Protection of our Blessed Lady, whose Image he
carried Sowed to his Arms, he put to flight and slew 900 Saxons: His custom was
to make use of these Spiritual Arms; and as Huntingdon affirms, In a Combat
near the Castle of Guinton, he carried the same Image on his Shoulders, and by
the power of our Lord Jesus and his Holy Mother Mary, that whole day the Saxons
fled before him. Florilegus writes, That Prince Arthur 's Shield, on which the
Image of our Lady was Painted, was named Pridwen; and that in a certain Battle,
he drawing ferth his Sword, Caliburn, invoked the Name of the Blessed Virgin,
and with great Violence peircing into the midst of the Enemies, at one Blow he
slew whomsoever he touched with it; nor gave he over, till he had slain 840. of
his Enemies with his Sword alone.

About this time there was a wonderful Apparition of the Glorious Archangel
St. Michael on the Mountain Garganus in Calabria, the memory whereof is
Celebrated Anniversarily by the Catholic Church on the 8th. of May: We here
make mention of it, because a Holy Bishop born in this Island of Saxon Parents,
St. Richard by Name, was present at the Consecration of a Church built in
memory of this Apparition: This Bishop was the first of the Angli or Saxons
recorded in Ecclesiastical Monuments, to have been gained to Christ, soon after
their entrance into Britain, and before any open Hostility broke forth between
the Nations: He was born of Illustrious Parents, and in the year of Grace 455.
his Innocence and Piety appeared in his tender years, and in that Age he was
averse from Luxury and Wantonness, diligent in reading the Scriptures,
conversing chiefly with men of Learning and Virtue; by which he not only gained
Love from his Parents, but Veneration from his Companions and Strangers: But
because the following War; and the Idolatrous Rites of his Countrymen, furious
Enemies of that Religion, to which our Lord had called him, were a hindrance to
his Progress in Piety: While he was intent upon his Devotions, the Glorious
Apostle St Peter appeared to him in his sleep, commanding him, in the Name of
Almighty God, To take a Journey into Apulia, there to Preach the word of God to
the Andrians; and that he should not apprehend the length of the way or menaces
of the Infidels, because our Lord would be present to assist him: St. Richard
thus awaked from sleep, immediately rose, and casting himself before a
Crucifix, gave humble thanks to God, and St. Peter for this Visitation: The day
following, he forsook his Brethren, and taking his leave of his Dearest
Friends; notwithstanding their importunity to detain him, began his Journey;
and being arrived at Rome, he addressed himself to the Holy Pope Gelasius, and
declared what had been in his Vision imposed upon him by the Holy Apostle;
begging his Permission and Blessing, to go for Andria, there to fulfill his
Ministry: Gelasius hearing this, greatly rejoiced, and observing the Venerable
Aspect of St. Richard, with his Gravity, ordained him Bishop of Andria;
commanding him wheresoever he went, to Preach the Gospel of Christ; and and so
Kissing him, gave him his Benediction. St. Richard accordingly throughout his
Journey Preached the Word of God, and by many Miracles and Cures of the Sick,
Converted many to the Faith and Worship of God. At length he arrived at Andria,
where, before the Gate of the City he saw a Blind-man, and a Woman, Bowed, and
Contracted together, both which begged an Alms of him. He began to expound the
Word of God to them, and perceiving the Blind man Attentive to him, he said, If
thou will believe in Jesus Christ, and be Baptized, thou shall receive thy
sight; The Blind man answered, I believe in Jesus Christ whom thou Preachest,
and beg that I may be Baptized: Whereupon the Holy man, with his Hands making
the Sign of the Cross upon the Blind-man's Eyes, he immediately received his
Sight: And casting away the Staves which had helped him in walking, he gave
Thanks to God and St. Richard, by whom he had been Enlightened. As for the
Woman, when she saw the Miracle, she likewise was Cnoverted; so as St. Richard
perceiving her Faith, took her by the Hand; whereupon she rose up straight, and
walking, cried out with a loud voice, There is only one most high God, who by
his good Servant has made me whole: At these Acclamations of the Woman, the
greatest part of the City met together, and attending to the Holy Bishops
Preaching, were in short time Converted; God by him working many Miracles; so
as the said Converts, having broken down all their Idols, were Baptized by him.

Not long after which, followed the Apparition of St. Michael to the People of
Siponto, who commanded them to Erect a Chapel there to his Name: This they
signified to their Bishop Laurentius, and He to Pope Gelasius, desiring his
advice, what was to be done; His Answer was, That being willed by the Blessed
Archangel, a Church should forthwith be built, and that it should be performed
by the Holy Bishops Laurentius of Siponto, Sabinus of Cannusium, Pelagius of
Salapia, Roger of Caunae and Richard of Andria. Upon this the two Holy Bishops
last mentioned, took their Journey to Siponto on foot, with daily Fasting,
toylsom Labors, and incommodity from the burning heat of the Sun; which
incommodity, upon their Prayers, was miraculously remedied, by the flying of a
mighty Eagle over their Heads, which shadowed them during their whole Journey:
At their Arrival they performed what they came for, as we may read in the
public Office of that Church: The Death of this Holy Bishop is Commemorated in
the Martyrology yearly on the 9th. of April.

In the year of Grace 494. A third Noble German came into Britain, Named
Cerdic, a man of a High Spirit and Noble Descent, as proceeding from the Stock
of Woden: Hearing of two Kingdoms already Erected in Britain; he resolved to
venture for a share in his Country-mens Achievements. For that purpose, with
his Son Cenric, and five Ships, he landed at a place after called Cerdic-shore,
and the same day was met by multitudes of Britains, who Fought with him: The
Saxons having ranged their Forces in order, stood immovable before their
Ships: The Britains boldly set upon them, and then retired, but were not
pursued by the Enemy; for they were resolved not to quit their place: The Fight
continued, the Britains sometimes Charging, then retiring, 'till night severed
them; and after the Britains perceiving the fierceness of those new come
Strangers, departed; yet so, that neither side could boast of Victory; only
this advantage the Saxons had, that they took possession of their Enemies
Shore, and by little and little enlarged their Conquests along the Sea Coasts:
Their landing was in the Province of the Iceni, comprehending Suffolk and
Norfolk; but there they settled not, for marching through the Island, they came
into the Western parts, where, in time they Erected the new and Powerful
Kingdom of the West Saxons.

The Island thus dismembered by Barbarous Enemies; yet sustained greater Damage
by Civil Dissentions, raised by Pascentius a Son of the late King Vortigern,
who, after the Death of his Father, perceiving the Minds of the Britains
inclined to Ambrosius, fled into Germany; where he remained several years,
endeavoring to gather Forces sufficient to restore him to the Throne of his
Ancestors; at length about the year 496. he came with a Powerful and well
furnished Army, and landed in the Northern parts of the Island, with intent to
revenge his own and his Fathers injuries upon Ambrosius. Upon news hereof,
Ambrosius marches speedily to meet him, they came to a Battle, wherein
Pascentius was overcome and forced to fly into the Country of the Scots, where,
he recruited his Army, and returned once more to try his Fortune against the
Britains. But hearing that Ambrosius lay sick at Winchester, he thought it
better to work his revenge by Treason, then open force: Therefore by Gifts and
Promises he hired a certain Saxon called Eopa, to fain himself a Physician and
a Britain; who under this feigned show, and with a pretense of great Piety and
Affection to the King, being admitted, mingled Poison in a Potion administered
to him, of which Ambrosius presently died, in the 31th. year of his Reign; But
Pascentius did not long enjoy the fruits of his Treason: For Vterpendragon,
Brother to the dead Ambrosius, and General of his Armies, marching against
Pascentius, obtained a Signal Victory against him, and in a Battle slew him and
his Captains that came with him.

The year following Vter came to Winchester, and calling an Assembly of the
Clergy and People of the Kingdom, took upon him the Crown of Britain, which is
said to have been set upon his Head by the Holy Bishop Dubritius. Vter then
calling to mind a great Comet which had appeared the year before, darting sorth
only one Beam, at the end whereof was seen a Globe of Fire, shaped like a
Dragon; out of whose Mouth proceeded two Beams, one reaching to Gaul, and the
other shooting toward Ireland, which ended in seven less Beams: For this
reason he commanded two Dragons to be made of Gold like to that which had
appeared; one of them he gave in Oblation to the Church in Winchester, the
other he carried with him, placing it in every Combat in his Ensign; and from
that time he was called in the British Language Vtherpendragon: And hence it
is, that to this day our Kings, in their Warlike Expeditions, carry the like
Ensign. Vter had no sooner put on his Crown, but he was forced to exchange it
for a Headpiece; for Esca the Successor of Hengist and his Son Octa, attended
with a mighty Army of Saxons, Invaded the Northern Provinces of Britain, and
destroyed all the Munitions between Albany and York. At last when they
attempted the Siege of the City of Alcluid, Vterpendragon came upon them with
all the strength of the Country, and entered Battle against them. The Saxons
manfully resisted, and in the end compelled the Britains to fly as far as a
Mountain called Danet, which they seized upon as a place of refuge; being so
dismayed, that they scarce knew what they did, but at last they resolved upon a
prudent Exploit, which was, Courageously to set upon the Enemies by night: This
Design they executed Prosperously, for the Saxons being thus unexpectedly
invaded, scarce endured any Combat at all, but were utterly routed, and Esca
and Octa were taken Prisoners, whom the King carried with him to London, where
he caused them to be kept safe: About this time Arthur became of ripe Age.

The year of Grace 500. in our Ecclesiastical Monuments, is remarkable for the
Death of St. Cadoc the Holy Abbot, Son of Gunleus Prince of the Southern
Britains, and Gladus Daughter of Braghan: The Father of St. Cadoc, Gunleus by
Divine Vocation growing weary of the World, built a Church, where he began to
live in great Abstinence and Purity of Conversation: His Clothing was
Sackcloth, his Diet Barley-Bread mingled with Ashes, and his Drink Water, he
usually rose at midnight, and to abate Carnal Desires, cast himself into
Cold-water; He received nothing from any, but sustained himself with the Labor
of his Hands. This retirement of St. Cadoc's Father, began while he was a
Child, who when he came to years of Discretion, chose rather to imitate his
Fathers Devotion, then to be exposed to the Temptations and Vicissitudes of the
World in the enjoyment of his Principality: He had for his Master and Director
in the way of Piety, a Learned and Holy man, famous in that Age, called Tathai,
who lived a Solitary Life, in all Austerity among the mountains of South Wales,
'till he was invited by Caradoc Prince of that Province to live Coenobitically,
and to institute young men in Learning and Piety, at a City called Venta
Silurum in the Province of Monmouth; which Region from that City was by the
Britains called Guent, the City being then an Academy Dedicated to the Studies
of Literature, over which St. Tathai was President; and exercising that Office
with great commendation, built there a Church,: Under so worthy a Master, St.
Cadoc made wonderful Progress in Virtue and Piety, and himself became a Guide
in Spiritual Life, and a Father of the Monks: For that purpose he built a
Monastery, which was called Lancarvan, from an admirable accident in the
building of it, wherein this Holy Father employed wild Hearts, which became
familiar, obedient and serviceable to him: Thus both the Father and the Son
contemning the World, lived in it to God only, and died Happily. As for Gunleus
the Father, when the end of his days approached, he sent to St. Dubricius, who
had been Bishop of Landaff, and to his Son Cadoc, desiring the Charity of a
Visit from them; who came and comforted him, and after he had received the Holy
Communion, for a Viaticum and defense of his Soul, he departed to our Lord: He
was Honorably buried, and at his Sepulcher, Angels have been often seen, and
Sick persons of all Infirmities resorting thither, and imploring his
Intercession, have been Healed, Glorifying God in his Saint: The day of his
Consummation in our Martyrology, is Celebrated yearly the 29th. of March;
concerning his Son Cadoc it is related, That he daily sustained 100
Ecclesiastical persons, as many Widows, and as many other poor People, beside
Strangers, which frequently visited him. For though he was an Abbot, and had
many Monks under his Government; yet he reserved a Portion of his Fathers
Principality, to be Charitably distributed to such as had need. Neither was
this Charity of his any transgression of his Monastical Profession, which
forbids Propriety in Temporal goods, because he only exercised a Pious
Procuration, as he did in other Goods of his Monastery: He died in the Province
of the Ordovices, and was there held in high Veneration: For Harpsfield
testifies, That a Church was Erected to his Honor among the Danmonii, at a
place called Corinia, which to this day conserves his memory: In the Ancient
Martyrology he is Commemorated on the 24th. of February: In that Martyrology
also the Names of other British Saints are recorded, who died about the year of
Grace 500. Among the rest St. Dogmael, or as the Britains call him, St.
Tegivel, Illustrious for his great Virtues, Sanctity and Miracles. A famous
Abbey in Pembrokshire took its Name from him. The memory is there also
preserved of St. Bernach Abbot, a man of admirable Sanctity, who in Devotion
made a Journey to Rome, and from thence returning into Britain, filled all
places with the fame of his Piety and Miracles. The same year a famous Irish
Saint and Martyr called Finguar, is recorded to have died: He was the Son of
Cliton a Prince in Ireland, who for Contemplation's sake, is said to have
retired into Cornwall, where, with many others he was slain by Theoderick a
Prince of that Country: His Life is found written by St. Anselm Archbishop of
Canterbury.

Aesca the Son of Hengist, who had been taken Prisoner by Vter, and confined in
London, made his escape out of Prison, and returned to his Kingdom of Kent,
where, he after remained quietly. As for Cerdic, being not able to establish a
Kingdom in the Western parts, he sent into Germany for new Supplies; whereupon
the year following, Port a German Captain with his two Sons Bleda and Magla in
two great Ships furnished with Soldiers landed at a Haven from him called
Portsmouth. Upon his landing, the British Governor with a great multitude
boldly set upon the Saxons, but without Order, and so were soon defeated: This
same year, while the Saxons made a Progress in the Southern and more Fertile
parts of Britain, the Scots in the North laid a Foundation of their new Kingdom
at the foot of the Mountain Grampius, which was called the Kingdom of Albany.
Fergus the Son of Eric of the Seed of Chonare, with a Nation called the
Dalreudins from Reuda, who first conducted them out of Ireland, and first also
took upon him to be King of Albany, from Brun Albain to the Irish Sea, where
the following Kings of the Seed of Fergus, to Alpin the Son of Eochal, reigned.

As from Ireland many Holy men sought a retreat for their Devotion in Britain;
so in these tumultuous times upon the same motive, some were induced to retire
out of Britain into Ireland: Bishop Usher exemplifies St. Petroc, who born in
Britain, lived in Ireland, to whose Care and Instruction a Youth of seven years
of Age, called Coemgen or Kegnius was there committed. Saint Petroc was by
Nation a Cambrian, not a Cimbrian, as in the Gallican Martyrology is mistaken,
born of Princely Parents in Wales, and in his Infancy did so well imitate the
Faith and Virtues of St. Peter Prince of the Apostles, that his Name may seem
to have been given him by Divine Inspiration, as if God had destined him to be
a Rock on which the Church of Britain should be built. When the Prince his
Father was dead, the Nobles of the Country, with the consent of the whole
People, were desirous he should succeed in the Royalty: But he neglecting
worldly Pomp, assumed with him 60 Companions, and with them entered into a
Monastery, and there undertook a Monastical Profession: After some time there
spent, he went into Ireland, where for the space of 20 years, he addicted
himself to the Study of good Learning and the Holy Scriptures; great part of
which time St. Coemegen was under his Tuition. Now having in this space of time
heaped up a great Treasure of Learning, under the most perfect Teachers of that
Island, he returned into Britain, and in the Province of Corinia or Cornwall,
intended to employ all that Treasure for the Benefit of others. And to show
that he had not deserted his Religious Profession, he built a Monastery in a
Town toward the Severnshore, in those days called Loderic and Laffenac;
afterward from him, Petrocstow, now more contractedly Padstow: At this time
the Saxons under Cerdic had possessed themselves of that Province, and when the
Saint with his Disciples had landed and left their Ship, certain Reapers then
at work, spoke rudely and bitterly to them; and among other taunting Speeches,
required them, That their Conductor St. Petroc, should for the asswaging of
their Thirst, cause a Spring of fresh Water to issue out of a Rock there
adjoining. This was said either in Derision of them, being Strangers, or for a
Trial, whether their Sanctity was answerable to their Profession: Hereupon St.
Petroc, who never refused what was in his Power, addressed his Prayers to our
Merciful Lord, and with his Staff smiting the Rock, immediately there gushed
forth a Spring of clear sweet water, which is said to flow there at this day:
The Barbarous Pagans utterly ignorant of Christian Religion, were astonished at
this Miracle. And when the Holy Servant of God asked them, Whether there were
any in that Province, who Professed the Christian Faith, They directed him to a
Holy man called Sampson, Who, they told him, led a Solitary Life, and exercised
himself in Corporal Labors, Fasting, Watching and Prayers, sustaining himself
daily with a small Portion of Barley Bread, This is that Samson, who succeeded
St. David in the Sea of Menevia, and after was Bishop of Dole in lesser
Britain, of whom more hereafter.

After 30 years abode in this Solitude, wherein he is said to have instructed
Credan, Medan and Dathan three of his Principal Disciples, Illustrious for
their Learning and Piety; he left his Monastery of Loderic, and undertook a
Foraign Pilgrimage to Rome, and so to Jerusalem, from whence, he is said to
have proceeded as far as India, and to have spent seven years, in the exercises
of a Contemplative Life in a certain unknown Island of the Eastern Ocean; from
which tedious Voyage, he at last returned home, and with 12 Companions retired
himself into a dry and barren Solitude: His death in our Ecclesiastical
Monuments, is referred to the year of Grace 564. and he was buried at Padstow;
in which Town was Anciently placed an Episcopal See, which was after translated
to Bodmin, in regard the Body of the Saint was at first meanly Buried at
Padstow, and afterward transferred and Honorably reposed at Bodmin: But his
Relics did not always rest at Bodmin, for as Roger Hoveden says, Martin a
Canon Regular of the Church of Bodmin, by stealth took away the Body of St.
Petroc, and fled with it to the Abbey of St. Meven in Britain the less: Which
Theft being discovered, Roger, Pryor of that Cathedral Church, with the Ancient
Canons of the Chapter, addressed themselves to King Henry the Father, (for his
Son was then likewise King) and from him they obtained a strict command to the
Abbot and Convent of St. Meven, without delay to restore St. Petroc 's Body to
the Pryour of Bodmin, which if they refused, the King gave order to Roland of
Dinant the Governor of little Britain, to take away the Sacred Body by force:
As soon as the Abbot of Meven heard hereof, he restored the Body entire,
Swearing withal upon the Holy Gospels, and the Relics of certain Saints, that
it was the very same Body unchanged and unimpair'd. The reason why the Covent
of Meven were so desirous of the Relics of St. Petroc, was, because St. Meven
the Patron of that Monastery was born in Great Britain, and (as many other
Saints did,) fled into the less Britain, and with great Veneration was Honored
in the Territory of St. Malo, where Judicael a Prince of that less Britain
descended from this of ours, built the said Monastery.

All Authors agree, that the year 508. was fatal to the Britains for the loss
of a great Battle; wherein either their Valiant King, or General of his Army
was slain; The Name of the Party mentioned to be slain, makes the confusion.
The Noble Historian Ethelward expressly affirms, That Cerdic and his Son Cenric
slew Natanleod King of the Britains. Mat. Paris indeed affirms, That Uther was
then sick, and Natanleod his General. Bishop Usher may decide this Controversy,
who affirms, That Uther in the British Language was called Natanleod, but after
for his Valiant Acts, obtained the Surname of Uter, which in British signifies
Terrible or Admirable; Therefore his Son and Successor Arthur was called Mab
Uther, which signifies the Son of a terrible Prince, because from his Childhood
he was Fierce and Cruel; Arthur being out of the British Language interpreted a
Terrible Bear, or an Iron-wall, which breaks the Lions Jaws. Henry of
Huntingdon thus describes this Battle; Nazaleod (says he, so he calls
Natanleod,) was a Prince of great Fame, and withal of great Pride, of whom the
Province was called Nazaleoli, which after had the Name of Certicks-ford: He
gathered an Army out of all Britain; and Certic with his Son to enable
themselves to encounter him, had in so great danger obtained Aid from Aesca
King of Kent, and Ella the Potent King of the South Saxons, as likewise from
Port and his Son lately arrived; which Forces were divided into two main
Bodies, one led by Certic, the other by his Son Cenric. When the Battle was
joined, King Nazaleod, perceiving the right Wing of the Enemies, conducted by
Certic, was much stronger than the other, he turned all his Forces against it,
willing to destroy that which was Strongest. He set upon it therefore with such
Violence, that he brake quite through them, threw down their Ensign, forced
Certic to fly, and made a great Slaughter of his Army in a short time: But
Cenric, who conducted the left Wing, seeing his Fathers Army routed, rushed
vehemently on the backs of the Britains, whilst they pursued their Enemies
flying; by this means the Combat became furious, insomuch as King Nazaleod was
slain, and the Britains forced to fly, of whom there fell 5000. and the rest
saved themselves by their swiftness. Thus the Saxons obtained a great Victory,
so that for some years they were not disturbed by the Britains; and the rather,
for that great multitudes of Valiant Soldiers, came out of Germany to join with
them. This famous Battle fought in Hampshire, the Province of the Belgae,
between the entire Forces of all the Saxons and Britains, as it were for the
Mastery, had utterly ruined the British State, had Vter left behind him a
Successor of a Courage less Heroical, then his Son Arthur that renowned Prince,
whose glorious Exploits are now to be related.

The Gests of this Son and Successor of Vter, are clouded by such mists of
Fables, that the Truth of his Story can hardly be related, not for want, but
the excess of matter recorded of him, and that by Writers, who out of a desire
to magnify his Fame, by their impudent Lies have almost extinguished his
memory, and rendered him to Posterity a mere Romantic Phantasm. That there was
such a Prince as Arthur, and that he was Illustrious by many Victories over the
Saxons in defense of his Country, cannot reasonably be questioned; But as to
his Exploits abroad, his RoundTable and feigned Knights, we may well leave them
to be justified by the Dreaming Bards of that Age: True it is, that Malbranc a
Learned French Antiquary, misled by a wrong transcribed passage out of Gildas,
will needs confound Arthur with Aurelius Ambrosius, as if Vter had been the
Father and not the Brother of Aurelius: Whereas our Ancient and most Prudent
Historians agree, that without doubt Arthur was the Son of Vter, and Nephew of
Ambrosius, and succeeded his Father, slain by the Saxons in the Throne of
Britain: Some say, he was begotten of Igerna Wife of Gorlois Duke of Cornwall,
whose affection Vter obtained, being transformed by the skill of Merlin into
the shape of her Husband: But the Virtues, Piety and Courage of this renowned
Prince, recompensed by God himself with wonderful success, seem not to suit
with a Birth so infamous. A more sober account is given of him, in the
Antiquities of Glastonbury, where we may find, That Uterpendragon the Brother
of Aurelius Ambrosius dying by Poison, after the coming of Cerdic the West
Saxon, his Son Arthur a Youth of 15 years, began to reign over the Britains,
his Mothers Name was Igerna; born he was in a Castle of Cornwall, called
Tintagel. In this Narration, no aspersion is cast upon his Birth, but rather an
Embelishment of it; for it seems to affirm him descended from a Nephew of St.
Joseph of Arimathaea called Hellanis: Whether he were no more then 15 years of
Age when his Father died may be a question, in regard mention is made of his
Noble Exploits in the time of Ambrosius: Arthur was not present in the Army
when his Father Other was slain, being then employed to oppose the Irruption of
the Picts: For which reason perhaps no mention is made of him in the Saxon
Annals, the design of which was only to relate the encounters between them and
the Britains: Neglecting in the mean time what intervened between the Britains
and Picts.

Now at this time lived a King of the Picts, by some Writers called Navus, by
others Can, Happy in a Fruitful Offspring; for he had 24. Children, the Eldest
named Howel or Huel, a Prince of Invincible Courage, who would by no means
acknowledge subjection to the Britains; into which Faction he drew all the rest
of his Brethren, except only St. Gildas, Sir-nam'd Albanius, who bare a
particular Affection to Prince Arthur: This Huel being of a restless Spirit,
made frequent inroads into Britain, as may be found in the Life of St. Gildas;
and so Cruelly wasted the Country, that the British King sent Prince Arthur
with a numerous Army, who began a furious War with the young Pict, and after
diverse Defeats and Pursuits, slew him in the Island Minau. This War of Arthur's
with the Picts, giving occasion to mention this St. Gildas, it will not be
unseasonable to relate his Gests, and the rather, that in course of Story, he
be distinguished from another Gildas his Contemporary, styled Sapiens or
Historicus, and the younger of the two, of whom more hereafter.

These two are not seldom confounded together by Ancient Writers, by reason
they agreed in Name and many good Qualities: Howbeit this Elder Gildas, as we
read in his Life, Was the Son of Con King of Albania; and being in his
Childhood of an excellent Disposition, was carefully instructed, and did
wonderfully profit in good Literature. After he was sent into Gaul, for the
increase of his knowledge; where, having abode seven years, he returned into
Britain, furnished not with Learning only, but abundance of Books also. The
report of his Eminent Learning drew many to him from all quarters, to suck
instruction from him. But he took more care to enrich himself with Virtue and
Piety then Knowledge; and indeed none was to be found in all those Regions
comparable to him in Assiduous Prayers, Fasting, Sackcloth and
Mortifications: He wholly abstained from Flesh, contenting himself with
Barlybread and Herbs, with which he mixed Ashes, to abate the Pleasure he might
take in the taste of his Food. His Drink was pure Water from the Fountain: He
would ordinarily at midnight plunge himself in the River for Mortification, and
spend the rest of the night in Prayer, by which Austerities he became so lean,
as if he had been in a Consumption. Whatever was bestowed on him by richmen, he
presently distributed amongst the poor: His Charity drew him into Ireland,
where the Gospel of Christ was not so well settled, and there he spent many
years in instructing that Nation; but being informed, that in the more Northern
parts of his own Country, Gentilism was generally professed, and that those few
Christians who lived there, were Poisoned with many Heresies, he returned
thither; and being thorough furnished with the Armor of God, he demonstrated
to the Pagans, that the supposed Deities Worshipped by them, were nothing but
the Inventions of Impious men: And to the Heretics, that what they held, was
contrary to Divine Truth revealed to Gods Church, by which means he is said to
have brought the Pagans to destroy their Idols and Profane Temples, to receive
Baptism, and erect Churches: The Heretics also he reduced into the bosom of
the Catholic Church: Now to make his Preaching more effectual; our Lord was
pleased to give him a Plentiful Grace in Healing the Sick, giving Sight to the
Blind, Curing the Deaf, Cleansing the Leprous, etc. So that his Preaching
confirmed by frequent Miracles, spread the true Faith through all those
Provinces, to the glory of God and the inexpressible joy of St. Gildas. After
this employment, some say he took a Journey to Rome, others more probably; that
being invited by the Holy Abbot St. Cadocus, he presided over the Studies of
many young Scholars in the Academy of Lancarvan, where he continued only one
year, leaving there a Book of the four Evangelists transcribed by himself: St.
Gildas having ended the year of his Presidentship, and his Scholars retiring
from their Studies, withdrew himself into a certain Island, as St. Cadocus did
into another, the Islands were Ronech and Echni; while St. Gildas continued
there in Prayer and Mortification, certain Pirates from the Isles of Orkney
robbed him of his Utensils, and carried Captive away some of those which
attended him, for which cause in great affliction he passed over to Glastonbury.

At this time Melvas a British Prince reigned in the Province of Somerset,
called by the Britains Gladarhaf: This Melvas had stolen away Guinivera, wife
to King Arthur, concealing her in the Isle of Glastonbury, esteemed most
secure, both for the Fenny Situation, and Religion of the place: Hereupon King
Arthur assembled a mighty Army out of Cornwall and Devonshire, and encompassed
the Island: The two Kings being ready to join Battle, the Abbot of Glastonbury,
attended by St. Gildas and all the Clergy, came between the two Armies, and by
persuasion induced Melvas to restore the Queen to her Husband, which being
performed, Peace ensued, and both the Kings bestowed great Possessions and
Immunities on the Monastery: After which St. Gildas, with the Abbots
permission, retired again to an Hermetical Solitude on the bank of the River
Axus near Glastonbury; where he built a Church, Consecrating it to the Blessed
Trinity, and there spent his time in Prayer, Fasting and other Austerities; His
Sanctity was so exemplary, that many came from the farthest part of Britain to
visit him, and take Spiritual Council from him: He then fell into a Sickness,
and knowing that his Death approached, he called to him the Abbot of
Glastonbury, and requested of him, That his Body might be buried in the Church
of that Monastery; which was readily granted: So the Holy man dying the 4th.
day before the Calends of February, many saw an Angelical Splendor about his
Sacred Body, which yielded a most Pleasant Odor. And after a solemn
Recommendation of his Soul with many Tears of the Religious, his Sacred Body
was carried with great Honor to the Church, and there buried in the midst of
the Pavement of the Ancient Church, in the year of Grace 512. What has been
here related, agrees with the Ancient Monuments of Glastonbury, where this Holy
man is styled Historicus, neque Insulsus, neque Infacetus, and most particulars
of his Life are with a large Character of him, confirmed in the Gallican
Martyrology, where is also added, That he being during his Childhood sent into
France, was recommended to the Instructions of Iltutus, a Disciple of St.
German; and that his Voyage into Ireland, was to root out many Heresies sprung
up amongst the late Converted Christians, and to reform many Vices and unlawful
Customs; and that the Heresy most opposed by him in the Northern parts of
Britain, was Pelagianism: What is there said of his going over to Little
Britain in his old Age, and his being buried in the Church of Vannes,
contradicts our British Authors; but it is probable, that when the Saxons
infested our Western Provinces, his Sacred Relics might be translated, and
reposed in the great Church of Vannes, where he is to this day Venerated as
Patron of that City. Many mistakes have fallen out by consounding this St.
Gildas, with two others, one Confessor and Abbot of Bangor, and another the
Historian Sirnam'd Badonicus: Howbeit the precise Territory where this Gildas
Albanius was born, may be collected out of Ancient Manuscripts quoted by Bishop
Usher, which relate, That the Blessed St. Gildas was born in the most fruitful
Region called Arecluta, His Fathers name was Caun, a most Noble and Catholic
person: This Region Arecluta, a part of Britain, took its Name from the River
Clut, by which the greatest part thereof is Watered, and is now called Argyle,
Argathelia: And Clut before that Glotea, and Cluida was Northward, the bounds
of the British Provinces under the Roman jurisdiction, beyond which lived the
Caledonians, etc.

In the sixth year after the Battle where Other was slain, new Supplies came
out of Germany to the Saxons. For Stuff and Whitgar Nephews of Cerdic landed
with three Ships at Certic-shore: The Britains early in the morning in very
good order ranged their Armies against them. The Sun then arising, cast its
beams upon the British Armor, and reflecting thence, partly from the
Mountains, and partly from the Valleys below, struck a great Terror into the
Saxons; But when they came to Fight, the Britains were quickly defeated,
because God despised them: By this Victory the Saxons gained a great extent of
Land, and Cerdic became so Terrible, that he marched whither he pleased without
control.

The year following, Ella King of the South Saxons dying, his Son Cissa
succeeded; whilst Ella lived, though his Territories were narrow, yet was he
for his Courage esteemed the most potent of all the Saxon Princes; insomuch as
the Princes, Nobles and Military Officers of the Angli had a great dependence
on him: But this lasted not long, for it was shortly after transferred on
Cerdic the West Saxon, whose Kingdom, though not yet begun, yet had its
foundation from this Victory: Cissa being of a milder Spirit, contented himself
with his own little Kingdom, without extending his Power further. He employed
his time in exercises of Peace, especially Building and Fortifying of Cities:
In two of which he left the memory of his own Name Chichester and Cisbury, as
our Cambden relates, adding, That this Cissa, with his Father Ella and Brother
Cimen, landed in a Port of that Province, called therefore Cimenshore.

The year wherein Cerdic obtained the last mentioned Victory, is famous for the
Birth of the renowned British Bishop St. Kontigern; the strangeness of which,
since it is Celebrated by many Ancient Writers, is not here to be omitted. His
Mother is said to be Thenis the Daughter of Loath King of Pictland, and Anna the
Daughter of Vterpendragon, and consequently he was the Nephew of King Arthur.
Who was the Father of St. Kentigern is not certainly known, some suppose him to
be Eugenius the Third King of the Scots. John of Tinmouth an Ancient Historian
thus relates his Original, A certain King in the Northern parts of Britain, who
was a Pagan, begot of his Wife a very Beautiful Daughter; she having been a
frequent hearer of Sermons preached by the Servants of God, obtained the Grace
to believe his Truth, and renounce the Worshipping of Idols; and though she had
not yet been Purified with the Sacrament of Baptism; yet she was diligent in
observing Gods Commandments with an Humble and Devout mind, being much given to
Prayer and Almsgiving, and other Duties of Ecclesiastical Discipline, as much
as the fear of offending her Father would permit. She bore so great a Devotion
to the fruitful Virginity and Integrity of the Blessed Virgin Mary, that moved
with a Womanish presumption, she begged of our Lord that she might in some
measure imitate her in her Conception and Birth: At length, as she thought, she
obtained her desire, for she found her self with Child. Now it is not to be
conceived that this happened without the Embraces of a man; notwithstanding who
this man was, or in what manner, and when this was done, she often Protested, and
with Oaths confirmed it, that she was utterly ignorant. Her Father perceiving
this, and not being able either by fair Speeches or Threatenings to wrest from
her, who was the Father of the Child; for she seriously Protested, that she had
never suffered the unlawful Embraces of any man: Hereupon in a great rage
determined to execute upon her the Law of the Country; which was, That
whatsoever young Maid should be found with Child by Fornication in her Fathers
House, should be thrown Headlong from the top of a high Mountain, and the
person who corrupted her should loose his Head: In conformity to this Law, the
young Woman was placed on the highest part of a mountain in that Country called
Dunpelder, from thence to be thrown down and torn in pieces: She therefore with
deep Sighs, looking up to Heaven, implored the Mercy and Help of her Redeemer
with many Tears; after this she was cast down, but by the fall was neither
bruised, nor received the least harm, but sliding down easily and slowly, came
safe to the bottom: The Pagans there present, ascribed this deliverance to the
Magical Enchantments of the Christians, and therefore with the Kings Consent,
they carried her several Miles into the Sea, and there left her in a small Boat
made of Leather without any Oars, and destitute of all Humane help: But it
seems he who commands the Winds and the Seas was her Protector; for by his
Power the Boat was carried straight to a far distant Haven, with greater
swiftness then either Oars or Sails could have driven her. Being there
arrived, the young Lady soon after at a place called Collenros, was delivered
without the assistance of a Midwife, of a Son: This Collenros probably is the
same which Saint Bede calls Coludi, and Ptolomy Colania in the Province of
Louden: The next morning St. Servanus came to the place, and seeing the
desolate Mother with her Infant, said, My Beloved Child, Blessed art thou who
art come in the Name of the Lord: He took them into his care, nourished and
Baptized them, calling the Mother Thanen, and the Child Kentigern, that is,
Cheif-Lord. The Child being of a towardly Disposition, profited, much in
Learning and Virtue, and was Beloved of St. Servanus beyond all his Companions,
and called Munhu, as he is still named among the Scots: So as they who affirm
his Birth to have been at St. Asaph in Flintshire, are much mistaken; which
mistake perhaps arises from his being afterward Bishop there. However, after
25 years, we shall find him Consecrated Bishop of Glasco, and then more is to
be said of him.

The continual Troubles raised by the Saxons, would not permit King Arthur to
Solemnize his Coronation, 'till eight years after his Fathers death: But in the
year of Grace 516. the Ceremony was Magnificently performed in a General
Assembly of Bishops and Nobles at Caerleon; St. Dubritius Bishop of that City
setting the Crown on his Head. After which the Holy Bishop retired into a
certain Island in Northwales called by the Britains Enhly, and by the English
Berdsey, which Island (says Cambden) Was inhabited by so many Saints, that
beside Dubritius and Merlin the Caledonian no fewer then 20000 Holy men were
Buried there, as Records inform us. Concerning this Island (says Bishop Usher)
It was called by the Britains, The Rome of Britain; for the distance of it, the
difficulty of Passage, the Sanctity and Security of it, since 20000 Saints are
there Venerated as Martyrs, and since it is on all sides encompassed with the
Sea. By which may be collected what esteem the Britains then had of Rome, and
what agreement in Religion there was between them.

At this time the Saxons invited more of their Countrymen out of Germany: And
under the conduct of Colgrin, they subdued all that part of Britain, which lies
from Humber to the Sea of Cathanes; whereof, when King Arthur was informed, he
marched with an Army toward York, which was then held by the Saxons. Colgrin
met him with a great multitude near the River Duglas in Lancashire; but coming
to a Battle, Colgrin was put to flight, and pursued by King Arthur to York.
Baldulph the Brother of Colgrin at that time lay with some Forces toward the
Sea, expecting the coming of the Saxons. He intended to make an Irruption by
night into King Arthur's Army; but the King being admonished thereof by Spies,
sent Cador Duke of Cornwall with 600 Horse, and 3000 Foot, to intercept the
Saxons; which Forces setting on the Saxons unexpectedly, killed a great number
of them, and put the rest to flight. King Arthur closely Besieged York; during
which Siege, a famous German Captain called Cheldric arrived in Albania with
700 Boats. These great succors frighted the Britains from their Siege, so as
the King retired with his Army to London, from whence he sent Messengers to his
Nephew Hoel King of Little-Britain, to inform him of the Calamity of this
Island. Hoel to succor his Uncle, landed shortly after with 15000 men at the
Haven of Hamon, where he was with great Joy and Honor received by King Arthur:
Encouraged with these new Forces, he obtained the next year two famous
Victories against the Saxons; the former near the River Bassas, the latter in
the Wood Chelidon, both in Lincolnshire, near Lincoln the chief City. No fewer
then 6000 of the Saxons were slain, the rest fled into the Wood or Forest of
Caledon, and were pursued by King Arthur, and there Immured by great Trees cut
down, and laid athwart, so as they were thereby reduced to such extreme Famine,
that they begged leave to depart the Realm, leaving all their Spoils behind
them: By this Exploit the Saxons were driven out of the middle part of Britain:
Howbeit in the Western part they so prevailed, that Cerdicus there established
a Kingdom.

Another Victory this Heroic King is said to have obtained, though the time be
not mentioned, against these Barbarous Enemies near the Castle called Guinnion.
In which Battle the King carried upon his Shoulders the Image of the Blessed
Virgin Mother of God, and all that day by the Virtue and Power of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and St. Mary his Mother, compelled the Saxons to fly, after many
had perished with a great slaughter; the succeeding Exploits of this King
follow after.

Whilst most of the Provinces of that part of Britain, which is since called
England, were thus miserably disquieted, the parts thereof since called Wales,
enjoyed good repose, and were made Illustrious by great numbers of Saints, who
flourished there; as St. Dubritius, St. Sampson, St. David, St. Thelian, St.
Kined, St. Paternus, St. Daniel, St. Justinian and others, some of these have
been already mentioned, and more of their Gests will follow: As for St. Daniel,
he is reported by Bishop Usher, to have built a College or Monastery of the
Apostolic Order for the Sacred Exercises of Learned and Pious men in Arvonia,
the Country of the Venedati, not far from the straight where men pass into the
Isle of Anglesey out of Wales: Which College, was by the Founder called the
Port or Haven; It was built in the year of our Lord 516. In the same place, not
long after Malgo Conan built a City, which for the Beautiful Situation of it,
he called Bancor or Bangor; after it was the seat of a Bishop, wherein this St.
Daniel was the first who sat: So that Bishop Goodwin is mistaken, in
affirming, that no Bishop had been there before the Norman Conquest. This City
of Bangor was a place distinct from the famous Monastery of that Name: There
was indeed a Monastery in both places; but this was seated in Arvonia, now
Caernarvan, upon the River Menai, dividing it from Anglesey, whereas the other
was in Flintshire. This was Erected by St. Daniel, that was extant long before,
in the Infancy of Christianity under King Lucius, as has been shown: In both
of them there lived Monks Apostolici Ordinis, because in imitation of the
Apostles they practiced self Abnegation, and a renouncing of Temporal
Possessions. This Holy man Daniel was joined with St. Dubritius and St. David
in confuting and condemning the Pelagian Heresy, for which purpose he was
present in the Synod of Brevi; he died in the year of Grace 544. in which year
also St. David died, and he was buried in the Isle of Berdsey, called to this
day in the Welsh Tongue Yrugan mil Saint. There was at this time two other
Saints, who Illustrated Britain with their Miracles and Sanctity, St. Justinian
and St. Pattern; the first took his Original from a Noble Family in Little
Britain, where, having spent his Youth in Learning, he received the Order of
Priesthood, and by Divine Oracle was commanded to forsake his Country:
Whereupon with certain Companions he adventured to Sea in a Boat covered with
Leather, Praying earnestly to God, That he would so direct their course, that
they might come to a Solitude, Commodious for the Exercise of a Spiritual Life:
At length they landed in a Province called Cormer, where they abode a certain
time; in which many repaired to the Holy man, to partake of his Instructions:
Not long after he received a second Command from God to relinquish that place.
Thereupon entering his Boat, and committing himself to the Sea and Winds, he
landed in an Island, then called Lemeney, in which Honorius a Devout Son of
King Thefrianc then lived a Mortified Holy Life, having preferred Poverty, and
a free Attendance upon God, before all Worldly Conveniences: By him St.
Justinian was received with all Benignity, and offered the same Mansion,
wherein he might without distraction, gain Souls to our Lord: But this offer
St. Justinian would not accept, but upon condition that the Sister of St.
Honorius and a Maid attending on her, might no longer abide in the same Island:
This scrupulousness was derided by some Mis-believers, but complied with by St.
Honorius, who sent his Sister to another place, that he might enjoy the
Instruction and Conversation of the Holy man: After this many repaired to him
to be Instructed in the Christian Faith and Piety, who returned sufficiently
Enlightn'd; both to find the way of Salvation themselves, and to teach it to
others. Now when the fame of so great a Saint came to the knowledge of St.
David; He sent for him, and received him with great Honor, making choice of
him for his Confessor, and under God the chief Director of his Soul, and
granted to him and his Brethren convenient Mansions, both in the Island and
adjoining Continent, such as they themselves had chosen: It is said the malice
and envy of the Devil interrupted and disturbed the Devout and Mortified Life
of this Holy man by frequent Illusions, and suggesting scandalous Lies
concerning him; But in the end the Enemy of Manking finding himself vanquished
by the Saint, and that neither by violent Assaults, nor by malicious
Suggestions, he could withdraw him from the Service of God; he attempted other
guileful Arts and Machinations, by infusing the Poison of his Malice into the
Hearts of three of the Holy man's Servants; for they being reproved by him for
their Idleness, were soon inflamed with fury against him; insomuch, as rushing
all upon him, they threw him to the ground, and cruelly cut off his Head: Where
the Sacred Head fell, a Fountain of pure Water presently flowed, by Drinking of
which in following times, many have been Miraculously restored to Health: But
in truth greater Miracles succeeded his Death, for it is constantly affirmed,
That the Body of the Blessed Martyr presently arose, and taking the Head
between the two Arms, went down to the Seashore, and walking thence on the
Sea, passed over to the Port called by his Name; and being arrived at a place
where a Church is now built to his memory, it fell down, and was there buried
by St. David with Spiritual Hymns and Canticles: In which Church our Lord has
frequently vouchsafed to attest the Sanctity of his Servant by many Miracles.
The name of this Island now is Ramsey, it lies in sight of Menevia, the
Episcopal seat of St. David, and opposite to it. And it is affirmed by Cambden,
To be famous for the death of of a Holy man called Justinian, who coming from
Little Britain, lived a Solitary Life, but was at last Murdered by his
Servants, and inscribed in the Catalogue of Martyrs.

The Sanctity of St. Dubritius and St. David, etc. Drew into Britain from
Foreign parts also St. Paternus a Devout young man, in the year of Grace 516.
(says Bishop Usher) together with 847 Monks which accompanied him. These fixed
themselves in a place called Mauritania, where St. Pattern built a Church and
Monastery, in which he placed the Monks under a Provost and Dean: The Name
Mauritania seems to be a mistake, for the Church within the Province of the
Dimetae or West-Wales, was Dedicated to the Honor of St. Paternus; after the
Pronunciation of the Britains, is called Llan Pattern Maur, from which last
word, Mauritania may creep in: The Monastery here built by St. Paternus, sent
abroad many Colonies of Religious Persons into the Province Ceretica, now
Cardiganshire: As for the Church he called Mauritania or Llan Pattern Maur, it
was an Episcopal See, wherein St. Paternus himself first sat, whose memory,
both as an Abbot and a Bishop, has been long since Celebrated by a famous Poet
Venantius Fortunatus: After 21 years spent by St. Paternus in governing this
See, from him called Paternensis; He was by Prince Caradoc, re-call'd into his
Native Country Little Britain, and made Bishop of Vannes, having left in his
former Bishopric Kinock his Successor: There was also another St. Paternus a
Bishop in France, many of whose Gests have been ascribed to the former, so as
some doubt is made which of those subscribed the Synod of Paris, assembled in
the year of Grace 569.

About this time died St. Darerca Sister of St. Patrick, and born in Britain,
from whence she repaired to her Brother in Ireland; she was also called
Monynni, and by some confounded with St. Moduenna, of whom more hereafter. St.
Darerca was a Married Woman, and by two Husbands enriched the Church with a
numerous and Holy offspring; by her Husband Conis, she is said to have brought
forth three Children, Mel, Rioch and Menni, all which accompanied St. Patrick
in his Journeys and Preaching, and were in several places exalted to the
Episcopal Function: Of St. Rioch we read, That he was by Nation a Britain, near
Kinsman to the Holy Bishop St. Patrick; and a Deacon when he attended him into
Ireland, and that in Beauty and Comeliness of Body, he excelled all others of
that Nation. But the Beauty of his Soul was much more valuable: He seems to
have been Ordained Bishop by St. Patrick, and to have fixed his seat in a small
Island, which according to Saint Bede is situated at some distance from the
Western Coasts of Ireland, and is called the Isle of Whitecalfe; where St.
Coleman afterward built a Monastery, and is promiscuously Inhabited by English
and Scots: St. Dererca had many other Sons famous for their Sanctity, but we
shall now take notice only of two more Illustrious then the rest; the first
Sechnallus, in Latin, Secundinus, who wrote the Alphabetical Hymn in Praise of
St. Patrick. The others name was Auxilius, who was by St. Patrick ordained
Bishop of Leimster (Laginensium) and after many Miracles wrought by him, ended
his Holy Life in Cealusalli, his own City, seated in the Plains of Leimster.

In the year of Grace 519. a British Synod was assembled; upon this occasion.
The detestable Heresy of the Pelagians extinguished by St. Germanus and St.
Lupus, began to Spring again, to the hazard of the Catholic Faith. The Bishops
and Abbots of Cambria met in Cardiganshire, diverse Noblemen and other
Lay-persons were present out of the whole Country; many Sermons and
Exhortations were made in the public Audience to confute the said Heresy:
Howbeit, the People were generally so infected therewith, that no reasons or
persuasions could prevail with them to return into the Path of Right Faith: At
length therefore Paulin, a Bishop with whom St. David in his youth had been
Educated, earnestly persuaded the Fathers to send for St. David in the Name of
the Synod, who was lately Consecrated Bishop by the Patriarch, and was a
Discreet and Eloquent man, to afford his assistance to Gods Church now in great
danger, but could not prevail with him to forsake his Contemplations, until at
last two Holy men, Daniel and Dubritius by their Authority brought him with
them to the Synod. And then all the Fathers there Assembled, enjoined St. David
to Preach. He commanded a Child, which had lately been restored to Life by him,
to spread a Napkin under his feet, and standing upon it, he began to expound
the Gospel and the Law to the Auditory: All the while he continued his Oration,
a Snow-white Dove descending from Heaven, sat upon his Shoulders, and the
Earth on which he stood, raised it self under him, 'till it became a Hill, from
whence his Voice like a Trumpet was clearly heard and understood by all both
far and near: On the top of which Hill a Church was afterward built, which
remains to this day: When the Sermon was finished, so Powerfully did Divine
Grace Cooperate; that the Heresy soon vanished and was extinguished: And the
Holy Bishop St. David, by the general Election and Acclamation both of Clergy
and People, was exalted to be the Archbishop of all Cambria. By the Confusions
of those times, the Decrees of this and other Synods are unhappily lost; by
which we might have been informed of the State of the then British Church; yet
something of it may be collected out of the Author of St. David's Life, who
tells us, That Heresy being thus expelled, all the Churches of Britain,
received their Order and Rule, from the Authority of the Roman Church; By which
we may see the mistake of some Modern Writers, who will needs affirm that the
British Church before the Conversion of the Saxons, in their Faith and
Discipline, were squared after the Model of the Eastern Church. This Synod
Spelman calls Panbritanicum; and soon after it, Monasteries were built in
several places, and this Holy Bishop St. David became the chief Protector of
them, and withal a Preacher of such esteem, that all men received a Rule and
Form of Holy living from him. This expedient the Holy Spirit suggested to the
Ancient Fathers, namely the Building of Monasteries, thereby to promote and
fortify the Catholic Faith; for out of them still proceeded some to instruct
Believers in Faith and Holiness of Life. But another Spirit suggested
Dioclesian, the Infidel Saxons, and some Zealots of late days, to destroy
Monasteries, as a sure means to destroy Faith and Holiness also. It may not
here be unprofitable to describe the form of a Monastic Life instituted by St.
David; who having built a Monastery near Menevia, in a place called Rosma, or
the Rosey Valley, gave this strict Rule of Monastical Profession, That every
Monk should labor daily with his Hands for the common good of the Monastery.
For Idleness corrupts the Thoughts and Minds of men. The Monks there were not
to take Gifts or Possessions from unjust persons, and detested Riches; they had
no care to ease their Labors by use of Oxen or Cattle, for every one to
himself and his Brethren was instead of Riches and Oxen. They never conversed
together by talking, but when necessity required, but each one performed the
labor enjoined him, joining thereto Prayer or Holy Meditations on Divine
things. And having finished their Country work, they returned to the Monastery,
where they spent the remainder of the day till Even, in Reading or Writing: At
Even upon the sounding of a Bell, they all left their work and repaired to
Church, where they remained 'till the Stars appeared, and then went all
together to their Refection, eating sparingly, and not to satiety; their Food
was Bread, with Roots or Herbs seasoned with Salt, and they quenched their
Thirst mith a mixture of Water and Milk: Supper being ended, they continued
three hours in Watching, Prayers and Genu-flexions. As long as they were in the
Church, it was not permitted to any to Slumber, Sneeze or Spit. After this they
went to their Rest, and at Cock-crowing, they rose and continued at Prayers
'till day appeared. All their inward temptations and thoughts they discovered
to their Superior, and from him they demanded permission in all things, even
when they were urged to the necessities of Nature. Their Clothing was of the
Skins of Beasts: Whosoever desired to join himself in their Holy Conversation,
he was obliged to remain 10 days at the door of the Monastery as a Reprobate,
unworthy to be admitted into their Society, and there be exposed to Opprobious
scorns: But if all that time he Patiently suffered all Mortifications, he was
received by the Religious Senior, who had care of the Gate, whom he served, and
by whom he was instructed; in which condition he remained a long time,
exercised in painful Labors, and grievous Mortifications; and so at last was
admitted to the Fellowship of the Brethren. Cambden makes mention of this
Synod, saying, Llandevibrevi, or the Church of St. David near the River Brevi,
was built in memory of St. David Bishop of Menevia, in the place where He,
during the sitting of a full Synod, confuted and repressed the Pelagian Heresy
reviving in Britain, by the Holy Scriptures and, Miracles; For, as the Fame is,
the Earth on which he Preached, swelled up under his feet till it became a
Hill. This Synod it seems was celebrated, not in House or Town, but in the open
Fields, as afterward St. Augustine the Monk held a Council in a place, from
thence called Augustine's Oak; and as Anciently Theophilus Assembled a Synod in
the Cause of Athanasius, in a place called, Ad Quercum, at the Oak. Now whereas
in this Synod were Assembled many great Saints and Holy Bishops, the Lights of
the British Churches, as St. Dubritius, St. Daniel, St. David, St. Telian, and
St. Paulin, of whom some mention has been made already, it will not be amiss,
here to subjoyn a summary of their respective Gests; least if they should be
set down particularly, there would be such intermixture as might perhaps
confound the Readers memory, especially considering the wonderful length of
time which most of them lived. Concerning St. Daniel, enough has been said. We
shall here begin with St. Dubritius, who was born in the Province of the
Demetae, or West-wales, Sir-nam'd he was Guainius, from the River Guain, near
which he was born; his Fathers Name is not mentioned, but his Mother was called
Euedyla, a Woman of wonderful Virtue and Piety; during his Childhood, he was
committed to the care of Teachers, to be instructed in Learning suitable to
that Age: In his riper years he made such Progress in Science, that very many,
not only among the Ignorant, but the more skilful also, repaired to him for
Instructions. Amongst which were St. Thelian, St Sampson, St. Aidan, and
others: He made choice of a place near the River Vaga, proper to receive the
great number of Scholars, which came to him; and there directed their Studies.
In the same place having built a Church by the direction of an Angel, he there
taught the People, and by imposing his Hands, Cured frequently the Sick of
diverse Infirmities; so that they which came to him Feeble, and full of Anguish,
returned Joyful, and in Perfect Health: He was taken from his Employment of
Teaching by St. German in his second Voyage to Britain, and with the consent of
King Mauricus and all the Clergy, Consecrated Bishop of Llandaff, as has been
said in the year of Grace 436. by which account, since he outlived the said
Synod of Brevi; it is plain, the length of his Life was wonderful, for at that
time he had been a Bishop more then 80 years.

In the year 492. Aurelius Ambrosius coming to the Mountains of Ambri, near to
Caer Carec, now Salisbury, where the British Princes Traitorously Murdered by
Hengist, lay, appointed Pastors to two Metropolitan Churches, granting York to
the Illustrious St. Sampson, and Caerleon to Dubritius, the latter vacant by
the Death of Threminius; Geoffry of Monmouth adds, That he was Primate of
Britain, and Legate of the Apostolic See; Which Dignity it seems was annexed
to that Church by St. German, from the Authority, which in his Mission hither
he received from Rome. In the year 516 He Solemnly Crowned King Arthur; after
which being very Aged, as has been said, he relinquished his See, and retired
into the Isle of Berdsey to prepare for his Death; from which repose
notwithstanding, his Zeal to the Catholic Faith, drew him to the Synod of
Brevy, St. David being his Successor as aforesaid: Three years after, full of
Sanctity and Age, he gave up his Soul into the Hands of his Creator, in the
said Isle of Berdsey, where, among a multitude of Saints, he chose his place of
Burial, and there his Sacred Body reposed, until the year of Grace 1120. at
which time it was translated from thence with great Honor by Vrbanus Bishop of
Landaff, and buried in the Cathedral Church on the North-side of the Altar of
our Blessed Lady: At which time the whole Country of Glamorgan was afflicted
with a great Drougth, no Rain having there fallen for many Weeks; but when
these Holy Relics were translated, great store of Rain sell, to the comfort of
the Inhabitants.

One of the most Illustrious Disciples of St. Dubritius was St. Thelian,
descended of a Noble British Family, whatever the Centuriatours of Magdeburg
have malignantly wrote of him. From his Infancy he was addicted to Devotion,
Prayer, and contempt of Secular Pleasures; and being come to his riper Age, he
was for his Wisdom and Piety Sir-nam'd Helias, because with his Doctrine he
Enlightn'd the Hearts of the Faithful, as the Sun does the World. He was
instructed in the Holy Scriptures by St. Dubritius, 'till he was enabled to
clear the most difficult places therein. Then having heard the fame of a
certain wise man called Paulinus, he went to him to confer with him of the most
abstruse Mysteries of Gods Word; by this means he contracted Friendship with
St. David, a man of great Perfection in Sanctity; insomuch as their Hearts were
so firmly knit together by Charity and the Grace of Gods Holy Spirit, that in
all things they had but one Will: When St. Dubritius was translated from
Landaff to the Metropolitan Church of Caerleon, St. Thalian succeeded him in
Landaff, wherein he sat many years; For, it is said, he died not until the
coming of St. Augustine into Britain, by whom his Successor St. Oudoceus was
Consecrated: When a certain Infection, called the Yellow Plague infested
Britain, raging against Men and Beasts, by Divine Admonition he departed into a
far Country, accompanied with many Disciples, where he abode, 'till by the same
Authority he was re-call'd: Neither did he cease day or night by daily Prayer
and Fasting to Pacify Gods Wrath; and then gathering together all his Devout
Companions, returned; and all his Life after exercised Supreme Jurisdiction
over all the Churches in the Western Britain: He died at last, being
replenished with all Virtues in a good Old Age. Many Miracles are recorded to
be done by him, both before and after his Death: One of them only which Bishop
Godwin thought not fit to pass over, is this, After he was dead, the
Inhabitants of three several places contended earnestly, which of them should
enjoy his Body: Those of Penualum, where his Ancestors had been Buried, those
of Lantelio vaur where he died; and those of Landaff among whom he had been
Bishop. When therefore no agreement could be made amongst them, there appeared
presently three Bodies, so like to one another, that three Eggs resemble not
more perfectly: Whereupon each of those People took one of them, and so ended
the Controversy: But by frequent Miracles at his Tomb in Landaff, it appeared
that the Inhabitants thereof possessed the true Body.

Now whereas mention is made of Paulinus, said to be Instructor to Thelian, and
who sent for St. David to the Synod of Brevi: His true Name seems to be
Paulens, of whom we find it thus written, That St. David, as soon as he was
promoted to Priesthood, went to Paulens a Disciple of St. German; and that in a
certain Island he led a Holy Life acceptable to God, and that St. David lived
with him many years, and followed his Instructions. Paulens at last by extreme
pains in his Eyes, lost the use of them: Whereupon calling his Disciples
together, he desired that one after another, they would look upon his Eyes, and
say a Prayer or Benediction on them: But receiving no benefit thereby, David
said to him, Father command me not to look you in the face, for ten years are
past since I studied the Scriptures with you, and in all that time I never had
the boldness to look you in the face; Paulens admiring his Humility, said,
Since it is so, it will suffice, if by touching mine Eyes thou pronounce a
Benediction on them; Presently therefore, as soon as he had touched them, Sight
was restored to them.

The same year wherein the Synod of Brevi was Celebrated, Cerdic began the
Kingdom of the West Saxons, That is (says Huntingdon) in the seventy first
year after the first coming of the Saxons, in the reign of the Emperor Justin
the Elder. This Cerdic is said to be Crowned with Pagan Ceremonies at
Winchester, in a place which once had been the Church of the true God, but
which these Barbarous Heathens had changed into a Temple of Dagon, after they
had slain all the Monks who served God there. The raising of this new Kingdom,
disproves the Fictions of Geffrey of Monmouth, concerning the great and
frequent Victories of King Arthur in these days. It is likely to be more true,
which Huntingdon expressly declares, namely, That this year a terrible Battle
was fought between Cerdic and the Britains, and that on both sides the Captains
Fought Magnanimously till Even; but then the Saxons got the Victory, which
would have been more Bloody to the Britains, had not the darkness hind'red the
Pursuit: After this the Fame of Cerdic and his Son Kenric was largely spread
through the whole land; and from that day began the Kingdom of the West Saxons,
which having swallowed all the other Principalities, remains to our times. Many
Battles are said to have been Fought between King Arthur and this Cerdic,
wherein, sometimes one, sometimes the other had the better; But at last King
Arthur grew weary, and contenting himself with an Oath of Fidelity from Cerdic,
gave him the Provinces of Hampshire and Somerset. Some Authors affirm a League
to have been made between them, wherein a special Privilege was provided for
Cornwall to be permitted upon an Annual Tribute, the free exercise of Christian
Religion: Which Indulgence seems to be proved by the great number of Saints,
which in those and the following times flourished in that Province; whereas
scarce any can be found in other parts of Britain subject to the Saxons: And in
truth it is very like that great multitudes of Britains flying from the fury of
the Saxons, betook themselves to Cornwall and Wales, as places most distant and
more defenceable, and where they might expect better Conditions, and more
advantage of resisting their new Masters, then in other parts; for no doubt
this Kingdom of the West Saxons was made up of more Provinces than Hampshire or
Somerset, so that Cerdic had good footing in Devonshire, Dorsetshire, Barkshire
and Wiltshire, to which shortly after was added the Isle of Wight, bestowed by
Cerdic on his late arrived Kinsmen Stuffa and Whitgar, who destroyed the
British Inhabitants there at Whitgarburg, so called from Whitgar, but now
contractedly Caresburg. While Cerdic was busy in establishing his new Kingdom,
in the year 520. Colgrin, Baldulf and Cheldric, whom King Arthur had lately
subdued at York, and forced to abjure the land; returning, landed at Totness,
from whence passing through Cerdic's Dominions, they came to the City of Bath
and Besieged it. King Arthur hearing thereof, caused the Hostages which they
had left to be Hanged; and gathering a mighty Army, came to raise the Seige;
where the Armies being joined, he calling on the Name of the Blessed Virgin
Mary, whose Image he wore over his Armor, slew great numbers of his Enemies,
and amongst the rest, Colgrin and his Brother Baldulf, which Cheldric
perceiving, fled, and was pursued by Cador the Duke of Cornwall to the Isle of
Thanet, and there slain by him, the rest being forced to yield. King Arthur, as
may be remembered, obtained a Battle before he was King near Bath at the
Mountain Badonicus; now this is likely to be another defeat given by King
Arthur to the Saxons, and the City of Bath being in the utmost extremity
Westward of Cerdic's Kingdom, it might at this time have been in the
possession of the Britains. As for King Arthur's invoking the assistance of our
Blessed Lady in the Fight, it was a Devotion generally practiced by the Church
in this Age. For two years before, there having been Assembled two Councels in
the East, one at Jerusalem, and the other at Constantinople, the Synod at
Jerusalem wrote to the Bishops of the other Council thus, We beseech you most
Holy Bishops, to Pray with us to our Lord for these things, for the Necessities
of Gods Priests ought to be common; make your Supplications likewise with us to
the most Holy and Glorious Virgin Mary, Mother of God, that she would intercede
for the Peace of the Catholic Church, and for the Victory and long Life of our
most Excellent and Pious Emperor; The like practice we find elsewhere, of
which many Examples may be given: The next year King Arthur was called into the
Northern parts to assist Prince Howel, who three years before was come out of
Little Britain to his Aid, and was now Besieged by the Picts and Scots in the
City called Acluid, wherein he lay Sick. Upon King Arthur's approach, the
Enemies retired to a place called Mureif whither he pursued them; but they
escaping by night, fled to a Lake called Lumoney: Whereupon King Arthur
gathering many Ships together, encompassed the Island, and in 15 days brought
them to such extreme Famine, that many thousands of them Perished: In which
utmost danger the Bishops of that Region came Barefoot to the King with Tears,
beseeching him, To take pity of that miserable People, and to give them some
small portion of that Country, to inhabit under the yoke of perpetual
Servitude. The King thus mollify'd with the Tears of the Bishops, pardoned his
Enemies, and granted their request; Hence it is, that some Writers ground the
subjection of Scotland to the Crown of Britain, and particularly Walsingham;
but certainly better grounds may be found of it than this. Whereas it is said,
that certain Pictish and Scottish Bishops were Supplicants to this King for
their Distressed Countrymen; it has been already demonstrated that the
Province of the Picts, where the City of Acluid is seated, had many years
before received the Christian Faith by the Preaching of St. Ninianus; but who
were his Successors is hard to conjecture. In the Annals of Ireland, mention is
made of a certain Bishop called Nennion, who is said to have flourished in
Britain about the year 520. and to have had his seat in a place called the
great Monastery: This man probably was the Successor of St. Ninianus, and that
great Monastery the same with Candida Casa, where the Monument of that
Apostolic Bishop was, which by reason of frequent Miracles wrought there,
invited great numbers of Devout men to embrace a Caenobitical Life: Of this
Bishop Nennion we read in the Life of St. Finanus, That he having been in his
Childhood instructed by St. Coleman, was afterward recommended to the care of
Nennion, when he came into Ireland, and returned with Nennion into Scotland,
and there Learned of him the Rules of a Monastical Life at his See, called the
great Monastery. Finanus there also studied the Holy Scriptures, and by
invoking the Name of Christ, is said to have wrought many Miracles. And having
been thus instructed by Nennion, he took a Journey to the Sea Apostolic, there
to supply his defects in saving knowledge; seven years he continued at Rome,
daily advancing in Sacred Science, and then ascended to the degree of
Priesthood. This Nennion in probability, was one of those who interceded with
King Arthur, and about the same time that St. Finanus lived under his
Discipline.

I shall pass by the Death of Guenevera King Arthur's Wife, and his second
Marriage with great Solemnities at the sametime, with the Prodigious Victories
ascribed to him by some of our Writers in Foreign parts, and proceed to other
transactions more probable occurring in his time.

In the year 527. two new Kingdoms were Erected in Britain, without any
disturbance from King Arthur, in the Eastern Provinces of Norfolk, Suffolk and
Cambridgeshire, the Kingdom of the East Angles was Established, and in Midlesex
and Essex the Kingdom of the East Saxons: Which of these Kingdoms were first
Erected, is uncertain; but both without doubt much about the same time. The
first King of the East Saxons, is believed to be Erkenwin the Son of Offa, and
the Kingdom of the East Angles, is thought to begin under Vffa, from whom the
succeeding Kings were Anciently called Vffings: The year following the Isle of
Wight, by the Britains called Guith, which signifies a divorce or renting
asunder, and by the Saxons Witland, was Conquered by King Cerdic, and given to
his Nephews Stuffa and Whitgar: But while Cerdic busied himself about the
Invasion of the Isle of Wight, St. David Bishop of Menevia Assembled a
Provincial Synod, called the Synod of Victory, wherein all the Clergy of Wales
or Cambria met together, and confirmed the former Decrees of the Synod of
Brevy, and added new ones for the Churches benefit; from which two Synods all
the Churches of Cambria received their Ecclesiastical Orders, which also were
confirmed by the Authority of the Roman Church: These Decrees were committed to
Writing with his own hand, and reserved in his own Church, the Copies thereof
being communicated to other Churches in that Province, all which with many
other Treasures of that Noble Library furnished by him, have been lost, partly
by Age and Negligence, but principally by the Incursions of Pirates, who, from
the Isles of Orkney, every Summer used to waste the Seacoasts of Cambria: This
loss indeed is to be deplored, since by those Records we might have perfectly
understood the state of the British Churches: However, we are assured that
those Churches were regulated according to the Roman, and practiced the same
both in Doctrine and Discipline, and consequently, that St. Augustine sent
after to Convert the Saxons, brought no Novelties with him, since St. Gregory
who sent him, was exalted to St. Peter's Chair, not above 60 years after this
Synod. It is written in the Life of St. Kined, That when St. David had
published his Edicts for assembling this Universal Council of Cambria, he
humbly invited St. Kined to it; who excused his not coming, in regard, that for
his sins, he was become distorted and crooked in his Body; and was besides
unable to undertake such a Journey: Whereupon it is said, that St. Kined by the
Prayers of St. David, was restored to Heath and straightness; and by his own
Prayers reduced again to his Infirmity and Crookedness. Whether this were so or
no, certain it is, that this St. Kined filled Britain with the fame of his
Sanctity: He lived a Solitary Anachoretical Life in the Province now called
Glamorganshire; probably in the same place where yet remains a Chapel, called
St. Keneth's Chapel, left as a Monument of his Sanctity, as Cambden witnesses.
The Celebrating this Synod, is the last public Action we find recorded of St.
David. He would not accept of Metropolitical Jurisdiction, but upon condition,
that he might transfer the Sea from Caerleon to Menevia, a place of Remoteness
and Solitude; and in the Neighborhood of many Saints and Religious Persons in
the Islands and Territory adjoining, and therefore most acceptable to him:
Which Translation was approved by King Arthur and the Synod not then dissolved:
This Menevia is seated in the Province of the Dimetae, now Pembrokeshire,
adjoining to the most remote Province of Britain, where the Soil is Stony and
Barren, neither Clothed with Wood, nor interlac'd with Rivers, nor adorned
with Meadows, but exposed to the Sun and Winds; yet with this Penury the
Ancient Saints and Bishops were best contented, accounting the remoteness from
Worldly Tumults and noise, to recompense sufficiently all such Incommodities.
This Menevia, or as the Britains called it Menew, was in memory of this Holy
Bishop named by the Converted Saxons, David Minster, and by the Britains, Twy
Davy, that is, David's House, and at this day, St. David's: The Bishop whereof,
was for many Ages the Metropolitan of Cambria, but at length became subject to
Canterbury: Notwithstanding the Inhabitants of Wales since the Norman Conquest
commenced a Suit against the Archbishop of Canterbury for their former Right
and Independance, but the Cause was judged against them. The Pastoral care and
Zeal of St. David in maintaining the Catholic Faith against Heresies,
especially against Pelagianism, and Ecclesiastical Discipline against Vices and
Disorders, was signally approved, and manifested in the Synod of Victory,
Assembled by him ten years after his Consecration: Neither was this his
Pastoral care confined to his own Province, but extended it self abroad also,
even to Ireland, from whence he was often visited and consulted by Devout men.
In those days it was a frequent custom amongst the Irish-men to go in
Pilgrimage, and their Devotion was to visit the Monuments of the Apostles in
Rome: Amongst the rest, one Barro, an Abbot in the Province of Cork, went
thither, and in his return, passed by Menevia, where he staid for the
accommodation of a Ship and Wind. And indeed it was the practice of Devout
Irish-men, either in their going or returning, to seek the Conversation of the
Holy Bishop David, whose Name like a precious fragrant Ointment, was spread all
abroad: It appears by Bishop Usher's Catalogue, that Irish Saints were to be
sorted into several Orders, according to the times wherein they lived.

The first Order, Was of such as lived either Contemporaries with St. Patrick,
or presently after him.

The second Order, Contained such Saints as lived about this Age; such as were
St. Finanus, called by the Irish, Fin, and by the Britains Gain or Win, St.
Brendon, etc.

It is said the Saints of the second Order received the right Order of
Celebrating Mass out of Britain, from Holy men there living, as St. David, St.
Gildas and St. Doc: Moreover, St. David sent over some of his Disciples into
Ireland, who grew famous for their Learning and Sanctity, of whom the most
Illustrious was St. Aedan, called by the Irish St. Madoc. After he grew
renowned for his Piety and Miracles, he built at length a Monastery near the
City of Fernes, where having collected a great number of Devout Brethren; he
Consecrated himself to the Service of God, living according to the form and
rule which he had received from his Pious Father St. David, the same which was
observed by the Monks in Egypt. This St. Aedan was afterward Bishop of Fernes
and Metropolitan of Leinster while St. David lived, whom he used to consult in
Affairs of difficulty. After many years spent by the Holy Bishop David in the
exercise of all Christian Virtues, it pleased Almighty God in love to him, and
just anger to the Ungrateful Britains, to translate this burning and shining
Light from Earth to Heaven, there to shine in Glory to all Eternity: According
to the best account. He died in the year of Grace 544. having lived 82 years,
though some writers affirm him to have lived much longer. It is said, That when
the hour of his Dissolution approached, the Angel of the Lord appeared to him,
saying, The day so much desired by thee, is now at hand; prepare thy self, for
on the Calends of March, our Lord Jesus Christ, attended with a multitude of
Angels, will come to meet thee; Whereupon the Holy man of God said, O Lord
dismiss now thy Servant in Peace: The Brethren who assisted him, having heard
the sound of these words, but not well understanding the sense, fell Prostrate
to the ground in great fear: Then the Holy Bishop cried with a loud voice, Lord
Jesus Christ receive my Spirit: Upon this the Brethren poured forth loud
Complaints, but he asswag'd their sorrow with mild and comfortable words,
exhorting them to be constant in their good profession, and unanimously to bear
to the end that yoke which they had undergone, and to observe and fulfill
whatever they had seen or heard from him; and from that hour, to the day of his
death, he remained in the Church, exhorting and encouraging them. But when the
hour of his departure was come, our Lord Jesus Christ vouchsafed his presence,
as he had promised by his Angel, to the infinite Consolation of the Holy
Father; who at the Heavenly sight, exalted in Spirit, cried out, O my Lord take
me after thee; With which words in our Lords company, he gave up his Spirit to
God, upon the Calends forementioned; and being associated to a troop of
Angels, mounted up to Heaven with them. The Death of this Holy Bishop, is said
to have been divulged by an Angel, and in an Instant spread through all Britain
and Ireland. That this was so, seems to be confirmed by a passage in the Life
of St. Kentigern, of whom it is said, That having one day continued his Prayers
with more then ordinary Devotion, his face seemed as on fire, the sight whereof
filled the bystanders with great amazement; when Prayers were ended, the Saint
began to lament bitterly, and when his Disciples demanded a reason of his
sorrow, he sat a while silent, and at last said, My dear Children, know for
certain that the Holy Bishop David, the Glory of Britain, the Father of his
Country, is this day dead, he has escaped out of the Prison of his Body, and is
flown to Heaven: Believe me, I my self have seen a multitude of Angels
conducting him into the Joy of our Lord; and our Lord himself at the Entrance
of Paradise, has Crowned him with Glory and Honor. Know also, that Britain,
which is deprived of so great a Light, will a long time mourn for the Absence
of such a Patron, who opposed himself to the Sword of our Lord when it was half
drawn out, for the destruction of that Nation, in revenge of their Sins and
Impenitence: Now will God deliver up Britain to a strange Nation which know him
not, and Pagans shall enjoy the land of its Inhabitants: Christian Religion
shall be utterly dissipated in it, 'till the time prefixed by God be ended. But
after that, it shall through the Mercies of our Lord, be restored to its former
state; yea to a far better and more Happy. St. David was Buried in his own
Church of Menevia, which he had loved above all Monasteries of his Diocese;
because St. Patrick, who had Prophesied of his Nativity, had been Founder of
it: And also indeed he was buried there by the command of Malgo King of the
Venedatae: But after 500 years he was Solemnly Canonized by Pope Calixtus the
second. This Church at first was Dedicated to St. Andrew, but after took St.
David for its Patron, and the whole Diocese was thence called St. David's. The
memory of his Sanctity was so precious, that within a few years after his
Death, the visiting of his Church proved a great Devotion of those times; St.
Oudoceus Successor of St. Thelian in the Bishopric of Landaff, after a
Pilgrimage to visit the Monuments of the Holy Apostles at Rome, made another to
this Church of St. David; and after, when any one had a desire to go in
Devotion to Rome, and was hindered by dangers or difficulties, he might equal
the merit of such a Pilgrimage by twice visiting this Church of St. David;
perhaps as a compensation allowed by the Pope: St. Kinoc or Cenac was St.
David's Successor, translated thither from the Sea of St. Pattern; of whom, and
other Successors in the Sea of St. David little is found: To keep the story of
this worthy Bishop entire, some interruption may be observed to have been made
in the order of Time. It is therefore requisite to return to its due course.

In the year of Grace 532. Otta King of Kent died, leaving his Son Irmeric
Successor in his Kingdom, who was Illustrious for nothing more, than that he
was the Father of Ethelbert the first Christian King among the Saxons. Two
years after died also Cerdic King of the West Saxons, in the 16th. year of his
Reign; to whom succeeded his Son Kenric in all his Dominions except the Isle of
Wight, which he left to his Sisters Son Whitgar, whom he loved especially for
his Military Skill. The great Commotions in Britain, and Cruelty of the Saxons,
compelled many to seek the means of serving God abroad; amongst whom was a Holy
Priest called John, who retired to Tours in France, there to live in Prayers
and Solitude; but after his Death his Sanctity by the good pleasure of God was
made known by a Miracle, thus related by that famous Bishop St. Gregory of
Tours. Not far from the Church of Caion (says he) rests the Body of a Priest
Named John, by Nation a Britain; who living here with great Devotion and
Sanctity, Our Lord was pleased by him Miraculously to restore many to Health:
The better to attend his Divine love, he avoided the sight of men, confining
himself to a little Cell or Oratory, over against the Church of Caion; where,
in a little Orchard, cultivated by himself, he had planted a few Laurel Trees,
which now are so increased, that the Boughs of them being drawn together
Arch-wise, do afford a very pleasing shade; under those Laurels his custom was
to sit Reading or Writing: After his Death, among the said Trees there was one
which through Age was quite Withered; He who had the care of these Trees,
dug up the root of the dry Tree, and of the Body of it hewed out a Bench,
upon which he used to sit: After he had made such use of this seat above two
years, thought of remorse came into his Heart; I believe (says the Holy
Bishop) by Divine Inspiration, which forced the man to say; Alas! Sinner that I
am, why do I for my Convenience make use of a seat, framed of the Tree, which
so Holy a Priest Planted with his own Hand: Whereupon he presently digs a hole
and puts the seat into it, having cut off the Feet which supported it, and then
covered it with Earth: The very next Spring this dry Bench sprouted forth into
Green Branches, and prosper'd so well, that at this day there are proceeded
from it several young Trees of great height; and which every year, by our
Lords Blessing, sprout forth more and more. About this time died St. Morchus,
or St. Mocchaeus a British Priest: In the beginning of the Saxon Troubles, he
forsook his Country, and passed over to Lugh or Louth in Ireland, a pleasant
place: St. Patrick had formerly had a resolution to build a Church there, but
was commanded by an Angel to consign that place to this Morchus, shortly to
come thither and end his days there in great Sanctity, as he did accordingly:
He was often times visited by St. Patrick, whose Disciple he became, and took
the care of 12 Leapers recommended to him by St. Patrick. He Prophesied of the
Holy man Columba, and was after Consecrated Bishop of Louth by St. Patrick: As
for the relation of his living 300 years as a punishment inflicted on him by
St. Patrick, it is justly rejected; so also of his succeeding St. Patrick in
the Sea of Armagh, for good Records put it out of doubt that St. Benignus was
by him designed for that succession.

In the year 539. St. Kentigern being no more then 25 years of Age, was
Consecrated Bishop of Glascow: As for his wonderful Birth, it has already been
related, and how his Mother was preserved by Servanus: He so much prosited
under the instruction of Servanus, that he became his dearly beloved Disciple;
afterward he went to Glasco, where he lived alone in great Abstinence, until
the King and Clergy of the Region, now called Gallway, with other Christians
there, which were but few, chose him for their Pastor and Bishop,
notwithstanding the utmost resistance he could make. They sent for one single
Bishop out of Ireland, whom they caused to Consecrate St. Kentigern after the
then usual custom among the Britains and Scots; for at that time a practice had
got footing, to use no other Ceremony in the Consecration of a Bishop, but only
the infusion of Sacred Chrism on their Heads, with Invocation of the Holy
Spirit, Benediction, and Imposition of Hands: For these Islanders, removed as
it were out of the World, by the continual Invasion of Pagans, were become
ignorant in the Ecclesiastical Canons: For which cause the Law of the Church
condescended to them, and admitted an excuse in this regard, so as
Ecclesiastical Censure did not touch them; notwithstanding, as is hereafter
mentioned, St. Kentigern made ample satisfaction for this defect: His Diocese
extended it self, according to the limits of the Kingdom of Cumbria, from the
famous Wall formerly built to secure the Britains, reaching from Sea to Sea as
far as the River Ford, or Scotish-Sea. The defects in this Consecration were,

First, His Age, for at a Council held then not long before, a Decree was made,
That no Metropolitan should presume to Ordain any one Bishop, before he arrived
to 30 years, the Age of a perfect man; least he should through Youth, incurr
some Error.

Secondly, The first Nicene Council ordered, That if any one were made a
Bishop, without the Judgment and Consent of the Metropolitan, he was forbidden
to exercise his Episcopal Function; And in this Ordination of St. Kentigern,
there was no consent of the Metropolitan, nor so much as concurrence of any
Neighboring Bishop.

Thirdly, The first Canon of the Apostles, confirmed by many Councels, enjoins,
That every Bishop should be Ordained by at least two or three Bishops: Whereas
St. Kentigern was Consecrated by one single Bishop, who was a Stranger of a
Foreign Nation.

Fourthly, In the Consecration of Bishops, the Ancient Fathers for the Dignity
of that Degree, ordained many Rites to be observed, beside such as belong to
the Essence of that Sacrament, As Anointing the Head with Chrism, with
Invocation of the Holy Spirit, Signing the Person with the Sign of the Cross,
Impositionof Hands; Together with several other Rites adjoined for the Adorning
the House of God, the defect whereof did not vitiate the Sacrament, but the
Person only.

Now in all these Points some Defects there were in the Ordination of St.
Kentigern, which when he afterward called to mind, caused great unquietness
and remorse in him; a Custom introduced among Britains, to ordain thus
imperfectly, crept in since the Disturbances made by the Saxons, so as the
Ecclesiastical Canons were either forgotten, or rendered unpracticable, for
that there were no Metropolitans, or at such distance, that they could not be
had, most places wanting not only Bishops, but Inhabitants; and it is probable
in the present case the very Chrisme was furnished out of Ireland. It therefore
is manifest, that these Disorders were excuseable, because unavoidable: But in
Peaceable times the practice was otherwise, and the Canons were duly observed,
and the British Faith unblemished. And by this we may see, that the Britains in
their Ordinations before St. Gregory's time, conformed themselves to the Roman
Church, and not to the Eastern, as some would collect; for in truth no Eastern
Church can be found, which neglected any of these Ceremonies. However, to be
sure the Britains in their Discipline established by Councels, demanded a
Confirmation from the Sea Apostolic: And this appears by the Demeanor of St.
Kentigern himself; for being after afflicted in mind, for those Defects in his
Ordination, he sought not Council from any Metropolitan, but from the Supreme
Bishop in Rome, to whom the custody of Ecclesiastical Canons was committed, and
who had Authority to enjoin the observation of them, and punish, and regulate
the neglect: Therefore St. Kentigern, as we find recorded, went several times
to Rome, where he heartily laid open his Life, his Election, Consecration, and
all the circumstances of it to St. Gregory the special Apostle of the English:
Upon which the Holy Pope perceiving, that he was a sincere man of God,
confirmed his Consecration, knowing it came from God. Moreover, at the earnest
request of St. Kentigern, though with some unwillingness, he condescended to
supply those small defects, which were in his Consecration, and so dismissed him
to the work of his Ministry enjoined him by the Holy Ghost. So that it appears
nothing essentially necessary in this Consecration was omitted, because the
Holy Pope supplied the defects merely upon importunity. The greatest fault the
Holy Bishop could impute to himself, was his being Consecrated by one only
Bishop against the express Canon of a General Council; though indeed
considering the danger and unquietness of the times, if the words of the Canon
were transgressed, yet the intent was not, as not obliging to Impossibilities:
And this sense of the Canon appears by the Resolution of St. Gregory to St.
Augustine: That he being the only Bishop in the Church of the Angli, might
himself alone ordain other Bishops. It is said of this St. Kentigern, That
during the whole course of his Life, his custom was to eat only every third
day, and sometimes every fourth; his food was Bread, Milk, Cheese and Butter:
He always abstained from Flesh and Wine, or any other Drink which could
Distemper. Next his skin he wore a very rough Haircloath, and over that a
Garment made of Goat Skins, together with a close Cowle, and his uppermost
clothing was a white Albe. He always wore a Stole, and carried a Pastoral
Staff or Crosier, not Spherical, Gilded or set with precious Stones, but of
simple Wood, bowing back at the Top; and in his Hand he ever held a Book, thus
was he always in readiness to exercise his Function, whenever necessity or
reason required: He lay in a stone Chest made hollow like a Biere; under his
Head lay a stone, and under his body were cast Cinders and Cilice of Hair; in
which posture with some unwillingness, he admitted a short sleep; after which
he would plunge himself into Cold Water, and so recite the whole Psalter: This
practice neither Snow nor Rain interrupted, nor any thing but Sickness, or
Journeying: He six'd his Episcopal See in the City of Glasco, where he also
ordained a great Congregation of Religious men, who lived according to the form
of the Primitive Church, in community of all things: The Infidels in his
Diocese, he converted to the Faith, Apostates and Heretics by his sound
Doctrine he reduced to the bosom of our Holy Mother the Church. He every where
threw down Idols and Images of Devils, and built some Churches: He
distinguished Parishes by their certain bounds: He was always traveling to
gain Souls to God; never riding, but in imitation of the Apostles, always going
on foot; And because he would not eat his Bread in Idleness, his custom was to
labor with his hands in Agriculture.

About this time our famous King Arthur, upon some unknown occasion Abroad,
left the Administration of his Kingdom to his Nephew Mordred, Son of Loath King
of the Picts by his Sister; Mordred in the Absence of his Uncle, invades his
Throne, upon pretense King Arthur was a Bastard, and born out of Lawful
Marriage: To this Treason the Traitor adds the Crime of Incest, violently
taking his Uncles Wife Queen Guenhumara: And to strengthen himself, he entered
into a Confederacy with the King of the West Saxons, to whom he yielded up
several Provinces. This infamous Crime soon brings King Arthur back into
Britain, inflamed with rage against his abominable Kinsman. Mordred was
prepared to hinder his landing, where a Cruel Battle was fought between them,
in which Auguselus King of Albania, and Walwan another Nephew of King Arthur
were slain; notwithstanding which, at last King Arthur with infinite difficulty
landed, and renewing the Fight, made a great slaughter of his Enemies,
compelling Mordred to fly to Winchester, whither he was pursued by King Arthur;
where in a second Battle, after much Bloodshed, he was again put to flight
toward Cornwall: But King Arthur not ceasing to follow, at last overtook him
near the River Camblan, where Mordred having ranged his Forces, in a desperate
fury rushed amongst his Enemies, resolved rather to die, then once more to show
his back to them. In this Combat, which continued almost a whole day, after
horrible Bloodshed on both sides, King Arthur with the Courage and fury of a
Lion, rushed into the Troop where he knew Mordred was, and making way with his
Sword, at last with horrible slaughter dispersed the Enemies: There fell the
Traitor Mordred, and with him several Saxon Commanders, Elaphius, Egbrith and
Bruning and many thousands with them: But this Victory cost King Arthur his
Life, for in the Combat he received a Mortal Wound, and was conveyed by the
Charity of a Kins-woman of his, a Noble Matron called Morganis, into the Island
of Avallonia, now Glastonbury, which gave occasion to the foolish British Bards
to invent the Story, Of Morganis a Faery Goddess, who carried the Body of King
Arthur into Avallonia by Magic skill, with promise to Cure his Wounds, and
that he should return with his former Strength and Courage to govern the
Britains; Who for many Ages expected his return, as foolishly as the coming of
the Messiah is looked for by the Jews. When Guenhumara heard of her Husbands
return, she fled to the City of Caerleon, and there took the Habit of a
Religious Woman among the Nuns in the Monastery of St. Julius the Martyr: The
true reason why King Arthur would be carried to the Monastery of Glastonbury
doubtless was, partly to prepare himself more perfectly for Death in the
company, and by the assistance of the Holy Monks there; and that after his
death he might be buried among such a world of Saints as reposed there from the
beginning of Christianity: The like we read of Constantine, who for the like
purpose was buried in like manner, That he might have the Prayers of such as in
succeeding Ages should come to visit those Monuments: King Arthur before his
death gave to that Monastery, Brent, March, Poulden and other Lands besides,
which the Pagan Angli took away; but after being Converted to the Faith,
restored with Advantage. King Arthur appointed for his Successor a Kins-man of
his called Constantine, and having recommended himself to the Prayers of the
Monks, he died Happily, and after a Christian manner was buried with a Cross.
His conveyance to Glastonbury was it seems by his own Order, and done with all
Secrecy, and by like order his Death and place of Burial studiously concealed.
For, (says Matthew Paris) the King dying, was desirous to be hidden, least his
Enemies should insult, and his Friends be molested at so great a Calamity.
Hence it is that Histories relate little or nothing of his Death and Burial;
Insomuch, as the British Nation out of their Affection to him, contend that he
is still alive; upon which occasion the Prophecy was invented and fathered upon
Merlin, That he should appear and reign once more.

It seems in the year of Grace 1142. the Sepulcher of King Arthur could no
where be found; whereas the Sepulcher of his Heroic Nephew Walwin had then
lately been found in the time of King William near the Seacoast, and was 14
Foot long: But a while after, in the time of Henry the II. by the industry of
certain Devout persons King Arthur's Monument was found, and the expectation of
his return thereby vanished among the Welsh People: The manner how it was
found, is set forth by many Authors; one of which affirms, That the Abbot who
found it, showed him the Cross which lay over King Arthur 's Body, the
Characters whereof he read: But we may receive the most Authentic account of
this from the great Table of Glastonbury, framed on purpose to preserve the
memory of this Invention, wherein it is thus written, In this Island Avallonia,
or rather this Tomb of Saints at Glastonbury; do rest King Arthur, the flower
of the Kings of Britain, and Guenhavera his Queen, who after their Decease were
Honorably Buried near the Old Church, between two Stone Pyramids, heretofore
Nobly Engraven; and in the same place have their Bodies rested for many years,
to wit, 628. years, until the time of Henry de Soili, who after the burning of
the said Church, was Abbot there: This Abbot after many admonitions by several
persons, commanded men to dig between the said Pyramids: They dig'd exceeding
deep, and at last found a very great Bier of Wood shut close up, which, with
their Instruments they opened, and within it discovered the Kings Body, and a
Cross of Lead, one whole side whereof was filled with this Inscription, Here
lies Buried the famous King Arthur in the Island of Avallonia: Then they opened
the Tomb of the Queen, and the Hairs of her Head were spread over her Body, and
seemed as if she had been but lately buried; but as soon as they touched them,
they fell all into Dust. The Abbot then and Convent with great Joy, and
exceeding Honor, transferred their Bodies from thence, and placed them in a
double Monument of Stone Nobly Engraven on the one side in the great Church, to
wit, The Kings Body by it self at the Head of the Tomb, and the Queens on the
East Side. These Testimonies are enough to declare the unreasonableness of some
late assertions, that there never was any such man; That many foolish stories
pass concerning him, cannot be denied; but that it may be collected from Saint Bede, that there never was any such man, is a mistake; all that he says, is,
That Ambrosius Aurelius a Modest man, was the only person of the Roman Stock,
who over-liv'd the Miseries of the Britains, at the time when the Saxons raised
such Tragedies in the Island; He denies not that he had Sons and
Grandchildren: On the contrary, Gildas expressly affirms, That the Offspring
of Ambrosius in the times when he wrote, did degenerate from the Virtue of
their Ancestors: It cannot therefore be denied, that such a Prince governed the
Britains as King Arthur, that he reigned about 33 years, that he died in the
70th. year of his Age, and was buried after the Christian manner, as was
sufficiently testified by the Cross over his Tomb; which Cross was from the
beginning esteemed through the whole Church, an assured Badge of Christianity:
The first degree of Apostasy declared by Julian, was the casting away the Sign
of the Cross, which says St. Cyril, Is the prime and immovable Foundation of
the Faith professed by Christians, and with which Athanasius, has in every Age
triumphed over all Superstition and Idolatry: Whereas of late the Cross it self
is now accounted Superstitious. Before we come to show how far the Successor of
King Arthur degenerated from him, something must be said of two famous men of
that Age, St. Iltutus, and St. Sampson; the former died during the reign of
that Heroical King: He was the Son of a Noble Soldier Named Rican, his Mother
was called Rieneguilida, Daughter to a Prince of Little-Britain. In his
Childhood he was instructed in Learning, but arriving to more years, he applied
himself to Martial Affairs; and hearing of the Magnanimity of his Kins-man King
Arthur, he went to visit him; after he applied himself to the Prince of
Glamorganshire, of whom he became so highly esteemed, that he advanced him to
the highest condition in that State next himself: After this he was Counseled
and persuaded by St. Cadocus to forsake the Secular Habit and Profession, and
to Consecrate the remainder of his Life to the Service of God, that he might
the more assuredly obtain Eternal Rewards and Happiness. Iltutus submitting to
the Council of the Holy man, relinquished the World, and retiring to a
commodious Mansion, lived there some time a Solitary and Devout Life: Then he
had recourse to St. Dubritius Bishop of Landaff, from whom he received the
Tonsure and Crown, Badges of a Religious Profession; And thus with the Consent
of his Wife vowed perpetual Chastity, which she also observed: How the
Centuriatours of Magdeburg have contradicted themselves in the relation of this
Saint, must be referred to their Writings: Sure it is the memory of his
Learning and Sanctity, is preserved to this day in Glamorganshire, where there
is a Town and Church called Llanlivit, or Llaniltut, (not far from Llancarvan
the habitation of St. Cadocus,) where St. Iltutus diligently Preached Gods
word, and instituted a College of Scholars, which he instructed in Learning
and Piety; amongst whom the most Illustrious was the fore-nam'd St. Sampson,
who by his Masters direction embraced also a Religious profession, of whom more
presently.

It is said of this St. Iltutus, that he was the Disciple of St. Germanus, and
had the Spirit of Prophecy: As for his Disciple St. Sampson, he was born in
South Wales of Noble Parents, after they had lived long Childless; his Fathers
Name was Amon, and his Mothers Anne: He was instructed in Humane knowledge,
Integrity of Life, and a Monastical Institution by St. Iltutus, and lived in a
Monastery built by a Holy man called Piro, in an Island not far distant from
the Monastery of St. Iltutus, and there is said to had led a perfect and
Angelical Life, Amiable in his Conversation, Vigilant in Prayer, and
Persevering in good Works. Not long after by the Death of Piro, this Holy man
Sampson was unanimously chosen Abbot: Four years after his Election, by the
permission of St. Dubritius, he went into Ireland, but his stay was not long
there, for he was present at the Council of Brevi: He was after ordained an
Archbishop in Britain, but it cannot be assigned of what place, only it is
without doubt reported, that St. Sampson a British Archbishop went over into
Little Britain, and carried with him the Pall, Ensign of his Dignity: Great
dispute has risen whether this St. Sampson were Archbishop of York or
Menevia; the debate seems to have been concluded to the advantage of Menevia,
wherein St. Sampson is supposed to have succeeded Kinocus, who was next to St.
David.

Now the Church of Menevia enjoying all the Privileges of the Church of
Caerleon, must needs be Metropolitan, and consequently the Archbishop thereof
wore a Pall, which he probably carried over with him to Dole in Little Britain
in the year of Grace 566. when the whole Province of Menevia was almost
depopulated by a raging Pestilential Disease; to avoid which, by the
importunity of his Friends, he undertook that Voyage. Being arrived there, he
was admitted into great Favor by Childebert King of France, and with his
License and Contribution Founded a Monastery there, where he led a Holy Life,
employed in Divine Meditation; and by his Pious Example and Admonitions,
directed many Disciples in the same way. St. Sampson in this Voyage took with
him a Companion of suitable Holiness, called St. Conaid, by the French vulgarly
St. Mein, said to be the Son of a Noble Britain, living near Caer Guent, and
recommended to the care of St. Sampson. One special Miracle is recorded to have
been wrought by St. Mein, viz. That by his Prayers a Fountain sprang forth in a
dry Soil, very effectual for Curing several Diseases, Especially the Scurvy,
there called the Disease of St. Mein: After St. Sampson had spent some years in
the Monastery of Dole, the Bishop of that City dying, he was Elected in his
place, and made use of his Pall there, from whence his Successor in Dole,
assumed the Honor of wearing a Pall, and consequently challenging
Arch-Episcopal Jurisdiction, and an exemption from the Metropolitan of Tours.
This continued 'till the days of Innocent the III. and all that time the Sea of
St. David's, though owned the Prime Church of Wales, yet abstained from the
Pall; for which cause Eugenius the III. under King Henry the I. subjected it to
the Sea of Canterbury in the year of our Lord 1148. 33 years St. Sampsom with
admirable Sanctity administered that Bishopric, and in the year 599. received
his Eternal Reward: His Body by reason of the frequent Incursions of the Danes
and Normans, was removed from Dole to Orleans, where it was received with such
Reverence, that a Church was built on purpose to keep it, which to this day is
Dedicated to his Honor; although destitute of that Sacred Pledge, which among
many other Bodies of Saints, was Impiously burned by those professed Enemies of
Sacred things, the Huguenots in the last Age, who seized on that City: Some
part of his Relics was with great Veneration reposed in the Abbey of Middleton
in Dorsetshire, which was built by King Ethelstan in expiation of being at
least accessory to the Murder of his Brother Edwin in the year 934. His
Successor in the Sea of Dole was his Kinsman and Companion in his Voyage. St.
Magbore another Kinsman of St. Sampson, called St. Maclovius or St. Malo,
otherwise St. Mainutus, was famous at that time. He, during the Tempest in
Britain, by the reason of Mordred, passed likewise into Little Britain, the
common refuge of Devout men in those times: He was born in Britain, his Fathers
Name was Went. His Mother was called Derwella or Darwalla, being 60 years of
Age when she was delivered of him in the Valley of Elan Carvan in
Glamorganshire. In the same place then lived a Holy man, called St Brenden,
Abbot of the Monastery of Elan Carvan, by whom this Infant thus wonderfully
born was Baptized, and after Educated in all Virtue and Piety: From his
Childhood he is reported to have shined Gloriously by innumerable Miracles,
which accompanied him all his Lifetime: Our Learned Cambden affirms, That the
constant Tradition was, that he was after made a Bishop of a City in the
Province of the Iceni, now Huntingdonshire, called Durosipons, after
Gormoncester from Gormon or Guthrum the Dane, to whom becoming a Christian,
King Alfred gave those Provinces. St. Malo upon occasion of the troubles at
that time, went into Little Britain also, where he lived in great Sanctity and
contemning his own Glory, retired privily into a Bodering Island, where in his
Eremetical manner of living, he expressed an Angelical Purity. But the
brightness of the Divine Splendor discovered this Light, which endeavored to
conceal it self. For when the Inhabitants of the Island, understood that a
stranger excelling in the Gift of Preaching, and Power of Divine Miracles hid
himself there from the Conversation of men, they in common Assembly came, and
drawing him by force out of his Solitude, chose him for their Pastor, and
inviting the neighboring Bishops, placed him in the Pontifical Chair of Aleth,
and partly by entreaties and partly by force, compelled him to be their Bishop.
The Saint being thus exalted, shed forth abundantly the Beams of that Divine
Grace wherewith he was replenished, illustrating men's Souls with the true
knowledge of God, inflaming them with his love, and affording both Admonitions
and Examples of all Virtues; to which he added a great efficacy, by wonderful
Operations and Miracles: Insomuch, as since the Apostles times, we read not of
any one, who wrought greater wonders than he. For with his word he calmed
Tempests, he restored three dead persons to Life, to the Blind he gave Sight,
by the sprinkling of Holy Water he expelled Devils and quenched the Poison of
Serpents: Neither did he resemble those Princes of our Faith in working of
Miracles only, but in Patience also, to the trial whereof he was often put; for
he was Assaulted by certain Impious persons, and suffered many Calamities for
Religion and Justice, so as at last he was violently thrust out of his
Episcopal Throne and Diocese with seven other Devout persons, his most especial
Companions, who imitated him in Purity of living. Yet did he bear this heavy
Cross after our Lord with a Courageous mind. Attended with these Holy men St.
Mahutus fled into Aquitain, and in the City of Xaintes was most kindly
entertained and Fatherly assisted by St. Leontius Archbishop of Bourdeaux and
Metropolitan of Xaintes, who there accomodated him with a convenient Habitation
for serving God: St. Leontius bare a tender affection to him, Admiring and
Reverencing the Divine Grace which he observed in him, esteeming him as sent
from Heaven to assist him in his Pastoral Charge; for which reason in all his
Visitations, he took him for his Companion, entreating his Councels and
Prayers. Howbeit the man of God, though he were so despitefully and unjustly
exiled, was not unmindful of his Flock, but forgetting all Injuries, daily
invoked our Lords Clemency for the Conversion of that stubborn People: The
Divine Majesty condescended to his Prayers, and by an Angel did acquaint him,
That his Flock was Penitent, and desired his return; that he should repair to
them, and restore to Health that Region which was grievously afflicted with the
Scourges of Divine Severity; that he should restore plenty to the barren Earth,
bestow his Benediction on the Inhabitants. And lastly, Returning to Xaintes,
that there he should be divested of corruptible Flesh, and his Soul ascend to
Eternal Felicity. As soon as he was come back, he was received with more then
ordinary respect, but presently after died full of Days and Sanctity, and was
buried by Leontius in Aquitain: Now though the Inhabitants of Aleth were
deprived of the Sacred Relics of their prime Prelate, whom they had treated so
injuriously; yet the name of Blessed Maclovius remains, never to be blotted
out, adorning and defending that City to this day with his Celestial Benefits
and Glorious Perfection. Howbeit the Episcopal See does not now remain at
Aleth, but is removed to an Island two Miles distant from thence, Anciently
called Aaron, where a City new built is in memory of their Holy Prelate and
Patron, called St. Malo, and Vrbs Macloviensis. It is said that St. Mahutus
with his seven Disciples in Devotion visited Rome, where he redeemed many
Infidel Captives; and having instructed them in the true Faith, Baptized them.

Saint Brendan his Spiritual Father and Instructor, though no Britain by Birth,
is not to be denied some place in this History: He came out of Ireland, to
visit the Holy man St. Gildas Albanius in Britain: He was also Superior in the
Monastery of Lancarvan, where he Baptized St. Maclovius, and returning into
Ireland, where he was made an Abbot, there died Happily in the year of Grace
571. The death of this Blessed man, is said to be revealed to St. Columba, who
declared, That he saw the Heavens on a sudden opened, and a Choire of Angels
descending to meet St. Brendan 's Soul, by whose incomparable Splendor, the
whole World was that night Enlightn'd: St. Brendan thus called to Heaven,
enjoyed on Earth also an Eternal Monument of his Name and Sanctity: For in the
Isle of Orkney, a Town and Church were built and called from his Name, the
reason was, because his Sacred Body was thither translated.

In this Age flourished a Holy British Abbot called St. Doc, of whom is
written, That when St. Canic, of whom the Province of Kilkenny took its Name,
was grown to an Age of capable knowledge, being desirous of instruction, he
passed over into Britain to a Religious man called Doc, and under him studied
diligently, and was taught both Learning and Piety: This St. Doc was one of the
three Holy Britains from whom the Irish learned the form and Rites of
Celebrating Mass: The other two were St. David and St. Gildas.

After the death of King Arthur, Constantine according to his designation,
succeeded him in the Government of Britain: He was the Son of Cador Duke of
Cornwall, and Kinsman to the King: His sufficiency to discharge that employment
for the Benefit of his Country, was enough approved by the choice of his
glorious Predecessor: But Almighty God having fixed a period to the British
Monarchy, permitted many Factions to arise, and many Pretendants to the
Principality, the opposing of whom hindered Constantine from advancing the
common profit and safety of the Kingdom: Moreover, Ambition and Revenge had
such a Power over him, that they invited him to commit Crimes, which hast'ned
the ruin of his Country. Hence it is that Gildas calls him the Tyrant of
Danmonia, Tyrant in regard of his Cruelty, and Tyrant of that Province, because
at that time several others had invaded each one their several Principalities,
and for the maintaining of their unjust Usurpations, filled the whole Nation
with all manner of Impieties; which gave occasion to the same Gildas to publish
a Passionate Invective against the Vices of the whole British Nation, which had
universally deprived the Inhabitants of all states and conditions, an exceeding
few excepted; who forseeing the unavoidable destruction of the Nation, withdrew
themselves from public Affairs, and in solitude deplored the sins of others,
by great Pennances and Austerities, procuring Indulgence to their own Souls. In
former times (says Gildas) our Kings public Officers, private Persons,
Bishops and other Ecclesiastics, every one kept their Order, and performed the
Duties belonging to them; But when they were dead, there succeeded a
Generation, utterly ignorant of the former Virtues, among whom all the Rules of
Truth and Justice were so shaken and subverted, that no footsteps, nor so much
as the least Monument of those Virtues appeared in any of the said Orders.
Constantine at his first Ascension into his Throne, bound himself by a Solemn
Oath, to govern Justly, and to use his utmost endeavors to defend his Subjects
from Injuries and Oppressions, and the Commonwealth from the violence of its
Enemies. And yet the year following, we find him charged with Perjury, and the
violation of his Faith, by his Barbarous Cruelty and Sacrilegious Profanation
of Gods House; For the two Sons of Mordred rising up in Arms against him, to
revenge their Fathers death, joined in Confederacy with the Saxons, and fought
many Battles with him; but at last being compelled to fly, Constantine pursued
them, and one of them he slew before the Altar of St. Amphibalus his Church in
Winchester; the other who had hid himself in a Convent of Monks, he Condemned
to a Cruel death in London: For this Sacrilegious Inhumanity, Gildas in his too
free style, calls Constantine, The Tyrannical Whelp of the Lioness of Danmonia;
an infringer of the dreadful Sacrament of an Oath, by which he bound himself
before God and all his Saints; to abstain from all Injustice and Treachery to
his Subjects; notwithstanding which, in the very bosom both of their Carnal
Mother, and Spiritual Mother the Church, near the most Holy Altar, he had torn
the Bowels of two Royal Youths, though covered with the Vestments of a Holy
Abbot, whilst they stretched forth their Hands, not armed with Swords to
resist, but to implore help from God and his Altar; and yet he most Barbarously
shed their Blood; which, with a Purple dye stained the seat of the
Ecclesiastical Sacrifice, and the Sacred Palls which covered it. To this
Invective, the same Author adjoyns most pressing Exhortations to Constantine,
That he would do suitable Penance for these horrible Crimes; that if possible
he might avoid the dark inextricable Torrents of Eternal fire, in which
otherwise he must for ever be rolled and roasted. By these Expressions, it
should seem, these two Sons of Mordred, were not so much to be blamed for their
rising, all Circumstances considered: Probable it is, that these, or such like
Exhortations wrought a good effect upon Constantine; for though some write that
he was slain by Conan, who succeeded in the Kingdom, yet others tell another
Story, viz. That after a short reign, having been deprived of his Wife and
Children, be grew weary of his Kingdom, and privily stealing from his Friends,
went into Ireland, and there for the love of Christ, labored unknown like a
poor Servant in a Mill; but afterward by persuasion of a Monk, to whom he
discovered his condition, he was induced to shave his Head, and Consecrate
himself to a Religious Life in a Monastery, where he is said to live with such
Piety and Devotion, that he became a pattern of all Virtues to the rest of the
Monks. That at last by the Prelate of that place he was sent in Mission to the
Scots, to instruct that Nation in the Doctrine of Christ, where he suffered
Martyrdom by the hands of some Impious persons: Some Ages after he became
Venerated as a Saint, and by Authority of succeeding Bishops, Temples were
Dedicated to his Honor, which yet remain in that Nation. To confirm this, we
read in the Life of St. David, That when St. David 's Holiness was spread
abroad, several Princes forsaking their Kingdoms, retired to his Monastery: And
that Constantine King of the Cornish-men, or Danmonii, forsaking his Throne,
became a Monk there, and after some time spent in the Service of God, at last
went into a far distant Country, where he built a Monastery.

Now it will be time to relate the great Affliction and Persecution which
befell the famous and Holy Bishop St. Kentigern in the second year of
Constantine. Certain Sons of Belial, Kinsmen to King Mark, rose against the
Saint, conspiring his death; whereupon being admonished by Divine Revelation,
he departed, directing his Journey to Menevia, where the Holy Bishop David
flourished with all Virtues; near Gaerleon he Converted many to the Faith, and
built a Church: Being come to St. David, he abode with him some time, and
received from the Prince of that Region Cathwallam, a place commodious for a
Monastery; which having Erected at Egla (Elwy) he fixed there an Episcopal See:
Near that place there was a Nobleman, which often threatened, and endeavored to
expel him from thence, whom God therefore smote with Blindness; but upon the
Holy Bishops Prayers, his Sight was restored, for which he became ever after
Helper and Protector to the Bishop: There were Assembled in that Monastery, no
fewer then 945 Brethren, who all lived under Monastical Discipline, serving God
with great Abstinence, of which number 300. who were Illiterate, he appointed
to Tilling the Ground, and Guard of the Cattle out of the Monastery; other 300.
he assigned for preparing Nourishment, and performing other necessary Works
within the Monastery; and 365. who were Learned, he deputed to the Celebrating
Divine Offices daily: Not any of which, without great necessity, would he
permit to go out of the Monastery, but ordained them to attend there
continually, as in Gods Sanctuary: And this part of the Convent he divided so
into Troops and Companies, that when one had finished the Service of God in the
Church, another presently entered, and began it again; which being ended, a
third without any delay entered: By this means Prayers were offered in that
Church without intermission, and the Praises of God were always in their
Mouths. Among these there was one named Asaph, more especially Illustrious for
his Descent and Form, who from his Childhood shone brightly, both by Virtues
and Miracles, and daily endeavored to imitate his Master in all Sanctity and
Abstinence: To him this man of God bore ever after a particular Affection, and
committed the care of the Monastery to his Prudence, and at last appointed him
his Successor in the Bishopric: As touching the forementioned Nobleman who
opposed this Holy Bishop, it is written to this effect, That St. Kentigern at
first built a Church of Wood and Lime, but after he renewed it of Stone,
although he was therein much hindered and molested by a Prince named Malgo or
Maglocun, whose dwelling was six Miles thence at Deganwy; but after being
asswag'd, he permitted him to place there an Episcopal See, on which he
bestowed both ample Possessions and Privileges, as he did also upon the
Monastery. The Sea is by some called Elguy or Llanelwy, so named from the River
Elwy, over which it is seated; St. Kentigern being the first Bishop thereof:
But in succeeding times it was called St. Asaph, from the next succeeding
Bishop. Of this Prince Malgo more hereafter.

St. Kentigern's Life was prolonged, till after St. Augustine the Monks coming
into Britain; yet because his future Actions, do not much relate to the general
Affairs of the British Churches, we may well in this place sum up the remainder
of his Life: He remained in Cambria seventeen years, exercising most perfectly
the Functions both of an Abbot, and after of a Bishop at Elwy, till in the end
he was re-call'd to his first Bishopric at Glasco in this admirable manner:
After that all his Enemies in Cambria had been consumed by diverse Calamities
and Diseases, the Inhahitants of that Region from whence he had been so long
Exild, through his Absence, had forsaken the way of the Lord, which he had
taught them, and were returned to their Idolatry, like Dogs to their Vomit;
which Apostasy of theirs it pleased God to puntsh by a grievous Famine, the
Earth, the Sea, and all the Elements refusing their accustomed aid and comfort
to them: But at length our Lord was pleased to raise up a good King in that
Region named Rederech, who had been Baptized by some of the Disciples of St.
Patrick, and who was very desirous to restore the Faith of Christ in his
Kingdom; for which purpose he directed Messengers with Letters to St.
Kentigern, wherein he acquainted the Saint, That the men who sought his Life
were dead, and besought him, that he would no longer be absent from his flock,
for which he was obliged to Sacrifice his Life; St. Kentigern having received
the Message, prepared for his return, and having appointed St. Asaph his
Successor in the Bishopric of Elwy, he attended with 600 of his Brethren, took
his Journey to the Region of the Cambrians, and was met by the Devout King, and
great numbers of his People, giving Thanks to God for his Presence, upon whom
the Holy man pronounced a solemn Benediction: After this he cried with a loud
voice. In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, I command all those who envy the
Salvation of men, and resist the Preaching of Gods word, to depart presently
from hence, that they may be no hinderance to those who shall believe: Having
said thus, immediately in the sight of all, an innumerable multitude of wicked
Spirits horrible to behold, both for their Stature and Shapes, fled away from
the Company, which caused a wonderful Fear and trembling in them: But the Holy
man, encouraged and comforted them, letting them see visibly who they were in
whom they had believed, and by whom they had been induced to Adore dumb Idols,
or the Elements which were Creatures appointed by God for their Use and
Service: And for Woden, whom by the Seduction of the Saxons they esteemed their
principal God: And to whose Honor they Consecrated the fourth day of the Week,
he showed that he was no better than a Mortal man, who had been King of the
Saxons, and Ancestor to several Nations; that his Body was then dissolved into
Dust, and his Soul tormented in Hell fire for ever. When he had said this, with
other Speeches in explanation of the Christian Faith: The ground on which he
sat in a plain Field called Holdelin, swelled up under him in the sight of
them all, so as it grew to a reasonable high Hill, and so remains (as is said)
to this day: All the People seeing these wonders, after they were instructed in
the Faith, received Baptism, and thus by his Doctrine he freed the Nation of
the Picts from Idolatry and Heresy: He Converted likewise the Country of
Albania, therein building many Churches, and Founding many Monasteries: Whilst
St. Kentigern lived among the Picts, St. Columba, by the English called
Columkill, hearing in his Monastery in the Isle of Hy, the Fame of this Holy
Bishop, came with a great Troop of his Disciples to visit him, and was met by
him with the like multitude; which they divided on each side into three
Companies: The First of Young men; The Second such as were of Perfect Age; And
the Third Venerable Old men: All which on the way toward one another, Sang
Spiritual Songs; and when St. Columba came in sight of the Bishop, turning
himself to his Disciples, he said, I see a Pillar of Fire, as it were a Golden
Crown, in the third Choire descending upon the Bishop, and casting a Caelestial
Splendour about him: Then the two Holy men approaching to one another with great
fervor of Affection, gave, and received mutual Kisses and Embraces: The King
of the Picts is said to be present at the meeting; and afterward St. Columba
going to a Monastery joining to the Castle of Caledonia built by Convallus,
there instructed the Caledonians in the Faith; the Horesti also, and other
Neighboring Nations: In the same place was afterward Erected a Church
Dedicated to St. Columba, and Plentifully endowed by the following Kings of the
Scots; which Church being an Episcopal See, was vulgarly called Dunkeld: Yet it
may be likely that the Author of this Relation concerning the Church of Dunkeld
may be mistaken, confounding the Actions of two Saints, both Named Columba; for
it is certain that St. Columba, who was first Bishop of Dunkeld, flourished
almost a 100 years after this time, and to him it was that St. Cuthbert being
then a Child was recommended; which mistake is Pardonable, because, as Bishop
Usher observes, There were in Ireland almost 20 several men of the Name Columba.

In the year of Grace 593. St. Kentigern out of Britain, and a Bishop called
Alban out of Ireland went to Rome to visit Pope Gregory the Great; says Bishop
Usher: And as it may be probably guessed at, from a consideration of the state
of the Church in those times, upon this special occasion: The famous Council of
Chalcedon having condemned Eutyches and his Doctrine, which confounded the two
Natures in Christ, was rejected by a Faction of the Eutychians, called
Acephali, because it seemed to them to favor the contrary Heresy of the
Nestorians, formerly condemned, who acknowledged not only two Natures, but two
persons in our Lord. The grounds on which the Acephali charged the Council, was

First, Because it seemed to approve an Epistle of Ibas Bishop of Edessa.

And Secondly, The Writings of Theodorus Bishop of Mopsuestia full of
Blasphemous passages savouring of Nestorianism.

Thirdly, Because it had received into Communion Theodoret Bishop of Cyrrhus,
who had written sharply against the 12 Capita of St. Cyril.

Hereupon the Emperor Justinian being desirous to repress the Acephali, who had
raised great Commotions in Egypt and the East, by the Advice of Theodorus
Bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia, a secret Favorite of the Acephali published a
large Edict, called tria Capitula, in which he proscribed Ibas, Theodius; and
Theodoret, procuring likewise a Condemnation of their Writings as Heretical
from the Bishops of the East. Notwithstanding Menas Bishop of Constantinople,
in his Subscription to the Emperors Decrees, added this Condition, If these
things were approved by the Bishop of Rome: So as Justinian perceiving, that
without the Sentence of the Pope, his attempts would be inneffectual, called
Vigilius, then Bishop of Rome, from thence to Constantinople: Who at his
departure was seriously admonished by the Churches of Rome, Africa, Sardinia,
Greece and Illyricum, That he should by no means consent to any Novelty, nor
suffer any prejudice to the Council of Chalcedon: In compliance with whom, by
Letters to Menas, He freely reprehended their Condemnation of the three
Bishops, desiring Justinian to recall his Decree, and when he came to
Constantinople, he suspended from his Communion the Bishops which had
subscribed the said Condemnation: And yet five Months after, at the request of
the Empress Theodora, he restored them to his Communion: And though he would
not subscribe to the Emperors Decree, by his consent, the whole Cause was
discussed in a Synod of 70 Bishops at Constantinople; and when the Suffrages of
the Bishops were brought to him, he wrote a Decree, which he sent to Menas, in
which also he confirmed the tria Capitula; Howbeit, this Condescension of
Vigilius to avoid a rent in the Eastern Churches, was ill taken in the West;
insomuch, as the Bishops of Africa, Illyricum and Dalmatia, withdrew themselves
from his Communion, and Facundus, who defended their Cause, called him a
Prevaricator: Upon which Vigilius endeavored to persuade the Emperor in the
presence of Menas and other Eastern Bishops, That whatever had passed on either
side, should be rescinded, and that a Synod should be assembled, to which
particularly the African and Illyrian Bishops, who had been scandalized should
be called. But they being unwilling to obey, Vigilius was dealt withal, That in
Case the Western Bishops would not comply; he joining with the Greeks should
condemn the three Bishops: Which he utterly refusing, the Emperor's Decree was
notwithstanding published: And when Vigilius, together with Dacius Bishop of
Milan, threatened the Grecian Bishops with Excommunication, in case they
consented to the Decree; The Emperor was so incensed, that Vigilius was forced
to sly for refuge into St. Peter's Church; from which Sanctuary, when the
Emperor's Officer endeavored to draw him, he was repelled by a Tumult of the
People: But many injuries being still offered to Vigilius, he fled by night to
Chalcedon, into the Church of St. Euphremia. But the constancy of Vigilius
procured this effect, That laying aside the Imperial Edicts, the discussion of
the whole Cause should be reserved to a Synod, which the Pope desired to have
Celebrated in Italy; but the Graecians refusing, it was agreed that an equal
number of Western Bishops should be summoned to Constantinople; which agreement
notwithstanding, the Emperor summoned all the rest of the Eastern Patriarchs:
Thus a Council of Eastern Bishops only met, at which Vigilius refused to be
present, not esteeming it Canonical, in regard the Western Bishops were absent,
who were most concerned in the affair. However, after 20 days respite obtained,
Vigilius sent a writing to the Emperor, which he called a Constitutum, wherein
he at large gave his judgment of the Tria Capitula, telling him, That as to the
Blasphemies of Theodorus, he did abhor them; but in imitation of the Council of
Ephesus, would spare his Name. Again, that it would be superfluous to cast any
infamy on the Writings of Theodoret against St. Cyril; since St. Cyril himself,
and the Council of Chalcedon, had required no other satisfaction from him, but
only to pronounce Anathema, against Nestorius, which he did: And as for the
Epistle of Ibas, no discussion should be made of it, after the Council of
Chalcedon. This Constitutum the Emperor, contrary to his Promise, reserved to
himself; but withal acquainted the Synod, with Vigilius his mind concerning
the Tria Capitula, which he had oftentimes both by words and writing
expressed; the Synod proceeded to a condemnation of them, complaining withal,
That the Pope would not afford his presence to them: After this definition of
the Bishops in the Council, the Pope being in extreme Anguish, because he saw
how the Western Bishops would be offended, and that the Scandal would be the
greater, because the Emperor had not sent his Constitutum to the Council,
utterly refused his Consent or Approbation of their Definition; for which
refusal, he was by the Emperor sent into Banishment with other Bishops. His
Banishment continued not long, for six months after the Synods Definition,
Vigilius sent a Decretal Epistle to Entychius Successor to Menas, in which he
condemned the Tria Capitula, and professed Communion with all those who
embracing the four Councils of the Church had condemned the same, (meaning
thereby the last Council, which he would not Name:) This Decree of Vigilius,
was by the Graecians referred among the Acts of the Council, by virtue whereof
it became a Lawful Ecumenical Council: This end being given to this
unnecessary Controversy; all the Western Churches, excepting only the Bishops
of Istria, Venice and Liguria, consented to it: But these Churches being under
the Dominion of the Longobardi, broke into an open Schism, which continued till
the time of St. Gregory the Great.

Besides them, we find no other Church unsatisfied, except Ireland only; To the
Bishop whereof St. Gregory, a year before St. Kentigern's Journey to Rome,
wrote an Epistle in Answer to one of theirs, who had charged the Roman See,
with injuring the Council of Chalcedon, by condemning the Tria Capitula: But
St. Gregory informed them, That this Controversy did not at all touch the Faith
of the Church, but the Persons only of two or three Bishops: That the Authority
of the Council of Chalcedon was entire, both with those who oppugned, and those
who defended the Tria Capitula, and therefore none could have just cause to
make a rent in the Church, upon so trifling a quarrel. This answer of the
Pope's seems to give satisfaction to the Irish, for several Epistles afterward
past from him to them, as unanimous Brethren, instructing them touching the
Rites in Baptism, and whether it were to be administered to those who returned
from the Nestorian Heresy, etc. This Controversy was hotly agitated when St.
Kentigern went to Rome, and perhaps it might be a considerable motive of his
Journey; especially in regard an Irish Bishop called Albanus, went thither at
the same time. And although the British Churches are no where taxed for
partaking with those who were divided from the Roman See; yet it might well
become the Zeal of so Holy a Bishop as St. Kentigern to inform himself truly of
the state of such a Controversy, as has been therefore the more at large set
down.

The man of God St. Kentigern, after his return from Rome, being worn away with
Age, for he was 85 years old, had his Nerves so dissolved, that he was forced
to sustain his Jaws by tying a linen Ribbon about his Head which came under
his Chin, that with the less trouble he might pronounce his Words: This
dissolution of his Nerves was promised him a little before his Death, to the
end, that since his whole Life had been a continual Martyrdom by the good
pleasure of our Lord, his Death might be milder and easier, then that of other
men ordinarily. At length calling together his Disciples, he earnestly exhorted
them, To continue their observance of the Duties of their Holy Religion, their
mutual Charity, Peace, Hospitality, their diligence in Reading and Prayer. He
bequeathed to them earnest and efficacious Precepts, firmly to obey the Decrees
of the Holy Fathers, and constitutions of the Holy Roman Church: After which
exhortation, he departed to our Lord. The Fame of his Sanctity soon after his
Death was every where spread by a World of Miracles, as many Authors relate.

Constantine beforementioned being dead, or removed, Aurelius Conanus his
Nephew, a Young man of extraordinary worth and well deserving the Crown, as
some report, succeeded him: His only fault was, that he was given to Civil
Contentions: He cast into Prison his Uncle, to whom the Crown of Right
belonged, and Murdered two of his Sons, who stood in his way to the Kingdom;
which Ambition and Cruelty perhaps occasioned some of our Historians to charge
him with the Murder of Constantine his Predecessor: Gildas also accuses him of
many horrid Crimes, for which he denounces to him a short reign and endless
miseries. Matthew of Westminster allows him 30 years rule; but true Chronology,
not above four; in the third whereof, while the British Provinces consumed
themselves in Civil Contentions, a new and Powerful Kingdom of the Saxons was
established in the Northern parts, called the Kingdom of Northumbers; in this
manner Hengist in the beginning of his reign in Kent, sent his Brother Otha
into those Northern parts, with his Son Ebusa, men of great Courage, Experience
and Nobility, as deriving their Descent from Woden, who had three Sons,
Weldege, Withlege and Beldege; from the Eldest descended the Kings of Kent,
from the Second the Kings of the Mercians, and from the Third the Kings of the
West Saxons and Northumbers, whose first King Ida, reckoned himself the Tenth
from Woden: Now Otha and Ebussa the first Saxons which brought an Army into
those Northern parts, fought many Battles with the Inhabitants; and having
Conquered those which resisted them, took the rest into their Protection;
notwithstanding, they and their Successors for many years contented themselves
with the Titles of Governors or Dukes, acknowledging a Submission unto, and
Dependence upon the Kings of Kent; but in the 99th. year after their first
arrival, they assumed the Title and Dignity of Kings; the first of which was
called Ida; others affirm, that the Region of Northumbers was divided into two
parts. That which was more Northern, extending it self from the Bay of
Edinburgh to the Picts Wall, inhabited by the Bernicians; the other reaching
from the Picts Wall to the River Humber, was held by the Deiri, so that the
whole Kingdom of the Northumbers Anciently contained the Provinces of the
Picts; Laudon, Northumberland, Cumberland, Westmorland, Durham, York and
Lancaster. This may appear by the Lives of several Saints, said to have lived
in the Kingdom of the Northumbrians. This Division is said to have been made by
Ida, who leaving his Son to govern the Deiri, fixed his own habitation among
the Bernicians.

Aurelius Conanus dying in the fourth year of his reign, Vortipor Prince of the
Dimetae succeeded him: By Gildas he is Styled, A Tyrant, who in his Old Age
ascended the Throne by Civil Discords, being a wicked Son of a good Prince,
defiled by many Parricides and Adulteries; who thinking to rid himself of his
Lawful Wife, wallow'd in Lust with her Impudent Daughter, and thereupon he
exhorts him by a timely Repentance to avert Gods Judgments. His reign likewise
lasting only four years, his Throne was Invaded by Malgo Conanus, or
Maglocunus, a Prince no less Vicious than his Predecessor, for he is said to
have Murdered his Uncle, Prince of Venedocia, called Catwallain, with the
greatest part of his Nobility. This is the same Maglocunus, who afforded to St.
Kentigern a place for a Church and Monastery, and after being tormented with a
remorse for his Parricides, he relinquished the World and retired into a
Monastery, where he undertook a Monastical Profession: But the Sparks of
Ambition thus covered, broke forth again into a flame; so that quitting his
Solitude, he returned to all his former Crimes, and became an Insular Dragon,
depressing other Tyrants, and by strengthening himself with their Power, became
the greatest Tyrant.

In the second year of his reign, a great Battle was Fought between the
Britains and Kenric King of the West Saxons, near Sorbiodunum, or Salisbury; in
which Combat, after much Bloodshed, the Britains were at last forced to fly:
Four years after the Britains Thirsting to avenge themselves of this Defeat,
gathered together all their best Forces, against whom Cenric with his Son
Ceaulin Marched: The Armies met in the Province of the Dobuni or Oxfordshire at
Banbury: The Britains divided their Armies into nine Bodies, three of which
they placed in the Front, three in the midst, and three in the Rear: The
Saxons, though inferior in numbers, yet exceeded them in Stature and Length,
and Fought all in one Body: The Combat was Bloody, continuing till night,
doubtful it was, which had the better: After which, many Battles past between
them, wherein for the most part, the Victory fell to the West Saxons; while the
Britains and Saxons contended in the West, the Picts beyond the Frith of
Edinburgh, made Bridius their King, who was Nephew to Loath their former King.

In the ninth year of Bridius St. Columba came out of Ireland into Britain,
being the year of Grace 565. The year following died the Tyrant Maglocunus,
after whom Careticus took upon him to sustain the State of Britain, every day
more and more falling to ruin; but with ill success; for besides, that God had
fixed a Period to that State, this Prince proved no better than his
Predecessors, but like them stained with all Vices. Gildas seems to give a
shameful Character to several Princes, by his manner of writing, most of them
seem to have reigned in several Provinces at the same time: For besides this
Bridius, he directs the point of his sharp Style against one named Lunegasla,
by interpretation the Yellow Lion, whom he accuses of all sorts of Crimes,
Impiety against God, and Savage Cruelty to his Subjects, repudiating his Lawful
Wife, and violating his Sister, who after Widdowhood, had vowed Chastity to
God; and by many injuries afflicting Holy men and Priests, who ceased not to
offer up their Sighs and Prayers for him: Gildas therefore exhorts him, To
change his Life, that he might reap the benefit of their Prayers, who had Power
to bind in Heaven, what they had bound in this World, and to loose such as were
Penitent. Now by the Impieties of these Princes, the Reader may observe the
Justice of Gods severity against so wicked a Nation, from which he took the
Spiritual Kingdom of Christ, and bestowed it upon a People which brought forth
better fruits: Yet out of this Dunghill of Vices some Pearls were to be
gathered; for here we find the Wise Gildas commending a perpetual vow of
Chastity, made not only by Virgins, but by Widows also; the infringing of
which Vow he bitterly inveighs against, and acknowledges in Gods Priests a
Power of retaining and absolving Sinners not by way of Declaration only, but of
Authority and Jurisdiction also.

In the year 559. died Ida King of the Northumbrians, to whom succeeded his Son
Alla, whose Empire extended both over the Deiri and Bernicians; yet were there
in some of those Provinces British Princes, who called themselves Kings, though
in Dependence on him: Such as Morken King of the Cumbrians, which Dependant
Princes had upon Treaty a promissive Authority in their peculiar Provinces.

This Age affords an example of the Zeal and Authority of a Holy Bishop
exercised Synodically, and of a Princes Devout submission to this Authority:
The Bishops name was St. Oudoceus, Son of Anaumeda, Sister of St. Thelian, and
Budit a Prince of Little Britain: This Saint Oudoceus from his Infancy was
addicted to Piety, assiduous in Fasting, Watching and Prayer for an everlasting
reward: In Devotion he Visited the Monuments of St. Peter at Rome, and at his
return he went to the place of St. David, and from thence he diverted to the
Church of St. Thelian, taking with him certain Relics, which during his
Pilgrimages he had obtained: Afterward he succeeded St. Thelian in the
Bishopric of Landaff, imitating him in his Doctrine, Virtue and Miracles: As
for the Prince submitting to the Authority of this Holy man, his Name was
Mouric Son of Theodoric Prince of Glamorganshire; who being weary of Worldly
Vanities, undertook a Monastical Profession, and served Almighty God in
Solitude, having transferred his Principality on his Son Mouric; into which he
was no sooner entered, but the Saxons broke into his Country, and began to
waste it. Whereupon the Inhabitants repaired to their former Prince Theoderic,
whom they even compelled to quit his Desert; and to be their General in the
War: He full of Divine Courage encountered the Infidel Enemies, whom he put to
flight at Tintern near the River Vaga: But having received a Mortal Wound in
the Combat, he returned homeward, and gave Charge to his Son Mouric, That in
what place soever he should end his Life, he should there build a Church to
God, and a Sepulcher for himself: And so not having passed five Miles, at a
place where Vaga and Severn met, he gave up his Spirit. There did his Son
Mouric Erect a Church, wherein he laid his Fathers Body, whom Posterity
Venerated as a Saint, calling the place from his Name Merther Tendric, at this
day more contractedly Merthern: In the same place is seated (says Bishop
Godwin) the House and Possessions of the Bishop of Landaff; Adding, That Mouric
first of his own accord gave to that Church a Farm called Mochros, lying on the
Banks of the River Vaga, together with the Porthasseg and the Church of Gurvid:
And after for the expiation of a Murder, committed by him on a person called
Cynetu, contrary to a League by Oath contracted between them, he added other
Possessions: He had two Sons Arthruis and Frior, and by Arthruis a Grandchild
called Morcant: This is that Prince Mouric, and this the Crime against which
Bishop Oudoceus exercised his Spiritual Authority, as appears by the Acts of a
Synod of Landaff, lately rescued from Darkness and Worms, by our diligent
Antiquary Sir Henry Spelman, where is declared by that Synod assembled by St.
Oudoceus third Bishop of Landaff, That in the year of Grace 560. Mouric King of
Glamorgan, for his Perfidious Murdering of Cynetu was Excommunicated: King
Mauric and Cynetu met together at Landaff, and in the presence of St. Oudoceus,
Swore before the Relics of Saints there before them, that they would observe a
firm Peace between them; some space after this Solemn Oath, King Mauric by
Treachery slew Cynetu: Whereupon Bishop Oudoceus called together all
Ecclesiastics from the mouth of Taratyrenguy to Tivy, together with three
Abbots, Cosen Abbot of the Valley of Garben, Cargen Abbot of Ildute, and
Sulgen Abbot of Docquini, and in a full Synod, did Excommunicate King Mouric,
for the Murder, by him committed, and for Perjury in transgressing the Covenant
made in his presence, and on the Altar of St. Peter the Apostle, and of St.
Dubritius and St. Thelian; moreover, inclining the Crosses toward the ground,
he interdicted the Countries of Mauric, and so dismissed the King: The
Christian Communion also Cursed the King with his Progeny, the whole Synod
confirming it, saying, Let his days be few, his Children Orphans, and his Wife
a Widow: The King remaining with his whole Region the space of two years, and
more, thus Excommunicated: After being sensible of the Perdition of his own
Soul, and the damnation of his whole Kingdom, he could no longer sustain so
dreadful an Excommunication, but humbly begged Pardon at Landaff of Bishop
Oudoceus; who therefore in the presence of three Abbots imposed on him the yoke
of Penance, proportionable to the quality and hainousness of his Crimes; the
King all the while humbly inclining his Head, and shedding Tears abundantly;
His Penance was to satisfy God, By Fasting, Prayers and Alms; King Mauric
undertook the yoke of Penance, and for the Redemption of his own Soul, and the
Soul of Cynetu, he gave to the Church of Landaff and the Bishops thereof, four
Villages, with their entire liberty, free from all service forever; with Common
through his Country for the Inhabitants of those Villages, in all Fields,
Woods, Pastures and Waters: These four Villages contain 24 Modii of Land: The
first is called Kirgracnauc, the second Nantavo; the third a Village beyond
Kadava, where Cynetu was slain; the fourth a Village beyond Nadava, called
Gudberdh. This was the form of the first Synod of Landaff, out of which we may
collect much of the Religion and Discipline of that Age: The same Bishop
Oudoceus, for very like causes Assembled two Synods more extant in Sir Henry
Spelman, the occasions whereof, and proceedings wherein, here briefly follow:
King Morcant and his Uncle Frioc, in the presence of St. Oudoceus and the three
fore-nam'd Abbots at the Poduim, or Church of St. Ildutus, took their Oaths at
the Holy Altar, on which were placed the Relics of Saints, That they would
observe Peace and Amity together without any guile; adding, That if either of
them, should Kill or commit Treachery against the other, he should not redeem
his Crime by Money or Lands, but should be obliged to quit his Kingdom, and
spend his whole Life in Foreign Pilgrimages: A good while after which Covenant
made, Morcant by the instigation of the Devil slew his Uncle, but soon after
came to the Holy Bishop Oudoceus, and humbly craved Pardon for his Homicide and
Perjury: The Bishop thereupon Assembled a Synod at the Monastery of the Vale of
Carban, to which came all the Clergy, and King Morcant also, with the principal
persons of Glamorganshire: The Synod unwilling to be deprived of their Natural
Lord, gave judgment, that the King should redeem his Pilgrimage with Alms,
Prayers and Fasting; which Penance the King laying his Hands on the four
Gospels and Relics of Saints undertook to perform; promising withal, that
ever after he would in all things mercifully execute Justice. The Penance
finished, and the King restored to Christian Communion; he presently proclaimed
the Churches of Catoc, Ildut and Docunni free from all Regal Service. Thus was
the second Synod: The third was Assembled many years after upon this occasion,
A certain British Prince named Guidnerth, in a Contention for the Principality
slew his Brother Mercheen; for which he was Excommunicated by St. Oudoceus in a
full Synod; in testimony of which Excommunication the Crosses were taken down,
and the Cimbals were turned; thus he remained excluded from Christian Communion
for the space of three years; at the end of which, demanding Pardon, he was
sent into the lesser Britain to St. Sampson Archbishop of Dole, from him to
receive judgment and suitable Penance: This was done, partly because of the
great Amity between these Bishops, but chiefly because the same Language being
spoken in both Countries, he would the more freely discover his fault, and
require Indulgence for the same: This Voyage was undertaken by Guidnerth, who
having obtained Absolution, he returned with Letters Sealed by St. Sampson
before the year was ended; but because he had not according to his Injunction
remained a whole year in Exile, the Bishop would not take off his
Excommunication; presently after St. Oudoceus died, to whom Berthguin succeeded
in the Bishopric of Landaff: To him King Morcant and Guidnerth made an carnest
request, to take off the said Excommunication, and to raise again from the
Earth the Crosses and Cimbals with the Holy Relics: Whereupon, after a promise
made by Guidnerth, to make satisfaction for his Crime by Fasting, Prayers and
Alms, he was at last with great Devotion and many Tears shed, Absolved by the
Bishop: After which Guidnerth, to testify his Gratitude, gave to the Church of
Landaff these Lands Lanu, Catigual and Tie, with all the Woods and Seacoasts,
etc. Bishop Godwin affirms this third Synod to be Celebrated by another Bishop
of Landaff, and that Guidnerth the Fratricide gave Lancadwallader, now called
Bishton or Bishopston to the Church of Landaff; Which Manor, (he says) is the
only Manor that is left to that See.

The Author of the Life of St. Oudoceus relates, That he quitted his Pastoral
Cure, and built a Monastery near the River Weye; and there Assembling a great
multitude of Brethren, spent the remainder of his Life, which lasted many
years, in wonderful Abstinence and Sanctity; So as it may seem this third Synod
was not held in his days. We often have had occasion to draw Testimonies from
our famous Historian Gildas, Sir-named Badonicus and Sapiens, called also the
Younger Gildas, to distinguish him from Gildas Albanius beforementioned.

Now because we are come beyond the times of those Princes, who have been
painted out by him in their foul colors, it will be necessary to say what may
be found of this our Younger Gildas: By his own Testimony, he was born in the
same year, when the great Battle was Fought at the Mountain called Badonicus
between the Britains and Saxons in the time of Aurelius Ambrosius; to which
Mountains the Saxons retiring, were Besieged by the Britains, and after in a
Battle discomfited; this happened in the year of Grace 493. forty years after
the first entrance of the Saxons into Britain. This Gildas is affirmed by the
Author of his Life, To be the Disciple of Iltutus, and leaving him to have gone
into Ireland, He remained four years under the Discipline and Instruction of
St. Iltutus; and having passed through the Schools of many Learned Teachers in
Ireland, and like a diligent Be collected the Juice of diverse Flowers, he laid
it up carefully in the Hive of our Mother the Church, to the end he might in
opportune season, pour forth the Mellifluous Doctrine of the Gospel to his own
Countrymen, and thereby draw them out of Misery to Eternal Joys, and like a
good Servant, restore unto his Lord the Talent entrusted with him. In this
Island (says Bishop Usher) there flourished in this Age the Schools of Armagh,
wherein the Elder Gildas presided, when he Piously labored in Cultivating the
minds of the Irish; in which employment probably this our Younger Gildas
succeeded him; and here not only collected sweet Juice, but got a sharp sting
also; which he after darted forth against the Vices of his own Country: However
in Ireland he restored Discipline to the Ecclesiastical Order; he gathered many
Congregations of Monks, and mercifully delivered many Captives from the slavery
of Pagans. After his return into Britain, it seems he found small comfort or
encouragement to pour forth the Honey which he had gathered in Ireland, for he
found in this Island, such Calamities and Confusions their reigning; such a
Contention of wickedness and misery, which should exceed the other; that almost
his whole employment was to bewail the approaching destruction of his Country,
and by publishing the Crimes, especially of the Rulers, as well in Church as
State, to justify the Severity of God, being in truth beneath their demerits
and provocations: Howbeit, he was by a double invitation from Ireland,
interrupted in his sad Thoughts, and withdrawn from beholding such mournful
Spectacles, as every where in Britain offered themselves to his Eyes. The first
Message about the year of our Lord 562. came from persons of quality in
Ireland, who sent an Epistle to him; at the same time he received an Epistle
also from St. Columba, whom he very much esteemed for his Sanctity. The second
Message or invitation was directed to him from a King in Ireland named Ammeric,
who requested this our Gildas, To come to him, promising that if he would
undertake the Journey, and restore to good Order the Ecclesiastics of his
Kingdom, wherein generally the Catholic Faith was decayed, both himself and
his Subjects would in all things be Obedient to him. St. Gildas hearing this,
like a Valiant Soldier thoroughly furnished with Caelestial Arms, presently went
into Ireland, there to Preach the Gospel of Christ: Being come thither, he was
presented to the King by some Noble persons who were acquainted with him. The
King gave him many gifts, and entreated him to stay some time, and restore
Order to that Region, because the Inhabitants had in a manner lost the
Christian Faith: St. Gildas as thereupon Traveling through all the Provinces
of Ireland, restored Churches, instructed the Clergy in the true Faith and
Worship of the Holy Trinity, Cured those who had been Poisoned with Heresy, and
expelled all Teachers of Error; So that by his zeal and diligence, Truth
became again to flourish in the Country: After this the Holy man built many
Monasteries in the Country, and instructed the Children of the Nobility in
Learning and Piety; and to win the greater number to the service of God, he
himself became a Monk, and brought to the same Profession very many, as well of
the Nobility, as others; and also he compassionately freed many poor Christians
from the slavery of Infidels, and so became a second Apostle to Ireland,
repairing the ruins of that Faith, which St. Patrick first Preached amongst
them. Now whereas it is said, that the first Epistle to St. Gildas was brought
by Faithful men, it is very probable, that the Holy Abbot Komgall was one of
those Faithful men. How long St. Gildas abode in Ireland is uncertain, but it
is certain, that the great work he there performed, could not be completed in
a short time, and yet that he returned into Britain, where he died in a good
Old Age, in the Monastery of Banchor, after he had lived ninety years. What
Bishop Usher refers to the former St. Gildas may reasonably be applied to this
latter, namely, that St. Brendan the Son of Finloga in the year of our Lord
562. came into Britain to visit the Holy old man Gildas, famous for his Wisdom,
this our latter Gildas at that time being above 70. years old.

In the year of Grace 561. Irmeric King of Kent died, after he had reigned 30.
years, leaving behind him a Son and Daughter; his Son and Successors Name was
Ethelbert, his Daughters Ricula: This is that famous Ethelbert, who, according
to his Name was the Glory and Splendour of this Nation, who had the first
Prerogative among the Saxons, of receiving and propagating the Christian Faith.
Some disposition thereunto, began it seems in his Fathers time, who permitted
at least a private exercise of Christian Religion: Thirty years of Ethelbert's
reign were never the less spent, before it was openly professed; during which
time he was frequently exercised in War; wherein at first he sustained great
losses, which after he repaired by many Victories, with which he much enlarged
the limits of his Dominions. In the third year of his reign St. Columba by
occasion of Civil Wars, was compelled to quit Ireland, and come into Britain,
as Adelmannus who wrote his Life relates in this manner. Some time after the
Civil War at Culedrebene, when Dermitius Son of Kerbail was Monarch of Ireland,
and all business was determined before the Kings Tribunal; it happened so, that
St. Columba was obliged to appear before him, to challenge a certain Freeman
who had been made Captive; and when the Cause being pleaded before the King, an
unjust Sentence had been pronounced by him; the man of God rose up with great
indignation, and before all there present, told the unrighteous King, That from
that moment, he should never see his face more, 'till God the just judge shall
have diminished his Kingdom for his Injustice; for ( says he) as thou have
despised me here before thy Nobles by an unjust Judgment, so shall the Eternal
God despise thee, before thine enemies in the day of War. And having said thus,
he presently took Horse, smiting him with his Whip, so as the Blood issued from
him: This being observed by the Kings Counselors present, they wondered at it,
and humbly entreated the King to comply with the Holy man's request, least God
should dissipate his Kingdom according to the man of Gods threatening: But the
King filled with fury would not understand, that he might do right; but swore,
he would take revenge of the Kingdred of St. Columba, and make them all slaves.
And in pursuance of his Oath, he gathered a mighty Army, 23000 of Horse, Foot
and Charriots, and with it marched to the Confines of that Country whither St.
Columba went; with resolution utterly to extirpate the Inhabitants: When
therefore the People of Conal heard of the Kings coming, they likewise
assembled the number of 3000. resolving to Fight manfully in defense of their
Country, being in so great danger, and placing all their hope in God alone. St.
Columba rose very early, and being full of Gods Spirit, encouraged them, and
with a loud voice, which sounded terribly through the whole Army, he said to
them, Fear nothing, God himself shall Fight for you, as he did with Moses
against the Egiptians at the red Sea; not any of you shall suffer the least
harm, for our Lords wrath is inflamed, against the proud Kings Army: So that if
one only person shall in the Name of God, give the Assault, He alone by the
Power of God, shall put them to slight. Be Courageous therefore, not a man of
you shall fall in this Combat. When he had spoken this, which his Army believed
as an assurance from Heaven; a few of his Soldiers, the same moment with
wonderful Courage, rushed upon their Enemies, who expected them not: And at the
same time, an Angel of God armed like a Soldier, and in the shape of a man, of
an incredible high Stature, appeared in the Kings Camp: His Aspect was so
terrible, that the Soldiers Hearts utterly failed them, and instead of
resisting their Enemies, fell one upon another, in have to fly away; and such a
confusion there was of Chariots and Horses, that they killed one another: So
that a handful of men, without any loss, defeated a great Army, taking many
Prisoners. After this wonderful victory, the man of God addressed his Speech to
a young man named Scandalan, with a Prophetic voice, saying, My Son, this day
will procure for me a tedious Pilgrimage, in a strange Country, where I must
live from my Friends many years; but say nothing of what I tell thee, 'till the
event show the truth of my words. After this St. Columba went to St. Finian, or
St. Findbar, a Bishop to receive condign Penance from him because of so much
Bloodshed in the said War; and it is said an Angel of God went with him,
shining with wonderful brightness, but was visible to none but St. Finian: The
Penance enjoined by this Holy Bishop to St. Columba was, That by Preaching and
Example, he should bring as many Souls to Heaven, as by occasion of that War,
were sunk to Hell: After which Sentence, St. Columba with great joy declared,
That the judgment pronounced against him was equal and just: Howbeit this Holy
man's Troubles did not end thus, for he was censured in a Synod of Bishops, to
abstain from the Communion, though not without the dissent of many in it;
insomuch as great contentions and disputes arose among the Clergy; for the
composing whereof, St. Columba himself sent a Letter to St. Gildas. St. Columba
wearied with these Ecclesiastical contentions, resolved to quit his Native
Country; but not permitted to choose his place of Exile, he by a Messenger
consulted the Holy man St. Brendan Abbot of Birre, to whom God had given the
Spirit of Council and Discretion: who after he had lifted his Eyes and Heart to
Heaven, commanded to dig under the feet of the Messenger, where was found a
stone, on which was Engraven only the letter I, whereupon he bad the Messenger
to tell his Master, That he must go to an Island called J or Hy, where he
should find employment for his Zeal, and be the cause of bringing many Souls to
Heaven. But Hector Boethius assigns another cause of his going into that
Country, saying, The fame of the great Devotion and Piety of Conal King of the
Picts drew St. Columba out of Ireland into Britain, attended with a multitude
of his Disciples, where he became the Father and Director of many Monasteries.
This Island falsely named in some Copies, was at last called Iona: In some
Copies also this St. Columba is confounded with that St. Columbanus, who being
also an Irish man, founded several Monasteries in France and Italy; by the
Britains St. Columba is usually called St. Columkill, for the great number of
Cells, which he built in Britain. The Author of his Life, after he had extolled
him for many Virtues and Austerities, relates a Prophecy of him to this effect,
That a certain Disciple of St. Patrick named Macceus, foretold of him, that in
latter times should be born one called Columba, who should illustrate the Age
wherein he should live, and be highly favored of God: He should descend from
Noble Parents, and in the 45th. year of his Age should pass over out of Ireland
into Britain, where he should live a Stranger in Exile for Christ. S. Bid
relates, That in the 565. year of our Lord, when Justinus the Son of Justinian
governed the Roman Empire, there came out of Ireland a certain Priest and Abbot
called Columba, with an intention to Preach the word of God to the Northern
Picts, whoare separated from the Southern Region by vast and horrible
Mountains. For as for the Picts dwelling on the South of those Mountains, they
had many years before renounced their Idolatry, and embraced the Christian
Faith, as their Tradition is, by the Preaching of Nynias, a most Reverend and
Holy Bishop born in Britain, who had been Regularly instructed in the Mysteries
of Divine Truth at Rome: The seat of whose Bishopric dignified with a Church
Dedicated to St. Martin, where the said Holy Bishop with many other Saints does
rest, is now in the possession of the Angli: The place pertaining to the
Province of the Bernicians, is ordinarily called Candida Casa, or White-House,
because a Church was there built of Hewn-stone, a way of Building not practiced
by the Britains.

Now Columba came into Britain in the 9th. year of the reign of Bridius the Son
of Meilochon, the most Powerful King of the Picts, and by his Preaching and
Example, Converted that Nation to the Faith of Christ; so that for a reward he
received the Island Hy or Iona for the Possession of a Monastery: The Isle is
but small, of about five Families: His Successors long held it, himself was
buried in it, being 70 years of Age, after he had spent above 32 years in it.
This Holy man before his coming into Britain, had Founded a Monastery of great
Note in Ireland, named in that Tongue Dearmach, or the Field of Oaks, for the
abundance of them there growing; and from these two Monasteries of Hy and
Dearmach many others were propagated in Ireland and Britain by his Disciples.
Among all which, notwithstanding the Monastery of Hy, in which his Sacred Body
resided, had the Pre-eminence and chief Authority: Now the said Island is
usually governed by an Abbot who is a Priest, to whose Jurisdiction the whole
Province, and even Bishops themselves, by a custom no where else practiced,
ought to be subject according to the example of their first Teacher S Columba,
who was only a Priest and Monk, and no Bishop: Of whose Life and Sayings, many
strange things are extant, compiled by his Disciples, but what manner of man
soever he was, sure we are he left Successors famous for their great
Continency, Divine Love, and Regular Institution: The Companions to St.
Columba, are said to be twelve, who came with him into Albion, eminently indu'd
with the Doctrine of Christ, and adorned with great Sanctity; their Names were
Bathemius and Cominus, afterward Superiors over Monasteries, and no mean
Ornaments of the Christian Church among the Scots: Also Cibthacus and Ethernau
Nephews to St. Columba and Priests: Moreover Domitius, Rutius and Fethuo, men
Illustrious for their Descent, but more for their Piety: Lastly, Scandalaus,
Eglodeus, Totaueus, Moteser and Gallan: These men after Traveled through the
Region of the Scots and Pict, and by their labor in Teaching, Disputing and
Writing, imbued both those Nations with virtuous Manners and true Religion. The
Scottish Writers add one Companion more to St. Columba; namely St. Constantine
formerly King of the Britains, who repenting his Crimes sharply reproved by
Gildas, became a Monk, and went with St. Columba into Scotland, where he
Preached the Faith to the Scots and Picts: He built a Monastery in Govane near
the River Cluid, which he governed as Abbot: He is said to have Converted to
the Faith the whole Province of Kentire, where he likewise died a Martyr, and
was buried in his Monastery in Govan.

The King who bestowed the Isle of Hy upon St. Columba, and by the eminence of
his Piety drew him thither, is said to be St. Comgal or Conval King of
Dalrieda. At the same time, not far from St. Columba, lived St. Kentigern,
lately returned to his Bishopric of Glasco; to whom no doubt St. Columba was
an Officious assistant in his Apostolic Office. Of the Solemn meeting of these
two Saints, with their Disciples, we have already spoken: That there was a
perfect agreement between these two Saints and their Disciples, is no doubt,
and between them and St. Augustine also, except in one Rite or Ceremony, about
the time of keeping Easter: Upon which inconsiderable difference, some would
infer that the British Churches received their Faith from the Eastern Churches,
and not from Rome: St. Columba having spent more then 30 years, in this Place
and Service, he impatiently begged of God to end his Pilgrimage; after his
Prayer ended, he saw in a Vision, certain Angels approaching to him, to conduct
his Soul to Heaven, which sight was so joyful to him, that his Disciples took
notice of it: But this sight was soon turned into sorrow, for the Angels told
him, That upon the Prayers of the Pictish Churches, God had added four years
more to his Life: At last in the year of Grace 597. the same year St. Angustine
came into Britain, this Holy man died, and his Holy body was buried in the
Monastery of Hy, from whence it was after translated, or a great part of it
into Ireland, and reposed in the Church of Dun-Patrick, by an Inscription on
his Monument it is signified, That in that one Tomb three Saints, St. Patrick,
St. Bridget and St. Columba did repose.

Hitherto the Saxon Princes had employed their Forces to the destruction of the
Britains, but now finding little resistance from them, turned their Arms
against one another: For three years after the coming of St. Columba into
Britain, Ceaulin and Cutha moved a Civil war against Ethelbert, which Ethelbert
the rather entered into, because the Power of Ceaulin so much increased, that
he took upon him the Title of Monarch: Hereupon Ethelbert a Valiant Young
Prince, mindful of the Glory of his Ancestors, who had always enjoyed a
Pre-eminence above other Princes, resolved to keep it: And raising an Army,
marched with it into the Province of the Regni or Surry; where passing unwarily
over a little River called Wandalis, he was rudely repulsed by Ceaulin; but
endeavoring again to march forward, the Armies met at a Village called
Wibbandun, now Wimbledon, where he was with a great slaughter of his men
compelled to fly back into Kent, having lost his two chief Captains Oslaf and
Kneban: Where this Battle was fought, still remains as a Monument of it, a
Rampire raised in a round form, as encompassing a Camp, called Knebensbury:
Ethelbert after his loss, sought to strengthen himself by a Friendship and
Confederacy with the Neighboring Powerful Kingdom of the Franks; to make which
Confederacy more lasting, he desired to confirm it by Marriage, which he
effected: This Kingdom heretofore was called Gaul, but afterward the Franks, a
German Nation under their King Pharamond invading it, and possessing the
greatest part of it, changed the Name from Gaul to France: The Successors of
Pharamond for several Generations were Pagans, till by St. Remigius Bishop of
Rhemes in the year of Grace 499. King Clodoveus was Converted to the Christian
Faith, and with him the greatest part of his Kingdom, which Faith ever after
continued and increased there: This Kingdom of the Franks was at that time
governed by four Kings Sons of Clotharius; a Daughter of one of which Kings
Elthelbert Married, named Berta, Gregory calls her Aldiberga, to whom he
attributes the Conversion of the the Saxons: Her Parents, not without some
difficulty, delivered their Christian Daughter to the Bed of a Pagan, but had
an engagement from Ethelbert to allow Her and her Family an entire freedom in
Religion; and so the Marriage was concluded. The Lady was accompanied into
Britain by a Prudent and Devout Bishop, called Lethardus, who is Styled, The
Percursor to St. Augustine, and one who opened the door to Christianity here:
There were then in Doroberni or Canterbury several Churches, which had been
built by Christians many Ages before, in the times of the Romans, and were not
utterly demolished by the Saxons; amongst which the Queen made choice of that
which had been Dedicated to the Honor of St. Martin, and stood Eastward of the
City: The Author of Life of this Bishop Lethardus, tells us, what Devotions
this Queen performed in this Church, viz. That she and her Family frequented
the Sacraments of Masses and Prayers, in the Celebrating whereof, the Blessed
Bishop Lethardus was President, or chief Priest: The saying or singing of
Masses, were the Solemn Devotion of the Church in those times, as appears by
the Councels of Orleans and Tours Celebrated in these very times; insomuch as
St. Columba by Revelation, knowing the death of St. Brendan in Ireland,
Celebrated a Solemn Mass for his Soul.

In the year of Grace 571. Cuthulf the Brother of King Ceaulin fought with the
Britains at Bedanford now Bedford; and having obtained the Victory, he took
from them four Royal Cities, Linganburgh, a place now unknown, Egelsburgh now
Ailesburgh in Buckinghamshire; Bensingtun or Benson in Oxfordshire, and also
Egnesham now unknown: After which Victory Cuthulf departed this life. In the
year 575. the Kingdom of the East Angles was Erected, in Norfolk, Suffolk,
Cambridgeshire and the Isle of Ely; the Name of the first King was Offa, from
whom his Successors and Subjects were called Vffings: Some place Kings in this
Region before Offa's time; if such were, they seem to be Dependant and upon
Courtesy, as after they were again Beneficiarii sometimes of the Kentish
Kings, sometimes of the Mercians: Two years after the beginning of Offa's
reign, was fought a Battle fatal to the Britains, by which they were expelled
almost out of all the fertile Plains of this Island, and driven to the
Mountains of Wales. The Britains had hitherto defended themselves in their
Cities of Gloucester, Cirencester and Bath; but this year Ceaulin after an
overthrow given in Battle, expugn'd those three Cities and forced the Britains
to retire into mountains and Woods: This Battle (says Cambden) was fought at a
place called Deorham, after which the City of Bath was given up to the Saxons;
And in this Battle, it is said, three Christian Kings of the Britains were
slain, whose Names were Comagil, Candigan and Faringmagil, so that Ceaulin
became so terrible to the Britains, that all places hast'ned to render
themselves to their Power: Nevertheless the Britains after seven years rest,
again attempted another Combat with the Saxons, at a place called Fedhanlea,
where on both sides they fought with horrible fury: Insomuch as Cuthwin the Son
of Ceaulin being oppressed with multitudes, was slain: But Ceaulin having
repaired his Army, the Soldiers whereof bound themselves by Oath not to fly, at
last in Battle vanquished the Conquering Britains, and pursuing them, too many
Provinces and innumerable Spoils.

In the year of Grace 585. the Kingdom of the Mercians took beginning under
their first King Croeda or Crida, though its foundation might be laid sooner:
This Crida reckoned himself the tenth in Descent from Woden the Idol Diety of
the Saxons: And whereas the others possessed themselves of the outward parts of
Britain, this Crida pierced into the Bowels of it, by little and little
possessing himself of all the Provinces toward the North, confined with the
Rivers Humber and Mersey, on the South with the Thames, on the East with Severn
and Deva, on the West with the German Ocean: The Britains themselves by a
voluntary Cession made Crida's way very easy to his new erected Throne, in
which he as yet sat contented with the inferior title of Governor or Duke:
For the Saxons being now dispersed through all the parts of Britain, and every
day gaining more strength, became intollerably burdensome to the poor Britains;
and being Infidels, published Laws extremely prejudicial to Christian Religion:
Whereupon by agreement between the Clergy and other British Inhabitants,
hitherto mixed with the Saxons, they resolved to quit the Country, and to
retire, some to the Mountains of Wales, some into Cornwall, others to Little
Britain and other Christian Regions: Then it was, to wit, in the year of our
Lord 586. that the Arch-Prelates Theonus Bishop of London and Thadioc or
Theodoc of York, seeing all their Churches levelled with the ground, attended
with many Ecclesiastics, sled into Wales, and carried with them the Sacred
Relics of Saints, least by an irruption of the Barbarous Saxons, the Sacred
Bones of so many and so great Saints, should be destroyed. So that the
Provinces of Loegria and Northumbria were utterly deprived of Christian
Congregations: Upon the Bodies of some Saints reverently hid in Monuments,
great heaps of Earth were cast, least they should be obnoxious to the
contumelious scorn of Insidels; for the Kings of the Angli and Saxons, as they
were very Powerful in Arms, so were they malicious Pagans, thirsting after
nothing more then the disgrace of Christ, and the Subversion of his Worship,
wherever they subdued a Country, if any Church were left untouched they
turned it into a Temple of their Profane Idols; with their Impious Sacrifices
polluting the Altars of the true God.

Concerning this Theonus Archbishop of London, he was formerly Bishop of
Gloucester, and from thence translated to London in the year 553. and in the
year 586. with his whole Clergy fled, as is said, into his own Country.
Afterward the Metropolitical Dignity was transferred to Canterbury from London,
as shall hereafter be declared. And never after the departure of Theodoc, do we
read of any other Archbishop of York, 'till by the Conversion of Edwin Son of
Alla King of the Northumbrians, St. Paulinus was there Consecrated Archbishop:
By the Secession and flight of the British Clergy and other Inhabitants, there
remained the miserable Relics of the Britains in three Provinces only, namely,
in Cornwall, stretching forth it self like a Horn into the Sea, in South Wales
and North Wales; with these narrow limits they were forced to be content;
nevertheless they never departed from the true Faith of Christ: One thing there
is indeed for which they are justly to be reprehended, the mortal hatred which
they long did bear to the English Nation who expelled them, was so, as they
would less communicate with them, then with Dogs: So mistaken are they which
will needs think, that the Saxons were instructed in Christianity by the
Britains, and not by St. Augustine from Rome.

The Saxons were no sooner in a secure Possession of this Island, but Almighty
God, so disposed the effects of his Divine Providence, as to prepare the way of
their Conversion to him, in order to their eternal Happiness; as if an earthly
Kingdom, had not been a reward answerable to their merits in destroying an
ungrateful People, abandoned to all Impiety. The instrument of this Felicity
now approaching, was the Blessed man St. Gregory, then a private Priest, though
soon after a most worthy Successor of St. Peter in the Apostolic Chair at
Rome: Upon this Happy occasion, a number of young English Youths were brought
to Rome, and there exposed to the public Market to be Sold; Gregory excited by
a zealous Affection to propagate the Name of Christ, and moved with a tender
compassion toward those Children, with whose Beautiful Features and
amiableness he was affected; and understanding that the Nation from whence they
came, was destitute of the knowledge of Christ, took a resolution to sow
amongst them, the Divine Seed of Christian Faith: And being after exalted to
the Pontificate, in order to the effecting of his design, sent St. Augustine
the Monk, to lay the foundation of a Christian Church in this Island, joining
with him other Auxiliaries and Devout Companions of his Labors: Bishop Parker
seems to doubt this Story, because of the improbability that the Saxons should
Sell their Children; whereas Tacitus recounting the Manners of the Ancient
Germans; affirms, They would out of greediness of gaining in Dice playing, even
set their own liberty at stake: And Malmburiensis says, It was a familiar and
almost a natural inbred custom among them to sell their Children; which unhappy
custom continued many Ages in our Nation: Insomuch, as in the days of our King
Henry the Second, by the Testimony of Giraldus Cambrensis, A Synod at Armagh in
Ireland, was fain to make a Decree, for redeeming of such English Youths as had
been sold for slaves in that Island: And before that time, among the Laws of
Inas King of the West Saxons, there is more then one Decree which under great
Penalties, forbid this unnatural Traffic.

Lastly, St. Gregory himself in his Epistle to Candidus his Procurator in
France, gives him order, To redeem such English Children, as he met with sold
for Slaves in that Kingdom, and to send them to Rome, to be there instructed in
the Christian Faith: In truth, almost all Ancient Writers agree in the story,
though some differ about the time, some ascribing it to the time of Pope
Benedict, but most, and that most truly, to the latter end of Pope Pelagius St.
Gregory's immediate Predecessor: St. Beda thus delivers the true Circumstances
of this Story, and tells us, That by Tradition from their Ancestors it was
brought to them, that St. Gregory took so much care for the Salvation of our
Nation; that on a day when great variety of Merchandise was brought into the
Market at Rome by Foreign Merchants; St. Gregory especially took notice of
three young Children of a pure Complexion, Beautiful looks, and Hairs
Gracefully ordered, and inquired out of what Country they came; and being told,
they came from the Island of Britain, where the Inhabitants generally are so
Comely; asked whether they were Christians or Pagans, and being told they were
Pagans, Sighed, saying, Alas! what pity is it, that the Prince of Darkness
should possess men of such bright Countenances; and that persons so amiable in
their Looks, should have Souls devoid of inward Grace: Then he asked what was
the Name of their particular Nation, to whom was answered, That they were
called Angli, Well may they be so called (said he) for they have Angelick
Countenances suitable to such who shall be Coheirs with Angels. He further
asked how the Province is called from whence they came, the Answer was, that
they were Inhabitants of the Province called Deiri, said he, importing they
should be delivered from the Ire of God, (de ira dei eruti,) and called to
partake of his Mercy: His last question was, How the King of that Nation was
called, and being told All, in allusion to that name, he presently replied,
Allelujah must be Sung in those parts to the Praise of God who created all
things: After which Discourse he went to Pelagius then Bishop of the Roman and
Apostolic See (himself not being then Pope) and humbly entreated him to send
into Britain some Ministers of Gods word to Convert that Nation to Christ;
adding, That he himself was ready to be employed with Gods assistance in such a
work, if his Holiness thought fit: But his offer could not be taken, for the
Romans would not permit his Absence so far from the City. Notwithstanding a
while after, when hewas exalted to the Popedom, he brought to perfection what
was so long, and so earnestly desired by him, sending indeed other persons to
Preach the Gospel there, but making their Preaching much more effectual, by his
Councels, Exhortations and Prayers: By which relation it is confirmed, that
this did not happen in the time of Benedict; for a good while passed after Pope
Benedict's death before St. Gregory was Prefect of the City; after which it
was, that he undertook a Monastical Profession, in a Monastery built by
himself, Ad clivum scauri, from whence he was called to be Archdeacon of the
Roman Church, then sent Nuncio to Constantinople; At his return from thence, he
afforded our English Youths so much Grace and Favor: But though Alla King of
the Deiri, by the Selling of the said Children gave occasion of bringing of
Christianity to the Angli, yet was not he so happy to hear any thing of it
himself, for the Divine Election regarded his Son Edwin who succeeded him, not
immediately, but after the death of Edelric, whose Reign was short and
inconsiderable; save only, that in his first year St. Columban, after he had
spent many years in the Monastry of Banchor in Ireland, came over into Britain
with twelve Companions, and from thence went into France: He was not above 20
years of Age when he undertook this Journey, and yet was so Courteously
received in France by Childebert, that he gave him choice of any place for his
abode: Whereupon He, and his Companions entering into a Desert place, found a
ruinous piece of ground encompassed with old Walls, but watered with warm
Springs, and of old called Luxovium, and there fixed their abode. While St.
Columban lived thereabout, he was Instructor to the Holy Virgin Phara, said to
be a British Nun, and Niece to the Saint himself, but of this Nun more perhaps
hereafter.

In the year 590. a War broke out between the Picts and Scots, Aidan or Edan
Crowned King by St. Columba at Hy, then enjoyed the Principality over the
Scots; the cause of this War was the same, which raised so much Contention
between the Britains and Saxons; for the Scots out of Ireland were invited by
the Picts, to assist them against the Britains, as the Saxons were by the
Britains, to assist them against the Picts and Scots; and these Irish Picts
imitating the Saxons, soon grew Insolent; and being supplied with new Aids, at
last obtained a Kingdom, and then rooted out the very Name of Picts; St.
Columba, though far distant in his Isle of Hy or Iova, had a strange prospect
of a great Battle then fought between these Scots and Picts, for calling his
Brethren together to Prayer, he Kneeling down said, Let us now Pray fervently
for this People and their King Aidan, for at this very hour the Battle against
their Enemies begins: A little while after, rising up, and looking toward
Heaven, he said, Now are the Barbarous Enemies put to flight, and the Victory
is given to Aidan, though dearly purchased, for of his Army 303. are slain.
Ecclesiastical Stories are not without Examples of Gods Pleasure in revealing
to his Servants things thus happening in parts remote.

This same year died Cissa King of the South Saxons, and his Kingdom devolved
to Ceaulin King of the West Saxons, yet so as Edelwalch Son of Cissa enjoyed
the Title of King, as Homager to Ceaulin; and this year also was chiefly
Illustrated by the advancement of St. Gregory to the Popedom; who immediately
after the death of Pelagius was with wonderful Applause of all Degrees and
Orders in Rome, placed in St. Peter's Chair, to the great benefit of the whole
Church, and the incomparable Felicity of our For his admirable Gests, among
which, the most Illustrious was the Conversion of our Ancestors; he was
deservedly called St. Gregory the Great, and the Apostle of England: The year
following Britain affords a memorable Example of the Instability of Worldly
Greatness and Power, in the person of the hitherto Prosperous King of the
West Saxons Ceaulin; who after all his Conquests, was at last overcome in
Fight, and expelled his Kingdom and Life also; for such was the general hatred
all men bare to him, that they unanimously conspired his destruction: A Battle
was fought between him on the one side, and the Saxons and Britains on the
other side in Wiltshire, at a place called Wansdike, fabulously reported to
have been made by the Devil upon a Wednesday, taking its Name from Woden or
Mercury the Saxon Idol: The cause of raising this Rampire seems to be, the
separation of the Kingdom of the Mercians from the West Saxons: Near to this is
seated a Village called Wadensbury, and here Ceaulin Fighting this Battle, was
utterly broken, and soon after died: After his death Cealric his Brothers Son,
possessed the Kingdom of the West Saxons; but being much inferior in Courage to
his Predecessors, did not inherit that extent of Power which Ceaulin had
exercised over the other Saxon Princes: This opportunity was not omitted by
Ethelbert, King of Kent, and next in Power to Ceaulin; who, without much hazard
obtained the Pre-eminence; by means whereof a freer way was opened to
communicate Christian Truths, to several Provinces of the Kingdom; after they
were embraced by Ethelbert, as they soon were.

St. Gregory in the third year after he was Pope, by his Wisdom and Authority
restored the Churches of Ireland to Catholic Unity, from which they had been
separated, by a quarrel about the tria Capitula spoken of before: His Epistle
unto them concerning that subject is extant, by which they received full
satisfaction: For presently after, several of their Bishops, and other Devout
persons, undertook Pilgrimages to Rome, to express their Duty to the Supreme
Bishop. There is another Epistle of the same Holy Pope, in Answer to certain
doubts and questions, which the Irish had proposed to him, touching the Rites
and manner of Baptism: But however the state of the Irish Churches then was,
the Churches of Britain are declared at this time, free from any stain, either
of Schism or Error in Doctrine.

In the year of Grace 593. Edelric King of the Northumbrians died, whom
succeeded Ethelsred the Cruel: At first he vigorously defended his own
Dominions, then unjustly invaded the bounds of others, and every where sought
occasions of exalting his Glory: Many Combats were undertaken by him Prudently,
and executed Gallantly, for neither would he be restrained by Sloth, nor by his
Courage pricked on to Temerity; about the same time Redwald came to the Kingdom
of the East Angles: But fatal indeed was this year in the Death of our Saxon
Princes, for Crida King or Duke of the Mercians now ended his Life, to whom
succeeded his Son Wibba or Wippa, who after also dying, left behind him three
Illustrious Children, Penda, Kenwalch and Sexburga: About this time also died
the Virtuous Queen Ingoberga, and received the reward of her Patience; she had
been the Wife of Childebert King of the Franks, and after she had brought him a
Daughter, was unworthily repudiated by him. Her memory challenges a place in
this History, as mother to Birtha or Aldiberga Queen of Kent, whose Piety and
Endeavors so disposed the Heart of her Husband Ethelbert, that it was ready to
receive the Christian Faith, soon after tendered unto him by St. Augustine: And
now behold the Sun of Righteousness began to dawn again upon this Island, and
dispel the Darkness of Idolatry and Superstition, and now a new Seed of Pious
Princes, Immaculate Virgins, Devout Monks, and a multitude of all sorts,
excelling in Christian Virtues and Graces sprung up, and flourished, to the
admiration of all Christian Churches; so as even from this time our Island
began to deserve the Title of the Isle of Saints: It will be needful to give
you a prospect at one view, how the Provinces were divided, and what Princes
Ruled in each.

It is agreed on all hands, that this Day Star of Christianity, began to shine
among the Saxons in the year of Grace 590. for then the Apostolic Messengers
from Rome received their Mission from the most worthy Successor of St. Peter
St. Gregory the Great, in the seventh year of his Pontificate, and began their
Journey toward our Island, though they did not arrive here 'till the year
following: At this time the Saxon Heptarchy was established in Britain, and all
the Provinces thereof were entirely under the Dominion of the Angli and Saxons,
except the Northern Kingdom of the Picts and Scots; the Western parts in
Cambria and Cornwall were not yet wholly subdued by the Saxons: The Kings
governing the Heptarchy, their Names and Provinces are as follows, Ethelbert
was then in the 35th. year of his reign; He was the Son of Irmeric, Son of
Otha, Son of Eska, Son of Hengist, this Kingdom contained Kent as now bounded:
Next over the South Saxons; which Kingdom comprised Sussex and Surrey, reigned
Eldwalch the Son of Cissa, the Son of Ella, who first established this Kingdom;
this was the seventh year of Eldwalch his reign: Thirdly, the King of the
West Saxons under Celric in his first year, as Nephew to Ceaulin, who founded
this Kingdom in the year of Grace 519. within his Dominions were comprehended
Hampshire, Barkshire, Wiltshire, Somersetshire, Dorsetshire, Devonshire and
part of Cornwall: Next over the East Saxons, Sebert was in the first year of his
reign, he was the Son of Sledda Son of Erkenwin; who in the year of Grace 527.
established that Kingdom, containing Essex, Middlesex, and so much of
Hartfordshire as is under the Bishop of London's Jurisdiction, whose Diocese is
Adequate to that Kingdom: After this was the Kingdom of the Northumbers, to
which belongs whatever lies between Humber and Edinburgh: It was sometime
divided into two Kingdoms of Bernicia and Deiri; Bernicia contained
Northumberland with the South of Scotland to Edinburgh: The Deiri consisted of
part of Lancashire, with the entire Counties of York, Durham, Westmerland and
Cumberland: The whole Kingdom at this time was governed by Ethelfrid in the
fourth year of his reign; who was the Son of Alla Son of Ida, who founded that
Kingdom in the year of Grace 547. After this in the year 575. the Kingdom of
the East Angles was founded, containing Norfolk, Suffolk, Cambridgeshire, with
the Isle of Ely and some part of Bedfordshire: At this time Redwald had been
King four year, he was the Son of Titillus Son of Vffa, esteemed the first King
and Founder of the said Kingdom in the year of our Lord 575. The last, though
largest, was the Kingdom of Mercia, so called for that it is seated in the
middle of the Island; It was the Marches or limits on which the other Kingdoms
did border: It comprehended the the whole Counties of Lincoln, Northampton,
Rutland, Huntingdon, Buckingham, Oxford, Worcester, Warwick, Darby, Nottingham,
Leicester, Gloucester, Stafford, Chester, part of Lancashire, Herefordshire,
Shropshire, and part of Bedfordshire: At this time when St. Augustine was sent
by Pope Gregory, to the Conversion of the Saxons, Wibba the Son of Crida was
King or chief Governor of Mercia, which Crida laid the Foundation of it, in
the year of our Lord 585.

These were the Saxon Kings, and these their limits, when Almighty God sent his
Apostolical Missioners to Convert the Blind Saxons to the Christian Faith: Yet
were these limits in continual motion, as the success of Princes proved good or
bad: And among these Kings, commonly one was most Puissant, overruling the
rest, who styled himself King of the English Nation: which Super-eminence
Ethelbert King of Kent at this time enjoyed, to whom the Word of Life was first
offered, and by him thankfully accepted: Thus stood the state of Christianity
in this Island, under the Government of the Romans and British Kings: In what a
different state it now is, may easily be discerned by the Judicious Reader;

Fiat Voluntas Dei.
FINIS.
Jesus is condemned to die.



