A DECLARATION PVBLISHED BY SIR THOMAS MIDDLETON Knight,
Serjeant-Major-Generall, and Vice Admiral for the six Counties of NORTH WALES.

Setting forth the Illegallity and Inc^^^ruity of a pernicious Oath and
Protestation, imposed upon (...) peaceable Subjects within the said Counties
(who to avoid ^^ndering or Imprisonment) were enforced to take the same,
whereby the Imposers of the said Oath endeavor under pain of perjury, to make
the people to renounce their own just liberties, and the benefit and
protection of the known Laws, and to sub^it to a Tyranicall, Arbitrary, and
slavish government, exercised by the Commissioners of Array.

AND LIKEWISE, Setting forth the use and intentions of the Forces raised for
the Service of the King and Parliament, under the Command of the said Sir
Thomas Middleton, the benefit that the Country shall receive by their
Protection: And what they are to expect that contemn their Power.

LONDON, Printed for Io. Thomas, 1644.

A Declaration published by Sir Thomas Middleton Knight,
Serjeant-Major-Generall, and Vice Admiral for the six Counties of North Wales.
Whereas according to an Act of Council of War holden at Salop the two and
twentieth of July, 1643. a certain Oath and Protestation contrived by the said
Council, is published in Print, and imposed upon many of His Majesty's
peaceable Subjects within the several Counties of North Wales, Worcester and
Salop; the tenor whereof follows in these words: viz.

I A. B. Do from my heart, without any equivocation, or mental reservation,
vow, protest, and swear in the presence of Almighty God, that I will to the
utmost of my power maintain and defend the true Protestant Religion
established in the Church of England, the Kings Majesty's Sacred Person, His
Heirs and lawful Successors, His Majesty's just Power and Prerogative, and
the just Privileges of Parliament: And that I do believe that the Forces
raised by Order of either, or both Houses of Parliament, under the conduct of
the Earl of Essex, Sir William Brereton, Sir Tho. Middleton, or any other
person or persons, pretending Authority from either, or both the said Houses,
or from the said Earl of Essex, or from any other whatsoever without His
Majesty's Command, and against His Consent, are traitorously and Rebelliously
raised against His Majesty, and His loyal Subjects, and the known Laws of
this Kingdom.

And that I shall endeavor with the hazard of my life and fortune, not only to
oppose and resist the said Earl of Essex, Sir William Brereton, Sir Thomas
Middleton, their forces and adherents, and all other person or persons
whomsoever that pretend or derive Authority from either, or both Houses, or
from the said Earl of Essex, or from any other person or persons without His
Majesty's Commander Consent, but also shall and will as far as I am able, aid,
and assist the Kings Majesty, and His Forces against the said Earl of Essex,
Sir William Brereton, Sir Thomas Middleton, their Forces and adherents, and
against all other Traitors and Rebels now in Arms against His Majesty and His
loyal Subjects, and the Peace and Laws of this Kingdom. And I do vow,
protest and swear in the Presence of Almighty God, That I have not, nor at any
time hereafter will take or shall conceal the name or names of any person or
persons which I now know, or hereafter shall discover to have taken that
detestable Declaration, Vow, or Covenant, lately published and imposed upon His
Majesty's Subjects by Authority of one or both Houses of Parliament, setting
forth, and as much as in them lies, justifying the Forces raised and continued
by both Houses of Parliament against the Forces raised by the Kings Majesty,
without the consent of the said Houses; and whereby His Majesty's Subjects by
and under the tie and obligation of the said Vow and Covenant; do declare, vow
and covenant before Almighty God to give assistance to the said forces so
raised without His Majesty's consent, and do by the said Declaration vow,
declare, and covenant, not to assist the Forces raised by His Majesty.

And lastly, I will not directly nor indirectly divulge nor communicate, nor
consent that any other shall divulge or communicate to the said Earl of Essex,
Sir William Brereton, Sir Thomas Middleton, or any other Forces or adherents,
any thing or matter that may hinder or prejudice His Majesty or any of His
Forces in His courses or designs, or otherwise further or advance the said
Earl of Essex, Sir William Brereton, Sir Thomas Middleton, or any of them, or
any of their adherents, in their treasonable ways or designs, as God shall
help me, and the contents of this Book.

At a Council of War holden at Salop. Present, the parties here undernamed.
IT is ordered that this Protestation be forthwith Printed, and to be sent to
the Justices of Peace of the nine Counties under the Lord Capels command, and
the Franchises thereof, and to the Commissioners of Array to be taken by them,
and to be by them commended to the rural Deanes to be by them sent to the
Clergy, and by them to be taken, and by them to be tendered to all Parishioners
of the age of sixteen years and upwards, and to take the names of all who
shall take the same, and of them who refuse, to be severally and distinctly
returned of the Justices of Peace, and Commissioners of Array, and by them to
be returned to the Lord Lieutenant General, Arthur Capel.

Francis Otley. Thomas Hanmer. Paul Harris. John Weld. Thomas Powel. John
Men's. Thomas Scriven. Michael Woodhouse, Roger Owen. Arthur Trevor. Dudley
Wyett. Rowland Vaughan;


Which Oath is not only contrary to the known Laws of this Realm and
Liberties of the Subjects, but also contrary to it self in the whole substance
thereof, laying an impossibility upon the takers thereof, of performing the
same, as may appear by these ensuing Observations.

First, They swear to defend and maintain the true Protestant Religion to the
utmost of their power, and they swear to aid and assist His Majesty's Forces
(consisting of all the English Papists, and many Irish Rebels) against the
Parliaments Forces, who consist all of Protestants, and are merely raised for
the defense of the Protestant Religion, and to suppress those Papists and
their adherents, who endeavor to destroy the same in this, and the Kingdom of
Ireland, and are the most opposite enemies thereto of any people that profess
Christianity.

Secondly, They swear to maintain His Majesty's just Power and prerogatives:
And they swear to oppose all persons that derive any Authority from both
Houses of Parliament, without His Majesty's command or consent: If the
Contrivers of the Oath do mean His Majesty's Royal and Regal Command or
Consent, the Houses of Parliament have that to warrant all their Actions and
Proceedings, as well as all other Courts of Justice have, where His Majesty's
Name and Command is always used of course, as a branch of the Kingly Office
inseparably annexed to the Power and Jurisdiction of every Court, as appears
by all ordinary process, and to say that any Court wants that, is to deny that
Court a being: But if it be meant His Personal command or consent (or rather
the will of some prevalent Popishly affected persons wresting from Him Commands
contrary to the Resolutions of His Parliament) such Commands are inconsistent
with, and destructive to His Regal Office, and consequently contrary to His
just Power and Prerogatives, because it opposes His Royal Commands (signified
by the highest Court of Justice) wherein His Majesty's Regal Power and
Sovereigne Authority does always reside.

Thirdly, They swear to maintain the just Privileges of Parliament, and they
swear to assist the Papists now in Arms in His Majesty's Army, contrary to
several Acts of Parliament, it being the highest breach of the Privileges of
Parliament to have their Acts contemptuously violated (the Court sitting) in
mere opposition to their Power.

So that whosoever takes that Oath, with an intent to keep the same, must
believe: First, That the English and Irish Papists (who are in Arms and have
places of eminent Command in His Majesty's Army, and have within less then two
years time almost quite destroyed the Protestants and their Religion in the
Kingdom of Ireland) do now fight for, and endeavor to maintain the true
Protestant Religion.

Secondly, They must believe, that such personal Commands are wrested from His
Majesty by private favorites, are to be actually obeyed before and against his
Royal commands and Regal Authority signified by his Courts of Justice: and
that his Majesty's just Power and Prerogatives are not resident in his Courts,
but in the breasts of His Favorites.

Thirdly, they must believe, that to set in open defiance several Acts of
Parliament made against Papists bearing of Arms (the Parliament sitting) in
contempt of their Authority, is no breach of the Privileges of Parliament. And
lastly, They must swear, that they do believe, that all the Members of both
Houses of Parliament, (for endeavoring to put those Laws in execution, and to
preserve themselves and the Kingdom from the power of the Popish Armies) are
Traitors. For if the Forces raised by them for that purpose, are traitorously
raised, it follows, that they that raised them are Traitors.

By which Oath and Protestation, the said Council of War do purposely decline
to make the people swear to maintain the known Laws, and their own just
Liberties; and do endeavor to engage them upon pain of perjury, to renounce
their liberties, and the benefit and protection of the known Laws, and to
subject themselves to such a condition of slavery as the unlimited and
arbitrary wills of the Commissioners of Array would put them into, who have
already so far exercised their illegal power over them, that the whole
Country do groan under the burden of their grievances, as the many heavy and
cruel taxations, the imprisoning of men's persons, the pressing of men for the
Wars without Authority of Parliament, and the countenancing of Robberies under
a new name of plundering.

The consideration of which Grievances and pressures, and the ill consequences
of the said Oath, if not timely prevented, have occasioned this ensuing
Declaration to undeceive the people.

FIrst, That the said Oath is unjust, deceitful, and impossible to be
performed, and the people enforced to take the same for fear of plundering or
imprisonment: So it binds not the Conscience of any man to keep it; but on the
contrary, he that endeavors to keep an unjust Oath, persisteth in sin.

Secondly, That the Forces raised by Authority of Parliament, under the Command
of Sir Thomas Middleton Knight, are neither Traitorously not Rebelliously
raised, but have His Majesty's Royal Authority for their warrant.

Thirdly, That the said Forces are raised for the preservation of the true
Protestant Religion, His Majesty's person, just Power and Prerogative, the just
Privileges of Parliament, the just Liberties of the Subject, and the known
Laws of this Kingdom; against those Armies of Papists and Delinquents within
this Kingdom, who (pretending His Majesty's personal Commands, as the Rebels
in Ireland do, to countenance their Rebellion) endeavor to destroy the very
constitution and being of Parliaments, and therein His Majesty's Royal
Authority and the Laws of the Realm, to the end they might avoid the justice
of that Supreme Court. And are particularly raised to free that Country from
the cruel oppression of those persons, who thought that ruin would not come
swift enough into their Coasts, except they did petition and ride far to usher
in the same: those persons, who (to compass to themselves some titles of
Dignities) would let the Kingdom see, into what measure of servitude and
bondage they can bring the Common people into, by their new acquired power of
the Commission of Array.

Fourthly, That all those persons inhabiting within any of the Counties of
North Wales, who have been misled, or enforced by the Commissioners of Array,
to raise Arms or pay money toward the maintenance of this unnatural War
against the Parliament, and shall forthwith come in and tender themselves to
the said Sir Thomas Middleton, and yield submission to the Power and Authority
of Parliament; their former delinquencie shall be remitted, and their persons
and estates protected from the violence and fury of Soldiers.

Fifthly, That as many of those persons who have put in execution the
Commission of Array, or have been in actual War against the Parliament, as
shall forthwith come and render themselves unto the said Sir Thomas Middleton,
and submit to the Power and Authority of Parliament; he will suspend the
putting in execution of the Ordinances of Parliament against them, until the
further pleasure of the Parliament be signified therein: and will use his best
endeavor to have their former delinquencie remitted or qualified.

Sixthly, That as many as will not submit to the Authority of Parliament, but
persist in their disobedience, must expect to feel those miseries which War
may bring upon them, and that punishment which they justly deserve for their
contempt of so High Authority.

And lastly, That the Forces of the Parliament shall be continued no longer in
the said Counties, then until those Commissioners of Array, and those other
persons that have been in actual War against the Parliament, be reduced to
their due obedience to the Laws of the Realm, and the justice of that supreme
Court: The Coasts secured against the landing of Irish Rebels (from whom no
Protestant Subject of this Kingdom can expect civil usage, however he stands
affected;) The people freed from those oppressions and bondage under which they
groan; and the trading of North Wales for Cloth and Cattle be restored unto
them, which now is quite decayed by the Commissioners of Array's opposition
against the Parliament; and the want thereof will bring extreme poverty and
famine upon the whole Country.

He that can believe,

That the Irish Rebels and English Papists do now fight to maintain the
Protestant Religion,

That His Majesty's Royal Power and just Prerogatives are not resident in the
Courts of Justice,

That the Papists who are now in Arms, contrary to the express words of
several Acts of Parli^^^nt made against Papists bearing of Arms; do now
fight to maintain and keep those Statutes in force,

That those Delinquents who were declared Traitors by the Parliament, and many
of them so proclaimed by His Majesty, do now fight against the Parliaments
Forces to maintain the Privileges of Parliament, and not to protect
themselves from the Justice of that Supreme Court:

is furnished with a sufficient competencie of Ignorance to digest that Oath.

He that has been enforced to take an Oath, the substance whereof he cannot
believe; is bound in Conscience and reason nos to observe the same.

FINIS.

