A DEFENSE OF Archbishop USHER AGAINST Dr Carry and Dr Isaac Vossius, Together
with An INTRODUCTION concerning the Uncertainty OF CHRONOLOGY; And an APPENDIX
TOUCHING The signification of the words (...) and (...), as also Of the men of
the Great SYNAGOGUE.

By JOHN MILNER, S. T. B.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by J. Hayes for Benj. Took, and are to be Sold by W.
Graves Bookseller in Cambridge. 1694.

October. 29. 1692.

Imprimatur,
Gabr. Quadring, Procan.
Humf. Gower, Prof. Marg.
Joh. Covel, Coll. Christ. Prefect.
Ja. Johnson, Coll. Sid. Mag.
THE CONTENTS
CHap. I. The Introduction concerning the uncertainty of Chronology.

Chap. II. Whether Lunar months were in use with the Israelites before the
Babylonish Captivity.

Chap. III. Of the month Dioscorinthius 2 Macc. 11. 21.

Chap. IV. Of the time when Artaxerxes Longimanus begun his reign, and of the
flight of Themistocles.

Chap. V. Of the time when Sanchuniathon, Semiramis and Nitocris lived.

Chap. VI. Whether Nabonasar was the same with Belesis.

Chap. VII. Whether Darius Hystaspis was the husband of Esther, also whether
Artystona was Esther, and Atossa Vashti.

Chap. VIII. Whether Tiglathpileser was the same with Ninus junior the
successor of Sardanapalus.

Chap. IX. Whether Moses was contemporary to Inachus.

Chap. X. Of that Alexander King of Egypt, who was reported to have made the
Commonwealth of Rome his heir.

Chap. XI. Of Argon the first King of the Lydians after the Atyadae, whether he
was the Son of Ninus.

Chap. XII. Of AEgyptus, how many years intervened between him and Sesac 1
Kings 11. also whether he was the same with Sethosis; and of Jonathan, 1
Maccab. 9.

Chap. XIII. Of the duration of the Aslyrian Monarchy, and of Herodotus, also
of the Median succession.

Chap. XIV. Of the duration of the said Assyrian Monarchy against Dr Js.
Vossius.

Chap. XV. Of the Study of Astronomy, whether it be as ancient as Nimrod, and
of the Celestial Observations sent from Babylon to Greece by Aristotle's
procurement.

Chap. XVI. Of the Egyptian Empire, when it begun and how long it continued.
Also of Constantinus Manasses.

Chap. XVII. Of the Septuagint.

An Appendix 1. Concerning the words (...) and (...) or (...), whether they do
any where in the Scripture signify the New Moon. 2. Of the men of the Great
Synagogue, and of the Books of Chronicles, Ezra and Nehemiah.

CHAP. 1. The Introduction.
I Need not enlarge in the praises of that great ornament of his Age, See and
Country, the incomparable Archbishop Usher. They that would be satisfied of
the worth of that excellent person may read his Life with the Appendix to it,
and more especially his Works, which sufficiently praise him in the gate: As
they that would know how great an esteem the most eminent men for Piety and
Learning in his time (not only in great Britain and Ireland, but also in other
parts) had of him, may consult the Letters writ by them to him, and since
Printed with his to them. Yet since his death several have appeared publicly
against him, and some of them have treated him very unbecomingly, to say no
more. Of these I shall single out the Author of the Palaeologia Chronica Dr
Carry, and him whom he has called to be his Second, viz. Dr Vossius, Both these
are displeased with the Archbishop for shortning the time from the Creation of
the world: but more especially Dr Carry. He is displeased with Petavius and
Eusebius upon the same account, but the storm of his displeasure falls most
severely upon the Archbishop. Yet this (says he) was nothing to that which
Bishop Usher did since in vindication of the Masora, by a way of new righting
of times and new shaping of persons, far otherwise then was ever taken notice
of by any man living before. Thus Dr Carry Part 2. Bo. 2.. 3. Chapter 17. Now (to
pass by those obscure expressions New righting of times and New shaping of
persons) I grant that the Archbishop may have offered some things to his
Readers consideration, which no man had ever taken notice of before; but then
he does it with such candor and modesty, as (if he do err) may obtain his
pardon from all ingenuous persons, And withal he confirms them with such
Authorities and Arguments, as that it is not very easy for those that are not
of his opinion to refute him. A further plea may be offered for him, drawn from
the uncertainty of the greatest part of Chronology, by reason whereof no man
can state the account, especially of Ancient times so, as that one or other
shall not be ready to quarrel with it.

Of the uncertainty of the greatest part of Chronology.

I Say of the greatest part of Chronology, for I most willingly grant that part
of it is certain: as 1. Whatsoever relating to Chronology is plainly expressed
in sacred Writ, or may be deduced from it by a clear and undeniable
consequence, that must be concluded to be certain. 2. The Chronology of Heathen
writers, so far as it agrees with and is consonant to the Scripture Chronology,
is also to be looked upon as certain. 3. Josephus c. Apion. l. 1. says that all
men confess that Alexander the great died in the 114th. Olympiad, and if any
one shall affirm that this account of his death (or any thing else, that is as
universally and unanimously attested, as according to Josephus it is) is
certain, I shall not gainsay. But as to other things, tho some have expressed
very much confidence, and seem to have firmly persuaded themselves that they
had demonstrated the certainty of them: yet I think it will appear that they
have rather demonstrated their uncertainty. However I doubt not but every
unprejudiced Reader will be satisfied of the uncertainty of them. To manifest
which, I shall not run through all the 4 Monarchies (that would be too tedious)
but confine my self to the first, i. e. the Assyrian: and I the rather pitch
upon it, because Dr Carry is so much displeased with Eusebius and Petavius, and
especially the Archbishop, for shortning the time of that Monarchy. The method
which I shall observe will be to take a view 1. Of Kingdoms, viz the Kingdom of
Assyria it self and the Kingdoms contemporary to it, 2. Of persons and
occurrences, and to show how uncertain an account is given of the time of all
these. I begin with Kingdoms, as

1. The Kingdom of the Assyrians. Herodotus l. 1. c. 95. says that the
Assyrians had held the dominion of the upper Asta 520 years, when the Medes
began to break from them. Justin l. 1. c. 2, and 3. says that the Assyrians had
held the Empire 1300 years, when the Medes rebelled against them. Velleius
Paterc, l. 1. writes that the Empire was translated to the Medes when the
Assyrians had possessed it 1070 years. Ctesias ap. Diodor. Sicul. l. 2. will
have the duration of that Monarchy to have been 1360 years. Diodorus Sic.
himself will have it to have been above 1400 years. Castor ap. Syncellum p.
168. allots to it An. 1280. According to Cephalion ap. Syncell. p. 167. all
those that reigned after Semiramis held the Empire An. 1000. Thallus ap.
Theophilum ad Autol. l. 3. and Lactantium l. 1. c. 23. affirms Belus to have
been An. 322. before the Trojan war. S. August. de Civit. Dei l. 18. c. 21.
says that the Empire of the Assyrians was translated to the Medes after almost
An. 13 5. taking the time that Belus reigned into the account. Orosius l. 1. c.
3. writes that Babylon was robbed of its wealth, King and Empire by the Medes
almost 1164 years after that it was built by Semiramis. Africanus ap. Syncell.
p. 92, and 165. makes the duration of this Empire (including the reign of
Belus) to have been An. 1460. Finally Eusebius says that all the years of the
Assyrian Empire from the first of Ninus were 1240. [Because I shall have
frequent occasion to lledge Eusebius. I desire it may be observed, that when I
do allege him as here without directing to the particular place, the citation
is to be found in his Chronicon; and that I follow the Latin Edition of him at
Basil in Folio.]

We have seen what different accounts the best Writers give of the duration of
the Assyrian Empire: they differ also about the number of their Kings, and of
the years that several of them reigned. As to the number of the Kings, Diodorus
Sicul. l. 2. reckons 30, making Sardanapalus the 30th from Ninus: whereas
Velleius Paterc. l. 1. makes Sardanapalus to have sprung from Ninus and
Semiramis in the 33d descent, the Son still succeeding the Father. Eusebius
reckons 36 Kings beginning with Ninus, whereas Syncellus p. 165 taking Belus
into the account reckons 41.

As to the time that several of the Assyrian Kings reigned Eusebius's account
differs much from that of Syncellus, as this Scheme following will manifest.

Juxta Eusebium. Juxta Syncellum. Manchaleus whom Syncellus calls Aschalios An.
30 An. 28 Iphereus or Spherus Reigned 20 22 Sparetus or as Syncellus calls him
Spartheos 40 42 Ascades or Ascatades 40 38 Lamprides 32 30 Sosarmus 19 22
Tauteus or Teuteus 40 44 Ophratens 20 21 Ophratanes by Syncellus called
Ephccheres 50 52 Sarpanapalus 20 15

Tho the Empire is said to have been translated to the Medes upon the overthrow
and death of Sardanapalus, yet the Assyrian Monarchy is usually supposed to
have continued till the beginning of the Persian: so that Nebuchadnezzar and
others that were long after Sardanapalus are reckoned among the Assyrian
Monarchs, particularly Evilmerodach and Neriglassar or Nericassolassar to the
former of whom viz. Evilmerodach Berosus ap. Joseph. c. Apion. l. 1. allots 2
years, and to the later 4; but Josephus himself Ant. l. 10. c. 12. gives to the
former An 18. and to the later 40; and the Ecclesiastical Canon ap. Syncell. p.
209. assigns to the former An. 5. to the later 3.

2. The Kingdom of the Egyptians. According to Eusebius eleven of the Egyptian
Dynasties were contemporary to the Assyrian Monarchy, of which the 16th is the
first, and the 26th the last. Africanus ap. Syncell. p. 61. etc. and Eusebius
differ much as to these Dynasties.

Juxta Africanum. Juxta Eusebium. The 16 Dynasty An. 518 An. 190 The 17 Din.
Continued 151 103 The 18 Din. 263 348 The 19 Din. 204 or 209 194 The 20 Din.
135 178 The 22 Din. 116 49 The 23 Din. 89 44 The 24 Din. 6 44 The 25 Din. 40 44
The 26 Din. 150 and men's. 6 168

Besides all this they differ as to the number of the Kings that were in some
of the Dynasties.

Juxta Africanum. Juxta Eusebium. In the 19 Din. were 6 Kings 5 Kings In the 22
Din. 9 3 In the 23 Din. 4 3

They also disagree about the number of the years that many of the Kings in
these Dynasties reigned, but I must not take notice of them all: yet I cannot
but observe how Herodotus and Manetho differ sometimes from one, sometimes from
both of them. As in the 26th Dynasty, when Africanus and Eusebius allow to
Necao the 2d only 6 years, Herodotus l. 2. c. 159. (who calls him Necos) gives
him complete 16 years. So when Africanus allots to Vaphres only 19 years,
Herodotus l. 2. c. 161. (by whom he is called Apries) assigns to him 25. And
lastly Herodotus l. 2. c. 157. gives to Psammitichus 54 years, and l. 3. c. 10.
to Amasis 44; when Eusebius allows to the former only 44, and to the later only
42 or 43. And as to Manetho ay. Joseph. c. Apion. l. 1. the discord between him
and them will appear in this following Scheme.

In the 18 Dynasty Juxta Manethon. Juxta African. Juxta Eusebius. Achenchres or
Acherres An. 12 and men's. 1 An. 32 An. 12 Rathosis (ap. Eusebius. Achoris) Reigned
9 6 9 Achencheres (ap. Afric. Chebres) 12 and men's. 5 12 16 Achencheres or
Acherres 12 and men's. 3 12 8 Armesses (ap. Eusebius. Remesses) 66 and men's. 2 68
Amenophis 19 and men's. 6 19 40 In the 19 Dynasty Sethos 59 51 55 Rampses or
Ramphes 66 61 66

3. The Kingdom of the Sicyonians. Which continued An. 862, according to Castor
ap. Eusebius. (in the Basil Edition, but in Scaligers Edition it is 962, not 862.)
according to St August. de civ. Dei l. 18. c. 19. An. 959: Suidas in voce (...)
says that it continued An. 900; the succession of the Sicyonian Kings which we
have in Scaligers Excerpt. gr. p. 301. attributes to it An. 980, Syncellus p.
97. An. 967. So as to the particular Kings, Eusebius and Syncellus are not
agreed how long several of them reigned.

Juxta Eusebium. Juxta Syncellum. Telchin vel Stelchin An. 20 An. 29 Epopeus
Reigned 35 32 Laomedon 40 43 Sicyon 45 42 Polybus 40 43 Ioachus 42 45 Phtllus 8
10 Adrastos 4 7 Zeuxippus 32 30

Add to all this that Homer Iliad. 2. ver. 572. seems to make Adrestus the
first King of Sicyon, (...): whereas AEgialeus is usually said to have reigned
first there. So Zeuxippus is usually made the last King, and yet Pausanias in
Corinth. reckons Hippolitus and Lacestades after him, and so do Scaligers
Excerptagr. p. 363. The same Pausanias omits the mention of Polyphides, who was
the next but one before Zeuxippus according to the usual account So little
agreement or certainty there is as to the very number of their Kings.

4. The Kingdom of the Argives. I need not mention that Africanus and many
besides him will have Moses to have been born in the time of Inachus the first
King of the Argives (see Syncellus p. 63.) and yet Eusebius makes Inachus to
have been above 200 years ancienter then Moses. Eusebius also and Syncellus
disagree about the time that several of Inachus's Successors reigned.

Juxta Eusebium. Juxta Syncellum. Crassus or Criasus An. 54 An. 55 Phorbas
Reigned 35 25 Troyphas or Triopas 46 36 Crotopus 21 24 Danaus 50 58 Lynceus 41
35 Abas 23 37

Moreover as to the succession in this Kingdom of Argos. Pausanias in Corinth.
differs both from Eusebius and Syncellus. He rekons Jasus (if not Gelanor also)
among the Kings of the Argives, whereas Eusebius and Syncellus make no mention
of them. He also omits Apis and Praetus, the one of which according to them,
was the 3d, the other the 13th King of the Argives. And Apollodorus l. 2.
agrees with Pausanias in making Pratus King of Tirinthe, not of Argos.

5. The Kingdom of Athens. From Cecrops the first King (as Eusebius Syncellus
and others account him, tho Pausanias in Atticis says that Actaeus reigned
first, and that Cecrops succeeded him: yea he tells how some made Porphyrion to
have reigned before Actaeus) to the taking Troy were 373 years according to the
Marmor Arundel., about 384 according to Syncellus, almost 400 according to
Eusebius de Praeparat. l. 10. c. 9. As to those that succeeded Cecrops.

Juxta Eusebium. Juxta Syncellum. Oxyntes or Zyntis the 13 King An. 12 An. 10
Timoetes or Thymites the 15 King Of the Archontes that continu'a for life.
Reigned 8 9 Agastus or Acatus the 2 36 35 Tersippus the 4 41 40 Phorbas the 5
31 30 Mezades or Megacles the 6 30 28 AEschylus the 12 23 14

Also to Agamestor the 11th of these Archontes for life Eusebius gives 20
years, when Syncellus allows him but 17: yet says at the same time, that others
allow him 40. He also tells us that tho he with Eusebius allots to Ariphron the
9th of those Archontes only 20 years, yet Africanus gives him 31. Hippomenes
was one of the Archontes that were to continue for 10 years, and Eusebius,
Syncellus and others give him complete 10 years: yet Suidas in (...) says that
for a certain fact he lost the Government before the time. The 4th year of that
Hippomenes was according to Pausanias in Messen. the first year of the 14th
Olympiad: but according to Eusebius it was the first year of the 15th Olympiad.
To the decennial succeeded annual Archontes, and the beginning of these is
referred by Eusebius to the 2d year of the 24th Olympiad; but Pausanias in
Messen. says plainly that there were annual Archontes in the 4th year of the
23d Olympiad, naming Tlesias as Archon then. [I know some alter Pausanias's
words so as to make him say quite the contrary; but I dare not deal so with
Authors, unless I have some very good ground or valuable Copy to warrant such a
change.] There is nothing more probable then that Tlesias in Pausanias is the
same with him whom the Marmor Arundel calls Lysias, who was the 3d annual
Archon, for Creon was the first (as Velletus Paterc. l. I. with many more does
testify) and there was but one Archon between Creon and Lysias according to
that Marble. And by the way there being a lacuna in the Marble thus (Since --
-- An. 418. Lysias being Archon at Athens) perhaps it may be supplied after
this manner (Since the beginning of the 2d Messenian war An. 418. Lysias being
Archon at Athens) just as Pausanias says that the Messenian war began when
Tlesias was Archon there. It is true the Anonymous writer in Excerpt. gr.
Scaliger. p. 318. does place Tlesias 3 years before Creon, not two years after
him: but I question whether his Authority be such as may warrant us to correct
Pausanias so as to make him say the contrary to that which he does say in our
copies. However that Author does say that the year of Creon the first annual
Archon was the 3d of the 24th Olympiad, whereas Syncellus p. 212. refers it to
the 19th Olympiad, and adds that some refer it to the 25th Olympiad. In Clemens
Alexand. Strom. 1. it is said that the beginning of Theseus's reign was 47
years before the taking of Troy, which agrees neither with Eusebius's account,
nor that which is given by Syncellus. According to both Troy was taken in the
last year of Menestheus the successor of Theseus: now according to Syncellus
Theseus reigned An. 31. and Menestheus 33. according to Eusebius the former 30
years, the later 24.

6. The Kingdom of Mycenoe. Apollodorus l. 2. says that Electrion reigned at
Mycenae with Taphius, but Eusebius and Syncellus make no mention of either of
these: and Syncellus brings in Pelops between Eurystheus and Atreus, whereas
Eusebius does not mention Pelops's being King of Mycenae. We are left wholly in
the dark as to the time that Perseus reigned there. To Sthenelus Perseus's
successor Eusebius (in Scaligers Edition) gives 8 years, and to Eurysteus 43;
but in my Edition Eusebius makes Eurysteus to have reigned An. 45. To Atreus
and Thyestes Eusebius allots An. 65, Syncellus only 33. and according to Homer
l. 2. v. 10. Thyestes seems to have succeeded Atreus, for he says, that Atreus
dying left the Scepter to Thyestes, (...) To Agamemnon Syncellus p. 170. with
Eusebius gives 18 years, but at the same time observes that Others do allot him
35 years, and p. 125. he says that some make him to have reigned 33 years some
30 or 28. Likewise p. 125. he says that AEgisthus reigned 7 or 17 years, and
yet p. 170. he allows him only 5. Orestes according to Eusebius reigned 15
years, according to Syncellus 23, but according to Velletus Paterc. l. 1. 70
years.

7. The Kingdom of the Thebans. The Marmor Arundel. makes Cadmus to have come
to Thebes when Amphictyon reigned at Athens, 64 years after the beginning of
the reign of Cecrops: but Eusebius says that he came when Pandion was King at
Athens, above 120 years after that Cecrops reigned first there; and he observes
also that some do set Cadmus's reign still later, and that above 100 years,
when Cecrops the 2d was King at Athens, Clemens Alexand. Strom. 1. refers the
coming of Cadmus to the time when Lynceus reigned at Argos, but it is not
certain when he reigned there, whether we are to refer the beginning of his
reign to the 13h year of Pandions reigning at Athens, with Eusebius, or to the
18th year of Erectheus the successor of Pandion, with Syntellus.

8. The Kingdom of the Corinthians. Diodorus Sicul. ap. Syncellum p. 179.
differs much from Eusebius as to the number of years that several of the Kings
of Corinth after the return of the Heraclidae reigned.

Juxta Diodor. Sicul. Juxta Eusebius. Aletes An. 38 An. 35 Ixion 38 37 Aristomedes
30 35

In the margin in Syncellus p. 179. to Aristomedes 35 years are assigned, and
likewise in 2 Latercula in p. 180. and yet p. 185. only 31 years are allotted
to him.

After Automenes the Prytanes of annual Rulers continued An. 90. according to
Diodor. Siculus, about An. 120 according to Eusebius. After them Cypselus
obtained the Government, and after him his Son Periander. To Cypselus Aristotle
Polit. l. 5. c. ult. gives An. 30. to Periander 44. but Eusebius and Syncellus
allow the Father only An. 28. and Diog. Laertius in Periandro allows the Son
only 40.

9. The Kingdom of the Medes. How differently the succession of the Kings of
Media and the time of their several reign is represented by Herodotus l. 1. c.
96. etc, Ctesias ap. Diodor. Sicul. l. 2. Eusebius and Syncellus, will best
appear by the following Scheme.

Juxta Ctesiam. Juxta Eusebium. Juxta Herodotum. Juxta Syncellum. Arbaces An.
28 Arbaces An. 28 Arbaces An. 28 Mandauces 50 Sosarmus 30 Mandauces 20 Sosarmus
30 Medidus 40 Sosarmus 30 Artias 50 Cardiceas 13 Artycas 30 Arbianes 22
Deiocles 54 Deioces An. 53 Dioeces 54 Arsaeus 49 Phaortes 24 Phraortes 22
Aphraartes 51 Artynes 22 Cyaxares 32 Cyaxares 40 Cyaxares 32 Artibarnas 40
Astyages 38 Astyages 35 Astyages 38 Allyages

I must not omit that though these Authors, how much soever they disagree in
other things, do all concur in this, that Astyages was the last King of the
Medes; yet Xenophon de Inst. Cyri. l. 1. says that Astyages had a son, who was
also his Successor in the Kingdom, viz. Cyaxares.

10 The Kingdom of the Lydians. The account which Herodotus l. 1. c. 7. etc.
gives of the Lydian succession differs much from that of Eusebius and
Syncellus. Herodotus writes that the Heraclidae Reigned from Argon the first of
them to Candaules the last 505 years; whereas Eusebius and Syncellus take
notice of only 3 Kings, viz. Ardysus, Alyattes and Miles or Meles before
Candaules, and the years that these 4 Kings reigned being all joined together
are only 79. After Candaules those reigned who are by Herodotus called
Mermnadae, and Eusebius with Syncellus agree with him as to the names and
number of those that held the Kingdom, yet they dissent from him altogether as
to the number of the years that they held it.

Juxta Herodotum. Juxta Eusebium. Gyges An 38 An 36 To the 2 of these viz.
Ardys only An. 37. are alloted by Syncellus. Ardys Reigned 49 Reigned 38
Sadyattes 12 15 Alyattes 57 49 Craesus 14 15

11. The Kingdom of the Tyrians. Tho Syncellus p. 182 pretends that he has the
account of the Tyrian Kings which he gives us from Josephus, and it is very
probable that Theophilus ad Autol. l. 3. had his from him also; vet there is
not a perfect accord betwixt theirs and that which we have in Josephus c. Apion
l. 1.

Apud Josepyam. Apud Theophitum Ap. Syncellum. Baleazarus An. 7 An. 17 An. 17
Ithobalus Reigned 32 12 32 Badezorus 6 7 8 Matgenus or Mettenus 9 29 25

12. The Kingdom of the Macedonians. Herodotus l. 8. c. 139. names Perdiccas as
the first King, and when Thucydides l. 2. says of Archelaus that as to warlike
preparations he ordered things better then all the 8 Kings that were before
him, he seems to consent thereto; for if Perdiccas was the first King, then
there were just 8 before Archelaus. Yet Justin l. 7. c. 2. says that Perdicca
reigned after Caranus, as Solinus c. 9. says that he succeeded him. Suidas
concurs with Justin in making Caranus the first King, and Livy l. 45. says
expressly that he reigned the first. They that please may also consult Ausonius
Epist. 19. When Justin and Solinus say that Perdiccas succeeded or reigned
after Caranus, if their meaning was that he succeeded Caranus immediately, they
are contrary not only to Eusebius and Syncellus, but also to the marginal
successions of the Macedonian Kings which we have in Syncellus p. 262; for all
these do reckon two Kings; viz. Caenus and Tyrimmas between Caranus and
Perdiccas. And so Theophilus ad Autol. l. 2. giving us the Genealogy of the
Temenidae makes Caenus the Son of Caranus, and Tyrimmas the Son of Caenus, and
Perdiccas the Son of Tyrimmas. Eusebius makes Caranus to have reigned An. 28.
and to have begun his reign 36 or 37 years before the first Olympiad: but the
two Successions of the Macedonian Kings ap. Syncellum, and Syncellus himself
grant him 30 years, and Syncellus says that he was 18 years before the first
Olympiad (or, if we will believe the marginal correction, he was 25 years
before it.) Solinus c. 6. writes that Perdiccas succeeded Caranus, or was first
named King in the 22d Olympiad, but Eusebius refers the beginning of his reign
to the 11th Olympiad. In that succession of the Macedonian Kings which we have
in the Text ap. Syncellum p. 262, Perdiccas is omitted. As also the other
Succession in the Margin does not altogether agree with Syncellus, much less
with Eusebius. To Caenus it allots 28 years; but Syncellus gives him 29,
Eusebius only 12. To Argeus it gives An. 34, Syncellus only 32; but Eusebius
38. To Tyrimmas it assigns An. 45. to Perdiccas 48. to Philip. 35. and to
AEropas 23: when Eusebius gives to the first of these 38, to the 2d 51, to the
3d 38, to the 4th 26.

The uncertainty of Chronology as to the Kingdoms that were in the time of the
first Monarchy has appeared sufficiently. I proceed now to persons and
occurrences which were in the time of that Monarchy; but the particular time
when they lived or happened is very uncertain. I begin with persons, as

1. Prometheus, who according to St August. de Civ. Dei l. 18. c. 8. lived when
Orthopolis was King of the Sicyonians, and Criasus King of the Argives.
Tatianus and Clemens Alexand. Strom. 1. say that he lived in the time of
Triopas who also reigned over the Argives. Eusebius says that some write that
he was in the time of Phorbas who reigned at Argos between Criasus and Triopas;
yet adds that others refer him to the time of Cecrops who was contemporary to
Triopas, and that according to others he lived 60 of 90 years before Cecrops.

2. Hercules. According to the computation which we have in Clemens Alexand.
Strom. 1. Hercules's institution of Olympic games preceded that of Iphitus An.
440. or above, but according to Eusebius from Hercules his instituting them to
the first Olympiad were only An. 430. Velleius Paterc. l. 1. makes Hercules to
have died above 40 years before that Troy was taken, but by Eusebius's account
he died but about 16 years before the taking of it. By Eusebius's account also
Hercules died after Eurystheus, whereas our best Historians say that Eurystheus
survived him. Diodorus Sicul. l. 4. writes that after Hercules his death
Euristheus desired to expel his Sons out of Greece, and they gave him battle
and vanquished him, and Hillus one of them slew him. Thucydides l. 1. testifies
likewise that Eurystheus was slain by them.

3. Lycurgus. Of Lycurgus (says Plutarch in his life) nothing can be said which
is certain and unquestionable, but there is the least agreement about the time
when he lived. Aristotle and others say that he lived at the same time with
Iphitus, and was assistant to him in ordering the Olympic games. Eratosthenes
and Apollodorus say that he was Ancienter by not a few years then the first
Olympiad. Timaeus will have him to have been not far from the time of Homer,
and some say that he conversed with Homer. Xenophon makes him to have been
about the time of the Heraclidae, and he seems to speak of those first
Heraclidae that lived not long after Hercules himself. Thus Plutarch. And as to
Eratosthenes he ap. Clem. Alex. Strom. I. declares the time from Licurgus's
Tuition to the first Olympiad to have been 108 years. Tatianus says that he
made his Laws 100 years before the Olympiads. But Clemens Alex. will have him
to have been 150 years before them.

4. Homer. It is vulgarly known how various opinions there are about the age of
Homer. Tatianus long since collected some of them. Crates (says he) will have
him to have flourished before the return of the Heraclidae within 80 years
after the war of Troy, Eratosthenes after 100 years from the taking Troy,
Aristarchus about the Ionick migration after An. 140. from the fall of Troy,
Philochorus after the Ionick migration Archippus being Archon at Athens An.
180. after the destruction of Troy. Apollodorus reckons 100 years after the
Ionick migration, and so 240 after Troy. Some say that he was a little before
the Olympiads An 400. (or 407.) after the fall of Troy. Others make him
contemporary to Archilochus, who was about the 23d Olympiad, in the time of
Gyges King of the Lydians, 500 years after that Troy was destroyed. Thus far
Tatianus. They that desire more to this purpose may consult Clemens Alex.
Strom. I.

5. Hesiod. The like uncertainty there is as to the age wherein Hesiod lived.
A. Gellius l. 3. c. 11. has taken notice of the dispute concerning Homer and
him, some making Homer the more Ancient, as Philochorus and Xenophanes; others
giving the seniority to Hesiod, as Accius and Ephorus; others making them
contemporaries, as Varro. Thus Gellius who l. 17. c. 1. determines that either
they lived almost at the same time, or that Homer was somewhat the Ancienter.
The truth is there are many besides those mentioned by Gellius that make Homer
the more Ancient yea Velleius Paterculus l. 1. makes Hesiod about 120 years
later then the age of Homer: but on the other side according to the Marmor
Arundel. Homer was by some years later then Hesiod. Cassius ap. Gellium l. 17.
c. 2. says that Homer and Hesiod were above 160 years after the Trojan war, but
the Marmor Arundel. makes Homer to have been above An. 300 after the taking of
Troy; and if you value Herodotus's opinion l. 2. c. 53. Hesiod and Homer were
no more then An. 400 before his own time. Cornelius Nepos ap. Gellium says that
Homer was but An. 160 before the building Rome.

Hitherto we have taken a view of Kingdoms and some illustrious persons that
were in the time of the Assyrian Monarchy. It remains that we take notice of
some remarkable occurrences that were in the same time, as

1. The flood of Ogyges. St Aug. de civ. Dei l. 18. c. 8. observes that
Historians are not agreed what time Ogyges himself was. Syncellus p. 148. says
that some refer the flood to the time of Phoroneus King of the Argives, others
to the time of Apis the successor of Phoroneus. Africanus ap. Eusebius. de
praepar. Evang. l. 10. c. 10. writes that it happened in the first of the 1020
years which were from Ogyges to the first Olympiad; whereas according to
Eusebius there were but about 987 years from this flood to the first Olympiad.
Censorinus c. 21. seems to make it to have been above 800 years before the
first Olympiad. From Ogyges's flood (says he) to the reign of Inachus were
about 400 years, from thence to the first Olympiad somewhat more then 400.

2. Deucalions flood. According to Solinus c. 11. there were 600 years from the
flood of Ogyges to this of Deucalion, according to Eusebius An. 237, according
to Orosius l. 1. c. 7 and 9, An. 230. St August. de civ. Dei l. 18. c. 10.
takes notice that Eusebius and St Hierome refer this of Deucalion to the time
of Cecrops, but that Varro refers it to the time of Cranaus who was successor
to Cecrops, and he might have added that Justin l. 2. c. 6. says that it was in
the reign of Amphictyon who succeeded Cranaus.

3. The taking of Troy. Censorinus c. 21. has these words, Sosibius indeed did
write that there were 395, But Eratosthenes 407, Timaeus 417, Aretres 514, and
besides these many have written diversely, whose very dissent does declare that
the thing is uncertain. Thus Censorinus. Now what it is about which there were
so many different opinions is not clear. It may seem to be the time from the
reign of Inachus (what Inachus I know not) to the first Olympiad. But learned
men have thought that he intended this of the time from the taking of Troy to
the first Olympiad, it being well known that Eratosthenes makes the time from
the taking Troy to the first Olympiad to have been just that number of years
which Censorinus mentions, viz. 407. However it be as to this, yea let it be
supposed that those Learned men were mistaken in thinking that Censorinus
referred to the taking of Troy in this passage; yet it cannot be denied that it
is a considerable Testimony of the uncertainty of Chronology, and we shall
sufficiently manifest the incertitude of the time when Troy was taken from
other Authors. Velleius Paterc. l. 1. makes it to have been An. 414 or 415
before the first Olympiad (not only 407 as Eratosthenes) Solinus c. 1. An. 408,
Eusebius 406 (in some Editions 405.) Very Learned men interpret the Marmor
Arundel. so that it makes the interval twi'xt the taking of Troy and the first
Olympiad to have been An. 434. As also they so interpret Dicaearchus ap.
Apollonii Skoliasten l. 4. ver. 272. Argonaut., that he makes it to have been
An. 436: for when Dicaearchus says (From the reign of Nilus to the first
Olympiad An. 436) they by the reign of Nilus understand the time of the Trojan
war, as perhaps by the reign of Inachus in Censorinus the same may be
understood. Add hereto that the Marmor Arundel. makes Troy to have been taken
An. 373 after the beginning of the reign of Cecrops, and in the 2d year of
Menestheus; whereas by Eusebius's account it was taken An. 375 after the
beginning of Cecrops, and in the 23d year of Menestheus; and by Syncellus's it
was taken An, 385 after the beginning of Cecrops, and in the 33d of Menestheus.
Also the Marmor Arundel. computes An. 320 from Deucalions flood to the taking
of Troy, but in Clemens Alex. Strom. 1. the very same number of years is
assigned from Deucalions flood to the rape of Hellen by Paris; now according to
Homer Iliad. w. ver. 765. there were 20 years between that rape of Helen and
the taking Troy, and consequently from the flood of Deucalion to the taking of
it there were An. 340 according to Clem. Alex., so that his computation exceeds
that of the Marble An. 20. From the taking of Troy to the building of Rome were
An. 432, so Dionysius Halic. l. 2. An. 433 says Solinus c. 1. An. 437 according
to Velleius Paterc. l. 1. I might take notice that Clemens Alex. writes how
some refer Troys being taken to the first year of Demophoons reigning at
Athens, as well as others refer it to the last year that Menestheus reigned
there, as also that Constantinus Manasses makes the Trojan war to have been in
David's time (saying that Priamus requested aid of him) whereas according to
Eusebius it was in the time of the Judges, particularly when Abdon judged
Israel: but enough has been produced already to show how great discord there
is about the year when this calamity befell Troy. There is no less difference
about the time of the year (whether it was in the Spring, Summer or Autumn) as
also about the month and day (of which they that please may consult Alex.
Strom. 1.) and therefore Plutarch in Camillus expresses himself very
cautiously speaking of the day of the month.

4. The return of the Heraclidae. Which was 80 years after Troys being taken
says Eratosthenes ap. Clem. Alex., almost 80 years says Velleius Paterc. l. 1.
By Eusebius it is referred to the time of Melanthus's reigning at Athens, but by
Syncellus to the time of his Son and successor Codrus.

5. The Ionick migration or the passing of the Jones from Attica to that part
of lesser Asia which is called Ionia. Philostratus in Euphorbo p. 702. says
that it was according to some 124, according to others 127 years after the war
of Troy that the Athenians sent a colony into Ionia, but Eratosthenes ap. Clem.
Alex. Strom. 1. makes it to have been 140 years after the expugnation of Troy;
for (says he) from the taking of Troy to the return of the Heraclidae were An.
80, and from that to the Ionick migration An. 60. And Strabo l. 13. seems to
dissent from them both, when he says that the AEolick migration was said to be
4 generations before the Ionick. Now 4 generations according to the usual
account (that 3 generations are 100 years, see Herodotus l. 2. c. 142. and
Clemens Alex. Strom. 1.) are above 130 years, so that the Ionick migration was
according to this computation above 130 years after the AEolick, and the
AEolick was some years after the taking Troy, yea according to Strabo above 50
years. For his account of it is that Orestes was the first Author of it, but he
dying, it was carried on by his Son Penthilus, who came into Thrace 60 years
after the war of Troy, about the time of the coming of the Heraclidae into
Peloponnesus. Thus Strabo. So that when Eratosthenes says From the taking of
Troy to the return of the Heraclidae An. 80, Strabo accounts only about 60; and
when Eratosthenes computes from the return of the Heraclidae to the Ionick
migration only An. 60, Strabo speaks of 4 generations between the AEolick and
it, and makes the AEolick to have been about the same time with the return of
the Heraclidae.

5. The building Carthage. It was 50 years before the expugnation of Troy, so
Appian de bello Punico, only 38 years before it says Philistus ap. Eusebius., and
in Scaligers edition only 32. But very many say that it was after Troys being
taken; An. 143 after it say some, An. 175 say others, An. 338, say others:
these 3 differing accounts are taken notice of by Eusebius, and the account
given by Josephus c. Apion. l. 1. that it was An. 143 and 8 months after the
building of Solomon's Temple, will not agree with any of these. Nor will these
that follow, viz. that of Velleius Paterc. l. 1. that it was 65 years before
Romes being built, and Servius's in Virgil AEneid. 1. that it was 70 years
before it, or Justins l. 18. c. 6. that it was 72 before it, or lastly
Timaeus's ap. Dionys. Halic. that it was 38 years before the first Olympiad.

7. The first Olympiad. That is accounted the first Olympiad in which Coraebus
was Victor, and Plegon in Fragment. accounts that the 28th Olympiad, with whom
Aristodemus and Polybius ap. Syncellum p. 196. seem to agree: but Callimachus
ap. Syncell. says that Coroebus overcame in the 14th Olympiad from Iphitus.
Syncellus p. 199. says that the first Olympiad was the 45th year of the reign
of Uzziah King of Judah, Eusebius makes it to have been the 50th year of that
King; but St Cyril c. Julian. l. 1. refers it to the reign of Jotham the Son of
Uzziah, as Africanus did before him if we believe Eusebius; tho Syncellus p.
197. would persuade us that Africanus referred it to the reign of Ahaz the Son
of Jotham.

8. The building of Rome. Touching the uncertainty of the time when this City
was built I shall transcribe the words of Solinus c. 1. Cincius (says he)
thought it was built in the 12th Olympiad, Pictor in the 8th, Nepos and
Lutatius following the opinion of Eratosthenes and Apollodorus in the 2d year
of the 7th Olympiad, Pomponius Atticus and M. Tullius in the 3d of the 6th
Olympiad. Thus Solinus, who also delivers his own opinion different from all
these, that it was built in the first year of the 7th Olympiad. They that
please may also consult Dionysius Halie. who has collected many various
opinions of both Greek and Roman writers about it.

I might instance in other occurrences, particularly in the Eclipse foretold by
Thales, as to which they cannot agree either in what Olympiad or in what Kings
reign it happened, Herodotus l. 1. c. 74. and Eudemus ap. Clem. Alex. Strom. 1.
saying that it was in the time of Cyaxares King of the Medes, but Solinus c.
16. and Eusebius in the reign of his Son Astyages: but I forbear.

All this time I have confined my self to the Assyrian Monarchy, and only
observed how more ancient Writers disagree in their accounts of time, for it
would be endless if I should go about to show the discord that there is among
our late Chronologers. Only it may not be amiss to represent how Scaliger is
not only at variance with others, but oftentimes also with himself: and how his
adversary Petavius is very unhappy in this respect as well as he is. And in
doing this I shall also confine my self to the time of the Assyrian Monarchy. I
begin with Scaliger.

Troy was taken An. 408, before the first Olympiad, Scalig. de Emend. temp. l.
1. de Periodo Attica Edit. 2. Troy was taken An. 406, before the first
Olympiad, Scaliger de Emend. l. 5. de Ilii excidio Edit. 1. The opinion that
Troy was taken An. 407, before the first Olympiad is more certain by much,
Scalig. de Emend. l. 5. de Ilii excidio Edit. 2.

Troy was taken An. Period. Julian, 3533, Scalig. de Emend. l. 5. de Ilii
excidio Edit. 1. Troy was taken An. Per. Jul. 3531, Scalig. de Emend. lib. 5.
de Ilii excidio Edit. 2. The first Olympiad was celebrated in the 36th year of
Azariah or Uzziah King of Judah, Scalig. de Emend. l. 5. de initio Olympiadum
Edit. 2. The first Olympiad was in the 37th year of Azariah, Scalig. Animadv.
in Eusebius. in An. 1241. The death of Nabopolassar was in An. Nabonassar 149,
Scalig. de Emend. l. 5. de initio Nebuchodonosor Edit. 2. Nabopolassar died in
An. Nabonassar 152, Scalig. in Fragment. p. 11. and in Canon. Isagog. l. 3.

Nabopolassar reigned only 19 years, Scalig. de Emend. l. 5. de initio
Nebucbodon. Edit. 1. Nabopolassar reigned 29 years complete and died in the 30
of his reign Scalig. in Fragment. p. 10 and 11. Nabopolassar died in the
beginning of the 29 year of his reign, Scalig. de Emend l. 5. de initio
Nabopolassar Edit. 2.

The beginning of Nebuchadnezzars reign was An. Per. Jul. 4107, Scalig. de
Emend. l. 5. de initio Nabuchodonosor. Edit. 1. The first year of
Nebuchadnezzar was An. Per. Jul. 4106, Scal. de Emend. l. 5. de initio
Nabuchodon. Edit. 2. Nebuchadnezzar reigned 7 years with his Father, Scalig. de
Emend. l. 5. de initio Nebuchod. Edit. 2. Nabuchadnezzar reigned almost 13
years with his Father, Scalig. in Fragment. p. 14. Nebuchadnezzars death was
An. Nabonassar 185, Scaliger de Emend. l. 5. de initio Nahuchod. Edit. 2.
Nebuchadnezzar died An. Nabonassar 183, Scalig. in Fragment. p. 14.

These are some instances of Scaligers uncertainty and inconstancy, with which
Petavius frequently upbraids him, and had been the more excusable, if he was
not guilty of the like himself. But his inconstancy will also appear by the
following instances.

The Kingdom of the Sicyonians begun An. Per. Jul. 2548, Petav. de doctrina
temporum l. 9. c. 16. The Kingdom of the Sicyonians begun An. Per. Jul. 2550,
Petav. de. doct. temp. l. 13. Inachus begun to reign An. Per. Jul. 2856, 179
years after the birth of Abraham, Petav. de doctr. temp. l. 9. c. 18. Inachus's
reign begun An. Per. Jul. 2857. in the 6th year after the death of Abraham (i.
e. 181 after his birth) Petav. Rationar. part. 2. l. 2. c. 5. The 7th year of
Pygmalion was An. Per. Jul. 3822, Petav. de doctr. temp. l. 9. c. 62. The 7th
of Pygmalion was An. Per. Jul. 3825, Petav. Rationar. part 2. l. 2. c. 13. The
first Olympiad was An. 776, before the birth of Christ, Petav. Rationar. part
1. l. 2. c. 5. The first Olympiad was An. 777, before our Saviors birth,
Petav. Rationar. part 2. l. 1. c. 11 and l. 3. c. 1 and 2. Nebucbadnezzar begun
the siege of Tire An. Per. Jul. 4122, Petav. Rationar. part 2. l. 2. c. 13. The
siege of Tire by Nebuchadnezzar begun An. Per. Jul. 4123, Petav. de doct. temp.
l. 9. c. 63.

To these we may add that Petavius makes one and the same year to answer to
several years. It is An. Per. Jul. 3961, in which he supposes Rome to have been
built. This answers to An. 752 before the birth of Christ (so Petav. de doctr.
temp. l. 9. c. 50.) to An. 753 before Christ (so in his Rationar. part. 1. l.
2. c. 7.) to An. 754 before Christ (so in Rationar. part 2. l. 3. c. 2.)
Finally in the end of his Books de doct. temp. being about to give us the
succession of the Kings in several Kingdoms he himself is pleased to acquaint
us, that he there gives an account of the beginning of the reigns of diverse
Kings somewhat different from that which he had given before in the Books
themselves, and this more especially in the Macedonian Kings.

We see then how wavering and unconstant these Learned men are in their
Chronology, and the great cause of their inconstancy is the uncertainty of it.
This uncertainty Petavius acknowledges as to the time of the creation of the
World. The number of the years from the Worlds creation to this time neither is
certainly known, nor can be without a Divine Revelation. These are the words of
Petavius de doct. temp. l. 9. c, 2. which may be applied to many other
Epocha's, about which Chronologers dispute with very great earnestness.

I have enlarged the more upon this subject, because of the great necessity and
usefulness of men's being convinced of this uncertainty of Chronology of which
we treat; which will appear, if we consider the many mischiefs which have been
occasioned by the want of such conviction. From the want of this have proceeded
many eager disputes about matters appertaining to Chronology, and those managed
with the greatest wrath and bitterness imaginable. If Syncellus had been
convinced of this uncertainty, he would have been more favorable to Eusebius,
and not taken all occasions of reprehending him, and that many times in very
rude and unbecoming language. Had others after him been thoroughly convinced of
it, and seriously considered it, it would have prevented the heats between
Scaliger, and the German Divines, and Scaliger would not have fallen so foul
upon our Mr Lydiat, endeavoring to expose him, and triumphing over him with
the greatest scorn and contempt. In like manner he treated all others that
opposed him, or only dissented from him, inveighing against every one that did
not fall down and worship every imagination of his; not sparing either Ancient
Writers or Modern, but passing the severest censures upon both. The
consideration of this uncertainty might also have prevented the scuffles
between Is. Vossius and his Countrymen that set themselves so fiercely against
him. Add hereto that if this uncertainty had been duly considered, the World
would not have been burdened with many tedious and voluminous writings, such
as Scaligers two Editions of his De emendatione Temporum, and his Canones
Isagog. etc. also Petavius's two Volumes De doctrina Temporum. Finally, for
want of the consideration of this not a few have spent a great part of their
life in the study of Chronology, and many of them men of extraordinary parts
and great diligence; so that if the time and industry, which they laid out upon
Chronological niceties, had been employed in more useful Studies, they might
have been very serviceable both to the time in which they lived, and also to
future generations. Therefore seriously weighing these and the like mischiefs
occasioned by the want of such conviction and consideration, I thought that I
could not do any thing more necessary and beneficial, then to endeavor to
convince men of the uncertainty of the greatest part of Chronology.

CHAP. II. Whether Lunar Months were in use with the Israelites before the
Captivity of Babylon.
Dr. Carry part 1. l. 1. c. 12. singles a passage out of Archbishop Oshers
Preface to his Annals, in which he says that it cannot be proved that the
Israelites used Lunar months before the Babylonish Captivity, but their year
consisted of 12 equal months, every month having 30 days, and 5 days being
added at the end of the 12th month in every common year, 6 days every 4th or
Leap-year. Thus the Archbishop. The arguments wherewith the Doctor opposes
this are either from authority or reason. His authorities are 1. The Penmen of
holy Scripture. 2. Other Writers. 1. The Scriptures which the Doctor produces
are Number. 10. 10. 28. 11. 1 Samuel 20. 1, 4, 5, 27, 34. 2 Kings 4. 23. 2 Chronicles. 8.
12, 13. Psalm. 81. 3. Ezekiel. 45. 17. 46. 3, 6. It is evident (says he) from one
or more of these Texts that the Lunar month was in popular use, particularly
from 1 Samuel 20. If you ask him how it is evident from one or more of these
Texts, all that he says to this purpose is 1. That the beginnings of the months
in the letter of the Law (i. e. Number. 10. and 28.) are interpreted by the
Psalmist (Psalm. 81.) to be the New moons. 2. That the Septuagint thought so
doubtless, who use the word (...) in these places. 3. That these Texts do
certainly mark out the New moon to be a day of solemnity. 4. That the morrow
after the New Moon is called the 2d day of the month. And now we have the whole
strength of the Doctors argument from Scripture. To which I answer 1. None of
those four propositions is evident, and consequently they cannot make it clear
that Lunar months were in popular use before the Captivity. I grant that if the
Translations of the Scripture were authentic, then three of the foresaid
propositions would be evident, viz. all except the 2d: but if we must have
recourse to the Original, then the other three are no more evident then it. For
instance, The first proposition is that the beginnings of the months Number. 10
and 28. are interpreted Psalm. 81. to be the New Moons: now the Hebrew words for
The beginnings of the months are (...) Number. 28. 11. and the Hebrew word which
is translated the New Moon Psalm. 81. 3. is (...), and to say that (...) is
interpreted by (...) is to say that an expression that is more plain is
interpreted by one that is more obscure. But let it be supposed (tho not
granted) that (...) is interpreted by (...), then we may say that the beginning
of the month is interpreted by the first day of the month; for the first day of
the month is called (...) says Kimchi both in his Radices and in his Comment
upon Psalm. 81. 3: and therefore instead of Blow the Trumpet in the New Moon, we
may Translate it, Blow the Trumpet in the first day of the month. Thus it
appears that the first proposition is not evident, and upon the very same
account the 3d and 4th propositions are not. For in all the Texts which the
Doctor has alleged for confirmation of those propositions ( viz. 1 Samuel 20.
5, 27, 34. 2 Kings 4. 23. 2 Chronicles. 8. 13. and Ezekiel. 45. 17. 46. 3, 6.) the
Hebrew word is also (...), which in 1 Samuel 20. 27, 34. signifies the month (and
is rendered so by our Translators) in the rest of the places it may signify the
first day of the month, or (which is the same) the New month, though in our
Bibles it is rendered in every one of them the New moon. So (to run over the
Texts) we may read To morrow is the first day of the month or the New month, 1 Samuel 20. 5. It is neither the first day of the month nor the Sabbath, 2 Kings
4. 23. On the first days of the month, 2 Chronicles. 8. 13, and Ezekiel. 45. 17. 46. 3.
and finally, In the day of the New Month, Ezekiel. 46. 6. So that it is the first
day of the month which these Texts do mark out to be a solemn day, and the day
after it is reckoned the 2d day of the month: but it will not be easily made
out that the New Moon is mentioned in any of those places. I acknowledge that
this account of the signification of the word (...) does not agree with that
which the Doctor gives of it, but his account will be fully examined in the
Appendix. It remains that I examine the Doctors 2d proposition, which is that
the 70 who use the word (...) in all those places ( viz. Number. 10. 10. 28. 11.
and Psalm. 81. 3.) doubtless thought that the beginnings of the months Number. 10.
and 28. are interpreted by the New Moons Psalm. 81. Now I deny, that this
consequence is evident, or that from their using the word (...) in all those
places it can be evidently deduced that they thought so as the Doctor says they
did. We may rather conclude from it that (...) Psalm. 81. signifies (not the New
Moon but) the first day of the month. For the beginnings of the months are
called (...) or (...), Number. 10. and 28. and then why should we not think that
(...) has the same signification Psalm. 81. 3: But the word (...) will also be
considered more fully in the Appendix.

2. Suppose that it was evident that the New Moon is marked out to be a day of
solemnity, it does not follow that the Lunar month was in popular use (which is
the thing in question) for the New Moon might be observed as a solemn day, on
what day soever of their month it happened; though it fell out toward the
middle or end of their month as well as if their month began with it. Again
suppose that it was evident, that the marrow after the New Moon is reckoned the
2d day of the month 1 Samuel 20, 5, 27, 34. yet it cannot be thence concluded
that the Israelites used Lunar months; for the morrow after the New Moon might
fall out at that time to be the 2d day of the month, though at other times it
was on other days of it. Thus his Text on which he chiefly relies, viz. 1 Samuel
20. fails him upon a double account, 1. It is not evident that the morrow after
the New Moon is reckoned the 2d day of the month. 2. If it was, the use of
Lunar months cannot be concluded from it. This may suffice for answer to his
argument from Scripture.

2. As to the Doctors argument from the authority of other Writers, he says
that All the Doctors, Ancient and Modern, Jews and Christians (except Kepler,
Petavius and Bishop Usher) were of opinion that the Jewish year after the
Israelites departure out of Egypt was Lunar. Now what shall we say to this
confident assertion? The least that we can say is, that it might have been
expected that so great an undertaker in Chronology should have acquainted
himself with Chronographers better then it seems he has done. If he had more
diligently consulted them, he would have found Massaeus and Temporarius very
positive for Solar years. It is manifest that the Scripture always every where
uses Solar years and equal months consisting of 30 days, so Massaeus
Chronicorum l. 1. in fin. It cannot be doubted but that both in Sacred and
profane History we are to understand Solar years, the days of every year being
365, so Temporarius Chronolog. Demonstr. l. 3. Harvillaeus also in Isagog.
Chronolog. l. 1. s. 11. p. 116. declares that he inclines chiefly to this
opinion. I incline (says he) more especially to the 5th opinion, viz. (as he
expresses it a little before p. 112, 113.) that till the Captivity of Babylon
the years are to be understood to be Solar, consisting of 12 equal Solar months
of 30 days with the addition of 5 days, and also of one more every 4th year.
And finally does not Scaliger sometimes seem to incline to this opinion? as in
his De emendat. Temp. l. 3. de anno priscorum Hebraeorum Abrahameo, where he
says that always even after the coming out of Egypt there were 5 days added at
or near the Equinox, as is sufficiently known by that which is disputed above
out of Moses. And that moreover the first day of the month is called (...)
which signifies (...), although there was no New moon on that day, no more then
there was on the first days of the Egyptian months. Also a little before this
he says that the sacred History testifies that David and Solomon did appoint 12
Officers according to the number of the 12 months of the year, see 1 Kings 4.
7. etc. 1 Chronicles. 27. 1. etc. The same Scaliger de emend. l. 3. p. 637. says
that when the Jews received the form of the Alexandrean year and the Calippick
Period, together with them they also received the Lunar year. Thus Scaliger,
who in all these particulars viz. that the Jews received the Lunar year after
the Captivity, that they superadded 5 days after their coming out of Egypt,
that their year consisted of 12 months, and that they called the first day of
the month (...) although the New moon did not happen on that day, no more then
it did on the first days of the Egyptian months, agrees very well with
Archbishop Usher. It appears then that Kepler and Petavius, are not the only
persons that have inclined to the Archbishops opinion, and that it had been
more prudent, if the Doctor had forborne that expression that all the Doctors
except those two were against him. Thus we have considered the Doctors
Arguments from Authority.

3. His Argument from Reason is very long, and they that would see it at large
may consult the Doctor himself Part. 1. l. 1. c. 12. beginning toward the end
of sect. 5. and reading on to sect. 8. I shall only give a Summary of it. He
says that it is not denied that before Christ's time the Lunar year was in
popular use. If then we hold that they used the solar year before the
Captivity, 1. He says us necessary that we show when, in what age and by what
means the change from Solar to Lunar was effected. 2. He wonders that neither
Josephus nor any other did take any notice of it. 3. He affirms that the Jews
would not suffer such a change. Now for answer to these.

As to the first, Why is it necessary to show when and in what age this change
was made, when the Doctor himself tells us that some have done it already? They
set it (says he s. 6.) after Alexanders time, under the Government of the
Seleucidae. Besides have not many innovations and corruptions crept into
particular Churches, and yet we do not think ourselves obliged to show the
precise time that they first sprung up?

As to the 2d, Why does the Dr wonder that Josephus and others take no notice
of this change, when he himself holds that after the departure of the
Israelites out of Egypt there was the same change of the year from Solar to
Lunar, and yet they have taken no notice of that? The Doctor says in the
beginning of s. 15. that when the Israelites were in Egypt their reckoning was
according to the Solar year, but after their coming out of Egypt he maintains
against the Archbishop that they used the Lunar year; now where is this change
taken notice of by Josephus? Josephus Ant. l. 1. c. 4. and l. 3. c. 10. says
that they were commanded to keep the Passover on the 14th Moon in the month
Nisan, and that Moses appointed Nisan to be the first month with reference to
their Feasts and the things pertaining to Divine worship; but as to buying and
selling and the rest of the dispensation of the year he made no alteration, but
retained the first rite, form or order. These are the words of Josephus. So
that if from hence that Moses appointed Nisan to be the first month with
reference to Feasts, etc. and the Passover to be kept on the 14th Moon in that
month, it can be necessarily concluded that he changed the year from Solar to
Lunar, so that in saying the one Josephus in effect says the other, then indeed
he does take notice of that change; but if it cannot be certainly concluded
(that Moses made such a change) from those words of Josephus (as I am well
assured it cannot) then he has taken no notice of it. I have insisted upon
this the longer because of that which the Doctor says s. 5. of Josephus and
Philo Judaeus. He says that they plainly signify that the year even of old
time from Moses was Lunar, and imply somewhat more, namely this, that there was
never any question made of it before their time. Now I would gladly be informed
where they either plainly signify the one, or imply the other. I have produced
Josephus's words already. Philo Judaeus de vita Mosis having said that Moses
made the beginning of the vernal Equinox the first month, adds, In this month
about the 14th day, the Moon being about to be at the Full, the Feast of the
Passover is celebrated, (...) in the present tense, so that Philo speaks of
that which was done in his time. Withal if he had spoken of the old time from
Moses, he neither plainly signifies that the year was then Lunar, nor implies
that there was never any question made of it.

The 3d particular remains, which is that the Jews would not suffer such a
change. The Doctor uses many words to prove this, the sum whereof is this.
The Jews (says he) believed that their ancient custom as to the time of
beginning the year and observing the Passover was of Primitive Divine
institution, or bound upon them by Divine Law; and therefore they would not
suffer a change of it. To which I answer, that if this be understood more
generally of their custom of beginning the year with the month Nisan, and
observing the Passover upon the 14th of that month, it will be granted that
they believed it to be of Divine Institution. But if we descend to particulars,
as that the first day of Nisan or their New years day was to be always that day
which answered to such or such a day in our Calendar, or what other day you
please; or that the day of the Passover was always to be that day which
answered (suppose) to our 4th of May, I cannot say that the Jews believed that
this was of Divine Institution, and the Doctor should have proved it otherwise
then by saying Questionless they must believe so. Yea, I could tell him that
some Jews have believed, that the precept for beginning the year with the month
Nisan was only temporary, and did not oblige them always to account it the
beginning of months.

CHAP. III. Of the month Dioscorinthius, 2 Mac. 11. 21.
THE month Dioscorinthius seems to have been mensis embolimus in Anno
Chaldaico, i. e. a month superadded in the Chaldaean year, and interposed
between Dystrus and Xanthicus, in which month Xanthicus the letters from the
King and the Romans to the Jews were written; so the Archbishop A. M. 3841.
The Doctor p. 84. falls upon him very insultingly for this. Upon consideration
of the premises (says he) we may ask the question what then becomes of that
conceit of Dioscorinthius as if it should be the Embolimaear month? Thus the
Doctor. Now 1. Suppose it was only a conceit, why does the Doctor single out
the Archbishop as if it was peculiarly his? especially when the Archbishop
expresses himself so cautiously and modestly, saying only that it seems to be
so. Scaliger de emend. Temp. l. 2. de periodo Syro-Macedonum Alexandrea
Salianus A. M. 3891. and Menochius in loc. are all of the Archbishops opinion;
yet we hear nothing of them, but the Archbishop alone must be arraigned and
tried, and the opinion (or conceit, for so the Doctor will needs call it,)
condemned. Now if you ask upon what evidence or grounds the opinion is
condemned, the Doctor tells us it is upon consideration of the premises; and if
we would know what those premises are, we must look back to the beginning of
the 25th section in that 84th page which I alleged above. Also that we may the
better understand that which the Doctor would be at, we must observe that in 2
Mac. 11. 21. the date of Lysias's letter is thus expressed; The 148th year the
24th day of the month Dioscorinthius. Now the sum of that which the Doctor
says is this, That according to his Tables the 147th year of the Seleucidae was
Embolimaear (as he calls it) i. e. a year in which one month was superadded.
Yet (says he) according to popular estimation (and that very just and good) not
the 147th but the 148th was Embolimaear. Then he adds in sect. 26. Whether the
year 147 or 148 were Embolimaear it matters not, once I cannot see how the year
149 could be such; And I speak of the 149 year Jewish reckoning according to
our Tables, which in the Chaldaean account was the 148 according to the date of
Lysias's letter 2 Mac. 11. Thus the Doctor. So that in short which year was
Embolimaear he knows not, but resolves that the 149 or 148 according to 2 Mac.
11. could not be such, that he might conclude against the Archbishop that
Dioscorinthius was not mensis Embolimus, a superadded month. But it may be said
that the Doctor gives a reason why the 149 year could not be Embolimaear,
because then the vernal New moon in the 150 year must be set over to the 15 of
April. To which I answer, that (possibly) according to the Doctors Tables it
must have been set so late, but who will regard his Tables, when he himself
has told us, that an account differing from that in his Tables, may be very
just and good, and agree very well with the truth, tho not with the precise
strictness (as he expresses it) of those his Tables? Besides his Tables have
reference to the Jewish year, whereas the Archbishop speaks expressly of the
Chaldaean year, and that which the Doctor calls the 149 i. e. the 148 in 2 Mac.
11. might be an intercalary year in the Chaldaean account, tho not in the
Jewish. Therefore the consideration of the Doctors premises does not persuade
us to slieght the Archbishops conjecture so much as he does. But

2. What if we should ask now What will become of the Doctors conceit, that
Dioscotinthius was that month which is called (...)? especially when we
consider that it ingageth him to say that Lysias's letter to the Jews was of a
later date then the Kings letter to them; the Kings letter bearing date April
9, Lysias's June 16 after (according to his reckoning) then which scarce any
thing can seem to me more incredible. When the King himself had by letter
certifi'd the Jews that he granted their desire, can any one imagine that Lysias
should write above two months after, only to signify the same thing to them?
If the Doctor had only said that Lysias's letter to the Jews was of later date
then the Kings letter to him, he had said that which is no less probable then
the other is improbable. For I make account that Lysias first informed the King
what the Jews desired, then the King writ to him to certify them that he
granted their desire (a copy of this letter we have a Mac. II. 22, etc.) Lysias
having received that letter, writes to the Jews as the King directed him, and
his letter bears date the 24 of Dioscorinthius. Lastly the King himself writ a
letter to the Jews dated the month following (according to the Archbishop)
Xanthicus the 15, which he sent with Menelaus (by whom also he had been
acquainted with the desire of the Jews) to give them-full assurance, that he
granted their request. In this there is nothing improbable. But that the King
should give order to Lysias to write to the Jews, and that he should not do it
till above two months or three months perhaps after, is that which I can by no
means subscribe to.

To conclude, it cannot be determined certainly what month it was, whether
Dystrus, as Serarius thought, or Dius as Grotius, or Dystro-Xanthicus as the
Archbishop: but of all the conjectures which I have seen, the Doctors
conjecture seems to be the least probable.

CHAP. IV. Of the time when Artaxerxes Longimanus begun his reign.
THE Archbishop A. M. 3531 sets the beginning of Artaxerxes's reign 9 years
before the received account. He was persuaded to set it so soon by the
Testimonies of Eusebius and Thucydides. Eusebius says that Themistocles fled to
the Persians Olymp. 76. An. 4, and Thucydides accordingly refers Themistocles's
coming to Artaxerxes to the time between the siege of Naxos, and the noble
victory which Cimon obtained against the Persian at Eurymedon; also he refers
the beginning of Artaxerxes's reign to the same time. For he says that
Themistocles writ a letter then to Artaxerxes newly reigning. Thus the
Archbishop. Now it may be that he is singular in this opinion about the
beginning of the reign of Artaxerxes, he himself insinuates so much. It must be
granted also that the time of Themistocles's flight is not agreed upon, and
indeed is one great instance of the uncertainty of Chronology. For Plutarch
writes that Ephorus, Dinon, Clitarchus, Heraclides and many more say, that
Themistocles came into Persia in the time of Xerxes: but that Charon Lamsacenus
agrees with Thucydides and affirms that he came to Artaxerxes his son, Xerxes
being dead; also Plutarch adds that Thucydides agrees better with the Annals.
Cornelius Nepos also follows Thucyaides, tho he was not ignorant that others
were of a different opinion from him. But suppose Thucydides, Charon,
Lamsacenus and Cornel. Nepos to be certainly in the right, in affirming that
Themistocles fled to Artaxerxes, yet whether it can be inferred thence that the
beginning of Artaxerxess reign was so soon as the Archbishop has set it, is
another question, which I shall not take upon me to determine. I shall
therefore only 1. Briefly thew the insufficiency of the Doctors answer to that
which the Archbishop alleges. 2. Take notice of an unbecoming reflection of
his upon the Archbishop.

The Doctors answer to the Archbishop we have Part 2. l. 1. c. 11. s. 8. n. 1,
2, 3. To Eusebius he opposes Diodorus Sioul. l. 11. by whom he says it is
clearly asserted that the time of Themistocles's flight was Olymp. 77. An. 2,
not Olympiad 76. An. 4. as Eusebius. To Thucydides he opposes the same Diodorus
Sie. and Justin, who (as he says) clearly assert that Cimons victory at
Eurymedon was in the time of Xerxes. As to Themistocles's letter to Artaxerxes
he says 1. The date of it is not known, possibly was not known to Thucydides
himself. 2. It is not without great suspicion that it was an Athenian trick, an
invention of Themistocles's enemies, a letter framed on purpose to blast his
reputation even after his death. 3. If it was true, it only evinceth this, that
Themistocles lived so long an Exile abroad as to the time of Artaxerxes his
reign. This is the sum of the Doctors answer. To which I reply;

1. It is not clearly asserted by Diodorus Sicul. that the time of Themistocles
his flight was Olymp. 77. An. 2. He indeed speaks of it in that year, as he
does also of his Ostracism and death. He thought it best to dispatch at once
all that concerned Themistocles's fall, and so in that year he gives us an
account of his Ostracism or Banishment, his going to Argos, his flight from
thence to Admetus, and afterward from Admetus into Asia, his journey from
thence to the Persian Court, and what befell him there, and lastly of his death.
Not that all these fell out in that year, (for there was a considerable time
from his Ostracism to his coming to the Persian Court, and a considerable time
again from his coming thither to his death) but it is Diodorus Sicul. his usual
way to throw things thus together that belong to the same subject. As then from
his mentioning Themistocles's Ostracism and death in that year, we cannot
conclude that they fell out that year: so from the mention of his flight in
that year i: cannot be concluded, that it happened then. However, it is plain,
that it is not clearly asserted by Diodorus Siculus, that the time of
Themistocles's flight was Olymp. 77. An. 2, let the Doctor say what he pleases.

2. It is very true that Diodorus Sicul. and Justin do make Cimons victory to
have been in the time of Xerxes, differing therein from Thucydides, and (as is
probable) following Ephorus, Dinon and others, who refer Themistocles's flight
to the time of Xerxes: but as Cornel. Nepos rather believed Thucydides about
the time of Themistocles's flight, because he lived near the time of
Themistocles, and was of the same City, so may we rather believe him about the
time of Cimons victory upon the same motives.

3. As to the letter with which the Doctor is so much troubled, 1. If the date
of it be not known, how comes the Doctor to know it so well, as to be able to
tell us that it is of the same date with the story of Themistocles's drinking
Bulls blood? 2. Why says the Doctor, that possibly the date of it was not known
to Thucydides, when Thucydides plainly tells us that Themistocles writ the
letter after that he was come to Ephesus, being gone from thence into the
midland Countries? 3. If there be so great suspicion that it was an Athenian
trick, it is strange that Thucydides and Corn. Nepos (who transcribes the
letter from him) were not aware of it. It must be acknowledged that the Doctor
was very quick sented that could smell it out at such a distance, when those
Authors which were much nearer did not. 4. It is most strange that the Doctor
should say that if it be true, it evinces only this, that Themistocles lived so
long as to the time of Artaxerxes's reign. As if the writing this letter was
one of the last acts he did, whereas he writ it (as we have seen) before his
coming to the Persian Court, and consequently Artaxerxes had begun his reign
then. Finally should we be so liberal to the Doctor as to grant that the letter
is supposititious, he will gain little by it; for it is still apparent that
Thucydides believed that Artaxerxes had begun to reign before Themistocles's
coming into Persia.

The Doctors unbecoming reflection upon the Archbishop is in s. 8. n. 4. where
he says that we must take notice that the knitting all these knots, and
patching together those shreds, as 1. Themistocles's courtly letter, 2.
Eusebius's incongruous Annotation, 3. Ctesias's authorizing (...) Artabanus
nothing to the purpose, these are upon design to make a boulster for the
Bishops interpretation of the 70 weeks of Daniel. Thus the Doctor. As if the
Archbishop foresaw that the Doctor would lay his interpretation to sleep, and
so set himself to knit knots and patch shreds together to make a boulster for
it. Or as if the Archbishops design was to serve his Hypothesis, whatsoever
became of the Truth. In the mean time the Archbishops interpretation is that
which very many Expositors, Ancient and Modern, have approved and followed,
computing the 70 weeks (as the Archbishop does) from the 20th of this
Artaxerxes. This 20th of Artaxerxes (according to the Archbishops calculation)
was An. Per. Jul. 4260, tho it is represented here by the Doctor as if the
Archbishop made it to be An. Per. Jul. 4261. To conclude this, I wish the
Doctor had not Part 2. l. 2.. 1. c. 9. s. 11. after a profession of all
humility, insulted with such contempt and scorn over many that have labored as
much to clear the sense of that celebrated Prophecy of the 70 weeks, as he has
done to obscure and pervert it. See the 2d chapt. of the same Book and Section.

CHAP. V. Of the time when Sanchuniathon, Semiramis and Nitocris lived.
THE Doctor Part 2. l. 1. c. 18. s. 11. tells us, that the world is made to
believe, that Semiramis was in the time of the Trojan war, or near thereabouts
according to Sanchuniathon. This is that (...) and (...) of which he speaks in
the same sect., which (says he) bears it self out upon the name of Semiramis,
and the credit of Sanchuniathon. And in the margin he cites Bishop Usher for
all this. Now it is true that the Archbishop A. M. 2789 will have Semiramis to
have been in the time of the Trojan war or thereabouts; but I would know where
it is that the Archbishop alleges Sanchuniathon for this, or reports it upon
the credit of Sanchuniathon. It is not Sanchuniathon that the Archbishop
alleges, but Porphyry, as cited by Eusebius. de Praepar. Evang. l. 1. and 10, who
says that Sanchuniathon was contemporary to Semiramis, and that she is said to
have been either before the Trojan affairs, or about the same time with them.
But let this strange oversight be past by. To Sanchuniathon and the Archbishop
the Doctor opposes Herodotus, who (as the Doctor would make us belive in this
s. 11) reckons Semiramis to have been 520 years after the siege of Troy. But if
we read on and peruse the 12th sect., it will appear that he is not serious in
it. For tho here after having spent many words about it, he concludes, that
this is most certainly the reckoning of Herodotus; yet there he says that it is
not imputable to Herodotus but his transcriber, who writ (...) instead of
(...). The meaning of this is, that if Herodotus had indeed said that Semiramis
was only five generations before Nitocris (as it is in our copies, see
Herodotus l. 1. c. 184.) then the Doctor thinks that it would have followed,
that by Herodotus's account Semiramis had been 520 years after the siege of
Troy: but (says the Doctor) our copies are faulty, and 50 being put instead of
5 we must read that Semiramis was Fifty generations before the other. The
question then will be, whether we must follow our copies, or the Doctors
correction, who produces no other authentic copy to warrant it. Yea but the
Doctor will demonstrate that this correction must be admitted. Let us (says he)
rate these 50 generations by Herodotus's rule (which is that 3 generations are
100 years) the product will be An. 1666. Let these be deducted from 4160 the
age and time of Nitocris, the remainder is 2494. which falls just with the time
of Semiramis her reign, the 35th year of her reign, according to the years of
the Julian Period described in our Scheme. These are the Doctors words, who
triumphantly concludes, This is a demonstration, I must insist upon it, taken
from Herodotus, a demonstration that Herodotus is on our side contra gentes.
And I would have given the Doctor leave to have been transported thus, if he
had proved these three things, 1. That the age and time of Nitocris was An.
Per. Jul. 4160. 2. That the word (...) in this place of Herodotus is to be
taken in that sense in which three generations make a Century, 3. That his
Scheme is a right Scheme. But if he fail in the proof of any one of these, what
becomes of the demonstration, which he must insist upon, and which occasioned
such triumph.

1. The Doctor in his demonstration (as he calls it) takes it for granted that
An. Per. Jul. 4160. was the age and time of Nitocris, whereas in sect. 11. he
was more cautious, and only said it was about that year. And yet he brought
neither Authority nor reason to satisfy us that it was about that year, unless
his saying without doubt it must be so, be Authority enough.

2. He takes it for granted, that the word (...) in Herodotus l 1. c. 184. is
to be taken in that sense in which three generations are accounted 100 years,
whereas it has various significations, and we may observe in Herodotus l. 2.
c. 142. where he says that three generations are 100 years, that the word (...)
or (...) is still joined with (...), as (...), and (...), and (...). Now this
addition of (...) does determine the signification of the word (...), so that
there it plainly signifies a generation of men. But here where the speech is of
Semiramis, we have (...) without any such addition to determine its
signification.

3. He tells us that An. Per. Jul. 2494. falls just with the 35 year of
Semiramis, according to his Scheme. So that in the upshot all depends upon his
Scheme, and if that will not bear the weight of the demonstration which he
builds upon it, it must fall to the ground. His Scheme we have in the end of
this 18 Chapter, and to recommend it to us, he says that it is Africanus's. But
how comes it then that in the beginning of the Chapter he gives us another
Scheme differing from this, and tells us that that is from Africanus? About the
time that Semiramis begun to reign the difference between the two Schemes is no
less then 25 years. But the Doctor solves this by saying that the one is
Africanus's according to Syncellus, the other according to Helvicus and
Ricciolus. So that it is questionable whether of them is Africanus's (if either
of them be) but there is some reason why we should rather believe Syncellus
then them, because he had greater advantages for knowing what was delivered to
Posterity by Africanus then they had. Add hereto that Helvicus seems not to
have valued the Scheme which he gives us as from Africanus so highly as the
Doctor does; for he gives us also another Scheme out of Justin, and observing
that Justin makes the Assyrian Empire to have continued only 1300 years, he
adds that this comes nearer to the Scripture, and again that it agrees very
well both with the Scripture and with the Era Babylonica. In a word, unless
there was a better accord among Historiographers about the time of the duration
of that Empire, about the number of the Kings and of the years that they
reigned, there can be no certainty either in the Doctors Scheme, or in any
other whatsoever. It is plain then that he has fallen far short of
demonstrating that we must read Fifty generations instead of five.

By the way, the Doctor forgot to tell us that he was obliged to Scaliger
(fragment. p. 42.) for this Criticism, or perhaps he was not willing to mention
him for this reason among others, because tho Scaliger thought that it should
be Fifty generations, yet he differs from him in the conclusion; for he says
that they amount to more then 1666 years, and being computed backward end in
the reign (not of Semiramis, but) of Ninus himself.

But it may be said, If we retain the usual reading, it will not help the
Archbishop at all, who makes Semiramis to have reigned about the time of the
Trojan war. For if she was but Five generations before Nitocris, and if
Nitocris lived about An. Per. Jul. 4160, then Semiramis must have been 500
years at the least after the siege of Troy, since according to this account she
was only 166 years before Nitocris, for Five generations according to the
forementioned rule amount to no more. But to answer this briefly, Suppose that
all the rest was granted, the Doctor (as I observed before) has not proved
either that Nitocris lived about An. P. J. 4160, or that (...) in Herodotus
amount to no more then 166 years. All his proof for the former is that, Without
doubt it must be so. For the later he brings a rule out of Herodotus l. 2. c.
142. to which I have already answered that it is not necessary that (...)
should have the same signification in Herodotus l. 1. c. 184. that it has l.
2. c. 142; especially when the word (...) or (...) is joined with it in the
later place, not in the former. But further (...) amongst other things
signifies an Age, Seculum, (see the Lexicon Graecolatinum vetus) yea the
Doctors great friend Is. Vossius says that it not only signifies an Age or 100
years, but sometimes above 100 years, Imo etiam 100 aliquando uti est apud
Theophrastum, vel etiam 110 annorum intervallum continet (...) ut docet
Phlegon. They are the words of Vossius con. Hornium Castigat. ad c. 6. Now the
word being interpreted in this sense, Herodotus says that Semiramis was 550
years before Nitocris, and so rather confirms the Archbishops opinion
concerning the time when Semiramis reigned.

CHAP. VI. Who Nabonasar was.
THE Archbishop A. M. 3257. makes Belesis, who obtained the Kingdom of Babylon
after the death of Sardanapalus, to be the same with him whom Hipparchus,
Ptolemaeus and Censorinus call Nabonasar. The Doctor Part 2. l. 1. c. 17. falls
foully upon him for this, and yet has very little to say against it. That
which he does say is 1. That there is a project in it, viz. to bring down
Sardanapalus 100 years and more lower in time, then all Historians and
Chronologers before did set him. 2. That he will not believe it. 3. That
Herodotus has no cover for this dish. Now for answer to these particulars, I
need not insist upon any of them but the first. For as to the 2d, Tho the
Doctor will not believe that Belesis was Nabonasar, this notwithstanding, it
may be very true. And as to the 3d, We need not go to Herodotus for a cover,
since the Doctor has not discovered any nakedness in the Archbishops opinion.
The first then only remains, in which the Doctor has brought forth all the
Historians and Chronologers that were before him against the Archbishop; all
these set Sardanapalus more then 100 years higher then he does. To which I
shall only say, that I cannot commend the Doctors prudence in using this large
expression, All Historians and Chronologers, for I can affirm that there are
some who do not set Sardanapalus so high as he pretends. Bibliander refers the
beginning of the reign of Sardanapalus to the 25 year of Amaziah King of Judah,
Sr W. Rawleigh to his 21, Funccius and Salianus to his 20, Torniellus to his
19, Constantinus Phrygio and Bunting to his 18, Eusebius to his 16, Gordon to
his 13 or 14, Simson to his 10, Syncellus to the 7, and Freculphus to the time
of Azariah or Vzziah the Son and Successor of Amaziah, Orosius l. 1. c. 19 to
the 64 year before the building of Rome. Now there is not one of all these that
sets Sardanapalus more then 100 years higher then the Archbishop does.
According to the Archbishop Sardanapalus's reign begun 19 years before the
building of Rome, and according to Orosius it begun but 64 years before it, the
difference between them is only 45 years. Freculphus and the Archbishop refer
the beginning of his reign to the time of the same King of Judah, viz. Vzziah,
and the Archbishop particularly to Vzziahs 44 year, and so they cannot differ
above 43 years. They that make him to have begun his reign in the time of
Amaziah do indeed set him higher then Orosius and Freculphus do, but Syncellus
who goes the highest of them differs not above 66 years from the Archbishop;
for from the 7 of Amaziah (who reigned but 29 years in all, 2 Kings 14. 2. and
2 Chronicles. 25. 1.) to the 44 of Vzziah there are no more, unless it be admitted
that there was an interregnum. And it must be a very long interregnum of almost
40 years, to make the distance twixt the 7 year of the Father to the 44 year of
the Son to have been above 100 years. Add hereto that Bid who refers the death
of Sardanapalus to the time of Vzziah, and so the Chronicon at the end of De la
Hays Biblia magna which refers it to the 9 year of the same Vzziah, do not set
him more then 100 years higher then the Archbishop does. The same must be said
of Bucholzer, who makes Sardanapalus's his death to have happened An. 823
before Christ, when according to the Archbishop it fell out An. 748 before
him. Finally Genebrard and our Mr Lydiat, who will have Saraanapalus to have
been the same with Esarhaddon Isa. 37. 38. or Assaradon-Pul (as they call him)
do bring down Sardanapalus many years lower then the Archbishop sets him; for
Esarhaddon did not reign before the time of Hezekiah. I may then safely
conclude, that the Archbishop had no such project to bring down Sardanapalus
more then 100 years lower then all Historians and Chronologers had set him.

To return to Nabonasar, with the Doctors good leave I would ask the question,
Why is the Archbishop only quarreled with for holding that he was Belesis?
They that please to consult Mr Lydiats Emendatio temporum A. M. 3257 will find,
that we were told the very same thing in express terms by him many years since.

CHAP. VII. Of Darius Hystaspis, whether he was the husband of Esther, and of
two of his wives Atossa and Artystona.
THE Arch Bishop A. M. 3483 and 3490. modestly offers some conjectures
concerning Darius Hystaspis, as 1. That he was Ahasuerus in the Book of Esther,
2. That Atossa was Vashti, 3. That Artystona was Esther. For this he must not
escape the Doctors lash Part 2. l. 2. s. 1. c. 4. notwithstanding that the
Doctor might have known, that many learned men, as Bertram de Repub. Jud. c.
13. Carrion, Melancthon, Funccius, Bunting, the Author of the Chronicon in De la
Haye's Biblia magna, Fevardentius, etc. have thought that Darius Hystaspis was
the husband of Esther, as well as the Archbishop; as likewise that there are
not many questions about which the differing opinions are so many, as about
this; Esther having been married by one or other to most of the Kings of
Persia, and to some of the Kings of the Medes. Melancthon also thought that
Artystona was Esther, and Atossa Vashti.

As to the conjecture that Darius Hystaspis was that Ahasuerus, who reigned
from India to Ethiopia over 127 provinces, Esther 1. 1. the Archbishop A. M.
3483 observes from Valerius Maximus l. 9. c. 2. that this Darius before he
obtained the Kingdom was called Ochus (...), to which (...) being added after
his being King, he had the name Ahasuerus, as Cambyses had before him. And A.
M. 3509 he says, that he is much confirmed in his opinion by that which we read
of Ahasuerus Esth. 10. 1. that he laid a tribute upon the land, and upon the
Isles of the sea. This (says he) agrees to Darius, who was the first that
instituted the paying of tribute, when they brought gifts before: (for which he
alleges Herodotus l. 3. c. 89. Strabo l. 15. Polyaenus Stratagem. l. 7. and
Plutarch Apophthegmat. Regum and Imperatorum) who also subdued and ruled over
the Isles in the AEgean sea (as he gathers from Thucydides l. 1. and Plato in
Menexeno) whereas Xerxes after his overthrow in Greece lost those Isles, so
that only Clazomenae, and Cyprus remained under the dominion of his Successors,
for which we may consult Xenophon Hellenicwn l. 5. Thus the Archbishop.

And what says the Doctor to all this? He dispatches it in very few words. For
1. The name Ahasuerus, 2. The dignification or title of being ruler over 127
Provinces, from India to Ethiopia, 3. The imposing tribute upon the Islands,
all and every of these (says he) did as much belong to the Kings of Darius's
succession, as to himself in particular; therefore nothing can be concluded
certain from hence in special for Darius. Thus the Doctor.

Whereunto I reply, 1. That the Archbishop never designed to conclude any
thing certain from thence, he knew full well that nothing can be concluded
certainly in such difficult questions as this is. 2. How appears it that all
and every of these did as much belong to Darius's Successors as to himself? the
Doctors own saying it is all the authority or proof that is brought for it.
Possibly some have said that Ahasuerus was a common name of all the Kings of
Persia, but we are not obliged to believe every bold conjecture or confident
assertion. And when the Doctor says that the being Ruler over 127 Provinces
belonged to Darius's Successors indefinitely, he seems to forget what he had
said Part 2. l. 1. c. 20 viz. that Egypt (which was certainly one of the
Provinces) did revolt from the Persians in the time of Darius Nothus, and was
not reduced till the reign of Artaxerxes Ochus. And then, as to the imposing
tribute upon the Islands, the Archbishop produces the Testimonies of sundry
Writers to prove 1. That this Darius was the first that imposed tribute (which
could not belong to his Successors.) 2. That he subdued and ruled over the
Isles in the AEgean sea, which his Successors did not; for his Son Xerxes lost
them upon his overthrow in Greece. But to all this the Doctor says nothing. I
shall only add to that which the Archbishop has observed of this matter, that
in Herodotus l. 3. c. 96. there is express mention of the Isles paying tribute
to this Darius.

We are now to make trial whether the Doctor be more happy in his arguing
against the Archbishop, then he has been in answering his arguments. He
objects against the Archbishops conjecture, 1. That Darius was a name so well
known to all the Jewish Writers, whether at Babylon, Sufa or Jerusalem, and so
appropriated to him that was the Son of Hystaspis, that it would be a very
strange thing to see his name suppressed by any of them. 2. That this Darius
was an eminent Benefactor to the Jewish Nation from the first of his reign to
his 6 year, and that it was his interest to confirm all Cyrus's decrees, and so
it is not likely, that in the 12 of his reign he should so much forget himself,
as at the instigation of a malapert Courtier to give commandment for the utter
destruction of the people of the Jews, throughout all his Dominions. 3. That
this Prince's levity in making ostentation of the Queens beauty, and
peevishness in taking so deep an offense at her refusal, and petulancy in the
use of many Concubines, and lastly rashness in granting a decree for an
universal massacre of the Jews, will not suit with Darius, who before he
obtained the Kingdom had been one of the Seven Counselors or Ministers of
State, and was full 28 years old when he came to the Crown. Thus the Doctor.

Before I return answer to all this I must premise, that the Doctor is of
opinion that Artaxerxes Longimanus was the husband of Esther. Now I say that
these objections make as well against Artaxerxes, as they do against Darius.
The Doctor himself confesses this to be true of the 2d objection. And as to the
first, Artaxerxes is a name which was as well known to the Jewish Writers as
Darius. For the 3d, the levity, peevishness, petulancy, rashness and cruelty in
granting a decree for a Massacre of all the Jews mentioned in it will not suit
with Artaxerxes, who is commended by Plutarch for his mildness or lenity, as
well as magnanimity, and by Diodor. Sicul. and others for his prudence in
managing affairs at the very first. So that the Doctor is obliged to answer
these objections as much as we. Besides the Doctor is guilty of not a few
mistakes. 1. I cannot understand why he says in the first objection, that the
name of Darius was appropriated to him who was the Son of Hystaspes, since
there were two other Persian Kings that had this name, viz, Darius Nothus and
Darius Codomannus; not to mention Darius the Mede. 2. I do not know how the
Doctor will prove that Darius was one of the Seven Counselors of Ministers of
State before he obtained the Kingdom, especially when he was but newly come to
Susa when the other conspirators against the Magi took him into their number;
see Herodotus l. 3. c. 30. The same Herodotus l. 3. c. 139. tells us indeed,
that he was one of Cambyses his guard, his (...) or satelles, but adds that he
was a man of no great note. 3. Suppose it granted that the levity, peevishness
and rashness noted in Ahasuerus did not suit with Darius's usual temper, yet
when he was heated with Wine (see Esth. 1. 10.) that might betray him to
miscarriages of this nature. It was therefore a mistake in the Doctor to think
that he might conclude thence, that Ahasuerus was not Darius. I add that if
cruelty was one of Ahasuerus's qualifications (as his giving commandment
utterly to destroy all the Jews in all his Dominions must be confessed to be an
act of cruelty) no man will acquit Darius of that, who calls to mind his
merciless slaughter of all the Sons of Oeobazus, only because he desired that
one of them might be permitted to stay behind, and not to accompany him in his
expedition against the Sythians, Herodot. l. 4. c. 84. This may suffice for the
first conjecture that Ahasuerus was Darius.

For the two other conjectures, that Atossa was Vashti, and Artystona Esther,
the Doctor objects that the agreement of the names Atossa and Vashti is of no
moment against the authority of History and Testimony of Herodotus, who writes
that Atossa was married to Darius after his obtaining the Kingdom, and that he
had four children by her, and that she continued all the time of Darius to have
a great power, yea all the power with him. How then (says he) is it likely that
in the 3d year of this Kings reign she should be put away? And to say that
Artystona was Esther, because the King had a greater kindness for her then any
of his other wives, yea and that the Persian Genealogies were falsifi'd out of
envy to the Jews, this (says the Doctor) is worse then saying nothing at all.
To which I answer, that the Archbishop does not say, that the Persian
Genealogies were falsifi'd out of envy to the Jews, but only that we may think
either that the Persians out of envy dissembled the parentage of Esther, or
that Herodotus had not rightly understood the Persian Genealogies. Again, the
Archbishop does not insist upon the agreement of the names Vashti and Atossa,
tho it is true he thought as Melancthon also did that Atossa was Vashti: as he
also thought with Carrion and Melancthon that Artystona was Esther; and he was
the rather moved to think so, because of the singular affection that Darius
bare to her, having her Image all of solid Gold; see Herodotus l. 7. c. 69. Now
whether this is worse then saying nothing at all let others determine.

CHAP. VIII. Of Ninus junior and Tiglathpileser.
THE Archbishop A. M. 3257. declares his opinion, that Ninus the Successor of
Sardanapalus mentioned by Castor apud Syncellum p. 205, 206. was the same with
him who in AElian Hist. Animal. l. 2. c. 21. is called Tilgam, in 2 Kings 15.
29. and 16. 7, 10. Tiglathpileser, but in 1 Chronicles. 5. 6, 26, and 2 Chronicles. 28.
20. Tilgathpilneser. This also is disliked by the Doctor Part 2. l. 2. s. 3. c.
4. and yet all that he says against it is, that there is just as much in AElian
to show that this Ninus junior was Tilgam, as there is in the Scripture to show
that he was Tiglathpileser, and no more. His meaning is, that there is nothing
either in AElian to show the one, or in the Scripture to show the other. To
which I answer 1. That there is as much in the Scripture to show that this
Ninus was Tiglathpileser, as there is in it to show that Phul was in a distance
of some 85 years after this Ninus, which the Doctor confidently affirms in this
Chapter. 2. Tho there be nothing in AElian to show the one, or in the Scripture
to show the other, yet they may be true. The Doctor is willing to grant that
Tilgam in AElian and Tilgathpilneser in the Scripture are one and the same
person, and yet there is nothing either in the one or the other to show this.
3. The Archbishop knew that there is nothing in Scripture directly to prove
that Ninus junior was the same with Tiglathpileser, but the ground of his
conjecture seems to have been this, that Tiglathpileser according to the
Scripture was King of Assyria at that time, when this Ninus was King of Assyria
according to Heathen Writers.

CHAP. IX. Of the times of Moses and Inachus.
THE Doctor Part 2. l. 2. s. 3. c. 10. says that it is fairly acknowledged by
the Archbishop, that it was the opinion of Tatianus, Justin Martyr, Clemens,
Josephus, Justus Tiberiensi^^ with others, that Moses was born in the time of
Inachus, and that the migration of Israel out of Egypt was in Phoroneus's time.
Wherein the Doctor has represented the Archbishop not much amiss, for A. M.
2179. he says that the forecited Authors believed that Moses was equal i. e.
contemporary to Inachus, tho it was the Archbishops own opinion that the
departure of the Israelites out of Egypt was long after the reign of Inacbus.
But if the Doctor have dealt well with him in this, I am sure he has not done
so in that which follows. For he adds that All that which he ( i. e. the
Archbishop) says to it is this, that his calculation, which he is sure is
right, will not permit it to be so, i. e. Moses to be contempory to Inachus.
Whereas the Archbishop does not say this, and suppose that he had said it, it
is not all that which he says.

1. The Archbishop does not say this. He does not say, that he is sure that
his calculation is right. He says indeed that the right account of times does
not permit us to doubt of this, that the departure of the Israelites out of
Egypt was much later then the reign of Inachus; but all that can be made of
this is, that the Archbishop thought that the account of times which he
followed is right; that he was sure that his calculation is right, he no where
says. And yet if he had said this, it is not much more then that which the
Doctor himself says in the first words of this Chapter; I shall proceed (says
he) a point beyond illustration, I shall go near to make a fair demonstration;
and again in this Chapter I doubt not (says he) but my deductions are as just
as any other whatsoever, for they are deduced by manifest proof.

2. Suppose that the Archbishop had said this, it is not all that he says.
For he shows how it came to pass, that those Learned men did believe Moses to
have been contemporary to Inachus, viz. Having read of certain Sheepherds that
came out of Egypt into Syria about the time of Inachus, they understood this of
the Israelites coming from Egypt to Canaan; whereas those Sheepherds were the
Phaenicians, of whom Herodotus l. 1. c. 1. and l. 7. c. 89. with Stephanus
Byzant. in (...) testifies that they came from the Red sea.

That it may not seem strange, that the Archbishop should depart from the
opinion of all those Learned men, I add that Eusebius did the same before him,
as also the greatest part of our later Chronologers. But the Doctor adheres to
their opinion, and will by all means demonstrate the truth of it, and if you
will be so liberal as to grant his suppositions, and that his Deductions and
Tables are right, then he may do something; but if you be resty and will not
grant him these, then you will put him out of the humor of demonstrating.

CHAP. X. Of that Alexander King of Egypt, who was reported to have made the
Commonwealth of Rome his heir.
THE Archbishop A. M. 3924. affirms that Alexander who was expelled by the
Egyptians, and died at Tire, and was reported to have left the Commonwealth his
heir, reigned at the least 15 years. And for this he alleges Cicero and
Suetonius; see him also A. M. 3939 and 3940. The Doctor Part 2. l. 1. c. 13.
takes notice of this, and though the Archbishop and he were friends a little
before in the very same Chapter (insomuch that he calls him the most Learned
Bishop of Armagh) yet he presently takes up the cudgels against him, and denies
that it can be proved by any Authorities alleged by the Archbishop and
others, that the foresaid Alexander reigned 15 years. If it can be proved from
any of them, the Doctor thinks it must be that of Cicero Orat. 1 and 2 de leg.
Agrar., but to take off the force of this, he urges those words in Orat. 2 Haec
L. Philippum in Senatu confirmasse in memoria teneo. Which words seem to the
Doctor to argue, that the Testament and death of Alexander, and the discourses
of L. Phillipus in the Senate concerning them, were more then a year or two
before Cicero's delivering those Orations. Furthermore (says the Doctor) let it
be granted that the death of Alexander was in the year in which the Archbishop
sets it; yet of the time of his expulsion, and how long he lived an Exile,
there is not a word to be found in any of those Authorities. Thus the Doctor.

Who might have been more easily understood, if he had set down the passages in
Tullies Orations on which the Archbishop relyes, or directed us to the place
where the Archbishop has transcribed them at large, viz. A. M. 3940. And his
snatching at the words Memoria teneo (as if they argued that Alexanders death
and the Speeches of L. Philippus were more then a year or two before Cicero's
delivering the 2d Oration) seems to me to argue that the Doctor was at a loss
for an answer. For certainly a man may say properly enough, I remember or
retain in memory that such or such things were discoursed of by such a person,
though it be not more then a year or two since he discoursed of them. Also the
Doctors saying that of the time of Alexanders expulsion there is not a word in
any of the Authorities, does more then seem to argue, that he had not consulted
the Testimony of Suetonius in Julio Caesare. c. 11. alleged by the Archbishop
A. M. 3939, for it is manifest from him, that Alexanders expulsion was at the
time of Julius Caesar's being AEdilis (as the Archbishop sets it) or very
shortly after it.

But the Doctor also produces the generality of Historians and Chronographers,
and the Mathematical Canon against the Archbishop. He cannot imagine why the
Canon should omit a King of the direct line of 15 or 16 years reign, to
substitute a stranger in the place of him. He concludes that allowing first
Cleopatra and then Alexander to have succeeded Ptolomaeus Lathurus; yet because
the time of their reigning was short, under the length of a year, therefore the
Canon casts it in to the reign of Ptolem. Auletes. Thus the Doctor.

But why does he urge the Archbishop with the Authority of the generality of
Historians and Chronographers? when he had told us but a little before, that
the Archbishop did acknowledge the generality of Historians and Chronographers
to be against him? Tho there are very Learned men that are for him, not only
Petavius de doct. tem. l. 10. c. 46. and in Paralipomen. item in Rationar. Part
1. l. 4. c. 15. and Part 2. l. 3. c. 12, but also Ricciolus To. 3. p. 34, and
To. 4. p. 82, and before them Paulus Manutius in Comment. in Orat. 1. de leg.
Agrar. As to the Mathematical Canon, the Doctor Part 2. l. 1. c. 3.
acknowledges that it is not free from imperfections and oversights, and
therefore promises to rectify the things that seem to be amiss in it. Withal
he should not have told us that the time that both Cleopatra and Alexander
reigned was not the space of a year, until he had offered some answer to the
Testimony of Suetonius alleag'd by the Archbishop to prove that Alexander
reigned many years.

Instead of answering Suetonius, the Doctor takes upon him to correct Justin,
who in Prologo l. 39. has these words, Ut post Laphyrum filius Alexandri
regnarit, expulsoque eo suffectus sit Ptolomaeus Nothus. Here (if we will
believe the Doctor) Justin wrote not Ptolemaeus Nothus, but Ptolemaeus novus;
for (says he) this Ptolemee was called (...), as Diodorus Sicul. testifies. But
I would know of the Doctor, how we can conclude from his being called a new
Dionysius or a new (...) or Bacchus, that he had also the name of a new
Ptolemee. I do believe that few have heard or read of a Ptolemaeus Novus before
this. And what necessity is there of making an alteration as to the name? since
it is believed that Ptolemaeus Auletes was really Nothus, with which agrees
that passage in Tullies Orat. 2. de leg. Agrar., where he says that he who
reigned then ( i. e. as the Archbishop and others interpret it Ptolemaeus
Auletes) was neque genere neque animo regio, and I thought that it was upon
this very account that the Doctor himself calls him a stranger.

CHAP. XI. Of Argon who was the first King of Lydia after the Atyadae.
THE Doctor Part 2. l. 1. c. 16. falls very severely upon the Archbishop, I
must (says he) advise the Reader that he beware of being imposed upon by the
allegation of Herodotus -- -- -- -- -- - As if Ninus and Belus forsooth, the
first founders of the Assyrian Monarchy, were the Grandchildren of Hercules the
Son of Amphitruo, for it is that Hercules which Herodotus speaks of. And then
(says he) who can choose but wonder at that of Bishop Usher in his Annals Part
1. p. 44. or A. M. 2781.) where this very Argon is made the Son of Ninus the
first great Assyrian Monarch, and this grounded upon the Authority of
Herodotus? And he adds that this was not a slip of the pen, but an industrious
excogitation. After other words he thus concludes, That this Argon should be
the Son of Ninus the Son of Belus founders of the Assyrian Monarchy credat
Judaeus Apella, non ego. Thus the Doctor.

Whom the Archbishop has thus highly offended only with these three words
Argon Nini filius. He does not say Argon the Son of Ninus the first great
Assyrian Monarch or Founder of the Assyrian Monarchy. Nor does he say The Son
of Ninus the Son of Belus, though (if he had said this last) he had only
transcribed the words of Herodotus l. 1. c. 7. which are these (...). Why then
does the Doctor talk of an industrious excogitation, when the Archbishop says
nothing but what he found in Herodotus? But the Doctor says that that which he
found in Herodotus (particularly the words (...)) is not Herodotus his own, but
the mistake of an unwary hand. In the Text of Herodotus (says he) it was not
(...), but (...). Now I think that the Archbishop is not to be blamed for not
being so profound a Critic as to discover that Herodotus was to be thus
corrected. And if he was now living, I believe he would scarce perceive, that
there is so near an Affinity between (...) and (...). as that an unwary hand
should write the one for the other. I believe also that it would have puzzled
the most learned Primate of Armagh to construe this new Greek (...). Therefore
the Doctor has obliged us by construing it himself, viz. thus, Argon the Son
of Alcaeus the Son of a servant maid of Jardanus. Now can any man possibly
imagine that Herodotus should express this sense in such Greek as the Doctor
would thrust upon us?

Therefore the Doctor is content that this should pass only for a conjecture;
he also acquaints us upon what he grounds it, viz. upon this, that Alcaeus the
Father of Argon is by Diodorus Sicul. called Cleolaus (...) in the time of
servitude born of a servant maid of Jardanus, so Diodo. Sic. l. 4. according to
the Doctor. But 1. Diodorus only says Born of a servant maid, he does not say
Of a servant maid of Jardanus. 2. How appears it that Alcaeus was the Father of
Argon? Diodorus does not say that either Alcaeus or Cleolaus was his Father;
and Herodotus says that Argon was the Son Ninus. 3. How appears it that Alcaeus
is by Diodor. Sic. called Cleolaus? The ground then of the Doctors conjecture
thus failing him, and the conjecture being in it self very improbable (to say
no more) he had certainly done much better, if he had suppressed both of them.

The Doctor very confidently affirms, that the Hercules of whom Herodotus
speaks, who was the Father of Alcaeus, and according to the Doctor, the
Grandfather of Argon, was Hercules the Son of Amphitruo. But Herodotus does not
say that he was the Son of Amphiatruo, and the Doctor does not offer any proof
of it. In the mean time this argument may be offered against it. If Hercules
the Son of Amphitruo was born but a little before the Trojan war, and if Argon
begun his reign over the Lydians before that war, then it is not probable that
Hercules the Son of Amphitruo was the Grandfather of Argon. But the former,
viz. that Hercules the Son of Amphitruo was born but a little before the Trojan
war, is expressly affirmed by Diodorus Sic. l. 3. in fin., and the Doctor
himself grants the later; for in his Canon at the end of his book p. 43 and 45.
he sets the beginning of Argons reign 28 years before the destruction of Troy.
This knot the Doctor is forced to cut, because it was not to be loosed; and so
let Diodorus Sic. say what he will, he sets the birth of this Hercules 85 years
before the Trojan war; see his Canon p. 41 and 45. Also he would have Alcaeus
to have been born some short time after the Argonautical expedition, forgetting
that which he says of Alcaeus in the margin, that he is called Cleolaus by
Diodorus Sic. and that Cleolaus was born in the time of Hercules's servitude
viz. to Omphale, which was long after the expedition of the Argonautae; see
Diodor. Sit. l. 4. Add hereto that the Doctor makes Hercules to have been about
58 years of age when Argon begun his reign, whereas in Eusebius. Chron. Hercules
is said to have lived only 52 years in all, and that there were some who did
not allow him so many. Lastly, the Doctor will have the expedition of the
Argonautae to have been long before that Eurystheus first reigned (see Part 2.
l. 1. c. 8.) whereas Diodorus Sic. l. 4. p. 153 and 156. makes that expedition
to have been long after Eurystheus's first being King, viz. after that Hercules
had performed the 8th task or labor that he enjoined him. In these
difficulties the Doctor has entangled himself by holding that the Hercules in
Herodotus must be Hercules the Son of Amphitruo, whereas we may suppose him to
be another (for Diodorus Sic. l. 3. says that there were three Hercules's, and
Cicero de not. Deor. l. 3. writes that there were Six) and that the Heraclidae
that were Kings of Lydia descended from that other Hercules, but the Heraclidae
that many years after settled in Peloponnesus were the posterity of this
Hercules who was the Son of Amphitruo.

CHAP. XII. of AEgyptus, and how many years intervened between him and Sesac, 1
Kings 11. also whether he was the same with Sethothis; and of Jonathan, 1
Maccab. 9.
THE Doctor Part 2. l. 1. c. 20. says that the Archbishop makes 506 years to
have intervened from the beginning of the reign of Sethosis to the reign of
Sesac, 1 Kings 11. 40; but according to the Doctor only 451 years were between
them. In this he relyes upon the authority of Africanus, whose Numbers
(generally speaking) he prefers before Eusebius's, whom (as he tells us) the
Archbishop follows, saving that with Josephus he gives four years more to
Sethosis then Eusebius does. But a brief answer to this will suffice. For as
the Doctor only says that generally speaking Africanus is to be preferred (which
implies that he is not always) so he himself in this very account does not
follow Africanus, but says expressly that Africanus may be rectified as well as
Eusebius. The Doctor pretends that he differs only two years from him, but take
Africanus as he is represented by Syncellus, without Goars alterations, and he
differs above 20 years from him. Besides the Archbishop is misrepresented by
the Doctor, for the Doctor says that according to the Archbishop, that
interval of time from the first of Sethosis to the first year of Sesac was 506
years, whereas the Archbishop makes it to have been 513 years; for according
to him Sethosis begun his reign An. Per. Jul. 3223. (not 3230 as the Doctor
would persuade us) and Sesac begun his An. Per. Jul. 3736.

In the very same Chapter the Doctor will not allow that AEgyptus was the same
with Sethosis, as the Archbishop An. Per. Jul. 3232 will have him to have
been; but Sethosis was the Son of AEgyptus, if the Doctor be in the right. Yet
the Doctor confesses that herein he differs from several others as well as
from the Archbishop, and I am apt to think that in making Sethosis the Son of
AEgyptus he is singular; neither Eusebius nor Syncellus has any cover for this
dish, if I may use the Doctors own expression. Yea the Doctor contradicts
Eusebius and Syncellus as well as the Archbishop, for they say that Armais was
the same with Danaus, and Ramasses the same with Egyptus; but the Doctor
supposes Danaus and AEgyptus to have been other persons, and of another family.
As to Sethosis the Archbishop transcribes the words of Manetho ap. Joseph. c.
Apion. l. 1. who says that Sethosis was called AEgyptus, and his brother Armais
Danaus; who also distinguishes Armais the brother of Sethosis from a former
Armais that reigned long before him.

The Doctor Part 2. l. 2. s. 2. c. 1. says that whereas Josephus Ant. l. 13. 5.
writes that Jonathan received the Stole four years after the death of Judas,
Bishop Usher roundly censures this as an ofcitancy in him. Thus the Doctor. But
I wish he had produced the words in which the Archbishop roundly censures it
as an oscitancy. It Is true A. M. 3852. he calls it an error, but withal as he
tells us what led Josephus into that error, so he makes him so ingenuous as
afterward (viz. Ant. l. 20. c. 8.) to retract that which induced him into it.

CHAP. XIII. Of the duration of the Assyrian Monarchy, and of Herodotus, also
of the Median Succession.
THat by which the Archbishop has most disobliged the Doctor is still behind,
viz. his shortning the Median Succession by 167 years, and the duration of the
Assyrian Monarchy by many more. For this the Doctor Part 2. l. 1. c. 18.
declaims most earnestly against the Archbishop, calling it the modelling a new
Chronology, and asking what Scaliger, Eusebius and Africanus would have said,
if they had heard of this adventure, how (says he) would they have stood
amazed? In this heat he runs on till he is out of breath, and not content with
this he brings in Is. Uossius inveighing against the Archbishop in like
manner. At last he begins to think it necessary to give some satisfactory
answer to Herodotus, on whom the Archbishop relies; and in order to this he
prays us to review that which he had written in the Chapter of the Medes ( i.
e. the 15 Chapter) foregoing. Herodotus, speaks of no Kings of the Medes before
Deioces, and says that after their revolt from the Assyrians the Medes were
(...) governed by their own Laws. Accordingly the Archbishop after Arbaces,
who delivered the Medes from the Assyrian yoke, so that they were now free to
live by their own Laws, mentions no Kings of the Medes before Deioces; see the
Archbishop A. M. 3257 and 3294. What says the Doctor Chapt. 15. to this? He
says that because Herodotus speaks of no Kings before Deioces, we must not
argue from thence that there were none, as we must not by the (...) of which
Herodotus speaks, understand a perfect Anarchy, or that during that time they
had no Kings at all; for (says he) this is disproved by the authority of
Ctesias ap. Diodor. Sic., who mentions both the names of several Kings, and the
years of their reign. And so Chapt. 18. it is noted as one of the Archbishops
mistakes, that by Herodotus's (...) he understands a perfect Anarchy. But what
if the Doctor himself prove to be mistaken in thinking that the Archbishop
intended to conclude that there were no Kings only from the word (...), or
Herodotus's not mentioning any? Herodotus writes that Rapines and other lawless
pranks growing more and more rife among them, some advised that they should set
over themselves a King, that they might be governed by good Laws, etc. So they
were persuaded to submit to Kings, and presently entered into consultation
about the person whom they should choose. Thus Herodotus l. 1. c. 97, 98. From
hence I think we may safely conclude, that according to Herodotus they had no
Kings at that time. It Is manifest that not only Vossius Castigat. adc. 10. but
also Diodorus Sic. l. 2. did understand Herodotus thus, that they were without
Kings. And as to Ctesias, probably the Archbishop saw no reason why his
authority should be preferred to that of Herodotus. This for the Median
succession; only I must add, that the Doctor makes the Archbishop to shorten
it by 167 years, whereas the Arch Bishop makes the duration of it but 130 years
shorter then the Doctor himself does; for from Arbaces's freeing the Medes from
the Assyrian yoke to the end of Astyages's reign the Archbishop reckons 187
years, and the Doctor reckons only 317.

We now proceed to the Assyrian Monarchy, to the duration of which (from the
beginning of the reign of Ninus to the death of Sardanapalus) the Archbishop
allots only 520 years, grounding himself (says the Doctor) upon Herodotus. And
it is very true, that the Archbishop alleges Herodotus l. 1. c. 95. for this,
who in express words says (as the Doctor translates him) that the Assyrians
holding the sway of the upper Asia some 520 years, the Medes were the first
that begun to break from them. But then the Archbishop also alleges Appian in
Praefat., who says that the three greatest Empires of the Assyrians, Medes and
Persians altogether did scarce make up the sum of 900 years. And what says the
Doctor to this? He makes a short answer serve, saying that there is no weight
at all in it as to the purpose for which it is vouched. But then he promises
to give a satisfactory answer to Herodotus, in order to which he first sets
down the words of Herodotus at large both in Greek and English, then he craves
leave to note some mistakes, and at last he will bring the business to account.

As to the mistakes, the Archbishop is only concerned in two of them, viz. the
first and the third. The first is, the Archbishop supposes that the Assyrian
Monarchy old expire at the time of the Medes defection. The third is, that he
supposes that Herodotus's (...) was a perfect Anarchy. To the latter of which
it has been answered already, that the Archbishop is not concerned whether
(...) necessarily denotes an Anarchy or no, for there are other passages in
Herodotus (transcribed by me a little above) from which the Archbishop might
gather that the Medes had no King at that time, and it is the Doctors mistake
to think that the Archbishop concluded it from the word (...) only. As to the
other mistake imputed to the Archbishop, viz. the supposing that the Assyrian
Monarchy did expite at the time of the Medes defection, I grant that the
Archbishop does suppose this, but deny that it is a mistake, for when, so
large a Province as Media was revolted from them, the Assyrians had not the
Monarchy of upper Asia as before, especially when Belesis had also obtained the
Kingdom of Babylon. But they had still a large Empire or Government, as the
Archbishop tells us, making Ninus junior to have succeeded Sardanapalus in it.
And yet the Doctor will prove that the Government was not extinguished, as if
the Archbishop had said that it was; whereas the Archbishop says plainly that
the Government was not extinct, tho the Monarchy was.

And now the Doctor will bring the business to account. He says that
Herodotus's (...) begun about An. Per. Jul. 3000, and continued 1000 years; and
yet when he descends to particulars he accounts but 800 years from the
beginning of the (...) to the confederacy of Arbaces and Belesis, and 180 years
after it, which two numbers do not make up 1000. But to pass by this, the
Doctors meaning is that whereas the Archbishop conceived that the defection of
the Medes and the beginning of Herodotus's (...) was in the time of Arbaces, he
should have set it 800 years sooner about An. Per. Jul. 3000, and so the
beginning of the Assyrian Monarchy 520 years before that, i. e. about An. Per.
Jul. 2480. Now there will not need any long answer to this, since 1. The Doctor
does not allege any Author that gives the least intimation of any defection of
the Medes 800 years before Arbaces. 2. No man that reads Herodotus can think
that he ever as much as dreamed that the Medes continued (...) the space of
1000 years. 3. These accounts do not agree with the Doctors own Catalogues of
the succession of the Assyrian Monarchs, which he gives us in the beginning and
end of this Chapter. From the beginning of the (...) An. Per. Jul. 3000, or
thereabouts to the confederacy of Arbaces and Belesis, he accounts a space of
800 years, but according to his Catalogues there were above 830 years between
them. He makes the Assyrian Monarchy to have begun 520 years before the
beginning of the (...), which was about An. Per. Jul. 3000, so that we must set
the beginning of the Assyrian Monarchy about An. Per. Jul. 2480: now the
Founders of the Assyrian Monarchy he makes to have been either Belus or Ninus,
and bids us reckon from either of them, but according to the former Catalogue
Belus begun his reign An. Per. Jul. 2378, Ninus An. Per. Jul. 2433, according
to the later Belus's reign begun An. Per. Jul. 2353 and Ninus An. Per. Jul.
2408; now how will any of these accounts agree with the making the Assyrian
Monarchy to begin about An. Per. Jul. 2480? Lastly, in this account the
duration of the Assyrian Monarchy is made to have been but 520 years and 800
years or three or four years more, in all about 1320 years: but in the former
Catalogue the duration of it from Belus to the death of Sardanapalus is 1460
years, in the later 1484 years; and from Ninus to the death of Sardanapalus,
according to both Catalogues, above 1400 years. It seems then that the Doctor
has not brought the business to an exact account. Add that according to the
Doctor the Medes were (...) in the time of Sardanapalus, whereas Diodorus Sic.
l. 2. plainly testifies that they were then under the Empire or Dominion of the
Assyrians.

Therefore upon second thoughts in this very Chapter s. 13. the Doctor could be
content to wave this answer, and pitch upon another, for which he is beholden
to his friend Vossius, viz. that Herodotus has been tampered with, and that he
wrote 1500, not 520, as our copies have it. And I coufess that this is a very
easy way of answering. If we may at pleasure, without the warrant of any other
copy, change 520 into 1500, and 5 generations into 50, and 30 or 35 into 40
(all which the Doctor does in this Chapter) we need not fear any objection from
the authority of any Writer whatsoever. I think that the Doctor had done much
better, if he had waved both these answers, and either turned off Herodotus as
he does Appian, or rested in that which he says before that Herodotus was
fabellarum pater, and not to be regarded.

CHAP. XIV. Of the duration of the Assyrian Monarchy against Dr Is. Vossius.
IS. Vossius in Dissert. de aetate Mundi c. 5. says that all those that follow
the Masorites Bible do make Ninus and Semiramis to have reigned in the 58 year
after the Flood. Hornius in Dissert. de aetate Mundi c. 8. objects against
this, that Usher refers their reign to A. M. 2737, so that they were almost 11
ages after the Flood. Hereupon Vossius in Castigat. ad. c. 8. inveighs against
the Archbishop for cutting off at least 8 ages from the time that was from
Ninus to Sardanapalus (making the whole time between them to have been only 496
years) and for omitting all the Assyrian Kings from Ninyas to Sardanapalus, and
this without reason or authority. To Herodotus, whom the Archbishop alleges,
and who says that first the Medes begun to revolt from the Assyrians when they
had enjoyed the Empire of the upper Asia 520 years, Vossius Castigat. ad c. 10.
answers, that he is to be understood thus, viz. that when the Empire of the
Assyrians had continued 520 years, the Medes begun to revolt from them by
little and little, and to become a Nation sui juris, yet without Kings; and
that Deioces was the first that invaded the Tyranny. Also to Herodotus he
opposes Ctesias, who begins the Kingdom of the Medes not with Deioces but
Arbaces, whom he makes to have possessed the city Ninus and part of Assyria,
whereas Herodotus writes that Cyaxares did this a long time after. Thus
Vossius. Hornius in his Defensio c. 31. asks Vossius where he had his Paulatim,
that the Medes did revolt by little and little. Then he alleges Dionysius
Harlicarn. l. 1. who refers the Empire of the Assyrians to the fabulous times,
and says that the Assyrians possessed a small part of Asia, therefore (says
Hornius) it is false which others write of the vast dominion of Ninus,
Semiramis and their successors. Also he alleges Strabo l. 11. who says that
the Antiquities of the Persians, the Medes and the Syrians do not obtain much
credit, because of the fabulousness of the Writers of them. Vossius in Castiga.
Auctario ad Effug. 31. tells Hornius, that if he had considered the place in
Herodotus, he would not have asked where he had his Paulatim. Also he makes
Hornius to argue from Dionysius Hal. thus, If that Kingdom was in a fabulous
age, then it was fabulous. Now (says Vossius) this is as if any one should say,
The Greeks called all the time before the Olympiads fabulous, therefore the
things that are written of Moses and Sampson are fables. He observes also that
Diodorus Sic. relating the opinion of Herodotus sets down 500 years (not 520)
and adds that he approves of Sr John Marsham's conjecture that in Herodotus we
are to read 1500 years instead of 520, as he will have us to read in Diodor.
Sic. 1500 instead of 500, otherwise (says he) Diodor. Sic. would not have
passed over that place in Herodotus without a reprehension. Hornius in
Defensionis Auctario Def. 31. only remarks how prudent Vossius was in taking no
notice of the place in Strabo, and how liberal in adding 1000 years to the
Annals of Herodotus and Diodorus Sic., as well as bold in correcting two
Authors at once. I shall not take upon me to determine whether Vossius or
Hornius have the better in this scuffle; only I observe 1. That Vossius not
only takes no notice of the place in Strabo, but also he takes no notice of
Hornius's argument from Dionysius Hal. viz. this, Dionysius Hal. says, that the
Assyrians had the dominion of a certain small part of Asia, and this (as
Hornius thought) does not very well agree with that which others relate
concerning the vast dominion of Ninus, Semiramis and their successors. And so
from Strabo's words we may well gather, that no great credit is to be given to
the long series or succession of Assyrian Kings which some give us. For by
Syrians, Strabo meant Assyrians; so Herodotus l. 7. c. 63. tells us that they
are by the Greeks called Syrians, whom the Barbarians called Assyrians; and so
Cicero Tuscul. qu. l. 5. calls Sardanapalus King of Syria, whom De finib. bon.
and mal. l. 2. he calls King of Assyria; and so Justin l. 1. c. 2. Assyrii qui
postea Syri dicti sunt. 2. That Hornius does not argue in such manner as
Vossius would persuade us, viz. The Assyrian Empire was in a fabulous age,
therefore it was fabulous, but the argument should have been formed thus,
Dionysius Hal. refers the time of the Assyrian Monarchy, or part of it, to the
age which is accounted fabulous, it is probable therefore that many things which
Heathen Writers say of the Assyrian Kings, their number, names, etc. are
fabulous. So that it is an odious comparison which Vossius makes, when he
speaks of Moses and Sampson; as if because we are not obliged to believe every
thing that is delivered in profane History, the like may be inferred concerning
the Sacred Records. 3. I think that Hornius had very good reason to ask Vossius
where he had his Paulatim; for Herodotus only says that the Medes begun to
revolt, he does not say that they begun to revolt by little and little (as
Vossius does) nor is there any thing in Herodotus which intimates this. There
is that which plainly intimates the contrary, viz. that they revolted together;
for it follows in Herodotus, that they gave the Assyrians battle and worsted
them, which they could not have done, if they had not all joined their force
together. 4. When Vossius in Castigat. Auctario ad Effug. 31. says that the
Archbishop relies solely on Herodotus, I am tempted to question whether
Vossius consulted the Archbishop, tho he pretends to confute him; for it is
apparent that the Archbishop A. M. 2737. alleges Appian as well a Herodotus.
5. But that which is most strange is still behind, that any man should have the
confidence to make such an alteration in the Text of both Herodotus and
Diodorus Sic. as Vossius does. He is displeased with the Archbishop for
shortning the Assyrian Monarchy without any Authority (for so he pretends) that
he then should take upon him in such sort to correct two Authors at once
without the Authority of any Copy either Manuscript or Printed, yea without any
Authority whatsoever, is the strangest thing imaginable. Certainly this that
the 1000 years which Vossius adds are not found in Diodor. Sic. where he
transcribes Herodotus, is a stronger argument that they were not in the copies
of Herodotus which he had, and so not in the ancient copies, then any that can
be brought to prove the contrary.

It will be said perhaps, that it was not without either reason or authority
that Vossius made this Emendation. As to Authority, Sr John Marsham in his
Diatriba p. 35. had declared his opinion, that in Herodotus we are to read 1500
instead of 520. And then for reasons 1. It is plain that there is an error in
the copies either of Herodotus or Diodor. Sic., for when the one has 520
years, the other has only 500. 2. If Diodor. Sic. had found 520 in Herodotus,
he would not have passed it over without a reprehension: thus Vossius in
Castigat. Auctar. ad Effug. 31. But his principal argument is in his Answer to
Christianus Schotanus, and it is this; If we read 1500 in Herodotus, then he
will agree not with Ctesias only, but also with Dinon, Polybius, Thallus,
Alexander Polyhistor, Castor, Diodorus Sic., Africanus and innumerable others.

To all this I return answer, 1. Sr John Marsham did long since in his
Chronicus Canon p. 489. in express words retract that which he had written in
his Diatriba concerning the substituting of 1500 instead of 520, for (says he)
it does not agree with the mind of Herodotus. 2. As to the first reason,
Suppose that there is an error either in Herodotus or Diodor. Sic., it does
not follow that there is an error in both, as Vossius will have it. And if a
careless Amanuensis left out 20 years in transcribing Diodor. Sic., we cannot
conclude thence that several Amanuenses should be so wretchedly careless as to
leave out 1000 years, both in Herodotus and Diodor. Sic. I add that perhaps
there is no error at all, but Diodor. Sic. thought it enough to set down the
round number 500 years. To the second reason from Diodor. Sic. his not
reprehending Herodotus, I answer, that it was his business only to report what
Herodotus and Ctesias had writ, not to reprehend either of them. In answer to
his third and principal reason I only say, that when we have substituted 1500
instead of 520 in Herodotus, he will not agree so well with the Authors
mentioned by Vossius as he pretends. Ctesias ap. Diodor. Sic. l. 2. will have
the duration of the Assyrian Monarchy to have been 1360 years. Castor ap.
Syncell. p. 168. allots to it An. 1280. Thallus ap. Theophilum ad Autol. l. 3,
and Lactantium l. 1. c. 23. affirms Belus to have been 322 years before the
Trojan war. Agathias de Imper. and reb. gest. Justiniani l. 2. seems to say
that Alexander Polyhistor writ, that from the beginning of Ninus's reign that
Empire continued 1306 years. The same Agathias makes Diodor. Sic. to agree with
Ctesias, tho in our copies of Diod. Sic. he differs from him, saying that it
continued more then 1400 years. Afrioanus according to Helvicus and Ricciolius
allows 1484 years to the duration of it, but according to Syncellus only 1460.
Now suppose that we ought to substitute 1500 instead of 520, how would
Herodotus still agree with these Authors, who do not agree among themselves,
and who do not (any of them) come up to 1500 years? As to Dinon and Polybius, I
know not where it is that they speak of the Assyrian Empires duration, and as
for Vossius's innumerable others, I do not know who they are. I conclude then,
that there is neither reason nor Authority to warrant such an alteration in
Herodotus and Diodorus.

I must not forget to take notice, that Vossius opposes Ctesias to Herodotus,
and yet at the same time, wholly destroys Ctesias's authority in that which he
writes concerning the Assyrian Monarchy, for (says Vossius Castigat. in c. 10.)
tho very much is attributed to his authority in the Persian affairs, yet he is
a most lying Writer in other things. Besides, the instances which Vossius gives
of Ctesias's dissenting from Herodotus do concern the Kingdom of the Medes, not
the Assyrian Empire of which we speak.

I shall only add, that Mr John Gregory informs us of a Chronological Abstract
in MS, which makes Thourias (who was also called Ares) to have succeeded Ninus,
and after that Thourias he places Lames, and then Sardanapalus. This Thourias
or Ares (as the said M Gregory acquaints us) is supposed to be the same with
him whom Africanus calls Arius. See Suidas in voce (...), for it is evident
that Suidas's. Thouras and Thourias in the MS are the same.

CHAP. XV. Of the study of Astronomy, whether it be as ancient as Nimrod, and
of the Celestial Observations sent into Greece by Aristotle's procurement.
VOssius Castigat. ad c. 10. says, that it is very absurd to think that the
knowledge of the Stars is as ancient as Nimrod. For (says he) Terah and Abraham
were the first that were skilled in that science. Of Abraham, Berosus testifies
that he was expert in it, and Eupolemus that he was, the Inventer of it. And
Philo L. de Nobilitate witnesses very clearly concerning both. The Archbishop
A. M. 1771. gathers from Porphyry ap. Simplicium l. 2. de caelo, that this
science is as ancient as Nimrod. Porphyry says that when Alexander had taken
Babylon, Calisthenes sent from thence into Greece Astronomical observations of
1903 years. Now (says the Archbishop) from the time of Nimrod (which was 115
years after the Flood) to Alexanders taking Babylon, were 1903 years, and so
the Babylonians begun to make their Astronomical observations in the time of
Nimrod. To this what says Vossius? He denies that Nimrod could begin to reign
so soon as in the 115 year after the Flood. He says that the beginning of those
1903 years was almost 1000 years later then the Flood, in the 124 year of
Terah, Thus Vossius. Hornius in Defensione, Disserta. Def. 24. answers, that
Berosus only says that Abraham was skilled in the knowledge of the heavenly
bodies, and that it does not follow from thence that he was the Inventer of it,
since he might learn his skill from the Chaldeans. Eupolemus, indeed, says,
that he was the Inventer of it, but (says Hornius) he brings no Authority for
the confirming his assertion. As to Philo, Hornius says that he favored his
cause and Nation. He adds that the knowledge of Astronomy was before the Flood,
and was delivered by Ham to Chus and Nimrod. And in his Dissertation de AEtate
Mundi c. 10. Hornius, to show that Nimrod might begin his reign An. 115. after
the Flood, supposes that Chus was born in the first or second year after it,
and that at the age of 35 he might beget Nimrod. Vossius in Castigat. Auctor.
Effug. 24. replies that Abraham could not learn Astronomy of the Chaldeans, for
there were no Chaldeans at that time. And he tells Hornius, that he is very
absurd in making Ham, Chus and Nimrod to have been Astronomers, when he will
not allow that Abraham was skilled in that science. As to Eupolemus, Vossius
says that he did not ascribe the invention of Astronomy to Abraham without
authority, for Berosus and the Egyptians had said almost the same before him,
adding that Philo, Josephus, and many of the Fathers do also confirm it.
Finally Hornius in Auctario Defens. brings the Testimony of Alexander
Polyhistor ap. Eusebius. de Praeparat. l. 9. who ascribes the invention of
Astronomy to Enoch, as also of Josephus, saying that Astronomy and Geometry
were invented before the Flood. And he tells Vossius, that Kircher had proved
that Ham, Chus and Nimrod were skilled in Astronomy by as good Testimonies, as
he had produced to prove that Abraham was the Inventer of it. Thus far Vossius
and Hornius.

I shall only observe a few particulars, as 1. Vossius says that it could not
be that Nimrod should begin his reign An. 115. after the Flood, but offers no
reason why it could not be; nor yet does he give any answer to that which
Hornius had said to make out the possibility of it. 2. When Vossius says that
Abraham could not learn Astronomy of the Chaldeans, for there were no Chaldeans
in his time, he merely trifles; for Hornius in Dissertat. de aetate Mundi c.
10. had plainly declared, that by Chaldeans he meant Babylonians, and would not
contend about Names. 3. When Vossius says that the beginning of the 1903 years
was almost 1000 years after the Flood, in the 124 year of Terah; he insinuates
that the 124 of Terah was also almost 1000 years after the Flood. Now this will
in no wise agree with his Chronologia sacra, for according to that neither the
beginning of the 1903 years, nor the 124 year of Terah can be said to have been
almost 1000 after the Flood, for both of them were above 1000 years after it.
The 124 of Terah in that Chronology is made to have been 1186 years after the
Flood, and the beginning of the 1903 years (counting backward from Alexanders
taking Babylon) must be according to that Chronology about 1259 years later
then the Flood. So that tho Vossius disputing against the Archbishop, will
have the beginning of the 1903 years to have been in the 124 year of Terah, yet
in his Chronology he makes the beginning of those years about 73 years later
then that year of Terah.

But that which is most necessary is to examine the Authorities produced by
Vossius against the Archbishop, which I shall do briefly. The first is
Berosus, who says, that in the 10th generation after the Flood, there was among
the Chaldeans a just and great man, that was expert in the knowledge of the
heavenly bodies; thus Josephus alleges him Ant. l. 1. c. 8. believing that the
just and great man, of whom Berosus speaks, was Abraham. Another of Vossius's
witnesses is Philo de Nobilitate, who says, that the Father of the Jews was a
Chaldean by Nation, born of a Father that was skilled in Astronomy; so that
Philo testifies of Terah Abraham's Father, that he was skilled in that Science;
but that he does there witness the same of Abraham (as Vossius pretends) I do
not find: yet Vossius might have cited other places in which he does, as l. de
Gigantibus and l. de Abrahamo. Josephus is alleged also, who l. 1. c. 9. says,
that Abraham taught the Egyptians Astronomy. The Egyptians themselves, and many
of the Fathers, are also called in as witnesses, Vossius says that the
Egyptians confess, that they learned Astronomy of the Chaldeans; but as to the
Fathers, he tells us not either what Fathers should testify any thing, or
where they should do it. Yet I freely grant, that some of the Fathers say as
much as some of his witnesses do, as S. Basil in Isa. 13. who ascribes the
invention of this science to the Chaldeans, and S. Greg. Nazianzen Orat. 3. who
attributes it to the Babylonians. But now what do all these Testimonies make to
Vossius's purpose, who should prove that Terah and Abraham were the first
Inventers of Astronomy, or the first that studied and taught it? Some say that
Abraham had the knowledge of Astronomy, and one adds that the Egyptians learned
it of him; as another says, that Terah was skilled in this science; but none
of them say that Terah and Abraham were the first Inventers of it. Indeed
Eupolemus ap. Eusebius. de Praeparat. l. 9. c. 17 very plainly testifies that
Abraham invented Astronomy, and instructed the Phanicians and Egyptians in that
Science; but as he is but a single witness, so he withal affirms that Enoch was
the first Inventer of it, and whereas the Greeks attribute the invention of it
to Atlas, Eupolemus informs us that Atlas was Enoch. This concerning Enoch is
confirmed by the Testimony of Alexander Polyhistor abovementioned, and of
Josephus l. 1. c. 3.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Egyptian Empire, when it begun, and how long it continued.
Also of Constantinus Manasses.
VOssius in Dissertat. de aetate Mundi c. 5. says that the Egyptian Dynasties
were some Ages before Abraham's time. But Hornius in his Dissertat. c. 8. tells
him that this is false. For (says he) according to the Archbishops
computation, the beginning of the Egyptian Empire was A. M. 1816, and Abraham's
birth was A. M. 2008, so that that Empire was not full two Ages more ancient
then Abraham's time. And yet within that space of time there might be several
Dynasties. Vossius Castigat. ad c. 11. replies, that the Archbishops
computation relies wholly upon the Authority of Constantinus Manasses, and his
Putidissimum Chronicon (as he calls it.) He adds that this Constantinus
Manasses makes that Abimelech, which fell in love with Sarah Abraham's wife, to
have been the first King of Egypt; how then (says he) can the Archbishop prove
from him that the Kingdom of Egypt begun almost two Ages before Abraham?
Further, whereas that Constantine writes that the Egyptian Empire continued
1663 years, the Archbishop errs in referring the end of that Empire to the
reign of Cambyses, for Egyptian Kings did reign after Cambyses to the time of
Alexander the great. Now let the time from Abraham to Alexander be computed,
and the number of the years, according to the computation of the Greeks, will
be found to agree with that which Constantine mentions. Eusebius makes the
destruction of the Egyptian Empire to have happened 1666 years after Abraham.
Hornius in Defensio. 30. rejoyns, that the Archbishops computation does not
rely solely upon the Authority of that Constantine, but also upon this, that
Mizraim lead Colonies into Egypt about the time, when according to the
Archbishops calculation, the Egyptian Empire did begin. He asks why Egypt is
called the land of Mizraim, if the Egyptian Empire was not founded by him. He
tells Vossius that his Father did not judge Constantinus Manasses to be a
despicable Writer, and that in Janus Douza his account his Chronica are
accuratissima (not putidissima.) He adds that the end of the Egyptian Empire is
by the Archbishop rightly referred to Cambyses, for tho the Egyptians rebelled
afterward, they were presently subdued together with their Kings. And whereas
Vossius speaks of the time of Alexander the great, he says that Ochus recovered
Egypt 13 years before that Alexander was King of Macedonia. Vossius in
Castigat. Auctar. ad Effug. 30. says that Eight Egyptian Kings reigned
successively after the time of Cambyses (as Diodorus and others testify) and
that Alexander was Seven years old when Ochus recovered Egypt, and that
Eusebius An. 1666 has these words AEgyptiorum regnum destructum. Hornius in
Defens. Auctar. Def. 30. says, that when we speak of the time of Alexander the
Great, we understand the time of his reign, or after that he came to be King.
When he was a boy of the age of Seven years, he was not Alexander the Great.
Thus this matter was debated betwixt Vossius and Hornius.

I shall only remark 1. That Hornius has rightly observed, that the
Archbishop was induced to refer the beginning of the Egyptian Empire to the
time of Mizraim, not only by the Authority of Constant. Manasses, but also by
that (which Vossius says that he never denied) viz. that Mizraim was the
Founder of that Empire. 2. That I do not look upon it as a necessary
consequence, because Eusebius reckons 1666 years from Abraham to the end of the
Egyptian Empire, and Constant. Manasses reckons 1663 years from the beginning
of that Empire to the end of it, that therefore Constant. Manasses makes it to
have begun in the time of Abraham, and to have ended at the time when Eusebius
says that it was destroyed. 3. It is manifest that Constant. Manasses makes the
Kingdom of the Egyptians to have begun before Abraham's time, for he says that
it begun when there were only Seven generations after the Flood, and so
according to him it begun before the time of Serug, for he says that Serug was
the Eight after the Flood. In like manner he says that Abraham and Belus were
not many generations after the beginning of the Egyptian Empire, and does not
this plainly imply that Abraham was some generations after it: 4. I cannot
sufficiently admire that Vossius should make Constant. Manasses to say, that
the Abimelech who fell in love with Sarah, was the first King of Egypt, whereas
he only says that he was King at the time of Abraham's sojourning there. It is
true, that he has these words (...): but 1. it is 9 or 10 verses before his
mentioning Abimelech that he has these words, 2. His meaning in them is only
this, that a King was first in Egypt. That this is the sense of the words is
manifest, for they are a repetition of that which he had said plainly before,
that the Egyptians were the first that were governed by Kings, and paid
tribute. And as some proof of this, he tells us that Abraham found a King in
Egypt when he came thither, whereas the foundation of the Kingdom of the
Assyrians was first laid in Abraham's time by Belus, so that there were Kings in
Egypt before the Founding the Assyrian Empire. Vossius therefore did strangely
mistake the meaning of Constant. Manasses. 5. If according to Constant.
Manasses the Kingdom of the Egyptians begun some generations before Abraham,
and continued only 1663 years, then (whether we follow Eusebius's account, or
Vossius's own in his Chronologia sacra) according to him the end of it was
before the birth of Alexander the Great. Lastly, all the time that Vossius's
Eight Egyptian Kings after Cambyses reigned, is computed to have been not much
above 60 years, so that Hornius did not err very much in saying, that the
Egyptians were presently subdued with their Kings.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Version of the Septuagint.
VOssius in his Epistle Dedicatory to Slingelandius prefixed to his
Castigations of Hornius, says, that the Archbishop in his Treatise concerning
the Version of the LXX does endeavor to show, that the true Translation of the
LXX lay hid in the Alexandrian Library, not read and transcribed by any person;
and at last perished in the fire which consumed the Library it self. Thus
Vossius. Now it is not doubted (as I suppose) but that the Original copy was
laid up in the Alexandrian Library, and was consumed there together with the
Library it self: so that the only thing in Question is, whether Vossius does
affirm truly that the Archbishop endeavors to show that it so lay hid in that
Library, as that it was not read or transcribed by any person. To which I say
that the Archbishop is so far from endeavoring to show this, that
contrariwise he says plainly, that some Copies of that Translation were extant
in the hands of private persons after that Philadelphus's Library was burnt, in
the former Alexandrian War; which could not be, if that Translation had lain
hid so as that it was not seen or transcribed by any. I shall produce the
Archbishops own words Licet in privatorum manibus (post incensam priori bello
Alexandrino Philadelphi Bibliothecam) veteris illius LXX Seniorum Versionis
adhuc exempla extarent; so the Archbishop De Editione LXX Interpretum c. 3.
Again in the same Chapter Evanescente paulatim, quae in privatorum tantum
manibus habebatur, Pentateuchi a 72 Senioribus facta interpretatione. Now if it
so lay hid as that it was not copied out by any person, I would gladly know how
private hands came to have Copies of it: I acknowledge that it is very usual
with persons engaged in any controversy to misrepresent the opinion of their
adversary (as Vossius has here misrepresented the Archbishops) to the end
that they may more easily expose it, and make it appear more absurd and
ridiculous in the eyes of such Readers, as take things upon trust, not having
opportunity, or not being willing to be at the pains of examining them: but
what Apology can be made for so disingenuous a practice, I know not.

An APPENDIX.
THough Vossius and Dr Carry were displeased with Archbishop Usher, yet they
both grant that he was a Learned man; and his Annals, in defense of which I
have presumed to appear, and which I make bold to recommend to such as shall
apply themselves to the Study of Sacred and Profane History, do sufficiently
proclaim him to have been such. I acknowledge that several things appertaining
to Chronology are interspersed in them, but he does not dwell upon them, or
trouble the world with tedious and eager disputes about them: And if he go
sometimes out of the ordinary rode of Chronographers, yet he does not this out
of any affectation of singularity, nor does he passionately espouse his
opinions, but modestly offers some conjectures to his Readers consideration,
briefly hinting the Reasons or Authorities upon which he grounds them. In
answering Dr Cary's objections against the Archbishops opinion concerning the
Months and Year which was in use among the Hebrews Chapt. 2. I promised more
fully to examine what the Doctor says of the word (...), which promise I shall
now perform; and also I shall annex a brief examination of that which the
Doctor says Of the men of the Great Synagogue.

Of the signification of the words (...) and (...).
THat which Dr Carry says of the word (...) we have in Part 1. l. 1. c. 12. s.
12. and it is this. One and the same word (says he) stands to signify Luna,
Novilunium and Mensis. The word in the Hebrew is (...) from (...) renovavit, to
make new. Hoc nomine non modo mensis i. e. 30 dies communiter and
universaliter, verum etiam dies duntaxat primus Mensis, seu Calendae vocantur,
quast novitatem seu renovationem dicas, Graeci (...) dixerunt. So Pagnin,
Buxtorf, Schindler, etc. and R. David in Lexic. quoted by Petavius de Doct.
Temp. l. 3. c. 22. vocatur autem (...) quod luna renovatur eo die, atque
tricessima dies eadem appellatione censetur, and primus dies solus etiam (...)
dicitur. So that wheresoever in Scripture mention is made of such or such a
day, for example the 14 (...), it may as well be rendered the 14 of the Moon, as
the 14 of the Month. Thus far the Doctors own words. Now what shall we say to
all this? 1. The Doctor affirms that (...) signifies the Moon, and would have
it Translated so; and yet in his Quotations there is not one word to prove that
it has this signification, and I believe that if he consult all the Lexicons
that are extant, he will not find one that says that (...) does signify the
Moon in all the Old Testament. I grant that in one place of the Talmud Buxtorf
makes it to have this signification, as also our most diligent Dr Castle
transcribing it out of him; but I do not find the words alleged by Buxtorf in
the place that he directs us to, and perhaps it is not necessary to translate
those words so as Buxtorf has translated them: however the word (...) has not
this signification any where in Sacred Writ. 2. It may also be questioned
whether it signify the New Moon, tho most Expositors do give it this
signification. I readily subscribe to the two significations which Kimchi
mentions in his Radices and in his Comment. upon Psalm. 81. 3. viz. that it
signifies sometimes the first day of the Month, sometimes the whole Month; but
when he gives this as the reason why the first day of the Month is called
(...), because the Moon is renewed in it, I cannot so easily assent to him, but
should rather say because the Month is renewed then. The Jews in Kimchi's time
and long before used Lunar Months, and so with them the Moon was renewed
constantly on the first day of the Month, and this gave the Jewish Writers, and
particularly Kimchi occasion to fancy, that the first day of the Month is
therefore called (...), because the Moon is renewed then; and this induced
others to translate it the New Moon. But there is no necessity of translating
it so, and I humbly conceive that it was much better, if in all the places
where our Translators have the New Moon, we instead thereof read The first day
of the Month, or The beginning of the Month, or the New Month. The Syriac has
rendered it The beginning of the Month in most of those places, as the Arabic
also does in some of them, and the Targum in 1 Chronicles. 23. 31. 2 Chronicles. 8. 13.
31. 3. and Isa. 66. 23. Kimchi also in his Radices directs us to render it The
first day of the Month 1 Samuel 20. 5, 18. 2 Kings 4. 23. Isa. 66. 23. Ezekiel. 46.
3. But the Doctor insists upon the Authority of the LXX who translate it (...),
and he supposes that (...) always signifies the New Moon. But why may we not
translate (...) or (...) (for the LXX use both) The New Month? Why may they not
be derived from (...) which signifies a Month as well as from (...) the Moon?
Suidas and Phavorinus interpret (...) by (...). Julius Pollux by (...). In the
Lexicon Graco-Latinum vetus it is rendr'd Initium mensts, as well as nova lana.
It more then once in Plutarch occurs in this signification (...), Plutare. in
Romulo. (...), Id. in Galba. All know that the Roman Calends or (...) in
Plutarchs time were the beginning or first day of the Month, and had no respect
to the change or renovation of the Moon. We may also observe that expression of
Thucydides l. 2. (...), which implies that there may be (...), when the Moon is
not renewed. The same expression we meet with in Josephus Ant. l. 4. c. 4, and
Epiphanius Haeres. 30. number. 32, and the like in Philo de Septenario. And in
that place of Josephus (...) is rendered Mensis initium by Epiphanius
Scholasticus. In the LXX (...) Numb. 10. 10. and 28. 12. answers to the words
which we rightly translate The Beginnings of the Months. Finally, they that
please may see what Scaliger says to this purpose, in a passage transcribed
from him Chap. 2. If this interpretation of the words (...) or (...) and (...)
be admitted, then according to both the Hebrew and the LXX there is not the
word New Moon in all the Old Testament, nor according to the Greek in the New
Testament. And there seems to be very good reason, why we should admit it and
prefer it before the other, and believe that God would not once name the New
Moon, and then surely he would not enjoin it to be observed as a day of
gladness and a solemn day, and that peculiar Sacrifices should be offered upon
it, least occasion should be given to a people prone to Idolatry to worship the
Moon as other Nations did. There is a remarkable passage in Origin. Homil. 23.
in Numer. Quid religioni conducit novae Lunae, i. e. cum conjungitur Soli and
adhaeret ei, observare festivitatem? Haec, si secundum literam considerentur,
non tam religiosa quam superstitioja videbuntur. Origin could not be lieve that
the Israelites were commanded to observe the New Moons according to the letter,
because it approached too near the Superstition or Idolatry of the Gentiles in
worshipping the Moon; and therefore he interpreted the command in a Spiritual
sense: But if we read (not The New Moons but) The beginnings of the Months,
there will be nothing to induce any man to believe that God enjoined the
observation of the New Moon. Besides it seems very reasonable that all the
Texts, in which according to our Translations there is mention of the New Moon,
should be interpreted by that Primitive Original Ordinance or Statute, which is
recorded Numb. 10. 10. and 28. 11. Here they are enjoined to blow the Trumpet
over their burnt-offerings, and the Sacrifices of their peace offerings, and to
offer two Bullocks, one Ram, and seven Lambs in the beginnings of their Months;
there is not a word of the New Moons: and thus I humbly conceive it ought to be
in all those other places.

Before I conclude this, I must correct a mistake in Petavius by the fault of
the Printer, and a greater mistake which the Doctor is guilty of whilst he
would correct Petavius. Petavius de doctr. Temp. l. 3. c. 22. alleges a
passage out of Kimchi's Radices concerning the signification of (...), and in
his translation of it when it should have been Triginta dies eadem appellatione
censentur, the Printer instead of censentur puts censetur. The Doctor thinking
that the mistake was not in censetur, but in the word Triginta corrects it thus
Tricesima dies eadem appellatione censetur, as if (...) signified the Thirtieth
day of the month, which never entered into the thoughts either of Kimchi or
Petavius; for their meaning is, that all the 30 days taken together, or the
whole month is sometimes signified by the word (...). I pass by the Doctors
mistake about the signification of the Greek word (...).

Of the men of the Great Synagogue.
THE Doctor Part 2. l. 2. s. 1. c. 7. speaks of an Assembly of Holy and Wise
men, which had the name of the Great Synagogue, which did immediately come
after the times of the Prophets, as is testified in Pirke Aboth. S. Jerome
styles them the 24 Elders, 24 Senes, in praefat. ad Esran. Malachi might be one
of the times perhaps, one of the Society; but for the saying of the later Jews
that Haggai and Zachary the Prophets were of this number, and Ezra the head of
this Assembly, I count it a very fable. These are the Doctors words in the
forequoted chapter s. 2. And in the same section he says, that the compiling
or digesting or (as he expresses it s. 1.) the bringing the whole body of
Scripture and parts of it into a congruous disposition or frame, so to render
the same more intelligible and plain, was the work of this Assembly of Holy and
Wise men. He adds s. 3. that he believes that this work was directed and
assisted by the Spirit of God, and s. 4. that this work was perfected about the
time of Alexander the Great. Now if we would know what it is that the Doctor
aims at in all this, he himself tells us in the following sections. In short he
would have the Books of Chronicles, 6 Chapters in Ezra, and a great part of two
Chapters in Nehemiah to have been written by these Holy and Wise men of the
Great Synagogue. As to the Book of Nehemiah he is very positive, I do account
(says he) that from Neh. 11. 3. to Neh. 12. 27. all is of this kind s. 5. i. e.
inserted by the men of the Great Synagogue. He is no less positive s. 7. as to
the second of Chronicles, To me (says he) it appears, that the Writer or
Digester of this Book lived after Ezra's time. If he had said only The Digester
of it, we should have taken the less notice of it; but when he says The Writer
or Digester, we see plainly what he would be at. It is true, he is not positive
as to the Six Chapters in Ezra; but s. 7. he questions whether they were the
writing of Ezra or no (tho he grants, that it is evident that all the Chapters
after the Sixth were his writing) and signifies plainly enough, that his own
opinion was that they were not.

Now this seems to be a very bold stroke, and of dangerous consequence, that
any man should go about to persuade the world, that the Books of Chronicles,
and also a considerable part of the Books of Ezra and Nehemiah, were not writ
till after their death. If I may use the Doctors own words, What would Scaliger
have said to this? How would he have stood amazed! He that was so much
displeased with the German Divines, who would make only some part of one
Chapter in Nehemiah not to have been his writing, but the insertion of a later
hand, would certainly have much more disliked such a bold attempt as this is.
But he would have been more highly enraged, when he had found, that nothing is
offered which looks like an argument to make it probable, that the Writers of
the foresaid Books or parts of Scripture lived later then Ezra or Nehemiahs

The Doctor says that it is evident, that the two first verses of the Book of
Ezra are the very same word for word, with the two last of the second Book of
Chronicles. But every one sees, what a strange or rather wild consequence this
is, Because the two first verses of the Book of Ezra are the same with the two
last of Chronicles, therefore Six whole Chapters in Ezra were the writing of
one that lived later then Ezra. Withal how appears it, that the Writer or
Digester of the second Book of Chronicles lived after Ezra? That (says the
Doctor) may be gathered from 1 Chronicles. 3. 17. to the end of the Chapter. But
surely it cannot be gathered from 1 Chronicles. 3. 17, etc. that the Writer or
Digester of the second Book of Chronicles lived after Ezra, unless it can be
gathered thence, that the Writer or Digester of the first Book of Chronicles
lived later then he. It must then be the Doctors meaning, that the Writer or
Digester of both the Books of Chronicles lived after Ezra's time. It remains
then that we examine what force there is in 1 Chronicles. 3. 17, etc. to evince this.

The Doctor says that 1 Cbron, 3. 17. to the end of the Chapter, mention is
made of Eight generations in descent from Salathiel, that must needs imply an
extension of time beyond that of Ezra. He brings also a Note of the Assembly of
Divines to confirm this. As to which Note it will suffice to observe 1. That
whereas the Doctor says Eight generations, they in that Note express
themselves more cautiously, saying only Many generations; for it is not clear
how many they were. 2. In it they take for granted that the generations
mentioned 1 Chronicles. 3. extended beyond the days of Ezra, when as they should
have proved it. 3. In that very Note they are manifestly against the Doctor,
showing plainly that it cannot be gathered from the mention of some
generations, which (as they suppose) were after Ezra, that the Writer or
Digester of the Books of Chronicles lived after his time; for (say they) Ezra
might by a Prophetical Spirit set them down beforehand. Besides it appears from
those words, that they inclined to think that Ezra himself was the Writer of
these Books. But it may be said, that the words immediately following do make
altogether for the Doctor; for they say that some other Prophet after Ezra's
death might add them. To which I reply, that there is no agreement at all
between them and the Doctor, for 1. The Doctor says positively, that it appears
to him that the Writer or Digester of these Books of Chronicles lived after
Ezra's time; they say only, that some Prophet after Ezra's death might add some
generations at the end of the third Chapter of the first Book. 2. They say,
that some Prophet after Ezra's death might add them, as the death and burial of
Moses is added to his last Book, Deuteronomy. 34. Thus they. As then it cannot be
concluded from the addition of the death and burial of Moses Deuteronomy. 34, that the
rest of the Book of Deuteronomy was not written by Moses: so it cannot be
gathered from the addition of a generation or, two 1 Chronicles. 3, that the rest of
the Books of Chronicles was not writ by Ezra. 3. The mention of adding them
after Ezra's death implies, that the Books to which they were added were writ
before his death. This Note then clearly overthrows that for which it is
alleged by the Doctor.

As to the Book of Ezra, the Doctor further hints that in the Preface of the
Seventh Chapter, which is (...), the Compilers mark is visible. Thus the Doctor
s. 8. As if it was visible and apparent from these words Ezra 7. 1. After these
things, that we owe all the Six Chapters foregoing, not to Ezra himself, but
the Compiler. Or as if Ezra having in the Six former Chapters dispatched the
History of Cyrus, Darius, etc. and now passing to that of Artaxerxes from whom
he received his Commission, might not use this note of connection Now after
these things. How frequently do these words occur, as in the History of the Old
and New Testament, so in all other Histories whatsoever?

As to the Book of Nehemiah the Doctor offers nothing at all that can tend to
prove, that so great a part of it, as from Neh. 11. 3. to Neh. 12. 27. is not
his own handwriting, but the adjection of another hand.

Now to return to the men of the Great Synagogue. The Doctor says s. 2. that S.
Hierome calls them the 24 Elders. But tho the Doctor is guilty of several very
great and unhappy mistakes, yet I think there is scarce any thing in which he
has erred more strangely then in this. For there is not the least mention of
the Great Synagogue in all that Preface of S. Hierome to the Book of Ezra,
which the Doctor alleges. S. Hierome is speaking of Canonical and Apocryphal
Books, and by his 24 Elders we are to understand the 24 Canonical Books of the
Old Testament. This will be made clear, if we compare the words in that Preface
to Ezra, with a passage in his Prologo Galeato or Praefat. in librum Regum, as
also in his Comment. upon Ezekiel. 43. In his Prolog. Galeat. having spoken of the
24 Books of the Old Testament, he immediately adds Quos sub numero 24 Seniorum
Apocalypsis Joannis inducit, adorantes agnum, and coronas suas prostratis
vultibus offerentes, etc. In his Comment. on Ezekiel. 43. he has these words, Vel
24 libri veteris Instrumenti debent accipi, qui habebant citharas in Apocalypsi
Joannis, and coronas in capitibus suis. Now please to compare with these the
words in Praefat. in Ezram. which the Doctor refers to. I shall transcribe them
at large. Nec quenquam moveat (says he) quod unus a nobis liber editus est, nec
Apocryphorum tertii and quarti libri somniis delectetur, quia apud Hebraeos
Esdrae Neemiaeque sermones in unum volumen coarctantur, and quae non habentur
apud illos, nec de 24 Senibus sunt, procul abjicienda. I hope it is now plain,
that S. Hierome has no respect to the men of the Great Synagogue, but to the
24 Elders in the Revelation, whom he interprets to be the 24 Canonical Books of
the Old Testament. And his meaning in those words, Nec de. 24. Senibus sunt,
procul abjicienda is, that they which are not of those 24 Books are to be
rejected as Apocryphal. Add hereto, that they reckon 12 as the heads and chief
of the men of that Synagogue, but I do not find that any of the Jewish Writers
reduce the whole number of them to 24. They usually make them to have been 120,
but in Cozri Part 3. it is said, that they were not numbered, or could not be
numbered for multitude.

The Doctor further says s. 2. that for the saying of the later Jews, that
Haggai and Zachary were of this number, and Ezra the Head of this Assembly, he
accounts it a very Fable. To which I shall only say, 1. He may account so of it
if he pleases, for there want not those who account the whole story concerning
the Great Synagogue to be no other; they think that the Jews feigned that there
was such an Assembly, that they might father their Traditions upon it. But the
Doctor will not allow of this, for it overthrows a great part of that which he
says in this and some other Chapters. 2. No man (as far as I know) requires it
to be believed as a certain truth. For though some eminent Jewish Writers (as
Maimonides in his Preface to his Book Iad, and in his Preface to Seder Zeraim
set forth by Dr Pocock, with others) do affirm, that Haggai, Zachary and Ezra
the Scribe were of this number, yet there are likewise some that make no
mention of them, but name others in their stead (see R. Abraham ben David in
his Cabala) yea in Cozri Part 3. Haggai, Zachary and Ezra seem very plainly to
be distinguished from the men of the Great Synagogue. 3. The Doctor gives no
reason why he does account it a very Fable; perhaps then the great reason is,
because it will not suit with his Hypothesis. And this may suffice for answer
to that which the Doctor says concerning the men of the Great Synagogue.

To conclude, This Defense of Archbishop Usher is a further confirmation of
the truth of that which I asserted in the Introduction, viz. The uncertainty of
the greatest part of Chronology: When these two great undertakers in Chronology
Dr Is. Vossius and Dr Carry, who express so great assurance in their Writings,
and insult so much over the Archbishop and others, are upon examination found
to be guilty of very great mistakes, and to have proceeded upon as uncertain
grounds as others had done before them. And yet Dr Carry has entertained so
high an opinion of his own performance, that in his Epistle Dedicatory, he told
King Charles the second, that his Chronology speaks the truth (happily) better
then any whatsoever of late days, and in our Climate, has been found to do. A
little before he had said that his Chronology is a kind of Clock, and so though
several of late days and in our Climate too have pretended to the Art of
Clockmaking or Clockmending, the Doctor has outdone them all, his Clock speaks
the truth (happily) better then any of theirs whatsoever. So that henceforth
there will be no need of a Scaliger de Emendatione Temporum, or a Lydiats
Emendatio Temporum. In the same Epistle he also told King Charles that it had
been under the Hammer and the File for many years; and I believe that he spoke
the truth in it, and am sorry that he laid out so much time as well as pains in
an unprofitable Study, neglecting that to which his Function did oblige him,
viz. the fitting himself rightly to understand and interpret the Scriptures.
That he neglected this, is too apparent from the strange interpretations that
he gives of sundry passages in Sacred Writ. I wish that all may be warned by
his example, that so much pains and so many precious hours may not be thrown
away hereafter upon Chronological Niceties.

ERRATA.
Page 4. lin. 29. read Et Lactantium. p. 6. l. 15. read Sardanapalus. p. 8. l.
18. dele Comma. p. 25. l. 17. dele Comma. p. 36. l. 7, 8. read (...) p. 50. l.
16. dele Comma after Charon. p. 68. l. 17. read Hystaspes. p. 70. l. 30. read
Scythians. p. 75. l. 12 and 16. read Shepherds. p. 88. l. 16. dele Comma. p.
104. l. 10. dele Comma after Defensione.

FINIS.

