Imprimatur
Concio haec in Luc. 1. v. 28. Gulielmus Jane, Reverendo in Christo Patri ac
Domino Dno Henrico Episcopo Land. April 1. 1676.
a Sacris Domesticis.

A SERMON Preached on the FEAST of the ANNUNCIATION OF THE B. Virgin Mary, AT
St Martins in the Fields, Westminster. BY JOHN MILL, M. A. Fellow of Queens
College Oxon.

In the SAVOY: Printed by THO. NEWCOMB, MDCLXXVI.

St. LUKE, Chap. 1. Verse. 28. And the Angel came in unto Her, and said, Hail,
Thou that art highly favored, the Lord is with Thee: Blessed art Thou among
Women.
GReat is the Mystery of Godliness, 1 Timothy 3.16.
says St. Paul; God Manifested in the Flesh, Justified in the Spirit, Seen of
Angels, Preached unto the Gentiles, Believed on in the World, Received up into
Glory. Mysterious Doctrines these indeed, and such as transcend the Capacities
of Men I do not say, Wisd. 19.16.
(those poor shallow Creatures who hardly guess aright at things upon Earth,
and with labor find even the things that are before them;) but also of the
Holy Angels of God. Those Glorious Spirits, who are all Flame and Intelligence,
cannot arrive to the Knowledge of them; are not allowed as much as a Glimpse
into these Depths of our Holy Religion. Desire they may and do, as St. Peter
tells us, 1 Pet. 1.12.
to pry a little into these Gospel- Arcana; but can by no means have their
Curiosity gratified: Any Wisdom inferior to that of God, being incapable of a
full Comprehension and Understanding of them. The reason is plain: For what
Man, says the great Apostle, knows even the Things of a Man, our poor
inconsiderable Thoughts and Designs, save the Spirit of a Man which is in him?
1 Cor. 2.11.
Even so the Things, the deep Things of God knows no Man, (nor for the same
reason any Creature else) but the Spirit of God. Verse. 10.
And yet God has revealed Them unto us, says the same Apostle. He has so; But
how? and in what measure? He has not explained the Modes and Reasons of
Gospel-Mysteries surely; Those are, and will, even in Heaven, remain to us
Unintelligible: But acquainted us merely with the Truth and Reality of them,
and discovered what those Supernatural Doctrines of Faith are, by Extraordinary
Revelation. A Revelation, to go on with St. Paul, as early as the Prophetic
Writings, wherein the Apostle affirms them to be declared: The Mystery of the
Gospel, says he, Romans 16.26.
was a thing hid from Ages, and from Generations, kept secret since the World
began; but is now, by the Scriptures of the Prophets, made known, and
manifested to all Nations, for the Obedience of Faith. A Truth undoubtedly
clear and evident, as far as concerns the Promises of a Messiah, ( i. e.) of
our Blessed Saviors Mission into the World, which are in the old Prophesies
most expressly delivered: but if extended to the several Doctrines touching his
Person, can only be true in this sense, that the Fullness of Time was able to
interpret those Ancient Records so, as to discover in them even these Doctrines
too. The Birth, Life, Actions and Sufferings of our Savior spread a sensible
Light over those Ancient Volumes, and made these Essential Truths of the Gospel
appear, otherwise or not at all, or very hardly discernable. The Truth is,
there is so much Obscurity in their Manifestations of them, (if I may so speak
without absurdity) that it is almost as difficult out of the Prophets to
conclude the Reality of any such Mysteries, as it is impossible to understand
the Natures of them. For to instance in that one, which more particularly
relates to the present Festival, I mean the Mysterious Incarnation of our Lord:
This Truth, I confess, was in some sort delivered to our first Parents, in that
promise of bruising, the Serpents Head by the Seed of the Woman: Genesis 3.15.
But this was a wonderful dark Insinuation of the Mystery. I grant also, that
Abraham had some Knowledge of this Matter; (our Savior himself attests so
much, Ioh. 8. 56.) So likewise had the Patriarchs, and several Godly Men, in
the first Ages of the World. They embraced This among many other things of the
Gospel; nay, they saw them, says the Author to the Hebrews, Chap. 11. v. 13.
but then 'twas (...), a far off, at a vast distance, and so implies a very
Inadequate and small Discovery. The Prophet Isaiah may seem indeed to have had
a much clearer and more advantageous view of Christ Incarnate, in his account
of it, Chapter 7. v. 14. Behold, a Virgin shall conceive, and bear a Son, and shall
call his Name Immanuel. For if the Prediction relate to Christ, then the
Prophet knew that the Mother of our Lord was to be a Virgin. But that the
Virgin there mentioned, was to Typifie the Virgin Mary, and the Immanuel to be
born, our blessed Savior, we have only the warrant of a Mystical
Interpretation, made indeed by St. Matthew, Chap. 1. v. 23. and so most
undoubtedly true; but such as otherwise we should never have thought upon; the
plain Letter of the Text only pointing out to a Child, to be born immediately
after the Prophecy, (whoever he was) as a Sign to King Ahaz, that Jerusalem
should be secured from the Arms of the Kings of Israel and Syria. So that for
all the Prophetical accounts of this and the like Doctrines of Faith, we are
like to be left infinitely in the dark, unless the Divine Goodness unfolds what
they wrapped up in Types, and displays the Truth of them in such an evident
manner, as may procure and establish a belief of them in the minds of Men.

But blessed be God, who will not suffer the World to remain under the
Prophetic Shades, and continue ignorant of the Principles of Christianity any
longer. It sufficed the Wisdom of Heaven to have kept these Glorious Things
unknown in a manner during the Mosaic Economy. But now the fullness of time is
come, when the Mysterious Abyss of the Gospel shall be broken up, and the
Glories of Christianity appear in so eminent and illustrious a manner, that all
the Ends of the World may see the Salvation of God. The Grand Design of Heaven
is to be laid open, and unravel'd successively, in all the Parts and Branches
of it.

The first of them, and Foundation of all the rest, I mean the Manifestation of
God in the Flesh, was explained to us this very day, by the Message of an
Angel; God sent one of those blessed Spirits from Heaven, on purpose to inform
us who was (...) That Virgin, (as the Prophet Isaiah styled her by way of
Eminency) that blessed Woman of all the World, who was to be the Mother of our
Lord. And who was this Virgin, think ye, who was to be Christ's Mother? and to
whom upon that account, so extraordinary an Embassy was dispatched? Some great
and and noble Personage certainly, highly eminent for her Extraction and
Quality. No such matter, but on the quite contrary, a poor mean Daughter of
Israel; expressing indeed in her Name something of Ladyship, (for so much St.
Ierom tells us the word Mary imports in the Syriac) but in reality of very low
condition. Lord! how thou despisest those things which in the opinion of the
World pass for great and honorable! how thou delightest to dignifie the most
excellent grace of Humility, by this and all the other circumstances of thy
Incarnation! A lowly Hand-maiden she was, (as she styles herself in her
Magnificat, v. 48.) in whom before all the Princesses of the Earth, our blessed
Lord was pleased to invest himself with Flesh, and become an Infant. Of this
astonishing Mystery the Angel Gabriel gives her solemn notice, v. 31. and out
of an admiration of the infinite Honor our Savior was about to do her, before
he delivered his message, he addresses himself to the Holy Virgin in this
affectionate Salutation: Hail, thou that art highly favored, the Lord is with
thee: blessed art thou among women.

Which words admit a twofold Interpretation: for they may be taken either in a
plain Indicative sense, and so they expressly denote the transcendent Glories
and Privileges of the blessed Virgin; or else they may bear a sense
Apprecative, as the Learned Grotius and others are of opinion they do, and so
they are expounded to be a Salutatory form of speech, wherein the Angel Gabriel
most heartily congratulates her upon the subject of her wonderful Conception,
whereof he is come on purpose to give her an assurance, and wishes her
thereupon all the joy and happiness imaginable. And thus the Reverend Doctor
Hammond paraphrases the words in this manner: Hail, Gracious Person, the Lord
of Heaven be with thee; and let all men ever account thee the most blessed
woman in the world. In either acceptance of the words, the Glorious Saint of
this day is sufficiently insinuated to be the Grand Favorite of Heaven; such a
woman as all the Generations of the Earth should have reason to celebrate, and
esteem most happy.

Let us now meditate upon, and consider ('it is, or ought to be, the religious
exercise of this Festival) the great and noble Character here given her. Let us
first of all fix our thoughts upon the high Honor God has vouchsafed her. And
then, in the second place, in Consideration of that, and of her singular
Endowments and Graces, pay to her memory all due Veneration and Respect: To the
first part of this Religious Duty, we have a prevalent Motive in the first
words of the Text; to the latter in the close of the Angels Salutation.

1. Mary is here styled (...), or highly favored, and accepted of God: for so
we render the word congruously to the sense of it in the best Greek Authors,
and to the mind of Gabriel, Verse. 30.
who tells her that she had found favor with God. Though I am not ignorant
that other Interpretations are fastened upon the word. Our Protestant Divines,
many of them, rendering it gratis dilecta; the Romanists generally gratiosa, or
gratia plena: neither of them so much out of respect, as I conceive, to the
meaning of the word in this place, as out of a design to countenance their own
particular Hypotheses. Not to stand therefore upon Critical Niceties, certain
it is, that highly graced and favored she was; in so transcendent a manner,
that we cannot fix our Meditations upon the Honor done her, in all its several
ennobling and exaltingCircumstances, without being swallowed up with
Admiration. We cannot trace the Divine Love to Her through the various Mazes
and Labyrinths of it, without losing our selves in so profound a Speculation.

We shall in the following Discourse, consider her as highly favored upon
these two accounts: I. Upon account of our blessed Lords Incarnation. II. Upon
account of those Excellent Graces and Virtues wherewith she was in a most
eminent manner dignified and accomplished.


I. Upon account of our blessed Lords Incarnation. down from Heaven, the
Habitation of his Holiness and of his Glory, and converse with Dust and Ashes?
Yes; and what is infinitely more, he will take upon him the very Nature and
Infirmities of a Man. And the blessed Virgin is to be the Woman in whom the
whole Mystery of this Incarnation is to be transacted. The Holy Ghost shall
come upon her, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow her, Verse. 35. And
that Holy Thing which shall be born of her, shall be Essentially God, God
blessed for ever, Romans 9. 5. Amazing News! And such as had the Angel acquainted
Us with, as he did Mary, supposing us to have known as little what was to befall
her, as herself did before that extraordinary Message, think whether we should
have believed him, and not rather have resolved all into mere absurdity and
contradiction. Nay, but with God nothing is impossible, says the Angel, Verse.
37. Well then, suppose for once a Conviction of the Possibility of the thing:
Suppose the Manifestation of God in Flesh Practicable; that is to say, that
Infinity could be circumscribed in the Womb, Eternity commence in Time,
Omnipotency be surrounded with Weakness, Dan. 7.9.
the Ancient of Days become a Child of a span long; (and yet the Conception of
Them is ready to crack our Faculties:) Suppose, I say, the Possibility of all
these things; and then consider how highly Dignified she must be, who is to be
the Illustrious Subject of all these Miracles. Quae vel Angelica puritas Illi
audeat comparari, quae digna fuit Spiritus Sacrarium fieri and habitaculum
filii Dei! S. Bern. de Assump. Sermon. 4.
The Woman, who by peculiar Designation is to carry Divinity in her Womb, and
become the Mother of God. Lord! what shall we say? She is inexpressibly far
above either Saints or Angels. The grand instance of a Creature on whom the
Almighty has accumulated all the Greatness and Honor consistent with a Created
Capacity, a Finite Nature. Virgo Matter! (as a pious Father harangues it upon
this Argument) Illa majorem Deus facere non potest: Majorem Mundum potest
facere Deus: Majorem autem Matrem quam Matrem Dei non potest facere Deus. God
cannot, says he, create a greater Creature than a Virgin Mother. God can make a
larger World, (a thousand Worlds if it pleases him) but to make a greater
Mother than the Mother of God, is perfectly Impossible. Blessed Saint! how
beyond all Imagination highly has the Lord regarded thy low condition! How far
has he advanced Thee above the whole Creation in point of Honor and Dignity!
The Glorious Angels which attend upon his Throne, were the Creatures he wholly
passed by, Heb. 2.16.
when he came down and Impregnated Thee by the Holy Ghost. His dearest Servants
are but small Sharers in his Favor, when compared to Thee, who did possess
even the whole Divinity. Moses had the Honor to talk with God, Exodus 33.
11,18,20.
with the like familiarity, as a Man talks with his Friend, and was earnest
to have a sight of his Glory; but was denied it, as not being able to endure so
dazzling a Luster. The Prophets likewise had some converse with Heaven; but
'twas withal by secret Inspirations and Dreams, in an imperfect manner. Several
Persons are Recorded in Scripture to have been filled with the Holy Ghost. And
indeed every good Christian may be said to be Partaker of the Divine Nature, 2
Pet. 1. 4. To have put on Christ, Gal. 3. 17. Nay, to have Christ formed in
him, Gal. 4. 19. in a Spiritual sense. But the Blessed Virgin was the Person
alone of all the World, in whom the Almighty would, not by the Gifts and Graces
of his Spirit only, but Essentially, Locally, Properly reside; whose Womb was
to be the real Receptacle and Temple of God, and in whom was to dwell all the
fullness of the Godhead bodily. Behold, 1 John 3.1.
says St. John, what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we
should be called the Sons of God. If so great be the love of God to us in
making us his Sons, what must That be whereby be made the Blessed Virgin
(besides the favor she enjoys in common with the best of Christians) our
Saviors Mother? We are his Sons only in a Qualified and Spiritual Notion; but
she is in Truth and Reality the Mother of God. This is her Title, and this is
her Memorial for all Generations. So that now we shall adventure to take up
again the Angels Salutation, and say, Hail, Thou that art highly favored, the
Lord is with Thee: Blessed art Thou among Women. Highly favored: And that not
only upon account of our blessed Lords Incarnation, the Reason hitherto
insisted on; but also,

II. Upon the score of those Excellent Graces and Virtues wherewith she was, in
a very eminent degree, dignified and accomplished. God might, it is true, had it
so pleased Him, have made choice of any other, even Unsanctified Virgin, as
well as the Virgin Mary, wherein to transact the Mysterious Incarnation of his
Son. And I know very well there are a sort of ill-natured Fanatical Spirits,
who will not allow this Holy Woman any Extraordinary Grace, nay indeed not any
Civil Respect upon the account of this her Honorable Relation. She was, say
they, beloved merely gratis, without the least respect had to any peculiar
Graces and Qualifications she could pretend to. An Assertion so far true
indeed, that her Piety could not challenge either This, or any other Divine
Favor, strictly and by way of Merit; but if so extended as to exclude the
Singular Eye or Respect God had to her Virtues and Graces in so grand an Affair
as this was, is an absurd and unworthy Doctrine. For if (according to the Wise
man's Aphorism) Into a Malicious Soul Wisdom shall not enter, Wisd. 1.4.
nor dwell in the Body that is subject unto Sin; it is infinitely gross to
imagine that our Blessed Lord, who is the Wisdom of the Father, 1 Cor. 1.24.
should inhabit the Body, and cloth Himself with the Flesh and Blood of an
Irreligious Woman. Far be this from our Conceptions. The Holy JESUS undoubtedly
had a very tender and special regard not only to the low estate, (Verse. 48.)
but much more to the Piety of this Hand-maiden whom he designed for his Mother.

Not that I would here be thought in the least wise to affirm the Blessed Mary
perfectly free from all Actual Sin, much less from Original Corruption. I leave
such Anti-Scriptural Doctrines to be Established by the Council of Trent, Conc.
Trid. Sess. 5 Art. 5. ad finem.
and Preached up by the Franciscan Friars. We have no warrant for any
Magnificent Strains of that kind concerning her. Having on the contrary as good
Assurance, as Scripture can give us, that all Men (the Virgin Mary no where
excepted) are conceived and born in Sin. Romans 5.12.
All that I aim at is this, that the Mother of our Blessed Savior was an
eminently Religious and Holy Woman. And truly we need not go far for an
Argument of this Truth. St. Luke has in this very Chapter given us a sufficient
account of her Graces: The History of the Annunciation representing to us these
several Particulars.

1. Her Chastity; She was a Virgin, (V. 29.) one that knew not a Man, (V. 34.)
free from all carnal Uncleanness and Pollution: Her Mind and Body entirely pure
and Immaculate; not in the least measure sullied and ruffled by Lust; and
consequently devoid of what might otherwise have alienated her from the Divine
Love, and rendered her Body an unfit Temple for the God of all Purity to
inhabit. 2. Her Humility and Modesty; Virtues expressed in her behavior
toward the Angel, (V. 29.) When she saw him, says the Evangelist, she was
troubled at his saying; and cast in her mind what manner of Salutation this
should be. She was troubled at his saying. Poor Virgin^ The Angels Complyment
is in all Circumstances too big for her Modesty; Quod turbata est, Verecundiae
fuit.

S. Bernard. Sermon. 3. super Missus. est.


The Address in her Apprehension, most infinitely unsuitable to a Woman of her
low Rank and Condition in the World. What! An Angel clad all in Robes of Glory,
come to visit a poor mean Daughter of Israel? Can it be that Heaven should in
Her, of all the Women in the World, find any thing that might incline God to
respect and favor Her? She blushes upon the Angels Address; Sees and hears
herself highly magnified; Thinks upon the Message deeply; Considers it again
and again: But after all, cannot apprehend any thing in herself which may in
any wise correspond to the Angels Character: Her Modesty will not allow her to
understand the least part of the Import of the Angels Salutation. How she of
all others should be the great Favorite of Heaven, advanced and honored above
all her Sex, a Person to be celebrated throughout all Ages, she cannot imagine.
And as for her Humility, 'twas the same after her Exaltation as before. In her
Magnificat, she expresses herself sensible of her low Condition; and takes
occasion to meditate upon, and adore the Mercy of God, who rejects the Proud, 1
Pet. 5.5.
but gives Grace and Honor to the Humble. He has scattered, says she, the
Proud in the Imagination of their Hearts. He has put down the Mighty from
their seat, and has exalted the Humble and Meek, Verse. 51, 52. Her Humility
was one of the principal Graces which procured her this favor. God delights in
this Grace in a peculiar manner; Loves those, and only those that are Humble:
He loves and lives with them. Thus says the high and lofty One, who inhabiteth
Eternity, whose Name is Holy: I dwell in the high and holy Place; with him also
that is of a contrite and humble Spirit, to revive the Spirit of the Humble,
and to revive the Heart of the Contrite Ones, Isai. 57. 15.
The next Grace observable in the Virgin Mary, is her Faith, expressed Verse.
38. Behold, says she, the Handmaid of the Lord; Be it unto me according to thy
Word. She staggers not at the promise of God through unbelief, (to apply to her
St. Paul's words concerning Abraham upon a much-like Argument) but is strong in
Faith, Romans 4.20, 21.
giving Glory to God; and being fully persuaded that what he had promised, he
was able also to perform. The Consideration of Omnipotency removes all Doubts
and Difficulties. To be a Mother without knowing a Man, is a strong Objection
against her Faith: But that GOD can do in this case, as well as any other, what
transcends our Imaginations, is on the other hand as much out of question. And
if he say he Will do it, the Divine Veracity, which is as infallible as his
Power is infinite, is engaged to a performance. And so she is undoubtedly
assured that it must be so, though she cannot tell how. And thereupon she
acquiesceth in what the Angel had told her, without any further Hesitancy or
Contradiction: Behold, says she, freely resigning up herself to the Divine
Pleasure, Behold the Handmaid of the Lord; be it unto me according to thy word.

But I shall not insist any longer upon the Variety of Gifts and Graces
wherewith the blessed Virgin was Endowed; but shall only take notice of the
profound Reverence and Honor which Antiquity paid Her in that Celebrated
Opinion of theirs, That after she had given the consent just now mentioned, Be
it unto me according to thy word, She was by singular Privilege kept secure
from all Actual Sin during her whole Life. An Opinion, I confess, entertainable
without any prejudice to our Holy Faith, and such as the Fathers who embraced
it, took up certainly out of the great and awful Regard they had to the Dignity
and Person of our Savior; but such as has not the least Foundation in
Scripture, and therefore may reasonably be laid aside, among many other
ungrounded Ejaculations, and over-officious Praises of a Saint, too honorably
and advantageously represented in the Gospel as to her Virtue and Piety, to
need the Accession of our groundless extravagant Commendations.

And if we cannot account the Zeal of some Ancient Fathers of the Church so
discreet as well-meaning in this particular; What shall we say of that
Abominable Superstition, which has induced the Church of Rome and her Doctors
to sally out so far in the Praises of the Virgin Mary, as to Romance her into a
Deity? to attribute to her Divine Perfections, and to pay her that Religious
Worship which belongs only to God?

She was, says the Angel (...), that is, say they, Gratia plena, Full of Grace.
And a very Gracious Person she was undoubtedly; so far we concur, and here we
must leave them. For they go on, and with a Confidence befitting the
Worshippers of Saints and Angels, mentioned by the Apostle, Col. 2. 18. who
should boldly intrude into those things which they had not seen; They affirm
that her Fullness of Grace was such, that she was able to communicate it to any
that wanted; in the very same manner, as our Savior says, Joh. 5.26.
that as the Father had Life in Himself, so had he given to the Son to have
Life in Himself. Nay, Suarez. the Jesuit is wonderfully Nice and Critical in
stating this Plenitude, and giving us an exact Estimate of it. The Grace of the
Virgin Mary (says he, 3. Part. Disp. 18. Sect. 4.
upon the the Popish Hypothesis of her Immaculate Conception) was greater in
the very first moment she was conceived, than the Grace of the highest Angel,
and consequently merited more than a thousand Men can merit all their Life
long. Now this Grace of hers received a continual Increase as long as she
lived; in such a manner, that in the first instant of her Conception, her Grace
excelled that of the highest Angel, who by one or two Acts completed his
Merits. In the second instant, her Grace was doubled, and so was twice as
Excellent and Meritorious as the former. In the third instant four times, in
the fourth eight times as much as the first; and so on according to Geometrical
Proportion. So that the Grace of every instant doubling its foregoing Grace
from the moment in which she was conceived, till the time of her Nativity; and
afterward every Act of Grace being in like manner twice as excellent as its
precedent Act, till the Seventy Second Year of her Age, wherein she died; She
was so far advanced in Goodness and Merit, as to have more Grace and Merit than
the whole Society of Men and Angels put together: She is dearer to God than the
whole Reasonable Creation; He loves her more than the Universal Church. What
odd Metaphysical Notions are these! And yet a World of such Insignificant and
Non-sensical Trash we meet with in the Schoolmen: Who in their Discourses
relating to the Holy Virgin, thought they could never be Romantic enough in
describing the Praises, and advancing (after their dull rugged fashion) the
Merits of a Saint, whom the Church of Rome had in so singular a manner made the
Object of a Religious Adoration. Conc. Trid. Sess. 25. Art. 2.
But I shall wave at present any farther pursuit of these, and the like
Superstitious Fopperies, whereby whilst they would be thought to magnify the
Mother of our Lord, they do really expose Christ himself and his Gospel to
scorn and contempt; contenting my self with what has been said already
concerning the high Honor done her in making her so miraculously Instrumental
in our Lords Incarnation; and bestowing upon her such eminent Gifts and Graces.
The Contemplation of this transcendent Dignity of the Virgin, was I told you,
one Branch of this Days Religious Exercise.

2. The second part of our Duty consists in the Celebration of her Memory, or
in expressing to her upon account of her eminent Virtue and Goodness, all due
Respect and Veneration. The blessed Angel, you see, did this in his Address to
her; Hail, Thou that art highly favored, the Lord is with Thee: Blessed art
Thou among Women. Blessed art Thou; i. e. Let all Men Honor Thee, as an ever
blessed Saint. Indeed, who can seriously reflect upon her wonderful Relation to
God, who can truly love our Lord Jesus Christ and not entertain a most
Profoundly Reverend Esteem of Her, whose Womb bare Him, and whose Paps He
sucked? If the Woman in the Gospel was to have a Perpetual Memorial for
breaking her Box of Spikenard, and pouring it upon our Saviors head, Mark 14.
9. of what Honor shall She be thought worthy, who was the very Mother of God?
How lasting and precious ought her Name to be among us, by whom God brought
forth Christ into the World, and conveyed to Us the Benefits of our Redemption?

But how must we declare and manifest the great Esteem and Honor we have for
the Blessed Virgin?

To this I answer, 1. Negatively; 2. Positively.

1. Negatively. We are not to express the great Esteem we have of Her by a
Religious Worship, or such a sort of Adoration as we pay unto God. We are not
to ascribe to her such Perfections as are proper to the Deity, nor pray to, or
call upon her in any case or exigency whatsoever. For it is written, Matthew.
4.10.
Thou shall Worship the Lord thy God, and Him only shall thou serve. He is the
God hearing Prayer, Psalm. 65.2.
and therefore to Him, and Him alone, shall all Flesh come. St. John indeed
fell down at the feet of the Angel to worship him, Rev. 19. 10. But received a
Reprimend for his Inconsiderate Zeal: See thou do it not, says the Angel; I am
thy Fellow servant, and of thy Brethren that have the Testimony of Jesus:
Worship God. And certainly (...), if the Blessed Virgin now in Heaven have any
Knowledge of what is done here below; if she sees the many Shrines and Altars
erected to her, and hears the Prayers and Devotions offered up continually by
stupid and superstitious Votaries; she cannot but infinitely disdain the
Religious Homage paid her, so much in Derogation to God and his Christ: A
Worship which has not the least countenance from Sacred Writ; there being in
those holy Books neither Precept nor Example of Devotion in this kind. Our
Savior is so far from enjoining the Worshipping of Her, that he restrains upon
all occasions all extravagant apprehensions of the Honor due to her, as
foreseeing the proneness of succeeding Ages to Superstition in this matter.
When he was told that his Mother and his Brethren stood without; Who, says he,
are my Mother and my Brethren? He that does the Will of my Father, the same is
my Mother, and Sister, and Brother. And when the Woman brake forth into that
Rapture concerning the Blessed Mother of our Lord; Blessed is the Womb that
bare Thee, and the Paps which Thou have sucked: Our Savior diverts it to
another thing; Yea rather blessed are they that hear the Word of God and keep
it. Nor do the Apostles give us the least advice of addressing our selves to
the Virgin, and making use of her Intercession; nay, they have not so much as
once mentioned her Name in all their Epistles. Now if the Worship of the
Blessed Virgin had been a thing in practice from the beginning, can it with any
color of reason be imagined, that our Savior and his Apostles would have been
silent in so considerable a part of Religion? The truth is, it is so far from
Apostolic or Primitive, that neither the Scriptures, nor the Christian Writers
for the first three hundred years, give any countenance at all to this sort of
Devotion. To be plain; This Superstitious Practice began about the middle of
the fourth Century; and Epiphanius, Epiphan. contr. Haeres. lib. 3. Haer. 79.
who lived about that time, particularly calls it (as he might have done a
great many more) The Heresy of Women. There were in his days certain devout
Women of Arabia, who, as an instance of their Worship of the Blessed Virgin,
offered up to this Queen of Heaven (as they thought her) certain Cakes called
Collyrides, whence they had the name of Collyridian Heretics. The Good Father
hearing of this preposterous Devotion of theirs, inveighs with all possible
vehemence against that Superstitious Practice; accounting it Damnable and
Diabolical, and the Persons devoted to it, no better than those that attend to
Seducing Spirits, 1 Timothy 4. 1.
and Doctrines of Demons. And then he states the Worship due to the Virgin
Mary, thus: Mary, says he, was a Virgin, it is true; nay more, (...), a very
Honorable Virgin; (...), but she is not proposed to us as an Object of
Religious Worship. (...), says the same Father, Though Mary be a most
Excellent, Holy and Venerable Woman, yet is she by no means capable of a
Religious Adoration. And again, (...), Let the Virgin be Reverenced, but God
only Worshipped. So Zealous was Epiphanius in the matter of the Virgins
Invocation, a piece of Superstition before his time not known in the World.

What would he have said, had he seen this Idolatry of Worshipping the Virgin,
(of calling upon her, and imploring her Mediation with Christ) grown into such
a general Reputation, as to be Universally Practiced, and Established by the
Law of a Church, Conc. Trid. Sess. 25. Art. 2.
which Glories in the style of Catholic? His Spirit undoubtedly upon
Observation of the Churches, Shrines and Altars Erected to her Devotion, (as
St. Paul's once was) would have been stirred within him, when he should have
seen not only one particular City, but a whole Church wholly given to this and
many other Branches of Idolatry: The Idols or Images set up in Honor of the
Blessed Virgin, being infinitely more numerous, than those the great Apostle
saw at Athens, and both made use of to the same Religious Ends and Purposes.

Indeed the Romish Superstition relating to the Blessed Mary, as it is now
practiced, is infinitely too gross and absurd, to be in any tolerable manner
accounted for, and justified. It Is wholly Anti-Scriptural; and it is evident the
Church of Christ knew nothing at all of it for above three hundred years after
our Savior. Alas! The several Periods of the Rise and Growth of this
Superstitious Folly and Will Worship, as to all the parts of it, are too
notorious, to allow it the least Pretensions to Antiquity. The Council of
Ephesus, Anno 431.
toward the beginning of the fourth Century, gave her indeed the style of
(...), or Mother of God, in Opposition to the Nestorian Heresy: And I know
very well that in the Ages immediately succeeding, they fell to making lofty
and unreasonably high Harangues in her Commendation. But 'twas above a thousand
years after Christ before any Daily Office was Instituted to Her. And a long
time after that was it ere the Doctrine of her Immaculate Conception appeared
in the World. The Canons of Lions are the first Men upon Record, who inserted
that Doctrine into their Ecclesiastical Offices, and are upon that account
sharply reprehended by St. Bernard. About three hundred years ago Duns Scotus a
School-Doctor revived That Opinion, and proposed it as a thing merely probable.
In favor of it Pope Sixtus the Fourth afterward Published a Bull, which was
finally Approved and Ratified by the Council of Trent. So that She now passes
among the Romanists (if they be true to the Decrees of their Church) for a
Virgin perfectly free from Original Sin; not to mention the several other
Prerogatives and Perfections they have out of very great kindness doubtless
fixed upon Her. They style her in their Missals and Offices, The Queen of
Heaven, The Empress of the World, The Ladder of Paradise, The Gate of
Salvation, The Mediatrix between God and Man, The Savior by whom God has sent
Redemption unto his People, A Goddess, The Omnipotent Lady, etc. And the
peculiar Offices which have been instituted to her, are so extremely Wild and
Blasphemous, that I cannot mention what they speak of the Virgin, without
offense to this Intelligent and Noble Auditory.

Bonavent.
A Cardinal of the Romish Church, who Compiled the Ladies Psalter, (as they call
it) has taken the liberty very fairly to Burlesque the Psalms of David, and
roundly to apply and direct to the Holy Virgin all those Noble Hymns, and most
Pious Ejaculations and Prayers which the Royal Psalmist presented to Almighty
God. So Indiscreet a Thing is Superstition, that whilst it labors to Gratify
and Please God, it blindly falls upon such means in order thereto, as do most
highly disoblige and dishonor Him.

Blessed Saint! Is this the Respect and Honor which Thou requirest of Us, to
build Thee Shrines and Temples, and then to pay to Thee in Them a Religious
Worship? To offer up at Thy Altars our Devotions and Prayers, to run over our
Rosaries, to say Ten Ave Mary's for One Pater Noster; i. e. to make Ten
Addresses to Thee, for One Prayer directed to Almighty God? (and this is the
proportion observed in the Romish Devotions.) In a word, to transfer upon Thee
the Religious Reverence due to God as his own Peculiar Prerogative? Surely no.
This is a sort of Complaisance or Humility (as the Apostle speaks in the case
of Angel Worship) which cannot possibly be grateful to Thee. Col. 2.18.
We cannot imagine that Thou can at all delight in receiving (if yet Thou art
capable of receiving) from Us those Religious Services, which we cannot pay
Thee, without Injuring and Affronting Thy MAKER. We dare not present to Thee
our Petitions and Prayers; because they are due to God only. We dare not
implore Thy Favor in Interceding for Us to Thy Son; because we have an
Immediate Advocate with the Father, 1 John 2.1.
JESUS CHRIST the Righteous. But This we will do; We will give Thee all the
Honor that possibly we can, on this side Religious Worship. We will Extol Thy
Graces, magnify that Infinite Mercy which raised Thee to the Dignity of being
the Mother of God: And last of all, Imitate as far as we can, Thy Admirable
Goodness and Piety. And this is the true way of declaring the Veneration we
have for the Blessed Virgin. Our Esteem of Her is to be expressed not in a
Religious Worship: But,

2. Positively. In the Celebration and Imitation of her Virtues and Graces. If
we affectionately Celebrate her Memory, Praise and Admire her Graces, and
endeavor to transcribe them in our Lives and Actions, we do her as much Honor
as is possible. We have hitherto considered her manifold Graces, pray let us
forthwith fall to Imitation and Practice. Let Us follow her even in her
Virginal Chastity; remembering that the God of Purity would be born of none but
a Virgin: That they were Virgins who had the Honor to sing a new and peculiar
Song before the Throne, and to follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes, Rev. 14.
3, 4. Or however, let us be Conjugally Chaste; and not by Lust and Folly defile
and profane our Bodies, which ought to be the Temples of the Holy Ghost; nor
make the Members of Christ, for such these of ours are by Mystical Union, the
Members of an Harlot. Let us Imitate her Humility, the very Crown of all
Christian Graces, that wherein our Lord chiefly delights. Learn of me, says he,
for I am meek and lowly in heart, Matthew 11. 29. The Lord chose a meek and
humble Woman for his Mother. A Lesson to those in particular, whom St. Peter in
one of his Epistles makes it his business to accomplish. But how? 1 Pet. 3.3,4.
Let their Adorning, says he, not be that Adorning of Plaiting the Hair, and of
Wearing of Costly Apparel: but let it be the hidden Man of the Heart, in that
which is not corruptible, even the Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, which
is in the sight of God of great price.

What shall I say more? In everything wherein we find her excellent, let us
tread her Steps; and this will be indeed to Celebrate This Festival. We may
Imitate her even in this Mysterious Conception of our Savior. We are capable
of the Honor of having Christ formed in us, Gal. 4. 19. Of being Partakers of
the Divine Life and Nature, 2 Pet. 1.4. Of having Christ dwell in our Hearts,
Ephesians. 3. 17. Of being the Temples of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 6. 19. In fine, we
are capable, in our Saviors account, of greater Blessedness than that which
accrew'd to the Holy Virgin upon the score of her being the Lords Mother:
Blessed is the Womb that bare Him, and the Paps which He sucked: But rather
blessed are they that hear the Word of God and keep it. He that does the Will
of my Father, the same, says Christ, is my Brother, and Sister, and MOTHER.

GOD Grant that We may all of Us so perfectly express our Love and Relation to
CHRIST by a Sincere, Constant, Uniform Observance of His Commands, that
together with the Holy Mother of our Lord, and all the Company of Saints and
Angels, We may enjoy a Blessed Immortality in the Highest Heavens for Ever and
Ever. AMEN.
FINIS.

