The Complete MODELLIST: SHOWING The true and exact way of Raising the Model of
any Ship or Vessel, small or great, either in Proportion, or out of Proportion.

ALSO The manner how to find the Length of every Rope exactly.

AND TABLES which give the true Bigness of every Rope in each Vessel. Together
with The Weights of their Cables and Anchors.

Performed by Thomas Miller of Great Yarmouth, Seaman, and Master in the Art of
Raising the Model.

LONDON: Printed for William Fisher near the Postern-Gate at Tower Hill, and
Eliz. Hurlock at the Rose at the West End of St. Paul's Church. 1676.

To the Right Worshipful Major William Burton, ALDERMAN Of the Town of great
Yarmouth, Esquire.
SIR,
I Wish you much Peace and Happiness both in Soul and Body. Sir, I do very well
know, and am sensible, that you are a great deal better knowing in this Art of
Rigging than my weak Fancy will ever attain unto, which did invite me to
present You with my weak Works: And knowing You to be one that was ever very
free to accept of the well-meaning of any one; which did the more urge me to
the performance of the same, not fearing but it would have a loving acceptance
from Your Worthy self to publish the same. So desiring not to be tedious, but
only to present my humble thankfulness for former Courtesies received from You,
I shall ever remain,

Your Worships Humble Servant THOMAS MILLER.

To the Reader.
GEntle Reader, I do here present you with the Rare and Exact way of Rigging by
the Model. But I must confess it is by the persuasions of some that have the
true taste of it: for I did not intend to publish it as yet, but taking it into
a serious consideration, I thought it not convenient any longer to obscure the
reflection of such a true light; and as it is truth, so it is so plain and
easy, that any one, although he could never before obtain to cut out a Ships
Rigging* may by this way Rigg any Ship small or great, with a Weeks Practice or
less. But if it were half so easy again as it is, which is almost impossible,
yet I say, if it were so easy, it is possible a man may have the Book, and yet
never come to Rigg a Ship, if he do not endeavor to get the use of the Book,
which is a thing that may soon be obtained.

Likewise I could have showed a great deal of curiosity in the Models, and have
drawn them perfectly like a Ship: for, for matter of draughting, And this way
of Rigging is most certain, and will hold true in all Vessels, small or great,
but those Rules by way of Proportion, formerly printed, cannot hold, but will
deceive those that trust to them.
few or none go beyond me. But I find it not convenient; for at first I did do
so, and some that I learned were so wise, they could almost have left the Goose
to run after the Feather; that is, they were so affected with the draught of
the Ship, they minded that more than the substance that belonged to it. So I
have now in every respect laid it down in a more plain manner; and as I find
this Book to be accepted of, I shall present you with another in the future. So
I conclude,

And remain yours in all my Practice, THOMAS MILLER.

Instructions for the raising of the Model of any Ship or Vessel, small or
great.
WHen you go to raise the Model of any Ship or Vessel, you must in the first
place know the Length of her Keel, and the Depth in her Hold, and the Breadth
of her Beam.

The length of the Keel.
First knowing the Length of the Keel, take the Length of the Keel off your
Scale, and place it on your Paper that you intend to raise your Model on,
making two pricks, one with one point of the Compasses, the other with the
other; then draw a Line with your Pen or Pencil of Black-lead, as from A to B.

The depth of the Hold from the Keel to the first Deck
Then take the Depth of the Hold off from your Scale with your Compasses, and
set one foot in the end of the Keel line at A, and with the other make a prick
at D, and likewise from B to C; then with your Ruler and Black-lead, or Pen,
draw another Line parallel with the Keel, and that is the Line for the first
Deck.

The height between the first and second Deck.
Then for the Height between the fi st and second Deck, which appears in the
Figure following, to be 6 foot and a half; then take 6 foot and a half off from
your Scale, and set one foot of your Co^passes at D, and with the other make a
prick at E, and likewise from C to F. So must you do for the Height between the
second and third Deck, and so for the Cabin, and Coch, and Round-house above
that, and for the Fore-castle, all in the same manner, and then draw Lines from
prick to prick.

To raise the Stem.
Then for the Stem raise a perpendicular Line from the forepart of the Keel to
the second Deck; then take two thirds of the Depth in Hold, which in the figure
is 12 foot; then set 1 foot of your Compasses at B, and with the other mark a
prick at G: so l kewise set 1 foot in the upper end of the line at H, and with
the other foot make a prick at I; then draw a line from G to I, parallel to
that from B to H, then from that outermost line draw the Stem to the Keel with
what Sweep you please, running the top of your Stem 3 or 4 foot above the line,
as it is in the Figure; then you may draw it double as you please, and the Keel
likewise.

D, and note how many feet soever your Model is by the Keel, so make and divide
the Scale into 15 equal parts, as is showed, the 2 first equal parts of the
Scale divide into 20 feet, The making of the Scale.
6 of those feet are one fathom, and 12 of those feet are 2 fathom. And the
other 13 divisions numbered by 10, 20, 30, etc. 10 130, are 10 feet a piece. By
the fathoms I measure the length of the Ropes, and also the Canvas for the
Sails; and by the Scale of equal parts, I measure the Model, the larger you
draw the Models of your Vessels or Ships, the better you may see to do your
Work.

A Rule for Masting and Yarding by Proportion; but for my part I make no use of
it, because it will not hold.
The Mainmast.
THe Mainmast must be twice and one half the Length of the Beam.

The Foremast.
The Foremast eight ninths of the Mainmast.

Main-top-mast and top-gallant-mast.
The Main-top-mast half the Mainmast, and the Main-top-gallant-mast half the
Main-top-mast.

The fore-top-mast and top-gallant-mast.
The Fore-top-mast half the Foremast, and the Fore-top-gallant-mast half the
Fore-top-mast.

The Bolt-sprit.
The Bolt-sprit the length of the Foremast.

The Missen-mast and Missen-top-mast.
The Missen-mast the height of the Main-top-mast from the Quarter Deck, and the
Missen-top-mast half that.

Main-yard and, Main-top-sail-yard.
The Main-yard 6 seven parts of the Mainmast, and the Main-top-sail-yard half
that, and Top-gallant-yard half that.

Fore-yard and Fore-top-sail-yard. Missen-yard. Sprit-sail-yard and
Cross-jack-yard. Sprit-sail-top-mast, and top-sail-yard. Note, That all the
small Yards are half the great Yards from Cleat to Note. Cleat, or from one
earing of the Top-sail to another, you may have what Yard-arms you please.
The Fore-yard eight ninths of the Main-yard, and the Fore-top-sail-yard half
that, and Top-gallant-yard half that.

The Missen-yard something shorter then the Fore-yard.

The Sprit-sail-yard and Cross-jack-yard both one, the Cross-jack-yard half the
Missen-yard.

The Sprit-sail-top-sail-yard half the Spri-sail-yard, and the
Sprit-sail-top-mast almost half the Sprit-sail-yard.

The Use of the Model.


The Yards hoisted gives the length of Clew-lines, Brases, and Clewgarnets, and
Tackles, and Sheats, and Bow-lines.

In the small ones is showed the length of Shrowds and Top-sail Halliards with
Brases, and Lifts, as in the Figure B.

A is showed how to give a near estimation how many yards of Canvas is in a
main Course. When you come in any Ship or Vessel, and desire to know how many
yards of Canvas is in the main or fore Course: First, you must know the depth
of your Sail, and the breadth of the Canvas that the Sail is made of; then take
off so much from the Scale as you see the Cloth is in breadth, and place so
many Clothes in the Model on the Main or Fore-yard, the same depth that the
Sail is on, as you see the main Course in this Figure: After you have so done,
then take a fathom or two off from your Scale, and measure every Cloth up and
down as you do the Ropes, and that gives you the number of yards.

Likewise, here is showed in this Figure the way how to place your Garnet and
Runner, and Sprit-sail-top-sail, Cran-lines, and main-stay and fore-stay to
find the true length of them.

In the figure C is showed the way to find the number of yards, that is in a
main or fore-top-sail, the same way that you measure one Sail, you must measure
all.



So likewise to find the length of all Ropes.
Likewise it theweth the length of main-top-sail bow-lines; and so you must do
to find the length of fore-top-sail-bow-lines: draw only a line from the
top-sail yard-arm, to the main-yard-arm with your pen, or black-lead: Note from
the further yard-arm, that you may take them at the largest extent, and so your
Brases: in like manner, it shows also the length of main-bow-line, and
main-sheat, and main-tack, and single Garnet.

All this I could have performed in one model, but then it would have been so
f^ll, that you would not so well have understood it: but you may perform all in
one figure, in starching three or four sheets of paper together, and then your
model will be of a very good volumn; for the bigger it is, the less error will
be: and your best way to perform all in one model is, to draw your yards with
black-lead only, especially the lowest yards, and then you may rub them out
after you have measured our your Rigging, leaving only a little speck or spot
at the end of each yards-arm, that you may the easier draw them again: if you
have occasion, the two spots will give you the length of them again without any
more trouble, and then it will not be so easy for any one to steal away the
use of your model by, as he that has an ingenious pate may do: and to prevent
that, I seldom let any yards be seen, but only leave two little pricks to give
me the length of them at any time, when occasion requires.

And then I draw them out again with black-lead, and measure out my Rigging,
and write them in a piece of paper, and then with the crumbs of white bread,
and a clean linen cloth, I rub them out again, and so leave only the mast
standing.

The fore-channel-bines
Then for the Channel-bines, if you see the Ship or Vessel, then you know the
better where to place them; or if she be upon the stocks, that they be not
brought too, he that is a Seaman will give a near guess where they should be it
is no great matter. But rather endeavor to place them a little too low rather
then too high.

The length of Stay and Shrowds.
Or two thirds of the Stay or Mainmast is a good Rule for your Shrowds; for
your Stay must be as long as the Mast.

To place the Main-masts.
Then for the placing of your Mast, there is very few but know the Main mast
must stand in the middle, and to that end raise a Perpendicular Line from the
middle of the Keel, making a little step some two foot, or two foot and a half,
as is in the Figure D. at K; if your Step be not so high as it should be, or if
it be a little higher then it should be, so it be not too much, it breaks no
square, so long as you give a handsome allowance for the end of your Shrowds to
turn up.

Then after you have raised the Mast at his proper length, then allow for the
Mast-head, and there place the Cross-trees; but if you measure your Mast, as it
is allowed any Boat-swain to do, then you must mind the height of the
Mast-head, and it is the surest way to know exactly the length of the Mast and
Yards, and then you cannot work amiss: for I have measured very few Masts, but
differ something, therefore I advise you to know the true length of your Mast
and Yards.

Now the Foremast stands just upon the Breast-hook, and there you must place a
thing imitating a step, of some 6 or 7 foot high, To place the Foremast.
or 4 or 5 foot high, according as the Ship or Vessel is in bigness, or
according as you see the Foremast will stand in proportion to the Mainmast,
as your eye will give you that: and as you see it agrees with the Mainmast in
height, so place your step as in the Model D, at L: and if it stand half a foot
too high or too low, it is no great matter so long as the Shrowds are long
enough.

Now in placing your Missen-mast, your judgment must be better there, then
about any Mast; because there is no just Rule to be given, To place the
Missen-mast
but only your eye must be your best rule.

Therefore after you have raised your Model, and placed your Mainmast, then
observe the Model well, and you may soon perceive where you shall place the
Missen-mast: and this observe, that if it becomes not the Model, it will not
become the Ship,

The Bolt-sprit.
Now the Bolt-sprit you must place as you see in the Model D, at H FC, letting
it run from six foot beyond the Foremast; this must be done in a Ship, but in
other Vessels they are placed other ways: therefore you must place them as you
see the Vessel requires.

For the height between Decks.
Now after you have the true length, and depth, and breadth of any Ship or
Vessel given you by any one that you are sure knows, you may give a guess your
self for the height between Decks, if she have two Decks, or the height in the
Steridge, and great Cabin, and Roundhouse, if she have any, and likewise the
Fore-castle: For my own part I never saw any Ship or Vessel since I began to
practice this Art, but I could give a near estimation of her heights between
Decks, and the like, without measuring, if I did but see the Ship or Vessel;
but indeed if I went aboard, I could guess the better by my own height. And I
would be sure to account them rather with the lowest then with the highest,
that my Rigging should fall out long enough.

The Practice.
Your only way to be expert in raising of the Model, is to make a Book of large
and good Paper Royal, and what Ship or Vessel soever you come in, you may by
discourse with the Master or Carpenter come to know the true length, and depth,
and breadth, and height of Masts, and length of Yards.

Or if she be a Merchant-ship, you may measure the depth in Hold, and breadth
of the beam your self, when she is light, and her Ballast out; and likewise
when she lies ashore, with a Carpenters Rule measure the Keel, and the Masts,
and Yards likewise, when you have opportunity, and then raise the Model of her
in your Book.

And likewise, if you be in any Ship that lay up in Winter, then you have an
opportunity for your own Ship, or any Ship or Vessel that lies by you to get
the Model of them; then place them in your Book of Models: then at any time if
you fall with a Vessel to rig of any of them demensions, there you have the
Model raised to your hand.

And likewise, when you are at home in the daytime, or in the evening, you may
upon your slate or on paper, with your Black-lead Pencil, that you may rub out,
as before is mentioned, raise an hundred models by supposition, which will
bring your hand into the way of raising a Model complete and handsome.

And likewise, you will by that come to be expert and perfect in giving
allowance for the sweep of masts-heads, and blocks, and dead-mens-eyes, and the
like; that when you come to raise a Model by a true proportion, you may go
through with your work without fear: for it will come to you with ease enough,
if you take but any pains at all to practice it, and not to do as a great many
do, to buy Books and be a little fond of them at the present, and afterward lay
them up, and never practice by them till they have occasion indeed to make use
of them, and then they run so headlong upon the Work, that there is one gross
error or other in their Work, and then to like themselves wholly, they impute
the fault on the Book or on the Author of it, when the fault lies wholly in
themselves for want of practice.

Therefore it is very good when you have opportunity, to be practicing to raise
a model, for you cannot be too perfect, because the Rigging of a Ship is a
thing that cannot be done in secret, and you have many eyes upon you; and if
you do not complete your Work, it makes such a blot in your Scutcheon, that it
will scarce wear our in seven years time: for every one will be spending his
verdict, as well he that knows nothing, as he that does.

Therefore to prevent all dangers, and to stop all mouths, I advise you once
more to be very diligent in practicing your self, till you find that you are
perfect in the work, which you will soon be by observing the Rules which I have
before mentioned.

For the measuring of the Rigging.
For the measuring of the Rigging you must have a Pencil of Black-lead on
purpose for that use, then any Rope that you desire to measure; first, draw a
line with the Black-lead, and then measure it, and put that out again, then
your Model will be the clearer to find the rest of the Rigging.

For Brases.
As for Brases draw a line from the Yard-arm to the place where the Brase should
go, you may draw it double if you please, as the Brases go; or you may draw but
one single line, and so take a fathom off from your Scale, and where it goes
double tell two fathom, and where it goes single tell but one.

Top sail-sheats.
And likewise for Top-sail-sheats, draw a line from the Top-sail-yard that is
upon the Cape, as you see in the Model D, down to the Yards arm, that is a
Portlens, as you see it is from the Fore-top-sail-yard to the Fore-yard; then
take one fathom or two off your Scale, and measure from the Top-sail-yard to
the Fore-yard upon the line that you have drawn* and then from the
Fore-yards-arm into the Mast, and so down to the Fore-castle, and there you
have the just length of your Top-sail-sheat, and it is left to your own
discretion what stray you will allow: So likewise must you do for your
Main-top-sail-sheat, and Fore-top-gallant-clew-lines, and Top sail-clew-lines,
you must do as you see in the Model, and so for any Ropes whatsoever; if you
will have them go after your own way, draw a line with your black-lead where
you will have it go, and so measure the length of it. And there you have it (as
a man may say) to an inch. So I hope I shall not need to fill your head with
any more stories; for here is directions enough for any one that has any wit
at all. And he that sees how to measure one Rope, may easily understand all the
rest.

The Stays.
But this note, That when you measure the Stays, you must measure the Collar
first double 3 or 4 fathom, according as you see the Model require it; for as
it becomes the Model, so it will become the Ship or Vessel, and you must know
that the Collar belongs to the length of the Stay.

The Penents of Brases.
But for the Penents of Brases, you must measure them first 3 fathom or 2
fathom, as you see it will become the Model, and there mark the Block, and so
measure the length of the Brace from that.

So desiring you to mind well what is before mentioned, for I have cut it off
as briefly as possible I may, that you might the easier get it by heart, which
with small pains you may, and then you shall be the better able to discourse,
and likewise to complete your Work.

Here follows the Bigness of Ropes for such Masts as follow.
The bigness of the Rigging for these Main-masts and Main-top-masts; the
Foremast to these Masts follow to in the next Page. Mast of 34 in. Mast of 32
in. Mast of 30 in. Mast of 29 in. Mast of 28 in. Mast of 20 in. Mast of 26 in.
Mast of 24 in. Mast of 23 in. Mast of 19 in. Mast of 13 in. Mast of 12. in. 1
inch. 2 inch. 3 inch. 4 inch. 5 inch. 6 inch. 7 inch. 8 inch. 9 inch. 10 inch.
11 inch. 12 inch. Penents of Tackles 8 8 7 6 6 5 5 7 6 5 4 4 Note, Ther^
Bunt-lines are in bignes^ as fol^oweth* 3 3 3 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1
Runners. 6 5 5 5 4 4 3 5 5 4 3 3 Falls of the Tack^es 4 4 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 2 2
Shrowds 8 8 7 7 6 5 5 7 6 5 4 4 Laniards 4 4 4 3 3 3 3 4 3 3 2 2 Swifters 8 8 7
7 6 5 5 5 5 4 3 Laniards 4 4 4 3 3 3 2 3 3 3 2 Stay 17 16 15 14 14 10 8 12 11 9
6 6 Collar at the stem 16 15 13 12 11 9 8 10 10 8 6 Laniard of the stay 6 5 5 5
4 4 3 4 4 3 2 3 Lifts 4 4 3 3 3 3 2 3 3 2 2 2 Tacks 9 9 8 8 6 6 5 6 6 5 4 4
Sheats 6 6 6 6 5 4 4 4 4 3 2 3 Bow-lines 5 5 4 4 4 4 3 3 3 2 2 2 Bridles 4 4 4
4 3 3 3 3 3 2 2 2 Penents fore-brases 4 4 3 3 3 3 2 3 3 2 2 2 Brases 3 3 3 3 2
2 2 2 2 2 1 2 Clew-garnets 4 3 3 3 2 2 2 3 2 2 1 2 Note, The Ships tha^ have no
Je^ their Tie (...) 4 inches, (...) their Hall ^ards is 2 ^
Jeers 8 8 7 6 5 5 6 4 4 Parrel-rope 6 6 5 5 4 4 3 4 4 3 3 3 Breast-rope 8 7 6
6 5 Runner of Mart-lines 2 2 2 2 2 2 Fall of Mart-lines 3 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1
Penent of the Garnet 8 8 7 7 6 5 4 6 5 5 5 4 Tie 6 5 5 5 4 4 3 3 3 3 3 3 Fall
of the garnet 4 4 4 4 3 3 3 3 3 2 2 2 Main-top-mast Rigging 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
10 11 12 Penent of Tackles 5 5 4 4 3 3 2 3 3 2 2 Falls of Tackles. 2 2 2 2 2 2
1 2 2 1 1 Shrowds 5 5 4 4 4 3 3 4 3 3 2 2 Laniards 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 2 2 1 1 1
Back-stays 5 5 5 4 3 3 2 4 4 3 2 2 Laniards 3 3 3 2 2 2 2 2 3 1 1 1 Stay 8 7 6
5 5 4 4 5 4 3 3 2 Laniard 4 4 3 3 3 3 2 3 2 2 1 2 Lifts 3 3 2 2 2 2 1 2 2 1 1 1
The higness of Fore-rigging. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Penent of Tackles 8 7 7
6 5 5 5 6 5 4 3 6 Runners of Tackles 5 5 5 5 4 4 4 5 5 4 3 2 The Falls 4 3 3 3
3 3 3 3 3 2 2 Shrowds 8 7 6 6 5 5 4 6 5 4 3 3 Laniards 4 4 4 4 3 2 2 3 3 3 2 2
Swifters 3 7 7 6 5 5 4 Laniards 4 4 4 4 3 3 3 Stay 15 13 2 11 9 7 6 10 8 ^ 5 4
Laniard 5 5 5 4 4 3 3 4 3 3 2 2 Tie 8 7 7 7 6 6 5 5 5 5 3 4 Halliards 6 6 6 5 4
3 3 3 3 2 2 Jeers 6 6 6 6 4 4 5 Lifts 4 3 3 3 3 2 2 3 3 2 2 Parrel-ropes 5 5 4
4 4 4 3 3 3 2 2 2 Breast-ropes 8 7 6 6 5 Sheats 6 6 5 5 4 4 3 4 4 3 2 2 Tacks 8
8 7 7 6 5 4 6 6 5 5 3 Bow-lines 4 4 4 3 3 3 3 3 3 2 2 2 Bridles 4 4 3 3 3 3 2 3
3 2 2 2 Penents of brases 4 3 3 3 2 2 2 3 3 2 1 2 Brases 3 3 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1
1 Clew-garnets 3 3 3 2 2 2 2 3 2 2 1 1 Bunt-lines 3 3 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 1
Mart-line runners 3 2 2 2 2 Mart-lines 2 2 1 2 2 2 2 2 1 The higness of the
Fore-top-sail-rigging. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 Penent of Tackles 4 4 3 2 2 3
3 3 2 Falls to them 2 2 2 2 1 1 2 2 2 1 Shrowds 4 4 ^ 3 3 3 2 4 3 3 2 2
Laniards 2 2 2 2 1 1 2 2 1 1 1 1 Pottoks 5 4 4 4 ^ 3 2 3 3 2 1 Stay 5 5 5 4 4 3
3 4 4 3 2 2 Penent of the Laniard 4 3 3 2 2 1 1 Fall of the Laniard 3 3 3 ^ 2 2
2 3 2 2 1 1 Tie 7 7 6 6 5 5 5 6 5 3 2 Runner 5 5 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 3 Halliards 5 4
4 4 3 3 2 3 2 2 1 Bow-lines 4 3 3 3 2 2 2 2 2 1 1 Bridles ^ ^ 3 3 2 2 1 2 1 1 1
Clew-lines 4 4 4 3 3 2 2 3 2 1 1 Parrel-rope 4 4 4 3 3 3 2 3 3 2 2

The bigness of the Bolt-sprit-rigging. Mast of 34 inch. Mast of 32 inch. Mast
of 30 inch. Mast of 29 inch. Mast of 28 inch. Mast of 20 inch. Mast of 26 inch.
Mast of 24 inch. Mast of 23 inch. Mast of 19 inch. Mast of 13 inch. Mast of 12
inch. 1 inch. 2 inch. 3 inch. 4 inch. 5 inch. 6 inch. 7 inch. 8 inch. 9 inch.
10 inch. 11 inch. 12 inch. Penents of sheats 6 6 5 5 4 4 3 5 4 4 3 2 Sheats 4 4
4 3 3 2 2 4 ^ 3 3 Clew-lines 3 3 3 2 2 2 2 3 2 2 1 1 Garnets 3 3 3 3 2 2 2 3 3
2 1 Penents of Brases 4 4 3 3 2 2 2 3 2 2 1 1 Brases 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 1 1
Halliards 4 4 3 3 3 3 2 3 3 2 2 2 Tie 7 6 6 6 5 4 4 6 5 5 4 2 Bunt-lines 3 3 2
2 2 2 1 2 2 2 1 Horse 6 6 5 5 5 4 3 3 3 3 2 2 Lifts 4 3 3 3 2 2 2 3 3 2 2 1

The bigness of the Sprit-sail-top-rigging. 1 inch. 2 inch. 3 inch. 4 inch. 5
inch. 6 inch. 7 inch. 8 inch. 9 inch. 10 inch. 11 inch. 12 inch. Shrowds 3 3 2
2 2 2 1 2 2 2 1 1 Laniards 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 1 1 1 1 Penents of Brases 2 2 2 2 1
1 1 2 1 1 1 1 Brases 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 Tie 3 3 3 2 2 2 1 2 1 1 1 1
Halliards 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 2 1 1 1 1 Clew-lines 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 2 1 1 1 1 Penents of
Tackles 3 3 2 2 1 1 Falls to them 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 Lifts 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
Puttocks 3 3 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 Parrel-ropes 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

The bigness of Missenrigging. Mast of 34 inch. Mast of 32 inch. Mast of 30
inch. Mast of 29 inch. Mast of 28 inch. Mast of 20 inch. Mast of 26 inch. Mast
of 24 inch. Mast of 23 inch. Mast of 19 inch. Mast of 13 inch. Mast of 12 inch.
The Missen-mast. 1 inch. 2 inch. 3 inch. 4 inch. 5 inch. 6 inch. 7 inch. 8
inch. 9 inch. 10 inch. 11 inch. 12 inch. Penents of Tackles 5 5 4 Runners 4 3 3
3 Falls of Tackles 3 3 2 2 Shrowds 5 5 4 3 3 2 4 4 3 2 2 Laniards 3 2 2 2 2 2 1
2 2 1 1 Tie 7 6 6 5 5 4 4 Halliards 5 4 3 3 2 2 2 3 3 2 2 Stay 6 5 4 3 3 3 3 4
4 3 2 2 Laniards 3 3 2 2 2 2 1 2 2 1 1 1 Sheat 4 3 3 2 2 2 2 3 3 2 2 1 Jeere 5
5 4 3 3 Truss 3 3 2 2 2 2 1 2 2 2 1 Bow-lines 4 3 2 2 2 2 1 2 2 1 1 1 Brayles 2
2 2 2 2 2 1 2 1 ^ 1 1 Parrel-rope 5 5 4 3 3 3 2 3 3 2 2 2

The Cross-Jack. 1 inch. 2 inch. 3 inch. 4 inch. 5 inch. 6 inch. 7 inch. 8
inch. 9 inch. 10 inch. 11 inch. 12 inch. Lifts 4 3 2 2 2 1 1 2 2 2 1 1 Brases 2
2 2 2 1 1 1 2 1 1 1 1 Penents 3 3 2 2 2 1 1 2 1 1 1 1 Halliards 4 3 3 3 2 2 1 2
1 1 1 1

Bigness of Missen-top-mast-rigging. Mast of 34 inch. Mast of 32 inch. Mast of
30 inch. Mast of 29 inch. Mast of 28 inch. Mast of 20 inch. Mast of 26 inch.
Mast of 24 inch. Mast of 23 inch. Mast of 19 inch. Mast of 13 inch. Mast of 12.
inch. 1 inch. 2 inch. 3 inch. 4 inch. 5 inch. 6 inch. 7 inch. 8 inch. 9 inch.
10 inch. 11 inch. 12 inch. Penents of Tackles 3 3 2 2 Falls of Tackles 2 2 2 2
Shrowds 3 3 2 2 2 1 1 2 2 2 Laniards 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 Puttocks 3 3 2 2 2 1 2 1 1
1 Penents of brases 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 2 1 1 Brases 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 Bow-lines 2 2 1
1 1 1 1 1 1 Bridles 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 Clew-lines 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 2 1 1 1 1 Tie 3
3 3 2 2 2 2 3 2 2 2 1 Halliards 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 2 1 1 1 1 Lifts 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
1 1 Parrel-rope 3 2 2 1 1 1 1 2 1 1 1 1 Runner of the stay 2 2 2 Penent of the
stay 3 3 2 2 1 Top-rope 4 3 3 2 2 2 1 Parts of the stay 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 Penents
for the backstays 3 2 2 Falls 2 2 1

The bigness of the Main top-gallant-rigging. Mast of 34 inch. Mast of 32 inch.
Mast of 30 inch. Mast of 29 inch. Mast of 28 inch. Mast of 20 inch. Mast of 26
inch. Mast of 24 inch. Mast of 23 inch. Mast of 19 inch. Mast of 13 inch. Mast
of 12 inch. 1 inch. 2 inch. 3 inch. 4 inch. 5 inch. 6 inch. 7 inch. 8 inch. 9
inch. 10 inch. 11 inch. 12 inch. Penents of Tackles 3 3 2 2 2 2 2 1 Falls of
Tackles 2 2 3 3 3 3 1 1 Shrowds 3 3 3 3 3 3 2 2 2 1 1 1 Laniards 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
1 1 1 1 1 Puttocks 3 3 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 Penents of Back-stays 3 3 2 2 2 2
Falls to them 2 2 1 1 1 1 The Stay 3 3 3 2 2 2 1 2 1 1 1 1 Laniard 2 2 2 2 2 2
1 1 1 1 1 1 Brases 2 1 1 1 1 2 1 1 1 Penent of Brases 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
Bow-lines 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 Bridles 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 Top-rope 4 4 3 2 2 2
Parrel-rope 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 2 1 1 1 1 Tie 3 3 3 2 2 2 1 1 2 2 1 1 Halliards 3 2 2
2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 Lifts 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 Flag-staff-stay 2 2 1 1 1 1
Clew-lines 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1

The Bigness of the Fore-top gallant-rigging. Most of 34 inch. Most of 32 inch.
Most of 30 inch. Most of 29 inch. Most of 28 inch. Most of 20 inch. Most of 26
inch. Most of 24 inch. Most of 23 inch. Most of 19 inch. Most of 13 inch. Most
of 12. inch. 1 inch. 2 inch. 3 inch. 4 inch. 5 inch. 6 inch. 7 inch. 8 inch. 9
inch. 10 inch. 11 inch. 12 inch. Tie 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 1 1 1 Halliards 2 1 1 1
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 Bow^l^nes 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 Bridles 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 Stay 2 2
2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 Shrowds 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 2 1 1 Laniards 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
Parrel-rope 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 Clew-lines 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 Brases 2 1 1 1 1
1 1 1 1 Lifts 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 Top-rope 3 3 3 2 Penent of the Tackles 3 2 1
Falls 2 2 2 Puttocks 3 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 Back-stays 2 2 2

1. 5. 9. C. q p. ou. C. q p. C. q p. Sheat-anchor 60 0 0 3 Sheat-anchor 29 0 0
Sheat-anchor 18 0 0 Best-bower 56 0 0 1 Best bower 25 0 0 Best-bower 17 0 0
Small-bower 55 0 0 Small-bower 23 3 0 Small-Bower 16 0 2 Stream-anchor 25 0 0 0
Stream-anchor 9 0 0 Stream-anchor 4 2 0 Kedg-anchor 7 2 0 2 Kedg-anchor 2 2 7
Kedg anchor 2 2 0 2. 6. 10. Sheat-anchor 43 0 0 0 Sheat-anchor 28 0 0
Sheat-anchor 11 0 0 Best-bower 40 0 0 5 Best-bower 27 0 0 Best-bower 10 0 0
Small-bower 39 0 0 3 Small-bower 16 0 0 Small-bower 9 0 2 Stream-anchor 20 0 1
2 Stream-anchor 4 3 2 Kedg-anchor 7 2 0 0 Kedg-anchor 2 3 0 3. 7. 11.
Sheat-anchor 35 3 3 2 Sheat-anchor 22 0 2 Sheat-anchor 7 0 0 Best-bower 34 0 0
2 Best-bower 11 0 0 Best-bower 6 0 0 Small-bower 31 2 2 7 Small-bower 9 0 0
Small-bower 5 2 0 Stream-anchor 11 3 2 5 Stream-anchor 5 0 2 Kedg-anchor 4 0 0
2 Kedg-anchor 2 0 0 4. 8. 12. Sheat-anchor 32 0 0 0 Sheat-anchor 27 0 0
Sheat-anchor 5 0 2 Best-bower 30 0 0 0 Best-bower 23 3 5 Best-bower 4 0 0
Small-bower 27 0 2 2 Small-bower 23 0 0 Small-bower 3 2 3 Stream-anchor 11 0 0
0 Kedg-anchor 3 1 0

1. 2. 3. Inches Inches Inches Cables of 21 Cables of 20 Cables of 17 Cables of
20 Cables of 19 Cables of 16 Cables of 14 Cables of 13 Cables of 12 Cables of
10 Cables of 9 Cables of 8 Cables of 9 Cables of 8 4. 5. 6. Cables of 17 Cables
of 15 Cables of 13 Cables of 16 Cables of 14 Cables of 13 Cables of 11 Cables
of 9 7. 8. 9. Cables of 10 Cables of 16 Cables of 14 Cables of 9 Cables of 15
Cables of 13 Cables of 10 Cables of ^^ Cables of 12 Cables of 8 10. 11. 12.
Cables of 12 Cables of 8 Cables of 8 Cables of 11 Cables of 7 Cables of 9
Cables of 6 Cables of 6

Weight of Cables.
Inches C. q. l. A Cable of 21 does weigh 90 0 0 A Cable of 20 does weigh 80 0
0 A Cable of 19 does weigh 70 0 0 A Cable of 18 does weigh 66 0 0 A Cable of 17
does weigh 59 0 11 A Cable of 16 does weigh 53 2 7 A Cable of 15 does weigh 46
2 7 A Cable of 24 does weigh 40 2 0 A Cable of 13 does weigh 34 2 10 A Cable of
12 does weigh 29 2 1 A Cable of 11 does weigh 25 2 6 A Cable of 10 does weigh
20 3 4 A Cable of 9 does weigh 17 3 13 A Cable of 8 does weigh 13 3 7 A Cable
of 7 does weigh 9 3 12 A Cable of 6 does weigh 7 1 0 A Cable of 5 does weigh 5
3 12 A Cable of 4 does weigh 3 3 0

An Index.
IN the first Page is showed how to raise the Model of any Ship or Vessel,
small or great. In the second Page is showed a Rule for Masting and Yarding.
From the third to the eight is showed the Use of the Model. In the first Column
of the ninth Page, where the figure of 1 stands on the top, is showed the
bigness of Rigging that is required in a ship, that the Mainmast is 34 inches
through. In the second Column is showed the bigness of the Rigging the
Mainmast is 32 inches through. In the third Column is showed the bigness of
Rigging for a Mainmast of 30 inches through. In the fourth Column is showed the
bigness of Rigging for a Mainmast of 29 inches through. In the fifth Column is
showed the bigness of Rigging for a Mainmast of 28 inches through. In the
sixth Column is showed the bigness of Rigging for a Mainmast of 20 inches
through. In the seventh Column is showed the bigness of Rigging for a Mainmast
of 26 inches through. In the eighth Column is showed the bigness of Rigging for
a Mainmast of 24 inches through. In the ninth Columnis showed the bigness of
Rigging for the Mainmast of 23 inches through. In the tenth Column is showed
the bigness of Rigging for a Mainmast of 19 inches through. In the eleventh
Column is showed the bigness of Rigging for a Mainmast of 32 inches through.
In the twelfth Column is showed the bigness of Rigging for a Mainmast of 12
inches. In the tenth Page is showed in the 12 Columns the bigness of Rigging
for the Foremast, answerable for the Mainmast, and Main-top-mast in the ninth
page. In the 12 Columns of the eleventh Page is showed the bigness of
Sprit-sail, and Sprit-sail-top-mast Rigging for such ships. In the 12 Columns
of the twelfth Page is showed the bigness of Missen-mast, and Cross-jack
Rigging. In the 12 Columns of the 13 Page is showed the bigness of
Missen-top-mast Rigging. In the 12 Columns of the fourteenth Page is showed the
bigness of Main-top-gallant Rigging. In the 12 Columns of the fifteenth page,
is showed the bigness of fore-top-gallant-rigging. In the 16 Page is showed by
the 12 figures the Anchors for such Ships that are to be Masted, and Rigged. In
the 17 Page is showed by the 12 figures the Cables for such Anchors. In the 18
Page is showed the Weight of Cables. From a Cable of 21 inches to a four-inch
Rope. In the 19 Page is showed the Model of a great Ship, of an hundred and 25
foot by the Keel, and likewise the making of the Scale. In the 20 Page is
showed the 3 small Models. Likewise note, That on the top of every Column in
the 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, and 15 Pages, there is a figure set, as thus, 1 2,
3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, which is to direct you aright to complete a
whole Ships Rigging in bigness. And as for the Length, the Model gives you that
so true, that you need not fear, but that your Ship will be well Rigged. So
leaving you to your Practice, and wishing you a good Proceeding as well for
your Good as my Credit, I conclude, and rest
Yours T. M.

FINIS.
diagram of ropes on a ship scale key The Figure of the SCALE.

A Table of the Names of the Ropes.
1 The missen top sail Brase. 2 The missen top sail sheat. 3 The Cross jack
Brase. 4 The toping list for the missen peck. 5 The main Brase. 6 The main top
sail Brase. 7 The main top sail Clew line. 8 The main top gallant Clew line. 9
The main shroud or Swifter. 10 The main top sail sheat. 11 The fore top gallant
Brase. 12 The fore top gallant Clew line. 13 The fore top sail Brase. 14 The
fore top sail Clew line. 15 The fore Brase. 16 The sprit sail top sail Brase.
17 The sprit sail top sail Glue line. 18 The sprit sail top sail sheat. Note
that it goes from the quarter of the sprit sail top sail yards arm to the
Sprit sail Yards arm, and back to the Knee at the Boult Sprits end; and then
you must measure from the Boult sprit to the fore Castle, and that is your
length. 19 The sprit sail Brase.


The Stays.
20 The missen stay. 21 The missen top mast stay. 22 The Leagues of the missen
top may stay. 23 The stag staff stay. 24 The main top gallant stay. 25 The main
top mast stay. 26 The main stay. The number 14 serves likewise for the fore top
mast stay, and the number 18 serves also for the Legs of the fore top may stay.
27 The fore stay.




depictions of three types of ships A

B

C




