A True and Plain ACCOUNT OF THE DISCOVERIES Made in SCOTLAND, Of the Late
CONSPIRACIES Against His Majesty and the Government. Extracted from the Proofs
lying in the Records of His Majesty's Privy Council, and the High Justice Court
of the Nation. TOGETHER With an Authentic Extract of the Criminal Process and
Sentence against Mr. Robert Baillie of Ierviswood. Extracted by Command of His
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council of Scotland; And Published by His
Majesty's Command.

Reprinted at London, by Thomas Newcomb, for Susanna Forrester in Kings-Street
Westminster. 1685.

A true and plain Account of the Discoveries made in Scotland, of the late
Conspiracies against His Majesty, and the Government.
THE King's Majesty having, on certain great considerations, indicted a
Parliament, to hold at Edinburgh, 28 of July 1681. Did render that Meeting the
more illustrious, by nominating His Royal Brother Commissioner, to represent
His Majesty in it.

The Fanatical Party, who let no occasion slip, to promove their Designs, and
to disturb the settled Government, did at this time, use all their endeavors,
to have as many of those infected with their principles, elected Commissioners
for the Parliament, as the little power and Interest they had in the Nation
could procure, and even where they could not hope to succeed, they had the
insolence to attempt, thereby pursuing closly what they constantly design, that
is, pertinaciously to disturb, where they cannot alter, and to found a
Reputation to their Party, by much noise, though to little purpose.

At the time of meeting of the Parliament, their first consult was to strick at
the Head, and by invading the Right of the Monarchy, to pull it down so far, as
to have the King, in the Person of His Commissioner, subjected to the same
Rules and Inquisitions, with other subordinat Members. The King by His Laws,
having prescribed Rules to those who Serve Him in that Great Court, and
Council: They, according to the Laws of their Leagues and Covenants, propose
that the Parliament should prescribe the same to the King, consonant enough to
their beloved Design of Co ordination in Power. Had this succeeded, they with
this one Blow, had overthrown the Parliament, by laying the Commissioner aside:
But as men oft-times design bold Treasons with abundance of Resolution, yet are
frighted from the Execution, by the danger, as well as ugliness of the Crime,
So this insolent Resolution dared not show its Face, being strangled by their
own Fears. And seeing they could not dissolve the Parliament, they, in the next
place, resolved to disappoint the Design of it; and indeed, if the maintaining
of an unjust Interest could warrant the action, they had reason so to do: For
the Fanatical-Party having, by their own great industry, and the supine
negligent^ (to say no worse) of these Trusted by the King, to suppress them,
not only kept up, but increased their pernicious Brood; So that they began to
appear formidable, both to the King and the Country: and one of their great
Hopes, whereby their Party increased, being founded on the short continuance of
the Supply granted by the Nation, for maintaining the Forces, they could little
doubt, but that all Loyal Subjects would not only continue, but also further
augment them, rather then leave the Seditious, in a capacity to disturb the
Government. Therefore, as a necessary expedient to preserve Fanaticism, they
resolved by all possible means, to hinder any continuation of the Supply. But
they soon found, that the Votes of their Party had neither number nor weight.

These well-natur'd Subjects, finding that they could not disappoint, thought
it convenient to perplex; and since they could not do what they would, they
resolved to do all they could. And albeit the late Earl of Argile, and some
others, who were under too great obligations to the King's Majesty, and His
Royal-Highness, to appear on the side of their Friends in the good old Cause;
whilst the opposition was so barefaced, and the hope of success so little. Yet
lest their little Flock should be discouraged, they began then to animat them
the more close, and (as they thought) undiscerned methods. And now the Cause
being in an apparent decay, they labored to refresh it, with its first milk,
the Pretense of Religion.

Wherefore a new Security for Religion was proposed; And albeit our Laws had
formerly provided, what was necessary for this; yet it could not be expected
that those, who aimed at debate for Religion, should rest-satisfied with what
settled it. So the Doctrine of the Church, the Canons of Councils, and the Laws
of the Kingdom being all looked upon as nothing: Argyle, Sir John Cochran,
Salton, the Earl of Tarras, Philiphaugh, Stairs, Gallowsheils, and others of
that Crew, would needs provide a greater security than these afforded; and
indeed it was congruous for those who were tainted with new Doctrines, to
desire new Sanctions: For this end they pressed a Committee, for drawing an Act
to secure the Protestant Religion, which was no sooner proposed then granted;
accordingly a Committee was appointed, consisting for the most part of
West-countrey men, who upon short deliberation prepared a long Act, which at
its first appearance in the Articles, was soon discerned to be an Invasion upon
the Prerogative, under the name of a Defense for Religion, and not to have many
more Lines than Incroatchments upon the Royal Right: whereupon it was rejected;
and in place of it a general and plain Ratification of all the former good
Laws, which had past for security of the Protestant Religion, was drawn,
approven, and acquiesced in, by the Parliament. But Fanatics are not of a
temper to give over, for notwithstanding of this good Law, Murmurings were
heard, Clamors were raised, and open Protestations were made for f^rther
security in Religion. Wherefore a new Committee was appointed, for preparing an
Act to be drawn from the proposals for that end. The Party which clamored for
the Protestant Religion (but in effect intending good Offices to the Fanatical
party) did seek after what conduced to their by-ends, which as they were easily
discovered, were as soon rejected: Argyle, Sir John Cochran, the Earl of
Tarras, Stairs, Philiphaugh, Gallowshiels, and their adherents fall at last on
an expedient, as they thought insuperable by the Kings Servants, and which
would force them on the Dilemma of opposing Religion, or the Soveraignity.

In the first Year and Parliament of King James the sixth, when the differences
betwixt Queen Mary and many of the Nobility were in their greatest hight, and
she forced to resign her Government, being a Prisoner; there were several Acts
past in that, and some subsequent Parliaments, which incroached on the
Prerogatives of the Crown, the King being then an Infant; and amongst others,
that wherein the Confession of Faith was insert, had in it several Clauses
altogether extrinsick to a Confession of Faith, for which that Act by its Title
was chiefly designed: And tho these Acts and Clauses which derogated from the
Rights of the Crown, were often rescinded, or corrected, and the Prerogative
fully vindicated in many succeeding Parliaments: yet these who intended more
disturbance to the State, nor security for Religion, took occasion after their
other Proposals were rejected, to offer the renewing of the said Act of the
first Parliament of King James the sixth, as an expedient for securing the
Protestant Religion, as it is there professed; concluding, that if that Act
were renewed, it would derogate from the pesterior Laws, which corrected what
related to the Prerogative; or if the renewing of it were refused, they might
take occasion from that refusal, to impose on the People, that the Kings
Commissioner and the Parliament designed not the security of the Protestant
Religion: But the Parliament defeated both these Projects, by taking into the
Test not that Act, but the Protestant Religion contained in it; for the
Parliament was far from reviving, much less for inserting in the Test any part
of that Act, which did incroach on the Royal Prerogative, the Episcopal
Government, and Policy, or whatever was extrinsick, or contradictory to the
Protestant Religion contained in it.

This, as all other disappointments, incited rage in those who resolved not to
be satisfied; and those pretended Patrons of the Protestant Religion, will
overturn it, and tear the securest Test that could be made for it, rather then
permit, that Monarchy and it should stand together; and finding that this Test,
as it did absolutely secure the Protestant Religion, so in just consequence
thereof, it knocked Fanaticism on the head: Therefore to work they fall against
it, with all the force of their imaginations; and none appeared more violent
then those who formally with undiscreet violence had pressed it, whilst they
hoped to invenom it, with a mixture of the poison of the Covenant. But amongst
them all, none acted with more industry, or more malice, then the late Earl of
Argile, who being by Education and Choice sufficiently Fanatical, yet having
dissembled it for a while, thereby to keep himself in the Government, and to
draw it to a concurrence in his particular designs, and oppressions, whereby he
kept a great Estate, defrauding all Creditors, and bringing many Families to
beggary; he found this Parliament pry a little into these Mysteries, for they
having made some motion in doing right to the Earls of Errol, Marischal and
Strathmore, whose Estates were exposed for Argiles Debt, whilst he enjoyed his
own Estate, without owning a relief to them: Therefore, albeit in the beginning
of the Parliament, he professed a fervor for carrying on of the King's
Service, yet (his zeal to the Old Cause, being pricked on by this Invasion of
his new Right) in the course of it, none was so active, or used more indirect
ways to disappoint it.

But being overpowered by the Loyal Members, who were Ten to One of the
disaffected; albeit he, and other Sticklers, were allowed to word the Test at
their pleasure, and did accordingly add to it all those Clauses which since
has given pretenses of scruple to many who have refused it; yet no sooner was
the Session of Parliament adjourned; but the said late Argile industriously,
first at Edinburgh, and afterward in traversing several Shires, did insinuate
all the prejudices he could devise against the Tenor of the Test: Thereby
endeavoring (and not without some success) to increase the dissatisfied Party,
and fit the Nation the more for Cumbustion: So passing home to the Shires of
Argile, and Tarhet, he fixed the Clergy and Laity thereof in these seditious
Sentiments. Thereafter he returns to Edinburgh, giving it out openly, that he
would not take the Test; but to make his refusal the more malicious, proposes
to his Royal Highness, and those of the Government, that he might be allowed to
take it with his own Explanation, which Exposition he put in Writ, and
dispersed it; being of that Tenor and Contryvance, as to cast all the
Obligations therein loose, making his Fancy the rule of his Religion, and his
own Loyalty the standard of his Allegiance, according to which he was only to
ty himself.

His Majesty's Commissioner, and the Council, being well informed of his
seditious Carriage, both in City, and Country, and fully confirmed in their
Judgments, of his malicious Design in this his Paraphrase on the Test; and
finding that thereby he had not only perverted the Sense of his Majesty's Laws,
contrary to their true Meaning and Intention; but that he had endeavored to
shake the People loose from their Allegiance, and make all Obligations thereto
illusory: and that by these Methods, he did with boldness and impudence, found
a Schism in the Church, and Faction in the State, publicly owning them in the
face of Council: On which grounds he was most justly pursued by the Kings
Advocat, before the Sovereign Justice Court, and there by Learned Judges, and a
Jury, not only of his Peers, but many of them his nearest Relations; his
Accusation was found relevant and proven, and judged a sufficient ground to
infer the Pains appointed by Law for Treason.

Albeit his Father had been one of the most obstinate, and most pernicious
Rebels against the Royal Family, and that he himself had been educated in these
Principles, and had entered early into those Practices: and albeit it be
notourly known, that his private Discontents and Debates against his Father,
and the penury to which those had reduced him, were the Motives which made him
join with Middleton in the Hills, bringing no Power with him to that Army, and
acting as little in it; but by assuming the Honor of what was acted by
M^naughton: and that at last he was instrumental to break that Party by
Faction; which though this was clearly discerned by Middleton at the time, yet
he judged fit to dissemble it, both for encouraging the High-landers, and
giving reputation to His Majesty's Affairs, upon which account also at Argiles,
then Lord Lorn's earnest suit he did give Testificates to him of his own
wording, which those of undoubted Loyalty did not require, and indeed were only
useful to such whose Actions and Principles needed vindication; yet under
pretense of these, together with the great Assistance of the Duke of
Lauderdail, having attained to so immense Donatives from His Majesty both in
Estate and Dignity, it was not easy to believe, he should retain that
hereditary Malignity, at least to such a degree as to become an open Rebel; but
the Ethiopian cannot change his Skin; for albeit the Kings Majesty, and his
Royal Highness were so far from any resolution of taking his life, that he was
allowed all freedom in Prison, even after he was found Guilty; and that no
further prejudice was designed to him, than to take from him those
Jurisdictions and Superiorities, which he and his Predecessors had
surreptitiously acquired; and were used by him and them to destroy many honest
and considerable Familes, sometimes by stretches of Law, and at other times by
Violence and Force, but always under shelter and pretense of these
Jurisdictions: And that some reparation might have been made to his just
Creditors, and some Donatives to those, whom he and his Father had formerly
robbed and destroyed, for their Fidelity and Loyalty to their King: And the
Super-plus (if any were) was intended for his Lady and Children; which was the
hight of Clemency, there being indeed more Debt upon the Estate then the whole
of its value: Yet being more conscious of his own Guilt then his Prince did
apprehend, he dared not rely upon that Clemency, whereof he had tasted so
plentifully; but abusing the favor of his open Imprisonment, for verifying of
his other Crimes, he added this one, of breaking the Prison, and flying from
the Laws.

No King but ours could after all this think of favoring his Family, but His
Majesty will not only favor but restore, and before it was known that the late
Argile had more Debt then Estate, in a Royal Largese, He gifts more to his
Children by thrice then their Father could lawfully give them, had he never
been Forsault.

Could it have been thought that any Christian, or Gentleman, could have been
guilty of Ungratitude to so benign and bountiful a Prince; and yet that the
late Earl of Argile, did after the receiving so many Favors, and the
profession and boasting of so much Loyalty; not only enter in a horrid
Conspiracy for rising in Arms, but gave at least courage by his bold
Undertakings to those who conspired the murder of His Sacred Majesty, and his
Royal Highness; and this Conspiracy does demonstrate what was his meaning in
that Paraphrase upon the Test, which Fools and Knaves have justified as very
Loyal and Orthodox.

But with what forwardness Argile and others did enter into a Conspiracy for
overturning the Monarchical Government, destroying the sacred Person of the
King, and of his only Brother, and for pulling Ruin upon the three Kingdoms by
a Civil War, the evident Proofs of unsuspect Witnesses, and the concurrence of
many authentic Papers and Documents with these Depositions, will not only
sufficiently prove, but amount to the quality of a Demonstration, all the
pieces being considered together; and with what earnestness he acted, does
evidently appear from these following Evidences.

For shortly after Argiles escape, information was given from the West that he
had caused secure the Militia Arms of Argile and Tarbet Shires, as also a
considerable quantity of the Kings Arms were given to him in Trust, besides a
little Magazine which he had of his own, and some pieces of Cannon, and that he
had employed some Merchants to bring Arms from abroad to be landed securely in
some of his remote High-land Castles.

And upon inquiry, one William Campbel Master of a Ship at Newport-Glasgow was
found to be conduced for this end, as his Deposition taken before some of the
Officers of State does clearly evince.

Edinburgh, the last day of August, 1682.
IN presence of the Lords Chancellor, and Advocat, William Campbel Skipper at
Newport-Glasgow, being examined upon Oath, Depons, That in March last he was
fraughted by John Campbel Merchant in Glasgow for Norway, France, or elsewhere,
for three Months certain, conform to a Charter-party produced by him; and about
that same day he having desired to know what could be his prospect of his
Voyage to Norway with so small a Ship and Loading, he refused to tell him till
he were at Sea, and being at the back of the Lews a day or two after they set
off, the said John Campbel then said, now Skipper I will tell you the design of
our Voyage, which is to go to Norway and laden Dails, and out of that to
Amsterdam and buy Arms, and to take in the same to Cairnbulg; and the Deponent
having asked him what he would do with these Arms there, he answered, may not
my Lord come to his own again, and have use for them; and the Deponent
understanding these Arms were to be made use of against the King, the Deponent
answered, that when he was made Burgess of Dunbartoun there was an Oath taken
of him to be true to the King, and the present Government, as it is
established; and upon the Deponents refusal to comply with him in the said
Voyage, he got the Ships Company upon his side, who beat and abused the
Deponent; and having gone from that to Norway, he behoved to suffer all the
Voyage; there being no Justice in these remote Places where he came to, from
which, being upon their Voyage to Holland, the Ship was by Providence cast
away, for which they blamed the Deponent, as having done the same wilfully. And
this is the Truth, as he shall answer to God. Sic subscribitur

Will. Campbell. G. GORDON Cancel.



Edinburgh, the 14 of January, 1685.
IN presence of the Secret Committee, the said William Campbel being
reexamined, adheres to his former Deposition; and further Declares, that he
offered to the then Lord Chancellor, to apprehend the said John Campbel; but
the Chancellor made no answer to him, but whispered the General in the ear; and
he heard afterward that the said Campbel had escaped. And this is the Truth,
as he shall answer to God. Sic subscribitur

Will. Campbel.


At the same time Surmises were heard, from amongst the Fanatics from all
parts, of Argiles intention to land in the West with Arms, and to raise that
Country, and to join with the Western Shires; and in Summer 1683, Gordon of
Earlston being apprehended at Newcastle, the Papers taken with him, and his own
Depositions made upon Oath in Scotland did give good grounds for suspicion of
some imminent Design, which apprehensions were raised by a little accident
which happened at the time; for upon the first noise of the discovery of the
Conspiracy in England Earlston being in Prison in Edinburgh Tolbooth, the
Keeper came in to visit, him; who found him asleep; but he awakening at the
time, the Keeper told him that now the Conspiracy was broke out: How (says
Earlston) is Argile then Landed? of which expression the Keeper having given
notice to some Councellers, Earlston was examined upon the meaning of the
expression, who plainly confessed, that both in England and Holland he had
information of Argiles buying of Arms with intention to land in Scotland, and
that at the same time he was informed that the English were to rise in several
places of England.

Alexander Gordon of Earlston his Deposition, before a Committee of His
Majesty's Privy Council, and two of the Justices.
Edinburg, the 25 of September, 1683.
Sederunt. Privy Counselors.
The Earl of Linlithgow. Lord Livingston. Lord President of the Session. Lord
Collington. Lord Castlehill.
Justices.
Lord Pitmedden. Lord Harcarss. The Earl of Linlithgow elected Praeses.


ALexander Gordon being further interrogate upon the Interrogators given in
anent the Conspiracy in England, Declares, That the first time he heard of any
design of rising in Arms, was at the time when the competition was anent the
Sheriffs at Midsummer was a year, and then he heard the Duke of Monmonth was to
head the Rebels, and this he had from John Nisbet and one Mr. Murray a Scots
man then at London, and declares that in January last the declarant being in
Holland, he heard by general report that the late Earl of Argile was to raise
some thousands of High-landers to assist the Rebels in England by making a
diversion, and was to get a Sum of Money for that effect, and that in March
last he having received a Letter in Holland from John Nisbet then in London, he
came over to London, where he met with the said Nisbet and Murray, who told the
Declarant, they designed to rise presently in England, and to Rendezvous in six
or seven places at one time, particularly at Coventry and London, and that they
computed several thousands in Yorkshire who were to join with them; that
Murray desired the Declarant to go along with him to meet with the late Lords
Russel and Gray, and the Lord Wharton, (but of Wharton they said they were not
very sure, being a fearful man) and with Mr. Ferguson, and spoke of several old
Officers of Cromwels that were to be there, but the Declarant not being for the
present rising, shunned to meet with these Persons, or any of them; and both
Nisbet and Murray told the Declarant, that Sir John Cochran was with them, and
heard from these two Persons, that both the Cessnocks were concerned in that
Business: As to the Letter written by Io. N. of the 20 of March, and directed
for the Declarant at Rotterdam, declares that John Nisbet wrote the said
Letter, and that under the Metaphor of Trade throughout the whole Letter, is
meaned the design of rising in Arms and a Rebellion, and that by the word
Dispatching the old rotten Stuff, is meaned either the excluding the Sectaries
from joining with them, or destroying the Government, both Civil and
Ecclesiastial, which last the Declarant supposes rather to be the meaning of
the words; and that by the Factors are meaned their Emissaries for carrying on
the Rebellion; and for that strange thing that was to fall out that Week or the
next, the Declarant thinks is meaned the sudden muster of the Rebels; In the
close of the Letter which says, Things are full as high as I tell you, is
meaned that the Rebellion was instantly to break out; And having met with John
Nisbet after his coming from Holland, the said Nisbet explained to him, that
the Sense of the said Letter was, as is abovesaid.

As to the little Letter direct to the Declarant under the name of Pringle, of
the second of May 168^, declares that the name of the Subscriver, which is
blotted out, was so blotted before it came to his hand; but by the Contents of
it, he knows it is from one Robert Iohnstoun, a Tennent or Vassal to the Lord
Gray on the Border, and that the Traders and Trading there spoke of, is the
designed Rebellion; and that the said Robert Iohnstoun offered to come into
Scotland with the Declarant to have seen some of our disaffected People here,
and to have met with them; and that A. Y. mentioned in the said Letter, which
the Letter says labored to undervalue the disaffected Party in Scotland,
which he calls your Goods, is the name of Andrew Young, who stays about
Newcastle, whom he supposes to be a suspected person, because he was afraid
Colonel Struthers would apprehend him; and that he supposes the way that that
Letter came to his hand, was from some person that was at a Meeting at
Tweeds-moor about that time, where were present several of these People that
had Commission from the several Districts, but he himself was not at that
Meeting. Sic subscribitur

Al. Gordon. Linlithgow I. P. C.


Follows the Letter direct b^ Jo. N. which was found upon Earlston.
London 20 March, 1683. Sir,
ON Saturday last I had the occasion of seeing a Letter from you, directed for
Mrs. Gaunt, in whose absence Mrs. Ward had received it, at the reading of which
I was not a little troubled, considering my full resolutions signified to you
in my last; for effectuating of which I had spoke for Passage, and taken my
farewell of Mother Gaunt, she going into the Country: And that very Week I was
set upon by that Gentleman with whom I stay, and Io. Iohnston with some others
to stay but a Month, and if that did not accomplish somewhat in hand to help
Trading, then I should be no longer detained* After I was prevailed to retract
so far, I ordered Io. who had time at command, to give you an ample account of
matters; and withal Io. was desired by our Friends from Scotland to stand here
in my place the like engagements of secrecy, etc. being taken, and thereupon I
ordered him to show you the grounds of my staying, and to desire if you
inclined to cross the Water to come this way, but since many are the confused,
yea troubled thoughts that have possessed me for yielding, concerning which,
(...) my yielding to it, take the subsequent account.

In my last, or it precedent to it, I showed you that Trading was very low
here, and many breaking, which has made the Merchants (such as they are) to
think that desperate Diseases must have desperate Cures; and while they have
some Stock, it will be better to venture out, than to keep Shop and sit still
till all be gone, and then they shall not be able to act, but let all go: Which
resolution I thought a thing not to confide in, seeing the most of them are
Fireside Merchants, and loves not to venture where storms are any thing
apparent. But about my departing they showed the model of Affairs in such
order, that I see venture they must, and venture they will; whereupon (...)
first demanded how our Trade would be carried on. Answer, they knew well what
Goods had proven most prejudicial to the Trade, and therefore they thought to
insist upon Negatives, in which whatever I proposed is assented to, as I find*
and thus they thought best to still some Critics in the Trade: And by this
means first to endeavor the dispatching the old rotten Stuff before they order
what to bring home next. This looked somewhat strange to me, but when I consider
all circumstances, I think they for themselves do best in it: For our Merchants
I made account only to have had some stock for to set the broken ones up again,
and so bid them here fare-wel, and they to try their way, and we ours* Since
they think fit that some of these whom we have found (as you will say, when you
hear them named) treacherous dealers in our Trade, consulted, and accordingly
have done: Whereupon I fear, or rather hope that our Merchants, tho broke, will
rather desire to live a while longer as they are, than join with such, etc. to
advance the Trade; unless surer grounds of their fidelity be gotten, the^ is,
or can be expected, and this is the bottom of all my sorrow. But to proceed, I
find (if all hold that is intended) that they think it is almost at a point to
set forward, if they had their Factors home, who are gone to try how the
Country will like such Goods, as they are for, or against the making sale of.
Friends, I mean Merchants, wrote to me, that after I had spoken to you,
possibly you might come this way, the better, thereby to advise them what to do
in this case, for I have signified somewhat of it to them, but not so far as
this, because I thought to have seen you long ere this time: But I hope you
will not misconstruct of my staying, seeing in it I designed nothing but
advancement of our Trade; but once this Week these Factors sent for will be
here, and then matters will in instanti, either off or on, break, or go through.
Wherefore in reference to Friends, I desire you will advise me what to do, if
you cannot, or think it not convenient to come here; if you do, let a Letter
preceed, and if any strange thing fall out this Nota, That this week His
Majesty was expected from New-mercat, but came 8. days sooner, by reason of
the fire.
Week or the next, I will again post it toward you; I think when this and the
next Week is gone (and no News come from you) that I shall set forward, being
still so ready, as that in 12 hours I can bid adieu: The Whiggs are very low as
well in City as in the Suburbs, all Meetings being every Sunday beset with
Constables to keep them out, and what they get is stolen, either at evening or
morning. This Winter many of the great Bankers and Goldsmiths in Lombardstreet
are broken and gone; The Ba^tam Factory in the Indies is taken by the Dutch;
Confusion, Confusion in Town and Country, such as you never saw. Mrs. Ward and
several others desire to be remembered to you. My endeared respects to your self
and B. with the young men arrived. This I have writ in short, and in have,
expecting a Line with as great have as you see is needful, for Matters are full
as high as I tell you. Farewell.

From your Friend and Servant, while Io. N.
Postscript. Be sure that you direct not for Bednal-green; but for me at Mr.
Mead's in Stepney, near London.




By this time the Conspiracy had broke out in England, and by the Papers sent
down from the Council Board there to the King's Officers in Scotland; it was
plain, that Argile and some other Scotsmen had joined in the Conspiracy, as
appears by what follows.

The Abstract of the English Depositions.
THomas Shephard on the 29. of June 1683. deposed, That Mr. Ferguson told him
of an General Insurrection intended in England and Scotland, and that in order
to it, Sir John Cochran, Mr. Baille of Ierviswood, Mr. Monro, Sir Hugh Campbel,
and Sir George Campbel of Cesnocks* were come up to treat with the Englishmen
about it, and that Argile had made a Proposition, offering for 30000. pound to
begin the Rebellion in Scotland, and to raise a great Force; and ere it were
undone, he would begin with 10000.

That Mr. Baillie of Ierviswood told him frequently, what Steps were made in
this, and that the Lord Russel, etc. had agreed to raise 5000. pound, and that
they expected the other 5000. pound to be raised in the City, which failing,
the Scots-men were to go beyond Sea, and that Baillie told him, he had advised
the Earl of Argile to accept of this 10000. Pound, and that he would remit it
into Shepards hand, and that Mr. Charleton had undertaken to raise the 10000
pound. The said Shepard declares, that he spoke with Commissar Monro sometimes
of this Money, and that Sir John Cochran knows of it also, and that Monro
complained to him that it was too little, and that the delay of paying it would
ruin them all: On the 24. of August, the said Shepard declares, that Baillie
did send Carsteres to him, to speak further of these things, and that Sir John
Cochran did also regrate the delay in payment of the Money, all this the said
Shepard deposes upon Oath; as is contained in his Deposition repeated in the
following Process, Page 23.

MAjor Holms declares, That he knew from Mr. Carstares, that some person
proposed the raising of 30000. pound to be given to Argile for buying of Arms,
toward his going into Scotland, and that 10000. pound was agreed upon, that
the Duke of Monmouth and Lord Russel, did send him word by Carstares, that the
Money was to be remitted to Argile for the said end, and that he the said
Holmes had writ so much to Argile at Carstares desire, that Argile did send to
him many Letters in Ciphers, and that Mr. Spence knew how to direct them, that
he showed some of Argiles Letters to Carstares, and that Carstares had often
spoke to him, both in the Coffee-House and Exchange, about Argiles going into
Scotland, to carry on the Conspiracy: that he cannot Decypher the long Letter
marked Number 3. nor can he positively say to whom it was directed, but was to
have been carried by Carstares to Ferguson, and by him to the other chief men
concerned in the Design: That the Letters marked Number, 2, is from the
Countess of Argile to her Husband, and that the Letter marked Number 5, was
from Argile to his Lady, which he knew by a Mark on the back; That Spence went
by the name of Butler, and that the late Earl of Argiles Letters were direct to
him by Spence, That Castares told him, the persons concerned had condescended
to give 10000. pounds to Argile, that he did so write to Argile, and that
Argile had writ to him, that 30000. pounds was the least he could accept of;
This was given in by Holms on the 3. and 7. of December, 1683.

ZEchariah Bourn on the 10. of December 1683. before Secretary* Ienkins
deposes, That Mr. Baillie did sit up a Night or two with Mr. Ferguson in the
Deponents House, and that they went several times to the Managers of the
Conspiracy, that Ferguson told him their main Business with the Conspirators
was, for getting 10000. pound promised to promove the Insurrection in Scotland,
and that Baillie was the chief man in it next to Argile, that Ferguson told him
he was to go over with the Bills of Exchange, and that Argile was to command
the Scots.

RObert West declares, That Ferguson told him that Argile would raise a sturdy
Commotion in Scotland, if he had but 6000. pounds; that Cessnock, Sir John
Cochran, and other Scots, were come up to London, under pretense of treating
for Carolina; but in truth to consert matters for a Design in Scotland.

ON the 29th of July, 1683. Hepburn, a Scots Vagrant Minister declared, that he
knew by several Hands and Persons, that there was a Plot, and a rising intended
both in Scotland and England.

All these Depositions were taken in England, except Earlstons and Campbels.
After this, one Mr. Spence, who past under the name of Butler, being
apprehended there, was sent to Scotland. Major Holms declared, that Spence did
pass under the name of Butler, that he came over from Holland with a Cargo of
Argiles Books, to disperse them, that he landed at Harwich, that he could open
Argiles Letters, and was the person who directed many of Argiles Letters to him.

These Proofs, with what occurred in England, were sufficient to convince all
men of the Truth of this Conspiracy; but the perverseness of Fanatic humors
will neither admit of Confession nor Amendment: For albeit the Evidence did
fully convince Juries and Judges: albeit Parties confess Associations and
Resolutions to amend the Government in their own Methods: albeit some
acknowledge designs to surprise the Kings Guards, others to have a Parliament
called (whether the King will or will not) to judge of the Government; and
severals with great remorse reveal their own resolutions to murder the Sacred
Person of the King, and his Royal Brother, and they adhering to this
Confession; yet Fanatics will neither believe it, nor allow others to do so,
but with unheard of Impudence treat so weighty a matter in Ridicule, as if they
who before had acted all, which now could be feared should be now esteemed
incapable to fall in the like Actions, albeit they openly avow the same
Principles: and bold Pamphleters adventure to impose these clear Proofs as
apert Falsehoods upon the credulous World, and too many were so ill minded as to
believe them. But it is hoped, that what follows will convince all good Men of
the truth of what was discovered, and silence all Libellers, if Darkness must
give place to Light.

AT the time of the Discovery of the Conspiracy in England, several Letters,
with two Keys for opening some mystical Words contained in them, were found
with Major Holms and others, which Letters were known to be Argiles Hand-writ,
by those who were acquainted with it, and afterward being confessed by the
said Holms to be so; they were considered in England, and some imperfect
Decyphers made of some of them there: many of which Letters, with the Keys, and
these Decyphers were sent down to Scotland; but they appeared so perplexed,
what with Ciphers, what with other secret Contrivances in Writing, as that some
who then had the chief management of Affairs there, by their supine negligence
made but little procedure in discovering them: Until a Secret Committee was
appointed by His Majesty, who considering that those Letters might contain
Matters of importance; did apply themselves with earnestness to search into
them; but finding them very intricate, and that the Decyphers which were sent
from England did open nothing to purpose: They employed one Mr. Gray of
Crichie, and gave him for the first Experiment, that Letter written by the Lady
of Argile to her Husband, thereupon to make an Essay, which indeed proved more
uneasy to unfold, then any of the rest; yet with much travel, he did very
ingeniously discover, First, that every Cipher was made up of two Figures,
Next, That every Letter of the Alphabet was denoted by three different Ciphers,
which were promiscuously used in one and the same Word; As likewise that there
was Mute-figures mixed in with many Words, the more to confound the Discoverer:
so that upon application of the triple Alphabet, hereafter set down, to this
and several others of the Letters; it was found to open them exactly.

Of which first Discovery Mr. Gray having given an account to the Lords of the
Secret Committee, they found it evident, and appointed the rest of the Letters,
the English Keys, and all other Papers relating to that Business to be given
him for his help in further Discoveries; all which being considered, it was
observed, that the middle Alphabet of that triple one found out in Scotland,
was the same with that found out in England, which was made use of by Argile
himself in his Letters; yet his way of using it in his Writings was so
perplexed by the interposition of a great many Mute-figures, that tho the Key
was found out there, yet some of the Letters could not be opened: And in full
evidence of this first Discovery, the said Letter is afterward set down, both
as it was written in the Cipher, and also as it was Decyphered, to which is
added the triple Alphabet, the Warrant thereof.

The Letter from the Countess of Argile to her Husband.
Marked Number 2.
87887886804482, the 9 2315. 788982.

I Came here on Tuesday, where I found 70 4686442881788878 82^6, 44 8444868817
81 81818382 44817026464482 4386 and the 70438983437088, 4, 8023261886 of the
874487182382 all the 8023261327 came 174426 to see 29, 75 and 25 and ^6 came
with 29 43 came by an 2326131426 with all 151815 442618282326 and 43 82268984,
I never saw 75 so 8944311413 for 43 12298228561032. We hear of a great Circuit
Court has been at Stirlin, there were three Shires met there or 4. and M. of
M. and the Kings Troop, and E. B. came with the Herotors of Fife, and his
Troop. M. of M. went to Glasgow, but some of his Troop is at Stirlin, and there
were some of them sent to to Edinburgh for an Prisoner they say they call
Smith; and Friday last the 8. of June, 50 of the Kings Troop came with that
Smith the length of an place they call Inch-belly-bridge as they go to Glasgow;
there is they say a Moss, and near it a House and a Barn; and as they came near
the Barn 8 armed men fired at the Gentlemen of the Guard, and shot dead one Mr.
Murray, he had one Shot in his Forehead, 3 in his Body, and one in his
Shoulder; and an other of the Gentlemen called John Bannatine was shot through
the Arm and Side, his Arm broken to Splinders, that he is dead before this
time; the Prisoner when he saw them, lighted off his Horse, and run to them,
and got an long Gun from his Fellows and ran into the Moss, the Gentlemen
pursued, but got none of them taken, but many is in pursuit of them. It Is a
horrid way for any that bears the name of Christians to associat persons to
Murder on the Highways: There is an Story going here that there was a Ship put
in to Newcastle which had some Box from Rebellious people in Holland, and when
they came to Land, a Waiter came to search the Ship, and the Box was cast into
the Sea, at which the Waiter called the Ship-Master to catch the Box as he
would be answerable; so it is said, it was got and sent to the King, and that
Io. Br. and some of L. St. Andrews Murderers was come to Scotland to make
trouble, but I would hope such a Crew shall never get fitting here nor harbor.
I must here bid you adieu, I use not to write so much News as this is. I got
not writ last Week, because poor 70261217181412 is sick, and I will not
88868927888132201488142627 to every 2322, I have got nothing done in my
Affairs, our Trade goes ill on; but 16231318172384 will 171420548144 to
111410261020 I am sorry I 121022132322232817182216 for 29 I am this far on my
way to 18222914261022 and to see 81321318142617 I shall give 20 account when I
come back, and I fear till then I will not get writ, for my Boy is sick. I sent
the Letter to 20 211028 who I saw on Wednesday, 43 told me he had received
yours; but did not yet 261410131828 which I confess I thought a little strange,
being at least 8 days with him 781822291828141343171826 to stay with 29 but 43
would not, but said 7819221429 it was not meet 151828 nor 874415 for 43 to 8032
at this 17232927182710181318 thought none would be so 1802 as to take that
182043121021 not, I said 75 never stood to show his constant 19322243527427 to
29 and all that belonged to 43 20 21108820 is very 1129271814 17181426 doing
that 43 18 hope has no 242014272926 1822 and I hear, for 10 20 43 13232887
there is a 291026102213 to 20 121027281020171820 to get 43 24201012 but 2021
knows not yet; there was 22 1429142627291217 29102619 as has 1114 2 2171426 it
makes 10 20 in 15141026 some 272921 14211317 1426 for 27244419182216 with
1822281426122321 1422 1413 2418241420 the 27281820 of their 17232682 832181426
10 1623 75 has so 27281819201413 for them all that has procured 43 a great
deal of love from the 12232228261032 and somewhat 142027 from others it is the
2728261022161427^8 thing tho it could not 1114 24262329^422 they could not
161428 an 281127232029102814281820 they 2810ck the 88448788 and 241032 a
16261828 13181020 to 887081 468386434482 the 4280708619 who 16142827 too great
131420 of 2123221814 there was one here a 1514291426 of 29 that lives in
2710201422. that was most 292218292728203227293120221317181426 ii32 on
241028102228 for speaking 282614272322 I spoke to 2021 for 43 but none
befriended 43 or appeared for him but 75 who did 1126182216432315, the
282614272322 was only good of 29 the other tho the favorit of the 1220102619
was 15292213 10 20321426 and Ja. 23201815102228 23 1i27232029141323 ii2928
1812292013 29261428 10 long Letter to 29 who I think 1710241814 1114 2328171426.

Postscript.
Let these News be known to your Scots Friends.




This Letter Opened.
Stirling the 9 of June
I Came here on Tuesday, where I found a great Meeting, E. Perth, M. Mon. E.
Mar. Genesis Dr. and the Advocat, four Lords of the Session; all the Lords came
here to see W. F. and Q. and R. came with W. D. came by an order with all Fife
Heretors and D's Troop. I never saw F. so vexed for D. country (here is in
plain writing some Scots News till it came to this) I got not Write the last
week, because poor Archie C. is sick; and I will not trust my Letters to every
one, I have got nothing done in my affairs, our Trade goes ill on; but God I
hope will help me to bear all. I am sorry I can do nothing for W. I am this far
on my way to Inveran and to see my dear H. I shall give L. account when I come
back: and I fear till then I will not get Write, for my boy is sick. I sent the
Letter to L. Mat. who I saw on Wednesday, D. told me he had received yours, but
did not yet Read it, which I confess I thought a little strange, being at least
eight days with him, I invited D. here to stay with W* but D. would not, but
said I knew it was not meet, fit, nor safe for D. to ly at this House; I said I
thought none would be so ill, as to take that ill; D. came not, I said F. never
stood to show his constant kindness to W. and all that belonged to D. L. Matl.
is very busy here doing what D. I hope has no pleasure in* and I hear for all
D. does there is a warrant to L. Castlehill to get D. place; but L. M. knows
not yet. There was never such work as has been here, it makes all in fear, some
summoned for speaking with Intercommuned people the style of their Horn. Eight
years ago: F. has so stickled for them all, that it has procured him a great
deal of love from the Country, and somewhat else from others, its the
strangest thing, tho it could not be proven they could not get an absolvitor,
they take the Test, and pay a great deal to Tam Gordon the Clerk, who gets too
great a deal of Money, there was one here a Feuar of W. that lives in Salen
that was most unjustly summoned here by one Paton for speaking Treason, I spoke
to L. M. for D. but none befriended D. or appeared for D. but. F. who did bring
D. off. The Treason was only good of W. The other tho the favorit of the Clerk
was found a liar, and James Oliphant absolved, O but I could write a long
Letter to W. who I think happy be others.

Postscript.
Let these News be known to your Scots Friends.




Nota, That after this Letter was Deciphered, the Letter D. which was denoted
by the Figure 43, could not be found out, until the Secret Commit appointed
the Kings Advocat and Sir William Paterson, one of the Clerks of the Privy
Council, to Examine the Countess of Argile upon the meaning thereof, who
declared that it was no proper name, but wherever it was placed in the Letter,
it stood for a Relative.

The Clavis of this Letter
D. stands for the relatives he, his, their, him, etc. W. stands for Argile,
and his Lady, or me, yours, etc. L. stands for Lorn, conform to the Countess
her Deposition. L. M. stands for Lord Maitland. F. Q. R.
The Key of Words, whereof two Copies were found with Major Holms, one of them
being Mr. Carstares hand Writ, and confessed by him to be the Key of their
correspondence, in which also there is an Alphabet different from the other
three, for which as yet we have found no use; the middle Column is thought only
to be Mute Figures, to confound the design of the Key. So that one word is only
set down for another, as Ker stands for King, Birch for England, Brand for
Scotland, etc.

King 40 Ker D. York 71 Corse D. Mon. 39 White E. Roch. 37 Whit E. Halifax 43
White The Court 45 West The Council 50 Westli One of the Council 57 East The
Torries 30 Westly The Whiggs 22 Brown The City 18 Wilson The Mayor 27 Watson
Sheriffs 31 Brun Court of Aldermen 36 Baxter Common Council 35 Barker L. Russel
29 Weste E. Essex 32 Wilson Dissenting Lords 47 Brown Bishops of England 61
Wood The Clergy 65 Child Non-conformists 64 Child England 73 Birch France 72
Birche The States 44 Heart The Prince 38 Harwood Forces 17 Hal Horse 28 Hilyard
Foot 90 Hickman 1000 of the one or -- other, a tick after. his so many
partners. and so forth a 100 -- a stroke after, thus. his so many neighbors.
Arms 75 Child Money 80 Hall 100 or 1000 lib Sterling. for the number 100 or 1000,
with a stroke, or tick, as above, but the 5 ves beneath, and the 10ths before,
or a little figure underneath to mark the number. so many associats or sharers
with him. Officers 81 Ramsey A General 88 Bareley Col. Sidley 96 Ramsoy Mr.
Holms 53 Barclay Commissar Monro 59 Reid Sir John Cochran 49 Rac Mr. Carstairs
74 Red Mr. Stewart 83 Harlay Mr. Athol 84 Harlaie Mr. Huntly 77 Ross Scotland
10 Brand Council there 92 Boid Chancellor 11 Calender Queensberry 15 Davidson
D. Ham. 93 Boyd E. Argile 67 Forest Scots Forces 66 Forret Scots Fanatics 42
Goven Scots n. c. Ministers 13 Lands Scots Clergy 5 Menzies The West 6 Mason
The High-lands 7 Wright The South. 9 Ma^son The North 95 Nairn Edinburgh 26
Ross The Castle 25 Masone Dumbareon 24 Thoms^n The East 20 Tomson The Scots
Gent. 21 Grein The Gent. at Land. 94 Gray The Borders 76 Menzies Ships for
their number a figure added 99 Mr. Berrie A Garrison 98 Bierre Religion 48 Bass
Popery 58 Sibbet Papists 51 Long Scots Nobility one of them a friend of h. 52
Sibit
The Alphabet.
a 12 b 14 c 16 d 19 e 23 f 28 g 29 h 33 i 34 k 41 l 42 m 46 n 54 o 55 p 56 q
60 r 63 s 68 t 69 u 70 v 78 w 79 x 82 y 85 z 86 and 89
An Addition in the Key, written by Mr. Carstares.
Old Friend is Tome. Mr. Kiffin is Bishop. Mr. Cox is Crafts. Lock is Huxter.
Cessnock is Cozens. Ierviswood is Ball. To surprise is to speak with. To land
is to go to. To march is to deal. To make prisoner is to agree. To fight is to
talk. To disarm is to help. To kill is to see. To give quarters is to ^ear. To
overcome is to find.
Here follows the Alphabetical Key, found out by the said Mr. Gray, which
opened the Countess of Argiles Letter.
a b c d e f g h i k l m n o p q r s t u w x y z ^ 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 3 34 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50
51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81
82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94

The next Letter Decyphered by the foresaid Mr. Gray, answering exactly to the
middle Alphabet of the said Key; was a little one written in a Paper, and
enclosed in a Letter to Mr. West, at Mr. Staples in South-wark Coffeehouse, in
Bartholomew-Lane, London, dated the 24 of June (the Letters direct to Major
Holms being declared by Spence and Mr. Carstares to pass under this kind of
Direction,) which little Paper enclosed within the said Letter, here follows
both in Cipher, and Decypher.

A little Letter written by Argile, all in Cipher, and confounded with Mutes.
32674845254324512641443651404344692837^6545648575352394
456274744294857395053575822535340504852585764545956545357
445768584756484244516921564443575140434428545653545358485
8485352205345445944566^6758474852463251484647585744425956
443941564052436048584753595840415361645847445258534344405
0446048584741^8564247415958485848575253585840504948524660
485043534448586460474058485774405444524443524444435752535
8474852434456415958574753595043455956584744564451.


The said Letter Decyphered.
32 67 If 25 D. 24 M. 26 be 36 made 69 28 37 26 Prison 39 er 27 he 29 is 39
lost 22 to all Intents and Purposes, 68 thrice M. 6921 Reds made 28 Proposition
20 of every 67 thing 32 might secure, 39 Brand without a Box, and then to deal
with Birch, but it is not talking will do it, and what is hapened needs not
hinder but should further 'em.


This Letter was opened by the middle Alphabet before set down: so the
significant Figures read thus in plain Writing.

IF D. Monmouth.
M. be made Prisoner, he is lost to all Intents and Purposes, thrice Mr. Reds
made proposition of every thing might secure Brand without a Box, and then to
deal with Birch: But it is not talking will do it, and what is happened, needs
not hinder, but should further 'em.

By M. Red, Mr. Carstares is signified, Brand is Scotland, and Birch England,
according to the Key of Words, which was found with Major Holms: Mr. Carstares
Deposition insert in Ierviswoods Process will further inform as to the tenor
and intent of this Letter.

This Letter was writ in all probability after that he heard, that the
Conspiracy was discovered; for the plain Letter in which this Cipher was
enclosed, seemed to be a part of his Lamentations.

The Letter follows.
24 June. Sir,
I Have received yours 19 instant, with the enclosed, which is indeed sad; yet
God guides the World, and all will work to the end he intends, and what he
purposes will at length prevail. I had newly read the first Treatise of the big
Book you sent me, pray read the last Lines of the 3 d Chapter, Page 152 of that
Treatise, and if you please some Leaves before, and the 20 that follows, he
mistakes the calculations of the numbers of Years, but the matter looks as like
our present Circumstances as any such thing can do, if the Party were alive he
could say little more: What you writ will make me long to hear again: Our
Scribe it seems is an unhappy man: Desire M. B. to buy me B. Vshers Prophecy,
which I have seen in Print by it self; and if it be possible to get me a Copy
of that little Book you once lent me, wherein is a Speech I copied; he may look
for it.


This Letter was also direct to Mr. West.

By these two Letters, it appears; That albeit by the Providence God the
Conspiracy was discovered, and the Designs thereof defeated, yet nothing would
either divert or deterr Argile from prosecuting so glorious a Work: For so he
had promised before it was discovered, by several of his Letters; as appears
particularly by one direct to Mr. West, dated 19 June.

Another adressed to Holms, marked n. 4.
19 June. Sir,
THis Morning I received yours, 15 instant, but can say little till I meet with
Mr. Red; only you may be sure, it will not be a small matter will make me
desert your Service, and especially no concerns of my own: and none shall be
more sparing of your credit that understands the Trade. I doubt not after I
have spoke with him, to convince you of what I shall then give you as my
opinion, and leave the issue to God Almighty. I am very sensible of all your
kindness to me, and of good honest M. L. pray return him my thanks: As for my
other Friend that is the life of all, pray tell him I must once see him before
I need that you offer to send me, it will be then time enough to dispose of it;
and if it be made use of, I hope he shall hear of it to his satisfaction: I
perceive by it, he hopes well of me: It made me smile when I read your Letter:
When I know that Mr. B. is with you I can write at greater length of all your
Affairs. I will now long to hear how the last Parcel of Goods I sent you
pleases the Merchants, they were long of coming, but I hope are not yet out of
time, and what ever the fault is may be helped in the next Parcel. Adieu.

Haste back. M. B. direct the enclosed by his advice.

Directed. Mr. West, at Mr. Shepneys South-wark Coffee-House in
Bartholomew-Lane. London.

Here follows another Letter, marked number 5. direct by Argile to his Lady, of
the same date, which was known by Major Holms, t^ be f^r the Count^s^, by a
particular mark upon the back of it, which he show to his (...).
Sir,
THis is only to tell you that all your Friends here are in health (God be
thanked) our news from England are very various and uncertain, and Mr. B. is
gone to London, and to return in a Month, or less; I doubt not he will write to
you: I have heard nothing from 80, nor 80, 81. these six Months. Adieu.


The Decypher of the said Letter^
THis is only to tell you that all your Friends here are in health (God be
thanked) our news from England are very various and uncertain, and Mr. B. is
gone to London, and to return in a Month, or less; I doubt not he will write to
you: I have heard nothing from L, nor L, M. these six Months.


This Letter is Decyphered by the aforesaid Alphabetical Key, and by the
Countess of Argiles Deposition, the Letter L, stands for Lorn, and the Letters
L, M, for Lord Maitland.

MR. Gray of Crichie having considered these following Letters of Argiles,
which after discovery, were found to comprehend the Designs more plainly, and
finding such a perplexed contexture and in-cohesion of the Words, as he had not
observed, at any time before, in this way of Writing: He concluded it to be a
work of very great difficulty to open them; yet his success in former
Discoveries, gave him encouragement to make an attempt. But in the mean time,
having informed the Lords of the Secret Committee, that it appeared from the
Postscript of the long Letter (where Argile says, in plain Writing, that Mr.
Butler (which is Spence) knows how to write to me, and understands my address,
and to instruct you; and if not, he had lost six hours work) that the said Mr.
Spence could do the business: And they finding, that what was already
Decyphered, did give such evidence of a Conspiracy and Treasonable Designs
against the King, and His Government, which being joined with Earlstons
Deposition, and the Letter taken upon him from Io. N. they judged themselves
bound in Duty, to offer what was discovered to the consideration of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council in Scotland, and thereupon, according
to the Law and Practice of the Nation, did call before them the said Spence,
and after all Arguments of persuasion and command were used, and these Passages
in Argiles Letter, whereby it appeared he was instructed to open them, were
represented unto him; yet (notwithstanding of his Duty and Alledgeance to his
Prince, and that it was judicially declared, that what he Deposed, should not
militate against him) he still refusing to open the Letters, or to depon that
he could not; yea, not so much as to answer other Interrogators, which did
arise from matter of Fact clearly proved against him. They afterward proceeded
to Torture, according to the custom of Nations, in the like Cases, which had
its desired effect. For upon the day of August 1684, he not only acknowledged
that he was the Mr. Butler, or M. B. mentioned in Argiles Letters; but also
undertook to show the way of reading the following Letters, to the then
Thesaurer Deput, now Lord Secretary, and to the Lord Register, upon their
promise not to divulge the same (which accordingly they performed) and so he
gave in a Copy of the Letters opened. But Mr. Gray (after some pains taken)
understanding from the Lord Register that all the Words of the Letters were
significant Words, whereof he had formerly been doubtful; there being of 1024
Words in the long Letter, 800 Monosyllab^, he did fall upon the way of opening
these Letters, which not only did confirm the Sense Mr. Spence, had given of
them; but made it a Demonstration: so that by the way of Opening afterward set
down, the Matter was more clearly proved, then it could have been done by the
attestation of many Witnesses: By which was discovered both the blackness of
the Treason, and the great care taken for keeping it secret.

For, 1. Things were expressed under new words: so that indeed upon the matter
it is a New Language. 2. These Words were written in Ciphers. 3. This Cipher
consisted of a Triple Alphabet. 4. Many Words were intermixed with
Mute-Cyphers. 5. In some of these Letters all the Relatives were expressed by
Figures, as in the Lady Argiles Letter, the Figure 43, or the Letter D, stands
for the Relatives He, His, Him, etc. 6. That tho Mr. Spence was instructed to
show the way of reading the following Letters, yet he knew nothing of the
purpose contained in them, all the material Words being in Cipher. 7. The words
in the long Letter were so ordered, that 254 Words in course were interposed
betwixt the 1 and 2 Word in Sense, and as many betwixt the 3 and 4, and so
forth to the last Word of the Letter: then beginning with the 2 Word there was
252 Words betwixt that and the next in Sense, and so forth till they came to
the penult Word: again beginning with the 3 Word of the Letter, betwixt which
and the next in Sense: there interveen'd only 250 Words, and so forward to the
end. 8. In the short Letter 62 Words were interposed betwixt the first and
second, and so to proceed as in the other. By which unequal destribution and
gradual decresce of the interjected Words, the method of reading became the
more mysterious and intricate; But the way fallen upon by Mr. Gray giving so
clear and convincing evidence of the Method, it leaves no ground of doubt
concerning the Matter: For in the long Letter there being 8 Colums, and each
Column containing ^28 Words, Argiles way of using them is, he begins at the
head of the first Column, and proceeds to the foot of it, then beginning at the
bottom of the second Column, he rises to the head thereof, thereafter begins at
the top of the 3 Column, and goes on after that manner till he come to the
upmost Word of the 8 Column, which tho it be last Word in order, yet it is but
the 8 Word in Sense: Whereby all the Words were placed in their right Sense and
plain view, as the Letter both in its Mask and Decypher does clearly evince;
yet one Word being added or abstracted in the said order of the Words, the
Letter should return to its first Chaos of Nonsense. The Letters follow,
together with their Decyphers, and ways of opening.

This is a Letter wherein Argile gives an account to his Confederates in
England, of the proceedings of the Kings Ministers in Scotland, thereby
endeavoring to disparage them, all written with his own hand.
WEst much way daily at I i^ with 69415358475944503322 then or 4253514857485352
or a if to 5644693941445057 at in 5744525844524244 of he cause other to keep
and also did 58445240525357 persons any thing they of any if gave any Mr. M.
did thereof knew these and relation 39505360435352 and go he 585644405862 any
with any in or 3648525^445642^3 5159524445 he send Air to be 40504056514443
Sheils is as done extremities to them knew 3951485248575844 657 if 4056
51445^66 others any other and knew to if or to if persons of and employ
384250445649 person him any thing others say they plea^e will to to of money
out of him if their now he the 3157 457 52^349 he 233246504057465360 who who of
person did or they or any to a here where any arrived the and you are
58^452445^58 you that others conversed since write to the was employed and knew
or present kept with going 446950 to the of for the persuade go be for fear
found to or above that the 384^485642594858 go 6942 44^7525349 away drawn
correspondence 4653^9445651445258 any of 4^^051485058^3 2 Mr. the 49485246^7 my
or and with at had for of 48^2584456534640^85^5657 are as pre^dent is desirous
things given 44 the private or the if send 50 party person M. to any other and
with and or or to 42535956^85453565844 5957 effect named dissuade the to or
money swear 5^444144 50^85352 any persons and roll to 332246504057465360 any
the if any black 6053435738 place meeting the C. and for M. any they Rebels
before meeting Style L. in go what as,

lib. ss. There rests just 32 -- 8.


The Decypher of the foresaid Letter, as it was done in England, with some
amendments here, which answered exactly with the middle Alphabet, found out in
Scotland.
WEst much may daily at I if with 69 Bothwel 33 22 then or Commission or a if
to Re- 69 39 bells at in Sentence of he cause other to keep and also did
Tennents persons any thing they of any if gave any Mr. M. did thereof knew
these and relation 39 London and go he treaty any with any in or 36
intercommuned he send Air to be alarmed Sheilds is as done extremities to them
knew 3^ Ministers if Arms 60 others any other and knew to if or to if persons
of and employ 38 Clerk person him any thing others say they please will to to
of Money out of him if their now he the 31 Cessnock he 23 32 Glasgow who who of
person did or they or any to a here where any arrived the and you are Tennent
you that others conversed since write to the was employed and knew or present
kept with going E. 69 L. to the of for the persuade go be for fear found to or
above that the 38 Circuit go 69 Cesnock away drawn correspondence Government
any of Hamilton Mr. the Kings my or and with at had for of Interrogators are as
President is desirous things given E. the private or the if send L. Party person
M. to any other and with and or or to Court Porteous effect named diswade the
to or Money swear Rebellion any persons and Roll to 33 22 Glasgow any the if
any Blackwoods 38 place meeting the C. and for M. any they Rebels before
meetings Style L. in go what as.

lib. ss. There rests just 32 -- 8


The Copy of the said Letter, as it was given in upon Oath by Mr. Spence.
WEst-shields is arrived, the President is as much alarmed as any, and as
desirous what may be done where you are; things go daily to extremities; here
are Interrogators given in at Air to a Tennent of E. L. I send them to you for
the Style: If he knew any that had private Meetings with Intercommun'd
Ministers, or others, at, or before Bothwel, or if they conversed with the
Rebels then in Arms, or since; and if they, or any others did write, or send
any Commission with any person, to my L. M. or any other of the King's Party
for a Treaty, and who was the person, and if he knew who employed Mr. M. C. to
go to Glasgow and Hamilton to the Rebels, and if he knew of any meeting at
Lowdon, or Cesnock, or any other place in relation to the present Government,
and Blackwoods Sentence, and if he kept correspondence with any of these
persons now withdrawn, and if he knew of their going away, or the cause
thereof, and if E. L. Cesnock, or any other did employ him to go to Glasgow to
Mr. M. Clerk of the Circuit Court, to keep any person out of the Porteous Roll,
and gave him Money for that effect; and also, if any of the abovenamed persons
did any thing to persuade, or dissuade any Tennents of others to go to the
Rebellion, Persons they say will be found to swear any thing they please, for
Fear, or Money.


Follows the method or way of opening the foresaid Letter discovered by Mr.
Gray, for further confirmation.

The foresaid Letter set down according to the Method of opening before
narrated.
West- Sheilds is arrived the President is as much alarmed as any and as
desirous what may be done where you are things go daily to extremities here are
Interrogators given in at Air to a Tennent of E. L. I send them to you for the
Style if he knew any that had private meetings with intercomun'd Ministers or
others at or before Bothwell or if they conversed with the Rebels then in Arms
or since and if they or any others did write or send any Commission with any
person to my L. M. or any other of the Kings Party for a Treaty and who was the
person and if he knew who employed Mr. M. C. to go to Glasgow and Hamilton to
the Rebels and if he knew of any meeting at Loudon or Cessnock or any other
place in relation to the present Government and Blackwoods Sentence and if he
kept correspondence with any of these persons now with- drawn and if he knew
of their going away or the cause thereof and if E. L. Cessnock or any other did
employ him to go to Glasgow to Mr. M. Clerk of the Circuit Court to keep any
person out of the Porteous Roll and gave him Money for that effect and also if
any of the above named persons did any thing to persuade or diswade any
Tennents of others to go to the Rebellion persons they say will be found to
swear any thing they please for Fear or Money.

The long Letter written with Argiles own hand, which was addressed to Major
Holms, and marked Number 3.
21 June.
THo I cannot by this Post send you a full account of your affairs, yet I send
you as much as may make you take measures what Bills to draw upon me, which I
hope you will fully understand by Mr Bs. help; the whole account amounted to
several Pages; but I only give you one to total, as sufficient.

I gone so I and refuse object first you time much is way the our would of
altogether concerned do upon absolutely do to do effectually as that it be to
is at all be 335759424244575769 money 36 47575657 of and to 69224736535657 and
they have is at be that no some their 2345535958, etc. 50000 4548464758 part as
against the but concurrence from be less nor like place and interest is small
and power against need do bring which Birch that cannot time are out upon an
324753235657 to 56444256594858444367 projected meat very may little done the
been Purse I to shall my lists ^ to great venture they prospect provided have
can willing God given conference week Brown I of things said some the now their
my head guard mention 324344675748465257 things which to your hope some ago as
over some if do spoke for of know and encouragement confer have and self be
order resolve and to reckoning all and undertake honest or was far be Shoes
undertaking many of to for purchase was as is the a possibly us of by force it
tho so how the credit for time Birch and some greatest them concerned will for
and to and 404843 station good may only the if more will if should expect
tollerably standing and by and necessar the the more the hazarded to it 8 and
think urge so necessar I the that so affairs have business very I possible of I
send here against my till what little upon know not which money
25405748575840524244 I service any what shall resolve thee at did least
effectually thought and far if business reckoned for still the there I or stuck
you upon money by first sum if then Bills 26 435640465359525769455356424457
well that 3841444058 515950584858594357 need trouble something very a frighten
the probably not 2000 the tho the once for and 575942 4244575735 will 4057
5748575840524244 and to money could foolish Brown many the not to Gods Brand
besides stay Job seat yet to proposed 322240565157 a deal the things as all
once less any drink well on know I as pay whether never the received to any
calculate about to that that the such with you I other I I for considerable be
particular add I are of lest I but all have it Enemies to cannot to Friends
made part I write wish may be service Mr. an whole there consider persons it
when knowing any and payments to I it low shall little little meaning
Intelligence thing out had which Tents usual whole with 673151485048584840 and
by the more of if but the that blessing raise a 54565358445758405258 4753565744
can Virgins supply to call 485650405243 not keep imaginable tho them 4853485244
standing many number 25 4753565733 only at standing a 5159505848585943 first
considerable with more can them Country 425351514052434443 in and there
40565157 it was Weeks half I so to at 600 think needs precise I the the it a
within what requisite not Sum truly this grounds to say Mr. thing nor know they
as has the grounds occasioned I they both do is Red only let I distance in I
half in I the little would 4057485758405242 first shall number very 1000 and
the consider small confess them work proposed please cannot are 2000 Brand it
544453545044 the be 40565157 then be 40544440564852464640584744564443 little
455356424457 5758445650485244 have the but it will 455356574457 and as we yet
together only it for buy it consider employ better Interest small so to some
47535657 a future the to total the absolute of and designed and Wagons are but
of proposed or and because what add as out meddle touch of I knowing Merchant
there it that what is 40454 04856444058^4515458 Red I not but I of expect of up
I enforce at be that should a is in considerable put I done this all have by
the not to had before able will I if and a they have will is for
5753504348535956 shall necessars the or of if is is they very incident for the
daily not Clothes necessar to there the necessar best of the 60405639 events
little to hope 564454564457 many Sum were for so in we them more will in and it
had any many yet be may all 51485048584840 and will it without and not but more
got triple on is very 45535959 now be God and but is what a if odds it as near
named not brush of not less power proposed an of thought my and go you in or
resolved so I intend hear them our 45564844524357 to neither to will much till
any the know on in proposition could what other I of could be the and be but
that easy were I all differ was absolutely soon more to sent above at well
right foot their together Provisions the suddenly that 404258485352 will take
will of the be unwilling the will can at is get Brand not 40565157 no should
the much their not and men the are be while do to advantage the husbanding for
number is be for 5747534457 only to whole Provisions Charges good can to I I my
meddle Money as freely for the and be es^ates do project all after see be I it
such you all 47535657 the yet I distance to dare them direction Gods hands in
on not prevent and have some help may from a a be pray very I I Necessars and
that to a occasion prices the submit they but not own had made be do men some
of Sum be necessar 47535657 such bestowed nothing they one it Money of Brand
not to sent engaged whole with a concerned own Money next prove Money far then
but some impossible first be be most to of 4744564858535657 20000 to up do tho
there done case and yet number without hard appointed left 1200 like give will
after necessar proposed as should leave hard had number I peremptor I
673347535657 stood possibly those thought juncture I do mention this as as mean
other I as neither give know offer have Adieu.

Gil. St. The total Sum is 128 8. which will be paid to you by Mr. B.

Follows in plain writing on the back of the Letter.

I have found two of the Books I wrote to Mr. B. were lost, I believe he has
the blew one, we have received his Letter, I have nothing more to say to him at
present, I hope he knows how to write to me, and understands my Address, and to
instruct you; if he do not, I have lost six Hours work.

Adieu.

The Decypher of the said Letter as it was done in England, with some
amendments since, which answers exactly with the middle Alphabet found out in
Scotland.
Sir, June 21.
THo I cannot by this Post send you a full account of your Affairs, yet I send
you as much as may make you take measures what Bills to draw upon me, which I
hope you will fully understand by Mr. B's help; the whole account amounted to
several Pages; but I only give you one to total as sufficient.

I gone so I and refuse object first you time much is way the our would of
altogether concerned do upon absolutely do to do effectua^ly as that it be to
is at all be 33 success 69 Money 36 Horse of and to 69 2 H 36 orse and they
have is at be that no some there 23 Foot etc 50000 sight part as against the
but concurrence from be less nor like place and interest is small and power
against need do bring which Birch that cannot time are out upon an 32 Ho 23 rse
to recruited projected Meat very may little done the been pur^e I to shall my
lists I to great venture they prospect provided have can willing God given
conference week Brown I of things said some the now there my Head guard mention
32 de 67 signs things which to your hope some ago as over some if do spoke for
of know and encouragement con^e^ have and felt be order resolve and to
reckoning all and undertake honest or was far be Shoes und^rtaking many of to
for purchase was as is the a possibly us of by force it tho so how the credit
for time Birch and some greatest them concerned will for and to and aid station
good may only the if more will if should expect tollerably standing and by and
necessar the the more the hazarded to it 8 and think urge so necessar I the
that so affairs have business very I possible of I send hear against my till
what little upon know not which Money 25 Assistance I service any what shall
resolve the at did least effectually thought and far if business reckoned for
still the there I or stuck you upon Money by first Sum if then Bills 20
Dragoon^ 69 Forces well that 38. beat Multitudes need trouble something very a
frighten the probably not 2000 the tho the once for and success 35 will
assistance and to Money could foolish Brown many the not to Gods Brand besides
stay job seat yet to proposed 32 22 Arms a deal the things as all once less any
drink well on know I as pay whether never the received to any calculate about
to that that the such with you I other I^ for considerable be particular add I
are o^ lest I but all have it Enemies to cannot to an account to Friends made
part I write wish may be service Mr. an whole there consider persons it when
knowing any and payment to I it lo^ shall little little meaning intelligence
thing out had which Tents usual whole with 67 31 Militia and by the more of it
but the that blessing raise a Protestant Horse can Virgins supply to call
Ireland not keep imaginable tho them join standing many number horse only at
standing a multitude first considerable with more can them Country commanded
in and there Arms it was Weeks half I so to at 600 think needs precise I the
the it a within what requisite not sum truly this g^ounds to say Mr. thing nor
know they as has the grounds occasioned I they noth do is Red only let I
distance in I half in I the little would assistance first shall number very
1000 and the consider small con^ess then work proposed please cannot are 2000
Brand it people the ^e Arms them ^e appearing gathered little Forces Stirling
have the but it will Forces and as we yet togethe^ only it for buy it consider
employ better interest small so to some Horse a future the to total the
absolute of and designed and Wagons ar^ but of proposed or and because what add
as out meddle touch of I knowing Merchant there it that what is affair attempt
Red I not but I of expect of up I enforce at be that should a is in
con^^^erable put I done this all have by the not to had before able will I if
and a they have will is for Soldier shall necessars the or of if is is they
very incident for the daily not Clothes necessar to their the necessar best of
the War 39 events little to hope repress many sum were for so in we them more
will in and it had any many yet be may all Militia and will it without and not
but more got triple on is very Foot now be God and but is what a if odds it as
near named not Brush of not less power proposed an of thought my and go you in
or resolved so I intend hear them our friends to neither to will much till any
the know on in proposition could what other I of could be the and be but that
easy were I all differ was absolutely soon more to sent above at well right
foot their together provisions the suddenly that action will take will of the
be unwilling the will can at is get Brand not Arms no should the much there not
and Men the are be while do to advantage the Husbanding for number is be for
Shoes only to whole provisions charges good can to II my meddle money as freely
for the an be Estates do project all after see be I it such you all Horse the
yet I distance to dar them direction Gods hands in on not prevent and have some
help may from a a be pray very II necessars and that to a occasion prices the
submit they but not own had made be do Men some of sum be necessar Horse such
bestowed nothing they one it money of Brand not to sent engaged whole with a
concerned own money next prove money far then but some impossible first be be
most to of Heretors 20000 to up do tho there done case and yet number without
hard appointed least 1200 like give will after necessar proposed as should
leave hard had number I peremptor J 67 33 Horse stood possibly those thought
Juncture I do mention this as as mean other I as neither give know offer have.
Adieu.

Gil. St. The total Sum is 128 -- 8. which will be paid to you by Mr. B.

Written in plain sense on the back of the Letter.

I have found two of the Books I wrote to Mr. B. were lost, I believe he has
the Blue on: we have received his Letter. I have nothing more to say to him at
present: I hope he knows how to write to me, and understands my address, and to
instruct you, if he do not, I have lost six hours work. Adieu.

The Copy of the said Letter, as it was given in by Mr. Spence, according to
the plain Sense thereof, without the Preface or Postscript, being set down
already with the Cipher and Decypher.
I Know not the grounds our Friends have gone upon, which has occasioned them
to offer so little Money as I hear, neither know I what Assistance they they
intend to give; and till I know both, I will neither refuse my service, nor do
so much as object against any thing is resolved, till I first hear what Mr.
Carstares.
Red, or any other you send shall say; only in the mean time I resolve to let
you know as much of the Grounds I go on, as is possible at this distance, and
in this way. I did truly in my Proposition mention the very least Sum, I
thought could do our Business effectually, not half of what I would have
thought requisite in an other juncture of Affairs; and what I proposed I
thought altogether so far within the power of those concerned, that if a little
less could possibly do the Business, it would not be stood upon: I reckoned the
assistance of the Horse absolutely necessar for the first Brush, and I do so
still: I shall not be peremptor to urge the precise number named, but I do
think there needs very near that number effectually; and I think 1000 as easy
had as 8 or 600 and it were hard that it stuck at the odds. I leave it to you
to consider if all should be hazarded, upon so small a differ. As to the Money,
I confess what was proposed, is more by half then is absolutely necessar at the
first Weeks work, but soon after all the Sum was proposed, and more will be
necessar, if it please God to give success; and then Arms cannot be sent like
Money by Bills: There are now above 1200 Horse and Dragoons, and 2000 Foot at
least of standing Forces in Scotland.
Brand, very well appointed and tollerably well commanded, it is right hard to
expect that Country People on Foot, without Horse; should beat them the triple
their number; and if multitudes can be got together, yet Here follows the
foresaid Letter, placed in Eight Columns, and 128 Words in every Column,
wanting both Preface and Postscript which was written in plain Sense.
I know not the grounds our Friends have gone upon which has occasioned them
to offer so little Money as I ^ear neither know I what Assistance they they
intend to give and till I know both I will neither refuse my Service nor do so
much as object against any thing is resolved till I first hear what Mr. Red or
any other you send shall say only in the mean time I resolve to let you know as
much of the Grounds I go on as is possible at this distance and in this way I
did truly in my Proposition mention the very least Sum I thought could do our
Business effectually not half of what I would have thought requisite in an
other juncture of Affairs and what I proposed I thought altogether so far
within the power of those concerned that if a little less could possibly do the
Business it would not be stood upon I reckoned the assistance of the Horse
absolutely necessar for the first Brush and I do so still I shall not be
peremptor to urge the precise number named but I do think there needs very near
that number effectually and I think 1000. as easy had as 8 or 600. and it were
hard that it st^ck at the odds I leave it to you to consider if all should be
hazarded upon so small a differ as to the Money I confess what was proposed is
more by half then is absolutely necessar at the first Weeks work but soon after
all the Sum was proposed and more will be necessar if it please God to give
success and then Arms cannot be sent like Money by Bills there are now above
1200. Horse and Dragoons and 2000. Foot at least of standing Forces in Brand
very well appointed and tollerably well commanded it is right hard to expect
that Country People on Foot without Horse should beat them the triple their
number and if multitudes can be got together yet they will need more Arms more
Provisions and have more trouble with them but the Case is if something
considerable be not suddenly done at the very first appearing and that there be
only a multitude gathered without action tho that may frighten a little it will
do no good the standing Forces will take up some station probably at Stirling
and will to their aid not only have the Militia of 20000. Foot and 2000. Horse
but all the Heretors etc. to the number it may be of 50000. and tho many will
be unwilling to ^ight for the standing Forces yet the most part will once join
and many will be as concerned for them as any can be against them and tho we
had at first the greatest success imaginable yet it is impossible but some will
keep together and get some concurrence and (...) not only in Brand but from
Birch and Ireland it will not then be time to call for more Arms far less for
money to buy them no Money nor Credit could supply it we should prove like the
foolish Virgins consider in the next place how Brown can employ so much Money
and so many Horse better for their own Interest tho the Protestant Interest
were not concerned is it not a small Sum and a small Force to raise so many Men
with and by Gods blessing to repress the whole Power of Brand that some hope
are engaged against us besides the Horse to be sent need possibly stay but a
little while to do a job if future events do not bring the seat of the War to
Brand which is yet more to the advantage of Birch as to the total of the Money
that was proposed by the best husbanding it cannot purchase Arms and absolute
necessar for one time for a Militia of the number they are to deal with and
there is nothing out of the whole designed to be bestowed upon many things
usual and necessars for such an Undertaking as Tents Wagons Clothes Shoes
Horse Horse- Shoes all which are not only necessar to be once had but daily to
be recruited far less out of the whole Sum projected was any thing proposed for
Provisions of Meat or Drink Intelligence or incident Charges some very honest
well- meaning and very good Men may undertake on little because they can do
little and know little what is to be done All I shall add is I made the
Reckoning as low as if I had been to pay it out of my own Purse and whether I
meddle or meddle not I resolve never to touch the Money but to order the
Payments of Necessars as they shall be received and I shall freely submit my
self to any knowing Soldier for the Lists and any knowing Merchant for the
Prices I have calculate when there is an occasion to confer about it it will be
a great encouragement to persons that have Estates to venture and that consider
what they do that they know that there is a project and prospect of the whole
Affair and all Necessars provided for such an Attempt if after I have spoke
with Mr. Red I see I can do you service I will be very willing if I be not able
I pray God some other may but before it be given over I wish I had such a
conference as I write of to you a Week ago for I expect not all from Brown some
considerable part of the Horse may I hope be made up by the help of your
particular Friends I have yet some things to add to enforce all I have said
which I cannot at this distance and some things are to be done to prevent the
designs of Enemies that I dare not now mention lest it should put them on their
guard I have a considerable direction in my head but all is in Gods hands. they
will need more Arms, more Provision, and have more trouble with them; but the
Case is, if something considerable be not suddenly done, at at the very first
appearing, and that there be only a multitude gathered without action, tho that
may frighten a little, it will do no good, the standing Forces will take up
some station, probably at Stirling, and will to their aid, not only have the
Militia of 20000. Foot, and 2000. Horse, but all the Heretors, etc. to the
number, it may be of 50000. and tho many will be unwilling to sight for the
standing Forces, yet the most part will once join, and many will be as
concerned for them, as any can be against them; and tho we had at first the
greatest success imaginable, yet it is impossible but some will keep together,
and get some concurrence and assistance, not only in Scotland.
Brand, but from England.
Birch, and Ireland; it will not then be time to call for more Arms, far less
for Money to buy them, no money nor Credit could supply it, we should prove
like the foolish Virgins: Consider in the next place how Dissenting Lords.
Brown can employ so much Money, and so many Horse, better for their own
interest, tho the Protestant Interst were not concerned; is it not a small Sum,
and a small Force, to raise so many men with, and by Gods blessing to repress
the whole Power of Brand, that some hope are engaged against us, besides the
Horse to be sent, need possibly stay but a little while to do a Job, if future
events do not bring the seat of the War to Brand, which is yet more to the
advantage of Birch, as to the total of the Money that was proposed by the best
Husbanding it, cannot purchase Arms, and absolute necessars for one time, for a
Militia of the number they are to deal with, and there is nothing out of the
whole designed to be bestowed upon many things usual, and necessar for such an
Undertaking, as Tents, Wagons, Clothes, Shoes, Horse, Horse-shoes; all which
are not only necessar to be once had, but daily to be recruited, far less out
of the whole sum projected, was any thing proposed for Provisions of Meat or
Drink, Intelligence, or incident Charges, some very honest, well-meaning, and
very good Men, may undertake on little, because they can do little, and know
little what is to be done. All I shall add is, I made the Reckoning as low as
if I had been to pay it out of my own Purse; and whether I meddle or meddle
not, I resolve never to touch the Money, but to order the payment of Necessars,
as they shall be received; and I shall freely submit my self to any knowing
Soldier for the Lists, and any knowing Merchant; for the Prices I have
calculate, when there is an occasion to confer about it, it will be a great
encouragment to persons that have Estates to venture, and that consider what
they do, that they know that there is a project, and prospect of the whole
Affair, and all Necessars provided for such an attempt, if after I have spoke
with Mr. Carstares.
Red, I see I can do you Service, I will be very willing; if I be not able, I
pray God some other may; but before it be given over, I wish I had such a
conference as I write of to you a Week ago, for I expect not all from
Dissenting Lords.
Brown, some considerable part of the Horse may I hope be made up by the help
of your particular friends. I have yet some things to add, to enforce all I
have said, which I cannot at this distance, and some things are to be done to
prevent the designs of Enemies, that I dare not now mention, lest it should put
them on their guard. I have a considerable direction in my head, but all is in
God hands.


Nota, That the foregoing Marginal Notes are so explained by the Key of Words,
page 19.

Here follows Mr. Spence his Deposition in so far as it relates to the two
foregoing Letters, whereof he had given in the Copies above set down in plain
Sense: The Queries put to him, and many of his Answers being little to this
purpose, they are not all here subjoyned, but only these that immediately relate
to the Letters.

Part of Spence his Deposition. At the Castle of Edinburgh, the 19 of August,
1684.
MR. William Spence, of the Age 33 Years, or thereby, not married, solemnly
sworn, Depons, That in the Paper subscribed by him, the Letter dated 21 June,
and the other without date, marked A, are written plain, and in the true Sense,
so far as his knowledge reaches, and that he had no Key to open the Letters
with, but the Alphabetical Cipher: That by the 128 Gilders, 8 Stivers,
mentioned in the end of the long Letter, he understands that it is the Key
thereof; and by the payment of the same, he understands the way of using it.
That he does truly believe there was an Insurrection intended, within these two
Years; and as for what is to come, he cannot tell what the People abroad may be
doing: That he had often heard of Designs and Associations; but that they were
directly intended to hinder the Duke his Succession to the Crown, he cannot
say: For all that he understood was pretended for the ground of any designs of
Arms, was the defense of the Protestant Religion, the Liberties of the Kingdom;
and if against the Duke, his Succession only, in so far as that might be
prejudicial to these: and that he thinks upon the Kings death Troubles may
probably arise: That Mr. West to whom the Letters were directed, was not one of
that name, but Major Holms to the best of his knowledge: And this is the Truth
as he shall answer to God. Sic subscribitur

W. Spence.


These foregoing Letters are exactly set down, both such as were in Cipher, and
these in plain Letter, all written with Argiles own hand (except that from his
Lady) conform to the Principals, compared therewith, before the Lords of the
Secret Committee: Together with the Decyphers, and other ways of opening,
perfectly agreeing both in the Sense and design, with the triple Alphabet, the
Key of Words, and the method before narrated.

There was also (besides these) several other Letters, both in Cipher and plain
Writ found with Major Holms; all of them, as in a Chain, knitting together the
undeniable Evidences of this Hellish Machination; but these above set down,
being the most material, and sufficient to convince all, except those of
invincible obstinacy, it was not thought fit to burden the Reader, or incumber
this short Narrative with more of them. All the principal Letters and Ciphers,
with the Keys of Words, and a great many Depositions taken both here and in
England, are lying in the Records of His Majesty's Privy Council in Scotland.

It Is further to be considered, That all these Letters being taken at one time
with Major Holms, who was Argiles Trustee for conveying them, it is not to be
supposed, but that much more of this Stuff has been interchanged betwixt him
and those of that Confederacy: as appears from the Alphabet written with the
Key of Words, for which Alphabet as yet there is no use found: And also from
the Key it self, wherein tho there be upwards of 80 new coined Words, yet in
all this Parcel of Letters there is not six of them made use of; which likewise
appears evidently from the tenor of all his Letters, and particularly from the
beginning of the long Letter, page 31. where he says, I did truly in my
Proposition mention the very least Sum, etc. and a little after he says, and
what I proposed I thought altogether so far within the power of those
concerned, etc. and toward the end of that same Letter, he says, But before it
be given over, I wish I had such a Conference as I wrote of to you a Week ago,
etc. by which, and many other Passages and Circumstances, what is abovesaid,
becomes undeniable.

The method or way of opening the long Letter, discovered by Mr. Gray, for
further Confirmation.

BUT for further Discovery of this Treason, The Secret Committee finding that
Mr. William Carstares, one of the Prisoners sent down from England, was not
only frequently mentioned in several of Argiles Letters, but related to in them
as one of the principal Agents in these Affairs; They endeavor to bring him to
a Confession, but all endeavors were fruitless, until he was put to the
Question, according to Law and Custom of this, and other Nations in such Cases,
where Persons under great and pregnant presumptions of the knowledge of Crimes,
refuse to confess, they are by Law to be put to Torture, especially where they
refuse to depone upon Oath to the Interrogators proposed, their Depositions
being always declared to be of no force nor danger to themselves; all which
concurred both in Mr. Carstares and Mr. Spence: This man albeit he was not
easily brought to confess, yet once brought to it, seemed very ingenuous. And
what he deposed at several times, is insert to a word in his Deposition; which
is not here insert, to evite prolixity, being at full set down in Ierviswoods
Process hereto subjoyned, page 23.

Every step discovering a new Scene of Treason, the Secret Committee did order
the apprehending of Polwart, Torwoodlie, Philiphaugh, Gallowsheils, and the
Earl of Tarras, as those who had corresponded with other Scotsmen and
Englishmen in England on these Treasonable Designs: Polwort and Torwoodlie
being indeed most active, and conscious to themselves of the highest Guilt,
were more watchful over themselves then others, and so escaped before they were
taken; the other three were brought in to Edinburgh, where Philiphaugh and
Gallowsheils, did at their first appearance freely and voluntarly confess, as
is subjoyned in the said Process against Ierviswood, page 14, 15, 16, 17, 18,
19, 20, 21, 22, 23. both these had assurance that their Confessions should not
militate against themselves, without which they could not legally be examined
upon Oath in so capital a Crime.

Alexander Monro another of the Prisoners being likewise examined, did depone,
as is subjoyned in the said Process; and shortly thereafter the Earl of Tarras,
without either craving or receiving any security, but on a sincere remorse for
his Guilt, did give in an ingenuous Confession of what he knew of the Design,
as it is there also subjoyned page 12, 13, 14.

These Depositions and Testimonies both in England and Scotland concurring to
bring a manifest Guilt on Baillie of Ierviswood, as one of the most active and
violent in these Conspiracies, whereby he did design with all possible rigor,
and imaginable violence, to destroy the sacred Person of His Majesty, and His
Royal Brother, to overturn the Monarchical Government of Britain, to destroy
our established Religion, the Property and Liberty of all Subjects, to settle
all the Power in the hands of Bloody and Fanatical Assassinats, to break off
the happy Peace and Tranquillity wherewith God has blessed us, under the Reign
of a most Gracious King; and in place thereof to throw these Nations into Ruin
and War, and to bring over our Isle a Deluge of Blood; he was pitched upon as
the first Person who should be brought to Trial for these Execrable Crimes; and
accordingly on the 23 of December 1684, he was brought before the Justice
Court, the Privy Council having commanded such Advocats as he named, to plead
in his defense, so far as Law could allow; the Libel adduced against him being
found Relevant beyond all Controversy, he was by a Jury of Noblemen, Barons,
and others his Peers, found guilty of these Execrable Crimes, and by the Proofs
adduced against him in presence of the Judges, Jury, Panual, and a Crowd of all
kind of People who were Auditors, they were all convinced of his Guilt;
wherefore he was on the 24 of December condemned to the death of a Traitor,
being Hanged, Quartered, and his Quarters affixed.

The plain and evident probation adduced against Baillie of Ierviswood in this
Process, the Probation and Confessions of Captain Thomas Walcot and John Rouse
in England, not only at the time of their Trial, but at the time of their
Death, when all dissimulation was to little purpose; The faint Defenses of the
Lord Russel and Colonel Sidney, with the open Prevarications in their
Confessions, and the certain Demonstration by the discoveries which are laid
open in Argiles Letter, and the concurring circumstances of the Keys which
discovers his Language, the Identity of the Decypher found out in England and
in Scotland, without any correspondence betwixt the Decyphers, with that
discovered by Mr. Spence, Argiles own Servant and Trustee; the unalterableness
of the Position of the words in these Letters discovered by Mr. Gray, which in
any other Position can make no sense, do not only amount to a sufficient
probation, but to an evident and irrefragable demonstration of the truth of the
Conspiracy in its blackest view: And chiefly of the late Argiles unalterable
malice to his King and Country, which he would have past as a Standard in his
Exposition and Paraphrase of the Test, under the names of his Religion and his
Loyalty; in which sense only he was to swear it then, and to vindicat it since
in his Book: And any who will but consider the foregoing evidences, must have
the famine opinion of the truth of his Book, and of the Justice of his Plea.
And no body can doubt the truth of such evidences, but such as would rather
wish these villainies execute then discovered.

FINIS.
THE TRIAL AND PROCESS OF High Treason AND Doom of Forfaulture AGAINST Mr.
Robert Baillie of Jerviswood TRAITOR. By His Majesty's special Command, As a
further proof of the late Fanatical Conspiracy.

Edinburg, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, and Reprinted at London, by Tho. Newcomb, 1685.

The Trial and Process of High Treason, and Doom of Forefaulture against Mr.
Robert Baillie of Jerviswood Traitor.
CVria Iusticiariae S. D. N. Regis tanta in praetorio burgi de Edinburgh
vigesimo tertio die mensis Decembris 1684. Per nobilem and Potentem Comitem
Georgium Comitem de Linlithgow, Dominum Livingstoun, etc. Iusticiarium
generalem totius Regni Scotiae, and honorabiles viros, Dominos Jacobum Foulis
de Colintoun Iusticiariae Clericum, Ioannem Lockhart de Castlehill, Davidem
Balfour de Forret, Rogerum Hoge de Harcarss, Alexandrum Seaton de Pitmedden,
and Patricium Lion de Carss, Commissionarios Iusticiariae dicti. S. D. N.
Regis. Curia legitime affirmata. Intran Mr. Robert Baillie of Jerviswood
Prisoner
Indicted and accused, that where notwithstanding by the Common Law of this, and
all other well Governed Nations, the Conspiring to overturn the Government of
the Monarchy, or of the Established Government of this Kingdom, or the
concealing, and not revealing of any Treasonable Design, Project, or Discourse
tending thereto; Or the assisting, aiding, or abaiting such as have any such
Designs, does infer the Pains and Punishment of Treason. And by the third Act
of the first Parliament of King James the first, The Rebelling openly against
the Kings Person: and by the thretty seventh Act of His second Parliament, The
Resetting, Maintaining, or doing favors to open, or notour Rebellers against
the Kings Majesty, is Declared Treason, and punishable by Forefaulture. And by
the hundred forty and fourth Act of the twelfth Parliament of King James the
Sixth, It is Declared Treason to Reset, Supply, or Intercommune with Traitors.
And by the first Act of the first Session of His Majesty's first Parliament, It
is Declared, That it shall be High Treason for the Subjects of this Realm, or
any number of them, less or more, upon any ground, or pretext whatsomever, to
rise, or continue in Arms, to make Peace or War, without His Majesty's special
Approbation. And by the second Act of the second Session of His Majesty's said
first Parliament, To Plot, Contrive, or intend Death, or Destruction, or to put
any Restraint upon His Majesty's Royal Person, or to Deprive, Depose, or
Suspend Him from the Exercise of His Royal Government, or to levy War, or take
up Arms against His Majesty, or any Commissionated by Him, or to entice any
Strangers, or others, to Invade any of His Majesty's Dominions, or to Write,
Print, or speak any thing that may express or declare such their Treasonable
Intentions, it declared Treason, and punishable as such. Likeas, by the second
Act of His Majesty's third Parliament, It is Declared High Treason in any of
the ^ubjects of this Realm, by Writing, Speaking, or any other manner of way to
endeavor the alteration, Suspension, or Diversion of the ^ight of Succession,
or debarring the next lawful Successor. Nevertheless, it is o^ ve^ity that the
said Mr. Robert Baillie of Ierviswood, shaking off all fear of God, respect and
regard to His Majesty's Authority and Laws; and having conceived most unjustly,
a great and extraordinary malice and hatred against His Majesty's Person and
Government, and having designed most Tra^^erously to debar His Royal Highness,
His Majesty's only Brother, from His due Right of Succession, did amongst many
other Traitorous Acts, tending to promove that wicked Design, endeavor to get
himself Elected one of the Commissioners for Negotiating the settlement of a
Colony of this Nation in Carolina, in one or other of the days of the Months
of January, February, March, April, or May, One thousand six hundred and eighty
three years; and that he might thereby have the freer and better access to
Treat with the Earls of Shaftsbury and Essex, the Lord Russeb and others, who
had entered into a Conspiracy in England against His Majesty's Person and
Government, and with Colonel Rumsay, Walcot, West, and Ferguson, and others who
had likewise Conspired the Murder of His Majesty's Sacred Person, and of the
Person of His Royal Highness; and finding that he could not get himself Elected
one of the said Commissioners, he resolved to go to London upon his own
expenses, and declared to severals (whom he took great pains to draw in to be
his accomplices) that his Design was to push foreward the People of England,
who did nothing but talk, that they might go on effectually; and after he had
settled a Correspondency here, he did go up to London in one or other of the
said Months, with Sir John Cochran and Commissar Monro, and did then, and
there, Transact with the said Conspirators, or one or other of them, to get a
sum of Money to the late Earl of Argile, a Declaired Traitor, for bringing home
of Men and Arms, for raising a Rebellion against His Majesty, and Invading this
his Native Country; and so earnest was he in the said Design, that he did
chide those English Conspirators, for not sending the same timeously, and
lamented the delays used in it; and persuaded the late Earl of Argile and
others in his name to accept of any sum, rather than not to engage: and amongst
the many meetings that he h^d at London, for carrying on the said Traitorous
design, there was one at his own Chamber, where he did meet with the Lord
Melvil, Sir John Cochran, and the C^ssnocks Elder and Younger, and amongst
others, with Mr. William Veatch a declared Traitor, and there he did treat of
the carrying on of the said Rebellion, and of the money to be furnished by the
English for Argyle, for buying of Arms. And that if the Scots would attempt
any thing for their own relief, they would get assistance of Horse from
England; and from that meeting, he or ane, or other of them did send down Mr.
Robert Martin to prevent any rising, till it should be seasonable for carrying
on of their Designs, which Mr. Robert, after he came to Scotland, did treat
with Palwart and others, for carrying on of the said Rebellion, by securing His
Majesty's Officers of State, His Castles and Forces, and by putting his
Correspondents here, and there Associates, in readiness, to assist the late
Earl of Argyle; and after the said Mr. Baillie had engadged many of his
Contrymen in England, and had assured his Correspondants here, that the
English were resolved to seclud his Royal-Highness from his due right of
Succession, thereby to encourage them to concur in the said Rebellion, and
Exclusion, he slew to that hight, that he did particularly and closly
correspond with Mr. Robert Ferguson, Sir Thomas Armstrong, Colonel Rumsay, and
Walcot, who were accessory to that horrid part of the Conspiracy, which was
designed against the sacred Life of His Majesty, and the Life of His
Royal-Highness, and did sit up several nights with them, concerting that bloody
Massacer: at least the said Mr. Robert Baillie of Ierviswood was, and is guilty
of having correspondence with the late Earl of Argyle, and Mr. William Veatch
declared Traitors, and of being art and part of an Conspiracy, for assisting of
these who were to rise in arms against His Sacred Majesty, and for exclusion of
His Royal Brother, and of concealing and not revealing the accession and
proposals of others for that effect. Wherethrow he has committed, and is guilty
of the Crimes of High Treason, Rebellion, and others above specified, and is
art and part of the famine, which being found by ane Assize, he ought to be
punished with Forfaulture of Life, Land and Goods, to the terror of others to
commit the like hereafter.

HIS Majesty's Advocat produced an Act, and Warrant from the Lords of His
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, for pursuing, and insisting against
the said Mr. Robert Baillie of Ierviswood, whereof the Tenor follows:
Edinburgh, The twenty two day of December, one thousand six hundred and eighty
four years. The Lords of his Majesty's Privy Council, do hereby give Order and
Warrant to His Majesty's Advocat, to pursue a Process of Treason and
Forfaulture, before the Lords of His Majesty's Justiciary, against Mr. Robert
Baillie of Ierviswood, to morrow at two a clock in the afternoon preceisly, and
the said Lords do hereby Require and Command, Sr. George Lockhart of Carnwath,
and Sr. John Lauder Advocats, to concur, and assist in the said Process with
His Majesty's Advocat, from the intenting until the end thereof, as they will
be answerable upon their alledgance. Extract by me, sic subscribitur.

Colin Mckenzie, Cls. Sti. Concilij.
Pursuers.
Sir George Mckenzie of Roshaugh Our Sovereign Lords Advocat Sir George
Lockhart Advocat. Sir John Lauder. Advocat.
Procurators in Defense.
Sir Patrick Hume. Mr. Walter Pringle. Mr. James Graham. Mr. William Fletcher.
Mr. William Baillie. Advocats.



THE Pannals Procurators produced ane Act of His Majesty's Privy Council, in
their favors, whereof the Tenor follows: Edinburgh, the twenty third of
December, one thousand six hundred eighty four years, The Lords of His
Majesty's Privy Council having considered ane Address made to them, by Mr.
Robert Baillie of Ierviswood, now indicted at the instance of His Majesty's
Advocat; before the Lords Commissioners of Justiciary, of Treason, do hereby
Require and Command Sir Patrick Hume, Mr. Walter Pringle, Mr. James Graham, Mr.
William Fletcher, Mr. James Falconer, Mr. William Baillie Advocats, to Consult,
Compear, and Debate for the Petitioner, in the Process of Treason, mentioned in
his Address, without any hazard, as they will be answerable at their peril;
Extract by me, sic subscribitur.

William Paterson, Cls. Sti. Concilij.


AFter reading of the Indictment, the Lord Justice General required the Pannal
to make answer thereto.

The said Mr. Robert Baillie Pannal pleaded not Guilty.

MR. Walter Pringle Advocat, as Procurator for the said Mr. Robert Baillie of
Ierviswood Pannal, alleadges that he ought not to pass to the knowledge of an
Assize; because he had not got a Citation upon fyfteen days, or at least on a
competent time, which is usual, and absolutely necessar in all Actions, and
much more in Criminal Pursuits, especially, seeing, if a competent time be not
allowed to the Pannal, he is precludit of the benefit of ane exculpation,
without which he cannot prove his Objections against Witnesses, or Assyzers, or
any other Legal, or competent Defenses; And by the late Act of Parliament
concerning the Justice Court, all Pannalls are allowed to raise Precepts of
Exculpation, and thereupon to cite Witnesses, for proving the Objections
against Witnesses, and Assyzers, which necessarily presupposes, that a
competent time must be allowed to the Pannal to execut his diligence, or
otherwise, how is it possible he can prove an Defense of alibi, or any other
just Defense: and as this is most consonant to that clear Act of Parliament,
and to material Justice, and to the Rules of Humanity, so this point has been
already fully and often decided, and lately in the case of one Robertson in
July 1673. The Instance whereof, is given by His Majesty's Advocat in his Book
of Criminals, and Title of Libels, where the Lords found, that albeit Robertson
got his Indictment in Prison, yet he behoved to get it upon fifteen days.

HIS Majesty's Advocat oppons the constant Tract of Decisions, whereby it is
found, that a person Incarcerated may be Tried upon twenty four hours; and the
late Act of Parliament is only in the case where a Summons or Libel is to be
Raised; but here there is no Libel or Summons, but only an Indictment; nor was
any Exculpation sought in this case, before the Trial, which is the case
provided for by the Act of Parliament.

THe Lords, Justice-General, Justice-Clerk, and Commissioners of Justiciary,
Repel the Defense, in respect the Pannal is a Prisoner, and that it has been
the constant Custom of the Court, and that the Pannal made no former
application for an Exculpation.

SIR Patrick Hume for the Pannal, alleadges (alwas denying the Libel, and whole
Members, and Qualifications thereof) that in so far as the Libel is founded
upon Harboring, maintaining, and Intercommuning with the persons mentioned in
the Dittay, the Pannal ought to be assoylzied, because it is res hactenus
judicata, he having been formerly pursued before the Lords of his Majesty's
Privy Council for the same Crimes, and Fined in an considerable Sum; and
therefore that Crime cannot now ^e made use of as a ground of Treason against
the Pannal.

HIS Majesty's Advocat answers, That he Restricts his Libel, to the Pannals
entering in a Conspiracy, for raising Rebellion, and for procuring Money to be
sent to the Late Earl of Argile, for carrying on the said Rebellion; and for
concealing, and not revealing; neither of which is referred to his Oath; and
consequently was not res judicata, there being nothing referred to his Oath;
but his Converse and Correspondence with some Ministers, and others within the
Kingdom, and his own Gardener, and his Writing Letters to my Lord Argile; and
oppons the Decree of Council it self, and restricts the Libel to all the
Crimes not insisted on in the Decree.

SIr Patrick Hume Replies, That as to the Corresponding with the late Earl of
Argile, at any time since his Forefaulture, was expressly proponed as an
Interrogator to the Pannal in that Pursuit, at His Majesty's Advocat's Instance
against him, before the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, and that not only
his own Correspondence by himself; but also by Major Holms, Mr. Carstares,
Robert West, Thomas Shepherd, Richard Rumbold, and Colonel Rumsay, as the
Interrogator bears, as appears by a double of the Act of Council, written by
the Clerk of Councils Servant, and is offered to be proven by my Lord Advocats
Oath: And as to any Correspondency with Mr. Veitch; it is not Relevant, since
he was not Declared Rebel.

SIr John Lauder for his Majesty's Interest, answers, That he oppons the
Decree of Privy Council, where no such Interrogator was put to the Pannal, and
the Decree must make more Faith than any pretended Scroll, and cannot be taken
away by His Majesty's Advocats Oath, to His Majesty's prejudice; and for Mr.
William Veitch, he stands expressly Forefault in anno 1667. and the Doom of
Forefaulture, is Ratified in the Parliament 1669.

SIR Patrick Hume oppons the Reply, That as to the Corresponding with Mr.
Veitch, it does not appear, that he is the person mentioned in the Act of
Parliament; and albeit he were, as he is not, he having thereafter come home to
Scotland, all the punishment inflicted upon him was Banishment, not to return
under the pain of Death, which did take off any former Punishment; and it was
no Crime in any Person to Intercommune with him, especially in another Kingdom;
and by the late Act of Council in anno 1683. Even the Conversing, and
Intercommuning with declared Traitors, is restricted to an Arbitrary punishment.

HIs Majesty's Advocat oppons the standing Doom of Forefaulture against Veitch,
and the Proclamation, or Act of Council it self.

THe Lords, Justice-General, Justice-Clerk, and Commissioners of Justiciary,
having considered the Libel, pursued by His Majesty's Advocat, against Mr.
Robert Baille of Ierviswood, with my Lord Advocats Declaration, whereby he
Restricts the same to the Crimes not insisted on in the Decree of Council
formerly pronunced against the Pannal: They find the same Relevant as it is
restricted, to infer the pain of Treason, and remits the same to the knowledge
of the Assize, and Repells the remnant Defenses proponed for the Pannal, in
respect of the Decree of Council produced, bearing no such thing as is
alleged, and of the answers made by His Majesty's Advocat thereto.

Assisa.
The Earl of Strathmore. The Earl of Belcarras. Sir George Skeen, Provost of
Aberdene. Sir James Fleming, late Provest of Edinburgh. Sir John Ramsay of
Whitehill. Adam Hepburn of Humby. Andrew Bruce of Earleshall. John Stuart,
Tutor of Alpin. Alexander Miln of Gar^in. Mr. Iams Elies of Stenhopsmilus. Sir
William Drummond of Halthornden. Major Andrew White, Lieutennent of
Edinburgh-Castle. Mr. David Grahame, Sheriff of Wigtoun. Colin Mckenzie,
Collector of Ross. David Burnet* Merchant.
THe Assise lawfully Sworn, no Objection of the Law in the contrary.

HIs Majesty's Advocat for Probation adduced the Witnesses and Writs
aftermentioned; and first, Walter Earl of Tarras.

SIr Patrick Hume Procurator for the Pannal, objects against the Earl of
Tarras, that he cannot be a Witness, because he is socius and particeps
criminis; and it is clear by the 34. Chap. Stat. 2. Rob. 1. Concerning these
that are excluded from bearing of Testimony that socij and participes ejusdem
criminis, vel incarcerati and vinculati, cannot bear Testimony: As also, the
Earl of Tarras being presently under an Indictment of High Treason, and under
the Impressions of Fear, and Death, no person in his Circumstances can be
admitted a Witness, as is not only clear from the foresaid Statute, but from
the Common Law.

HIs Majesty's Advocat answers, That it is an exception from that Rule, both by
the Common Law, and ours, that in the Crime of lose Majesty, and especially,
that Branch thereof, which we call a Conspiracy, socius criminis may be a
witness, and which is introduced very reasonably by Lawyers, to secure the
common interest of mankind, which is the chief of all Interests; and because
Conspiracies cannot be otherwise proved, and not to allow this manner of
Probation, were to allow Treason, since no man can prove a Plot, but he that is
upon it, and how can a man object against him as a Witness, whom himself
trusted with his Life, his Fortune, and their common Plot, nor is the intenting
of the Lybel any stronger qualification, since every man that is socius
criminis, is under the same impression, and it would rather seem the greater
and nearer apprehensions a man has of death, he will be the more sincere and
faithful; Nor has the Earl of Tarras, nor did he ever seek any security, in
order to his deponing. And this has been constantly, and latlie, conform to the
Common Law, as may be seen in the hundreds of Citations set down by Mascard, de
probationibus, vol. 4. conclus. 1318. number 21. and the contrary citations prove
only, that regularly socius criminis cannot be a Witness.

SIr Patrick Hume replies, that the Statutes of Robert the first is opponed,
and non est distinguendum ubi lex non distinguit, and not only was he socius
criminis, which is acknowledged, but he is incarceratus, and lying under an
Indytment of high Treason, and has thrown himself on the Kings Mercy, and it is
not proper he should be a Witness, seeing he is in the Kings Mercy, who may
give him his life or not, and there was never a Person in these circumstances,
that ever was admitted a Witness.

MR. Walter Pringle adds, That the Earl of Tarras, is not only in the case of a
person who stands Indyted for High Treason; but must be looked upon, as a
person condemned for the said Crime, seeing he fully, and amply confessed the
Crime: and confessus habetur pro convicto, and never any Lawyer asserted, That
damnatus criminis loesae Majestatis could be admitted as a Witness, and there is
nothing more clear, then that by the common Law, and the Law of all Nations,
this Objection ought to be sustained, for the Civil Law is clear, leg. 11. cod.
de testibus and Matheus in his title de probationibus, cap. de testibus, does
assert positivlie, that the Crime of lose Majesty, Heresy, and generally all
these Crimes quae sine sociis non possunt facile admitti, are not excepted. And
he asserts, that the Lawyers, viz. Gomesius, and Decianus, who are of another
Opinion, do acknowledge, nominatum a reo damnandum non esse, and that they
contravert only, An nominatio rei ^it indicium sufficiens ad torquendum
nominatum.

SIr George Lockhart Repeats, and oppons the Answer, and the Crime lybelled,
being a Conspiration of Treason, which of it is own nature is manadged, and
carried on by Secrecy and Contrivance; and which is only known to the Accomplices
of the Treason, and which cannot be committed sine sociis, the Law of this
Kingdom, and of all Nations, do allow socios criminis to be testes habiles, and
not only are they admitted in the case of such Conjurations, but generally in
omnibus criminibus exceptis, amongst which the Crime of Perduellion, and lose
Majesty is the chief, and it is absolutely impossible, that Plots, and
Conspirations of Treason can be otherways proven, then per socios, and such as
are participes criminis, and which is the common opinion of all Lawyers, as may
appear by Farin. Quest: 45. And the Authorities cited by him, and which is the
inviolable practique of this Kingdom: and as to that pretense, that the Earl of
Tarras is under a Process of Treason, and has submitted to His Majesty's mercy,
and that confessus habetur pro convicto, it imports nothing, and infers no more
then that he is socius criminis, and is still a habil witness, as to Conjuration
of Treason socius criminis hoc ipso, that it is acknowledged, or proven, being
still under the hazard of Process, or condemnation, which Law regards not in
regard of the secrecy involved in the nature of the Crime, that either
witnesses neque actu neque habitu, can be present, so that the objection
amounts to no less then that Conjurations of Treason cannot at all be proven:
And as to the Law cited from the Majesty, it imports no more then that the
Objection regulariter procedit, in Crimes, which of their own nature are not
perdifficilis probationis, and are not inter crimina excepta such as the Crime
of Conspiracy and Treason is.

MR. Williom Fletcher Oppons the Objection, and Reply, and further adds, that
albeit crimen loesae Majestatis be reckoned inter crimina excepta, and so have
some privilege* as to the qualification of Witnesses, yet it cannot be denied,
but there are some Objections competent against Witness adduced for proving
Conspiracies, and Treason, verbi causa, that a Witness is a Capital Enemy, or
that he is sub potestate accusatoris, and the Objection now pleaded, being
taken complexlie, viz. That the Earl of Tarras is not only sucius criminis, but
also, that he is publico judicio reus, upon the same Crime, and that as means
to procure His Majesty's savor, he has submitted himself, and come in His
Majesty's mercy, by an acknowledgment of the Crime, before the Diet of
Citation, he is obnoxious to a most just Objection, viz. That he is sub
potestate, and by the submission, and Confession, his Life and Estate is now in
His Majesty's hands, so that he is not only in the case of a reus confessus,
but in the case of a Witness, who does absolutely depend upon His Majesty's
Advocate the Pursuer; and as a private accuser, could not adduce his own
Servants to be Witnesses, because they are ^estes domestici, and depend upon
him, so far less ought a Witness to be adduced, who not only depends, as to his
Estate, but as to his Life, and the Law gives a very good reason, and which is
mentioned by Paulus, lib. 1. receptarum sententiarum, cap. 12. parag. ult. In
these words. de se conf^ssu^, non est audiendus ut testis, ne alienam salutem
in dubium deducat qui de sua desperavit; and as to the pretense that a
Conjuration is a Crime so occult, that it must either be proven by such
Witnesses, or otherways the guilty person will escape. It is answered, that in
this case, His Majesty's Advocate had an easy remedy, ^or he might have
pursued the Pannal, before he pursued the Witness, and the Terror and
Apprehension of the event of a Process for Treason cannot be constructed
otherways, then to have influence upon the Deposition of the Witness; and as to
the Citation out of Farina^ius, it is only in the case o^ ^ocius ^riminis, but
when he comes to treat de ^este accusatio vel carcerato. Quest. 56. articulo 4
to. He says, Regula sit in accusato quod is pendent^ accusatione a testimonio
repellitur* and be the 2 d. Rule of the same Ar^icle, He says, it is a
principle quod carceratus testimonium far prohibetur, and he gives this
reason, quia praesumitur, quod falsum testimonium diceret pro aliquo qui ei
promiserit se liberare a vinculo, and limits this Rule, that he must be
carceratus propter crimen.

SIr Patrick Hume adds, that it is a certain principle, that any person that is
guilty infamia juris, cannot be a Witness, no more than a person that is
Convict, and Condemned of Treason; and if he were Convict, and Condemned of
Treason, he could not be a Witness, even in the case of Treason: so neither can
the Earl of Tarras in this case be received a Witness, for he being adduced a
Witness after he received his Indi^ment, and confessed the Crime, is
equivalent, as if he had been actual Convict; and whatever may be pretended,
that testes infames may be admit^ed; yet it was never asserted by any Lawyer,
Nota, That the Earl of Tarras depon'd nothing against Jerviswood but what the
other two Witnesses depon'd against himself before the Trial, and upon which
thereafter they being renewed, the Earl was forfaulted; so that there could be
no ground of suspicion from his Circumstances.
that a person Convict of Treason can be admitted a Witness.

THe Lords Repelled the Objection against the Earl of Tarras, and ordains him
to be received a Witness.

WAlter Earl of Tarras, aged forty years, married, purged, and sworn; being
Interrogat, if about the time that Sir John Cochran, and Commissar Monro got
their Commission from the Carolina Company for London, the Pannal Mr. Robert
Baillie of Ierviswood did not desire the Deponent to speak to Commissar Monro,
to try if he could get him the said Pannal added to that Commission, Depones
affirmative. Being Interro^at, if the said Ierviswood, the Pannal, did not tell
the Deponent that he was resolved to go to London however upon his own
Expenses, and that his and their going about the Carolina Bussiness, was but a
pretense, and a blind; but that the true design was, to push foreward the
people of England who could do nothing but talk, to go more effectually about
their bussiness, Depones affirmative. Depones that the Pannal did settle a
Correspondence with the Deponent whereby he was to give an account to the
Deponent of what should pass betwixt the Country Party in England, and the
Scots men there: and on the other hand, the Deponent was to Write to him what
occurred here; Depones that the Pannal did say to the Deponent, if the King
would suffer the Parliament of England to sit, and pass the Bill of Seclusion,
that that was the only way to secure the Protestant Religion. Depones that the
Pannal said to him, that the King might be induced to do so, if the Parliament
would take sharp or brisk measures with Him, or the like. Depones these words
were spoke to him by the Pannal* since the holding of the last Session of this
current Parliament; and before the Pannal and Commissar Monro went for London.
Depons that after the Pannal went to London, he did give the Deponent an
account by Letters, that things were in great Disorder there, and that he hoped
there would be effectual Courses taken to remeid them. Depones that Mr. Robert
Martin did come to Mr. Pringle of Torwoodlies House in May 1683. or thereby,
and brought a Letter to the Deponents Lady unsubscribed, but the Deponent knows
it was Ierviswoods Handwriting, who was then at London, and that Mr. Martin
told the Deponent, that things in England were in great disorder, and like to
come to a hight, and that the Country Party were considering on methods for
securing the Protestant Religion. And that Archibald, sometime Earl of Argile,
was to get ten thousand pounds Sterling, whereas thirty thousand pounds
Sterling was sought by the Scotsmen at London, which was to be sent over to
Holland to provide Arms; and that the late Earl of Argile was to Land with
these Arms in the West-Highlands of Scotland, and that the Deponents Friend
Ierviswood the Pannal, was to be sent over with the Money. Depones that
Philiphaugh and he went to Gallowshiels House, where they met with Polwort and
Gallowshiels, and that it was talked amongst them there, that in case those in
England should rise in Arms, that it was necessary in that Case, that so many
as could be got on the Borders should be in readiness to deal with Straglers
and seize upon Horses, and that thereafter they should join with those that
were in Arms on the Borders of England. Depons That in the case foresaid, it
was said, it was convenient the Castle of Stirling, Berwick, and some other
Strengths should be seized upon; and it was likewise spoke amongst them, that
some persons should be employed to inquire what Arms was in that Country.
Depons, That it was spoke then, that the best time for Argyle was to land in
the West when there was a stur in England, or Scotland, or words to that
purpose. Depons, That every one desired another to speak to such particular
persons as they could trust, by letting a word fall indirectly upon
supposition, in case of the Rising in England concerning the Affair for
preparing of them: And that he was told by Philiphaugh thereafter, that there
was a Word and Sign to be used amongst them, viz. the sign was by loosing a
Button on the Breast, and that the Word was Harmony. Depons, the Pannal spoke
to the Deponent to advertise Torwoodlie, that he might acquaint Mr. William
Veitch a forfault Traitor, who was in Northumberland, that he might keep
himself close, and be on his guard, lest he should be caught; which was since
the Pannal was Prisoner in the Tolbooth of Edinburgh. And this is the truth, as
he shall answer to God. Sic subscribitur,

Tarras, Linlithgow. I. P. D.


ALexander Monro of Bear-crofts, Aged forty five Years, or thereby; solutus,
solemnly sworn and purged. Depons, that the Earl of Tarras proposed to the
Deponent, that Ierviswood might be made one of the Commissioners for the Affair
of Carolina, for that he could not safely stay at Home; and that the Deponents
answer was that he had no interest in the Affair, and so could not be a
Commissioner. Depons, that the Pannal did wait for the Deponent at Wooller, and
did go along with him to London, and that by the way he heard him regrate his
own hazard and others, because of Blackwoods Sentence; and that he heard him
regrate the hazard our Laws, and Liberties, and the Protestant Religion were
in. Depons, that the Pannal spoke to the Deponent and others, more then once at
London for getting of Money from the English to be sent to the late Earl of
Argile, for bringing home Arms for the said Earls use, as he understood, for
carrying on an Insurrection, and Rebellion in Scotland. Depons, that at the
time libelled, in Ierviswoods Chamber in London, Mr. William Veitch a forfault
Traitor was present; and that Sir John Cochran did at that Meeting expressly
speak of Money to be sent to Argile for bringing home Arms for invading the
Kingdom of Scotland; And that at another occasion he heard some of them say,
that there would be twenty Thousand Men in Scotland who would assist the
Rebellion, and that he heard Sir John Cochran and Ierviswood speaking of it,
but cannot be positive which of the two said it. Depons, that at the Meeting he
heard Ierviswood speak, but did not hear him oppose that Treasonable Proposal,
or contradict the Overture proposed by Sir John Cochran. Depons, that Mr.
Robert Martin was sent down from that Meeting which was at Ierviswoods Chamber,
to Scotland, to try what the People of Scotland would do for their own safety:
And that it was understood that the people of Scotland should not rise till
there should be a rising in England, and that the Commission was granted to Mr.
Robert Martin by all the persons present, whereof Ierviswood was one, and that
there were present the Lord Melvill, Sir John Cochran, Cessnocks elder and
younger, Mr. William Carstares, Mr. William Veitch, Ierviswood, and the
Deponent; and depons they did contribute Money for Mr. Martins Journey. Depons,
that at his return he meeting with the Deponent, told him, that Matters were in
that condition in Scotland, and that the Country was in such a condition as
little would kindle the Fire in order to the Rebellion. And this is the truth,
as he shall answer to God. Sic subscribitur,

Alexander Monro, Linlithgow, I. P. D.


JAmes Murray of Philiphaugh, aged 30. Years, married, purged and sworn,
produces ^our Leaves of Depositions, emitted by him before the Lords of the
Secret Committie, and all Written and Subscribed with his own hand, which being
publicly read, in presence of the Justices, and Assize, he adheres thereto, in
all points, whereof the Tenot follows. Upon the day of May, 1683. Upon a letter
from Mr. Pringle of Torwoodlie, I came to his house in the morning, and he
presently led me to a Chamber, where I found Mr Robert Martin, who was lately
come from London, with whom we stayed a little, and discoursed of the news, and
about the present condition, and temper of England, and in particular of
London, which Mr. Martin said, was much irritated through some attemps upon
their Privileges, either as to the concern of the Sheriffs, or their Charter,
but that all honest men were of good heart and very brisk, and after some
general discourses to this purpose, Torwoodlie, and I left him* and walked out
a little, and he told me, he was expecting the E. of Tarras presently, for he
had sent to him; and Mr. Martin had a Letter to him from Ierviswood, then he
told me that there were great matters in agitation at London, and that Mr.
Martin had come down with a Commission from our friends there, (I do not
remember he named any) but that I behoved not to expect, he would impart his
Instructions to me, for he was to communicate them only to Polwart and himself,
(at least for these Shyres) and they were to pitch on such as they thought fit
to entrust with the affair, whereupon he assured me, that he had great
confidence in me, and his kindness to me oblidged him to send for me, to
acquaint me that matters were now come to a crisis, and that he had reason to
think England would shortly draw to Arms, and stand by them, till they were
satisfied anent the Bill of Exclusion, and what other security they could
propose for the Protestant Religion, and their Liberties, and that it was no
project of any inconsiderable party but a design through the Kingdom, and that
many of the finest men, and of the greatest interest and credit there, had
adjusted almost every thing necessar for the purpose, and had concerted matters
with our Friends there, in order to concurrence from this, and had agreed to
advance Money for furnishing Arms here, (I do not remember he told me more
particulars at this time) but said, Polwart would be at Gallow-shiels that
night, and it would be necessar that the E. of Tarras and I should confer with
him fully, on the business, about this time the E. of Tarras lighted, and
Torwoodlie having left us for a little time, being gone to bring Mr. Martin;
the E. of Tarras asked me, what news, I told him of Mr. Martins being there,
but that he had given me no account of the design of his down-coming, which
perhaps he would acquaint him with, but by what I had heard from Torwoodlie, I
understood it to be, to engadge us to rise in Arms shortly, whereat the E. of
Tarras hummed, and said, he would look ere he leapt, such a leap, or some such
expressions, presently Mr. Martin came, and the E. of Tarras and he retired a
little, after the reading An Letter, he gave him, the Contents whereof was (as
the E. of Tarras informed me) only an order from Ierviswood, to deliver some
Money to the bearer, which he had left with him, and the E. of Tarras called
for his Servant, and bad him bring up the Money; in the mean time, Torwoodlie
asked me, if I had acquainted the E. of Tarras with what he spoke to me, and I
told him, I had let something of it fall to him, but it was not to be thought,
that persons of sense and quality would engadge in such designs at random; so
Torwoodlie said, that (though Mr. Martin would not commune with us upon his
Commission directly) yet he thought it would be fit, we conferred, and without
taking notice of his Commission, discoursed of things upon suppositions, and as
our own private notions* abstract from any prospect of a present design, so
after dinner, we four went to a Chamber, and after some general discourses, of
the discontents of both Kingdoms, these suppositions following were discoursed
(and as I remember) Mr. Martin started them all, or the most part) viz. What if
the country party in England should have thoughts of going to Arms (whereof he
knew nothing but only supposed such a thing, for discoursing a little freely,
and to know our sentiments, what we thought could be expected here in such a
case) would it not be expedient to have a settled Correspondence betwixt that
Party there and here, and might not matters be so adjusted, that both Kingdoms
should draw out in one day, and might not as many be expected to undertake in
these Shires, and about Edinburgh, as would serve to surprise, and seize our
Rulers (I do not remember any named, but the then Chancellor and Treasurer)
and some to join with these on the English borders, to assist them to surprise
Berwick; and if for that effect, any Horse, or Dragoons, that should be in the
bounds might not be surprised, that their Horse and Arms might be gotten to
furnish the Country people, and Stirling Castle; and if Argile should at the
same time Land in the West, and raise that Country, would not these Measures
contribute much to the advancement and security of the Interest of that Party
here, since thereby the Government would be disordered, and such steps would
encourage all that had an inclination to the Country Party, to draw to them
frankly, and scar many of the other side to act against them, and so they might
have leisure to join from all places; and might it not be expected, there would
be as many in this Kingdom, as would be able to deal with the Forces here, at
least divert them from troubling England. This is the sum, as I remember, of
what was proposed, and discourst of, though I cannot distinctly say, it was in
this method, and expression, nor was all moved at once, but droped now and
then, as the Discourse seemed to give rise to it; and though I cannot fully
Re^count all that was spoke on these Heads, and tell distinctly, what this and
that man said; yet I remember these following Answers were giving, and (as I
judged) acquiesced to by the whole Company; and they were certainly the E. of
Tarras, his sentiments and mine, and every one that spoke, used this or some
such Precaution, that if they were concerned, or to give counsel in any such
case, (as they were not, etc.) 1. As to the settling a Correspondence, it was
confessed to be very convenient for those of a common Interest; but the present
circumstances of Affairs were such (as we thought,) that none could be found
here who was fit to manage it, and would undertake it. 2. As to the trysting
at the same time, it could not be done without the devulging the Design to all
Ranks of people, which none would undertake, except these already in desperate
Circumstances, and they could not have generally much influence. 3. The thing
was not at all advisable for this Kingdom, since if any of Englands own
measures miscarried, they would not stur for any such Trust; and the spring of
their motions being always at London, there might happen an interruption near
the appointment, whereof these here could have no timous notice, and so might
keep Tryst, whereby they would be exposed a prey; and if they should subsist
any time, or prevail (which was hardly possible) the multitude that must be
employed, are tainted with such wild and unruly Principles, that if once they
got the Sword in their Hands, they would never be brought to Order without a
greater force to overawe them; neither would any expectation of Argiles
Landing, be a just ground for such a Tryst, considering the uncertainty of
Sea-Voyages; and if Argile were to be the Head, undoubtedly many people would
conclude that he were to be suspected of private designs, and that restoring
him, might lay him aside: As also, that despair might blind his usual prudence,
and prompt him to unsolid, and undigested Methods; and so it was to be
expected, that few of the Gentry (except such as he had special influence on,
or such as were under hard Circumstances) could embarque with him. 4. As to the
surprising Rulers, etc. It was inveighed against, as an Action not to be
thought of amongst Protestants (especially when the very design of it was
pretended, to secure that Religion, which taught its Professors to abhor and
detest such Principles as Popish, yea un-christian) since it could not be
effectuat without Bloodshed of people, secure in Peace, which being by all
approven, Divines and Casuists condemned as unlawful, and mere Assassination;
it was not to be doubted, that as such a practice would cast a blot upon the
whole Affair, and quite take off any pretense of Defensive Arms, so it would
scar many from joining. These things were reasoned again and again: But I do
not remember there was any formal Conclusion made, but the Discourse was let
fall; and Mr. Martin told us, if any of us had a mind for a suit of Armor, he
could provide as many as we pleased, from one who had made a great many lately,
to honest men at London, of a new fashion, very light, and at an easy Rate; so
Torwoodlie and I gave him our measures, E. of Tarras told he had a suit
already; Then Torwoodlie said to the E. of Tarras and me, we would meet Polwort
at Gallowsheils, and desired we might Commun with him, anent what we had been
Discoursing, so we hasted away, that if possible, we might both get home that
Night, it being Saturnday, and we unfurnished, for staying abroad, and
Torwoodlie whispered me just as I was mounting (as I think) that he was not
clear we should commun before Gallowshiels, for he was sometimes too much
Good Fellow, or the like; so the E. of Tarras and I Rod away together, and upon
the way we were both of Opinion, that the Suppositions we had discoursed of,
were in effect Propositions, and resolved, if they were insisted on by Polwort,
as we suspected, we would adhere to the former Answer, and would undertake
nothing in these methods; When we came to Gallowsheils, the Lord was abroad,
and Polwort was not come, so we had thoughts to go away, being both damped with
what had passed, and inclining to be free of farther meddling; but the Lady would
by no means hear of our going till her Husband came, who, she assured us, was
about the Doors, and she having sent to call him, he would be in presently; yet
it was so late ere he came, that the E. of Tarras could hardly have day enough
to go home with; so Gallowsheils would not let him go, and he would not stay,
unless I stayed, so we both stayed, and not being resolved to Discourse with
Gallowsheils on what passed, we we it to the Tavern, on pretense I might call
the Baillie, and seek Horses or Lime, and stayed there till Polwort came (which
seemed unknown to Gallowsheils) then we returned to Gallowsheils House, and
after Supper Polwort whispered the E. of Tarras and me, and enquired if we had
seen Mr. Martin; and we having told him we had, he enquired, if we were free to
commun on the Affair before Gallowsheils, we told, as he thought fit, for we
could trust him; Then he whispered Gallowsheils, and (as I understood
afterward) asked if he was free to commune on matters of great Secrecy and
importance with that Company, to which he assented, then we sat down closs
together, and as I remember* Polwort began the Discourse; But since I am not
able to follow exactly the method of our Conference, or keep the very
expressions used, or repeat all that was spoke, or to tell distinctly what was
every man's part of the Discourse; I shall set down the Heads, and most
remarkable Passages thereof, that I remember in some Articles following; 1.
Polwort signified that he was credibly informed (but I do not remember he named
his Informer) that the Country party in England would draw to the Fields
shortly, as he heard before Lambass, wherewith Gallowsheils seemed visibly
surprised; and being asked, if his Heart failed him already, he said he did
love it better truly to be walking in his own Parks in Peace, and quiet, than
to be meddling in such matters; however he assured the Company, that if there
came any troublesome world, he would join with them firmly; and the E. of
Tarras said, he wondered to hear of any such Resolution in England, for he took
it for a Principle amongst that Party there, that they should make no stir in
the Kings Life (which the whole Company owned to be their Opinion and desire)
because that might strengthen the Dukes interest; and he suspected it was the
project of the Commonwealths men, with whom he believed, few Scots Gentlemen
would join; and he was almost persuaded the D. of Monmouth would not concur in
any rising during the Kings Life, To which it was answered by Polwort, that he
had indeed heard that principle had been generally agreed to, but it seemed
they found, they behoved either to do their business now, or lay aside hopes of
doing it hereafter, which might be, that if the Charter of London were let
fall, they would not only lose all safe opportunity of digesting Matters; but a
great part of their strength, and he heard all things were concerted mutually,
betwixt Monmouths Friends and the Heads of the Commonwealth Party; and tho he
heard Monmouth was shy on that account, yet it was hoped he would engage, for
otherways he would be deserted by that Party. 2. Polwort told us the
suppositions above-written as overtures concerted betwixt our friends at
London, and the principal men of that Party there; so the E of Tarras and I
renewed our former answers also above-written, and maintained them with all our
vigor, wherein Gallowsheils joined forwardly with us; and Polwort asserted, we
went on very good grounds, and he was fully of our opinion, if things were
entire but referred it to be considered, whether it were better to comply with
some of these methods, tho not so proper and justifiable as were to be wished,
then to disappoint the business totally, which might be of the best consequence
to all the Party, yet we did not condescend as I remember to undertake any of
these methods. And there was a further argument adduced against the trysting
above-written, viz. That it was talked there was a day appointed in England
latly in Shaftsberry's time, which did not hold, so they were not to be relied
upon. 3. It was proposed to be considered what methods were most proper in the
Companies opinion for Scotland to follow in case of Englands rising, whereanent
it was said, that all that could be expected or desired from Scotland, was,
that upon the certain News of Englands being in the Fields, those in the
Southern Shires who would own that Party, should presently rise, and (how soon
they could get as many convened as would be able to deal with straggling
Parties, or any sudden rising in the Country) march to join them, and that it
would be fit these in the Northern Shires of England waited near the Borders
for such, and that they had Officers trysted there to command, and that then it
would be seasonable for Argile to land in the West, and these Parties on the
Borders might divert the Forces till he had time to put himself in a posture.
These things seemed to be the sentiments of the whole Company, but were not
finally determined till the opinion of others who were to be communed with by
Polwort were known: And it was represented, there behoved not to be any wilful
and obstinate adhering to our own thoughts of things, (but an mutual
condescendance to others concerned,) otherwise it were not possible to bring a
public Design to any good issue. 4. All the Company seemed to agree, that they
should undertake nothing or move in that Affair, till they had a full and
certain account what England proposed, what methods they resolved to follow
there, who were to be their Heads, and that if they designed any attempt on the
Kings Person, or overturning Monarchy, they would not be forward or clear to
join: And it being here insinuated, that the most they could do (at least for
which there could be any plausible pretense to justify) was to draw together,
and without any act of Hostility, send Addresses to His Majesty for redress of
the present abuses of the Government, and for obtaining sufficient security
against the hazard they apprehended to their Religion and Liberties. It was
said by Polwort that he was apt to think, that was their very design, for he
had heard it was generally believed by that Party in England, that if once they
were in a Body, the King would be prevailed with to quite the Duke, to be tried
for Popery, correspondence with France, and accession to the Popish Plot, and
then if the King were once free from the influence of the Dukes Counsels, they
were confident he might be moved to reform their Abuses, and secure their
Religion and Liberties for the future to their contentment. 5. It was resolved,
that till we got the foresaid account from England, and were satisfied
thereanent, and knew others here (who were to be communed with) their
Sentiements of what methods were most proper for us, in case we should
undertake, we should not meddle further; only it was left to the Earl of Tarras
and me, if we thought fit to acquaint Sir William Scot younger with some of the
matter of this Conference overly, without taking notice of our Informers, or
such an Conference; and it was recommended to all to be enquiring (at such as
they had some trust in) indirectly about the affection of our Neighbors, and
what Arms there was amongst them; that if we should get an satisfying account,
and resolve to join, we might know where to seek Men and Arms suddenly: here it
was said by Polwort, as I think, that if the E. of Tarras, Torwoodlie,
Gallowsheils, and I once took Horse, he thought the most part of the West end
of Tiviotdale and Selkirk Shire would soon come to us, especially, when they
heard England was risen, then we trysted to meet there against Midsummer Fair,
betwixt and which the forsaid account was expected, but in case it came to any
of our hands sooner, we promised to advertise the rest, that we might meet,
presently, if the case required; this is the substance and sum of what passed
at the forsaid conference, that I can now remember; but I remember, I was
likewise told these following particulars in private, by Polwart, or Torwoodlie,
(which of them, I cannot distinctly tell) the day of the forsaid conference, or
within a short time after. 1. That Polwart kept the correspondence with our
friends at London, I remember not positively of any of them that was named, to
be on the entrigue there, except my Lord Melvil, Sir John Cochran, Ierviswood,
and Commissar Monro (for I hardly knew any of the rest) and as I think,
Commissar Monro was called his correspondent there. 2. That the Money to be
advanced by the English party to Scotland was ready, when Mr. Martin came from
London, and it was expected, that within few days after, it would be dispatched
with some confident to Holland, (whither by Bills, or in Cash, I cannot say) it
was called ten thousand pound Sterlin, and was to be employed (as I was told)
by that confident, at Argyles sight, for buying Arms, providing Ships to
transport them with Argyle, to the West here, and such other Charges. 3. That
how soon our friends at London got notice of the safe arrival, of the confident
forsaid, and all other things were finally concluded there (which was expected
would be about the middle of June, as I remember) they would come home, and as
they passed, would give them, or one of them, an particular account of all
resolutions taken to be communicate to the rest, that it was not to be expected
by Letters, that behoved to be under figures, and dark expressions, and as I
remember, they were written as it were about the Carolina business, or some
household Furniture, as I was told, for I never remember I saw any Letter,
either direct to London, or sent from it on that head. 4. I was told there was
a Sign, and a Word agreed on by that Party, so that men might know with whom
they might use freedom, the Word, as I remember was Harmony, and the Sign, the
opening two Buttons in the breast coat and shutting them presently; this I
communicate to the Earl of Tarras, but does not mind I ever saw it used, except
when I visited Park-Hay here in Town, about the end of June; we discoursing a
little freely, he asked if I had the Word and Sign of the Carolina men, and I
having given them, he said something to this purpose, that he was afraid that
the Carolina business did not go well, for there had been some of the Managers
expected here (as I think he named Ierviswood or Commissar Monro) these eight
days past, but there was none come, nor could he learn that any of their
Friends had heard from them for several Posts. Polwart, Torwoodlie, and I met
at Gallowsheils, on Midsummer Fair, but I mind nothing passed but private
whisperings. Dated September 15. 1684. and subscrived thus,

James Murray.


Edinburgh, December 23* 1684.
THe Deposition above-written being read to the said James Murray of
Philiphaugh, in presence of the Justices and Assizers, he adheres thereto in
all points upon Oath. Sic subscribitur,

James Murray. Linlithgow, I. P. D.


THe said James Murray further depons, That at their meeting at Gallowsheils,
it was resolved, that they should keep up their Cess unpayed till their next
meeting at Midsummer, which was to be at Gallowsheils, and should deal with all
these they had influence upon to do the like, and that upon the supposition
mentioned in his Oath given in. It was spoke amongst them that the Troupers
Horses should be seized upon, when they were grasing. And this is the Truth, as
he shall answer to God. Sic subscribitur,

James Murray. Linlithgow, I. P. D.


HVgh Scot of Gallowsheils, aged 36. Years, married, purged, etc. and sworn.
Depons, That the Earl of Tarras and Philiphaugh did come to the Deponents
House, in May, 1683. and Polwart came likewise there, where there were
Discourses and Proposals, that if the English would rise in Arms, their Friends
in the South Shires should rise with them; and that they should seize the
Horses belonging to the Kings Troops where they grased; and the Town of
Berwick, and the Castle of Stirling: And likewise it was there discoursed anent
the late Earl of Argiles coming to invade Scotland, but because of the
uncertainty of Sea Voyages, there was not much stress laid upon it. Depons, It
was also proposed, that some of the South Country whom they trusted in should
be acquainted with it, and that endeavors should be used to learn what Arms
was in the Country. Depons, There was some such discourse there, as that the
Earl of Tarras, Philiphaugh, Torwoodlie, Polwart, and some others should draw
to Horse with the first when the rising should be in readiness, that it might
be expected that the South parts of Teviotdale and Selkirk Shire would join
with them. And this is the truth, as he shall answer to God. Sic subscribitur,

Hugh Scot. Linlithgow, I. P. D.


HIs Majesty's Advocat produced other Depositions, emitted by Gallowsheils
before the Lords of the Secret Committee, whereof the Tenor follows.

Edinburgh, the 14 of September 1684.
GAllowsheils Depons, that the E. of Tarras and Philiphaugh, being in his House
in May 1683. Discoursed of an intended rising in England, and of Proposals made
to Scots men, to rise with them, and of London in particular, and that Polwort
was present at that Meeting, and told he was sure the Englishmen intended so,
and that it was Discoursed at that Meeting amongst them, that it were fit to
seize Berwick and Stirling; and that it was talked amongst them of bringing the
Duke of York to Trial, and tha^ the King would abandon him. Sic Subscribitur,

Hugh Scot. Perth, Cancel. Queensberry George Mckenzie. Io. Drummond. George
Mckenzie.



Edinburgh, October 29. 1684.
Sederunt. Lord Chancellor. Lord Secretary. Lord President. Lord Advocat.


THe Lord of Gallowsheils, Prisoner in the Tolbuith of Edinburgh, being Called
and Examined upon Oath, Depons, that in the Month of May 1683. The E. of
Tarras, Hume of Polwort Elder, and Lord of Philiphaugh, came to the Deponents
House, himself being absent, at his coming home, they were speaking of the
Security of the Protestant Religion; and of a Party in England, who would
secure, or seize the King or Duke; and that if any should rise in Arms to
Defend them, or to rescue the King and Duke: There was another Party who would
rise in Arms against them, it was proposed, that some Contrymen should be
spoken to, to try their Resolutions, and that the Resolutions, of England
should be told them, to see if they would concur. But the Deponent does not
remember that this proposition was approven, or undertaken to be done by any
present; nor does he remember who managed the Discourse. It was likewise
proposed, to seize the Officers of State, especially the Chancellor and
Thesaurer, and the said, Sir John Cochran was to come to the West from England,
for advancement of the Design; and that the Earl of Argile was to Land in the
West Highlands, and to raise that Country. Of these matters, all these who
were present Discoursed, as of an Affair that they were agitating, and wherein
themselves were particularly concerned, though at that time they did not
conclude what their carriage should be; The reason why the Deponent cannot be
more particulars is, because he was sometimes going out, and sometimes walking
up and down the Room; and though the Deponent cannot be positive of the very
words; yet he is positive they were either these Words, or Words to that
purpose. Sic subscribitur,

Hugh Scot. Perth Cancellarius.


Edinburgh, December 23. 1684.
HVgh Scot of Gallowsheils being solemnly Sworn in presence of the Justices and
Assize, adheres to the Depositions within, and above-written in all points, Sic
subscribitur.

Hugh Scot. Linlithgow, I. P. D.


HIs Majesty's Advocat in fortification of the former Probation, adduces the
Printed Copy of Mr. William Carstares Depositions, emitted before the Officers
of State, and other Lords of Privy Council, and leaves the same to the Assise,
and uses it as an Adminicle of Probation; for though it was capitulat, that he
should not be made use of as a Witness; yet it was agreed, that the Deposition
should be published: and likewise produces the Principal Deposition signed by
himself, and the said Lords.

THe Lords, Justice-General, Justice-Clerk, and Commissioners of Justiciary,
admit the Paper produced as an Adminicle, and refers the import thereof to the
Inquest, and ordains the Printed Paper as it is Collationed, to be taken in,
and considered by the Inquest.

SIr William Paterson, and Mr. Colin Mckenzie, Clerks of His Majesty's Privy
Council being Interrogat, if they heard Mr. William Carstares own the
Depositions Read, Depons they saw and heard him Swear, and own the same upon
Oath, and they Collationed the Printed Copy with the Original formerly, and
now they heard it Collationed, Sic subscribitur,

Will. Paterson. Colin Mckenzie.



THe Deposition of Mr. William Carstares, when he was Examined before the Lords
of Secret Committee, given in by him, and renewed upon Oath; upon the 22. of
December 1684. in presence of the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council.
Edinburgh Castle, September 8. 1684.
MR. William Carstares being Examined upon Oath, conform to the Condescension
given in by him, and on the Terms therein-mentioned; Depons, That about
November, or December 1682. James Stuart, Brother to the Lord of Cultness,
wrote a Letter to him from Holland, importing, That if any considerable sum of
Money could be procured from England, that something of importance might be
done in Scotland: The which Letter, the Deponent had an inclination to inform
Shepherd in Abb-Church-lane, Merchant in London of; but before he could do it,
he wrote to Mr. Stuart above-named to know from him, if he might do it; and Mr.
Stuart having consented, he communicate the said Letter to Mr. Shepherd, who
told the Deponent that he would communicate the Contents of it to some persons
in England; but did at that time name no body, as the Deponent thinks: Sometime
thereafter, Mr. Shepherd told the Deponent, that he had communicate the Contents
of the Letter abovenamed, to Colonel Sidney, and that Colonel Danvers was
present, and told the Deponent, that Colonel Sidney was averse from employing
the late Earl of Argile, or meddling with him, judging him a man too much
affected to the Royal Family, and inclined to the present Church Government;
yet Mr. Shepherd being put upon it by the Deponent, still urged, that one might
be sent to the Earl of Argile; but as Mr. Shepherd told him, he was suspected
upon the account of his urging so much; yet afterward he pressed, without the
Deponents knowledge, that the Deponent being to go to Holland however, might
have some Commission to the Earl of Argile, which he having informed the
Deponent of, the Deponent told him, that he himself would not be concerned, but
if they would send another, he would introduce him; but nothing of this was
done: upon which the Deponent went over, without any Commission from any body,
to Holland, never meeting with James Stuart abovenamed: He was introduced to
the Earl of Argile, with whom he had never before conversed, and did there
discourse what had past betwixt Mr. Shepherd and him; and particularly, about
remitting of Money to the said Earl from England; of which the said Mr. Stuart
had written to the Deponent, namely of 30000 pounds Sterling; and of the
raising of 1000 Horse and Dragoons; and the securing the Castle of Edinburgh,
as a matter of the greatest importance: The method of doing this was proposed
by the Deponent, to be one hour, or thereby, after the relieving of the Guards:
But the Earl did not relish this Proposition, as dangerous; and that the
Castles would fall of consequence, after the Work abroad was done. James Stuart
was of the Deponents Opinion for seizing the Castle, because it would secure
Edinburgh, the Magazines and Arms; As to the 1000 Horse and Dragoons, my Lord
Argile was of Opinion, that without them nothing was to be done; and that if
that number were raised in England to the said Earl, he would come into
Scotland with them; and that there being so few Horse and Dragoons to meet
them, he judged he might get the Country without trouble, having such a
standing Body for their Friends to Rendezvous to; and the said Earl said he
could show the Deponent the conventient places for Landing, if he understood;
and as the Deponent remembers, where the Ships could attend. The Deponent
remembers not the names of the places. The Deponent spoke to the Lord Stairs;
but cannot be positive that he named the Affair to him, but found him shy: but
the Earl of Argile told him, he thought Stairs might be gained to them: And
that the Earl of Lowdo^n being a man of good Reason, and disobliged, would have
great influence upon the Country, and recommended the Deponent to Major H^lms
with whom the Deponent had some acquaintance before, and had brought over a
Letter from him to the Earl of Argyle; but the Deponent had not then
communicate any thing to the said Holms, James Steuart laid down a way of
correspondence by Ciphers and false Names, and sent them over to Holms, and the
Deponent, for their use (which Ciphers and Names, are now in the hands of His
Majesty's Officers, as the Deponent supposes,) and did desire the Deponent
earnestly to propose the 30000. pound Sterling abovenamed to the party in
England, and did not propose any less; for as the Earl told the Deponent, he
had particularly calculate the Expense for Arms, Ammunition, etc. But James
Steuart said, that if some less could be had, the Earl would content himself,
if better might not be; but the Earl always said, that there was nothing to be
done without the body of Horse and Dragoons abovementioned. During the time of
the Deponent his abode in Holland, tho he had several Letters from Shepard, yet
there was no satisfactory account, till some time after the Deponent parted
from the Earl of Argyle, and was making for a Ship at Rotterdam to transport
himself to England. James Steuart wrote to him that there was hopes of the
Money. The next day after the Deponent came to England, he met with Sir John
Cochran, who, with Commissar Monro, and Ierviswood, was at London before he
came over; and depons, that he knows not the account of their coming, more then
for the perfecting the Transaction about Carolina: and having acquainted Sir
John Cochran with the Earls demands of the 30000 pound Sterling and the 1000.
Horse and Dragoons, Sir John carried him to the Lord Russel, to whom the
Deponent proposed the affair, but being an absolute Stranger to the Deponent,
had no return from him at that time; but afterward having met him accidently
at Mr. Shepards horse, where he the Lord Russel had come to speak to Shepard
about the Money abovenamed, as Mr. Shepard told the Deponent. The Deponent
(when they were done speaking) desired to speak to the Lord Russel, which the
Lord Russel did, and having reiterate the former Proposition for 30000. pound
Sterling, and the 1000. Horse and Dragoons, he the Lord Russel told the
Deponent, they could not get so much raised at the time, but if they had 10000.
pound to begin, that would draw People in, and when they were once in, they
would soon be brought to more; but as for the 1000. Horse and Dragoons, he
could say nothing at the present, for that behoved to be concerted upon the
Borders. The Deponent made the same proposal to Mr. Ferguson, who was much
concerned in the Affair, and zealous for the promoving of it. This Mr. Ferguson
had in October or November before, as the Deponent remembers in a Conversation
with the Deponent in Cheapside, or the Street somewhere thereabout, said, that
for the saving of innocent Blood, it would be necessary to cut off a few,
insinuating the King and Duke, but cannot be positive whether he named them or
not, to which the Deponent said, that is work for our wild People in Scotland,
my Conscience does not serve me for such things; after which the Deponent had
never any particular discourse with Ferguson, as to that matter; but as to the
other Affair, Ferguson told the Deponent that he was doing what he could to get
it effectuate, as particularly that he spoke to one Major Wildman who is not of
the Deponent his acquaintance. Ferguson blamed always Sidney, as driving
designs of his own. The Deponent met twice or thrice with the Lord Melvil, Sir
John Cochran, Ierviswood, Commissar Monro, the two Cessnocks, Mongomery of
Landshaw, and one Mr. Veitch, where they discoursed of Money to be sent to
Argyle, in order to the carrying on the Affair, and tho he cannot be positive
the Affair was named, yet it was understood by himself, and as he conceives by
all present, to be for rising in Arms, for rectifying the Government.
Commissary Monro, Lord Melvil, and the two Cessnocks were against meddling with
the English, because they judged them men that would talk, and would not do,
but were more inclined to do something by themselves, if it could be done. The
Lord Melvil thought every thing hazardous, and therefore the Deponent cannot
say he was positive in any thing, but was most inclined to have the Duke of
Monmouth to head them in Scotland, of which no particular method was laid down.
Ierviswood, the Deponent, and Mr. Veitch, were for taking Money at one of these
Meetings. It was resolved, that Mr. Martin, late Clerk to the Justice Court
should be sent to Scotland, to desire their Friends to hinder the Country from
Rising, or taking rash Resolutions upon the account of the Council, till they
should see how matters went in England. The said Martin did go at the Charges
of the Gentlemen of the Meeting, and was directed to the Lord of Polwart and
Torwoodlie, who sent back word that it would not be found so easy a matter to
get the Gentry of Scotland to concur: But afterward in a Letter to Commissar
Monro, Polwart wrote that the Country was readier to concur then they had
imagined, or something to that purpose. The Deponent, as abovesaid, having
brought over a Key from Holland, to serve himself and Major Holms: he remembers
not that ever he had an axact Copy of it, but that sometimes the one, sometimes
the other kept it, and so it chanced to be in his custody when a Letter from
the Earl of Argyle came to Major Holms, intimating, that he would join with the
Duke of Monmouth, and follow his measures, or obey his Directions. This Mr.
Veitch thought fit to communicate to the Duke of Monmouth, and for the
Understanding of it was brought to the Deponent, and he gave the Key to Mr.
Veitch, who as the Deponent, was informed, was to give it and the Letter to Mr.
Ferguson, and he to show it to the Duke of Monmouth; but what was done in it,
the Deponent knows not. The Deponent heard the Design of Killing the King and
Duke, from Mr. Shepard, who told the Deponent some were full upon it. The
Deponent heard that Aron Smith was sent by those in England to call Sir John
Cochran, on the account of Carolina, but that he does not know Aron Smith, nor
any more of that matter, not being concerned it it. Shepard named young Hamden
frequently as concerned in these Matters.

Signed at Edinburgh Castle, the 8. of September, 1684. and renewed the 18 of
the same Month. William Carstares. PERTH CANCEL. I. P. D.


Edinburgh Castle 18 September 1684.
MR. William Carstares being again Examined, adheres to his former Deposition,
in all the parts of it, and Depones he knows of no Correspondence betwixt
Scotland and England, except by Martin before named; for those Gentlemen to
whom he was sent, were left to follow their own Methods. Veitch sometimes, as
the Deponent remembers, stayed sometimes an Nicolson, Stabler's House, at
London-wall; sometimes with one Widow Hardcastle in More-fields. The Deponent
did Communicate the Design on foot to Doctor Owen, Mr. Griffil, and Mr. Meed,
at Stepney, who all concurred in the promoting of it, and were desirous it
should take effect; and to one Mr. Freth in the Temple, Councellor at Law, who
said that he would see what he could do in reference to the Money, but there
having gone a Report, that there was no Money, to be raised, he did nothing in
it; nor does the Deponent think him any more concerned in the Affair. Nelthrop
frequently spoke to the Deponent of the Money to be sent to Argyle, whether it
was got or not, but the Deponent used no freedom with him in the Affair.
Goodenough did insinuate once, that the Lords were not inclined to the thing,
and that before, they would see what they could do in the City. The Deponent
saw Mr. Ferguson, and Mr. Rumsay, lurking after the Plot broke out, before the
Proclamation, having gone to Ferguson, in the back of Bishopsgate-street, at
some new Building, whether he was directed by Ierviswood, who was desirous to
know how things went. Rumsay was not o^ the Deponent his acquaintance before,
but they knew as little of the matter as the Deponent. This is what the
Deponent remembers, and if any thing come to his Memory, he is to deliver it in
betwixt the first of October. And this is the truth, as he shall answer to God.

William Carstares PERTH, Cancel. I. P. D.


At Edinburgh, the 22. of December, 1684.
THese foregoing Depositions, Subscribed by Mr. William Carstares Deponent, and
by the Lord Chancellor, were acknowledged on Oath by the said Mr. William
Carstares, to be his true Depositions; and that the Subscriptions were his, in
presence of us Under subscribers.

William Carstares. PERTH Cancel. David Falconer. Queensberry. George
Mckenzie, Athol.



HIs Majesty's Advocat for further probation, adduces the Examinations of Mr,
Shepard, taken before Sir Leolin Ienkins Secretary of State for England, with
the Information or Deposition of Mr. Zachary Bourn, relating to the Plot,
signed by him and Secretary Ienkins, of which Depositions the tenors follow.

THe Examination of Thomas Shepard of London Merchant, taken upon Oath before
the Right Honorable Sir Leolin Jenkins Knight, His Majesty's Paincipal
Secretary of State, the 23. day of December. 1683.
THe Deponent says, That Ferguson told him on, or about the Month of April
last, that an Insurrection was intended both in England and in Scotland, and
that for the settling that Affair betwixt the two Nations, Mr. Baillie, Mr.
Monro, Sir John Cochran, Sir Hugh and Sir George Campbels, with some others
(whose names this Deponent heard not) were come to London.

That the Deponent had some acquaintance with Mr. Baillie, Mr. Monro. and Sir
John Cochran, and none at all with Sir Hugh and Sir George Campbels; that Mr.
Baillie told the Deponent, that the Earl of Argile demanded Thirty Thousand
Pounds of the English to capacitat him to begin the business effectually in
Scotland, and that he the said Baillie likewise told the Deponent, that having
concerted things with the Lord Russel and others, he the said Baillie found an
impossibility of raising that Sum; After which the said Baillie had acquainted
the Deponent, that they were certainly promised Ten Thousand Pounds, which Sum
was agreed to be paid into the Deponents hands, in order to be remitted into
Holland, for the providing of Arms; and that the said Baillie told the Deponent
at diverse times, that the said Sum, or at least one half of it would be paid
such a day, and such a day; and sometimes asked the Deponent, if he had
received any part of the said Money, to which the Deponent replied that he had
not, and that he the Deponent scarce thought any would be paid.

And the Deponent also says, that having had some little conversation with Sir
John Cochran, he remembers well, that both of them did sometimes lament the
delays in not paying in the Money, and said, that although the said Ten
thousand Pounds were paid in, they, the said Sir John Cochran and Mr. Monro,
fear^d it would be too little; and this Deponent further says not, as to any
new matter. But the Deponent being asked, to Explain what he thought was meant
by the words above-written, viz. to capacitat him (the Earl of Argile) to begin
the business, he, this Deponent says, that he did understand by the Word
business, an Insurrection in Scotland. Sic subscribitur,

Jurat coram. Thomas Shepard. L. Ienkins.



THe Information of Zachary Bourn of London, Brewer, taken upon Oath, the tenth
day of December 1683. before the Right honorable Mr. Secretary Ienkins.
THe Informant Deposes, and says, that Mr. Baillie set up one Night, if not
two, with Mr. Ferguson, and went several times in the Evening with him to the
Duke of Monmouth, and the chief mannagers of the Conspiracy; That Ferguson told
the Deponent, that he the said Baillie was the chief man for the Scots, next to
the Lord Argile; that the said Baillie did sit up the greatest part of one
night, with the said Ferguson; at which time this Deponent believes they were
busy in preparing the intended Declaration, which the Deponent has the more
reason to believe, in as much as the said Ferguson did go about to show him the
Deponent, such a Paper, wherein the said Ferguson was hindered by the coming up
Stairs of some person, to speak with the said Ferguson, that the said Ferguson
told the Deponent, that the main business of the said Baillie, in meeting the
said Conspirators, was in order to get from them the Ten thousand Pounds,
promised for the buying of Arms, for the Insurrection intended in Scotland.

That the Deponent saw Mr. William Carstares come often to the Lodgings of the
said Ferguson; but that the said Ferguson never told the Deponent of any
Discourse held by him with the said Carstares: and further this Deponent says
not* sic subscribitur,

Zac. Bourn. Jurat coram. L. Ienkins.



HIs Majesty's Advocate likewise produced several Warrands, and Papers to
prove, that those Depositions are signed by Sir Leolin Ienkins.

HIs Majesty's Advocate also produced the Books of Adjournal, bearing Mr.
William Veitch to be a Forefault Traitor, and the Act of Parliament whereby the
Forefaulture is Ratified,

His Majesty's Advocat's Speech to the Inquest.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
YOu have now a Conspiracy against His Majesty's Sacred Person, and Royal
Government, so fully discovered, that they must want Reason as well as Loyalty,
who do not believe the Discovery; and they must be enemies to sincerity, as
well as to the King, who do not acknowledge it. Beside, that the Councils of
all the three Nations, thought the proof sufficient, for Indicting a General
Thanksgiving through all these Nations; and that the Judges of England thought
the same strong enough to infer Forefaulture of Life and Estate, against some
of all Ranks there; you have a Discovery made here from the Late E. of Argiles
own Letters, and the Confession of his own Emissaries, the two surest proofs
that Law ever invented, or the nature of Humane Affairs can allow; and I am
this day to add to all this, a new S^rt of Proofs in the Process that I now
lead against this Pannal, from the Confessions of Noblemen and Gentlemen, who
have been engaged in this wicked Conspiracy; and who from a sense of their
Guilt, are content freely to Depose against their nearest Relation, and their
most intimate Friend, in which having thus cleared to you, that there was
really such a Conspiracy, I shall, in the next place, proceed to prove this
Pannals Accession to it.

It cannot be imagined, that we would willingly involve our Country men in it,
without a Conviction stronger then our kindness to Scotland; nor did His
Majesty's Servants accuse this Pannal, without the opinion of the ablest
Lawyers of the Kingdom, who did, with them concur, to think that there was not
the least occasion of doubting left, to the most indifferent Inqueist of his
guilt, after they had seriously, and with reflection, read over, and pondered
the probation now laid before you.

The Person accused of accession to this Crime is the Ringleader of all those,
who in this Kingdom concurred with the English Conspirators, as you may see by
the Testimonies of all who have Deposed; and it was indeed fit and just to
begin with the most guilty, so that if he be not convicted, there should no man
be punished for this Conspiracy; all the noise we have heard of it, is but a
Cheat, the Kings Judges have been Murderers, all the Witnesses have been
Knaves, and such as dyed for it have been Martyrs.

The Accession charged on the Pannal, is not an accidental escape, nor is it
proved by Witnesses, who can be suspected of unkindnes to his Person, or his
Cause, for it is a long tract of a continued design, gone about with the
greatest deliberation and concern imaginable, and proved by his nearest
Relations, and persons so deeply engadged in that Cause, (for which he
Suffers,) that they were content with him to venture their Lives and Fortunes
in that quarrel. He is not accused of a Crime that can amount only to a single
Murder, though that be a dreadful Crime, but a Rebellion, which was to draw
upon us a Civil War, that Murder of Murders, in which hundreths of thousands
were to fall; and to Crown all, he was to (...)* and to be the (...) a
Rebellion, in which one of the first steps was to kill His Sacred Majesty, and
his Royal Brother; and one of the chief Witnesses which I have led against him,
is Bourn, which Bourn confessed that he was to kill the King, and who confesses
the Pannal sat up several nights with Ferguson, the other contriver of the
Kings Murder, and so familiar was he with him, that Bourn depons, that the said
Pannal had been with Ferguson, at the drawing of the manifesto, whereby he was
not only to be an Actor, but to be the Justifier of that horrid Villainy: and
therefore Bourns depons, that Ferguson, (the best Judge in that case) looked
upon him as the chief man, next to Argyle; But because no man is presumed to go
to such a hight, without previous inclination and motives, I shall to convince
you, that this Gentleman was very capable of all that was lybelled against him,
remember you, that he is Nephew, and Son in Law to the late Waristoun, bred up
in his Family and under his Tutory; about the time of this Plot it was
undenyably known, and is now sufficiently proved, by two present Witnesses, the
Earl of Tarras and Commissar Monro, that he thought himself desperate, knowing
himself to be guilty of Treason by Blackwoods Case; and as it is presumable,
that a man that is guilty of one point of Treason, will commit another; so when
a man is desperate as to his Life and Fortune, he is capable of any thing; he
was likewise animated to commit this Crime, by the intelligence he had that
there was a Plot in England, carried on by men of so great Parts, Fortune and
Influence, and by the too probable hopes, that they would get all the Western
Shires to join with them here, because of the common guilt, in which they had
engadged themselves, by their late extravagances, they made an account of an
assistance of twenty thousand men; and by Philiphaughs Deposition, that these
Gentlemen expected the concurse of the Southern-Shires; and thus, I am to prove
to you a Crime, which is in it self, so probable and liklie, that it should
need little probation, tho I have adduced for your conviction sufficient
evidences, albeit the Crime were in it self very unliklie.

The Crimes which I hope I have proved, are, That Ierviswood the Pannal
transacted for Money to the late Earl of Argyl, a declared Traitor. 2. That he
designed to raise a Rebellion. 3. That he intercommuned with the Earl of Argyl
and Mr. Veitch declared Traitors. 4. That he was present, whe^^ it ^as treated*
either that Argyle should have Money from the English* and assistance from
Scotland, or that a Rebellion should be raised, and that he did not reveal the
famine; and all these being sound relevant separati^n* it is sufficient for me
to have proved any one of them. And if a Gentleman was lately found guilty of
High Treason, by the opinion of all the Lords o^ Session, for not revealing,
that Sir John Cochra^ sought fifty pound Sterling from him, though he refused
the same, and tho he believed, it was sought for a charitable subsistence to
preserve him from starving; what deserves this Pannal, who sought thirty
thousand pound Sterling, to buy him Arms, to invade his Native Country?

That Ierviswood was designing to carry on a Rebellion, or at least was
accessory, or (as our Law terms it) was Art and Part thereof, is clearly
proved; but that in this occult and hidden Crime, which uses not to be proved
by clear witnesses; I may lead you through all the steps of the Probation, which
like the links of a Chain, hang upon one another. You will be pleased to
consider, that 1. It is proved that he desired a blind Commission to go to
England, not to manage the affairs of the Carolina Company, as he confessed,
but to push the People of England to do something for themselves, because they
did only talk and not do; and what he would have them to do, appears too
clearly, because he tells the Earl of Tarras it was probable, that if the King
were briskly put to it by the Parliament of England, he would consent to
exclude the Duke from the Succession: here is not only a Treasonable Design,
(though a design be sufficient in Treason) but here are express acts of Treason
proved, viz. The treating with the Earl of Tarras upon this design, the
settling a Correspondence with him for the prosecution of it, and the writing
Letters from London to him concerning it, and the sending down Mr. Martin to
complete it by a general ^^sing; As he designed to push on the English, so he
prosecutes closely (...) Design upon all occasions. On the Road he complains
cunningly and bitterly, that our Lives, Laws and Liberties, and the Protestant
Religon were in danger, the style and method of all such as design to Rebel;
after he arrives at London, he engages the Conspirators there to assist the
late Earl of Argile, a declared Traitor, with Money to buy Arms; this was
indeed to push the English to do the most dangerous things by the most
dangerous man, and in the most dangerous methods. He enters also in a strict
Correspondence with Ferguson the Contriver, with Shepard the Thesaurer, and
Carstares the Chaplain of the Conspiracy.

Alexander Monro another present Witness, proves that he argued with him, that
it was necessary to give Argile Money expressly for carrying on the Rebellion,
and that they did meet at Ierviswoods Chamber where this was spoke of, and from
which Mr. Robert Martin was sent to their Friends in Scotland to know what they
would do; and though the silly caution was, that they sent him to prevent their
rising, yet a man must renounce common sense, not to see that the design was to
incite them to Rebellion, and to prevent only their doing any thing in this
rebellious design, by which they might lose themselves in a too early and
abortive Insurrection here, till things were ready in England. For, 1. This
Commission was given him in a place, and by a Company who had been themselves
treating immediately before of sending Money to the late E. of Argile to buy
Arms, and certainly those Arms were to be bought for Men, and not for a
Magazine. 2. They were treating how many Men could be raised in Scotland. 3.
Carstares Deposition bears, that Martin was sent to hinder rash Resolutions,
till they saw how Matters went in England, and the return to their Embassy
bore, that it would not be an easy matter to get the Gentry of Scotland to
concur; but afterward better hopes of their rising was given, which could not
have been, if the true Commission had not been to raise Scotland. 4. That Sir
John Cochran made a Speech to that purpose, is expressly proved, and that
Ierviswood spoke to the same purpose, is proved by a necessary consequence; for
since it is proved that he spoke, and that he did not speak against it, it must
necessarily follow that he spoke for it, though the Witness is so cautious,
that he cannot condescend upon the words now after so long a time; and it is
against Sense to think, that Ierviswood who in private pressed the same so much
upon Commissar Monro, and who was the Deacon-Conveener here, and who, as Mr.
Martin their Envoy declared, was the person who was to be sent for the Arms,
should not himself have been the most forward man in that Design, but above all
exitus acta probat, this Commissioner, (who being a mere Servant, durst not
have proposed any thing from himself, being a mean Person, and being one, who,
as the Earl of Tarras deposes, would say nothing, but what was in his Paper:)
does expressly declare, that he came from Ierviswood and others; and in the
meeting with him, a Rebellion is actually formed, and it is resolved, they
should seize the King's Officers of State, Garrisons, and Forces, and that they
should join with the late E. of Argyle, and put their own Forces in a condition
to join with these Forces that were to come from England, and they gave a Sign,
and a Word, which uses only to be done in actual War; So here is Treason
clearly proved, by two present Witnesses, from the first Design to it is last
perfection.

Nor can it be objected, that they are not concurring Witnesses, but testes
singulares upon separat Acts, for in reiterable Crimes, Witnesses deposing upon
different Acts; do prove if the deeds tend to the same end; as for instance, if
one Witness should depose, that they saw a Traitor sit in a Council of War, in
one place, and in another place, they saw him in Arms, or that one saw him
assist at a Proclamation in one place, and saw him in Arms in another; or that
one saw him writ a Treasonable Paper, and another saw him use it; These
Witnesses are still considered as contestes, or concurring Witnesses, and ten
or twelve Inqueists have so found, and upon their Verdict, Rebels have been
lately hanged. The learned Judges of England being all met together did
expressly find, that one Witness proving, that A. B. said, that he was going to
buy a Knife to kill the King, and another deposing, that he saw him buy a
Knife, without telling for what, that these two Witnesses were contestes, and
proved sufficiently the Crime of Treason, yet there the one Witness, proved only
a remote Design, and the other an Act, which was indifferent of it is own
nature, and became only Treasonable by the Connection; But no Witnesses ever
Deposed upon things so coherent, and so connected together, as these do, for
they depose still upon the same person, carrying on the same Design of a
Rebellion; as to which, in one place, he is exciting his own Nephew, and
telling him his Resolutions, and settling a Correspondence with him, at another
time, he presses Commissar Monro to the same Rebellion. At a third, He holds a
meeting at his own Chamber, and speaks concerning it, and from that meeting, he
sends a Trusty, who forms the Rebellion. Besides all this, tho two Witnesses
be sufficient, I have adduced Mr. William Carstares Chief Conspirator, and who
choos'd rather to suffer violent Torture, than to disclose it, he likewise
Deposes upon all these steps, and connects them together, and this his
Deposition is twice reiterated, upon Oath, after much premeditation. And I
likewise adduce two Depositions taken upon Oath, by Sir Leolin Ienkins, who was
empowered by the Law of England, and at the command of the King, and the
Council of England, upon a Letter from His Majesty's Officers of State here, In
which Deposition, Shepard, one of the Witnesses, deposes, that Baillie came
frequently to him, and desired him to advance the Money, and lamented the
delays, and that there was so little to be advanced; and who should be better
believed then one who was his own Trusty, and a Person who was able to advance
so great a Sum; Bourn, another of the Witnesses, Deposes, that Ferguson told
him, that the Pannal spoke frequently to him concerning the same Money, and
that he sat up several nights with Ferguson upon the said Conspiracy; and who
should be better believed then Fergusons confident, and one who was so far
trusted in the whole affair, that he was to take away that Sacred Life, which
Heaven has preserved by so many Miracles.

Against these three Depositions, you have heard it objected, that non
testimonia sed testes probant, especially by our Law, in which, by an express
Act of Parliament, no Probation is to be led, but in presence of the Assise and
Pannal. To which it is answered, that these Depositions are not mere
Testimonies; for I call a Testimony, a voluntar Declaration, emitted without an
Oath, and a Judge; but these Depositions are taken under the awe of an Oath,
and by the direction of a Judge. 2. Shepard was confronted with the Pannal
himself, and he had nothing to say against him; whereas the great thing that
can be objected against Testimonies (and by our Statute especially) is that if
the Party who emits the Testimony had been confronted with the Pannal; the
impression of seeing a person that was to die, by his Deposition, would have
made him afraid to Depose laxly; and the Pannal likewise might, by proposing
Interrogators and Questions, have cleared himself, and satisfied the Judges in
many things Deposed against him: But so it is that Mr. Shepard having been
confronted with the Pannal, before the King Himself, who is as ^ar above other
Judges, in His Reason and Justice, as He is in His Power and Authority; He
Deposes that the Pannal was the chief Mannager of this Conspiracy, next to
Argile, and that he was so passionate to have this Money to buy Arms, that he
lamented the delays; and can it be imagined that Mr. Shepard whom he trusted
with his Life and his Fortune, and whom all their Party trusted with their
Cash, would have Deposed any thing against him that was not true, especially
when he knew that what he was to Depose, was to take away his Life and his
Fortune; or that if the Pannal had been innocent, he would not when he was
confronted with Mr. Shepard, before the King Himself, have roared against Mr.
Shepard, if he had not been conscious to his own Guilt. There is a surprise in
innocence, which makes the innocent exclaim, and it inspires men with a
courage, which enables them to confound those who Depose falsely against them;
and in what occasion could either of these have appeared, more than in this,
wherein this Gentleman was charged to have Conspired with the greatest of
Rascals, against the best of Princes; and that too in presence of the Prince
himself, against whom he had Conspired; but Guilt stupifies indeed, and it did
never more than in this Gentleman's Case, whose silence was a more convincing
Witness than Mr. Shepard could be. Mr. Carstares likewise knew when he was to
Depone, that his Deposition was to be used against Ierviswood, and he stood
more in awe of his love to his Friend, than of the fear of the Torture, and
hazarded rather to die for Ierviswood, than that Ierviswood should die by him:
How can it then be imagined, that if this man had seen Ierviswood in his Trial,
it would have altered his Deposition; or that this kindness, which we all
admired in him would have suffered him to forget any thing in his Deposition,
which might have been advantageous in the least to his Friend: And they
understand ill this hight of Friendship, who think that it would not have been
more nice and careful, than any Advocate could have been: and if Carstares had
forgot at one time, would he not have supplied it at another; but especially at
this last time, when he knew his Friend was already brought upon his Trial: and
that this renewed Testimony was yet a further confirmation of what was said
against him; and albeit the Kings Servants were forced to engage, that
Carstares himself should not be made use of as a Witness against Ierviswood;
yet I think this kind scrupulosity in Carstares for Ierviswood, should convince
you more than twenty suspect, nay than even indifferent Witnesses; nor can it
be imagined, that the one of these Witnesses; would not have been as much
afraid of God, and his Oath at London, as at Edinburgh; and the other in the
Council Chamber in the Forenoon, as in the Justice-Court in the Afternoon.

3. The Statute founded on, does not discharge the producing of Testimonies
otherways than after the Jury is enclosed; for then indeed they might be
dangerous, because the party could not object against them: But since the
Statute only discharges to produce Writ, or Witnesses, after the Jury is
enclosed; it seems clearly to insinuat, that they ought to prove when they are
produced in presence of the Party himself, as now they are. And though the
Civil Law did not allow their Judges to believe Testimonies, because they were
confined to observe strict Law; yet it does not from that follow, that our
Juries, whom the Law allows to be a Law to themselves, and to be confined by no
Rule, but their Conscience, may not trust entirely to the Depositions of
Witnesses, though not taken before themselves, when they know that the
Witnesses, by whom, and the Judges, before whom these Depositions were emited,
are persons beyond all suspicion, as in our case. But yet for all this, I
produce these Testimonies, as Adminicles here only to connect the Depositions
of the present Witnesses, and not to be equivalent to Witnesses in this legal
Process; albeit, as to the conviction of mankind, they are stronger than any
ordinary Witnesses.

When you, my Lords and Gentlemen, remember that it is not the revenge of a
private party, that accuses in this case; and that even in private Crimes, such
as Forgery, or the murder of Children, etc. many Juries here have proceeded
upon mere presumptions, and that even Solomon himself, founded his illustrious
Decision, approved by God Almighty, upon the presumed assertion of a mother; I
hope ye will think two Friends Deposing, as present Witnesses, adminiculated
and connected by the Depositions of others, though absent; should beget in you
an entire belief, especially against a Pannal, who has been always known to
incline this way, and who, though he was desired in the Tolbooth to vindicate
himself from those Crimes, would not say any thing in his own defense, and
though he offers to clear himself of his accession to the Kings murder, yet
says nothing to clear himself from the Conspiracy entered into with the late
Earl of Argile, for invading his Native Country, which is all that I here
Charge upon him, and which he inclines to Justify, as a necessary mean for
redressing Grievances; I must therefore remember you, that an Inquest of very
worthy Gentlemen did find Rathillet guilty, tho there was but one Witness led
against him, because when he was put to it, he did not deny his accession: And
two Rogues were found guilty in the late Circuit at Glascow, for having
murdered a Gentleman of the Guard, though no man saw them kill him; but the
murderers having been pursued, they run to the place out of which the Pannals
then accused were taken, none having seen the face of the Runaweys; and the
Pannals being accused: and pressed to deny the accession, shunned to disown the
Guilt, but desired it might be proved against them. This may convince you that
there are Proofs which are stronger then Witnesses; and I am sure that there
were never more proving Witnesses then in this case, nor were the Depositions
of Witnesses ever more strongly adminiculated. Remember the danger likewise of
emboldening Conspiracies against the Kings Sacred Life, and of encouraging a
Civil War, wherein your selves and your Posterity may bleed, by making the
least difficulty to find a man Guilty by the strongest Proofs that ever were
adduced in so latent a Crime as a Conspiracy is. And I do justly conclude, that
whoever denis that a Conspiracy can be thus proved, does let all the World see
that he inclines that Conspiracies should be encouraged and allowed. Our Age is
so far from needing such Encouragements, that on the other hand in this, as in
all other Crimes, because the Guilt grows frequent and dangerous, the Probation
should therefore be made the more easy, tho in this Case the King needs as
little desire your Favor, as fear your Justice. And I have insisted so much
upon this Probation, rather to convince the World of the Conspiracy, than you
that this Conspirator is Guilty.

THereafter the Lords Ordained the Assize to enclose, and return their Verdict
to morrow by Nine a Clock in the morning.

Edinburgh, December 24. 1684.
THe said day, The Persons who past upon the Assie of Mr. Robert Baillie of
Ierviswood, returned their Verdict in presence of the said Lords; whereof the
Tenor follows. The Assize, all in one Voice, finds the Crimes of Art and Part
in the Conspiracy, and Plot Libelled; and of concealing, and not revealing the
same, clearly proven against Mr. Robert Baillie the Pannal, in respect of the
Depositions of Witnesses and Adminicles adduced. Sic subscribitur,

Strathmore Chancellor.


AFter opening and reading of the which verdict of Assyze, The Lords, Justice
General, Justice Clerk, and Commissioners of Justiciary* therefore, by the
mouth of James Iohnstoun Dempster of Court, Decerned and Adjudged the said Mr.
Robert Baillie of Ierviswood to be taken to the Market Cross of Edinburgh, this
twenty fourth day of December instant, betwixt two and four a clock in the
afternoon, and there to be hanged on a Gibbet till he be dead, and his Head to
be cut off, and his Body to be Quartered in four, and his head to be affixt on
the Nether-bow of Edinburgh, and one of his Quarters to be affixt on the
Tolbooth of Iedburgh, another on the Tolbooth of Lanerk, a third on the
Tolbooth of Air, and a fourth on the Tolbooth of Glasgow; And ordains his Name,
Fame, Memory, and Honors to be extinct, his Blood to be Tainted, and his Arms
to be riven forth, and delate out of the Books of Arms, so that his Posterity
may never have Place, nor be able hereafter to bruik, or joyse any Honors,
Offices, Titles or Dignities, within this Realm in time coming; and to have
Forfaulted, Ammitted and Tint all and sundry his Lands, Heritages, Tacks,
Steadings, Rooms, Possessions, Goods and Gear whatsoever, pertaining to him, to
Our Sovereign Lords use, to remain perpetually with His Highness, in Property,
which was pronunced for Doom.

Sic subscribitur. LINLITHGOW. James Foulis, I. Lockhart, David Balfour, Roger
Hog, Al. Seton, P. Lion.

Extracted forth of the Books of Adjournal, by me Mr. Thomas Gordon, Clerk to
the Justice Court, sic subscribitur.

THO. GORDON.




In pursuance of which Sentence, His Majesty's Heralds, and Pursevants, with
their Coats displayed (after sound of Trumpets,) Did publicly, in face of the
Court (conform to the custom, in the Sentences of Treason) in His Majesty's
Name and Authority, Cancel, Tear and Destroy the said Mr. Robert Baillie his
Arms, threw them in his Face, trampled them under foot; And ordained his Arms
to be expunged out of the Books of Herauldry, his Posterity to be ignoble, and
never to enjoy Honor and Dignity in time coming: And thereafter went to the
Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and solemnly Tore and Cancelled the said Mr. Robert
Baillie his Arms, and affixed the famine on the said Mercat Cross Reversed,
with this Inscription; The Arms of Mr. Robert Baillie late of Jerviswood
Traitor.

FINIS

