portrait of Charles Howard, 1st Earl of Carlisle The Right Honble: Charles,
Earl of Carlisle, vico^^^ Howard of Morpeth, Baron Dacre of Gilsland* Lord
Lieutenant in the Counties of Cumberland and Westmoreland, and one of the Lords
of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council. etc.
(...) fec.


A Relation Of Three EMBASSIES From his Sacred MAJESTY Charles II TO THE Great
Duke of MUSCOVIE, The King of SWEDEN, and The King of DENMARK.

Performed by the Right Hoble the EARL of CARLISLE in the Years 1663 and 1664.

Written by an Attendant on the Embassies, and published with his Lps
Approbation.

LONDON, Printed for John Starkey at the Miter in Fleetstreet near Temple-Barr.
1669.

To his Excellency the Right Honorable Charles Earl of Carlisle, Viscount
Howard of Morpeth, Baron Dacre of Gillesland, Lord Lieutenant in the Counties
of Cumberland and Westmorland, One of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council, and at this present Ambassador Extraordinary to the King of Sweden.
My Lord,
WHen I consider the Perfections and Sublime Qualifications wherewith Nature
has so advantagiously adorned Your E^cellency, I cannot but think, would be an
injury to the Public^ should I omit to attempt some de^lineation thereof. And
seeing (...) is no new thing for others to b^ ambitious of describing the
Actio^ of Great Men, it is but reasonab^ that I, who for sometime have bee^ an
ocular witness of those of You^ Lordships, should erect a Mon^ment for
Posterity of the same. Upon this account it is that I no^ publish this Work,
under Your Excellencies favorable Protection, b^ which it is manifest, that
Your Excellency has born the Charact^^ of Your Prince through three fo^raign
Nations with all imaginab^^ Prudence and Honor. There is nothing to be seen in
the whole S^ries of Your Lordships Conduc^ but what is generous and Noble and
in which Your Excellency makes it appear with what Reason and judgment His
Majesty made choice of Your Person for the Representation of his own, under
the Illustrious Title of His AMBASSADOR EXTRAORDINARY. Which same Honor, being
now conferred upon You again, is a sufficient Proof of the Verity of my
Sentement: and, without further Enlarging upon Your Lordships Worth, I believe
the Knowledge alone of Your Lordship is sufficient to render You beloved: which
yet one cannot do, but with a most profound respect. For my part, my Lord, if I
have any Ambition in the Publication of this Work (of which Your Excellency is
both the Subject and Ornament) it is only that I may have the Advantage to
testify to the World with how much Zeal and Devotion. I am

MY LORD, Your Excellencies Most humble, and most Faithful servant G. M.

The Authors Preface to the Reader.
IT was the saying of an Ancient, That the Spirit of Man affects Novelties,
which is justified by daily Observation. For any thing to which a man is
accustomed long, commonly grows unpleasant; whereas Variety delights him, and
rescues his Imagination from the tediousness of ordinary Objects. Hence is the
desire men have naturally to Travail: and though it withdraws one from his
Relations and Country, and exposes him to several incommodities and perils,
yet the pleasure of his Voyage preponderates all apprehensions, and renders all
discouragements contemptible and vain. And as there is Pleasure in Travailing,
so it has in my judgment its Vtility likewise, and its Profit as well as
Diversion. Of this Homer seems to be sensible, when amongst all the Elogies and
Encomiums he gives to Ulysses, one of the principal was, That he had seen
several Countries, and made Observation of their Fashions and Manners. Ever
since I understood, that the World was not altogether shut up in my own
Country, I have had a constant inclination to travail, and in my travels a
curiosity to observe (according to my talent) what I thought most considerable.
In the Voyage I had the honor to make with the Right Honorable the Earl of
Carlisle during his Embassies to Moscovy, Sweden, and Denmark, I had a
particular opportunity to gratify my self. And, forasmuch as Moscovy is a
Country little known, saving to its Neighbors, I fixed my design there more
particularly, and resolved to inform my self, as exactly as was possible, of
the nature of that Country and its Inhabitants. In the mean time I observed
also all the remarkable passages of our Travails, but especially the pompous
solemnities wherewith the Ambassador was received: and as I had besides, the
advantage of being employed about the Negotiation, I neglected nothing of that
whereby I might instruct my self of States-business. The Voyage being over I
put my Memoires in order, and framed them into a continued discourse, so that
afterward I had the satisfaction now and then to review all what I had seen. I
communicated what I had done with some of my Friends, who found the subject too
good to be buried in oblivion, and wanted not arguments to invite me to Print
it. But then I was not yet of that mind, being very careful how I exposed my
self to the Censure of the World, and I took always that enterprise to be too
dangerous and bold: Nam nulli tacuisse nocet, nocet esse locutum. Yet seeing at
last, that I might do it under my Lord of Carlisles Protection, and with a
full Permission, I thought nothing could excuse me, if I neglected a thing
wherein his Excellencies Interest, the Publicks, and my own perhaps were
concerned.

And accordingly, besides the General Description of the Voyage, and the manner
wherewith the Ambassador was received, the Reader will find in the Relation of
the first Embassy, an exact Description of Moscovy, and of all that passed
there in his Excellencies Negotiation. There I display the naked truth of the
business, how contrary to the expectations of all Europe his Excellency was
treated there, after so many effectual testimonies of Friendship the King of
great Britain and the Tzar of Moscovy had received from one onother. There a
man shall see how unworthily some of the Tzars Commissioners dealt with my Lord
Ambassador, and made such an Embassy fruitless, how instead of taking care for
the preservation of that Amity, which for so long time had continued betwixt
the Crowns of England and Moscovy, they suffered themselves to be so far
transported, as to become instrumental in the diminution thereof. And this is
clear thorough the whole Series of the Negotiation, in which on the one side
there is nothing to be seen but a just and well grounded deduction of reasons,
tending only to the reinforcement of the ancient Alliance: Whereas on the other
it is plain their blind interest had prepossessed them, and that they were
contented to be Friends for the future, but upon condition (it seems) they
should be required no more to give any fair and competent testimonies of their
being such. This is the unexpected humor wherein his Excellency found the
Court of Moscovy, who causlesly disliking his whole manner of proceeding, found
fault with those very actions which were generous and honorable in him. And
indeed, why that Court should have opposed it self so obstinately against his
Lordship, I know no other reason, but because his Lordship acted with much Zeal
and Vigor for the Interest of the King and his Subjects, and because he would
not prostitute the dignity of his Office to the ridiculous pride of a Stolnick
or a Boyar, nor patiently endure several disobligations in their manner of
proceeding. In the Courts of Sweden and Denmark, during our small Residence
amongst them, it was clear otherwise: For there his Excellence received all
manner of satisfaction, being laden with praise and honor, and in short used
with as much kindness and respect as could be expected from two Nations, whose
Politeness and Vrbanity are clear different from the Humor of the Moscovite;
So that in changing of Climates, we found also a great difference of Humors.
From whence it is easy to be seen, that if the Court of Moscovy were not
favorable to my Lord Ambassador, it was only Prepossession and Interest which
hindered them from making a right estimate both of his person and affair: For
it is most certain his Excellency employed all imaginable endeavors, and that
nothing obstructed them but a fatal Pertinacity in those that treated with him.
This being in general the nature and success of these Embassies, the first
makes the greatest part of my history: for the other two Embassies being
speedily performed, affoard but little matter besides the Complements, which
the Ambassador made in the behalf of his Royal Master to the Kings and Queens
of Sweden and Denmark. But the thing that concludes this Work is an Apology,
presented by his Excellency soon after his return to London, against the
pretensions of those Ambassadors whom the Tzar had sent to the King after the
first Embassy, to complain of his Excellencies comportment in that Court. In
this Apology his Lordship gives for his justification a large Narrative of the
manner both of his own proceeding, and of that of the Moscovites toward him,
to the Russ Ambassadors confusion, who had laid an heinous charge against him.
Thus having given here a general account of these Embassies, I leave the
perusing of the whole Work to the Reader: intending to have it shortly
published also in French, the Copy being now ready for the Press.

ERRATA.
PAge 25. last line read, of this Entry. p. 32. l. 5. for they change r. there
are some Gourds that change. p. 37. 23. r. with one small oar. p. 43. l. 4. r.
tops, and l. 10. for furr r. felt. p. 56. l. 7. r. than they do. p. 60. l. 24.
r. short sighted. p. 65. l. 27. r. illuminated. p. 68. last l. r. Altin. p. 83.
l. 26. r. streets. p. 93. l. 21. dele and, and l. 29. r. Shousca. p. 104. l. 2.
r. fell, and l. 20. r. which. p. 118. l. 15. r. fumosi. p. 120. l. 22. r. Me.
p. 151. l. 25. r. amazed. p. 159. l. 26. r. India. p. 160. l. 9. r. subjungit.
p. 177. l. 6. r. great Prince p. 180. l. 12. r. himself. p. 215. l. 27. r.
Serena. p. 228. l. 25. r. remotis. p. 235. l. 1. r. tam longam. p. 239. l. 6.
r. nisi. p. 242. l. 26. r. recensere p. 243. l. 4. r. que. p. 245 l. 23. r.
excedere, and last l. r. dixerint. p. 253. l. 23 r. Tzarskoy Majesty. p. 288.
l. 11 for and r. from. p. 309. l. 3. dele and p. 315 l. 1 r. intuitu. p. 325 l.
16 for re r. ne. p. 354. l. 14. r. that friendship. p. 357 l. 2 r. contribuere,
and l. 11. r. effusissimam. p. 367 l. 1. for who r. and his Majesty. p. 384. l.
12 for only r. But not far from it. p. 392 ^. 13. r. constitutae. p. 396. l.
14. after Queen r. his Excellency received. p. 417. l. 2. r. afflaverint.

Having seen the Relation of my Embassies into Moscovy, Sweden, and Denmark,
written by G. M. I do hereby give him leave to print and publish the same.

Carlisle.
The 30. of November 1668. Licensed

March the 26. 1669: Roger L' Estrange



The Table.
THe Occasion of these Embassies Page 1 and 2 The whole extent of the Voyage
Page 5 Of our Voyage from London to Archangel Page 6 Of the Ambassadors Entry
into Archangel Page 23 The Description of Muscovy Page 26 The Russes Origin
Page 39 Their Shape and Proportion Page 39 Their Habits Page 40 Their Language
Page 43 Their Nature and Genius Page 44 Their manner of living in economy Page
49 Their Women have great respect for their Husbands Page 51 How they use
Bath-stoves which are very common amongst them Page 53 There manner of
Divertisements Page 54 Under what Policy they live, and what kind of Government
they have Page 56 The Greatness, Riches, and absolute Power of their Tzar Page
58 The great Humility his Subjects express to him Page 60 Three general Maxims
whereby the Russians are kept under a strict Discipline Page 61 What kind of
Magistrates the Tzar keeps under him Page 66 Their Lawsuits are quickly
dispatched Page 67 Their manner of punishment Page 67 Their Coin Page 68 What
time they begin their day and their year Page 69 Their Religion Page 70 Of the
Ambassadors Stay at Archangel, and how unmannerly his Pristaf showed himself
when first he received him. Page 79 A short Description of the Samojedes Page
83 The Preparations for our Voyage to Vologda Page 85 Of his Excellences Voyage
from Archangel to Vologda Page 86 A passage therein of a rude and stubborn
Governor of a Province Page 90 Of the Ambassadors residence in Vologda. Page
95 How ill we were used there some three or four weeks Page 96 and 97 Of our
Journey from Vologda to Mosco in sledges Page 107 Our preparations for our
Entry into Mosco Page 113 The description of the Entry, about which the
Ambassador received two or three affronts, and the Letter he sent thereupon to
the Great Duke Page 115 A Description of Mosco Page 135 The manner of our living
there Page 139 The preparations for the Audience, the presents from the King to
the Great Duke, and how my Lord went to the Palace Page 143 The Pomp and
splendour of that Court, as we saw it at this Audience Page 147 The Speech which
the Ambassador made in the name of the King his Master to the Grand Duke Page
164 Some remarkable passages of this Audience after the Speech was ended. Page
180 Another short Audience two days after Page 184 The beginning of my Lords
Negotiation with six Lords Commissioners, whom the Tzar had appointed him Page
185 The unexpected answer given to his Excellency about his business Page 248
Some smart Replies since given on both sides Page 196 A Speech said at a
Private Audience by my Lord Ambassador to the Tzar about the ill success of his
business Page 248 His Excellence demanded Reparation from Pronchiss of one of
his Pristafs and one of the Commissioners, as having affronted him in several
points Page 278 Some other passages of the Negotiation Page 280 The Ambassadors
Complement to the Great Duke when he took his leave of him Page 288 Some
Memorable Passages that had happened besides during our residence at Mosco, and
first the description of a Feast which the Tzar had made us Page 290 A
Narrative of a noble Procession on Palm Sunday Page 295 Three several
Conflagrations we saw in a little time Page 301 A Duel between one of my Lords
Domestics and a Scotch man, an Officer in the Tzars Militia Page 302 How the
Ambassador refused the Presents which the Tzar sent him Page 302 Of his
Excellences Journey from Mosco to Riga Page 306 A new business that fell out
about Calthof, at our departure from Mosco, and the Letter my Lord Embssador
sent to Mosco since about it, which angered the Tzar very much upon occasion of
a ridiculous mistake on their side Page 313 The danger we were in to be robbed
at the Frontiers, and how we were conveyed by 500 soldiers, by the care of the
Governor of Plesco Page 322 Another Letter sent by my Lord from Plesco about
Calthof Page 324 How his Excellence was met at the Frontiers by two Swedish
Officers sent from Riga by the Governor General of Livonia Page 332 A short
Description of Livonia or Lifland Page 332 Of the Ambassadors Entry into Riga
and his Residence there Page 338 Of our Voyage from Riga to Stockholme Page 342
Of his Excellences Entry into Stockholme Page 349 Of our Residence at
Stockholme, wherein is contained a Description of the City Page 351 The
Audience Page 353 My Lords Negotiation Page 361 Some Particular Passages during
our stay in this Court Page 362 My Lords last Audience Page 368 Of our Voyage
from Stockholme to Copenhagen Page 375 Of our Residence at Copenhagen, wherein
is contained a Description of the City Page 384 The Audience Page 385 My Lords
Negotiation Page 400 Some particular Passages during our stay in this Court
Page 406 My Lords last Audience Page 413 Of his Excellences Voyage from
Copenhagen to London Page 424 My Lords Apology against the Russ Ambassador.
Page 535
FINIS.
A RELATION Of Three EMBASSIES From his Sacred Majesty CHARLES II. Into
MOSCOVY, SWEDEN, And DENMARK, Performed in the Years 1663, and 1664.
THe most Serene and most Mighty Prince CHARLES the SECOND, King of Great
Britain, etc. being happily ^estored to His Dominions, which the malice and
iniquity of this age had deprived him ^f, His Alliance (which had been
interrupted ^uring his misfortunes) was by the rest of the ^hristian Princes
immediately re-desired. To which end their several Ambassadors were dis^atched
with extraordinary Pomp and Splen^our, suitable to the Dignity and Grandeur of
^im it had pleased God to restore. But amongst all the Princes of Europe, that,
by their congratulations of his Re-establishment, seemed ardently to aspire at
His Alliance, the Tzar of Moscovy had the most equitable pretentions. For,
besides that admirable Sympathy which has been so long time betwixt the Kings
of England and the great Dukes of Moscovy, Alexey Michailovitz the present Duke
had so great an abhorrency of the murder of King CHARLES the First, that he
resolved in some measure to revenge it upon the English Company at Archangel,
whom he looked upon as assertors if not associates in the Rebellion. And as a
certain instance of the constancy of his affection, he no sooner understood the
calamities Our present King was reduced to, but he assisted him immediately
with a considerable sum of money. From hence it was that his Majesty gave his
Ambassadors so great a Reception, as made the Friendship he had for that great
Monarch conspicuous to all the World.

And it was this Embassage from the Tzar, and those from the Kings of Sweden
and Denmark, that gave occasion to his Majesty of Great Britain to return
these, which are the present matter of this Relation: The first Embassy was
addressed to the Great Duke of Moscovy, The second to the King of Sweden, The
third to the King of Denmark. It is true, the first had, beside That, a
peculiar subject of Importance, touching Commerce at Archangel in Moscovie,
viz. To obtain a re-establishment of the Privileges of the English Company,
which consisted in this, That the Merchants of this Kingdom did formerly trade
into that place without paying any Impost. Which Immunity was but a generous
recompense, that one of the former Dukes, Ivan Basilovitz, made the English for
their discovery of that Port, and introduction of so considerable a Commerce
thither.

The present Great Duke had vacated these Privileges in the time of the late
Rebellion in England, because conceiving the Merchants accomplices in that
rebellion, he esteemed them unworthy of his favor, and therefore of enjoying
any longer these Immunities. The Company having since that time, to the happy
Return of his Majesty, been deprived of their Privileges, the King by this
Embassage desired things might be restored to their former state, and that upon
two principal considerations. One, because his Subjects (for whose rebellion
they were taken away,) were returned again to their obedience; The other,
because these very Privileges were the basis and foundation, upon which the
Amity betwixt the two Crowns of England and Moscovy were superstructed. And
these were two fundamental Reasons, that were strong enough to induce his
Majesty to hope for success in his Demand, but he could expect no less from the
generosity and promise of the Tzar. Yet He was flatly refused, as if the Tzars
kindness had been already quite exhausted.

The Earl of Carlisle, to whom the King encharged these Embassies was without
contradiction, in all respects proper for the employment. For, besides that he
was of a comely and advantageous stature, a Majestic mine, and not above four
and thirty years of age, he had a peculiar grace and vivacity in his discourse,
and in his actions a great promptitude and diligence. In a word, he was adorned
with all perfections that could render a man acceptable, and especially with
those that were requisite for the discharge of so important an affair.

Gratior est pulchro veniens e corpore virtus. Virg. His Train consisted of
near fourscore persons; amongst which he had ten Gentlemen, six Pages, two
Trumpets, and twelve Footmen. He had also a Chaplain, several Interpreters, a
Surgeon, six Musicians, besides many Tradesmen that were very necessary in
Moscovy. And forasmuch as his Excellence was to begin that way the circle of
his Embassies, (to the end he might come back by Liefland into Sweden, by
Sweden into Denmark; and from thence come into England) before his departure he
provided himself of all such necessary things as Russia could scarce afford. So
that, besides the Liveries which were made at London, he was also forced to
provide himself of Beds and Chairs, and even of all Kitchin-moveables, only the
Chimney excepted, and that would have been too most serviceable in several
places. Besides these, his Majesty provided his Excellency with a magnificent
Canopy of red Damask, surrounded with a gold and silver Fringe, and having on
the back in a large circle the Arms of the King of England, richly embroidered
with silver, together with a very rich Chair of State having its Footstool. For
other things it is the custom of the Tzar to defray the charges of all foreign
Ambassadors from their Entrance into his Dominions, till the time they are out
of them.

In short, all things being thus provided, we prepared to depart in the month
of July 1663. but before we come to the particular relation of our Voyage, it
will not be incongruous to give some general notions of its extent.

The whole Voyage contained at least eighteen hundred leagues, that is to say,
upon the Northern Seas betwixt London and Archangel, seven hundred and fifty:
from Archangel to Vologda by water up the Rivers Duina and Sucagna in Moscovy,
two hundred and fifty leagues; after that an hundred leagues at least from
Vologda to Mosco, by Land. So that the way the Ambassador went, his Voyage from
London to Mosco (which is the Metropolitan in Moscovy) made up eleven hundred
leagues. From Mosco to Riga the principal City in Livonia, we traveled two
hundred and fifty leagues, the most part by Land, which said Town is under the
Dominion of the King of Sweden. From Riga we passed an hundred leagues upon the
Baltic Sea to Stockholm, the capital City in Swedeland. From Stockholm by Sea
also an hundred leagues more to Copenhagen in Denmark, where his Excellence
concluded his Embassies. And from thence returning to London, he made a Tour at
the least of two hundred and fifty leagues more.

Of our Voyage from London to Archangel.
THere were two Vessels appointed for this Voyage: One, a Man of war of 50.
pieces of Ordnance, The other a Merchants ship; which last set sail before the
other with twenty two of his Lordships Domestics, of which number I was one. A
great part of his baggage, and of the Presents his Majesty sent to the great
Duke, were disposed in this Vessel also, besides eight Coach horses. In this
manner we embarked from London for Gravesend, where our ship lay at anchor in
the Thames, with the Man of war, in which the Ambassador was to come after us
very shortly.

But after we were embarked, there was an unlucky accident befell one of our
Company, who fell down upon the hatches, and hurt himself in several places of
his body; so that we thought fit to get him carried immediately ashore into
Gravesend, where he found himself so ill, that we concluded his journey would
be at an end before it was well begun. This person was of the number of them to
whom the generosity of the Ambassador had given leave to transport themselves
for Moscovie, and to cross those Countries with his Train. His Excellence being
arrived at Gravesend in order to his embarkment, received him into his Vessel,
where in a short time he recovered so well, that he made a match with one of
the Maidservants, and so gave us afterward the entertainment of a Marriage at
Mosco. However this fall proved to be but a happy fall, forasmuch as by that
means he leapt out of a Merchants ship into one of the King's Men of war well
provided, and much happier in this Voyage than ours. There they were
entertained all the way with the sound of Trumpets, and the melody of Music,
whilst we (Strangers to all these divertisements) had no other harmony than
what is ordinarily concomitant with the sickness of the Sea; in which the most
of us bore our parts.

On the 15th. of July we set sail from Gravesend, with a favorable gale to
fall down the River. But shortly after the wind turned so cross and violent,
that for the space of seven or eight days we were all in a very sad and dismal
consternation, and those chiefly who were but strangers to these confusions as
yet. It is true we had now and then a little calm weather, and chiefly the 21.
which gave us the opportunity of entertaining our selves with the sight of a
Porpoise of an exceeding bigness, for a full quarter of an hour. She gave us
great diversion with her constant plungings and leapings in the water, on each
side of our Ship, as if she had come on purpose to make us that Recreation.
But, as if all that had been but so many presages of a grievous Storm, and a
Prognostication of crosses impending us, presently after the wind was at
North-East, which was directly contrary and continued there four days with a
very great violence. And so that Sea, which in the calm appeared like an azure
field, wherein the fishes sported themselves with the wanton expressions of
their joy, on a sudden became a place of horror, of mountains, and abysses,
combating one another by the violence of the winds, the foaming waves tossing
up our Vessel to the clouds, and in an instant re-plunging it in the bottom of
the Sea; and the Ocean after so pleasant a calm bellowing and roaring with
incredible fury so long a time together.

At last we came in sight of Norway, and here we solicited the Master to go to
an harbor which was in sight of us, and stay there till the wind served. But
he refused it, alleging in his excuse, that he came out very late from England
to make so long a Voyage, that it was unseasonable to divert our selves with
recreations ashore, that he was obliged to keep himself at Sea as much as was
possible, so that he might be ready to make his advantage of the first
favorable wind. By all which we quickly discerned that we had not to do with
an Acessaeus, who was always coining of pretenses to delay his voyage, and
quarrelling the Moon that she was no more propitious to his Navigation. Our
Master on the contrary would anticipate his oppotunities, and resolved however
to manage his Vessel in spite of the inclemency of the Heavens. He was an old
Seaman, so accustomed to the air of the Sea, that he scarce subsisted but on
Shipboord, and never lived but by compulsion on shore. Which made one say, That
he feared lest the Master being become by custom an Amphibium already, should
at last degenerate into some Sea Monster; and that if he had lived in the time
of the ancient Pagans, when the Gods transformed Men and Women into Stones,
Trees, and Birds, it would have been no hard matter to have Metamorphised him
at least into a Man-fish, his disposition contributing so much thereunto.

The 26. the wind increased with such fury, that it blew down and brake in
pieces the scuttle of our main Mast, tore our main Sail, and sprung one of our
masts, so that it hung loose among the Tackling. At first this disaster was
very dreadful, but we turned it presently into an occasion of joy:
intermingling with the common apprehension of extraordinary danger, a secret
hope of being for some time delivered from the importunity of the Sea. And
indeed the Master himself whose great refractoriness had carried us into so
many extremities, disposed himself at last to strike sail to the tempest, and
turning to the West, we stood in for Newcastle, to repair our Ship which the
storm had reduced to a very ill condition. Upon which nothing was to be seen
amongst us but transportation and joy, every body blessing God for the
consolation we had drawn out of this accident, and in a moment forgetting our
sorrows that were past, we pleased our selves as much that we were making for
Newcastle, though it was sixty leagues backward, as if we had been arriving at
Archangel, and ready to put an end to a terrible and a tedious Voyage. But,

About noon the next day the wind having done its worst, left us as it were
standing still, a calm, after we had discovered the mountains of Cheviot in
Scotland. At length about the Evening we had a South-West wind, which served
only to inveigle us further into the fury of the same wind that had so
perplexed us already, and expose us afresh to the same dangers we had almost
overcome. For though it was but a little gale, yet the Master and Pilot puffed up
with insignificant hope, thought it best to make advantage of so rare an
occasion, persuading themselves by the opinion of their Carpenters, that their
scuttle and mast might be mended well enough at Sea, to hold out to Archangel.
Insomuch as they peremptorily resolved, to turn their backs upon Newcastle, and
address themselves once more to their Voyage to Moscovy. So that having made
near sixty leagues in less than four and twenty hours, and being come within
six or seven leagues of the shore, here we saw by a sad disappointment the end
of our joy, and the fruit of our expectations. And

The next morning the wind turned North-East again, with its old impetuosity
and rage, as if it had retreated only to redouble its force. The Master, far
from looking out any refuge, employed his Carpenters all this while about his
scuttle and mast. Whereupon, being all very impatient of our condition, and
finding our selves slaves to the brutality of an insupportable person, that
delighted himself as it were, to make us a sport to the winds, exposing
altogether to the mercy of the storms in a shattered bruised Vessel our lives,
His Majesty's and his Ambassadors goods, two of his Excellencies Gentlemen
amongst the rest of our Company expostulated with him boldly, and protested his
rude proceeding should not go unpunished. But all this would not move him,
Rigor having no better an effect upon him than good Nature. This son of the
Sea forbore not still for some time to exercise our patience by the enraged
Ocean, that seemed to threaten the very Heavens themselves. At last, on the 29.
the weather befriended us with as favorable an accident as befell us before,
for the Bolt-sprit being loose, the Master made presently what sail he could
for Newcastle, which was then some fifty leagues from us. But the wind
constrained us twenty leagues further, and we were glad the next day to put
into Burlington, a Harbor in the County of York. There we were no sooner come
to an anchor, but we went immediately on shore to refresh and take some
necessary repose after so great incommodities at Sea.

In the mean time, while we staid in this Harbor till our Ship was repaired,
Mr. Watson, a Gentleman who had the direction of our Company, was commanded
away by General Monck upon occasion of a new Mutiny of Fanatics in Yorkshire,
which was soon after happily suppressed, several of the Mutineers having been
executed. This Rebellion we heard of as soon as we came to the Harbor; and Mr.
Watson, who had a military Command in his Majesty's Guards, was therefore
advised by a friend of his Sir Thomas Gower, then High Sherif of Yorkshire
(whom he met with) to acquaint speedily General Monck with his being at
Burlington, that in case the General should have had occasion for him in that
conjuncture he might receive his commands. Mr. Watson followed this advice, and
writ accordingly to the General, though indeed he was very loath to break off
his Voyage, and to undergo after so many troubles the frustration of the desire
he had to see particularly the Country of Russia, whereunto nothing had engaged
him but his own curiosity. At length having received no answer at the return of
the Post, the wind being turned fair, and our Ship being sufficiently repaired,
he prepared himself for his embarkment with us, rather than wait any longer for
an answer to the prejudice of the Ambassadors affairs. But just as he was
putting his foot, as it were, into the boat, he received Orders from General
Monck to return immediately to London about his military Office. Whereupon he
came aboard our Ship, and having writ an account of the business to the
Ambassador he was reconveyed on shore, to the great dissatisfaction of all our
Company. And so, having staid nine whole days at Burlington,

The 8. of August we sailed away for Archangel, reduced to a lesser number by
three or four persons. From thence the weather was so favorable, that whereas
before we had spent three weeks and three days making but fourscore leagues, we
finished our Voyage within a small matter in the same proportion of time.

It is true we had not above eight or nine days of fair wind, but it was so
propitious, that in five days (from the 11. of August to the 16.) we made near
four hundred leagues. The 12. we left Shetland to the leeward, and the next day
we had so great a storm, that one of our Yards was broken in the middle, and we
compelled to slacken our sails. However we reckoned this tempest benign, as
long as it did contribute to the good expedition of our Voyage.

The 20. and 21. were so foggy that we could scarce discern one another upon
the Decks; whereas, when the weather was clear, we had so little darkness, that
from Sun setting to Sun rising it seemed a continual Twy-light. Nevertheless,
about this time we began to be very much incommoded with cold, which brought
our strong water into very great request among us, especially after we had on
the 22. discovered the Isles of Rust and Gromsond all covered over with snow.

The 26. sailing South-East, we past on toward the North-Cape, having left
several Mountainous Islands to the windward of us, and coasting for some time
along Capland, we came in few days upon the Coast of Lapland.

The second of September we had the divertisement to see our selves surrounded
by great numbers of Fish, solacing and sporting in the calm; and though
according to the judgment of our Seamen, and the experience we had often had,
it was ordinarily a presage of ^ll weather, yet to us it appeared that we were
not capable of a more acceptable entertainment amidst the delays of a calm: and
here it was we discovered a great Whale, playing in the Sea some two or three
leagues off us. About noon we had a gentle gale that gave us a sight of the
Ambassadors Frigate, by which we understood his Excellence was long since
arrived at Archangel, that he was persuaded we were cast away, and resolved, if
he had no news of ^s before, to begin his journey for Vologda the 8. of
September.

As this news (which we received but by the ^y, as the Frigate was returning
into England) gave us no small joy on the one side, so on the other, it was a
great trouble to find our selves sixty leagues from our Port, exposed to the
fury of a wind, that was already rallying its forces to beat us back, and did
effectually repel us, so as

The next day we were obliged to cast anchor toward the point of Orlogones,
for the more certain evasion of the Rocks and Sand-banks that encompast us. In
the mean time, five or six of our men, and as many Seamen, made a a party to go
on shore, and see how that country was inhabited, and expecting to meet store
of wild beasts, amongst other weapons they took their fire Arms also. They
stayed on shore about five or six hours, but so incommoded with the coldness of
the wind, that they were constrained to cut down a wooden cross, (they found
newly erected near the sea side) to make a fire therewith to warm themselves:
the remainder of which they brought along with them aboard to do as much for
us; for we had already consumed almost all our seacoals. They brought us also a
Bottle of fresh water, as sweet as liquorice, which they had from a Rock near
the sea side, which the Master liked so well, he resolved the next day to fill
two or three Tun with it, for that most of our water was corrupted.

The 4. the wind turned, but we escapt very narrowly being wreckt. For, a
little after midnight, as we were weighing anchor, in the midst of the tempest
and rain, we found our selves violently forced among the Rocks by the fury of
the Sea, and the Tide driving us inevitably on ground; insomuch, as the Master
dispairing to get the ship off, with a most lamentable voice cried out, All is
lost. His rocky heart at last melted at the sight of those Rocks that environed
us, and he whom the most outrageous surges of the Sea could not terrify,
trembled then at the sight of a Rock; insomuch, as to have seen him then, one
would have thought no body had been in danger but he, so strangely was he
surprised with amazement and despair. And now it was, every one put his affairs
into order, and he being in expectation every moment of dashing in pieces, and
giveing us the alarm, most of us prepared our selves to swim, if we could to
Land, which was not far from us. For my part, I took up Ulysses Resolution, who
being almost in the same condition, thought it best to keep in his ship, till
it was broke in pieces, and then (said he) when the Waves have destroyed my
Vessel, will be the best time for me to swim, for then a man has nothing else
to mind. But God Almighty delivered us from this desperate extremity, so that
having with much labor weighed Anchor, we cleared our selves beyond all
expectation, and doubling the point of Orlogones, we made forty leagues that
day upon the white sea, and that evening we came up as high as Catsnose, which
we left to the lee-ward.

The 5. of September. was the day whereon we arrived happily at Archangel; but
before we got in, we ran a great hazard at the Bar of Archangel, where the
Duina dis-imbogues it self: and where we saw a Holland Merchant man that was
newly wreckt there. The reason was, the sea was so shallow, that we had not
above a foot or two water to spare, so that when we entered into the River, we
were brought to that extremity, that our ship ran on ground; where we were
constrained to continue till evening, when the Tide came in. During which time,
the master with another Gentleman went on shore to Archangel, to give his
Excellence notice of our arrival. The tide coming in, the ship that lay but
lightly upon the ground, was dis-ingaged in that manner, that we all arrived at
Archangel in three hours, where we were recived by our companions with all
imaginable joy: so that it was no easy matter to determine which side thought
it self most happy, we, who were arrived, or they, that we were so.

Of the Ambassadors Voyage, and of his Entry into the Town of Archangel.
IF our Voyage was full of troubles and disasters, I dare on the other side
affirm, there was scarce ever any so happy as the Ambassadors. For without
mentioning the advantage and convenience of his ship, I shall only relate, that
whereas we spent seven complete weeks betwixt London and Archangel, his
Excellency made the whole Voyage of seven hundred and fifty leagues, in less
than a month: for, having set sail from Gravesend the 22. of July which was
eight days after us, he arrived the 19. of August at the Bar of Archangel,
which was seventeen days before us. And there it was his Frigate came first to
an anchor, in expectation of Orders for his Entry, for which reason he sent Mr.
Marvel his Secretary into the Town. Of whose landing, the Governor having
notice, ordered him to be conducted by six Gentlemen to the Castle, through a
Regiment of six hundred men, and the next day he sent sixteen boats, guarded by
several hundreds of men, under the command of a Colonel, to receive his
Excellence, and bring him ashore.

The Ambassadors Entry into Archangel was made the 23. in a remarkable manner:
For, besides the sixteen boats which were sent to attend upon the Ambassador,
there was a Barque particularly trimmed for his Excellence, besides ^^veral
others dressed up with Tapestry, that came to meet him, and accompany him to the
Town above half a league, whilst several ships, men of War and Merchantmen,
both of England and Holland, forbore not to congratulate his Entry with the
noise of their Canon, which is not much in use amongst the Muscovites, unless
in their wars. And just as his Excellence was landing, upon a wooden bridge, he
was prevented by a certain Colonel, called Bogdan, who came to complement him,
according to their mode, and to declare himself deputed to attend him as
Pristaffe (which is the Title they give such as are appointed to receive
foreign Ambassadors, and to take care of their passage and provisions) The
Ambassador having replied to him very handsomely, began to advance toward the
lodging which was prepared for him: but as he was setting the first step, the
Pristaff took the upper hand of him. And this was an instance of the great
rudeness and insolence of the Muscovites (of which we shall have future
occasion to speak more largely) which is the ordinary method they use to those
Ambassadors, upon whom they design any advantage: so as they believe, they do
their Prince a manifest injury, if they do not in his name treat them
uncivilly. But his Excellence being resolved to teach them the dignity of his
Character, stopped himself immediately, and turning to the Pristaff, remonstrated
to him the incivility of his carriage, telling him in these words, That he had
received great civilities till then, but that he could by no means give him
that advantage, which was due to himself, That he was sent from his Majesty of
Great Britain to the Emperor, to do him all possible honor, but it was
without derogating from himself, and much less from the King his Master.
Thereupon Bogdan, in some perplexity, excused himself, by alleging the Orders
he had received from the Governor to that purpose, and entreated his
Excellence to make a little stay: In the mean time, he dispatched away a
Messenger to the Governor, to give him notice how unluckily his Design had
succeeded, and continued bare-headed all the while (till the messenger
returned) though his Excellence was covered. At length the difference was
decided, to the advantage of the Ambassador, who was immediately conducted to
his Lodging, where the Pristaff with great Apology, made him a liberal offer of
all things necessary for his family.

And this is all I have to say concerning the manner of our Entry. However,
before I describe the Circumstances of our abode at Archangel, and the success
of our journey cross the Country to Mosco, I think it not impertinent to give a
Relation of the Country it self, and the Inhabitants; to the end that the
Readers, being pre-instructed in these two points, the manner of our Voyage may
be more easily comprehended.

The description of Moscovie.
Moscovie is properly but the name of a Province so called, of which Mosco is
the chief City. But as France communicates its name to all the Provinces under
that Dominion, so by Moscovie are ordinarily understood all the Provinces
united under the Obedience of the Czar. This Country is a part of the Europaean
Sarmatia, whereof the Ancients make mention; which is otherwise called Russia
or Roxolania, and from thence comes the name of Russians, which is given to the
Moscovites.

This Empire which is doubtless the greatest of all Europe, extends it self
Northward to the frozen Sea, beyond the Artique Circle; Eastward it is
terminated by the River Oby; Southwards by the Crim Tartars and Precopia; And
on the West by Livonia, Poland, and Swedland. So that in its whole extent, as
well in Asia as Europe, it comprehends thirty degrees, which is near six
hundred leagues; and in its Latitude sixteen, which is above three hundred.

This Country is generally flat, in which Nature has taken delight, as it were,
to put the Trees in array, and to beautify it with several Lakes and Rivers.
And in truth, Moscovie from one end to the other, is in a manner nothing but a
continual Forest, irrigated by several Lakes and Rivers, which render it
incomparably pleasant and beautiful. Amongst others, there is Volga, sometimes
called Rha, and which the Tartars at present call Edel, without exception the
finest River in Europe. It takes its source in the Province of Roscovie, from a
Lake called Fronow, and passing some few leagues beyond into another called
Volgo, it takes its name from that Lake, and disimbogues near Astracan into the
Caspian Sea, Where it divides Europe and Asia. So as from its head, to the
place where it falls into the Caspian, is a tract of a thousand leagues at
least, receiving most of the Rivers in Moscovie, as it goes along, which
enlarge it so, that, as Olearius mentions in his Relation, it is not far from
Nice, four thousand six hundred Geometrical feet broad.

The Boristhenes also, which parts Lituania and Moscovie, is very considerable;
which rises in Roscovie also, and discharges it self into the Euxin Sea.
Besides these, there is Duina which receives the Conslans, Jagel, and Sucagna,
and casts it self into the White Sea, some six or seven leagues from
Archangel. There is another Duina also, which rises some leagues off of the
Nieper or Boristhenes, in a Lake that gives it its name, and falls into the
Baltique about four leagues from Riga. The Oby, which discharges it self into
the Frozen Sea, and takes its source from the Lake Cataisco, is so broad at the
mouth, they must have a very good wind that cross it in a day. I could speak
also of Mosca and Occa, considerable Rivers, and of several others this Country
is well provided with; but it shall be sufficient at present to say, that for
the most part they lose themselves in the Rivers abovenamed. Besides these,
there is so great a number of Brooks, Pools, and Lakes, one can scarce pass
four or five leagues without seeing some great collection of Water.

Moscovie being scituat in so cold a Climat, no wonder if the Winters be very
long there, and the Frosts exceeding violent, especially in the most Northerly
Provinces. About Mosco, where the weather is more temperate, the Winter takes
not up above six or seven months in the year: but on the Eastern, and Northern
sides of the Country, particularly in the Province of Petzora, that runs along
by the Frozen Sea, their Winters are so long, that their Rivers which begin to
thaw but in May, freez again before August is past. And although those
Provinces toward the South should seem in reason to be more mild, they are
notwithstanding so subject to violent Cold, that one shall meet with men upon
the Road benumbed ordinarily, who (though their whole body perhaps be not
stupefied) yet there is nothing more common, if they have not extraordinary
care, than to have their Ears, their Lips, their Hands, or their Noses frozen.
In short, the Colds there are great to that degree, that they many times become
insuperable by any exercise of the body, and cleave the very Earth as much as a
Drought. The Rivers, the Lakes, the Sea it felt is frozen, and as at that time
they seem to have changed their Natures, they change also their Customs. One
may see there a River so frozen in four and twenty hours, that one may pass
over dry foot, and without doubt the abundance of Water that contributes to the
Frost, must needs make the Air more bitter, and the Winter more fierce.

From thence it comes to pass, that Moscovie is exempt from Epidemical
diseases, their bodies being more robust, and more vigorous than in the hot
Countries, where they are more subject to distempers. True it is, the Heats in
the Summer are so excessive, that (as it is commonly reported in that Country)
even the Fir-trees are sometimes set on fire by the Sun. Nevertheless, the
Nights are so fresh and cool, that in the month of July, we had Frosts,
though the Days had been sweltry and insupportable. But that which is much more
troublesome than the Heat, is the Clouds of Insects, of Wasps, and other Flies,
engendered by the Sun in the Pooles and Marshes, which give a perpetual
persecution to them that travel.

For Aliment, necessary for the subsistence of Man, Moscovie produces so good,
and in that quantity, that it yields not to the best country in Europe. They
have Grass and Corn in that abundance, that they know not which way to consume
it, for which cause here it is the Hollander makes his provision of corn
yearly. Their Seed time is not before May, though about Mosco and the Provinces
adjacent, the fields are open ordinarily in April, or the end of March: The
great Frosts they have in the Winter, make them give the Earth more leisure to
thaw, yet that hinders not but they have their Harvest before August. For the
great heat of the Day, which is eighteen hours long, and the freshness of the
Night, which with plentiful dews waters the Corn, thrusts it up immediately,
and in a short time brings it to maturity. They have very good Beef, but their
Mutton (especially about Archangel) is but indifferent. They have great store
of Deer, Wild-bores, and Elkes, but principally of Hares, which are gray all
Summer, and in Winter as white as Snow: Phesants, Partridges, Wood-pigeons,
Wood-cocks, Duck, and Mallard, Geese, Quails, and Pigeons are very plentiful,
and by consequence cheap. Their Forests are well furnished with small Birds
also, as Thrushes, Larkes, and Feldifere; but having enough of others, they do
not spend their time in taking of them. There are also about Archangel some
Birds of prey white all over. And if the Forests befriend them with such
variety of Game, their Rivers, Lakes, and Pools are no less bountiful in their
Fish: In the Volga, they have a kind of Sturgeon, of whose Eggs they make an
excellent Ragout, which they call Ikari, and the Italians Cavayar, which
affords a considerable Trade in those Parts, and the Czar keeps it to himself:
They put their Eggs into Paste, and (having prepared them with Salt ten or
twelve days) they eat them like a Sallad with Vinegar, oil of Olives, Pepper,
and Onions, They have all kind of Pulse, and Pot-hearbs, yet it is not long
since Sallades and Asparagas were in fashion in Mosco; and since Flowers and
strong Herbs were transplanted thither. Onions and Garlic are so common
amongst them, especially in their Lents, that one needs go no further than his
Nose for information. They have great quantities of Melons, Cucumbers, and
Gourds, and we were assured, that (like those which Olearius mentions of the
figure of a Lamb) they change their place as they grow, that they dry up the
Grass which way soever they turn, and that when ripe, the stock dies, and that
the fruit being covered with a certain velvet on the rind, the same with a
little preparation is made serviceable as Furrs. And these kind of Gourds are
frequently had near Samara, betwixt the Volga and the Doa. They have no want of
Apples, Plums, or Cherries, but they have no Walnut-trees, or such Fruit as
require a longer and more moderate heat. They have good store of fair
Straw-berries, and in Autumn a certain red Goos-berry, that grows flat upon the
ground. They have Mulberries also, and Rasberries, and Honey in that abundance,
that they gather it as they pass along the Woods. All which being considered
together, with their vast numbers of Cattle, one may well say, That this also
is a Country flowing with Milk and Honey. Of this Honey they make a great
proportion of Wax, so as beside what they consume in their Torches, Candles,
and Lamps, they utter yearly near twenty thousand Quintals to Strangers. Of
this Honey it is they make their Mead, which they call Mioude, a very common
drink amongst them. They make it of raw Honey, beaten in warm water, which,
when they have stirred up and down a long time with a stick, they cover, and
let it stand twelve hours: then boiling and scuming it, they strain it through a
cloth, and it is made. They have also another sort that is red, which is
excellent with Straw-berries, Cherries, Mulberries, or Rasps, and is prepared
with more curiosity and ingredients. Besides this, the Ordinary People drink
Quaz, which is a kind of small Beer, and not unpleasant. The better Sort make
themselves a kind of strong Beer, which they keep in their Snow-houses all the
Summer. True it is, they have no Vines, yet by the Courtesy of the English and
Hollander, they are every year so well provided with Wine and strong Waters,
that they have no want either of the one or the other.

Stone being a Rarity in Moscovie, and Wood so plentiful, there are few Houses
but what are built of Wood; which I observed to have two conveniences: One is,
that they are warmer than Stone, the Other, that they are cheaper. But withal,
they have this disadvantage, that they are more obnoxious to the Element of
Fire, which is so outrageous sometimes, that it devoures a whole Town at a
blow. And hence it is their Houses are very rude, without any fashion or art,
being only so many pieces of Firr piled up one above another, and Moss stuffed in
betwixt them, their Windows very small, and their Roofs of bark of Trees,
covered over sometimes with Turf. So that (their Stoves excepted, which they
use to warm their Chambers with, in the severity of the Winter) they do almost
follow the Discipline of Lycurgus, who would have the Lacedaemonians build with
no other Instruments, than the Hatchet and Saw. They are generally low, and
those of the Pesants, not of above one or two Rooms at the most, in which the
Father, Mother, Children, Hogs, and Hens lie all together. They have for the
most part no Chimneys, insomuch as when they make use of their Stoves, the
smoke goes out still at the Windows. Another Remedy the Muscovits have against
the mischief of fire, is the miserable furniture of their Houses, which is so
contemptible, that in any such accident, they can lose nothing with their
Lodgings, but their Dishes and Spoons, which are made of Earth or Wood; so that
they comfort themselves in their losses, by the facility of their Reparations.

For their Garments, which are very necessary for the resistance of the Winter,
Nature must be acknowledged to have dealt very prudently in providing their
Forests, so replete with Beasts of prey, with whose Skins they protect
themselves against the injuries of the Weather. For, besides Furs of Otters,
Martins, common Foxes, and Hares; they have some more precious, as your black
Fox, Sables, Beaver, Ermines, and gray Squirrels. They have white Bears also,
whose Skin is of great value, and much used by great Persons to hang behind the
back of their Sledges, as an Ornament, when they travel or pass through the
Town. The Skins of the common Bears are of much use to the same purpose, which
beasts are there in so great numbers, that they do not only infest the
Highways in Winter and make them dangerous, but trooping together in
Companies, they sometimes fall upon a whole Village, and destroy it. Their
Wolves are no less fierce, and sometimes they have much ado to defend
themselves against them; They have white Wolves too, but not so frequent. They
have a water Rat, whose skin is of a pleasant Smell, and very proper to lay
amongst clothes.

They have Hemp and Flax in that abundance in Moscovie, that notwithstanding
all that is exported from Archangel, linen amongst them is very cheap. It is
not necessary that I mention the Leather of Russia, being a thing so well known
already in Europe by the means of the English and Hollander, who transport it
daily from Archangel. Cloth is the only thing that is defective to the
Muscovits, what they make there being course and thick, and for the use only of
the Peasants; which gives occasion to the English and Dutch to drive a great
Trade there every year with that Commodity.

As for Travailing, they have great advantages (especially in the Winter) by
their Sledges. For the Country being flat and exceeding Cold, and the ground at
that time covered constantly with Snow, their Sledges which are drawn with
horses glide easily away upon the surface of it, and pass with incredible
swiftness. These Sledges are made of the Bark of the Linden-tree, about the
length of a man, in which one lies along. They line them commonly with some
thick Felt to make them warm, and because the top is open, they cover and wrap
themselves up in good Furs, as well as they can. They travail under the conduct
of a Carter, who sits on one side, and sometimes by fits will endeavor to warm
himself with running by, but most commonly with good full draughts of strong
Water, which is his principal Preservative in his Travels. And if at any time
he happens to overturn upon any Bank or Declivity, the Sledge being built low,
the fall is the less dangerous. The Ladies Sledges, that are covered above and
on all sides like Coaches, are built much higher, and by consequence much
heavier, and are therefore more dangerous, otherwise they slide along upon the
Snow like the rest. This manner of Travailing in Sledges, is not only
convenient (seeing one may in three days time travail in them from Vologda to
Mosco, which is at least an hundred leagues distance) but pleasant also in so
plain a Country. And (provided a man be well covered) he may sleep with ease,
his motion is light and insensible, and favors rather, than disturbs ones
repose: besides the Advantage of Travailing by nights, as well as by days,
according to the importance of occasions. In Summer they have two ways of
Travailing, by Land, and by water, whereas in Winter they Travail but only by
Land. On the first, one may travail on Horseback, by Coach, or by Wagon, the
Ways being very broad, beautiful, and generally easy for Travail all Moscovie
through. In the other way of Travailing, they make use of certain little Boats,
made all of one piece, of the trunk of a Tree made hollow, in which they stand
right up, and row over Lakes and Rivers. So, these Boats being very light, a
man with small care can travail a great way in a very short time. But there is
this dangerous inconvenience in them, if there be not an exact counterpoise
observed, they totter from one side to another, till at last they turn quite
over. They make use also of certain floting Bridges, made of pieces of Firr
joined and tied together, which bear themselves up upon the Water. Furthermore,
they have this great incommodity in all sorts of Travailing, that they have no
Inns or Houses of Reception to retire to, or where one may be accommodated, as
in other Countries of Europe, so that one must carry both his Bed and Provision
along with him. And for this reason the Merchants that traffic from Archangel
to Mosco have their houses at Vologda and Mosco, and being well known and
accommodated, it is a great convenience to travail with them. Another great
incommodity in the Summer is the violence of the Heat, and the importunity of
the Flies, buzzing perpetually about ones Face, and interrupting the pleasure
one might take in the beauty of the Forests, and the grateful confusion of
Light, and Shadow that is made in the Woods.

Thus far we have represented the Condition of the Country, we will now
consider the Genius of the People succinctly; and that First, In respect of
their Origin, their Stature, their Habits, and Language; Secondly, Of their
Humor, and Nature, and Disposition; Thirdly, Of their Managery, and manner of
Living; Fourthly, Of their Policy; and Last of all, Of their Religion.

The Moscovits, or Russians, are those whom the Ancients called Rhoxalani, they
boast themselves descended from the Greeks, whom in many things they zealously
imitate. But this I dare undertake, they are not descended from the
Lacedaemonians; If they be, they have left all their Virtue behind them. I
should rather deduce them from those, who were called Sibarites, who had the
Reputation of good Drinkers above all others.

Their Shape and Proportion is much the same with the Germans, being for the
most part Corpulent, and of a strong Complexion. The Boyars (for so their
principal Nobility are termed) are very ambitious to have their bellies stick
out, as if they esteemed it a mark of their Nobility. Great Beards (as in
Germany) are in great request here also, and looked upon as tokens of Virility,
and he that has the greater Beard, is the bravest man amongst them. But though
they wear their Beards so long, yet they please themselves as much in the
shortness of their Hair, which they cut very close, notwithstanding the
Coldness of the Country. Ecclesiastical persons only wear long Hair, except
such Lords of the Court as are in disgrace with the Czar, who as a testimony of
their affliction do suffer it carelessly to hang down over their Shoulders; Not
unlike the ancient Custom among the Greeks, upon any public or extraordinary
Calamity. For then the Women shaved their Heads, and the Men wore their Hair at
length; whereas commonly they did the contrary. The Women in Moscovie are of a
midling Stature, and well proportioned, they are for the most part handsome, and
well featured; but painting is amongst them so common, they never think
themselves beautiful without it. And whereas other Women use it as a
concealment of their deformity, these for the most part do use it (how gross or
bad soever it be) as a Veil to their beauty. The married Women have a Custom
of putting up their Hairs in a Coyfe, whereas their Virgins suffer it to hang
down in two Tresses upon their Backs.

As to their Habits, the Men wear long great Robes down to their Feet, not much
unlike the Greeks, with sleeves of the same length, but very strait, in so much
as when they dress themselves, they must turn them up in several plates upon
their Arms, and in that multitude of folds they fancy there is great
comeliness. They have two conveniences by the length of their sleeves; one, that
in the Winter time they do the office of a Muff, whilst having no employment
for their hands, they let them hang down at their full length. The other is,
that when they have any design to rob, or take revenge upon any body, they let
them hang down as for warmth; and under that pretense they carry their cudgels,
stones, or daggers in them. They ordinarily wear them as low as their knucles,
and so they have but one half of their hands at liberty. The most considerable
Persons amongst them make their robes of Satin, Damask, or cloth of Gold: The
Citizens, of cloth of a dusky, violet, or dark green color, and sometimes of
red: The People of the lowest Condition have theirs of a dark-colored course
Cloth, made in their own Country. In Winter every one lines them with Fur,
according to their several qualities, the poor People generally lining theirs
with Sheep skins, which though they be very useful against the Extremity of the
weather, yet in this they are inconvenient, that they cast an ill smell, and
are in perpetual hostility with our Noses. They wear Juste-au-corps or Vests
also, which are made close to their Body, and come down to the Calf of their
Legs, open before, and set to the bottom with Gold or Silver buttons, and
having Collars very large. Under them, they have strait Breeches, and
Wast-coats (which they call Caftan) that come down to their knees, whose
Collars are made after the fashion of the Jesuits, only these are much higher,
so that they go round about the hinder part of their Heads. They are generally
made of Satin, Damask, or Taffaty, and because these Collars, by reason of
their height, are very conspicuous, they line them many times with Velvet, or
cloth of Gold, and sometimes adorn them with Pearls and precious Stones. Nor
does this vanity rest here, it goes even to their Shirts, which the richest
sort Embroider at the Collar, Wrists, and Breast, with several colored Silk,
and sometimes with Jewels or Gold. They wear no Hats, only a Bonnet of cloth,
with a little snip open before and behind, which has something of the form of
a Pyramide. The Nobility have them of Scarlet cloth, or Velvet embroidered with
Pearl on the sides, and in Winter time lined with the preciousest Furs; but the
common Sort wear nothing but white Felt or cloth Caps, which they get lined in
Winter with the vilest sort of Fur. Cloth is so dear in that Country, that
many amongst them make no bones of patching up their Bonnets with pieces and
shreds of sundry colors, so that they resemble in some manner the disguised
Watermen in the Play. These Bonnets I observed to be altogether inconvenient
abroad; for having no brims, they give no protection against the Sun, the Wind,
the Rain, or the Snow: whereas our Hats are some defense to us in all these
cases. The Polonian Bonnets are more commodious than these; for they are made
with a brim of pastboard, of each side covered over with Fur: and hence it is,
that in Winter most Strangers make use of them in Moscovie, as being warmer
than our hats. In stead of Shoes, the Russians wear commonly Boots without
stops, which serve them also for Pockets: the Peasants wear shoes made of the
bark of a Tree wrought very thin, and interwoven and braided, after the manner
of Wicker baskets. The most of them have no Stockins, only some pieces of Fur
or cloth wrapped about their Legs, and tied fast with a pack-thred. There is no
great difference betwixt the Men's Habits and the Women's, saving that the Women's
Robes are somewhat larger, and their Sleeves not so fastened to the bodies of
their Robes, but that they can either put them on, or let them hang by as they
please. They have this only peculiar in their smocksleeves, that they are
commonly three or four Else long, plated into so many folds, that they have
nothing else from the top of their Arm to their Fingers end. But their greatest
difference is in their Bonnets, which for the Women, are made a very
fantastical way.

Their Language has great affinity with the Slavonian, as well as the
Polonian, so that he who understands either of these, cannot be at any great
loss for the Moscovian, which is pleasant enough, and not very difficult to
learn. They have borrowed their Characters from the Greeks, but have since much
altered and transformed them, and they abound so much in double Letters, that
they have increased their Alphabet to the number of forty. But their Character
is that alone wherein they communicate with the Greek; for their Words have
very little affinity to it.

And thus I have given an account of their Original, their Stature, their
Habits, and their Language; we will now proceed to their Nature and Genius.

The Moscovites (as appears particularly by their Commerce) are a People of
great Wit, Cunning, and Dexterity.

They are of a Temper very remarkable in this, that they are so accustomed to
the Extremities of Heat and Cold, that the suddenest and most violent
alteration that can be, makes no ill impression on their health. There one may
see little Children come running out of their warm Stoves in their shirts in
the midst of Winter, and having (in the fiercest Cold imaginable) taken two or
three frisks upon the Snow, return immediately into their Stoves, and find no
inconvenience by the change. Insomuch, that as Agesilaus had but one Habit
Winter and Summer; so do these seem to have but one Temper; neither the Heat
succeeding the Cold, nor the Cold the Heat, making any alteration in them. In
short, they are so hardened and accustomed to both Heat and Cold, that their
Custom seems to be turned into Nature. Besides, they being used to very hard
fare, and brought up as they are in servitude and slavery, they must
unquestionably be very proper for the Wars. And indeed having little comfort or
pleasure in their lives, they want rather Conduct than Courage to fight.
Nevertheless, Idleness which in other places is reckoned as the Root of all
Vices, seems to be peculiar to this Nation, so Lazy are they naturally, and of
such Antipathy to all kind of Labor. It must be either force or necessity that
compels them thereunto, they often preferring a bastinado or whipping before an
honest but painful employment.

From hence it is, that Drunkenness amongst them is so familiar, that there are
but few Persons exempt from it. The Clergy are addicted to it, as well as the
Laity, the Women as the Men, the Young as the Old, all striving as it were,
with a brutish emulation to outdrink one another. Aquavitae is generally the
charm by which this Metamorphosis is made, like the liquour of Circe, which
turns them into Swine; or like the Mead of Camma which carries death along with
it, when they venture so far as to dye upon the spot. Yet I must say, that
notwithstanding this liquor is very necessary in this Country, and that there
were scarce any living without it, in regard it is a sovereign Remedy against
the Cold, and not un-useful in Summer. But the abuse of it is grown so great,
that, instead of taking it now and then for the re-inforcement of their
Spirits, they employ it to their dissolution; and whereas by a moderate taking,
it would be a means of refreshment, their debauches pervert its good effects,
and turn it to their ruin. Tobacco was formerly also taken with no less
extravagancy than their strong Water now, but in the year 1634 the Czar and
Patriarch thought good with great rigor to prohibit it, many of them having
before that time set their Houses on fire by their negligence, when they were
drunk with Tobacco. The poor People instead of buying themselves bread,
consumed all their Money in Tobacco. Besides (which was the particular disgust
of the Patriarch) they presented themselves before their Images with so reeking
and smoaky a breath, that, perhaps he was afraid, they would poison their
Saints, with the stink of their Tobacco. At this day it is more frequently used
than in some years past, the search being not now so strict against the takers,
nor the punishment so severely inflicted on them that sell it. Strangers have
the liberty to use it, which makes the Moscovites to be the more desirous of
it, for some of them would almost worship a man for a pipe of Tobacco.

But Vice having (as Plutarch observes) many baits and allurements, by the
motion and representation of which, it gives the Passions several encroachments
to entangle themselves: So may I say of Drunkenness, that it has its
attraction, and draws men into Lasciviousness and Excess. Amongst the rest of
the World, the Moscovites do furnish us with experiments of this kind, both the
Women and the Men giving themselves over to Ebriety, there is a concomitant
addiction to Wantonness. True it is, the Czar permits not any public Brothels,
but the Drunkenness and Idleness wherewith this Country is excessively
delighted, is the occasion of so great irregularity, that Sodomie it self is no
stranger to it.

Quaeritur Aegysthus quare sit factus adulter,
In promptu causa est desidiosus erat.
Ovid. Upon this score the Insolences they commit in their ordinary Quarrels
are insupportable. Upon all occasions they make no scruple of upbraiding one
another with Incest, Sodomie, and such crimes, as the very thought of them
ought to be horrid and abominable.

In short, Civility and Complacence amongst them is so rare, it is no wonder if
they be very sparing of it before Strangers: to whom if they bear any
difference or respect, it is certainly from some advantage they expect to draw
from them. And in that case they spare not their Caps, and the greatest
reverence they can show, which is commonly expressed by a low declination of
their Head toward the ground without moving a Foot. The Women use also the
same way of saluting one another, only they bow themselves more gradually, and
letting their hands hang loose by their sides, they touch not their Bonnets at
all. But when a Citizen or Peasant would show something more than ordinary
Respect, then he goes to the very ground, and prostrates himself, even to the
beating the ground with his Forehead; which is the manner of expressing the
Reverence which they bear to their Nobility. And this extreme submission is
that which makes their Magistrates so insolent, and so exceeding jealous of
their Authority, that Strangers let them be of what Quality they will, do very
rarely meet with any Kindness or Civility amongst them. And withal, having an
opinion of the Grandeur of their Emperor, that he is incomparably greater than
any King in Europe, from thence it comes to pass, that they use Ambassadors so
indifferently, making no scruple to prefer themselves before them; in which
regard there is great prudence and circumspection required to the maintaining
the Honor of ones Prince amongst them.

And this is in general a true Character of the Humor of the Russians; it
remains now that (according to the Order I have proposed) I give some Prospect
of their manner of Living.

Moscovie is indeed a very fertile and plentiful Country, yet the Inhabitants
brought up from their Cradles in great Hardship and Austerity, understand not
how to improve the advantages it yields. And being born as it were to Slaverie,
they easily endure those Incommodities, which without long accustomation would
have been intolerable. So that what Agesilaus said of the People of Asia, may
be very well applied to them, viz. That they are very good Slaves, but would
make the worst Freemen in the World. For their Oeconomie and the affairs of
their Houses, it is certain, they are very ill furnished, that they live very
poorly, and that they know no superfluity, but of Drink. Those Persons of
Quality that are obliged to live in any Equipage or Height, have all their
Provisions from their own Farms. The common People have little other cheer than
Peace, Turnops, Cabbages, Coleworts, and fresh Cucumbers, or pickled with Salt
and Vinegar. They have fresh Fish and Salt sometimes: but then they never
forget their Onyons and Garlic, which are their principal hautgout. Besides
these they have little other fare, especially of Flesh, most of their year
being taken up by fasting days, and their Butter and Cheese is so bad, that it
is a hard thing for Strangers to make use of them. Those who are rich enough to
have Aquavitae of their own, will not sit down at the Table, till they have
drank of it, and whilst they are at Meals they drink it, and lest their
Digestion should be weak, they must needs have their Dram too afterward. The
common People are always prepared for it, as well drunk as sober, at midnight
as at noonday; and though their Waters are made very strong, yet for fear they
should not be hot enough, they clap in now and then a good quantity of Pepper.
Their Ordinary drink is Mead and Quaz, as I have intimated before. After Dinner
the Russes have a Custom of shutting up their Shops, and going to sleep; and
the great Persons amongst them, will scarce speak of affairs with any Body.
Nevertheless they use Beds so little, that none but some Persons of quality do
lie upon Beds or Quilts. The People of Capua had anciently a Custom to suffer
none of their Children to use any Beds, till they were married, because as they
alleged, Beds were not invented for young beardless Boys, but for ancient and
decrepit Men. Amongst the Moscovites this Custom is more severe; for they use
them neither before, nor after they are married, nor in the very extremity of
Age. In Winter time they content themselves to lie along upon a table or a
bench of Firr before their Stoves, covering themselves only with their clothes:
and for coolness in Summer they make bold with the Ground.

Instead of Candles, the Peasants make use of long and thin chips of Firr,
which being very dry presently take fire, and give a great ^ight. But because
they are instantly burnt but, they must have a good store of them to supply, if
they want light but for a little time.

One thing there is very commendable amongst the Moscovites, and that is, that
the Women have great respect generally for their Husbands; for which reason
they are exceedingly retired, and appear very seldom ^n public. And this is
a Custom so conformable to Nature, and so religiously observed amongst the
Ancients, that there is no person ^naddicted to a carnal sense, but will
condemn the liberty which is at this time taken ^y most of the Women in Europe.
Plutarch ^ells us, That a discreet Woman should de^ort her self directly
contrary to the Moon, that is, that she should appear when her Husband is by,
and in his absence keep her self close at home. Phidias making the Image of
Venus for the Elians, represented her standing upon a Tortoise; to signify,
that a Woman should by no means be gossipping abroad. It is to be commended
also in the Moscovites, that they permit not their Wives to be seen too
frequently in the Streets, though in other things their Discipline appears
rigid enough, and favoring of too much severity. For they make use of them
only as a necessary evil, they look upon them supercilliously, and with
frowns, they beat them often, and handle them as if they were their slaves,
and not part of themselves.

But if the Women in general are so retired, amongst the Nobility, the Virgins
are much more for besides, that they appear very seldom abroad, when they do so
they cover themselves always with a Veil, to prevent their being seen: so
that many times they marry before the Bridegroom has seen his Mistresses face
Amongst them it is not permitted that young Men and Maids see one another, nor
that they make any promises of Marriage by Word o^ Writing, those things being
always left to the transaction of the Parents. So it sometime happens that the
Bridegroom, having not see his Wife till he be brought up into her chamber
where she is laid, that the man who expected a very handsome Wife, meets with a
deformed Person, and perhaps a counterfeit, if the Parents will but consent to
the Cheat. This Custom of Women's wearing Vailes, is very ancient, especially
amongst the Jews, who did it in token of Bashfulness and Chastity, as the
Moscovites do now. And hence it was that Rebecca as soon as she saw her
Husband, took a Vail and covered herself, and that Laban deceived Jacob, when
he gave him Leah his Eldest daughter, who was bleer-eyed, instead of the
Beautiful Rachel whom he had promised him.

The Demeanor of the Moscovites being thus described, as to their manner of
Living, we shall now speak somewhat of the Baths, of which they make use in
imitation of the Ancients. They are close places with Furnaces, which they heat
exceedingly, and for the greater excitation of Vapors, they cast Cold water
now and then upon the Stove. They have diverse Benches, at some distance, one
above another, which yield several degrees of Heat, according as each one
thinks convenient. They lay themselves along stark naked upon these Benches,
and after they have swet a competent time by means of those hot Vapors, that
have diffused themselves all over the Bath, there is care taken, that their
Bodies be well washed with Warm water, or some other liquour, and rubbed all
over with hand-fuls of Herbs. After which they commonly take a Dram of the
bottle, to reinforce their Spirits, which are sometimes so weakened by their
sweating, that they fall into a swound. And these Baths are the universal
Remedies the Moscovites make use of, as well for keeping of their Bodies clean,
as for conservation of their Health, which they enjoy with great advantage
above other Nations. And for this reason there is not a Town without its
Stoves, both public and private: which they believe very necessary for new
married People, especially after their first congress, therefore in such a
case, they always make use of this kind of purification.

And forasmuch as every Country has its divertisements, as being necessary for
the Exercise and Recreation of the Body, it is but reasonable to say something
of those that are in use amongst the Moscovites.

At their Festivals, their young Men are accustomed to meet in great numbers,
and for their pastime to play at fifty cuffs, or cudgels, without the least
quarrelling, or exceptions. By which means they are so inured to blows, that
they become almost insensible, and have much greater aversion to work, than
they have to the whip or the cudgel, though the same be laid on in very good
earnest. Some also there are that understand wrestling pretty well, with which
they exercise themselves in imitation of the English, who are taken to be very
skilful in this kind of Recreation. In Winter they have a sort of Pattins, or
Scates, as they have in Holland, of which they make use, as soon as the Rivers
are frozen, not to make their journeys with (as in the Low Countries) but for
their Exercise, and to warm themselves upon the Ice. They are made of Wood,
with a long piece of polished Iron at the bottom, very strait and turned
upward at the toe, and that the Iron may the better cut the Ice, they turn
their Feet, on the one side and the other, so that they go directly on very
fast. They have also public Engines to Swing withal, like a double gallows,
having four places for four men, all in an equal distance, where having placed
themselves, they swing continually by the Counterpoise they give one another,
so that while some swing up to the height of a Windmill, one may see the
others falling near as low as the Ground: which they do successively, till they
think it fit to hold. The Women have Ropes which they swing with, or else they
lay a plank cross a block, and mounting one at one end, and the other at the
other, they toss themselves up with a very violent motion. Their ordinary
Music, is nothing but a bag pipe, which they accompany sometimes with the
tune of a Song. They make so ill use of their Trumpets and Kettle-Drums, that
the same render but a harsh and obstreperous Harmony; Their Howboys are much
better, which they use before their Infantry in the Wars.

As for their dancing, it is so absurd and ridiculous, that the Bears they
teach to dance there acquit themselves better than themselves. For they tumble
up and down in such Brutish and unbecoming postures, one would think they use
it only to excite Lasciviousness, whereas this exercise should be undertaken,
and managed with decency as a thing that is very graceful and honorable. They
use great distortions with their hands, shoulders, and back parts, and hopping
right up with their feet, they scarce appear to move one step out of their
place.

This being their manner of Living in private, we shall now give an account how
they regulate themselves in respect of the public, by the Laws and Customs of
their Country; and so having done with their Economy, we shall proceed to
their Policy, and after that to their Religion.

Policy and Religion are the two Poles, on which the Globe of civil Society
moves. And though it is possible some places may be found very barbarous and
licentious, where Learning and Civility were in no esteem, and where the
Government by Kings was not usual, yet it is hard to name any place that has
subsisted without some Policy or other, and where they have not had some sense
or apprehension of a Deity. But amongst all the Policies of the World,
Monarchy is manifestly the most advantageous, as most conformable to the
Majesty of God, who alone manages and presides over the whole Universe. The
State of Moscovie which is now before us, is Monarchical: but it is also
Despotical and Absolute, insomuch as the Tzar being Lord and Master (as it
were) over all his Subjects, disposes uncontroulably of their lives and
estates, as he thinks good. And under this kind of Monarchy it was they lived,
which were anciently called Barbarians, as the Assyrians, Medes, and Persians,
whose Princes usurped that Magisterial Authority over their Persons and Goods,
governing their Subjects no otherwise than as a Lord does his slaves. And such
at this day is the Government in Turkey, where the Grand Segniour has so
absolute a Sovereignitie over his Subjects, that he disposes of their lives
and fortunes, as an absolute Lord. But for the better comprehension of the
State of Moscovie under the Domination of so unquestionable a Prince, it is
First to be considered, in what his greatness and Authority consists; Secondly
the Submission, Obedience, and singular Respect his Subjects bear him; Thirdly
the Policy and Order, by which his Dominion over his Subjects is maintained,
and the union and concurrence of Obedience in his Subjects preserved and
established.

The Tzars of Moscovie having the Power and Right of disposing of the Lives and
Estates of their Subjects, in this vast Tract of ground under their Dominion,
no question but it is absolute over all depending upon that Government. It is
the Tzar alone that gives Laws to the People, it is he that disposes of the
Government of the Provinces, it is he that sends and receives Ambassadors, it
is he that levies Imposts and Taxes, and in short, does every thing that he
pleases. And from hence it is he is called Grand Seigneur, and Tzar, is the
right pronuntiation according to the Russes, therefore I had rather spell it so
than Czar with a C, as it is commonly written, because it seems to be derived
from Caesar.
Tzar, which is as much as to say, King, or Emperor, else he is called Velika
Knez, which signifies Great Duke. His Arms are an Eagle with two Heads,
carrying three Crowns, which import Moscovie, Casan, and Astracan, two Kingdoms
he possesses in Tartary. There is also in his Escutchion, a Cavalier
represented in Combat with a Dragon, which without doubt must be intended for
Michael the Archangel, or St. George. And as the Authority of this Prince,
must be acknowledged to be great, so his Revenues must be owned to be
extraordinary and commensurate. For besides his proper Demains, which are very
considerable, he has an incredible Revenue from the Taverns, which he
licenseth through all his Dominions; besides, five per Cent he exacts for all
Merchandise imported or exported, and a vast Sum of Money he receives from the
Factors he imployes himself. He has a great Revenue also out of his Furs, and
Cavyar, being a commodity he reserves entirely to himself, he makes very great
advantages by that also. Yet this I must needs say, that if his Treasure be
vast, his Issues and Expenses are not small, as well in respect of the
Splendor and extraordinary Pomp he lives in, as the continual Wars he
maintains with his Neighbors, either the Swedes, or the Polanders, or else the
Tartars. For which reason he frequently raises: mighty Armies, and for his
better Success, gives great Pensions to his Officers, which are paid very
punctually; and by this means he draws many Stangers to him, whose service he
likes very well, and knows which way to gratify their Prudence and Fidelity.
True it is, generally upon the commencement of a War, it is the People that
supply him according to his demands, by which he gives them severely sometimes
to understand the Power he has over their fortunes and estates.

The greatness of this Prince being established in this manner, through the vast
extent of his Dominion, by the abundance of his Wealth, the magnificence of his
Court, and the absoluteness and indisputablenesse of his power over all his
Subjects; it is not to be doubted but the same imprints a most profound respect
in the hearts of the people toward his Person. And indeed so abject are they,
and submissive to the Sovereigns command, that they will themselves declare
their own servitude, and caknowledg they hold their Estates from God and him
only. Some would not refuse any danger for his sake, and would perhaps many
times be over joy'd to expose their innocent lives at the Capriccio or fury of
a Tyrant. They will freely confess to be his Slaves, and as a Testimony of
their Humility, they will never name themselves in his presence but with a
diminutive, as if a Petitioners name be Peter, he will say: I little Peter the
humblest of all your Vassals do implore, etc. They boast of nothing more than
the sparkling eyes of their Prince, (be he never so shore-sighted as Dyonisius
of Syracuse was,) for they cry always, I have had the honor or shall have the
honor to see the clear eyes of our Tzar. And did not Christian modesty
restrain them a little in the Religious respect they bear unto their Monarch,
they would be near to fly out into such Extravagant acclamations, as were used
to King Herod; and say of his voice, that it is the voice of a God, and not of
a man. They are very careful also of insinuating this Reverence into their
Children, and of making them know the Majesty of their Prince, before they are
capable of understanding the misery of their condition.

And this discipline is principally founded upon three general Maxims; one of
which is, That it is prohibited upon pain of death to any man to Travail out of
that Country, unless they be the Tzars Merchants, or Ministers of State, which
he sends to other Princes in quality of Ambassadors. The reason is, lest by
their Travails into other parts, they should bring back some new customs at
their return, and having tasted the sweetness of the liberty other Nations
enjoy, they should some time or other break asunder the chains of their own
Servitude. This maxim to us that are inamoured with the happy liberty we are
born under, might perhaps seem barbarous and intolerable, but the Russians are
so accustomed to this kind of Slavery, that they are scarce sensible of it, and
do comfort themselves in the vastness of their Country, which affords them
space enough for their Travails, and in the Examples of other Countries, which
have lived, and do live under the same maxim. The Lacedaemonians amongst
others, who gloried and boasted that they lived under the greatest liberty,
were subject notwithstanding to this Law, and forbidden any Commerce with
foreign Nations: Whereas the Muscovites are permitted to Traffic with them in
their own Country. Which gives me some hopes they will in time leave off that
rustic and barbarous humor, which is so natural to them, and learn by degrees
to live with more civility, for they are already delighted with the
Conversation of foreign Merchants, and do please themselves very much in their
manner of living. And were they under a gentler Government, and had a free
Trade with every body, no doubt but this Nation would in a short time be taken
with our civility and decent way of living. But this maxim that we do now
discourse of, has no less effect toward the maintenance of their Religion,
than their civil Customs, and is so exactly observed, that the very Strangers
themselves that have entered into the service of the Tzar, or have otherwise
embraced their Religion, are not exempt from it. For to have made himself a
servant to the Great Duke, is to have made himself his Slave, and to have taken
up his Religion, is to have abandoned his own Country, and to be always
confined within the Limits of Muscovie. In short, by this Policy it may be
easily imagined the Muscovites understand little of Navigation, seeing they
exercise it so little: and indeed they know no other Compass than the Earth,
nor do any of them, except some few fishermen, expose themselves to the Sea,
and they no farther than within sight of the Shore.

The Second Maxim the Tzars make use of, for maintaining the Policy of their
Estate is, That they marry no foreign Princesses, nor look out any farher for
a Wife, than their own proper Slaves. The other Princes of Europe, who are
solicitous of nothing but the good and happiness of their Subjects, do comport
themselves clear otherwise; they marry themselves with foreign Ladies for the
Alliance of their Nations, and in order to establish a reciprocal and perpetual
Amity betwixt them, for the benefit of both. By which means they avoid the
insolence of their Wives Relations, which is almost inevitable, where a Prince
takes a Wife out of his own Subjects. Moreover, it is certainly more honorable
and more worthy the Majesty of a King, to espouse a Princess that is not of
the number of his Subjects, uniting and mingling, as it were, their Crowns as
well as their blood to produce a Posterity perfectly Royal. Whereas to take a
Wife from that infinite distance, which there is betwixt a King and a Subject,
to join her to the Crown, to descend from his Throne, as it were, to raise her
up thither, who perhaps is very unfit for so great an elevation, is no less
than to prostitute and debase the Majesty of a Monarch. Yet amongst the Tzars
of Moscovy it is very usual, lest by introducing a foreign Princess she should
bring some new Customs along with her, which in time might cause some
alteration in the State. And from hence it was, that this present Tzar
vouchsafed on Shrove-Sunday 1647. (which was then the seventeenth year of his
Age and the second of his Reign) to marry the eldest Daughter of
Ilia-Danilovitz Miloslausky, a person at that time in no excellent Condition;
for to speak properly, there was nothing but the Beauty of his Daughter to
induce the Tzar to honor him with so great a Relation.

The Third Maxim by which their Policy and Religion is preserved, is their
Ignorance of Learning, which is so well established in this Country, that they
never learn farther than to write and read their own Language. And indeed
Experience does teach us this truth, that Seditions and Revolutions have not
been any where so frequent as in Commonwealths, where Learning was commonly in
great esteem, and even when it triumphed most. The reason of which is plain,
forasmuch as Ambition and Pride march always in the Rear of great Knowledge:
whereas Ignorance (as is evident amongst the Peasants and common People every
where) renders them more supple and obedient: And this Valentian and Licinius
Emperors of Rome had experience of, when they termed Learning the Plague and
Poison of a Kingdom. Lycurgus was not far from this opinion, when he established
Ignorance in his Republique. And we see at this day the greatest Enemy of
Christendom triumphing, partly by virtue of this Maxim, over all the Monarchs
of this Age. The Tzars of Muscovie also find great benefit by this Policy,
which conduces much to the easy Conservation of Obedience in their Subjects
toward their Sovereign Empire. So that the Muscovites have this advantage,
that they quietly enjoy their apprehensions of Nature, as they are at first
sight represented to their sense, or their reasons, without any scandalous
Imputation of Ignorance. They do not trouble themselves with the height of the
Heavens, nor the greatness of the Earth, whether the Sun (as Anaximenes
thought) be as flat as a Trencher, or whether it be hunch backed underneath
like a Cockboat, as Heraclitus held, or whether it be round or square. They
disturb not their heads with the dimensions of the Moon, to know whether she be
hung loose in the Air, or inhabited or not, whether the Stars be but Earth
Muminated as Thales maintained or whether perfect fire as Plato. They leave
Nature to it self, and think it sufficient to know who is its Author, to
discover the use of things by experience, and to give God thanks as they are
able. They amuse not themselves to make Syllogismes, after the Model of Barbara
or of Festino, to dispute whether Logic be an Art or Science, nor to determine
sundry other curious and impertinent questions, which though of no use but to
molest and torture the brain, are yet at this day amongst the learned people,
in great practice and use, upon a mere principle of Curiosity, Ambition, or
Interest. In stead of Books the Muscovites use Rolls of Paper as the Jews did
sometimes; they glue every leaf together by the ends, with a certain Glue they
have out of Siberia a Province of the Tzars, which they moisten only with the
end of their tongue, and drawing it upon the Edges of the two leaves they are
to join, they put the Edges upon one another, which fasten so close, it is
scarce perceivable where they are joined, and in this manner they make Rolls
sometimes of seven or eight Fathoms long.

Furthermore, amongst the Magistrates that Govern Muscovie in their Council of
State, there are in the first place thirty Noblemen or Boiars, so properly
called which the Tzar obliges to be Resident in Mosco. After them there be the
Ockolnitz, that is to say a Privy Councellor.
Ockolnitz, the Dumeny Duorainy signifies the same Office but in lower degree.
Dumeny Duorainy, the Sin Boyarsky, the Chancellor and two Secretaries of
State. There are six appartements in the Council of the Great Duke, the first
is designed for foreign affairs, the second for Military, the third for the
Exchequer and the Treasury of the Tzar, the fourth for receiving the Accounts
of his Factors, and such as have the Superintendance of the Taverns, the fifth
for Civil Processes, and the sixth for Criminals. Their Council is commonly
held in the Night, and the Tzar changes the Governors of his Provinces every
three Years.

There is no room for subtilties or wrangling in this Country, they dispatch
their Suits in a short time, according to the plainness and paucity of their
Laws. So that the Atturneys and Sollicitors are there of as little use and
concernment as the Philosophers.

Amongst other punishments that they use, they have one they call Battoki,
which has much affinity with that which God ordained in the time of Moses for
the people of Israel, as appears in the 25. Chapter of Deuteronomy. They strip
the condemned person to his Shirt, e. g. for having been the Author of some
Riot, pilfering, or some other such small crime as is not worthy of death; Who
then laying himself flat upon his Belly on the ground, there are two Men placed
on each side of him, which give him as many blows with a Cudgel one after
another, as the Judge that presides does condemn him to, sixteen, twenty or
thirty, more or less, according to the quality and proportion of the offense he
has committed. And as soon as his account is made up, he rises and makes his
reverence to the person that condemned him; Not much unlike the Persians, who
after correction returned, and gave their King thanks for his great Bounty in
remembering them. The Muscovites use this kind of Chastisement in their private
Families also, especially the Nobility, who have commonly great store of
Slaves, who without respect of their Society are oftentimes constrained to beat
one another till the blood follows. They have another sort of punishment with a
Whip, which is much crueller, and inflicted by the hands of the Executioner,
when the correction is public. The Whip is made of the skin of an Elke cut
into several thongs, which pierces the skin in such manner, that at the very
first lash it oftentimes leaves bloody impressions behind it; their Capital
punishment which they use commonly for those that are condemned to die,
scutting off their heads, and to extort Evidences they use the Strapado.

As for their Money, they have but one kind which they call Copeca, fifty of
which make a Crown, it is of Silver, of an Oval figure, and so small that the
value of two Crowns will scarce bear the bulk of four pence in French Deniers;
that which they call Muscofske is the fourth part of a Copeca, Poluske is the
half, an Alim is three pence, a Grifna is ten, a Rouble a hundred, but these
are not to be had of one piece.

There are two things further remarquable in the commune Society of the
Moscovites, one is that they begin their day at the rising of the Sun, and end
it at the setting, so that their Night begins as soon as the Sun is down, and
ends when it rises. By which means they confound that which we call the Natural
day with the Artificial, which extends it self from the rising to the setting
of the Sun. The other is, that they begin their Year the first day of
September, as allowing no other Epoche than from the Creation of the World
which they believe was in Autumn. And they reckon according to the opinion of
the Greeks, five thousand five hundred and eight Years from the Creation of the
World, to the Nativity of our Savior, whereas we account but three thousand
nine hundred and sixty nine. So that in the Year of our Lord 1663 when we
arrived in Moscovie, they reckoned 7175 Years from the Creation, whilst we
accounted but 5686. Every first day of the Year, they have great Processions in
their considerable Towns.

And thus far we have given you the Policy or public Comportment of the
Moscovite in the World: I shall now give you some hints of their Religion.

The Religion of the Russes is the same with the Profession of the Greeks, they
follow their Faith, their Rites, and their Ceremonies. The principal part of
their Devotion after they are Baptized, consists in the Invocation of their
Saints. For every Family has its Saint pictured, and hung up against the wall
of the Chamber, with a small wax Candle before it, which they light when they
make their Invocations. Their Churches also are all adorned with Pictures, very
ill drawn, and in flat painting; for they will endure no b^ ages embost. Over
the Porch of their Churches, in their Market places, and over the Gates of
their Cities, they have always the picture of the Virgin Mary, or their Patron
St. Nicholas. And amongst them these Images are in such Veneration, that all
that pass that way make a stand for a while before them, till they have made
Reverences to them five or six times one after another, which is performed by
crossing themselves with three Fingers of their right Hand, and by saying with
a low voice, Gospodi Pomilui, which is as much as to say, God have mercy on me.

They do address themselves with the same Veneration and Prayers to the Crosses
they meet by the way, so that they are observed to stop themselves every
moment. And these profound Reverences to their Images, and the signing
themselves with the Cross at the same time, and crying Gospodi Pomilui, is
almost all the Devotions the Parents do teach their Children. When a Moscovite
enters into another Man's house, he first looks about for the Saint, and having
paid his Reverence there, he turns about and salutes the Family. When they buy
any of these Images, they take great caution of saying, they have bought them,
but choose rather to say, they have changed them for Silver. When they grow old
or rotten, they either bury them with some Ceremony, or throw them into some
River, and expose them to the mercy of the Current. In short, the sign of the
Cross is so usual amongst them, that they are perpetually at it, and do make it
the ordinary preface of all their civil Actions.

On Sundays and their Festival days, they go three times to Church, Morning,
Noon, and Evening; and are standing and uncovered all the time of Divine
service, for which reason, they have neither benches nor seats in their
Churches. The most devout enter not into the Church, but perform their devotion
at the door amongst the Women, who being looked upon as more impure than the
Men, have not so easy an admission as they. A person who that day has had
knowledge of his Wife, ought not to enter into the Church, till he has washed
himself and put on a clean shirt. They have no preaching amongst them, so that
their whole Service consists in the reading of certain Psalms or Chapters in
the Bible by their Priest, and (upon occasion) Athanasius his Creed; or else
they Sing their Prayers with a very high voice, and adding sometimes after that
a Homily of St. Chrysostom. They say their Prayers standing, only when they
come to the Gospodi, they bow their Heads to the very ground, beating it with
their forehead. And this is the whole Service of their Sundays, in which many
amongst them forbear not any labor or travail. As to their Festivals, besides
their Sundays, they observe but fifteen, that is to say, the Nativity of the
Virgin Mary, on the eighth of September; the Exaltation of the Cross, the
fourteenth of the same; the Oblation of the Virgin Mary, the one and twentieth
of November; the Nativity of our blessed Savior, the five and twentieth of
December; the Epiphany or Feast of Kings on the sixth of January; Candelmas
day, on the second of February; the Annuntiation of the Virgin Mary, on the
five and twentieth of March; Palm Sunday, Easter Day, Ascension-day,
Whit-Sunday, the Feast of the Trinity next day after the Pentecost, All
Saints-day the Sunday after, the Manifestation of the Glory of Christ upon the
Mountain, being the sixth of August, and the Ascension of the Virgin the
fifteenth of the same.

If there be any Religion that obliges its Professors to a severe
Mortification, this must needs be confessed to do it with most Rigor. For
besides that they fast ordinarily on Wednes-days, Fridays, and the Eves before
holydays, they have four Lents every year. The longest of them is like ours, of
seven weeks, there is another that begins Eight days after the Pentecost and
lasts to St. Peter's day, the third holds from the first of August to the
sixteenth, and the fourth from the twelfth of November till Christmas day.
During these Lents they Eat neither butter nor eggs nor milk, only the first
week of their chief Lent they have liberty for all kind of Excess, save eating
of flesh. And indeed in this week (which serves them as a Carneval) their
extravagancies are incredible, and as if their debauches were a preparative to
their fasting, the insolences of drunken men are such, that at Moscow
especially, it is very unsafe walking the streets in the night. But after this
week they live so soberly that the most strict of them eat no fish but on
sundays, and drink nothing at all but Quaz or fair water. They content them
selves with pulse, and herbs, but above all with Garlic and Onyons, of which
they stink very enormously all Lent long; only now and then they indulge and
sweeten themselves with honey. In the mean time the husband being not allowed
the knowledge of his wife, but tied up from the pleasures of matrimony, is
subject as it were to double Lent, which is not to be transgressed under a
years excommunication.

In their Confessions they stand upright before their Images, and when the
Priest gives them absolution, he obliges them to certain penancies; the
greatest of which are, that they abstain from aqua vitae, and from their wives,
so that many times it falls out, a woman is punished for the sins of her
husband. Or else they enjoin them when they come to Church to come no further
than the Porch, to pronounce so many times the Gospodi, to make such a number
of reverences to their Saints, to wash themselves with holy water, which is
consecrated on the Epiphany, and which the Priests know very well how to
distribute for their own advantage.

They commonly take the Communion on a Fasting day at Noon service, and if any
one receives on a Sunday, he must that day eat no Kind of flesh. It is
administered in both Kinds with leavened bread, and wine mingled with warm
water, which represents the believers, or rather (according to a Council of the
East assembled at Constantinople) the water that came forth with the blood from
the most precious side of our Savior. There are none that receive in one kind
only but children under seven years old, at which age as soon as they are
arrived, they are admitted to communicate in both: because (say they) at that
age they begin to sin Mortally. Some there are that will sleep as soon as they
have received, to prevent by that means any occasion of sinning. If a Priest on
the Communion-day happen to touch any dead Corpse, or be present at any
funeral, he is looked upon as defiled, and can neither Consecrate nor
Administer the Sacrament that day. But for what Oleareus alleges, that they
believe a Transubstantiation, I could not perceive any such thing. And I have
three reasons that do principally persuade me they are not yet fallen under so
great an Error: The first is, that when one discourses with them about the
consequences of that belief, they will own it to be irrational, and declare it
absurd and ridiculous, and they never betake themselves (as the Catholics do)
to God's Omnipotency to maintain it. The Second is, that if they did believe a
real Transubstantiation, they would show more respect than they do to that
mystery; and indeed it would be very strange, if in a Religion so precise and
superstitious as theirs, they should want Zeal and Adoration at a time wherein
it ought to be most Eminent as it is amongst the Roman Catholics. And lastly
were they of this opinion, which Olearius imputs to them, it must have bin
derived to them from the Greeks, from whom they received the scheme of their
Religion, but neither do we find the Greeks under so great a blindness.

Amongst the Moscovites they have yearly many Processions, but the principal
and most solemn is on Palme-sunday, by which is represented our Saviors
Entering into Jerusalem. They have Saints also that perform great miracles, if
one will believe the stories they tell of them. Amongst the Rest, there is one
of them called Serge, at Troitza, in the richest and most beautiful Convent in
all Moscovy; in which place he lived formerly so religiously, that at last he
wrought Miracles. He died in the year 1563. and yet as we past by Troitza
(which is a Town near Moscow) they told us his countenance was as fresh as when
he died. And to this Convent the Tzar does usually go in Pilgrimage twice every
year, he comes on horseback within a league of the place, and then walks the
rest on foot.

The Religious or Monasticks eat no flesh in their Convents, nor drink any
thing but Quaz, but when they are out of their Convents, they have liberty to
drink what they please. In this Country a man may forsake his Wife, and
Children, and betake himself to a Convent; if a Woman be barren, her Husband
has power to quit himself of her, and dispose her into a Religious house; and
the Tzars themselves when they have none but Daughters, do serve theirs in the
same kind. Moreover, he that can convince his Wife of fornication has it at
his choice to shave her and clap her up in a Nunnery, and marry again within
six weeks after the Divorce. I call it Fornication and not Adultery, because
the Moscovites believe there is no Adultery but marrying another man's wife.

They do not believe there is a Purgatory, but they hold there are two
distinct places where the Souls that are separated from their bodies do remain
in expectation of the day of Judgment. One of them is the Mansion of the
Blessed, where they enjoy (as they believe) the conversation of Angels, with
all sort of Pleasure and Delight; the Other of the Wicked, in a dismal Valley,
where they have no other associates but Devils. Notwithstanding, they believe
the Souls of the Wicked are not altogether incapable of Comfort, but that by
the prayers and the perfumes of their Priests, they may be forced back out of
the very jaws of Hell. And for this cause their Priests will pray over their
Sepulchers morning and night, for forty days, which is the term of their
Mourning, in memory of their departed Friends; and on the Eve before the
Pentecost they perform certain annual Ceremonies in their behalf; which though
very formal, are altogether most ridiculous.

In their Hierarchy, they have for their chief a Patriarch, elected by the
Tzar, and it is this Patriarch that judges in all Causes Ecclesiastical, and
disposes absolutely in all matters of Religion; He has his palace in Mosco in
the great Dukes Castle. After him, there are several Metropolitans and Bishops,
dispersed into sundry parts of the Country. The rest of the Clergy is composed
of Proto-popes, and Popes, or simple Priests, which are obliged (contrary to
all other Ecclesiastical Persons) to marry before they receive Orders, but if
their wife dies, they are to remain widdowers as long as they live, because
(say they) the Apostle would have a Bishop to be the husband but of one wife in
the 1 Timothy chapter 3: whereas Saint Paul's meaning is that a Bishop should have but
one wife at a time, Poligamy being in his time a very Ordinary vice. And hence
it is that one of these Priests being a widdower is not permitted to administer
the Sacrament, nor to marry, he has only liberty to assist at Morning and
Everning service, not at Noon, at which time they usually Communicate as I have
said before. Nevertheless, if one of these Priest be unsatisfied with his
Condition, he may freely relinquish his charge, and lay by his vest and his Cap
which they put upon him at his Consecration, and after that become a Mechanic
if he thinks it for his advantage.

Of the Ambassadors stay at Archangel.
HAving given a sufficient description of Moscovie, it is time we return now to
speak again of our Voyage; But before we leave Archangel, it will be
convenient to say something of the Town, and that little Residence we made
there.

The Town of Archangel (so called from St. Michael the Archangel) is situated
on the bank of the River Duina, on the left hand as you pass from the White
Sea. When we were there it was not very great, but yet so populous by reason of
the great trading thither, that it was scarce capable of all the Inhabitants.
And indeed it is in respect of the Commerce especially, that this Town is so
considerable; for hither it is that the English and the Hollander, amongst
other Commodities, transport Cloth, Velvets, Damask, Spices, Tinn, Lead, Wine,
and strong Waters. But because the Moscovites swallow down small Wines like
River water, therefore they send them no French nor Rhenish Wines, as being not
strong enough for them. On the Moscovites side there is great store of Corn
exported, of Cavyar, Furs, Hemp, Russia-leather, and Wax. It is above an
hundred years since this trade was brought hither by the English from Narve, in
the time of Edward the sixth King of England, and Ivan Basilovitz Emperor of
Moscovie.

For Edward the sixth having set out a Fleet, for the establishing a Trade in
some unknown Country, the Fleet having followed the Northern passage, was at
length brought into this Port. And hence it was that Ivan Basilovitz (to
recompense the generous designs of the English, whose pains and industry had
opened a Trade into these parts) gave them a Privilege of Commerce to that
Town without any Custom or Impost. And this was the occasion upon which the
great Amity betwixt the two Crowns was established, to the no small Advantage
both of the one and the other.

After we, that made our Voyage in the Merchant-man, were arrived at Archangel,
his Excellence inquired particularly into the causes of our delay, and of Mr.
Watsons desertion, who was parted from us. Upon which the Master of the Ship
made a great Apology for himself, laying the fault upon the winds, and taking
occasion of Mr. Watson's absence, he accused him also (besides many particular
points) of being partly the cause that our Expedition had been no greater. But
it was answered sufficiently against the Masters Calumnies, both by the Seamen
and us. And indeed had the Master come to an harbor either in Norway or
Scotland, as he was often desired by Mr. Watson, rather than stay till the Ship
was bruised to pieces to get her repaired in England, sixty or seventy Leagues
out of our way, it is very likely we might have been two or three Weeks sooner
at our Port. And so it was doubtless rather the Master of the Ships than Master
Watsons fault, that we had stayed so long behind my Lord Ambassador, and that
his Excellency had not only the apprehension we should have been cast away, but
the continuation of his Voyage differred very long, to some great disadvantage.

However, while the Ambassador stayed at Archangel, he had all manner of good
Entertainment, which tasted very pleasant to us, who newly had made an end of a
long and very hard Voyage amongst the troubles of the Sea. Therefore we took
our good share of it, and in the mean time we took also a view of the Town
while we had opportunity, during one Weeks time his Excellency stayed in it
since our arrival. As for the Entertainment given us in this Town, it was
indeed so great and plentiful with all kind of Provision, that we wanted
nothing but a great number of Cooks to get it dressed, and more People to
consume it. And that we took to be a good Omen for the rest of our Travails
thorough that Country: but we were mistaken in it, for we experienced the
contrary in several places upon a very bad account. Howsoever the Ambassadors
meat was always dressed after the English and French way by his own Cooks, and
all the bread that was eaten at his Table, was made also by his own Baker. What
was eaten besides, was after the Moscovite fashion which seemed at first
something strange to us, for they bake it in such manner that it has scarce
any crust at all. As for Drink, we were plentifully provided with Beer, Mead,
Aqua-vitae, diverse sorts of Wines, and Spanish amongst the rest. The
Ambassadors from the Tzar, who about two months before had arrived at
Archangel from London, had without question given us fair recommendation by the
report they had published at this Town, and thorough the whole Road to Mosco,
of the extraordinary Reception which had been given them by the King of great
Britain.

Here I shall take the liberty of speaking something of the People called
Samojedes, upon occasion of some of them that we saw at Archangel. They are of
a Country very barbarous, but under the Tzars dominion, and of a long time
instructed in the Religion of the Greeks. Their Habitation is under the frozen
Zone, near the ancient Scythia, toward the Ryphean or Hyperborean Mountains,
which are next neighbors to Petzora which I have mentioned before. The word
Samojedes denotes what they have formerly been, viz. Anthropophagi or such as
eat mansflesh: for Samojedes is composed of Sam which signifies ones self, and
Jeda which signifies to eat; and indeed they did use to eat the bodies of their
dead friends with Venison. The Sun (that robs them of his presence in their
Contry five or six Months every year) obliges them to make provision in summer
of whatever is necessary for their livelihood in so tedious an obscurity;
against which they have no better remedy than the brightness of their lamps,
which are fed with a certain oil drawn out of Fish. It is reported that their
houses are built half way under ground, and that for their mutual conversation
in winter, they are forced to make trenches in stead of sheets, and that in
summer time they march out from their imprisonment at their Chimneys. Their
Common sustenance is Venison, honey, or a certain fish dried in the Wind or
the Sun, without any bread at all. They wear a Kind of Vest half way down their
legs which they make of Buck skins or the skins of Rein Deer with the Furrs
turned outward. These Vests have no other parts open than the bottom by which
they get into them, and the upper part where they put out their face, for they
cover the head with it as the Capuchinos do: but the cap has the same fashion
with the head of a Man. At the end of their sleeves they have their Muffs Sown
half on, that they may have it at their choice, to make use of them or let them
hang loose as they have occasion. They wear Boots, but with the Furr on the
outside, which Garb appears so horrid, that it is a hard matter at first sight
not to be frighted to see them habited in furs like savage Beasts. Under their
Vests they wear shirts made of the skins of young Reine Deer which are much
softer than linen, and under those shirts Drawers. They use also a very large
sort of Bonnets which hang down round about their shoulders, and are commonly
made of cloth and lined with furr. Their Stature is but low, their Faces flatt
and broad like the Tartars, and their Hair long. Two or three of these
Samojedes were brought to his Excellency, with whom he entertained himself for
some time with several questions which he asked them touching their manner of
living. He had the diversion also to see them dance after the mode of their
Country, which was the most ridiculous in the World.

The Preparation his Excellence made for his Voyage up the River consisted of
six barges or great boats for his train and baggage, of which one was set
apart for his Kitchen, and a hearth and Chimney contrived in it; and an other
for his Coach horses. Besides these six there was one Barque peculiar to the
Pristaff, who resolved to carry his wife along with him. The day of our
departure being at hand, his Excellence and all his Gentlemen provided
themselves with gowns and coats lined with furr, some of martin, others of
sables, beaver, fox, or squirell, to defend themselves from the severity of the
Cold which was sufficiently increased at Archangel when we arrived there. The
most of them bought Caps lined with furr according to the Polonian fashion,
some bought also their Caps like the Samojedes, others for curiosity sake
bought whole suits ready made, which cost them but about ten shillings. The
Governor of the Town also would needs give us supplies against the Winter, and
present most of my Lord Ambassadors domestics with Sheep skins dressed after the
fashion of Moscovie, and some fair Buck skins to ly upon instead of quilts.

Of his Excellencies Voyage from Archangel to Vologda, upon the Rivers of Duina
and Sucagna.
ON Saturday the twelfth of September his Excellence departed from Archangel
with all his Train, and came the next day to Colmogro, and on the nineteenth to
Arsinoa, which is two hundred and fifty Versts (every Verst being the fourth
part of a League) from Archangel. On the two and twentieth we parted from
Arsinoa, and on the seven and twentieth arrived at Yagrish one hundred and
thirty long Versts, and from Yagrish to Vstiga, which is one hundred and fifty
Versts in five days. The third of October we left Vstiga (which is almost half
way betwixt Archangel and Vologda) and on the twelfth arrived at Tetma, which
from Vstiga is two hundred and fifty Versts. From thence in three days we came
to Chousca one hundred and forty Versts, and on Saturday the seventeenth of
October we arrived at Vologda, which is ninety Versts from Chousca. So as this
Voyage of two hundred and fifty Leagues took us up five weeks complete, in the
Relation of which I shall first speak something in general concerning the
manner of our Navigation.

We made no use of Horses for the haleing our Barques from Archangel to
Vologda, but (notwithstanding it was up the River) we performed all with men,
so that ordinarily we had no less than three hundred with us. The River is not
very rapid but in certain places, where we were sometimes constrained to employ
the Watermen of two boats for drawing up a single one against the opposition
of the stream. But his Excellence fearing (and not without reason) the River
would freez before we could finish our Voyage, he entreated the Pristaf Bogdan
to go before, that we might have fresh watermen ready at our arrival in every
relay; and that all necessary provisions being provided before hand, we might
have no occasion lo lose our time. But this care was very ill seconded by our
Pilots, who ran us several times upon ground, so that sometimes we spent two or
three hours in disengaging a boat from the Rocks. And sometimes we received so
horrible concussions, that it was a wonder the barque was not broke to pieces
under us, and this gave one occasion to say, that peradventure the Boats did
break the Rocks. In the night time ordinarily the Boat-men made fires in the
Woods, as if they would have set all Moscovie on fire, and when they had done,
laid themselves down by it to sleep very civilly upon the banks of the River.

We had always very good provision of Victuals, and especially of strong
Waters, of Wine, Mead, and Quaz, of which we laded a barque at Archangel to
serve us the whole Voyage. The Barque which we had made our Kitchen, furnished
all the rest with meat, and in particular his Excellencies, by getting them
close one to another, in such a manner, that those that were in the
Ambassador's Vessel received the dishes from the hands of the Cooks, to carry
them two or three steps to his Table: Whereas the other boats were glad to make
use of their skifs to fetch their provision daily.

In this Voyage Walking was our greatest Recreation, for whilst our barques
were drawn by the men, and advanced but a small pace, we went ashore in our
skifs. The Shadows and Umbrages which the continual Forests cast upon the
River, the excellent Verdure wherewith they were adorned all the way, together
with the favourableness of the Weather invited us to it, and many times made us
lose all sense of weariness; sometimes also we had the diversion of Shooting,
by reason of the many wild Ducks and Pigeons that Moscovie is provided with. In
short, we saw never a Town considerable enough to have any particular
Description. Vstiga (which is the principal in a Province of that name) is the
greatest we saw, but it is built of wood, as the rest are, and paved only with
piles of Firr. True it is here we had now and then liberty to see their
Churches, which in Mosco they will not permit to Strangers of another Religion,
for they believe them profaned, when any such set their feet in them. Betwixt
Archangel and Vstiga we saw several Rocks of Alabaster, or white Marble, as we
passed upon the River.

This being the manner of our Voyage, it remains now that we present you with
some circumstances that happened in our Navigation.

And first of all it was usual as we past by any Village, to have the Priest
come to his Excellencies boat, with a present of Fish, autumnal Goose-berries,
or sometimes a Hen with some few Eggs, in hopes of receiving some reward from
the Ambassador: And drinking Aqua vitae, which they gusled down with so much
pleasure, they commonly went home again drunk.

The next day after we parted from Archangel, the Pristaf brought his Wife into
the Ambassadors barque. She was very richly dressed with Pearls and precious
Stones, and (had she not been painted) might have past for very handsome;
however his Excellence vouchsafed to honor her with a Salute, and entertained
her with great Civility, presenting her according to the custom of the place
with a Cup of Aqua vitae, till Dinner came in. Within a little time after she
was unhappily deprived of her Husband, for being arrived at Vstiga, he found
himself seized with a distemper which in a short time ended both his Life and
Voyage.

Being arrived near Arsinoa the Ambassador expecting to have found boat-men
ready for his departure, was constrained himself to provide them, after he had
attended three whole days. The Governor of this Town had had advertisement
from the Governor of Archangel to have all things ready in good time, and the
like notice he had also from the Pristaf; but he despised all, and ranted (as
if he had been in a frenzy) against all such as were employed in the business,
resolving the Ambassador should go back if he pleased, rather than he would be
troubled with any thing. So that his Excellence was necessitated at his own
proper charges to hire some of the Watermen that had brought us from Colmogro
to carry us to Yagrish, and to engage the rest at Arsinoa. In the mean while we
saw a Wolf upon the bank of the River running up and down, which some fancied
was the Governor dressed in that disguise, to take a view of the Ambassador
and his train. We clapped some dogs after him immediately, but he ran the foil
so cunningly, that we lost him in a moment.

On the 26. of September at Night there was an unlucky accident befell fifteen
of our boatmen, who put themselves in a huddle into a skif to come to one of
the barques, and falling down the River suffered their boat to be carried away
by the stream with that violence, that it fell foul upon one of the barques,
and was overturned, and seven of the fifteen were drowned, the rest saving
themselves by swimming. Another time one of our watermen fell off the Decks
into the River, and having no skill in swimming, he was in the greatest danger
of the World; But as he was just sinking, a Boat was presently dispatched,
which took him up, and after he had drunk two or three good draughts of strong
Waters, he found himself very well again. Which made me imagine that had the
water of the River been Aqua vitae, he would have thought they had done him a
great injury to preserve him, and would rather have chose to have died with
that plenty than to have lived in want of it. About this time also we received
the News that Archangel was burnt, and almost all reduced into ashes presently
after our departure.

The Governor of Vstiga expressed great Civilities to my Lord Ambassador, and
was clearly of another humor than the Governor of Arsinoa; yet it was without
violating a Custom they have to see no foreign Ambassadors themselves.
Nevertheless he tendered his service and all that he was able to do by one of
his Gentelmen, and provided us abundantly with all things necessary for our
Voyage by the means of two honest Officers which he deputed Pristaffs in the
place of Bogdan lately deceased. For this reason his Excellence would not
depart from thence till he had made him some acknowledgment, and presented him
by one of his Gentlemen with three douzain bottels of Canary and French wine.
We stayed only two days in this Town, and from thence made all possible have
because the Rever began to be frozen. At this time every of our barques having
two Masts, one for our Sails and another for our Ropes, we were fain to cut
our Sayls Mast to make our barques the lighter; for betwixt Vstiga and Vologda,
they cannot in those large Boats upon the River Sucagna (which runs into the
Duina hard by) make use of their Sails by reason of the great number of Rocks
betwixt Vstiga, and Tetma. His Excellence to lighten his Vessel yet more, left
there a hundred Ingots or Rigs of lead, for notwithstanding it was still haled
with threescore and ten men, it nevertheless went the most heaviely of them
all, because of its bulk and freight. For besides seven or eight boatmen who
guided it, there were always aboard the same thirty persons, besides a great
quantity of Goods, which was the cause that several in that Vessel were very
narrowly lodged. This Lead abovementioned was designed amongst the rest of the
presents for the Tzar which the King of England sent him, and for that purpose
was brought to his Excellence a little after our arrival at Vologda,

And now by this time the Winter was so far advanced, that our Voyage began to
be grievous and insupportable; for there being no Convenience for fire to warm
our selves we had no relief but from our furrs, and strong waters (which we
began to take down in good lusty draughts) or else by walking, although the
ground was already covered with snow. Insomuch that in a short time we were all
in our Robes, some like Moscovites, others like the Samojedes, and some of them
in their Sheep-skin Vests with long sleeves, resembling those old and eternal
Destinies, whom Venus did so laugh at when she saw them in their habits, those
like the Samojedes looking so hideously that we made a good sport with them. At
length we found the frost increasing by degrees, so that at our parting from
Rousea we found the River so frozen to Vologda about twenty miles, that we were
forced to break the ice before our first Vessel which guided the rest in the
way.

At Tetma we were no sooner arrived but the Governor came, though it was night,
to salute the Ambassador; who surprised with the unusualness of his civility,
received him with great courtesy and treated him in his Barque. The Governor
was in his person like a Boyar, thick, and fat, and corpulent, as most of the
Governors of Provinces generally are; otherwise he was a pleasant man, good
company, and very richly clad. He expressed great civilities to the Ambassador,
tendering his assistance in any thing which lay in his power, in acknowledgment
whereof his Excellence sent him a present the next morning of three Else of
scarlet cloth by Mr. Tailor his Steward. He received it with great Kindness and
thanks, and presented Mr. Tailor with a pair of Sables worth about four pounds
sterling, at the same time expressing a desire once more to recreate himself
aboard us. His Excellence being gone, Mr. Tailor prepared to entertain him, and
conspired with some other Gentlemen who were in his boat to try whether the
Governors head were able to bear a lusty cup or no. But the design succeeded
very ill, for he defended himself so well in this debauch, that he came off
much better than all the rest.

Tantalus in media garrulus aret aqua. Of his Excellencies Residence in the
Town of Vologda.
Vologda is the chief City of a Province of the same name, it is very
considerable both in respect of its bigness, and of a strong stone wall which
surrounds it. The River makes it a place of great trading, therefore very
populous. It is situate on the right hand of the River, like Vstiga, Colmogro,
and Tetma, all raised upon the banks, and the River running under them.

Our Lodgings were taken up in the Suburbs of the Town near the Rivers side:
but the houses there being small and incapable of such a number, we were forced
to take up six or seven more, and lie dispersed about the Town. In this posture
we continued three months in this place; contrary to his Excellencies design,
who was to pass immediately to Mosco, as soon as it was possible for him to
travail in Sledges: and therefore he resolved to attend, till the frost
hardening the snow should make the ways passable. At our first coming we did not
think to stay above a month, the ground having been a long time covered with
snow, and the air in appearance disposed to freez it well. Yet after our
arrival the weather proved so moist, that in a short time we saw the ground
uncovered, and the River giving free passage to the Boats. So that in the mean
while we passed our time very ill, in respect of the rain and dirt, which was
so great, that for the space of a month or five weeks, we scarce ever durst set
a foot in the Streets. But that which was an Aggravation of our trouble, was an
impatience we all had to be at Mosco, and indeed it was a hard matter for us to
be satisfied in a Town that kept us so long from that where his Excellencies
Embassy to the Tzar determined, and where we hoped to have a happy repose. In
the mean time from the first day of our arrival we began to warm our chambers
with our furnaces of stone, which is indeed a very convenient invention in so
cold a Country: but not being able to endure them to that degree of heat the
Moscovites do, we were fain to use them with more moderation.

At first our Entertainment was very good, and regulated as the Ambassador
pleased; so that we had plenty enough of all things, and yet nothing
superfluous. But as Soon as Nestrof and Davidof (which the Tzar had sent from
his Court in the quality of Pristafs to conduct his Excellence to Mosco) were
arrived at Vologda in the Month of December, our diet and accommodation was so
altered and retrenched that there could be nothing more mean and dishonorable.
Nestrof, was a Stolnick (which is as much as to say, a Gentleman waiting at the
Tzars Table) the other was a Diack (which is an office importing something
higher than a Secretary, but lower than a Chancellor) Nestrof was he that took
all upon him, managed the whole Oeconomie, and made all things depend upon his
own conduct. His arrogance had no bounds in all his actions, nor was it less
remarquable in his languages: he was a person like himself in every thing, and
little cared to dissemble himself a civil man. This was the form of his
Complement to the Ambassador the next day after his arrival, having with a
grave impudence and austere brow entered the Hall, where his Excellence
received them; The most Serene (says he) and Puissant Great Lord, Tzar and
Grand Duke, Alexey Michailovitz, (with a long enumeration of Titles, which had
been Treason in him to have omitted) is very joyful to understand that you the
great Ambassador of his Majesty of Great Britain, etc. are so happily arrived
here, and has commanded, that We and your Excellence go together to Mosco. Not
contenting himself to say bluntly, the Tzar had commanded him (designing
thereby to bring the Ambassador under the Tzar's command) with yet higher
^ncivility he preferred his own person and his associates before his
Excellence, when he said, the Tzar had commanded them and his Excellence to go
in company to Mosco; True it is he sweetened his discourse a little afterward,
when having preferred himself before, he condescended to make him his companion
in these words, We must go in company together to Mosco; and it was a wonder to
me (as he had placed the Ambassador in his Speech) he did not say, and you must
come after me. This is the Character of Nestrof, the most insolent and rude man
we met with in all Moscovie, he it was who undertook to regulate our Table
as soon as he arrived, before he had ever thought of regulating the insolence of
his Nature; as if he had believed his credit and authority could not have any
way been signified better, than by rendering himself surly, proud, and
insupportable. It was at this time one of their Lents, and we observed it so
strictly, that we could scarce get Tallow or Wax candles, for nothing could
escape the good husbandry of Nestrof. There was nothing wherein he did not
retrench us, insomuch that at one blow we were fallen from plenty to want, and
instead of making our residence there comfortable to us, he disobliged us so
much, that from his first arrival we had reason to admire the civility of our
treatment at Archangel. In the mean time we comforted our selves in the
Shortness of the days, and the Hopes we had of departing suddenly for Mosco,
where our condition was like to be much better.

The affairs of our House being thus established, the Ambassador took
particular care of our Devotions. He appointed the Chaplain to read Prayers
twice a day, and that there should be a Sermon every Sunday. He commanded all
his domestiques to be constantly present at the same, the Catholics only
excepted, in which number he had four French men: the Surgeon, the
Confectioner, and two Cooks. These had all their liberty of Conscience, but it
was very seldom they made use of it. At Christmas we received the Communion.

Amongst all the Divertisements we had in this Town (besides music, dancing,
and some other Recreations we used at home, during the rain, to divert the
tediousness of the time) Hunting was our best and most usual entertainment,
when the Snow was frozen upon the ground. Our Music was most commonly at
Dinner, at which time there was nothing to be heard but Trumpets and Viols,
whose delightful and agreeable Harmony, did sometimes so charm the Russes, that
it drew great Company of them to hear it. And indeed the Music was very good,
being managed by one of the best experienced Musicians of England, who from
time to time composed new aires. Our dancing also, which the Ambassador used
sometimes upon occasion of this Music, was no less admired by them, who in
their Dances knew nothing but brutish and uncomely Postures, But when the River
was stopped up to the boats, and the Snow was frozen upon the ground, which was
not till the latter end of November, Hare-hunting was our principal sport, of
which Creatures we found such plenty, that we could very well entertain our
selves amongst them from morning till night; and then we went a hunting in our
Sledges. But they that knew how to march upon their Scates, did also divert
themselves with sliding upon the River. Moreover the Baths were grown very
familiar amongst us, for besides the pleasure, we found great refreshment by
them. We had also the Celebration of several Festivals, but principally of the
fifth of November, which we kept in Memory of the happy Discovery of the
Treason contrived against King James at London. We began our Solemnity in the
night by artificial fireworks, made by an Englishman with great skill and
success; and the same was continued by a great Feast which the English
Merchants were invited to, and by a pleasant farce of Mascarads after Supper,
and concluded with dancing.

And thus have you seen the manner of our living during our Residence at
Vologda: I shall now present you with some particular circumstances, before I
proceed to the Description of our Voyage betwixt Vologda and Mosco.

Although Tobacco be forbidden in this Country with great severity, yet there
were some of the Ambassadors Servants who drove a private Trade with it in this
Town, and that with so much advantage, that sometimes they sold the most
ordinary tobacco (which cost them in London not above nine pence or ten pence
the pound) for fifteen shillings the pound to the Moscovites, who stole to them
with great secrecy to buy it. It is a Commodity they love so well in those
parts, that if they want money they will truck their shirts for tobacco: which
they take so brutishly that I was almost frighted to see such of them as waited
on the Ambassador smoking it when they had opportunity. Instead of Pipes they
have an Engine made of a Cows horn, in the middle of which they pierce a hole
and therein place the Vessel which holds their tobacco. The Vessel is commonly
made of wood, very wide and indifferently deep, which when they have filled
with tobacco, they put water into the horn to temper the smoke; then they
lighten their pipe with a firebrand, and suck the smoke thorough the horn with
such greediness, that they make not above two sucks of a pipe; and when they
whiffe it out of their mouths, they raise such a cloud that it hides all their
face; and immediately after they fall drunk upon the ground. Five or six of them
one after another have I seen tumbling in this manner, and so drunk that they
had scarce time to give their Companions these pipes, and for half a quarter of
an hour they will ly in this pickle as insensible as if they had the falling
sickness. But as soon as they begin to revive, and the smoke of the tobacco has
had its operation, they leap up in an instant one after another more brisk and
lively than they were before, pronouncing it a most admirable invention for
purging the head. Red cloth, and Gray especially are of that esteem in this
Town, that some of us could hardly forbear selling our clothes off our backs,
to accomodate them.

In the mean time his Excellencies family was increast by the birth of a son,
of which the Buttlers wife was brought to bed, having been big with child
before she came out from London. But the Parents being both Catholics, and the
child to be educated in that way, our Minister made some difficulty to baptize
it, as not being born within our pale. Yet upon Consultation concerning the
matter it was judged necessary it should be Christened presently, rather than
have its baptism suspended, in regard that as to the essence of the Sacrament,
both Protestants and Roman Catholics, do hold our administration of it
sufficient, and upon that score both the one side and the other receive their
proselites without Injunction of being rebaptised. And thus his Excellencies
family represented a Commonwealth rather than a private house, some laying
there the foundation of their Marriage, as the good man that hurt himself in
the Merchant-man at Gravesend, some conceiving with child whilst others were
delivered, and this very woman happened to serve as a Nurse, when the Countess
(who accompanied My Lord Ambassador) was brought to bed of a son at Copenhagen
in Denmark. So that at length there were three or four families comprehended in
Ours; we married, we Christened in our house, we heard sermons there, and
received the Sacrament; our Chaplain was Bishop and Minister, he was the only
person and all, that managed the affairs of our Church.

During our stay here, there happened a Quarrel also betwixt two considerable
servants in his Excellencies train, at an entertainment made him by the Pristaf
at a Country house of his, two or three miles from Vologda. For his Excellence
setting out late to return back to the Town, one of them fell in as close as he
could to the Ambassadors person, who was then attended with sixteen sledges,
the other who was but then preparing to depart being come up to him, fell foul
upon the former with design to quarrel with him, and nothing could serve his
turn but he must stop his sledg, that he himself might go before him according
to his place. The other not at all pleased with so strange a dealing, refused
him and gave him withal ill language. Upon this they both betook themselves to
their swords and leaping on shore they fell presently to fight. But the
Ambassador having the alarm came presently in, and seeing how deficient they
had bin in their respect to his person, he used them both severely. However
every one lamented the ill fortune of the assailant, who appeared to have
engaged in this business upon a public account, and made use of this only as
an occasion; the other being an imperious person, and one that (by reason of
his long relation to his Excellence with had gained him some favors) seemed to
despise the whole family. And indeed nothing but his long standing in that
family could be the ground of all his presumption, for of his other qualities
there was no body believed he had any reason to boast.

In the 18. of December we saw that strange representation, that is annually
made by the Moscovites of the fiery furnace in which Shadrech, Mesec, and
Abednego were cast by the King of Babylon. The Persons that act in it are
disguised, their beards rubbed over with honey, their hats of wood with which
they run up and down the streets, and with wild fire in their hand burn the
hair or beard of any body they meet, with great insolence. During this
Extravagance the Moscovites look upon them as so many Pagans and profane
persons, but on the feast of Kings they baptize them again, because that day
they believe was the first calling of the Gentiles, and for that reason they
return them into the bosom of the Church:

Our devotions at Christmas being over, my Lord Ambassador made all necessary
preparations for our Voyage from Vologda to Mosco. In order to which he sent to
Nestrof to desire that he might have good sledges chiefly for his Gentlemen,
and that the same might attend them quite through his journey to spare the
trouble of changing them by the way. But this demand was presently rejected by
Nestrof, who had been will pleased if all his Excellencies Retinue would have
marched on foot. His answer was, he could not furnish him with any, but the
Ordinary sledges which are commonly very thin and split in their sides. Upon
this answer my Lord Ambassador dispatched his Secretary to him, who told him
freely it was most undecent to have persons of quality worse accommodated for
their confidence in the Care of the Tzar so great a Monarch, than if they had
been at their own charges. He replied they might do as they pleased, no body
hindered them from taking their own course. And thereupon he declared that his
Excellence had no reason, to complain, that his Tzarskoy Majesty had done him
extraordinary honor in sending a person of his quality so far to conduct him to
Mosco. To which the Secretary replied, that my Lord Ambassador acknowlegded his
quality, but that he never thought it so great, that he and his associate ought
to prefer themselves before him as they had done at their first visit. But
after all this expostulation his Excellence was constrained to provide himself
of sledges at his own charges. In the mean time to secure themselves from the
wind and the snow, every one took care to make himself a kind of a tilt of
cloth stretched upon two or three hoops, as the people of quality of those
parts are used to do. And the weather being exceeding cold, the greatest part
lined their sledges with a course kind of felt that is sold on purpose for that
use, as they did likewise their Coverlets with good furs to wrap themselves up
in. The rest provided as well as they could to cover themselves, so that our
Samojedes Vests were not with out employment, nor were our Buck and Sheeps skin
unusefull in this Voyage, everyone endeavoring above all things to be
furnished with furrs against the cold.

Of his Excellencies Journey from Vologda to Mosco.
MY Lord Ambassador foreseeing what the inconvenience would be if he marched
with his whole train along with him, especially from Vologda to Yeroslaf, upon
which road there was nothing but Villages, thought good to send before his
Horses and all things belonging to his Stables with sixty sledges, in which
there was also a good part of his bagage, and some nine or ten Servants who had
all their quarters assigned that they might have the better care of the Goods.
The 7. of January 1664. they set forward, and on the 15. of the same month his
Excellence with a Train of about an hundred and forty Sledges. On the 19. he
arrived at Yeroslaf, having crossed the Volga at the Towns-end, which was
Frozen over, and covered with Snow. The 22. we parted from Yeroslaf all
together, and passing by Rostof, we came the 24. to Peroslaf. The next day his
Excellence departed from Peroslaf, and arrived on the 27. at Troitza, where we
stayed five days. At length we came to the Yawes on the third of February,
which is a little Village some five Versts from Mosco, and there it was my Lord
Ambassador prepared himself for his Entry, which began the fifth, and was not
finished till the sixth at Night.

The Weather was so sharp, and the Frost so violent, when Mr. Godbolt (the
Master of the Horse) departed with my Lord's Coach and Horses from Vologda,
that notwithstanding our provision of Furs, we thought we should never have
been able to overcome it. But this extremity continued not above five or six
days, the Heavens had reserved more mild and propitious weather for his
Excellencies departure, so that it thawed till the very day we arrived at
Yeroslaf; but it began then to reassume its former fierceness, as by very
sensible Convictions we found afterward. We marched as well night as day,
every one in his sledge at his full length. And, because the upper parts of us
were more exposed to the injuries of the Air, we took a particular care of
covering our selves, and to stop all the chinks the cold might possibly come in
at. We had every one of us (besides our Furs) his bottle of strong water, which
we drunk off now and then as an excellent preservative of Heat. The Kitchen
went still before with the Russ Harbingers, which the Pristafs sent away to
take up our Lodgings in good time, and to get such meat dressed as they had
along with them, and having dispatched these away, they advanced to the next
place some three or four hours before the Ambassador. The Pristafs Equipage
made the whole journey on horseback; true it is they were well mounted and
warmly clad, yet in my judgment their manner of travailing was very much
disagreable with the Season. The Waggoners or Drivers condition was lamentable
too, who as the other had no other covering than the Sky, but they had this
advantage that they could warm themselves as they ran by their Sledges sides,
besides a certain dexterity they had got in begging strong Waters, which they
would do so frequently, it was a hard matter to prevent them by offering it.
Moreover we had three Relaies or Stages by the way, viz. at Yeroslaf, at
Peroslaf, and at Troitza, where some of us changed both their Horses and
Sledges; others whom his Excellence had furnished with Sledges from Vologda,
provided themselves with fresh Horses only, so that each of us had four several
Waggoners or Drivers by the way.

The greatest Inconvenience I found in our whole Voyage was in our Lodging; for
besides that the accommodation of Inns is not known in that Country, there are
very few Towns upon the Road that are capable of receiving an Ambassador. So
that his Excellence had never good Quarters, but at Yeroslaf, at a Moscovites
house which was newly built, and there we stayed near four complete days to
refresh our selves, most of us lying in sheets, which we had scarce done any
where but there in our whole Voyage. Our usual lodgings were Cabbins, or little
Cottages of Wood, one story high, black all over with smoke, so that to
dissipate the stinks which are occasioned by the same, and the sweltring heat
of their skins, which would be otherwise intolerable, we were forced to keep
the Windows continually open. But the greatest trouble we had in these
lodgings, or Wisbies (as they call them) was when they heated their Stoves, for
having no Chimneys they make their fires within side of the Chambers, and the
smoke having no passage but at the Windows into the Streets, it is scarce
possible to subsist one moment in that condition.

And hence it was also we were so ill accommodated with Diet: for, besides that
we almost always eat in a Scramble, mutton, beef, or hens, which were roasted
in their furnaces, was commonly our fare. They having no other invention for
the dressing their meat, and we doing it ordinarily in have, it fell out often
our meat was but half dressed, insomuch that some rather chose to eat their
meat that had been frozen in the way, provided it had been better dressed. This
it was that in the beginning of this Relation gave me occasion to say, that
amongst the Utensils of the Kitchen that the Ambassador brought from England, a
Chimney would not have been superfluous in several places. However as we were
well lodged at Yeroslaf, so our entertainment was very splendid, the Governor
of the Town showing so much generosity, that he would spare no cost in regaling
the Ambassador and his Train. There was an English Merchant there, that treated
his Excellence very nobly, Nestrof entertained him twice also in his Voyage,
and amongst the rest at Peroslaf, where we had the diversion of Music, though
in a Wisby all blackned with smoke.

Furthermore, in the Condition where in we travailed, it was no easy matter
for us to divert our selves being every one in his sledg by himself as in
another world, marching as well night as day amidst the snow, and in the
Violence of the winter, which to us seemed very bitter, though to the
Moscovites it appeared very Favorable; Our Emploiment for the most part was
sleeping, the solitude, the warmth of our furrs, and the agreeable motion of
our sledges inviting us thereunto; so that the greatest part of us did nothing
almost but sleep all the Voyage. And for this reason when we came near any Town
or Village, the Ambassador gave order that the Trumpets should sound, to give
advertisement to his train.

Moscovie being not very populous, and the Towns but of wood, my intention is
not to delay my self in describing those that presented themselves in this
Voyage. For, besides that the Moscovites are very scrupulous in permitting
strangers to see their forts, there are very few of their Towns worthy an exact
description. The handsomest we saw in this Journey is Yeroslaf, no very great
Town but remarquable for that the Volga runs by it, and renders it a place of
good Trade and populous. At Peroslaf there is a very narrow River, but above
100 fathoms deep, and by the side of the Town a little Lake which was frozen as
well as the River, at that time. Troitza is a Town built upon the bending of a
hill: in which there is a Covent that makes it very remarquable. It is built on
a plain below the Town, all of stone, fortified with a fair Wall, and so rich
that it maintains ordinarily 300 Monks. Here it was his Excellence was retarded
five days in respect of the preparation that was making at Mosco for his Entry,
and by reason that betwixt this place and Mosco, there was no other Town so
proper for his stay, though in this also he was sufficiently incommoded; Yet in
all the time he could not have liberty to see the Monastery:

On the third of February as soon as we were arrived at the Yaws, his
Excellence got his Coach ready, and put himself immediately into a condition of
making his solemn Entry into Mosco. In the mean time the tediousness of our
Journey past, the ill lodging we met with in so little a Village, and the happy
repose we promised our selves in Mosco, made us impatiently to expect tho hour
of our departure. At length the fifth of that month was appointed for the
Ambassadors reception, as Nestrof had acquainted his Excellence the day before,
advising him to have all things ready by nine a clock the next Morning, which
according to the Moscovite account was the third hour of the day. Accordingly
the Liveries were immediately given out to those that were to wear them, and
the Gentlemen put themselves with all speed into a very good Equipage, so that
all were ready at the hour appointed. Our Liveries were so rich, and so well
trimmed, that the Pages Liveries amongst others cost near thirty pound sterling
a piece, being almost covered quite over with silver lace. Each of them had a
good plume of feathers in his hat, and in short there was nothing in all this
Equipage unworthy the greatness of the Master. This was in part the condition
in which his Excellence was to make his Entry on the 5. of February, for which
all things were in readiness by nine of the clock in the morning. But the hour
being come we had no Orders for our departure, in so much that there we lay
languishing in a tedious expectation till four a clock in the evening. His
Excellence having dispatched his Cooks to Mosco in the morning to prepare his
dinner in the house that was assigned him there, we were constrained to remain
all that day without provisions, because we expected every moment to be gone.
In the mean time no body knew what to make of this dis-order; Nestrof himself
was amazed and could not imagine the reason, unless it was that the Tzar was
a-sleep, and no body durst wake him. At length about half an hour before night,
the Messengers arrived with orders for our departure when we were in despair of
making our Entry. The Ambassador was much surprised at it, and could not
imagine what their design should be to receive him in the night, in so much,
that he represented to Nestrof that it was not the Custom to receive
Ambassadors in that Manner. However orders being come, and we tired with an
extreme impatience all day of removing from those Wisbies, he prepared to
depart, and expose all his pomp and splendour to the darkness of the night.

Of the solemn Entry of the Ambassador into Mosco.
THe Glory of Princes is in some proportion like the glory of the Sun, and
suffers its Eclipses, the disorders and irregularities of their Officers many
times intercepting the rays of their glory. Of this we have an instance in the
condition we were in all that day, contrary to the Tzars design, who stayed
near four hours with the Empress or great Duchess at one of the gates of the
Town, to see the splendour of this Embassy which was to be more particularly
illustrious at this Entry. But those who were the contrivers of this so great
miscarriage, were the cause also of that which happened after our setting
forth, and which his Excellence resented with great indignation; which was the
deferring of our Entry till the next day, after we had advanced a good part of
our way, and arrived within sight of the Town. For it being very late, and the
night overtaking us when as of five Versts we had past but two, his Tzarskoy
Majesty thought good his Excellence should retire, and send orders to Nestrof
to conduct him into a little Village on the Left hand, to the end the
Ambassador might from thence make his Entry the next morning in good time. We
had already in some manner presaged this disorder when we took notice how we
were lead thorough by ways, and that they had by design drawn us out of the
high way. For which cause the Ambassador reflecting upon the ill treatment he
had received that day: and imagining this delay would become every where a
matter of laughter and contempt, he was so far transported, that he resolved
and protested not to make his Entry till he had lawful reparation thereupon.
And to testify the resentment he had of this affront, he commanded his Trumpets
should be silent. Thus this day, which should have been a day of Pomp and
Magnificence proved a day of fasting of trouble and discontent; this day in
which his Excellence ought to have received the extraordinary Marks of the
greatest Amity that ever was betwixt two Crowns, was a day in which he
received but the tokens of indignity and contempt. True it is, the Ambassador
was no sooner arrived at the Village, we were retired to by order from the
great Duke, but a Diack (whose name was Loukian Golozof) arrived from him to
excuse this disorder, and accordingly he alleged that the Messengers that were
sent with the orders for our departure had imprudently lost their way, and that
his Majesty judging it inconvenient his Excellence should make his Entry so
late, he thought good to defer him till the next morning, that he might give
him a Reception suitable to his Character. But the Ambassador being assured
that this wandering of the Messengers was but a pretense (for he was otherwise
informed, that all this happened because they were not ready to receive him) he
was so far from being satisfied with his apology, that he was disgusted at the
very person of the Diack, and told him that without any reflection upon him, it
had been more becoming to have sent a person of greater quality than he was
of, to excuse such proceedings. In the mean time our Cooks were sent back, who
brought us some provision along with them, to recover those Spirits we had lost
that day for want of victuals. The next day in the morning his Excellency
apprehending Golozof might have either disguized or concealed his answer, he
commanded his Secretary to draw up a letter in writing to the Tzar, in which
he should inform him of the principal circumstances of this disorder, and
intimate his resolution not to stir from thence, till some correction were
given to the Authors and Instruments of it. The Letter was in these Terms.

Illustrissime atque Excellentissime Imperator.
NOvum hoc and inusitatum ad Imperatoriam Vestram Majestatem scribendi,
antequam optatissimo ejus conspectu frui liceret consilium expressit hesternae
diei infortunium, dicam an opprobrium. Quippe post tot in itinere a Vologda
moras, and tertiae diei quatuor tantum ab aula vestra Imperatoria milliaribus
expectionem, quum multo mane surrexissem and Offonarii Evan Vizy Nestrof
monitu, ante horam diei Tertia diei hora apud Moscovitas tum erat nobiscum
circiter nonam: Primam enim (ut prius affirmavi) numerant horam ab Orient sole.
tertiam ad iter me comparassem; ultra decimam tamen inter famosi gurgustii
sordes and angustias sine cibo aut potu detentus marcebam and macerabar. Quae
quidem omnia, quamvis Serenissimi Regis mei Majestate, Imperatorio Vestro
Fastigio, and nostra Dignitate indignissima, utcunque Metropolin Vestram
intrandi, and ad Majestatem vestram Imperatoriam appropinquandi, and
justissimas querelas nostras exponendi spe tolerabam. Tandem quum jam
advesperasceret, signum proficiscendi datum Tunc vero postquam (quod ignes
fatui solent) per camporum and noctis errores me circumduxissent pronuntiatur
in ignobili hoc Pago ubi cum omnibus incommodis and (honor sit auribus) cum
vilissimis insectis conflictor pernoctandum. Accepi quidem ab Imperatoria
vestra Majestate per quendam Procancellarium nuntium humanissimum, qui rem
excusaret and in Angarorum and Veredariorum negligentiam culpam derivaret. Cui
ego tunc quidem respondi and idem jam, ne optimo homini per viam aliquid
interciderit, ad Majestatem vestram Imperatoriam perscribo, me Imperatoriae
vestrae Majestati quam maximas gratias persolvere and nullo modo de humanitate
vestra dubitare; sed neque hanc rem tam parvi momenti esse, ut tam facile dilui
possit and deleri; Neque ab Angaris aut Veridariis proculdubio hoc crimen
profectum, sed ab aliis qui majori in ministerio eodem tamen in numero haberi
mereantur; Neque tam impune serenissimi Regis mei honori, Imperatoriae Vestrae
Majestati, aut nostrae Dignitati posse illudi; Serenissimum Regem meum, qui
summus and praecipuus est Imperatoriae Vestrae Majestatis Amicus, nequidem
Inimicorum multo minus Amicorum Legatos ita accipere; Et si modo aliquid
hujusmodi in suo Regno evenire potuisset serenissimum Regem meum (quod sine
Procancellarii ignominia dicitur) nobilissimum e Magnatibus aliquem missurum
fuisse qui rem excusaret, neque antea destiturum priusquam reorum sanguine
quantacunque gratia aut nobilitate pollentium tam barbarum and inhumanum
facinus expurgasset; Rem hanc fabulae and ludibrio toti mundo futuram; Ne
igitur quamvis Imperatoriae Vestrae Majestatis conspectu fruendi
cupientissimum, and in hoc loco pessime habitum, nullo tamen modo hinc
exiturum, donec de eorum corio mihi satisfieret quicunque quantum in se erat
Serenissimi Regis mei Majestatem, Imperatoriam Vestram Majestatem, and
Sanctissimam Legatorum dignitatem violassent proculcassent profanassent. Haec
uti facta and dicta erant Imperatoriae Vestrae Majestati exposui, ut in
gravissimo hoc negotio quod Imperatoria Vestra magnitudine and prudentia dignum
est constituere possit. Interpreti meo mandavi ut responsum Vestrum
Imperatorium in hac re expectaret. De caetero Imperatoriae Vestrae Majestati
summam faelicitatem voveo and exopto.

6. Februarii Anno Dni. 1664. CARLISLE.
The Superscription was thus; Magno Domino Imperatori, and Magno Duci Alexio
Michailovicio totius magnae minoris and albae Russiae Autocratori, and multarum
aliarum Ditionum and Regionum Orientalium Occidentalium and Septentrionalium,
Haeredi earum a Patre and Avis, Domino and Monarchae.




Most Illustrious and most Renowned Prince and Emperor,
THis new and unaccustomed resolution of writing to your Imperial Majesty,
before I have the most desired Honor of being admitted to Your Majesty's
presence, is occasioned by a misfortune, if not an indignity which happened to me
Yesterday. After a tedious Journey from Vologda, and three Days waiting at the
distance only of four miles from Your Imperial Court, when I had risen very
early, and according to the advertisement of Offonarius Evanovitsius Nestrof,
had fitted my self for my Journey; nevertheless, I was constrained to languish
till after Ten without any manner of refreshment, in the confinement and dirt
of a smoaky Cottage. All which things, though most unworthy the Majesty of the
King my Master, Your Imperial Grandeur, and my particular Character, I
patiently sustained with the hope however of Entering Your Imperial City, and
approaching the presence of Your Imperial Majesty, and declaring my just
complaints. At length, when Night was now at hand, notice was given for our
setting forwards. And after the Guides had, like Ignes fatui, mislead me up and
down the Fields, in the Night, it was signified to me, that I must quarter in
this pitiful Village, amidst all kind of inconveniences, and swarms of
troublesome Insects. I confess I received from Your Imperial Majesty by a
certain Vice Chancellor, a very courteous Message, excusing the matter, and
charging the fault upon the negligence of the Guides and Posts. I then answered
him, and write the same now to Your Imperial Majesty, lest the good man may
have forgotten something by the way, That I give Your Imperial Majesty very
great thanks, and no wise doubt of your Generosity; but that the thing is not
of so small importance, as to be blown off so easily; That the fault proceeded
not from the Posts or Messengers, but from others of greater Quality perhaps,
though but of equal merit; That affronts done to the Honor of the King my
Master, Your Imperial Majesty, or my self ought not to go unpunished, That the
King my Master, who is Your Imperial Majesty's highest and chiefest Friend,
gives not such Reception to the Ambassadors of Enemies, much less to those of
Friends; And that in case any such thing should happen in his Kingdom, the King
my Master would have sent some person of the highest Nobility to excuse it
(which I speak without reproach to the Vice Chancellor) and not desisted till
he had expiated so barbarous and inhumane an action with the blood of the
Criminals, of whatever quality or consideration; That this proceeding would
give cause of talk and laughter to the whole World; That therefore, however
desirous I was of approaching of Your Imperial Majesty, and ill accommodated
in this place; yet I should not stir from it till satisfaction were given me
upon the Persons of those, who as much as in them lay had violated and
affronted the King my Master, Your Imperial Majesty, and the sacred Character
of Ambassadors. I have related these things to Your Imperial Majesty, as they
were done and spoken; to the end, that You may make such determination in this
most weighty business as shall be suitable to your Imperial Grandeur and
Prudence. I have commanded my Interpreter to wait for your Majesty's answer in
this matter. And I wish and imprecate to your Imperial Majesty all Happiness.

Carlisle.


This Letter was scarce gone, when Demente Bashmacof Diack of the great Dukes
Cabinet, arrived at the Ambassadors Wisby from the Tzar, he acquitted himself
of his Message to his Excellence so well, that having promised him all manner
of satisfaction, he prevailed with him upon those terms to make his Entry
immediately. And as Bashmacof was returning very well pleased, the Interpreter,
who departed with the Letter at the same time Bashmacof came to his Excellence,
arrived with this answer, that Almaze the Diacke of the Embassy office (into
whose hands he had given the Letter) told him that Bashmacof was gone toward
the Ambassador to give him satisfaction in the behalf of his Tzarskoy Majesty:

This being past, we departed immediately to make our Entry, in which we
received indeed very evident tokens of the Grandeur of that Prince, there being
all the splendour and glory that precious stones, rich furrs, cloth of gold and
silver, velvets and other rich stuffs, goodly horses, and a noble Equipage
could make: besides the noise of an incredible number of Trumpets, Kettle-drums
and other Instruments of military Music. so that it was reported every where
in the court, that the City of Mosco never saw the Entry of any Ambassador so
glorious as this, which was made, on saturday the sixth of February in a very
fair day, with the same Order and Circumstances that follow.

The Ambassadors Trumpeters, sounding their silver Trumpets as they went,
marched on horsback in the Van. They were followed by the Gentlemen one after
another, every one in his sledge, the inferior foremost, so that he whose place
and quality was immediately before the other followed him immediately in this
procession, to the end that thereby he might have the advantage of being so
much nearer the person of the Ambassador. Each of them had his sledge adorned
with Bearskins so disposed, that half of them hung down behind. The Pristafs
domestiques followed two and two, all very well clad, and they made five ranks
on horsback. After them came the Pristafs, each of them in his sledge. And my
Lord Ambassador followed Nestrof in his sledge drawn by two white horses, which
is the most esteemed color for horses in Moscovie. The Tilt or covering of his
sledge was of scarlet, whose edges hanging down very low were guarded round
about with crowns made of little pieces of sky colored velvet edged with
silver lace, and the back of his sledge was dressed up with the skin of a white
Bear. On the right side of his sledge upon a plank laid cross sat his chief
interpreter with his head uncovered, behind there was another board laid at the
bottom of the sledge on which there stood two Pages, the twelve footmen in the
mean time marching six of a side with Partisons trimmed according to their
Liveries, one behind another, and all bare. Behind his Excellence followed my
Lord Vicomte Morpeth the Ambassadors only Son then of about seventeen years of
age, who bare his Father company in all his Embassies. He sat in a very fair
glass coach drawn by six black horses, with rich housses of Scarlet very well
laced and fringed with silver, which upon black show very handsome, and behind
his Coach he had two Pages also. After my Lord Morpeth came my Lady
Ambassadress in her Caftnaz, covered on the out side all over with Crimson
velvet, with very broad laces of gold and silver, and lined within with blew
damask according to the Liveries which were red, lined with blew. On each side
there were great windows which served as doors to go in at, besides which,
there were little windows also, which her Ladyship might look through without
being seen her self: she had one of her Gentle-women in the Caftnaz with her,
two Pages standing upon a plank behind, and three footmen running by. After my
Ladies Caftnaz came my Lord of Morpeths sledg, but without any body in it:
after which there followed two Caftnazes more and so in order all the rest of
the train and baggage; which made up about two hundred sledges.

A while after we had left this Village, (which was about two a clock) we
entered into a very fair champaigne; in which the Moscovian horse were drawn
up, and had been two days there putting into Order. Amongst the rest they had a
great Number of Archers with their Quivers full of arrows; and for their
Music there were so many Trumpets, Kettle-drums, Howboys, and other such
instruments of war, which they had dispersed in parties through all their Troops,
that for two miles we were in no want of Music. But they having battered our
ears with one continued air above two hours together all the way as we marched,
the noise of those Instruments which at first had delighted us with their
melody, became now obstreperous and troublesome. In the mean time there were a
great number of Boyars, of Stolnicks, and other persons of the Court, which
came to meet the Ambassador, richly clad in Vests or Tuniques, of cloth of gold
and silver, or velvets lined with Sables, with great caps on their heads of
black Fox, made in the fashion of a Muff, which they use commonly in their
Ceremonies. They were most of them very well mounted upon good horses, with
rich trappings and bridles of silver, made like chains, with the linkes very
broad and thin, so that whilst their horses were in motion, they made a noise
altogether Majestique. There were several also who had their housses covered
with precious stones, whose luster seemed to add a richer light to the light
of the day; and behind them they had their servants carrying covers for their
sadles of Leopard skins, cloth of gold, velvet, and scarlet. All the Gentlemen
of the Tzars chamber were there ready to accompany the Ambassador to his very
house.

At length, the Master of the great Dukes horse came to present to the
Ambassador from the Tzar a sledg, and another for my Lord Morpeth, with several
white horses for the Gentlemen. A while after, came Pronchissof, one of the
Tzars Counsel, and Gregory Cosmevitz along with him, who were both deputed to
serve his Excellence as Pristafs, or Masters of the Ceremonies during his
residence in Mosco. And in this occasion it was we had another ridiculous
example of the pride and rusticity of the Moscovites, who are so quick and
precise in anticipating the Prerogative of Ambassadors. Pronchissof being
arrived within some small distance of the Ambassadors sledg, gave him to
understand that he was sent to receive him from the grand Duke his Lord, and
that he expected the Ambassador should first come out of his sledg. But his
Excellence signified to him by his Interpreter, that his expectations were very
ill grounded, that he represented the person of the King his Master, and that
in that case all such Kind of respect was due to himself. Pronchissof however
continued unmovable in his sledg as a Master of Ceremonies, and sent back to
the Ambassador that he also was sent from the Tzar his Master to represent his
person: so that to have seen him, one would have thought he had taken upon him
the form of a statue, to represent the Majesty of his Prince. This answer, how
absurd soever it was, caused several smart replies both on one side and the
other: till at last the Ambassador to prevent any further delay in his
Entrance, condescended to this, That they should both of them come out of their
sledges together. But in this Pronchissof took occasion to deceive his
Excellence, and falsify his word, hanging in the air betwixt the arms of his
servants, and but touching the earth with his tiptoes, whilst the Ambassador
came out freely. At their meeting, they saluted one another, and Pronchissof
first delivered his complement, which consisted in declaring his Employment,
and acquainting his Excellence, that the Tzar had sent him, and his associate
Gregory Cofmovitz (who was there present also) to take care that all things
necessary should be provided during his continuance at Mosco. But the greatest
part of his complement was the recitation of his Masters Titles, which he
enumerated from the first to the last, in a most troublesome and ridiculous
manner, as will appear hereafter. His complement being made, and the Ambassador
having answered him with a very good grace, they retired both of them into
their sledges, Pronchissof returning in the same posture he came, his servants
holding him up by his arms, as if they were afraid he should sink under the
burden of the emploiment, which his Master had given him. At this time Nestrof
and Davidof (giving place to Pronchissof and Gregory Cosmovitz the new
Pristafs) took their leaves of the Ambassador. After which Ceremonies, we
disposed our selves to enter into the Town, the Ambassador having Pronchissof
on his right hand, and Cosmovitz on his left; my Lord Morpeth had two Lords of
the Court to accompany him; so that in every rank there were three sledges a
breast. The Gentlemen were all on horseback betwixt Sinboyars, or Gentlemen of
the Court. The Chaplain, Physician, and Musique-Master, with several English
Merchants, and two Vallets de Chamber were joined with them, so that they made
up about five and twenty ranks on horseback, marching three a breast.

All these Ceremonies, and the slowness of our march took up so much time, that
the night overtook us before we could enter the Town, our frequent stoppings
and pawses having consumed above three hours in going of about two miles.
Therefore, because the Sun had withdrawn himself before we were ready to appear
in the Town, the Citizens had made great fires in their streets, and provided
great numbers of torches to render every thing visible about his Excellence; so
that the night as well as the day did seem to participate in the Glory of this
Entry. And the precious stones, darting about the rays of their refulgency,
made the clearness of the night in some respect more majestique than the
brightness of the day; not to mention the multitudes of people, wherewith the
streets were filled, and the houses covered in all places where we passed,
every one clambring up here and there to behold this Magnificence.

The Tzar, the great Duchess, and the young Princes also would needs be
Spectators now, as they had disposed themselves to be the day before. But to
the end they might see all without being perceived themselves, they made choice
of a place near the Gate of the Brick Wall, whither they had ordered a great
number of Wax-tapers to be sent. And here the Moscovian Trumpets all stopped, to
sound at the time as the Ambassador past the Gate, and was entered into the
Town, which was exactly performed: but with so confused a noise, it might very
well be compared to that which the Geese made in the Capitol, whilst the Gauls
were climbing over the Walls. After this terrible alarm, which we were
altogether surprised with, under pretense of some little accident, they made a
stop for about half a quarter of an hour, to the end the Tzar might at his
leisure observe the whole Pomp; and indeed the great number of Wax-Tapers which
they had disposed of each side of the Gate, discovered the design clear enough.
At length, when his Majesty was satisfied with viewing the Magnificence of his
Excellences Train, he was conducted to the House which they had prepared for
him, the Moscovian horse trouping thorough the Town in a huddle, without
observing any order at all in their march. From the Gate of the Town, we past
through the Tzars Guards, which were drawn up on both sides of the streets, from
thence to the House where we lay.

Of the Ambassadors Residence at Mosco.
THere are three things which principally recommend themselves to our
Consideration in this place: Our manner of Living whilst we were here; The
Ambassadors Negotiation; And some Circumstances that happened during our
Residence at Mosco. Of which City it is necessary to give a precedent
Description for the better comprehension of what follows.

The City of Mosco has the same inconvenience with the other Towns in
Moscovie, which is, that it is built like them with Wood, some princi^^^ Houses
excepted. Instead of being paved, they have only great pieces of Firr laid
close together, and cross the Streets. When we were there, its figure was
almost Circular, and at least four leagues in Cirumference, but being much
subject to Fire, its form and extent does not continue long in the same
condition. True it is, their Streets are broad enough, and from place to place
there are certain Intervals left to break off and cease the fury of the Fire,
but the materials of their Houses being so combustible, they have much ado to
prevent its progress. All the remedy they have, is to pull down the Houses that
are next, to the end that by taking away the matter, that should nourish it,
they may give the flame more room to extinguish. But this not always
succeeding, especially if the wind be high, it happens sometimes, that they see
a great part of the Town in ashes in a very short space.

This Town has three Walls, one of Brick, another of Stone, a third of Wood,
separating the four quarters of the Town, which are called Cataigorod,
Tzargorod, Scoradom, and Strelitza Sloboda. The Brick-wall divides Cataigorod
from the rest of the Town, that of Stone belongs to Tzargorod, and the Wooden
one serves as Ramparts and Bastions to Strelitza Sloboda, which is properly the
quarter of the Strelitz, or Musketeers of the Tzars Guards.

Amongst the Rivers that pass by this City, Mosca is a fair one, which gives it
its Name; it rises in the Province of Twere, and loses it self in the Volga,
where the same joines with the River Occa, not far from Columna. Besides these,
there are the Neglina and the Yagusa, two little Rivers which run by the City,
and fall into the River Mosca.

But that which is the greatest Ornament to this City, besides the Rivers I
have named, is the great number of Churches and Chapels which they have there,
together with the Tzars Castle, which is called Cremelena. Their Churches are
generally of stone, arched, and of a round form. They are a great Ornament to
the Town, by reason of their steeples, which are covered over with Lattin,
whose glittring seems to redouble the brightness of the Sun. As to the number
of Churches and Chapels in Mosco, they are reckoned about two thousand.

The Tzars Castle is of that greatness, that it is about two miles in
Circumference. There is in it a very fair Palace of Stone, built after the
Italian fashion, and another of Wood, which the Tzar chooses to reside in, as
the more healthful of the two. The Patriarch also, and several Boyars have
their Houses of Stone within this Castle, besides two Covents, one of Moncks,
and the other of Nuns. There are also a great number of Churches and Chapels
of Stone, and amongst the rest, one dedicated to St. Michael, in which the
Tombs of the Tzars are placed. All the Steeples of these Churches are covered
with Copper, which the heat of the Sun has burnished into a great resemblance
of Gold; but upon one of these Steeples there stands a Cross which is of massy
Gold. We saw there a Bell (which was made some years since by a Moscovite) of
that prodigious bigness, that fifty men might very well stand within it. It is
about nine fathoms in circumference, which by consequence is three in diameter.
When we came first to Mosco, it was upon the ground, in a base Court where it
was cast, and during the four months and a half we remained there, all they
could do, was to raise it though but a little from the ground, with intention
to build a Steeple for it in the same place. The Fortifications of the Castle
are also very considerable: for, besides that it is very well planted with
Canon, there is a large Ditch and three very strong Walls about it. Some of our
company that had the curiosity to survey this Ditch, as they past over the
bridge, were desired by the Moscovites to march on, and not trouble themselves
with surveying their Works.

There are moreover in Mosco a great number of Greeks, of Persians, and
especially of Tartars, but they admit no Jews. The Greeks of all Strangers are
most welcome to them, as being in many things conformable with them, but
particularly in matters of Religion. The Protestants and Lutherans are well
received also, and have all of them liberty to hold public Assemblies, for
the Exercise of their Religion, which is not permitted to the Roman Catholics,
for whom they have a particular aversion. But to the end that foreign
Christians may live together with more liberty, there is a Sloboda, or great
Suburb without the Town, where most of them live, according to their own way.
And in this place it is the Germans, English, Hollanders, and Polonians do most
commonly reside.

The House we were lodged in in this Town, was a large building of Stone, no
great distance from the Castle, and one of the most commodious to be found. The
Chambers were all arched, every window had its shutters of iron, and every
passage-door was also of iron: which gave one occasion to say, we were
certainly in the iron Age; though otherwise it be a mettle rare enough in that
Country. Our Chambers were most of them hanged with Serge or red Cloth, and
instead of chairs, we had benches covered over with the same stuff, without any
Beds or other necessary accommodations, besides tables and furnaces for the
Winter. Amongst the rest of the Rooms, there were two great Hals, one of them
(in which the Canopie of State was set up) we made use of as our Chapel, on
those days wherein we had Sermons, of the other for a Quarter for seven or
eight of our Gentlemen, who were constrained at their arrival, to make their
several lodgings distinct from one another. For when he who had the charge of
preparing the House was advertised that the Ambassador's Gentlemen could not
lie crowded together as in a Hospital, and that this manner of living would be
very strange and incommodious to them; he answered jestingly, that it was best
for them to lie together, lest the Rats should run away with them being single.
Which Answer put some of us on a sudden upon a desire to know, if the Rats were
so big at Mosco; for my part I imagined for the doing of such an exploit, every
Rat ought to be as big as two Boyars. However, we saw we had great reason to be
impatient at Vologda, for our arrival here, where we had all that could be
expected in this Country. Our Public devotion which had been suspended in our
Travails, was regulated here as at Vologda, and at Easter we had a Communion.
We had moreover the diversion of seeing the Town, and to visit our Friends in
the Sloboda, where his Excellence himself was sometime treated by the
Merchants. But this freedom was so regulated and restrained, that for the four
first days we were shut up close in our House, and not permitted to stir abroad
before the Audience. They would suffer no Strangers to come near us, nor could
the Ambassador prevail, that the English Merchants Wives might have access to
his Lady. It is true, after the Ambassador's Audience we had liberty to go
abroad, but then for two or three months we were obliged to take some of the
Tzar's Guards along with us, which followed us armed with their half-pikes; for
which end there were commonly fifty of them attending us, keeping their guards
at the Gate, and examining almost every one that came in. The Ambassador
himself was not permitted to stir unless he had a Pristaf with him, and was
attended with a Company of Strelits. Whereby it happened, that the Ambassador
one day after a long expectation of the Pristaf (who seemed to neglect him)
being upon the point of going abroad in his Coach without him, the footmen
running before as if they would have passed out of the Gate, the Strelits stood
immediately to their arms, to hinder them, which they did, till the Pristaf
was pleased to come and accompany the Ambassador. None of the Boyars could have
the sight of his Excellence in his House, unless he was sent by the Tzar, it
being almost a Capital offense for any person of quality whatsoever, to have
any kind of Conference with an Ambassador without his leave. Hunting, which was
our great divertisement at Vologda, was the least of our recreations here, but
as soon as the snow was melted, and the spring arrived, we fell immediately to
making of Horse-matches. There was a challenge also betwixt twelve of our
Company to play at Football. At other times we ran at the Ring, and on that
day our repast was taken in the Wood, where that exercise was performed. Our
Musique-master composed a handsome Comedy in Prose, which was acted in our
House. As for their Baths, they were as rare at Mosco as hunting, for we used
one as often there as the other. But the most part of our Family would go now
and then to their public Stoves, where sometimes they could see a great
company of Women naked by the favor of some little hole or cleft in the Wall,
which served also as a passage for their immodest discourses. About one mile
from Mosco we observed in a little Lake an Island floting, as the Ancients
believed of Delos, but it was very small. It is kept above water by the roots
of Trees, with which it is enterlaced, there were some of us took a boat and
went upon it, turning it as a piece of timber which way they pleased.

This being, as near as I could relate, the manner of our living at Mosco, it
follows now that we display the Ambassadors negotiation, and at the same time
the Ceremonies which are practiced in that Court. In pursuance of which design,
I shall speak in the first place of the Audience which the Tzar gave the
Ambassador on the 11. of February, which was five days after our Entry.

The 7. of February which was the next day after we arrived at Mosco,
Pronchissof, and the other Pristaf offered the Ambassador Audience from the
great Duke on the ninth of that month, and pretented it as a singular favor,
that he could have it so soon; nevertheless, the next day they thought fit to
delay him two days longer. In which time his Excellence was desirous to inform
himself of all the Ceremonies which were to be observed, according to the
Custom of that Court: and amongst other things, he demanded of them, whether
it were expected that he should be uncovered in the presence of the Tzar. To
which they answered, that the Tzar's Ambassadors were bare before the King of
England, and by consequence that he was to be so before his Tzarskoy Maty.. But
the Ambassador declared freely to them, that his Master the King of England had
commanded him to be so, and for that reason he was obliged not to dispute it:
otherwise the Ambassadors of the Tzar could not so well represent the person of
their Prince, being but his Slaves, and so styled by him in their very Letters
of Credence. After this, he demanded leave to visit the great Duchess and the
young Princes, the eldest of which was not above ten years old; but this was
refused upon this ground, that it was not their custom. Indeed the Tzars wives
live there very retired, and his Sons appear not in public, till they are
twelve years old, at which age they show them solemnly to the People, and the
Tzar himself is but rarely to be seen.

The Eleaventh day being come, there were a hundred and thirty persons of the
Tzars Guards, and threescore sledges sent to carry the Presents from the King,
the greatest part of which was designed for the Tzar, the rest for the two
young Princes Knetz, Alexcy, Alexevitz, and Pheodor Alexevitz his Sons. But
besides the Kings Presents to the great Duke, there were Presents also from the
Queen to the great Duchess, and some which his Excellence gave the great Duke
apart as from himself. The whole consisted in Vessels of gold and silver, in
cloth, velvets, satins, and damask of diverse colors; there was also great
quantities of stufs, and table linen, two gold-watches, three clocks, two pair
of Pistols, one gun, and two carabins, besides six pieces of cast Canon, a
great quantity of Cornish tynne, and a hundred piggs of lead. All which was
sent before to the palace, the plate being carried by four and twenty men, the
cloth by threescore, ten men carried the Velvets Sattins and Damask, six and
twenty the stufs and table linning, and ten more the Gun, the Pistols, the
Watches, and the Clocks; and on the sledges they carried the Canon, the Tynne,
and the Lead. This being done there were two sledges brought for the Ambassador
and my Lord Morpeth, and at the same time several white horses for the
Gentlemen of his attendance. At length we began to set out about ten a Clock
in the morning, the Gentlemen on horsback two and two all richly habited, their
hats covered with fair plumes of feathers which did principally attract the eyes
of the Moscovits, with whom the streets, the shops, the gates and the windows
did swarm at this time. There were several English Merchants also who had
joined themselves with the Gentlemen, and were fallen into the same Order.
After them followed my Lord Morpeth in his sledg betwixt the Ambassadors
Pristafs who had brought their rich robes along with them to our house, and put
them on there. After my Lord Morpeth the two Trumpets followed, after them the
six Pages in three ranks, and after them the twelve footmen marching in the
same Order as at our Entry. His Excellence was this day in black having on his
ha^ a rich band of Diamonds, on either hand he had two of the principal Boyars
in their sledges as himself was, who had put on their robes also at our house.
In the Ambassadors sledg there was the Secretary and the chief Interpreter
standing and uncovered, the Secretary carrying in his hands upon a yard of red
Damask his Letters of Credence written in parchment, whose Superscription
contained all the titles of the Tzar in letters of Gold. Behind the Ambassador
there came none but the Master of the horse on horseback.

In this manner we past through the Tzars Guards, who were drawn up in rancks on
both sides of us reaching to the very bottom of the stairs of the Hall, through
which we were to pass to audience. Near the Castlegate we found another
regiment of Guards drawn up also in very good order. A while after we past
through another Regiment in one of the Courts of the Castle, and in this place
we saw a great number of very fair Canon planted on one side and the other with
the Canoniers by them, and ready in appearance to fire upon us from all parts.
From thence we passed to another Court filled also with Guards, but when we
came to the gate of a passage through which we were to go, all that were in
sladdes or on horseback alighted. Those who were to go up into the Hall of
audience were constraind to leave their swords behind them, it being not
permitted for any body to pass any further with them by their sides, for the
prevention of which ceremony, his Excellence and my Lord Morpeth carried none
with them. When we had gone some paces this way (which is a way peculiar to
Christian Ambassadors, those of Infidel Princes being carried another) there
was a Boyar came to meet the Ambassador and complemented him from the great
Duke. From thence we came to a great stone Galerie, where another Boyar
received his Excellence with another complement. And from thence we came into a
Hall through which we were to pass in to that of the audience, and here it was
we saw the Guards of the Tzars body in a most splended Equipage, their Vests of
velvet being lined with sables, their caps richly adorned with pearls and
precious stones, and their very Partesans covered with gold and silver. Near
the door of the Hall of audience, the Ambassador received a third Complement
from the Tzars own Cousin. After which we opened to the right and left, and the
Ambassador entered first into the Hall, after him my Lord Morpeth, and then the
Gentlemen and the Pages.

And here it was we were like those who coming suddenly out of the dark are
dazzled with the brightness of the Sun: the splendour of their jewels seeming to
contend for priority with that of the day; so that we were lost as it were in
this confusion of glory. The Tzar like a sparkling Sun (to speak in the Russian
dialect) darted forth most sumptuous rays, being most magnificently placed upon
his Throne with his Scepter in his hand, and having his Crown on his Head. His
Throne was of massy Silver gilt, wrought curiously on the top with several
works and Pyramids; and being seven or eight steps higher than the floor, it
rendered the person of this Prince transcendently Majestic. His Crown (which
he wore upon a Cap lined with black Sables) was covered quite over with
precious stones, it terminated toward the top in the form of a Pyramid with a
golden cross at the spire. The Scepter glistered also all over with Jewels, his
vest was set with the like from the top to the bottom down the opening before,
and his collar was answerable to the same. By his side he had four of the
tallest of his Lords standing below his Throne, each of them with his battle-ax
upon his shoulder, and with a profound gravity casting their Eyes now and then
upon their Tzar, as inviting us to an admiration of his grandeur. Their habits
were no less remarquable than their countenances, being all four of them from
the top of their head to the sole of their foot clothed in white vests of
Ermine, and having great chains of Gold, and their Caps of that large sort
which they use in their portrait of Duke of Muscovy Alexey Michailouitz great
Duke of Moscovie Aged xxxiv Years 1664
Ceremonies, but whereas others were of black Fox these were of Ermin as well
as their Vests, their very Boots also were covered with the same. But that
which was farther admirable was the glorious equippage of the Boyars present at
this audience, who were as so many beams of the Sun elevated in his triumphal
Carr, and seemed to have no luster but to do homage withal to their great
Monarch. They were about two hundred clothed all with vests of cloth of gold,
cloth of silver or velvet set with Jewels, all placed in order upon benches
covered with tapistry round about by the wall; the floor being raised there
three or four steps higher and about the breadth of a good walk. At the
Entrance into the Hall there was a great number also of his Goses which are his
Merchants or Factors whom he furnishes with rich robes to appear at such
Ceremonies; This was the Splendor we found this great Prince in, with a
countenance perfectly majestic; as having not only the advantage of a handsome
proportion, but of a lively and vigorous age, for this was but his four and
thirtieth year. The Hall notwithstanding answered not very well to this
Magnificence, saving in its Vastnes, and that it was covered all the floor over
with tapistry. But it was wanting on the walls, which had no other Ornament
than a few old pictures; the roof of it was arched, and supported by a great
Pillar in the middle.

My Lord Ambassador made a low Reverence to his Majesty as soon as he was
entered into the Hall, the Throne being opposite to the Door; then he advanced
some paces, and stopping at the Pillar in the midst of the Hall, he made him a
second, then being ready to speak, made him a third, and saluted him in the
behalf of his Master the King of England in these words; The most Serene and
most Puissant Prince Charles the Second by the Grace of God King of England,
Scotland, France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. To You the most
High, most Potent, and most Illustrious Prince Great Lord, Emperor, and Grand
Duke Alexey Michailovitz of all the great, and little, and white Russia
Self-upholder, of Moscovie, Keavie, Volodimerie, Nofgorod, Emperor of Cazan,
Emperor of Astracan, Emperor of Siberia, Lord of Pscove, great Duke of
Lituania, Smolensco, Twersco, Volinsco, Podolsko, Vghorsco, Permsco, Veatsco,
Bolgarsco, etc. Lord and Great Duke of Nofgorod in the Lower Countries, of
Chernigo, Resansco, Polotsco, Rostofsco, Yeroslafsco, Beloozarsco, Oudorsco,
Obdorsco, Condinsco, Wetepsco, M^stisclaaco, and all the Northern parts, Lord
of the Country of Iversco of the Tzars of Cantalinsco, and of Gruzinsco, and of
the Country of Cabardinsco, of the Dukes of Chercasco, and Igorsco, Lord and
Monarch of several other Dominions, and Provinces, East, West, and North, of
which he is Heir from Father to Son, by me Charles Earl of Carlisle, Vicomte
Howard of Morpeth, Baron Dacre of Gillesland, His Majesty's Lieutenant in the
Counties of Cumberland and Westmorland, one of his Majesty's most honorable
Privy Council, and his Extraordinary Ambassador sends greeting, and has
commanded me to deliver these Letters (being his Letters Patents which he held
in his hand) to Your Imperial Majesty. Which words being with a loud voice
explained by his Interpreter which stood by his Excellencies side, the
Ambassador advanced toward the Throne to present the Letter which he
immediately delivered into the hands of his Chancellor.

His Excellence returning to his place, the Tzar rose up, and the Boyars doing
the like all of them at the same time, their Vests of Tissue made such a
ruffling one against another, that we were something amuzed at the suddenness
of the noise. Then after a short silence, his Majesty began to speak, and to
enquire of the Ambassador concerning the Kings health, but there being a too
great distance between the Tzar and his Excellence, the Chancellor had the care
of coming to the Ambassador, and repeating what the Tzar had said. To which the
Ambassador returned answer in these terms. The most Serene and most Mighty
Prince Charles the Second, by the Grace of God King of England, Scotland,
France, and Ireland, Defender of the Faith, etc. was through the mercy of the
Omnipotent God in perfect health upon the twentieth day of July, in the Year of
our Lord 1663. when I had last the honor to kiss his Royal hands at my
departure. This answer being interpreted to the Tzar, He arose again, and
enquired concerning the Queen Mother in these words, How does the desolate
Widow of that glorious Martyr Charles the First. To which the Ambassador having
in like manner replied, began the following Speech, of which he had a Copy in
English, and his Interpreter another in the Moscovian Language. As he spoke it,
every period was interpreted apart, so that when his Excellence had concluded
one Sentence, the intepretation succeeded before he began the next, which was
conceived the properest way to entertain their attentions. Therefore the
Ambassador and his Interpreter were obliged to read from time to time, and to
observe punctually their several Periods. This Harangue was also translated
into Latin, of which Translation, because we shall have occasion to speak, I
shall make no difficulty to insert a copy in this place, the Style being
besides sufficiently elegant.

Illustrissime atque Excellentissime Princeps Imperator,
PErvenit nuper ad Serenissimam suam Majestatem Dominum meum Clementissimum
perhonorifica Legatio, cujus quidem splendour uti magnificentia tanti Principis
unde est profecta dignissimus extitit, ita and argumentum Ei ad quem missa est
long erat gratissimum. Vtpote quo, praeter optatissimum de prospera valetudine
Vestra and rebus secundis nuncium, gratulatio quoque de laetissimo Ejus in
Regna sua Reditu, and summa Serenissimae suae Majestatis felicitate,
Commemoratio antiquae inter Augustissimos Vtriusque Majores amicitiae, and
perseverantia Vestra in eadem colenda atque in futurum augenda continerentur.
Itaque inaestimabilis ille intimi animi Vestri affectus tam luculentae
Legationis honor expressus and illustratus instar gemmae clarissimae
videbatur, cui postquam Natura ultimam manum imposuit perfectissima quoque
artis politura accessit. Vel, ut de nuncio tam opportuno dicam quod Solomon
Regum prudentissimus de verbo commode dicto, erat velut aurea mala cum figuris
argenteis. Vnum tamen est de quo Serenissima sua Majestas cum Majestate Vestra
Imperatoria and meretissimo quidem conqueritur, praeoccupatum sese beneficio
and Majestatem Vestram Imperatoriam praeripuisse sibi, ne (quod semper animo
destinaverat) Majestatem Vestram Imperatoriam ea celebritate and pompa quae
summam Vtriusque amicitiam deceret and dignitatem primus salutaret. Ego vero,
si tantulum a Domini mei Serenissimi sententia dissentiri liceret, dum
Vtriusque pares annos, communes rations, adeoque consimilia studia atque
affectus considero, Neutri Vestrum priores in hoc officio parts tribuendas sed
in excellentissimis Amborum mentibus easdem causas uno momento eandem utrobique
Voluntatem excitasse crediderim. Sed and astrorum, quorum fulgores Majestatum
Vestrarum lucem optime adumbrant, efficacitas pro varia corporum intermediorum
natura suspenditur and retardatur: Nec amici, quorum nobilissimum exemplar in
Majestatibus Vestris resplendet, tam commodam and opportunam rationem hactenus
inire potuerunt, ut absentes mutua mentis sensa condicerent, and pariter
repraesentarent. Quum igitur alteri necessario de tempore concedendum esset,
Serenissima sua Majestas minus laborat quod eo se praeverterit Imperatoria
Vestra Majestas, dum ne (quod nunquam fieri patietur) constantia etiam and
sinceritate affectus Ipsum antecedat. Neque vero gravatur Serenissima sua
Majestas, uti solet inter amicos, rationem consilii sui reddere, and
justissimis suis excusationibus adversus Majestatem Vestram Imperatoriam uti,
solam nempe negotiorum domesticorum molem obstare potuisse quo minus honorem
hunc, quo dum Majestatem Vestram Imperatoriam afficit Se ipsum impertit,
maturius Majestati Vestrae Imperatoriae deferret; Et quum compluribus
Principibus sibi propioribus eodem beneficio prior esset obligatus Se tamen
interposuisse omnibus Majestatis Vestrae Imperatorae remunerationem, utpote quo
Neminem benevolentia and amore magis propinquum haberet; Se denique ab omni tam
debiti officii dilatione tantum abfuisse, ut occasionem modo idoneam
persolvendi illud Majestati Vestrae Imperatoriae captaverit. Quamvis enim
Serenissima sua Majestas non soleat ex syderum motu consilia sua suspendere,
aut ex Coelorum ordine de rerum suarum sucessu superstitiose hariolari, solet
tamen ex Omnipotentis Dei nutu totus pendere and ad ejus coelorum ejusdem and
Regiae felicitatis authoris significationes actiones suas (ut ita dicam)
modulari. Postquam igitur divina Benignitate in plenissima eorum omnium
possessione Se constitutum vidisset quaecunque summam ornare possent fortunam
and cumulare, hoc tandem uti auspicatissimum tempus elegit quo potissimum
Imperatorem tam Illustrem, Fratrem Amantissimum, and Charissimum Amicum
salutaret, and Majestati Vestrae Imperatoriae eandem vel fi fieri possit
majorem etiam felicitatem auguraret. Quum enim in his tribus, Hostium Terrore,
Subditorum Obsequio, and Amicorum multitudine atque constantia praecipuum
Regalis Solii firmamentum and robur consistat, liceat omnino affirmare
Serenissimum Regem meum, qui in rebus adversis admirandum undequaque virtutis
and fortitudinis suae specimen dederit, nunc etiam e contrario ad miraculum
usque melioris fortunae esse evectum. Quod enim Inimicos attinet nemo inventus
est qui recentem Ejus felicitatem interpellare voluerit, praeter infames istos
Praedones Africanos Christiani Nominis and Humani generis hosts, quos igitur
quamvis bis mill passuum millibus distantes in illa sua spelunca Algeriensi
obsedit; Naves eorum partim cepit, partim depressit, captivos liberavit, and
piratas nefarios suis conditionibus in posterum astrinxit. Subditi autem Sui
tam diu Tyrannorum and Perduellium vi and artibus decepti atque oppressi,
postquam eorum supplicio manus commodassent, eo alacriores in Clementissimi
Regis sui fidem redierunt, and eluerunt antiqua obedientia nuperae Rebellionis
maculam. Quoad Amicos denique uti cum nullo Principe Christiano inimicitias
exercet, ita vix Vllus est Eorum qui non honorificentissime per Legatos Eum
appellaverit, and in arctioris necessitudinis nexum accipi petierit, ea ante
omnia pactione interposita (quod etiam fecerunt) ut si cubi in Eorum Ditionibus
delitesce^ent execrabiles illos fugitivos and parricidas ^ederent, qui
Gloriosissimi Parentis Sui san^uine manus cruentassent. Si vero super haec ^e
Imperii sui magnitudine disserere liceret ^aereditariis quae ab Augustissimis
suis Majori^us crevit in Europa Regnis alias etiam in Africa, Asia, atque
America Provincias Ipse ^ubjunxit, and hodierni Imperii fines protulit, ^ltra
quam priorum infortuniorum rumor per^aserit. Disjunctissimas illas Regiones
Oceano ^anquam Ponte Suo continuat, and Naves Suae (...) quoties Ei videtur) ad
remotissimos Orbis ^abitabilis fines mobilem Imperii sui limitem circumferunt
and transmittunt. Quamvis au^em haec Ditionum laxitas animi sui magnitu^ini
consentanea videatur, Subditorum regi^en prudentiae and justitiae Suae proprium
ex^stat, and hostium subjectio tantae fortitudini ^nsuavis esse nequeat: Ille
tamen utpote utriusque fortunae vicibus exercitatus, etiam victoriam ^astidire
posset uti sanguine commixtam, and ^egimen potius ralaxare quam humani generis
^ibertatem nimis circumscribere: imo quan^umvis ampla Imperii spatia, tamen
angustiora ^unt capacissimae mentis meditationibus quibus Deum Optimum Maximum
horum omnium da^orem complectitur. Nec tamen hisce omnibus ^uae per se
prae^lara sunt atque eximia victoria ^ominatu possessionibus tantum sibi placet
^uantum amicitiarum fide atque constantia. Ipse enim quantus est totus a Natura
factus and ab Experientia educatus est ad amicitiam. Neque ego tam imperfecta
narratione res adeo conspicuas and pervagatas perstrinxissem, nisi haec
praesentis Suae magnitudinis commemoratio Eum uti Amicum tanto praestantiorem
commendaret, and cum gratitudinis argumento esset conjuncta quam erga Amicos
suos profitetur, quorum open res Suae adversae tolerabiliores olim reddebantur,
and qui nunc etiam verissimum saporem and gustum meliori Suae fortunae
conciliant. Et in Eorum numero quis est qui Majestati Vestrae Imperatoriae non
dic am anteferri sed omnino cum Ea conferri mereatur? Sive enim Principis
Majestatem, sive antiquitatem amicitiae, sive recentia beneficia astimemus,
nulla est arbor quae aut viridiorem and latiorem umbram porrexerit, aut
altiores radices egerit, aut fructus uberiores and suaviores ediderit. Solet
saepenumero Majestas sua Serenissima inter Nos qui sem per Ei proximi regiorum
sermonum oracula captamus, non sine summa sua voluptate narrare, ut ante centum
annos ex Augustissimis Suis Majoribus unus Edwardus Sextus heroico incaepto
classem and homines emiserit, ut in Mundi fines inquirerent, and ignotas adhuc
Gentes commercio miscerent. Hi felicissimo successu Maris Septentrionalis, quod
ad illa usque tempora impervium credebatur, secreta and si nus pervestigarunt
donec uti olim Israelitas per eremum clarissimi ignis ita illos continuae diei
columna per illa Oceani deserta ad Oras Vestras deduxisset. Hos demum verum
magnetis usum reperisse dixeris, and acus illa divina tunc primum quievit
invento quem per tot saecula frustra indicaverat Vestro Septentrione. Eluctatis
tandem Maris difficultates duplex adhuc restabat nec levius periculum, ne vel
in itinere per non minora Terrarum Vestrarum spatia deficerent, vel saltem nova
illa Majestatis ad quam appropinquabant, and quam extra suam Regionem vix
expectaverant, luce percellerentur. Attamen non solum recreati sunt (prout
aequum est) Imperatoris qui tunc temporis regnabat humanitate, sed etiam in
praemium Commercii ex isto latere Vestri Orbis tunc primum aperti ea Privilegia
a munificentia Ejus acceperunt, ex quibus Vtraque Natio non mediocria deinceps
commoda and utilitates percepit. Et ab illa origin haereditaria and
sincerissima amicitia mutuis beneficiis exculta a Patre ad Filium usque ad
Majestates Vestras jam rerum potientes descendit. Circa idem tempus alios etiam
Europae Principes cupido incesserat scrutandi si quid adhuc in lacinioso
Naturae si nu lateret. Lusitanus in Orientali Indiae Margaritarum and Aromatum
thesauros detexit, nulla tamen aromata quae suavitate, aut uniones qui candore
exaequent, quod praesens Lusitaniae Rex apud Serenissimum Dominum meum
deposuit. Hispanus autem in India Occidentali Auri and Argenti fodinas
occupavit. Adeoque cum nihil dignum Regibus Angliae reliquum videretur,
invenerunt tamen quod Principibus nec avaris nec indigis ulterioris Imperii
magis placeret, Amicum. Et solet quidem affirmare Majestas sua Serenissima
Illos optimam Omnium sortem traxisse, and nolle se Amicum suum centum annorum
cum utriusque Indiae gaza commutatum. Rationisque loco proprium experimentum
subjungi, quandoquidem cum Subditi sui defecissent, Amici plerique (quod solet)
tempori cessissent, and Coelum and Terra in ruinam suam conjurasse viderentur,
dum tantum de felicitate sua consultarent, Imperatoria tamen vestra Majestas
non solum tunc Tyranni preces repulit, and omnibus qui vel minimum contagione
istius rebellionis afflati viderentur praesidium fuum negavit, sed Ipsum etiam
copiis and facultatibus vestris prompte and benevole sublevavit. Ideoque
Serenissima Sua Majestas, uti libentissime in manus Imperatorii vestri Legati
pecunias quas Majestas Vestra Imperatoria Sibi suppeditaverat persolvit, ita
semper in Regiae mentis sacrario depositam retinebit, and adultimam
Posteritatem transmittet gratissimam omnium benefactorum Vestrorum memoriam. Et
propter tot causas recentes and super solida ista and antiqua fundamenta,
Serenissima sua Majestas in ipsissimis Majestatis Vestrae Imperatoriae verbis,
ut pote quibus nulla vel per se magis efficacia vel Sereniffimae suae
Majestatis menti magis consona and conformia esse possint declarat, Majestatem
suam Serenissimam animadverso florentissimo Regnorum suorum statu, and
sincerissimo illo amore, amicitia, and frequenti communicatione quae inter
Augustissimum and gloriosae memoriae Patrem suum Carolum Primum ab ipso Regni
sui principio, and Patrem Vestrum Augustissimum gloriosae etiam memoriae
Michaelem Phederovicium Imperatorem and Magnum totius Russia Ducem viguerunt
and inviolata permanserunt, and summa felicitate and tranquillitate quae ab
illa causa in Utriusque Ditiones redundarunt vehementissime and ex animo cupere
no solum ejusdem affectus continuationem, sed etiam propiorem, intimiorem, and
firmiorem charissimum and fraternum amorem, amicitiam, and frequentem
communicationem cum Imperatoria Vestra Majestate charissimo suo Fratre and
amantissimo ut nihil ultra esse possit. Deum denique Optimum Maximum solum suum
and Vestrum Regem veneratur, ut Imperatoriae Vestrae Majestati longam vitam,
regimen tranquillum, perpetuas amicitias, and summum Imperatoriae Fortunae
cumulum addere velit, and largiri ultra omnium immortalium Vestrorum Majorum
felicitatem, and Thronum Vestrum Imperatorium aeterna successione augustissimae
stirpis confirmare quoad Solis and Lunae cursus duraverint.

Serenissima sua Majestas resalutat etiam humanissime magnum Principem Alexium
Alexiovicium Imperii Haeredem, and magnum Principem Theodorum Allexiovicium (
Quae includuntur in ista Parenthesi, and proxime sequenti, omissa fuerunt in
recitatione, Principum absentiae causa.
duas illas Imperatoriae Pharetrae Sagittas, quas in quemcunque gloriosum
scopum Imperatoria Vestra Majestas collineare voluerit neutra potuerit
aberrare, quos Subditi Vestri tanquam duplex pacis suae Pignus suspiciunt,
Inimici uti ancipitem belli Terrorem reformidant) Diu est quod Serenissima sua
Majestas de praeclara Eorum indole, and virute tam illustri genere dignissima
inaudiverat. Ideoque valde delectatus est dum e Legatis Vestris intelligeret,
Eos erga se ita affectos hac etiam in re Paternum exemplum tam been imitari:
Quod non solum Ipse Dominus meus Serenissimus pro summo beneficio habet, sed
etiam pro thesauro ingenti successoribus suis reservabit ( Certo augurans, duos
illos Aquilae Moscovitici Pullos, qui hactenus ad lucidissimos Majestatis
Vestrae Imperatoriae oculos visus suos exacuunt atque illustrant, justa etiam
aetate ad Vestrum exemplum alas commoturos and ad summam^evolaturos
altitudinem, quo vera virtus and labor indefessus magnanimam Heroum Progeniem
provehere unquam and efferre potuerint.)

Quod ad meipsum denique attinet, uti Serenissima sua Majestas nihil mihi
potest imperare quod non novo honere me augeat, ita nullum majorem mihi honorem
mandare potuit hac ad Imperatoriam Vestram Majestatem Legatione. Quum enim ex
summa Serenissimae suae Majestatis and Augustissimorum Majorum suorum
munificentia multas possessiones and haereditarios dignitatis gradus sim
adeptus (quibus alios tamen mihi exaequare potuissent) absit verbo invidia,
praeter Solemn assiduum illum inter Imperia Vestra Legatum, nemo est qui in hoc
munere jure mihi praeponi possit uut anteferri. Cum igitur particeps hactenus
and testis Imperatoriae Vestrae Majestatis gloriae and serenitatis (quae augeri
usque and perpetuari voveo) factus fuetim, nihil ultra est quod exoptem, nisi
ut Majestas Vestra Imperatoria eodem porro favore me velit dignari ad
Serenissimae suae Majestatis mandata conficienda, i^ mutuum Vtriusque
Imperatoriae Coronae commodum and Posterorum utilitatem. Ad quam rem uti omni
humillimi officii atque erga Serenissimam suam Majestatem obsequii nexu
obstringor, totum animum studium atque industriam meam prout incoeptum tam
laudabile postulat adhibebo. Neque dubito Majestatem Vestram Imperatoriam
vicissim tales Viros delegaturum, qui candore, and affectu, celeritate etiam
agendi ad tantum opus maturandum maxim sint idonei.

Most Excellent and most renowned Prince and Emperor.
HIs most serene Majesty, my most gracious Lord and Master, has lately
received from Your Imperial Majesty a most honorable Embassage, the splendor
of which as it was most worthy the magnificence of so great a Monarch from whom
it proceeded, so the subject was most acceptable to Him to whom it was
directed. For as much as it contained, together with the most welcome news of
the health and prosperity of Your Imperial Majesty, Your joy for His happy
Restoration to His Kingdoms, your memory of the ancient friendship betwixt the
glorious Predecessors of both your Majesty's and your own most constant
resolution to continue and increase the same for the future. So that the
inestimable worth of your Imperial affection being expressed and set of by the
honor of so conspicuous an Embassy, seemed as a Jewel to whose value nothing
could be added by Nature and Art, has appropriated its utmost perfection. Or
rather what the wisest of Princes said concerning a word fitly spoken, your
seasonable Imperial Message was like apples of gold in pictures of silver. One
thing only his most Serene Majesty complains of, and not without reason,
that your Imperial Majesty has thereby prevented Him, and whereas he had
nothing earlyer in his royal intentions than to have saluted you with that
solemnity which belongs to the greatness of both your Estates and Friendship,
that he must now be the last to perform it. Yet doubtless, considering the
parity of your years, the conformity of your Interests, and consequently the
symparthy of both your Inclinations, there was herein neither first nor last
betwixt you, but in one instant the like causes must in your Princely breasts
have produced the same resolutions. But even the influence of the caelestial
luminaries, those truest Emblemes of Majesty, is suspended by the various
disposition of inferior bodies and friends, of whom your Majesty's are the
best pattern, although they think the same things could never yet invent so
punctual an happiness, as to interchange those thoughts at one and the same
minute. Seeing therefore the prevention must fall on one side, his most Serene
Majesty is content that your Imperial Majesty has gained the advantage of
time upon Him, so that he may not come behind you as he never will in the truth
and sincerity of his affections. And therefore as is usual among Friends, he
has thought fit to render you a reason of his actions, and to allege his most
just excuses, that nothing but the multiplicity of his Royal domestic affairs
could have so long retarded the honor he receives and paies in sending to you:
That in order to this Embassage to your Imperial Majesty he has postponed the
return to other Princes nearer to Him, though none have a situation closer to
his heart than your self, and that he has been so far from admitting any
delay herein, that he has only watched the most proper opportunity to acquit
himself of so due an Obligation. For though his most Serene Majesty consults
not the stars and the position of the heavens as often as he would undertake any
great action; yet he asks counsel of him that is the Creator of them and the
first mover of his felicity. And therefore finding himself now stated by his
Almighty Grace and Providence in full fruition of all the blessings that can
crown a Sovereign head, he has chosen this as the most fortunate hour to
salute so great an Emperor, Friend and Brother, and to congratulate and
augurate to your Imperial Majesty a perpetuity of the same, or, if it may be,
greater happiness. For if Victory over Enemies, obedience of Subjects, and
multitude of Friends be, as doubtless they are, the greatest strength and
ornaments of the Regal Throne, certainly his most serene Majesty having been a
miracle of courage and aequanimity in his adverss fortune is at this day a
greater miracle of prosperity. For as for Enemies none has provoked or tried
his power, but those infamous Pirates of Algier, Enemies of Christianity and
mankind, whom therefore at two thousand miles distance he blocked up in their
own dens, destroyed their ships, battered their forts, rescued the captives,
and forced those miscreants to his own conditions. For his subjects, they have
gladly assisted to the punishment of those Traitors and Tyrants, which so long
oppressed and misled them, and with so much more veneration and duty do pay
their homage unto their natural most Gracious Sovereign, and have with their
ancient loyalty washed out the stains of the late Rebellion. And for Friends
as he has no Christian Prince at enmity with him, so is there scarce any of
them but have addressed themselves to him by extraordinary Embassages, and have
upon their desires been received into his nearer Alliance, Covenanting first to
deliver up (as they have done) those detestable fugitives who were imbrued in
the blood of his most glorious Father. And if after all these things there were
leisure to discourse of the largeness of his Dominions, he has to his
Hereditarie Kingdoms in Europe, Himself added several Provinces in Asia,
Africa, and America, beyond whatever was acquired by his immortal Ancestors.
The Sea is his Bridge betwixt so distant Territories, and as often as he pleases,
his Navies do carry a moveable Frontire to all the habitable World: so that the
Fame of his former afflictions has not been heard so far as his present
Dominions extend. But though the Extent of Empire be consonant to the greatness
of his mind, the Government of subjects natural to his Prudence and Justice,
and Victory over Enemies must needs be gustable to the height of his Courage,
yet he, a Prince so well exercised in the vicissitude of humane affairs, could
even disrelish Victory, because it tastes of blood, and relax his Government
rather than it should oppress the liberty of mankind, and looks upon whatsoever
Extent of Dominion, but as a confinement of those more capacious thoughts
wherewith he adores the Author of all these mercies. Nor values he himself
therofore so much upon all these things though in themselves excellent and
desirable, not upon the largeness of his Territories, nor the tranquillity of
his Kingdoms, nor the fortunateness of his Arms, in comparison of the
constancy of his Friends. He has himself been fashioned to it by experience,
and is by nature all made up of friendship. Nor should I have made this
defective rehearsal of things so universally known, did not the commemoration
of his present Greatness show him to be the more considerable Friend, and imply
the gratitude he professes to those his Friends who formerly made his adversity
more tolerable, and do now give the truest season and sweetness to his better
fortune. And among all those Friends, who can be preferred, or who indeed is
comparable to your Imperial Majesty? For whether his most Serene Majesty
consider the Greatness of the Prince, the ancientness of Alliance, or freshness
of Obligations, what Tree is there that spreads a deeper root, or sheds a
greener shade, or bears a fruit more delicious? His most Serene Majesty
himself uses with much delight to discourse among us who have the honor to be
nearest his Sacred Person, how above an hundred year^ ago one of his Royal
Ancestors, Edward the fixth, did out of an heroical mind man out his ships to
trace out the limits of the World, and join the most distant and unknown
Nations by intercourse. These were they that first discovered the vastness of
the Northern Ocean counted till then unnavigable, who, as the Children of
Israel with a pillar of fire by night, so were conducted by a pillar of
continual day through that wilderness of waters unto this your Empire. They may
justly be said to have invented the true use of the load stone, and that
supernatural needle then first rested, at the finding out of your northern
principalities, to which it had pointed in vain for so many ages. Having
escaped the hazards of the sea, they were yet in danger twice to be lost, first
in the remaining journey through so spacious Dominions, and then in the
brightness of that Majesty which they expected not out of their own Country.
But they were not only refreshed, as it was seasonable, by the courtesy of the
then Emperor, but received moreover from his munificency, and as a reward of
the trade then first opened and introduced on that side of your World, those
Immunities and privileges from which thence forward both the Nations have
reaped no small Advantage. And ever since a most sincere and hereditary Amity
has been transmitted between the Successors of both Princes from Father to
Son, unto your Majesty's now reigning. 'Twas much about that time that other
Princes had sent out their Navies likewise for new discoveries. The Portuguez
found out and conquered in the East Indies the Land of pearls and spices,
though none so orient or fragrant as what his present Majesty of Portugal has
deposited by the side of my most Serene Lord and Master. The Spaniard in the
West Indies seized upon the mines of Gold and Silver. So that when nothing of
value seemed left for the Kings of England, they found what was more adequate
to the desires of Princes who neither needed nor coveted further Empire, a
Friend. And his most Serene Majesty is wont to say that his was the best lot of
the three, and that he would not change his Friend of an hundred years for the
Treasure of both the Indies. And He adds for reason his own Experiment,
forasmuch as when his Subjects were generally revolted. His Friends as it is
usual most of them failed, and when it seemed that Heaven and Earth had
conspired his ruin while they were but contriving his happiness, He was then
not only readily assisted by your Imperial Majesty but the addresses of the
Usurpers rejected, and your protection withdrawn from all who might seem any
way tainted with the infection of that disloyalty. And therefore his most
Serene Majesty, as he has readily repayed into the hands of your Imperial
Ambassador those sums with which you did then pleasure him, so will he always
retain deposited in the most sacred recess of his Royal heart, and transmit to
his Successors the memory of all these Obligations. And for all these new
causes, and upon those good and ancient grounds, his most Serene Majesty
declares in your own Imperial words, than which none could be either more
significant in themselves or more consonant to his sense, That his most Serene
Majesty taking into consideration the flourishing estate of his Kingdoms, and
that entire brotherly love and amity and frequent correspondency which was
inviolable held, and continued from the beginning of the Reign of his Royal
Father Charles the First of blessed memory, with Your Imperial Father of
blessed memory the great Lord Emperor and great Duke Michael Pheoderovith of
all Russia self-upholder, and the happiness and tranquillity thereby accruing
to both Dominions, does most earnestly and heartily desire, not only the
continuance thereof, but a nearer and dearer and firmer affectionate brotherly
love and frequent correspondency with Your Imperial Majesty, His dear and
loving Brother than formerly. For Conclusion, wishing and praying to the
Omnipotent God, His and Your only King and Sovereign; that he will grant you
length of days, tranquillity of Reign, perpetuity of friendships, and all
other Imperial blessings beyond the achievements of all Your immortal
Ancestors, and that there may never want of Your most Illustrious line to sit
upon your Imperial Throne, so long as the Sun and Moon endure.

His most Serene Majesty likewise returns his most affectionate salutations
and friendly congratulations to the great prince Alexey Alexevich the Heir of
your Imperial Dominions and the great Pheodor Alexevich, [Those two Shafts of
the Imperial Quiver, which at what so ever glorious mark Your Majesty shall
draw them you can miss with neither: Those two Pledges of peace to Your
Subjects and a double terror to your Enemies.] His most Serene Majesty had
long since heard of their hopefulness and virtues worthy of so Illustrious a
parantage, and therefore was highly delighted to understand by Your Ambassadors
that in their affection to Him also they did so well follow their Fathers
pattern, which he therefore thankfully accepts as an Obligation on Himself and
a Treasure for his Successors, [ Certainly augurating that those two Sons of
the Russian Eagle, as they are now sharpning their sight daily at the most
clear eyes of Your Imperial Majesty, so will also in due time extend their
wings after Your example, and soar to the highest pitch that true virtue and
indefatigable labor can carry the magnanimous offspring of Princes.]

And now for what concerns my self, as I can receive no command from His most
Serene Majesty my most Gracious Lord and Master, but what places a new honor
upon me, so must I acknowledge that in choosing me for this Embassage, He has
done me as great an honor as He could command me. For whereas from the supreme
munificency of Himself and His immortal Ancestors I have and inherit several
possessions and dignities (but of which other men might also be equally
capable) may it be spoken without vanity, the Sun only that posts on a daily
Embassage betwixt both Your Dominions can justly dispute the precedence with me
in this Employment. So that having been thus far made a partaker and witness
of the Glory and Serenity of Your Imperial Majesty (which may it long
continue) I can have nothing further in my wishes than that You will still
vouchsafe me the same favor toward the happy expedition of His most Serene
Majesty's affairs, for the mutual Advantage of both Your Crowns and the good
of posterity. Unto which ends as I am bound by all the Obligations of duty to
my most Gracious Prince, Lord and Master; so shall I bring all the affection,
Zeal and diligence which may befit so laudable an undertaking. In order to
which I doubt not but Your Imperial Majesty likewise will appoint me such
Commissioners, as shall bring the same ^andor and inclination, together with
that dispatch and expedition which is necessary for the furthering of so great
and good a design.

My Lord Ambassador having made an end of his speech, which was well approved
of, His Tzarskoy Majesty told him that he would do him the honor to let him
kiss His hand: therefore he went up again to the Throne and kissed His hand,
according to the custom of Christian Ambassadors. For it is a ceremony that
they must be subject to in this Court, though indeed it is a thing much
inferior to the dignity of an Ambassador, who under that Character should
rather keep themselves equal with the Princes Majesty than to condescend to
such a low submission. Nor do I doubt but that my Lord Ambassador had rather
accepted of such a condition as they put to Infidels Ambassadors who are not
admitted to the performance of this Ceremony, because the Tzar counts it a
great favor, and therefore He does reserve it only for Christians. He did also
the same honor to my Lord his Gentlemen, who all kissed his hand decently and
in good order, while his Excellency sat upon a form that his Tzarskoy
Majesty Himself called for to that purpose. The mean while there was a Boyar
to uphold the Tzars right hand that was kissed lest He should come to be tired,
and with the left hand He held His heavy Scepter. In this conjuncture my Lord
recommanded from the King to his Tzarskoy Majesty Sir John Hebdon, who was
come along with my Lord from England, where he had been of late his Tzarskoy
Majesty's Agent. And therefore, because being in that employment he had
bestowed a great care and prudence in promoting the common good of both Crowns.
His Majesty thought fit to acquaint upon this occasion his Tzarskoy Majesty
with the singular esteem He had for his person. These are the words my Lord
spoke in the said Knights behalf as he was stepping next to my Lord of Morpeth
to kiss the Tzars hand, This Gentleman (says he) is I suppose well known to
Your Imperial Majesty: He has done Your Imperial Majesty very good service
in the Court of England, and therefore his Majesty has a particular esteem
for him, and has commanded me to recommend him more particularly when I shall
next have the honor to be admitted to Your Imperial presence.

The Gentlemen having all kissed the Tzars hand, the Presents that were sent by
the hundred and thirty men came in and passed in very good order on one side of
the great pillar, and so went about into a room next to the hall. Thereupon my
Lord Ambassador stood up and said to his Majesty; His most Serene Majesty
has sent a Present as a token of His affection to Your Imperial Majesty,
which whatsoever it is, the value thereof will be multiplied by the kind
acceptance of Your Imperial Majesty.

The First thing that came in was a Gun of King Charles the First, and
therefore his Excellency presented it with this Compliment; This Gun was
delivered to me by his Majesty's own hand, being excellent in its kind, the
same which his Royal Father of blessed and glorious memory used to shoot in,
and which as a Relic of that renowned Prince he thought could not be better
dedicated than to the hands of Your Imperial Majesty.

Next to the Gun came a pair of Pistolets, whereupon my Lord spoke again, That
pair of Pistolets (says he) his Majesty delivered me also with his own hand,
commanding me to excuse their oldness, which he thought would not make them
less acceptable, when You knew they where those, with which after so long
adversity, He rid in His triumphant Entry into His Metropolitan City of London.

The Plate came next to those Pistolets, and in the first place a great
silver-guilt Basin supported upon two men's arms, so all the rest passed by
without stopping, next to the Tzars the presents allowed for the two Princes,
then the Queens present to the Duchess, and at last my Lord Ambassadors.

Thus ended the Audience, and my Lord being brought home was treated (as it is
usual in that Court at Audience-daies) with the Tzars own meat, and it was
therefore sent presently from the Palace. There was about an hundred dishes
brought publicly in order, with good store of wine, brandy, and meade; His
Majesty sent also one private Boyar to take a care of all the Ceremonies that
were to be observed: but the greatest Ceremony being to drink many healths, he
made sure to have every health written in a bill in the same order as the Tzar
had appointed him. His Excellency sat at the middle of the table upon his
chair of State, at his right hand was my Lord of Morpeth, and at his left Sir
John Hebdon, both at each end of the table, so that they were pretty distant
from my Lord Ambassador: the Moscovites sat together at the other side of the
table which was square and crosswise set. My Lord having furnished his own
plates, took occasion to make use himself alone of a dozain of silver-guilt
plates he had, but the Boyars not liking that Ceremony seemed to look upon it
with a jealous eye: yet his Excellency kept them as cheerful as he could, both
by his graceful presence of spirit and the sweetness of his Music. The Boyar
who directed the feast did also play his part with his healths, holding the
paper in his hand, and presently begun his great Lords good health; Though
indeed I think he liked far better the King of Englands, for my Lord
Ambassador presented him with the cup wherein he drunk it being of
silver-guilt, wherewith he was so much taken that he scarce minded any thing
else and so went away with it.

The 13. of February, my Lord had again Audience of the Tzar, and also his
first Conference with the Commissioners appointed by his Tzarskoy Majesty. We
went in the same order and manner as we did the first time, but my Lord
Ambassador was led into another hall much handsomer than the first, the
inner-roof being fairly guilt with very good pictures, there were also fair
windows and very rich tapestrie. The Tzar was upon a little Throne not above
two steps over the ground, yet having still the Crown upon his head and the
Scepter in his hand, and at his right hand there was the Imperial Globe. This
Audience being a little private, and therefore not so copious of Boyars, the
Tzar inquired of the Ambassadors health, and told him besides, that having
caused the Kings Letter to be translated he knew thereby his Majesty's desire,
and that consequently he had appointed six Commissioners amongst his near
Boyars and Counselors to treat with him about his affairs. So my Lord did not
stay with the Tzar above a quarter of an hour, then he stood very near to him,
but still with his hat off.

While he was going to the room appointed for the Conference, he was met twice
by some of their Boyars wearing great gold chains about them, which I thought
to be something like those Ethiopian slaves whose chains were also of gold.
My Lord being come to the room, he and his Commissioners sat together, and he
delivered them one paper about the Reparation promised in his Tzarskoy
Majesty's name before he made his Entrance, and another concerning the
Restitution of the Privileges enjoyed formerly by the English Company. Thus was
the first paper written.

FOr as much as the second day after my arrival at the Yaws, but five versts
from this City, notice having been given me by Offonassie Evanovich Nestrof my
Pristaff, that his Imperial Majesty expected me the next day (being the fifth
of February) in Mosco, and that about nine a Clock I should be ready to set
forward, I was thereupon before the said hour ready accordingly with all my
train and equipage to make my solemn Entry into His said Imperial City of
Mosco, but was nevertheless detained in a noisome wisby the whole day without
meat or drink for my self or attendants; And when at the last order came to my
Pristaff I was, after having been for an hours time or more led up and down
the Fields out of the way to the City, instead of entering into the Imperial
City (according to appointment) lodged in a mean village three miles distant.
Which indeed was the same evening in the name of his Imperial Majesty excused
to me, upon the mistake of the Posts and Messengers sent out for direction.
Whereupon I thought necessary to write thence to his Imperial Majesty, to
inform His said Imperial Majesty of what had passed, and of my resolution not
to stir out of that place until satisfaction were given me for so great an
indignity as it to me appeared. And forasmuch as before the answer to the said
Letter, there was (upon the sixth of February) sent from his Imperial Majesty
to me the Diack of the imperial Cabinet, to desire me by any means to make my
Entrance the same day: and the said Diack promising that all satisfaction
should be given me concerning the said indignity, I did therefore accordingly
make my Entry into this City the said sixth day of February, but have not yet
received any sufficient account concerning the occasion, the manner, and the
punishment of the said miscarriage, as in so weighty a business appertains;
And forasmuch as by reason of the said miscarriage I was, which I account a
damage irreparable, detained one whole day longer from the honor and felicity
of seeing His Imperial Majesty, and am so much the longer withheld from
proposing what I have from the King my Master for the good of both Estates; And
forasmuch as in the eye and discourse of the whole World, the honor of the
King my Master has thereby exceedingly suffered, and will daily more without a
satisfaction as public and notorious as the miscarriage; And forasmuch as
otherwise I can give no good account to the King my Master, to whom I am
responsible with my head, should I digest any such indignities? I therefore
desire that his Imperial Majesty will be pleased to command that a perfect
narrative in the most authentic manner of the reason of that disorder, of
names of the persons criminal both principals and accessory, and what example
of justice his Imperial Majesty (who cannot but be most tender of the honor of
a Prince, and such a Prince as the King my Master) has showed upon them, may
be delivered to me under the hands and seals of the Lords Commissioners for my
justification: Which I do expect with the most vehement impatiency, that I may
forthwith proceed into the particulars of that friendly Negotiation; In order
to which I have leapt over all complaints of lesser moment, as not being come
to pick quarrels but to cement the most perfect union that ever has been
betwixt the two Crowns, unto which God grant an happy success and perfection.

Given the 13 of February Anno Dni. 1663./4. CARLISLE.

These were the words of the Second paper.

WHereas the first foundation of that happy Correspondency and great Amity
betwixt the Kings of England and Emperors of Russia, was laid in the
Privileges granted to the English Merchants by the said Emperors of Russia, in
regard of the trade first introduced by them by the way of Archangel, Whereby
not only the Subjects of both Countries, and of this Country especially, have
reaped great advantages: but also both Princes, and particularly the Emperors
of Russia, in several great affairs of state and otherwise have had further
occasion to receive great assistance and effectual testimonies of friendship
from one another, His Majesty of England desiring not only to equalize but to
excel all His Predecessors in the firmness and strictness of brotherly amity
and entire correspondence with his Imperial Majesty, and considering that
those first foundations, laid by the singular Providence of God and wisdom of
the former Princes, and which by the duration of so many years have been
approved to be most solid and permament, are therefore the most proper grounds
whereon to raise a building of perpetual Friendship, has therefore commanded
me, as I do in His name, first of all to desire the Restitution of the former
Privileges, as they were enjoyed in the time of the Father of his Imperial
Majesty, and in the Reign of his present Imperial Majesty before the taking
of them away upon occasion of the late Rebellion in England. And these being
first granted, his Majesty will further manifest by me the great affection
which He bears to his Imperial Majesty.

Given the 13 of February Anno Dni. 1663./4. CARLISLE.

The 17. my Lord Ambassador had another Conference in the Palace, where his
Commissioners read to him their answer to his two papers, but refused to give
him yet a Copy of it. In that answer all things were quite contrary to his
expectations, so that he thought fit thereupon to speak somewhat hard to them.
Then it happened that one great casement of the room, wherein they were
assembled together, fell down with such a horrid noise, that the Lords
Commissioners were quite astonished, and wished my Lord had spoken more gently.
An Interpreter of theirs, who was an outlandish man, speaking afterward to
that purpose said, If (says ^he) two or three words of anger of My Lord
Ambassador's do so shake off the house, how would they tremble, if they heard
King Charles thundering at their ears with just indignation?

The 26. Pronchissof brought my Lord Ambassador a Copy of their answer read to
him the seventeenth. But lest I should tire the Reader with an ill compacted
discourse, whose style and meaning are equally rude and unpleasant, I shall
only tell the substance of it in as few words as I can. And first, as to the
Reparation demanded by my Lord Ambassador in his first paper of 13. of
February, they say (when they have much extolled the greatness of the pomp that
was shown at his Reception, which they take to be the most glorious that ever
was made in their Court to any Ambassador) that the disorder aforesaid happened
upon the mistake of the Posts. That it was not fit he should make his Entry by
night, and that his Tzarskoy Majesty had therefore given order that he should
lodge that night nearer Mosco, so that the next day he might be received
betimes with a splendour answerable to his quality; And so, that so many
strangers who lived in Mosco might see by this Reception, how great is the
Amity which their Great Lord bears to his Majesty, and that they might
discourse of it in their several Countries. But to that they added a thing that
surprised very much his Excellency, saying, that he himself stayed also a great
while the next day, after many Messengers were sent unto him. And presently
after they make bold to tell him, that he ought not to have demanded
satisfaction in that place, where then he was. And at last without any other
proofs they only say; that those Messengers who accidentally missed their way
the first day had been chastised.

Their answer to the second Paper concerning the Privileges of the English
Company was no less unreasonable, they refused them under the following
pretenses, which they allege for good and solid reasons. First of all they
say, the Privileges were abolished upon occasion of the late Rebellion of
England, and that the English Company of Archangel was guilty of it. Then they
speak of one Luke Nightingale whom they affirm to have been sent secretly to
his Tzarskoy Majesty by the late Kings Majesty during the Rebellion, to give
Him notice of it, and to desire Him to abrogate the Privileges of the English
Company, as having also put off their Obedience; Adding moreover, that this
same Nightingale had Letters from the King, that he was very private with his
Royal Majesty, and very trusty to Him. Besides they tell what this pretended
Agent gave the Boyars that treated with him notice of, that the Fa^tors of the
English Company had at that time ^roguish design with one John Cartwrite, a
^ember of the Company, to rob his Tzarskoy Majesty's Subjects in the
East-Countries, and that shortly after the said Cartwrite did accomplish his
design. Whereupon they say, that John Hebdon (so they call the Knight that I
mentioned before) was Factor to this same Cartwrite. Afterward they lay an
heinous charge against the said Company; as, that they had not furnished the
Tzars treasury with their commodities, at the same price they were sold for in
England, that they had sold prohibited commodities as Tobacco, and that besides
they offered to take strangers goods to carry them through the Country custom
free. Lastly they speak of a general complaint made by the Russes, Merchants
and Tradesmen, as if the English Merchants had all the trade themselves, and
grew thereby very rich in a short time, whereas his Tzarskoy Majesty's Subjects
grew poorer every day. They allege also that the Merchants who were first
nominated for the Privileges were dead, so that (it seems) they will have the
Privileges to die with them.

After this answer the Commissioners were pleased, as if they had a mind
thereby to be revenged of the former Reparation required by his Excellency, to
complain also on their side most vehemently of the Title, most Illustrious,
that he had given his Tzarskoy Majesty. This was the occasion and manner o^
their complaint. Pronchissof, one of the s^ Commissioners, had of my Lord (upon
hi^ desire) a Latin Copy of the Speech said a^ the first Audience, where indeed
he gives the Tzar the Title of Illustrissimus. That was the thing that they
stickt to, but as to the expression said publicly by word of mouth before the
Great Duke himself (which should be thought more offensive) they had the
goodness to interpret it in good part, because they gave it a good sense
according to their own will. But a writing that was only given ^o satisfy a
man's curiosity, who desired to see it, is now become a very great matter of
State, every word of it is examined strictly, ^s if the whole business were
only to pick quarrels. Such was the occasion of the great ^nvective they gave
here in writing against ^llustrissimus, which they take to be much ^nferiour to
the dignity and grandeur of their Monarch. Therefore they require of my Lord
Ambassador that instead thereof he make use ^f Serenissimus, that he would also
acquaint ^is Royal Majesty with it, whom they desire together to leave off
most Illustrious, and to ^rite most Serene, when it shall be his plea^ure to
write to their Great Lord. To that ^urpose they say, that all other Princes of
Eu^ope do it according to his Princely worth, and amongst others the Caesar,
for a proof ^hereof they had already showed my Lord ^mbassador one of his
Letters being at Con^erence with them. His Excellency took then ^otice, how
the Emperor called Him only Tzar according to His own Language, and therefore
he resolved ever since to do so, and never name him Emperor, as he had done
hitherto after the custom of English Monarchs and their Subjects.

The 29. my Lord Ambassador had another Conference, where he did so reply in
writing, first concerning the Reparation promised the sixth of February. I
reply (says he) that it is hard for me to conceive, whereas his Tzarskoy
Majesty is able at so great distances in his absence by the good order of his
Generals to embattle so numerous and victorious Armies, upon the sudden
opportunities of fighting a^ Enemy, that after my so slow advancing from
Vologda, and three days lodging almost under the Gates of his Tzarskoy City,
the continua^ Attendants upon his own Person, where the^ can learn and see
nothing but the most perfec^ and exquisite Order, should not in a whol^ day be
in a posture to receive the Ambassado^ of a Friend. And again that it is almost
a^ strange to me, that his Tzarskoy Posts, wh^ run daily at his Command through
so spacious Dominions (which may ever be enlarged that they who would not miss
a foot at midnight thorough the very deserts of Tartary yet should lose their
way in broad daylight within three or four miles of Mosco. An^ yet I am most
assured, that his Tzarskoy Majesty did really intend to reflect upon me that
day all the Honor which according to the custom of his Court is due to the
Character I bring from my Royal Master. So that there seems to be much more in
it than an accident, and especially seeing that Persons sent that same day to
the same place upon an incivility to Sir John Hebdon, a Gentleman of his
Majesty's privy Chamber, and of my Train, could find the way early in the
morning; but those that were sent about my Reception, did miss it till night.
And therefore, because so many Strangers of several Nations, which dwell in his
Tzarskoy City, were winesses that day of such miscarriage, contrary to the good
pleasure of his Tzarskoy Majesty, as no age nor no Nation can parallel, and
that they have, and do, and will discourse of it according to their own
apprehensions, both here and in their several Countries, neither to the
advantage of the King my Master, nor yet of his Tzarskoy Majesty, unless His
prudence may appear in his Justice. Therefore I say, I demanded what is in my
first paper mentioned. But instead thereof I am told in this paper delivered to
me the 26. of February, that the next day after, many Messengers being sent
unto me, I also stayed late; To which I reply, that it is very possible that
many Messengers were sent to me that day, and that they lost their way then as
the others the day before: And indeed in the place where I was it was yet
difficulter to find me, especially seeing it appears the nearer one comes to
Mosco men are more ignorant of the Roads. But the first message that I received
that day was by a very considerable Person the Diack of the Imperial Cabinet,
and as soon as we had spoken together and he promised me satisfaction, which if
I ought not to have asked, he ought not to have promised; but being promised
ought to be effected: I was ready in a quarter of an hour, though it was then
not two a clock after the English account, and I but at two Versts distance;
which indeed according to the proportions of the former day, made me suspect,
as also it proved, that by how much I was yet nearer I should come in so much
later to Mosco. However though I could have wished to have entered by day, as
indeed it was fitting, and might perhaps the third day have succeeded, yet out
of complacency to his Tzarskoy Majesty's good pleasure, I took my chance of the
night. And what I discerned before it was dark of the the Honor his Tzarskoy
Majesty intended, and did me, joined with those most friendly and cordial
Sentiments, which I brought along to Him from my Royal Master, made me
interpret that very obscurity for splendor, and that most Serene night which
brought me so near his Tzarskoy Majesty, was by me preferred before the most
Illustrious day that had detained me from Him. But whereas it is said, that I
ought not in that place to have demanded an answer of my being hindered the
former day; After having first protested, that whatsoever I have said above in
reference to my self, upon the second day, has not been upon any account or
obligation that I have or ought of answering any charge, accusation, or
recrimination against me; but only out of the desire that I have by all
honorable means to retain the good opinion of his Tzarskoy Majesty, as being
so great a Prince and Friend of the King my Master, and which I have neither
forfeited yet, and may possibly deserve further before my going away (unless
upon some unhappy interruption from other persons:) I add next, that none but
the King my Master knows what I ought to have done, and therefore I desire
that all expressions to the contrary may be omitted for the future. But if upon
promise from so considerable a person as the Diack of the Tzarkoy Cabinet, I
did enter this City, and if upon the fairest hopes given me by his Tzarskoy
Majesty's Boyars and Counselors, I leaving it upon the honor of so worthy
persons, I have passed from this Complaint into His Majesty's other business,
and that no redress be given me, then indeed I have done what I ought not. And
that such redress has as yet not been given me I must affirm, seeing all that
is said tending thereto is, that in the meeting of me the height of Honor was
shown me, which is nothing, if in not meeting of me, the day before, there was
showed me all Dishonor. For the actions of his Tzarskoy Majesty are all equal,
and of one thread; and so magnanimous a Prince is far from being so straightened
and necessitated in courtesy, that to make that Courtesy appear the higher, He
must do a Discourtesy the day before. And then to say, that those by whom the
delay was caused have been punished, I appeal to your selves, whether if mine
were your own case, you would think so slender and transitory an account, a
sufficient satisfaction to his Tzarskoy Majesty, or a competent discharge for
your selves. And therefore I insist upon my demands, as they were expressed in
my former Paper of the thirteenth of February.

Thus my Lord answered to their Excuses concerning the Hinderance of his Entry
the first day. Now he comes to the second part of their answer concerning the
Privileges, and indeed he does so discuss and refute their Objections alleged
against the granting of them, that nothing could be said more just and
reasonable.

First, says he, as to the sending the English Merchants out of the Moscovian
Dominions, and whatsoever passed either in public or in secret in any year in
relation to those affairs, is perfectly known to his Majesty my Master; who
has chosen to interpret it all to the best advantage, and accordingly both at
Council before the King my Master, as also here in public, I have still
mentioned it with honor to his Tzarskoy Majesty. Forasmuch as, though all the
English were involved in the calamity of that Rebellion, but the better part
always free from the guilt thereof, and though the English here did generally
put on mourning out of their abhorrence and grief for that detestable
Parricide, and though most of them had from the Lord Culpepper his Majesty's
Ambassador in this Court testimony under his hand and seal of their fidelity
to his Majesty (which they also witnessed by considerable sums of money
furnished at that time by them for the service of his Majesty to the said
Ambassador) nevertheless his Tzarskoy Majesty might very well not be informed
of the said particulars; And therefore, though he sent the English out of the
Moscovian Dominions, and seized upon their houses, and commanded in their bonds
and bills which they had upon Russes, yet did therein a generous and most
obliging act to the King my Master; Especially if, as follows in the answer of
his Tzarskoy Majesty near Boyars and Counselors, there came from his
Majesty's Father of ever blessed memory Luke Nightingale and as follows in the
said Boyars and Counselors narrative thereof before recited.

But neither did the same Luke Nightingale come with his Majesty's Letters
privately: For what Letter he brought was very public, being without a seal
or open, neither was that Letter from his Majesty, as will appear if the near
Boyars and Counselors of his Tzarskoy Majesty produce that Letter they
mention, which in the name of the King my Master I desire may be done. And
whereas the said near Boyars and Counselors say the said Luke was always about
his Royal Majesty without going from Him; to the contrary his Majesty never
knew such a person or heard of him before his crimes in Russia, the said Luke
Nightingale being a broken merchant, a perjured fellow, and a gross Imposter.
Which will further appear, if the said his Tzarskoy Majesty near Boyars and
Counselors will be pleased to remember, that his Tzarskoy Majesty in a Letter
dated July 11. 7155. to his Royal Majesty's Father of ever blessed memory did
make the same relation which his Tzarskoy Majesty's Boyars and Counselors do
now make of the said Nightingale, and to compare with that what I now offer
them delivered to me by his Majesty's command out of the Secretary of States
office, being an extract of his Majesty's Royal Father of ever blessed memory,
His answer to the said Letter, which having been prepared ready could not by
reason of his death shortly succeeding be sent over; [ Lastly whereas Your
Imperial Majesty has intimated that one Luke Nightingale has presumed to
treat with Your Imperial Majesty in Our name, and to present a writing in Your
Majesty's Office, we therefore finding our selves much dishonored thereby
desire a Copy of the said writing, that thereupon when he shall repair into
Our jurisdictions, we may according to justice proceed against him as a person
abusing our name, and treating without our Royal Commission and order in
propounding matters repugnant to our Royal intentions 1648.] And though the
fellow be since dead, and has escaped so the justice of the King my Master,
yet in his Majesty's name I desire the letter may be delivered into my hands,
as also that I may know with what Boyars he treated or writ or spoke in that
matter; that by what they remember of the matter I may give his Majesty more
perfect information thereof. And, though by what appears already whatsoever he
has said here of that nature is most false, and not to be valued any further
by any person of honor and understanding, yet can I not omit what upon his
account his Tzarskoy Majesty's near Boyars add concerning Sir John Hebdon. For
I cannot comprehend to what purpose he is mentioned in this place, the said Sir
John Hebdon being ten years before free from the Service of Cartwrite, and
being he who procured the remanding of Nightingale from Novogorod and his
detaining here some time, till he got away as privately as he came, and never
daring to repair to the sight of his late Majesty of ever blessed memory, or
of his Majesty now reigning, dyed like a villain at Riga. But indeed the near
Boyars and Counselors did very prudently, when upon their urging this matter
upon me as a truth and realitie, they made difficulty to admit the said Sir
John Hebdon, though then required by me according to the desire of his Royal
Majesty, and though at the same time Forainers were all the while present to
spy and observe my discourse concerning his Majesty's affairs. For they could
not be ignorant that Sir John Hebdon was able to give a pertinent account of
all the Impostures of the said Nightingale, and in two minutes to have
discovered the nakedness of all that falsehood, which for want of Audience all
this time has gone current for a truth of great authority. And as for that
Cartwrite, if being oppressed by some of the late Tzarskoy Majesty of ever
glorious memory His Ministers, he sought abroad any reparation contrary to his
late Majesty's of ever blessed memory will or knowledge, I have nothing to say
for him at this time.

But, whereas the said near Boyars and Counselors, passing from that reason of
taking away the Privileges upon occasion of the late Rebellion, are pleased to
allege several Miscarriages of the English here in their way of trading in
this Country, I confess it is some thing new to me. And it seems thereby to
appear (which I am unwilling to believe) as if the said Boyars knew some other
reasons than his Tzarskoy Majesty's generous resentment of the injuries and
inhumanities done to his late Majesty of ever blessed memory for the taking
away those Privileges. Which being so contrary to what the King my Master has
always believed, and that from several expressions in his Tzarskoy Majesty's
own Letters, I am therefore the less prepared to answer. Yet thus much I shall
say, after minding the said near Boyars and Counselors of his Tzarskoy
Majesty, that their allegations had been more weighty, had they named the
particular persons guilty of such miscarriages; as first to their not
furnishing of his Tzarskoy Treasury, wherewith they are charged. The Merchants
have from time all along, yea to the very time of his Tzarskoy Majesty's taking
away of their Privileges, furnished his Treasury with Cloth, Tyn, Lead, Pewter,
and all other Commodities of the growth and manufacture of England, at prices
far cheaper than the Dutch or Hamburghers did or could deliver them, if their
Commodities were answerable to those furnished by the English. And it is
affirmed by the Company of English Merchants, that their Servants and Factors
have at several times offered to deliver goods into his Majesty's Treasury at
the prices they cost there in England, but they would not be accepted. And when
they have been accepted or received into his Tzarskoy Treasury, the Factors
here could very seldom or never get their moneys without great bribes to his
Officers, nay several of them could never get any thing for their goods so
delivered. And the said Merchants do and can justly affirm that his Treasury
has not suffered in that particular, but that they have been much sufferers in
what they have delivered for want of good payment. As to their dealing with
Tobacco, the Companies care and orders were such (each member being under an
oath to observe the same) that if any man trading under the Privileges were
known or found to have any, it was presently taken and burnt before the Russes
his Subjects, whereof many presidents may be produced. So that in this
particular of what is said there is nothing proved, no not so much as any one
instance of any one member of the Company trading here under the Privileges. As
to buying of strangers Commodities, the Merchants privileged here, have ever
been so far from dealing in prohibited Commodities, as also from taking or
meddling with any strangers goods to carry them from Archangel to Moscow
custome-free, and so defraud his Majesty of his customs, that they have from
time to time made very strict orders to the contrary. So that if any person
were found faulty in that particular, he should be delivered to the Emperors
laws and not be protected by the Agent or Company there residing. Nay further
of late years the Company have been so fearful to offend in coloring strangers
goods, that they have made strict orders to prohibit all trade with the Dutch,
Hamburghers, or any other strangers, either at Archangel or any other place in
his Dominions.

As to the first Merchants being dead, It was never understood (as far as I
know) by the Tzar his Predecessors here, nor (I am sure) by the Kings of
England there (who by their Ambassadors capitulated and made agreements in
which the Companies Privileges were included) that those Privileges were made
only to particular and individual men, and that when those men should die, the
Privileges should cease and dye with them. For it was then understood that the
Privileges granted was a due to the Nation; and not only those men which were
then nominated, but likewise to those who should succeed them in the trade.

And for what belongs the Petition of the Goess and all other Tradesmen of the
Muscovian Dominions, and all the pretenses which are hudled together against
the English Merchants; I shall only say at present that it seems natural
enough to me that the Goses, a small number of persons, might desire thereby to
ingross the whole trading to their own hand, though to the prejudice of the
generality of his Tzarskoy Majesty's subjects. But that the whole Tradesmen of
Russia, who receive great advantage from the traffic with the English, should
in that manner petition, seems not so probable because less reasonable.

Therefore passing over all such colors or realities, which may easily be
discussed in succeeding Conferences, unless this new and abrupt answer shall
give me occasion wholly to give over the business, I shall my self say roundly
(inviting thereby the near Boyars and Counselors of his Tzarskoy Majesty to
the same way of proceeding) that if the Privileges were only taken away upon
occasion of the late Rebellion and the Impostures of Luke Nightingale, as has
been given to understand to the King my Master, that therefore the same
Impostures being now discovered, and the said Rebellion being extinguished and
pardoned, and his Majesty now desiring by me that they may be restored again;
It is now therefore time for his Tzarskoy Majesty hereby to redouble the
former obligation upon the King my Master. But if these other Pretenses were
the sole or the concurrent reasons of their taking away, His Majesty is ready
by me both to invigorate the execution of any good orders formerly made for the
preventing the like miscarriages, and also to make for the future such further
provision and regulation, as may secure the interest of his Tzarskoy Majesty
and Subjects. And therefore however the King my Master desires that before all
things the said Privileges may be revived, not that thereby there is any
advantage or gain to his Royal Majesty, who could willingly shoot away yearly
as much powder as the value of them comes to at the health of his Tzarskoy
Majesty his dear and loving Brother. Nor that the Merchants his Subjects have
thereby (as is alleged) so inricht themselves in any comparison with what the
Subjects of his Tzarskoy Majesty have reaped this hundred years from the
English Trade. For on the contrary the English merchants have in their free way
of living and expense in the Country rather strove to defray only and maintain
the friendship with the inhabitans than to accumulate wealth to themselves;
Which yet if they had done they could not be envyed nor ought to be reproached
therewith by those, whose Country has by their benefit drawn in the Commerce
and riches of all Europe. Nor yet that his Majesty expects herein, as it were,
a recompense of all those other accommodations which their Tzarskoy Majesty
have received upon several emergencies of State from the Crown of England, his
Majesty being disposed rather to continue and increase all such Obligations
than to call them in, and diminish them by any exprobration or demand upon His
side. But, to tell you the upright truth as it is fit for us to do with one
another, his Majesty considers that these Privileges were the ancient and
continued foundations of Amity, and transmitted so long from Father to Son on
both sides: so that as men prize a token and memorial of a friend (though
otherwise of small value) above pearls and diamonds he counts it a kind of
unlucky thing to lose them. Also He himself and all his Subjects upon his
Tzarskoy Majesty's Letter of July 28. 1661. (where He says, Whereas Your
Majesty writ in Your said Letter concerning other affairs, in prosecution of
which Your Majesty would send to Us our Tzarskoy Majesty Your Subjects the
Merchants together with Your Majesty's Ambassador, who shall further express
the affection of friendship which Your Majesty Our loving Brother has toward
Our Tzarskoy Majesty; we answer that when to Our Imperial Majesty Your
Majesty's said Ambassador shall arrive and shall declare to Us the Commission
he has from Your Majesty Our Brother, we Our Tzarskoy Majesty will be ready,
so far as in Our power is, and for the affection we bear to You Our Brother,
give assent thereto and command the same to be obeyed) and again upon his
Tzarskoy Majesty's Letter of July 21. 1662. (were he says, We the great Lord
our Tzarskoy Greatness taking into our Princely consideration the flourishing
State of our Empire, and that entire Brotherly love and amity and frequent
correspondencie, which inviolably was held and continued from the beginning of
the Reign of our Tzarskoy Father of famous memory the great Lord Emperor and
great Duke, Michaelo Phedorovich of all Russia self-upholder, to and with Your
Majesty's Royal Father of famous memory Charles the first, and the happiness
peace and tranquillity accruing thereby to both Dominions, wishing the like
happiness had been and were still enjoyed by and between all other Christian
Princes and Potentates, do most earnestly and heartily desire not only the
continuation thereof but a more nearer and dearer and firmer affectionate
blessed Brotherly love, and amity and frequent correspondency with your Royal
Majesty our dear and loving Brother, than formerly with all readiness and
freeness on all occasions to the utmost of our power to answer the desires of
Your Royal Majesty our dear and loving Brother) did not ^n the least wise
doubt, but at the first word (...) had spoken, the Privileges would have been
^ranted. For else what signifies, When to our Tzarskoy Majesty, Your Majesty's
Ambassador shall arrive, and shall declare to us the Commission he has from
Your Majesty our Brother, we our Tzarskoy Majesty will be ready, so far^ as in
our power is, to give assent thereto; An^ again, We our Tzarskoy Majesty do
mos^ earnestly and heartily desire not only the continuation thereof but a more
nearer and deare^ and firmer affectionate blessed Brotherly lov^ and amity with
Your Royal Majesty our dea^ and loving Brother, than formerly with all
readyness and freeness on all occasions to the utmost of our power to answer
the desires of You^ Royal Majesty our dear and loving Brother And how can there
be a continuation and encreas of amity and the same amity, unless the same
Privileges to continue as formerly Therefore his Majesty thought it the most
honorable way for his Tzarskoy Majesty to rene^ them at first frankly without
all little capitulations, as for other reasons so because h^ would be in debt
to his Tzarskoy Majesty that he might embrace all occasions to rep^ it with
usury. And that the near Boyars an^ Counselors may not be terrifyed with the
vastness or irrationality of the grant, and fe^ to be accounted evil
Counselors should the advice indeed so small a thing, and in which the
Subjects of his Tzarskoy Majesty reap mo^ advantage than the English, before
they ha^ driven the market with me for some furth^ interest of his Tzarskoy
Majesty, I desire they may be informed that some hundred years ago even England
(though always most potent at sea in men of war) yet for some part of their
traffic were beholding to the Hans Towns, who in Merchant ships brought all
kind of their merchandise home to the English. Whereupon the Kings of England
granted several great Immunities to the Hans Towns, with dwelling and all
accommodations. Which Immunities though so many hundred years ago granted, and
though the tide of ^rade be long since wholly turned, the English ^ow carrying
all that trade to their doors, and much more than ever received from them;
nevertheless Their former Majesty's have al^aies religiously continued the same
Privi^edges, as also his present Majesty has re^ewed them since his happy
Restoration, at ^he ratification of which I my self was present ^n his
Majesty's Council. For it is for Mer^hants to calculate and subdivide the
present ^ccount, but it becomes Princes to make e^erlasting obligations;
Princes are richer by ^iving, than others by receiving; and grati^ude laid up
in the breast of another Prince, is upon any necessity better than ready money
in is own Treasure. But doubtless his Majesty, under whose most auspicious
Government His ^wn Subjects have also every where else al^eady recovered and
increased all their former Privileges, cannot but take it ill should they only
fail of them with his Tzarskoy Majesty, the antientest and most constant of his
Friends and Allies: and the more must He lay it to heart, seeing in the mean
time those of other Nations do enjoy Privileges, and thereby drive a trade not
much inferior to that of all the English. And this I must say, that the
English Nation, and especially their Princes, as They are generally the most
frank and faithful in returning of Courtesies, so are they by the same right
most tender and sensible of any Unkindness, and most when it seems to touch
upon Their Reputation. I shall only add this for conclusion, that if His
Majesty's desires be no better understood, the near Boyars and Counselors
needed not to have given a NO, of such a circumference, or if it be yet
intended to grant them, it is too much like the second day of my Entrance.
Therefore I desire a definitive answer with the soonest, that so I may obey His
Royal Majesty's Orders, and accordingly provide for my departure.

But as to that new matter which the Lords Commissioners were pleased to
advance, over and above what there was occasion given for his Excellency did so
explain it.

I reply, says he, that I sent no such pape^ into the Embassy-office, but upon
the desire of his Tzarskoy Majesty's Councellor Eva^ Offonassy Pronchissof, I
delivered it to him, not being a paper of State, nor written in the English
Language wherein I treat, nor put into the hands of the near Boyars and
Counselors of his Tzarskoy majesty, nor subscribed by my self, nor translated
into Russe by my Interpreter, but only as a piece of curiosity, which is now
restored me and I am possessed of it; so that herein his Tzarskoy majesty's
near Boyars and Counselors are doubtless ill grounded. But again I say
concerning the value of the words Illustrissimus and Serenissimus compared
together, seeing we must here from affairs of State, fall into Grammatical
contests concerning the Latin tongue; that the word Serenus signifies nothing
but still and calm; and therefore though of late times adopted into the Titles
of great Princes by reason of that benign tranquillity which properly dwells
in the majestic countenance of great Princes, and that venerable stillness of
all the Attendants that surround them, of which I have seen an excellent
example when I was in the presence of his Tzarskoy majesty, yet is more
properly used concerning the calmness of the weather, or season. So that even
the night is elegantly called Serene by the best Authors, Cicero in Arato 12.
Lucretius l. 1.29. Serena nox, and upon perusing again what I have writ in this
paper, I find that I have out of the customariness of that expression my self
near the beginning said, And that most serene night, etc. Whereas on the
contrary Illustris in its proper derivation and signification expresses that
which is all resplendent lightsome and glorious as well without as within, and
that not with a secondary but with a primitive and original light. For if the
Sun be, as he is, the first fountain of light, and Poets in their expressions
(as is well known) are higher by much than those that write in Prose, what else
is it when Ovid in the 2. of the Metamorphoses says of Phoebus speaking with
Phaethon, Qui terque quaterque concutiens Illustre caput, and the Latin
Orators, as Pliny Ep. 139. When they would say the highest thing that can be
expressed upon any subject, word it thus, Nihil Illustrius dicere possum. So that
hereby may appear to his Tzarskoy Majesty's near Boyars and Counselors what
diminution there is to his Tzarskoy Majesty (which far be it from my thoughts)
if I appropriate Serenissimus to my Master and Illustrissimus to Him than which
nihil dici potest Illustrius. But because this was in the time of the purity of
the Latin tongue, when the word Serenus was never used in the Title of any
Prince or Person, I shall go on to deal with the utmost candor forasmuch as in
this Nation the nicety of that most eloquent language is not so perfectly
understood, which gives occasion to these mistakes. And indeed there being no
literature amongst them, they have no occasion to learn the Original
Languages, so that few of them do understand Latin. True it is that in the
Court some have the curiosity to learn it, as this Golozof who is spoken of
before. Which gave my Lord occasion to write sometimes in Latin.
I confess therefore that indeed in the declination of the Latin tongue, and
when there scarce could be found out words enough to supply the modern ambition
of Titles, Serenissimus as several other words has grown in fashion for a
compellation of lesser as well as greater Princes, and yet befits both the one
and the other. So there is Serenissima Respublica Veneta, Serenitates
Electoriae, Serenitates Regiae, even as the word Highness or Celsitudo befits a
Duke a Prince a King or an Emperor, adjoining to it the respective quality,
and so the word Illustris. But suppose it were by modern use (which I deny)
depressed from the undoubted superiority that it had of Serenus in the purest
antiquity, yet being added in the transcendent degree to the word Emperor, the
highest denomination that a Prince is capable of, it becomes of the same value.
So that to interpret Illustrissimus unto diminution is to find a positive in a
superlative, and in the most orient light to seek for darkness. And I would,
seeing the near Boyars and Counselors of his Tzarskoy Majesty are pleased to
mention the Title given to his Tzarskoy Majesty by his Cesarian Majesty gladly
be satisfied by them, whether ever any Cesarian Majesty writ formerly hither in
High Dutch, and whether then they styled his Tzarskoy Majesty Durchluchtigste
which is the same with Illustrissimus, and which I believe the Caesar has kept
for Himself. But to cut short his Royal Majesty has used the word to his
Tzarskoy Majesty in his Letter, not out of imitation of others, although even
in the Dutch Letter to his Tzarskoy Majesty of 16. June 1663. I find
Doorluchtigste the same (and said) with Illustrissimus, but out of the c^^stant
use of his own Court, further joy^^^^ before it Most High, Most Potent, and
adding after it Great Lord Emperor, which is an higher Title than any Prince
in the World gives his Tzarskoy Majesty, and as high a Title of honor as can
be given to any thing under the Divinity. For the King my Master who possesses
as considerable Dominions, and by as high and self-dependent a right as any
Prince in the Universe, yet contenting Himself with the easiest Titles, and
satisfying Himself in the essence of things, does most willingly give to other
Princes the Titles which are appropriated to them, but to the Tzarskoy
Majesty's of Russia his Royal Ancestors, and to his present Tzarskoy Majesty
his Royal Majesty himself, have usually and do gladly pay Titles even to
superfluity out of mere kindness. And upon that reason He added the word most
Illustrious, and so did I use it in the Latin of my speech. Yet, that You may
find I did not out of any criticisme of honor, but for distinction sake use it
as I did, You may see in one place of the same speech Serenitas, speaking of
his Tzarskoy Majesty: and I would have used Serenissimus an hundred times
concerning his Tzarskoy Majesty, had I thought it would have pleased Him
better. And I dare promise You that his Majesty will upon the first information
from me style him Serenissimus, and I (notwithstanding what I have said) shall
make little difficulty of altering the word in that speech, and of delivering
it so to You, with that protestation that I have not in using that word
Illustrissimus erred nor used any diminution (which God forbid) to his Tzarskoy
Majesty, but on the contrary after the example of the King my Master intended
and showed him all possible honor. And so God grant all happiness to His most
high, most Potent, most Illustrious, and most Serene Tzarskoy Majesty, and that
the friendship may daily increase betwixt His said Majesty and his most Serene
Majesty my Master.

Such was concerning this matter my Lord Ambassadors answer, who thought fit
also on his side to give them notice (seeing they were so scrupulous about the
Tzar's Titles) to use for the Kings Majesty the Title of Defender of the Faith,
which hitherto they had always omitted. The King my Master, says he, has one
essential Title, and which He prizes more than those of all his dominions,
Defender of the Faith, an immemorial, indubitable, successive Title from his
Ancestors, and as always heretofore, so in His last Letter to his Tzarskoy
Majesty He uses it; in this Court ever since my coming I think by some
inadvertency omitted. I desire that in styling his Majesty my Master, and in
all Letters to Him henceforward, it may be inserted according as belongs to Him.

The nineteenth of March Pronchissof brought to my Lord an answer to his given
the 29. of February, whereby the Commissioners complain much in the first place
that he writ with slighting the honorable orders of his Tzarskoy Majesty's
forces, and with little repute for his Posts. Therefore they do not like at all
this expression of my Lords, where he says, that the nearer one comes to
Mosco, men are more ignorant of the Roads; so that they freely say, it was not
handsome for him to speak so. Moreover they deny the foundation of the
Friendship between the two Crowns to be (as my Lord said) the Grant of the
Privileges, but only the mutual Love of both Princes. That therefore the
Privileges were taken away by reason of the English Rebellion to his late
Majesty, and that his present Majesty being in misery, his Tzarskoy Majesty
comforted. Him with Letters, and (as they are pleased to say) furnished him
with Bread and Money. Whereas His Royal Majesty does not offer to give their
great Lord any assistance against his present Enemies, the Pole and the Crim
Tartar, as had done formerly his Royal Father to his Tzarskoy Majesty's Father,
against Vladislaus King of Poland. But besides the wars (wherein the Tzar was
then engaged) and the King's cold assistance, they blame also the English
merchants who had lately refused the Tzars Ambassadors in England to lend him
money for the war. Yet notwithstanding it seems the Tzar will allow ten
English merchants, new men, such as His Royal Majesty shall think fit to make
choice of, that should faithfully observe such lawful conditions as should be
required of them, to drive a free trade, after such a time that his Tzarskoy
Majesty's Wars cease with John Cassimir King of Poland and the Cham of Crim.
Lastly they find the answer about the Titles to be mighty full of offenses,
and that his Excellency does much diminish their respect when he says, that
they are not fitly grounded; Whereas being at Conference with them, he called
them (as they say) His Tzarskoy Majesty's potent Boyars, wise, and rightly
honorable. And that therefore that man is not fit to lay the foundation of
things, who praises in his words, and in his writings dispraises without the
truth.

But as to the first Complaint, his Excellency by an answer given in Conference
the 22. of March replies, that (as it is easy to be seen) his words are
misunderstood, and what tended to the honor of all persons that deserve it, is
by His Commissioners perverted to the slighting of them. And whereas they say,
it was not handsome for him to say, that the nearer one comes to Mosco, men are
more ignorant of the Roads; he answers, that it seems they rather undertake to
censure him as Judges on the bench, than treat with him as Counselors of his
Tzarskoy Majesty. That perhaps out of have to answer his last paper (which
indeed is a jest put upon them, seeing they had been near three weeks about it)
they had omitted the words, As we conceive, so that the whole sense would have
run thus, It was not, as we conceive, handsome for you to declare. At last he
still insists upon the satisfaction demanded. As for the Reproach (which my
Lord took very ill) of his Tzarskoy Majesty's assistance to the King, whom
their most Wise Prince, as they call him, furnished with bread; his Excellency
said, he agreed in that with them, forasmuch as the Wisest of Princes says,
Cast thy bread upon the waters, and after many days thou shall find it again,
as also it has happened; And again he said, that only our blessed Savior
could multiply the five loaves. That his Majesty has and will own perpetually
that courtesy, that he has in his name declared it, and given his thanks in
the face of the whole World. But this he would mind his Tzarskoy Majesty's
Boyars and Counselors, that even papers of Obligation are sullied and worn out
with too much handling; and so is it in regard of the Obligations themselves,
when men too often repeat their own good actions. Concerning the matter of
Trade his Excellency tells them, that with all becoming thanks for the good
intention of his Tzarskoy Majesty, he refuses to treat of any such conditions
as were in their last proposal, having no Commission or Latitude from the King
to go less in matter of Trade, than the Restitution of the former Privileges.
And whereas the Commissioners had pleased to say, that his Royal Majesty does
not upon this occasion of wars, as his Royal Majesty's Father of highly
glorious memory, who had sent his Colonel Thomas Sanderson with many warlike
men to assist his Tzarskoy Majesty Michaelo Phederovich against his Enemy
Vladislaus King of Poland; his Excellency tells them, whether seeing in this
and many other expressions they seem to weigh the generous actions of Princes
by Salotnicks (or ounces) they would think it civil in him, should he say, that
his Royal Majesty's Father of highly glorious memory lent his Tzarskoy
Majesty's Father of highly glorious memory, besides those men of Sandersons,
forty thousand Rixdollers and they were repaid, even as His present Tzarskoy
Majesty lent his present Royal Majesty the same sum, and they are repaid. And
that moreover upon his Tzarskoy Majesty's Commission to Sir John Hebdon, his
present Majesty granted the levying of three thousand horse and foot for his
present Tzarskoy Majesty, which might have proved as good as either Bread or
Treasury, and if it were not effected, it was not his Royal Majesty's fault: So
that hitherto the obligations are equal. As to those offenses contained (as the
Commissioners pretend) in the latter part of his Excellencies answer, it seems
they fix them all in his saying, That they are not well or fitly grounded.
Which words, as often as they shall have the same occasion to use toward him, he
does promise them he shall take it kindly and civilly of them. But whereas they
say, that in Conference with them, he called them His Majesty's Boyars
Velmoshnei, wise, and rightly honorable, his Excellency does acknowledge that
they are indeed wise, and rightly honorable; but I do not remember (says he)
that ever I called you Velmoshnei, as fearing that it came too near the word
Velmoshneshei (that is to say most potent) one of the proper Titles of his
Tzarskoy Majesty; Although if, according to the custom of this Court it may be
given you, I shall heartily pay it to you, and all other expressions of
civility, esteem and affection which your own hearts can wish. Though I must
complain on mine own part, that you should obliquely add, that in my writing I
dispraise you without truth (a word which any man dare use in his own Country)
and that such a man is not fit to lay the foundation of things. Would to God
(says he) you his Tzarskoy Majesty's near Boyars and Counselors had been
pleased to cooperate and labor so plainly and so cordially toward the common
good of both Princes as I have done: Then how easily might all that your
Lordships have said, or that I have said, in fruitless replies have been
spared, and much precious time have been saved to cooperate toward his
Tzarskoy Majesty's affairs.

Besides this answer my Lord gave in writing ^n another paper, several demands
of common ^ight and coutesy in the behalf of his Royal Majesty's Subjects
living in the Tzar's Domi^ions; as Satisfaction to the English merchants for
their old debts and houses; That ^ll English merchants desiring to repair home
might have their Passes to go over Sea with their wives and families without
molestation; That Justice might be done the English merchants for their debts;
That all his Majesty's ^ubjects of whatsoever other condition might upon their
desire have full Liberty to return: and so he gave the names of those who at
that time demanded any Justice or Favor of this nature.

In this Conference my Lord Ambassador did also entreat his Commissioners, that
he might have a private Audience of his Tzarskoy Majesty, thinking to find
more favor from the Tzar, as concerning his most important affairs, if he
could himself instill into his Majesty's ears his strong and solid reasons,
with the evasions and friendless dealing of the Lords Commissioners. But, as if
they had first resolved to grant nothing at all, it was hard enough to my Lord
Ambassador to obtain this Audience; And when at last they told him of the day,
appointed for that purpose by his Tzarskoy Majesty, they said it was not for
any business sake, but to complete their great Lords brotherly love and
friendship with his Royal Majesty, as if that could be done merely by seeing
the Tzar private. My Lord Ambassador finding this answer as much unfit for his
business as it is ridiculous, made them to understand, how Princes in former
Age and most in this had, and have by such immediate Intercourse, occasion
fuller to inform themselves of all matters, and to remove a^ obstacles. So that
upon this reflection (i^ seems) the Tzar granted his Excellency the liberty to
speak of affairs. He had this priv^ Audience the 22. of April in the Tzars own
Lodging Rooms from ten a clock at night till one of the next morning. Then
indeed he spoke at length with all the advantage he could desire himself, and
added to the strength of reasoning the eloquence of the language. He refuted,
as much to the purpose as could be, all his Commissioners Objections before
alleged, whereupon they purposed to ground the Refusal of the Privileges, he
represented to his Tzarskoy Majesty how little of solidity there is, that they
are but weak pretenses, and that his Royal Majesty must needs be much sensible
of this proceeding so contrary to his expectations. But, to give more weight to
the matter, he speaks in the Kings own person, after he has made a Preface
from himself. Of this same Speech there were two Copies given to the
Commissioners, one in English and the other in Latin as follows.

Serenissima atque Potentissima Czarea Majestas.
QVum december Septimanae effluxerint ex quo Czarea Vestra Majestas negotiorum
meo^um curam proximis suis Magnatibus and Con^liariis delegavit, and tamen
indies ab optato ^egationis nostrae successi^ me longius abesse comperiam;
coactus sum, quod solent Viatores qui Fluminis rapiditatem aut flexum superare
nequeunt, ad ipsum fontem contendere. Quicquid per tam ampla Imperii Vestri
spatia, sive potestatis sive rationis, reperitur a Czarea Vestra Majestate
tanquam unica font atque origin manat and derivatur. Et uti omnium Subditorum
vestrorum est seipsos suasque sententias Summae Vestrae Potestati subjicere,
ita neque ego rectissimae vestrae Rationi meipsum and totius negotii Nostri
judicium permittere recusem. Mihi enim videtur Deum Optimum Maximum uti olim
Salomoni, ita Czareae vestrae Majestati non solum divitias atque honores, sed
sapientiam quoque and prudentiam largitum; ut neque ex Augustissimis vestris
Majoribus ullus cum Czarea vestra Majestate possit comparari, neque Vestri
similis in posterum aliquando possit exoriri. Hinc est quod a Czarea vestra
Majestate secreto hodie audiri petierim, and impetraverim. Ita etiam magnus
ille Johannes Basilii, qui primus fundamenta jecit amicitiae inter Angliae and
Russiae Coronas, and Privilegia illa mercatoribus Anglis concessit, ita Ille
remotus arbitris cum Legatis Regum and Reginarum Angliae agere, and familiarius
colloqui solebat, adeoque Consiliariis quibusdam suis and Domino Cancellario
frustra renitentibus tam certas rerum suarum mensuras, iniit ut ab illo tempore
usque ad Czareae vestrae Majestatis regni initia, aut ad hunc diem, nemo mutuam
illam amicitiam inter Vtrasque Coronas and Nationes convellere aut labefactare
potuerit. Et ego qui eandem materiam and animo non minu sincero inter
Principes, majorem etiam affectum mutuo profitentes pertracto; non dubito, quin
and ipse bono cum Deo a Clarissimis Czareae vestrae Majestatis oculis cum eodem
optato Legationis nostrae fructu sim dimittendus.

Quum enim caeteri omnes potentissimi Europae Principes nullo nuncio a
Serenissima sua Majestate accepto curaverint, ut Legationibus Extraordinariis
gratulabundi Regiam suam Majestatem in Regna sua redeuntem certatim
prosequerentur: Regia sua Majestas pro singulari sua benevolentia, atque erga
Czaream vestram Majestatem affectu, ad Czaream vestram Majestatem solam ex
omnibus Principibus Christianis prior literas dedit 10mo. Maji. Anno 1661. ante
Legatorum vestrorum adventum. Quibus Czaream vestram Majestatem de laetissimo
suo reditu certiorem fecit, and simul de Czarea Vestra in rebus suis adversis
fraterna benevolentia gratias egit. Iisdem etiam literis significavit se
Johanni Hebdon Equiti aurato, tametsi nullas ad Regiam suam Majestatem a Czarea
vestra Majestate literas, quas vocant Credentiales, pertulisset; ea tamen fi
ducia quam etiam in eodem Hebdeno Czaream vestram Majestatem reponere credebat
indulsisse ei petenti, ut tria millia equitum and peditum sub Ducibus probatae
fidei and virtutis pro Czarea vestra Majestate in regnis suis conscriberet.
Illud in super addidit se Czareae vestrae Majestatis inimicis Regiorum s orum
Ministrorum interventu significaturum quam gratum sibi foret, ut honesta and
firma pace cum Czarea vestra Majestate deciderent. Quod si eorum pertinacia and
culpa minus succederet, se effecturum ut and illis and toti terrarum Orbi
innotesceret, quantopere Czareae vestrae Majestati cupiat, and rations Vestras
singulari cura amplectatur. Quin and magnani mitatem Czareae vestrae Majestatis
praedicat, qua mercatoribus Anglis utpote qui nuperae rebellionis contagione
afflati viderentur, praesidium suum negavit, and simul rogat ut quoniam omnes
Subditi sui jam postliminio in fidem suam Regiam redierunt, Czareae quoque
Majestati placeret Mercatorum Privilegia in integrum restituere, and voluntatem
Vestram e^ in re declarare. Quod simulac Czarea vestra Majestas declaraverit,
Regiam suam Majestatem Legatum suum missurum qui Czareae vestra Majestatis
humanitatem and benevolentiam R gio suo sensu celebraret, and omnimoda mutui
affectus officia cum Czarea vestra Majestate reciprocaret. His acceptis Czarea
vestra Majestas per literas respondit 28. Julii Anno 1661. Czareae vestrae
Majestati in votis and animo esse eandem amicitiam cum Regia sua Majestate
colere^quaeinter Patres Vestros beatae memoriae ^oaluerat, and quod ad illa
attineret de quibus regia sua Majestas se Legatum missurum confirmaverat
Czaream vestram Majestatem paratamiri, quantum in se aut quantum possibile
esset de iis Regiae suae Majestati assentiri. Et post haec Czarea vestra
Majestas alteris literis 31. Julii Anno 1662. per Legatos vestros
Extraordinarios declaravit Czaream vestram Majestatem animadverso florentissimo
ditionum suarum statu, and sincerissimo illo amore, amicitia, and frequenti
communicatione, quae inter augustissimos utriusque Principis Patres inviolata
permanserunt, and summa felicitate and tranquillitate quae ab illa origin in
Vtriusque ditiones redundarunt, vehementissime and exanimo cupere non solum
ejusdem affectus continuationem, sed etiam propiorem, intimiorem, and
firmiorem, charissimum, and benedictum fraternum amorem, amicitiam, and
frequentem communicationem cum Regia sua Majestate, charissimo suo Fratre and
amantissimo, supra quod antea fuerit cum summa promptitudine and animi
alacritate ad obsecundandum omni occasion Regiae suae Majestatis charissimi
vestri Fratris votis, quantum Czarea vestra Majestas maxim potuerit. His
luculentissimis and certissimis ex Czareae vestrae Majestatis part testimoniis
freta Regia sua Majestas me ad Czaream vestram Majestatem legavit, and quod ex
Regiae suae Majestatis part and suo mandato coram and toto mundo audiente
Czareae vestrae Majestati, de pari and mutuo Regiae suae Majestatis erga
Czaream vestram Majestatem affectu exposui procul dubio in memoria Czareae
Vestrae Majestatis penitus insedit. Czarea Vestra Majestas statim delegavit,
qui mecum agerent, Viros summa nobilitate and maximo rerum usu atque
experientia pollentes, pro quo beneficio gratias quas possum maximas Czareae
Vestrae Majestati persolvo; and utinam non minores persolvere possim de eorum
omnium affectu erga amicitiam inter duas Coronas and celeritate in negotiis
nostris tractandis a Czarea Vestra Majestate eorum curae commissis. Sed illi
quum primo Colloquio ex Regiae suae Majestatis praescripto Privilegiorum
restitutionem primo proposuerim, significando si mul post eorum concessionem me
alia insuper in mandatis habere pro summo Regiae suae Majestatis affectu
Czareae Vestrae Majestati retribuenda, responsum mihi reddiderunt tam ab omni
spe nostra abhorrens, and alienum, ut neque si Coelum ipsum corruisset, uti
fenestrae Cubiculi ad ejus recitationem, bis ingenti cum fragore sunt devolutae
magis prodigiosum and inexpectatum mihi accidere potuisset. Idem erat acsi
omnem Privilegiorum spem praecidissent. Primo quidem nuperam in Anglia
rebellionem causantur. Postea affirmant Regiam suam Majestatem beatae memoriae
per Lucam quendam Nightingale petiisse ut Privilegia illa rescinderentur. Tum
varias market (...) caudes praetexunt. Deinde supplices literas Publicanorum
and Mercatorum totius Russiae. Et Mercatores Anglos emortuos affirmant. Tandem
secundo scripto Czareae Vestrae Majestatis bella cum Tartaro Crimaeo and Polono
objiciuut. Regiam suam Majestatem pecunias ad Majestatis Vestrae bella Czareae
Vestrae Majestati suppeditare noluisse. Mercatores itidem Russicae in Anglia
Societatis idem Czareae Vestrae Majestatis Legatis Extraordinariis denegasse.
Et alia quaedam argumenta ad numerum faciendum astruunt, quorum vel unum si
prius contra Privilegia omnimodo statutum est sufficere potuisset; sed ne
quidem omnia unam satis honestam and justam causam componere possint, si modo
tam acri and profundo quale est Czareae Vestrae Majestatis judicio
perpendantur. Quum igitur hoc modo proximi Czareae Vestrae Majestatis Magnates
and Consiliarii omnem in praesentia Privilegiorum spem praesecarent, and
instarent solummodo ut aliae Regiae suae Majestatis mandata secum communicare
pergerem, Ego vero si quid illi in Czareae Vestrae Majestatis rem proponendum
haberent quandoquidem hoc illis praecipue incumbebat, commodum responsum
pollicerer and de hoc solo mihi satisfieri rogarem, number si quae ego alia in
mandatis haberem digna quae Privilegiis permutari possent viderentur ipsi
potestatem ea concedendi haberent, illi nullo modo aut potuerunt aut voluerunt
hac in re mihi satisfacere. Ad Czarcam Vestram Majestatem provoco, quum ego
plenissimas autoritatis literas quod per se sufficit a Regia sua Majestate
Czareae vestrae Majestati obtulerim, and alia etiam autoritate a Regia sua
Majestate sub magno Sigillo Angliae, ad Privilegia recuperanda essem munitus,
utrum meum esset Regiae and Fraternae benevolentiae arcana illis committere,
qui vel nullam omnino vel tantummodo denegandi potestatem non itidem
assentiendi and transigendi vim haberent. Quocirca quum negotium nostrum huc
redierit, and hujusmodi responsa a proximis Czareae vestrae Majestatis
Magnatibus and Consiliariis acceperim, adeoque e nostris manibus totius rei
disceptatio ad Regiam suam Majestatem and Czaream vestram Majestatem brevi sit
devolvenda, liceat in quantum Serenissimum Regem and Dominum meum in hoc munere
repraesento, etiam Regis sua verba hac occasion refer and imitari, tanquam
coram congredi and inenarrabiles Vestras Majestates in clarissimis alterutrius
oculis splendidissimis illis verae amicitiae speculis simul contemplari Vobis
daretur. Quantum ego quidem tenuiori nostro judicio profundissimos Regiae suae
Majestatis sensus capere and conjectura assequi valeo, sic omnino esset
dicturus.

Si novum aliquid a Czarea Vestra Majestate Fratre nostro amantissimo
petiissem, aut ad quod Czarea Vestra Majestas se prius non obstrinxisset minori
cum animi aegritudine tam deliberationem Vestram tolerare and forsitan libenter
tulisse potuissem. Privilegia autem illa ultra centum annos steterunt, and
duratione sua supremae rationis, qua primum constituta fuerunt, soliditatem
approbarunt, and raro quidem antiquae amicitiae and consiliorum fundamenta sine
periculo and discrimine succutere aut movere successit. Et quod ad Czareae
vestrae Majestatis obligationem attinet (ut omittam Czareae vestrae Majestatis
sub ipsa regiminis sui initia Anno 1645. per Archangeli Praefectum ad
mercatores Anglos, declarationem Czaream vestram Majestatem omnia sua
Privilegia illis confirmare, quae Czareus suus beatae memoriae Parens illis
indulsisset, and non minori clementia illos amplexuram quam sub augustissimo
Vestro Patre aut omnibus majoribus vestris experti fuerant) nonne Czarea vestra
Majestas me redintegrationem Privilegiorum petente primis suis literis
respondit Czareae Vestrae Majestate in votis and animo esse eandem amicitiam
cum Regia nostra Majestate colere, quae inter Patres nostros beatae memoriae
coaluerat, and quod ad illa attineret, de quibus Regia nostra Majestas se
legatum missurum confirmaverat, Czaream Vestram Majestatem paratam iri quantum
in se aut quantum possibile esset de iis Regiae nostrae Majestati assentiri? Et
nonne Czareae Vestrae Majestatis Legati Extraordinarii, quum de privilegiorum
restitutione ipse illos interrogassem in ea erant sententia and ita nobis
dixerunt Czaream Vestram Majestatem proculdubio solenni and honorifica
Legatione a Regia nostra Majestate ad Czaream Vestram Majestatem missa nostra
causa mercatoribus nostris ea praestituram? Nonne etiam Czarea Vestra Majestas
per illos Legatos alteris literis a Secretiori vestro Cubiculo Czarea Vestra
manu munitis bracteata illa aureae mentis oracula depinxit, quae ego statim
Vestri solius calami and sensus esse posse intellexi, quaeque ideo tanquam
adamantina cuspide Cordi nostro insculpta reservo, and Legato nostro
Extraordinario mandavi, ut illa uti nostrae erga Czaream Vestram Majestatem
menti maxim consona and conformia totidem verbis Czariae Vestrae Majestati
rependeret and numeraret, Czaream Vestram Majestatem animadverso florentissimo
Ditionum suarum statu, etc. Sic ut supra hic quoque Literae repetitae fuerunt,
quippe vim magnam ad convincendum habentes: quod inter caetera constat ex
perpetuo Magnatum qui cum Legato agebant hac in part silentio.
Eadem amicitia eosdem tractatus proculdubio easdem utilitates includit,
adeoque Czareae Vestrae Majestatis fides prioribus illis verbis ad
Privilegiorum restitutionem devincitur, nisi (quoniam illo postea limite Czarea
Majestas Vestra voluntatem suam circumscribit) impossible sit. Impossible
autem esse non potest quum Czarea Vestra Majestas tantum possit polleatque and
omnimoda potestate excellat, ideoque meritissimo Autocratoris titulo
insigniatur. Si quantum possibile vel quantum in Czarea Vestra Majestate est
negationem significet, interpretationem istorum verborum in posterum didicero.
Et quoad illa in secundis vestris literis 31. Julij Anno 1661. Quomodo ad
propiorem and firmiorem amicitiam pergere possumus nisi ad priorem firmitatem
and propinquitatem prius deveniamus? Si quis tamen erga nostram mutuam
amicitiam male affectus, diverticulum aliquod ex modo vestro loquendi invenire
posset, per quod Czaream Vestram Majestatem salvo ^^omisso se recipere and
subterfugere posse videatur; At pace Vestra dixerim Frater amantissime
hujusmodi argutiae utiles forsan and necessariae fuerint inter Principes
confines, cum quibus aperta semper bella aut pacem incertam geritis. Sed Regiae
nostrae and Czareae vestrae Majestati utpote centum annorum amicis, and ab omni
suspicionis causa alienissimis minus honestum and decorum esset istiusmodi
scobes, ut ita dicam in animabus nostris defodere, and per verborum reticula
nosmet ipsos percolare. Neque illud mirum aut ab amicitia nostra absonum
videatur, quod ejus vigorem and quasi fatum in privilegiorum conservatione
collocaverim; ideoque Legato nostro Extraordinario mandaverim, ut ante
ulteriora benevolentiae and fraterni erga Czaream Vestram Majestatem amoris
indicia eorum petitione Vestram amicitiam prius experiatur, tametsi forsitan ad
Mercatores illa potius pertinere videantur. Ita enim ab ipso principio
privilegia illa sponte concedebantur neque gratum mihi sienti Deo gratias,
neque opus est me Majoribus nostris augustissimis minorem gerere. Quin etiam ea
Privilegia nihil aliud sunt nisi constans praemium perpetui fructus and
utilitatis quam Czariae Majestates and suae Ditiones semper perceperunt, and
percipere possint ab Archangeli portu aperto and commercio invecto per
Mercatores Anglos, multorum hominum navium and facultatum suarum jactura.
Quamvis magni Principes etiam beneficium semel acceptum, and cujus fructus
omnis cum ipso illo homine and tempore pereat in perpetuum remunerari soleant.
Quod autem praecipue me in hoc instituto nostro confirmavit, erat honoris and
existimationis Vestrae (quam ego semper sanctissimam habebo) cura and
reverentia, ut sicuti heroica quadam magnanimitate Privilegia illa propter
subditorum nostrorum rebellionem revocastis, ita etiam ea nostro rogatu and
rediviva illorum obedientia, ronovando toti terrarum Orbi constare posset, quam
justa proportione actiones Vestras regeretis, and quanta cum gratia uti magnum
Principem decet collocare apud me beneficium noveritis. Istud enim ego pro
beneficio habeo, quod in subditorum meorum emolumentum redundat, and si in ipso
exilio nostro quid illis boni accidisset me etiam aliqua gaudii part tangere
and afficere videbatur fieri, non potest quin post faelicem meum reditum
maximopere commoda sua procurem atque promoveam. Quorsum tot tractatus inter
Principes quotidie misi in Subditorum securitatem and commoda contrahuntur?
Tractatus pacis commercii auxiliorum imo nuptiarum inter Principes; anne
idcirco fiunt quoniam Principes illi tanquam amore capti mutuo se depereunt? an
vero ad Regnorum Suorum utilitatem omnes diriguntur? Ne tamen uti ego ea pro
populi nostri bono peto ita Czarea Vestra Majestas pro ditionum suarum bono
abnegaret; experiamur si placet argumentorum aciem eo ordine quo temere
occurrunt.

Subditi mei rebellarunt, At nimiae curae and diligentiae esset, and Czarea
Vestra Majestas negotiorum nostrorum sensum nimis extenderet, si quos ego
Subditos nostros in fidem accepi, in illos Czarea Vestra Majestas pergat
animadvertere; Et quum ipse Capitis loco unum deinceps cum Regnis meis corpus
componam, anne quae subditi mei peccarunt meipsum luere vultis? Sed Anglum
quendam Nightingale literas a Patre nostro beatae memoriae attulisse memorant,
and Ejus nomine cum proximis Vestris Magnatibus de abrogandis Privilegiis
egisse, Iste Nightingale Proditor and Perduellis and Falsarius illa in re erat,
and novi Czaream vestram Majestatem pro jure Gentium, and uti omnes Principes
suae existimationis causa in ejusmodi imposturis mutuo solent and debent,
quoniam ipse morte poenas evasit falsas illas, resignatas, erasas, interpolatas
literas mihi tradituram. Si vero Pater meus beatae memoriae tunc temporis
arcana ratione Privilegiorum abrogationem postulasset (quum e contrario optimus
ille Princeps ad extremum usque spiritum pro Populo suo Deum rogaverit and ejus
bono inter ultimas curas adlaboraverit, adeoque etiam literas ad Czaream
Vestram Majejestatem, quas inter alias suas reliquias religiose conservo, de
hac re exaraverit quibus Privilegiorum instaurationem petit, and illum
Nightingale uti impudentissimum falsarium detestatur) Si inquam Pater meus
abregationem, Ego vero jam instaurationem Privilegiorum efflagito. Postea de
Mercatoribus Anglis contra conditiones Privilegiorum agentibus multa
conqueruntur. Sed nihil probant; Legato nostro mandavi, ut contra hujusmodi
facinora provideret, quorum and ipse severus vindex fuissem, utpote quae ad
existimationem nostram pertinerent. Publicani and totius Russiae mercatores
supplices literas obtulisse dicuntur, quibus exponunt Anglos per haec
Privilegia locupletatos, se vero exhauriri and depauperari: Quum tamen Czarea
Vestra Majestas suis literis supra memoratis multam felicitatem, pacem and
tranquillitatem in Vtriusque Imperia redundasse affirmet eo tempore quo Angli
Privilegiis gaudebant. Cur non etiam contra Belgas and Cupshinos Persas
supplices literas seribunt? Horum enim nonnulli gaudent Privilegiis, dum Angli
omnes illis excluduntur. Procul absit ut ea petam cum Imperii vestri
calamitate. Gratum mihi esset intelligere post Privilegia Anno 1649. adempta
(satis prolixo ad experimentum spatio) Populum vestrum divitiis magis abundare.
Ex Subditis autem nostris (qui potius laudandi sint si honesta industria
ditescere potuissent) ad triginta plus minus e Societate Russica intra triginta
annos hoc commercium sectando ad incitas redacti sunt, qui tamen magnas
fortunas in ditiones vestras attulerint. Mercatores quoque omnes quorum nomina
Privilegiis inserta mortuos aiunt, At unus eorum adhuc in vivis est, quod satis
est si illud argumentum valeret ad ea conservanda. Ego vero intellexi
Privilegia ad Successores etiam extendi and Legatum jussi recentia nomina
Czareae vestrae Majestati exhibere. Sed in aliis Regionibus ubique exteri
duplex pendunt Portorium. Vnde ergo fit quod in Hollandia Societas Anglorum
Adventuraria nullum pendant, domum publicam habeant, and omnibus aliis
vectigalibus quae Incolae ips^ persolvunt, illi sint immunes? Vnde fit quod
Hamburgi etiam iisdem Privi^egiis utantur, in quibus locis Angli multo ma^orem
mercaturam quam in hoc Imperio faci^nt? Vnde quod Mercatores Angli non solum
ipsi Portorio vacent apud Ormusii Portum, sed etiam cum ipso Shagh Persiae
aliarum ibi Nationum vectigalia dividant and ex aequo partiantur? Number Angli
etiam mercatores has omnes Regiones depauperant? Bellum cum Polono and Tartaro.
Ne miretur Czarea Vestra Majestas si ad hoc argumentum post alia illa pene ad
verbum ex responso ad Tyranni illius Cromwell veredarium descripta nonnihil
commoveor. Nullane ergo bella fuerunt, quum illa Privilegia primo concederentur
sub Czarea Majestate Johannis Basilii? Nulla sub caeteris Principibus? Si
hosts illi non contemnendi Czareae vestrae Majestati videantur, adeone
inconsultum esset meam amicitiam retinere. Et anne sex millia Rublarum annua
(neque enim Anglica vectigalia post Privilegia abrogata majorem summam
conficiunt) tanto Principi ad bellicos sumptus tolerandos sunt tam necessaria,
ut Nostra amicitia and Subditorum Nostrorum commercio compensari nequcat? Ego
vero Czareae Vestrae Majestati pecuniam non commodavi. Spero quidem tantam
argenti vim cuicunque vel maximo Principi difficillimam (liceat Czareae Vestrae
Majestati secreto illam recenser) decies mill Podas, hoc est, ultra trigesies
centena millia Rublarum non ideo petitam, ut Privilegia honesta aliqua specie
possint recusari, and impossible quaesitum, ut facillima negarentur. Quo minus
est quod postulatur, eo gravior est repulsa, and Posteritas ad cujus tribunal
maximorum Principum memoria citatur, non tam me accusabit, qui tantum
excusaverim, quam Czaream Vestram Majestatem qui tantillum negaverit. Czarea
Vestra Majestas responsum hac de re nostrum a Legatis suis proculdubio accepit.
Mercatores quoque Russicae Societatis Legatis Vestris petentibus multo minorem
summam ad Bellorum impensas repraesentare noluerunt. Omnes in Privilegiis, uno
excepto, mortui, qui vivunt Privilegiis tam diu suspensis attenuati and inopes;
and Legatus Vester. Evan Zelobushkee malo ad persuadendum color usus est, quum
se obligaverit nunquam futurum, ut in Russia Angli a vectigalibus essent
immunes. Haec sunt illa ut videtur argumenta, quibus (ut Czareae vestrae
Majestatis verbis utar) murum illum aheneum quassare aggrediuntur, qui tot
annos stetit Majorum nostrorum prudentia extructus, and nunc Czarei vestri
promissi constantiae innititur. Et anne hujusmodi globulis illud centum annorum
opus diruetur? Hoc ergo erat quod Czareae vestrae Majestatis Legatos extra
maria nostra a freto Ore-sundico navi nostra transmitti curaverim, quod in
palatio nobilissimi cujusdam e nostris Magnatibus locum illis praebuerim, quod
nostris aulaeis, nostris lectis discubuerint, and ex Regis auri and argenti
vasis quotidie comederint? Quod honor hactenus inaudito intra Aulae nostrae
portam Regio curru invehi permiserim, Quod ipse quoties rogarent privato illos
audierim, and quoties volebant Consiliariorum Nostrorum copias illis fecerim?
Non poenitet, non exprobro, Parva sunt illa prae honor quo Czaream vestram
Majestatem Fratrem meum amantissimum prosequor, sed suspicor aliquem ex illis
multo majora reticuisse, and de tot honoris indiciis Czaream vestram Majestatem
plura celasse. Nonne super haec ad Czaream vestram Majestatem legavi
Consanguineum Nostrum and (quicquid alii dixerint) a Sanctioribus nostris
Consiliis, and hoc ab ipso reditu nostro Carolum Comitem Carleolensem
Vice-comitem Howard de Morpeth, Baronem Dacre de Gillesland, Statae militiae
Praefectum, and Locum tenentem Regium in Provinciis nostris Cumberlandiae and
Westmorlandiae, qui etiam si monitore egerem Memoriae nostrae perpetuo
subjiceret quicquid in rem vestram esse videretur? Nonne arcana pectoris mei
illi commisi in omnibus quibus Czareae vestrae Majestati potero commodare? Et
number Czarea vestra Majestas per illum mihi exiguam and fortassis unicam rem
negabit, quam a Czarea vestra Majestate unquam petere possim, Privilegia? Hoc
quidem me poeniteret, utpote magis notum and pervulgatum quam aut cum nostra
aut vestra existimatione possit consistere; Et totus terrarum orbis multa cum
admiratione ejusmodi frustrationem intuebitur, quum praesertim reputaverint
quot and quanta emolumenta ab augustissimis nostris Majoribus and sub suis
auspiciis ad Czaream vestram Coronam redierint. Illi portum vestrum investigari
fecerunt and totius Europae mercaturam ad Archangeli fanum deduxerunt. Illi in
Orientali mari, quum Principes adjacentes faedere inter se facto de obstruenda
narva convenissent, Classem hostilem delerunt and Captivos Praefectis vestris
tradidere. Illi pecunias ad bella vestra mutuo dederunt and milites and Duces
vobis suppeditarunt. Illi pacem inter Vos and Principes vicinos conciliarunt.
Illi in summa annonae caritate fruges huc transportari sinebant (quas Angli
mercatores sine ullo compendio aut lucro incolis vestris vendiderunt) and multa
alia tam pace quam bello necessaria and omnibus aliis prohibita. Possem etiam
majus adhuc hisce omnibus beneficium commemorare uni e Czareis Vestris
Majoribus delatum, si adeo dictu tempestivum videretur. Et ego qui Legato
nostro mandavi, ut vobis declararet propositum mihi esse omnes Majores nostros
studio erga Czaream vestram Majestatem exedere Privilegiis prohibeor subditorum
nostrorum industria redemptis, cum maximis suis impensis, jacturis maximis in
indagando instruendo and hactenus continuando hoc commercium. Ego ipse a reditu
meo Dno. Johanni Hebdon sine ullis Czareae autoritatis literis in rem vestram
tria millia equitum peditumque concessi e flore militiae Anglicanae, quae
qualis sit alii melius dixerunt. Et si Legati Vestri Extraordinarii quicquam
praeter intempestivam illam and impossibilem pecuniae molem petiissent, aut
rerum Vestrarum conditionem melius exposuissent, Ego nullo modo Czareae Vestrae
Majestati defuissem. Tamen antequam Legatum meum mitterem quam potui rerum
Vestrarum notitiam aliunde comparavi. Comperi Polonum adhuc vos infestare;
Inter Czaream Vestram Majestatem and Suecum pace facta quaedam tamen discordiae
semina adhuc pullulare. Alia quaedam didici de quibus mecum meditando credidi
propter causas. Majestati Vestrae non ignotas, nostram inter Czaream Vestram
Majestatem and Illum interpositionem minus gratam Ei futuram: Praeterquam quod
and Ipse mecum reputavi solum, cum nullam ad me de laetissimo reditu
gratulatoriam Legationem adornasse, ut neque ego cum dignitate nostra Illum
ultro potuerim compellare. Inter Czaream Vestram Majestatem and Regem Sueciae
interventum nostrum magis opportunum esse posse and utrobique acceptum speravi,
si operae pretium videretur latentes contentionum scintillas antequam flammam
darent comprimere and restinguere. Consideravi praeterea quanta nobis copia
esset and semper sit futura Ducum and militum, navium armatarum, apparatus and
instrumenti bellici, quantam semper autoritatem and influxum habiturus essem
(...) plerosque Europae aut etiam extra Europam ^rincipes qui Czareae Vestrae
Majestati nocere aut incommodare possent, and de hisce omnibus mandata
necessaria dedi Legato nostro Extraordinario. Et proculdubio quum Ipse a Czarea
Vestra Majestate beneficio affectus fuerim, quum talia in literis nostris
promiserim (quibus Ego sane me obligari sentiebam) quum talem Virum ad Czaream
Vestram Majestatem legaverim, Czarea Vestra Majestas neque in rebus hujusce nec
alius naturae quae mihi non potuerunt succurrere me ingratum aut immemorem
invenisset.

Quum haec tanquam ex ipso Regiae Suae Majestatis ore pro nostra tenuitate
Czareae Vestrae Majestati repraesentaverim haud deceat ex nostro aliquid addere
aut subnectere, sed Czaream Vestram Majestatem solummodo rogare, ut de hisce
serio and maturate pro Summa illa Prudentia qua Deus Czaream Vestram Majestatem
impertivit, Ipse deliberare and decernere velit, and brevem expeditionem mihi
indulgere, ut prima cum anni tempestate, quod Regia sua Majestas mihi injunxit,
iter incipere possim.

Actum Moscuae, 22. Aprilis Anno Dni. 1664. CARLISLE.

May it please Your most Potent and most Serene Tzarskoy Majesty.
HAving continued here ten weeks since your Tzarskoy majesty appointed me your
near Boyars and Counselors Commissioners, and finding my self still further of
every day from any good success of my Negotiation, I have been forced, as those
who cannot get over the violence or winding of the river, to make up to the
fountain. Your Tzarskoy majesty is through your so great Dominions the only
Fountain of Power and Reason, and as all your subjects ought to humble
themselves to your power, so dare I subject my self to your Reason. Forasmuch
as it seems to me that God has given, as to Solomon, not only riches and honor
to your Tzarskoy majesty, but also an understanding heart; So that as there was
none among your Tzarskoy Progenitors before, so neither can any arise after
like unto you. Therefore have I desired and obtained this private Audience from
your Tzarskoy majesty. And even so did that first and great founder of the
Amity betwixt the English and Russian Crowns, and of the Privileges to the
English Nation, Tzar Ivan Basilovich. So did He use to discourse and converse
in private with the Ambassadors of the Kings and Queens of England, and by that
means, notwithstanding the ill offices of some of his Counsel and the then Lord
Chancelour, he took such true measures of his own affairs, that ever since the
mutual friendship and commerce has continued and flourished betwixt the two
Crowns and Nations till your Tzarskoy majesty now reigning. Neither do I doubt
but that I, being come for the said purpose with as sincere intentions betwixt
Princes mutually professing much greater affection, shall by Gods blessing go
away hence from the clear eyes of your Tzarskoy majesty with as full
satisfaction.

For whereas all other great Princes without any notice from his Royal majesty
took care to follow him into his Kingdoms with Extraordinary Ambassages of
Congratulation, the King my Master out of his singular kindness and affection
did to your Tzarskoy majesty alone, of all the Princes in Christendom write
first the tenth of May 1661. before You had sent your Ambassadors to inform You
of His happy Restoration and acknowledge your Tzarskoy majesty's brotherly
kindness showed to Him in His affliction. And further in the same letter
signified that, though Sir John Hebdon had not presented any Letters of
Credence to his Royal majesty from your Tzarskoy majesty, yet in confidence of
the trust your Tzarskoy majesty reposed in him, his Royal majesty had upon his
desire for your service granted the levy of three thousand horse and foot under
Officers of great courage, ability and fidelity. Adding moreover that your
Enemies should know by the instance of his Royal majesty's Ministers, that they
should do a thing very grateful to him in making a good and lasting peace with
your Tzarskoy majesty, and if by Their default such peace were not embraced,
that they and all the World should see the great affection He has for the
prosperity of your affairs, which should be always in his particular care.
Also in the same Letter his Royal majesty acknowleges your Tzarskoy majesty's
magnanimity in withdrawing your Protection from the English Merchants during
the late Rebellion, and desires that all his Royal majesty's good Subjects
being now returned to their Allegiance, your Tzarskoy majesty would restore
them their houses estates and privileges, and that You declare the same; Upon
which your Tzarskoy majesty's declaration he would send forthwith his
Ambassador to express further His sense of your Tzarskoy majesty's affection,
and to make all possible returns of the same. Hereupon your Tzarskoy majesty
returned answer of the 28. July 1661. That your Tzarskoy majesty desired to
continue with his Royal majesty the same friendship and correspondency, which
had been betwixt both your Fathers of blessed memory, and that as to what his
Royal majesty said, he would send his Ambassador about, your Tzarskoy majesty
would be ready, so far as is possible, to give assent thereto. After this your
Tzarskoy majesty in your Letter of the 31. July 1662. sent by your late
Extraordinary Ambassadors writ also, that taking into your princely
consideration the flourishing Estate of your Tzarsva, and that entire brotherly
love and amity and frequent correspondency, which inviolably was held and
continued betwixt both your Fathers of blessed memory, and the happiness peace
and tranquillity accruing thereby to both Dominions, your Tzarskoy majesty does
most earnestly and heartily desire not only the continuation thereof, but a
more nearer and dearer and firmer affectionate blessed brotherly love and
amity, and frequent correspondency with his Royal majesty your dear and loving
Brother, than formerly with all readiness and freeness on all occasions to the
utmost of Your power to answer the desires of his Royal majesty Your dear and
loving Brother. Upon these assurances on your Tzarskoy majesty's part, his
Royal majesty dispatched me hither, where what I said in the face of the whole
World by his Royal majesty's Command in his name, concerning the mutual and
equal affection of his Royal majesty, is perfectly known to Your Tzarskoy
majesty. Your Tzarskoy was then pleased to appoint me Commissioners, persons
of great nobility and experience, for which I give Your Tzarskoy majesty
thanks, and wish I could as justly give You thanks also for their affection
(all of them, to the amity and good correspondencie betwixt the two Crowns,
and for their expedition in the business committed to them. But when as I at my
first Conference according to his Royal majesty's order moved first for the
Restitution of the Privileges, signifying in the same writing that these being
granted I had other things to profer on his Royal majesty's part out of his
affection to your Tzarskoy majesty, I received from my Commissioners so
unexpected an answer, that had heaven fallen as the windows of the
Counsel-chamber broke in twice at the recital, it could scarce have been more
strange or miraculous to me. It amounted in effect to an absolute denial of the
Privileges First indeed they say that they were taken away upon occasion of the
la^ Rebellion. But after that they affirm that his late Royal majesty of ever
blessed memory by Luke Nightingale desired that the Privileges might be
nulled, then they allege several miscarriages of the English Merchants, after
that a petition of the Goses and all the Traders in Russia, then that the
English Merchants are dead. In a second paper they speak of Your wars with the
Crim and the Pole, that his Royal majesty furnished not your Tzarskoy majesty
with money, that the Merchants of the Moscovia Company refused to lend money
toward your Tzarskoy majesty's wars being desired by your Ambassadors. And
several other reasons to make up the number though any one of them would have
served, if it be indeed resolved before hand not to grant the Privileges, but
altogether will not compound one solid argument, if weighed by so piercing and
deep a judgment as that of Your majesty. So that my Commissioners, wholly
cutting off all hopes of the Privileges for the present insisted only that I
should declare to them what else I had to offer from his Royal majesty. And I
profering to them, that if they had any thing as that remained on their part,
and was proper for them to propound for your Tzarskoy majesty's service, I
should give them a fitting answer. And only desiring to be resolved by them,
whether in case my proposals should seem to them equivalent to the Privileges
they had then power to grant them, they could not or did not give me any
satisfaction therein. I appeal to your Tzarskoy majesty, whether I having a
plenipotential Letter from his Royal majesty to your Tzarskoy majesty (which is
in it self sufficient) and over and above that a particular Commission under
the great seal of England for the Recovery of the privileges, it were fit for
m^ further to divulge the secrets of his Royal majesty's singular affection and
brotherly intentions toward your Tzarskoy majesty, to persons not empowered and
fully authorized to conclude with me, or that had only a power to deny but none
to assent to my proposals. And therefore this being the whole State of my
business, and such being the answers which in your Tzarskoy majesty's name I
have received from my Commissioners, so that the matter will now shortly return
out of our hands to be decided betwixt his Royal majesty and your Tzarskoy
majesty your selves, I shall as I have the honor to represent his Royal
majesty's person, ^o take the liberty to represent his words upon this
occasion, as if He and You could meet together, and did in ^resence contemplate
both Your unspea^able Majesty's in that glass of friend^hip the most clear
eyes of one another. ^s far as my weak judgment can ^ade into the dephts of
his Royal majesty's wisdom, Thus would He say.

Had I desired any new thing of your Tzarskoy majesty my dear and loving
Brother, or to which your Tzarskoy majesty had not formerly engaged Your self,
I might with less unkindness have taken Your so long deliberation and perhaps
have digested the refusal. But as for the Privileges they have continued above
an hundred years, and have by that their duration approved the solidity of that
reason of State, upon which they were first founded, and it has been always
dangerous by new experiments to shake the foundation of ancient counsels and
friendships. And as for your Tzarskoy majesty's engagement (to omit your
Tzarskoy majesty's declaration in the year 1645. at Your first coming to the
Crown by the Governor of Archangel to the Merchants at Archangel, that your
Tzarskoy majesty confirmed to them all the Privileges granted by your Tzarskoy
majesty's Father of blessed memory, and that You would be as gracious to them
as ever Your said Father or any of Your Predecessors) did not your Tzarskoy
majesty in Your first letter upon my desire of the Restitution of the
Privileges answer me, that your Tzarskoy majesty desired to continue with me in
the same friendship and correspondency that had been betwixt both our Fathers
of blessed memory, and that upon my Ambassadors arrival and proposition You
would be ready as far as is possible to give assent thereto? Did not your
Tzarskoy majesty's Ambassadors, being demanded by my self concerning the
Privileges, reply as their own opinion, that they questioned not but your
Tzarskoy majesty upon my desire by an honorable Embassy, would for the love
You had to me doubtless grant them? Did not your Tzarskoy majesty in Your
Letter by them of the 31. of July 1662. written from Your privy Chamber under
your Tzarskoy majesty's own hand use those golden words which could indeed drop
from no other pen or sense than that of your Tzarskoy majesty, and which are
therefore engraven in my heart as with the point of a diamond, and which being
also so consonant to mine own entire affection to your Tzarskoy majesty, I
commanded my Ambassador to return in the very same terms in my name to your
Tzarskoy majesty, that your Tzarskoy majesty taking in to consideration the
flourishing estate of your Tzarsva, etc. So the whole Letter was here repeated
again as before, forasmuch as it carries with it so strong a conviction as can
receive no excuse: and indeed it seems the Commissioners found it to be so,
seeing they never said one word as to those Letters.
Surely the same correspondency and friendship includes the same treaties and
agreements, and therefore so You obliged Your self for the Privileges, unless
(because your Tzarskoy majesty indeed limits Your self with that word
afterward) it be not possible to grant them. But that cannot be, your Tzarskoy
majesty being so great a Prince, and having all power, and therefore so
properly styled self-upholder. If, as far as is possible, signify a denial I
shall know how to understand it for the future. And as to those words in your
Tzarskoy majesty's second Letter to me of the 31. of July 1662. how can there
be a nearer and firmer correspondency betwixt Us, unless first it be as near
and as firm as formerly? But suppose any person disaffected to Our mutual
friendship could pick out some evasions in Your manner of expression, to seem
to disingage You, yet let me tell You dear Brother such subtilties might
perhaps be necessary or serve the turn with confining Princes, with whom You
are always either at open war or suspicious friendship. But it would be much
below You and Me, Friends of an hundred years, free from all reason of jealousy
of one another, to leave such loop-holes in Our souls, and to penetrate and
squeeze Our selves through our own words. Neither let it seem strange to You,
or as an undervaluing of the mutual princely Amity betwixt Us, that I seem to
place it upon the restoring or not restoring of the Privileges, and have
therefore commanded my Ambassador before any further overture of my good
intentions toward your Tzarskoy majesty, to desire the Grant of those
Privileges which belong but to my Merchants. For they were so from the first a
voluntary grant, and I do not love to go less as (God be praised) I need not
than any of my Predecessors. And those Privileges are but the Princely constant
reward of that perpetual and vast advantage, which has and may always
continue to the Tzars of Russia, and their whole Tzarsva by the English
Merchants first discovery and opening of the Trade at Archangel, with the loss
of many men's lives, shipping and estates; though great Princes even for an
action once well done, and whereof the fruit dies with that time and person,
are used to recompense to perpetuity. But my chief motive for such a
preliminary desire was indeed your Tzarskoy majesty's honor, of which I shall
always be most tender, that as your Tzarskoy majesty took away the Privileges
out of Your high generosity and resentment of the late Rebellion, so it might
appear to the whole world by Your reinstating the English therein, without any
farther reach of reason, only upon their return to their Obedience and my
desire, how just and perfect You were in the proportioning of Your actions, and
how like that great Prince you are, you know to place Your Obligations upon me.
For that is amity to me which is the advantage of my Subjects, and if even in
my Exile I could not but partake some joy in their welfare, certainly upon my
happy return I shall by all means strive to procure and advance it. To what
purpose are so many Treaties in the World betwixt Princes, but all for the
constituting the conveniences and profit of their Subjects? Treaties of Peace,
of Trade, of Assistance, nay even of Marriage of the Princes are they, because
those Princes fall in love with one another; or are not all directed to the
security and prosperity of the people? But lest therefore as I demand them for
the benefit of mine, so You should refuse them for the benefit of your people,
let us (if your Tzarskoy majesty please) try the arguments against them of
several natures as they ly before me.

They rebelled against me: It Is true, but it would be too much care in your
Tzarskoy majesty, should You pursue the resentment for ever upon my subjects
after I my self have forgiven them; And I being the Head, and making up hence
forward but one Body with my Nations, will your Tzarskoy majesty undertake to
revenge upon me the disloyalty of my people? But they say that Nightingale
brought a Letter from my Father, and treated with the Boyars for taking them
away. That Nightingale was a Traitor therein and an Impostor, and I know your
Tzarskoy majesty will according to the law of Nations, and as Princes are
obliged in honor to one another upon such impostures deliver me that open
false counterfeit letter. But if my Father had at that time for reason of State
desired the taking of them away, whereas to the contrary, He blessed Prince
even to His last breath prayed and labored for the good of His subjects, and
even as to this matter had prepared a Letter which I yet preserve among His
other Relics, wherein He desires of your Tzarskoy majesty the Restitution of
the privileges, and disavowes Nightingale as an Impostor, but had He I say then
desired they might be revoked, I also do now desire they may be restored. The
Merchants are complained of for several miscarriages contrary to the condition
of the Privileges. None of those miscarriages are verifyed, but however I
ordered my Ambassador to provide against the possibility of any such thing for
the future, and I my self should also have been a severe Inspector of any such
default, as intrenching highly upon mine own honor. But the Goses and all the
Tradesmen of Russia petitioned, that the English were become rich by these
Privileges, and Your Majesty's subjects were impoverished. How is it then that
your Tzarskoy majesty said in your Letter above mentioned, that much happiness
peace and tranquillity had accrued to both Dominions? why do they not also
against the Privilege, which is enjoyed by the Dutch? why not against the
Cupshins of Persia, for some of these in the mean time have privilege while the
English are totally debarred it? did the privileges impoverish the Country? I
should be glad to hear that since they were taken away (which has been time
long enough to make an experiment) the Country has thereby grown richer. But
for my Subjects, though if by honest industry they could grow rich, they are
rather to be commended: Yet to the contrary near thirty of them within this
thirty years are undone by the Trade, having brought considerable estates into
your Dominions. The English Merchants to whom the Privileges were granted are
dead. One of them is still living however, which is so enough to continue the
claim of the inviolable Tzarskoy privilege: and though all were dead, I
understand it to have been granted to their Successors, and I have given my
Ambassador order to name new. In other Countries every where strangers pay
double custom: How comes it then that the English Merchants Adventurers pay no
custom in Holland, and have besides free houses given them and freedom from
excise, and all other immunities denied their own subjects? That likewise they
have the same privileges and pay no custom at Hamburgh, in which places the
English drive a much greater trade than here? Do not the English Merchants not
only pay no custom themselves, but divide the customs of all other Nations
with the Shagh of Persia at His Port of Ormus? Do the English also impoverish
all those Countries? But then your Tzarskoy Majesty has war with the Crim
and the Pole. Your Tzarskoy majesty must pardon me if at this reason, and
considering most of those before which are in a manner word for word what was
returned by the Messenger of that Usurper Cromwell, I find my self something
moved. Were there therefore no wars when the English privileges were first
granted by Tzar Jvan Basilovich? were there never in all the times they have
been since enjoyed? If your Tzarskoy majesty has such Enemies that seem so
considerable to you, will it hurt you to continue me your Friend? And is six
thousand rubles yearly (that is three thousand pounds) which is the uttermost
the English customs have amounted to, since the cassing of the privileges, is
it I say so necessary a sum to so great a Prince for the carrying on of his
wars, that the effects of my friendship and the commerce of the English Nation
cannot countervail it? But I denied your Tzarskoy Majesty the loan of money. I
hope so impossible a sum to the greatest Prince of Christendom to advance on
the sudden, being I may name it to your Tzarskoy majesty ten thousand Poods of
silver, to the value of above thirty hundred thousand Rubles, was not demanded
on purpose to have a pretext to deny the privileges, and by proposing an
impossibility to refuse what is rational. The less the Courtesy is asked, the
greater disobligation not granted, and posterity which sits in judgment upon
the memory of the greatest Princes, will not so much blame Me for excusing so
much, as You for denying so little. Your Tzarskoy majesty surely received from
your own Ambassadors my Answer to that particular. And the Merchants of the
Muscovia Company refused a much less sum to Your Ambassadors. Truly the
former Merchants named in the privileges were dead all except one, these now
living have been impoverished and disinabled by the want of the privileges this
seventeen years, and Evan Zelobuskey offered them but ill security for the
money, an Obligation that it should never be that they should trade without
custom.

These it seems are the reasons, with which they strive to shake (to use your
Tzarskoy majesty's own expressions) that brazen wall which has stood so many
years, built by the wisdom of our Ancestors, and now leaning upon the
stability of Your own Princely promise: and shall such Pellets be able to ruin
it? Have I for this sent mine own ship into the sound to fetch your
Ambassadors? Have I lodged them in the Palace of one of my greatest Princes,
laid them in mine own beds, mine own hangings, and treated them continually in
mine own Vessel? Have I done them the honor to enter in my Coach within the
gate of my Court, given them private Audience my self as often as they desired
it, and as frequent Conferences with my Counsel as they pleased? I repent it
not, I reproach it not, I bear more honor to your Tzarskoy majesty my loving
Brother than to do so. But I doubt that some of them have not truly informed
You of all the honor they received much more than I tell You. Have I not after
this sent Ambassador to You my Cousin, and (whatsoever may have been told You to
the contrary) my privy Counselor, and that ever since my return into England,
one of the principal Noblemen of Our Kingdoms descended of Thomas Duke of
Norfolk, Charles Earl of Carlisle, Viscount Howard de Morpeth, Baron Dacre of
Gillesland, Lord Lieutenant of the Counties of Comberland and Westmorland,
having destinated him not only for this Ambassy, but to have been my perpetual
Remembrancer, could I have been forgetful of any thing that tended to your
Service. Have I committed to him the secret of my heart in all things wherein I
might pleasure you, and shall your Tzarskoy majesty by him refuse me so small,
and perhaps the only thing which ever I can have occasion to ask of you, the
Privileges? This indeed would repent me, for the World will take more notice of
it then can stand with Mine and Your honor, and it will be the subject of much
discourse and wonder when men shall consider what advantages this your Tzarskoy
Crown has recived from time to time from my Predecessors. They discovered the
port and opened you the Trade and Market of all Europe at Archangel. They
fought your Enemies ships in the Eastern-seas, when the Princes there adjacent
had leagued together to shut up the Narve, and delivered the prisoners to the
Russian Governors at the Narve. They lent sums of money for the wars, they
furnished Soldiers and Commanders to fight your Enemies, they made peace for
you with neighbor Princes. They suffered the Merchants to supply the Country
in the times of great dearth with corn, who sold it to the Nation ^t the rate
it cost them: and several other things to be transported hither for your
accommodation in peace or war prohibited to all other Nations. I could mention
yet an higher Obligation than all, these upon the desire of one of your
Tzarskoy Ancestors, were it so seasonable to relate it. And I my self who
ordered my Ambassador to tell You that herein I desired to exceed all my
Ancestors, yet am refused the Privileges, the purchase of my Subjects industry
and their vast expense and great losses in finding out and carrying on the
Trade to this present. I my self, at my first coming to the Crown, granted to
Sir John Hebdon without Credentials three thousand horse and foot of the flower
of the English forces for Your service, which what they can do and are, let the
world witness. And had your Ambassadors either demanded any thing of me but an
unproportionable and unseasonable sum of money, or had they but acquainted me
with the posture of your Tzarskoy majesty's affairs in any measure, You should
not have found me wanting. However before I sent my Ambassador over, I did my
best to inform my self otherwise, I found that the Pole was likely still to
molest You, and that notwithstanding the late Peace with Sweden some points
remained yet undecided. Reflecting upon which I thought, for the reasons Your
Majesty knows as concerning the Pole, that he would not think me a competent
Mediator betwixt You; seeing besides that the King of Poland only has not yet
sent me any Embassage to congratulate my happy Return. For the Swede I saw no
reason why mine interposition betwixt your Tzarskoy majesty and Him might not
be acceptable and seasonable on all sides, if your Tzarskoy majesty ^hought it
necessary to quench any parks of contention before they broke ^ut further.
Moreover I consider the opportunity that I have and shall always of assisting
You with Commanders and Soldiers, ships, armor, and ammunition against any
Enemies You might have for the future, and the influence and authority that I
should have from time to time with most Princes of Europe or out of Europe that
could annoy You, for the composing of any differences. And upon all these
things I had given such order, as I thought fitting, to my Ambassador. And
doubtless considering mine own Obligations to your Tzarskoy majesty, and the
promise I had made You in mine own Letter formerly, which I took my self bound
to accomplish, and the choice of the person of my Ambassador, You would not
have found me ungrateful in any thing of this or other nature which could not
occur to me.

Having represented these words as from his Royal majesty's own mouth to your
Tzarskoy majesty, it becomes me not to continue them with any of mine own,
further than to desire that your Tzarskoy majesty will seriously and speedily,
according to your great prudence wherewith God has inspired You, reflect upon
them, and give me a quick dispatch one way or other, that I may not lose the
very first season of the year to depart hence, as his Royal majesty has given
me positive order.

Given at Mosco, 22. April 1664. CARLISLE.

This speech being thus ended, my Lord Ambassador added four Memorials, which
he gave also in writing, but in a paper by it self. Three of them were against
Pronchissof, who endeavored by all means to obstruct my Lords affairs, and
to make him odious to this Court. It seems he had told my Lord that his Royal
Majesty's affairs were in a dangerous and weak condition, so that my Lord
being confident that he had strove to instill this false report into the Tzars
ear, thought himself bound upon this occasion to inform his Tzarskoy Majesty,
that what he said therein was contrary to the truth, and maliciously invented
by Enemies of his Royal Majesty, and that the King was in as good condition of
quiet at home and power abroad as any Prince in Christendom.

Another time the same Pronchissof told my Lord Ambassador at his house in the
presence of Demente Bashmacof and of a Colonel van Staden their Interpreter,
that it was reported his Excellency had received a great sum of money of the
Merchants to recover the Privileges, and upon the effecting thereof was to
receive yet greater from the said Merchants; whereupon my Lord requiring his
author he would or could name none; so that his Excellency took him for the
Author himself, as it was very likely. Therefore upon this occasion he
acquainted the Tzar with it, and desired his Majesty to cause Reparation to be
given him by the said Pronchissof for so malicious and high a slander.

Besides the said Pronchissof at several other times spoke to my Lord
Ambassador, as if he had neglected his Royal Majesty's business in respect to
the Merchants, and threatened him with the Tzars displeasure, that he should not
depart with honor, and as if his Tzarskoy Majesty would complain of his
conduct to his Royal Majesty, whose instructions he said that my Lord had
transgressed. In all which things he much diminished the respect due to his
Excellency, and doubtless exceeded any Commission from his Tzarskoy Majesty: My
Lord did not neglect to inform his Majesty of all these things upon this
present occasion, and to tell Him, that for these and for the former reasons he
takes the said Pronchissof (who was at this Audience) to be an Enemy to the
good correspondence betwixt his Royal Majesty and his Tzarskoy Majesty, and
consequently no Friend to himself. And that therefore whatsoever he might have
reported at any time, or would afterward concerning him, to give his Tzarskoy
Majesty (as he had all reason to suspect) an ill taste and impression of him:
He desires his Tzarskoy Majesty to hold it for falsehood, as he himself was
ready to prove it if his Majesty had thought fit at any time to communicate any
such thing to him for his own satisfaction.

He put moreover his Tzarskoy Majesty in mind of the former Reparation
promised, which still his Commissioners had neglected hitherto.

The 24. of May, my Lord received his Commissioners answer to his papers given
at Conference the 22. of March, wherein first they blame his Excellency for
saying in the beginning, that they misunderstood his words, as if he had a mind
thereby to tell them, that they were not able to understand his meaning. But
for the Posts innocent mistake (as they call it) they say that satisfaction is
given heretofore. They do not like at all this expression of my Lords, where he
says that they seem to weigh the generous actions of Princes by Salotnicks.

As to the several Demands contained in another paper, none but the second
demand had a satisfactory answer. The demand is this, that all English
Merchants desiring to repair home might have their passes to go over sea with
their wives and families without any molestation. But it is frustrated by
reason of the next following article, that justice might be done the English
Merchants for their debts, for of this there was no care at all taken. The next
demand to that, which is of a great moment and much against the custom of
Russia, that all his Royal Majesty's Subjects of what condition soever might
upon their desire have full liberty to return, is left without an answer. Now
concerning some particular subjects of the Kings, who looked for the Tzars
favor or justice upon this occasion by my Lord Ambassador they were all either
rejected or put off.

The 27. of May, the Commissioners sent to my Lord Ambassador their Answer to
his Speech said at the private Audience the 22. of April, but as to his
Complaints against Pronchissof (who as in spite of his Excellency was still in
his Pristafs office) there was not one word said to that, nor to the other
Memorial. And indeed they might as well have left the speech unanswered, seeing
their writings signify no more than their silence. For as heretofore so
concerning this speech, that perhaps might have had any where else a favorable
answer, they say amongst many words very little or noting to the purpose. Their
whole business it seems is to catch at some expressions, which interpreting
always to their disadvantage, they take thereby occasion to give his Tzarskoy
Majesty an ill taste of his Excellency, and so to obstruct his business. To that
purpose they allege first, that in a place of his speech he calls them
persons of great wisdom and experience (whereas there is, of great nobility and
experience) and that in another place he writes as if they could not show in
all their answers one certain or solid reason for the denial of the propounded
Privileges. They do extremely wonder at such an expression, and that being a
man of great understanding he would sometimes praise them (which they take in
very good part) and sometimes vilify them. But whereas my Lord says in another
place of his Speech, That he received from his Commissioners so unexpected an
answer, that had Heaven fallen, as the windows of the Councel-Chamber broke in
twice at the recital, it could scarce have been more strange or miraculous to
him, they are pleased to say, that it was not fitting for him to speak so to
his Tzarskoy Majesty. But here is the grand scandalous and unhandsome
expression (as they take it) that stickt to the Tzars very heart, when his
Excellency, speaking as from the Kings Majesty's own mouth concerning that
unproportionable sum of money that his Tzarskoy Majesty's Ambassadors demanded
of his Royal Majesty in England, said, I hope so impossible a sum to the
greatest Prince of Christendom was not demanded on purpose to have a pretext to
deny the Privileges, and by proposing an impossibility to refuse what is
rational. The Commissioners answered, that this unhandsome expression was an
indignity, not only to the friendship between both Princes, but chiefly to the
person of his Tzarskoy Majesty, that such a Declaration was far from his Royal
Majesty's meaning, and that therefore their Great Lord would write about it to
the King. As for the Privileges they put them off till the wars be put to an
end, and then the Merchants must stand upon the Tzars courtesy; Lastly his
Tzarskoy Majesty does indeed acknowledge the Kings affection to him, where it is
spoken of those fit opportunities, that his Royal Majesty had and might have
afterward of assisting Him upon all occasions of War. The Commissioners said,
that their Great Lord received these Declarations of the Kings in brotherly,
friendly amity and love. Therefore they desired my Lord Ambassador to declare
them, against which of his Tzarskoy Majesty's Enemies his Royal Majesty would
assist their Great Lord, and whether with warlike men and ammunition, and if
so, with how many warlike men and arms, and with what ammunition, and whether
his Royal Majesty would give this Assistance out of his own Treasury, and for
what time, and to what place these his Majesty's men were to come. To that my
Lord Ambassador gave them this answer, that in all these things he was not at
all limited, but that they were left at his own best discretion, provided
first, that his Tzarskoy Majesty would show a just value of his Royal Majesty's
constant brotherly love and friendship. But what concerns the propounded
Mediation betwixt the Tzar and his Majesty of Sweden, it was answered by the
Commissioners, that there was an Everlasting Peace concluded between Them, and
that those things that fell out after the Conclusion, might be quieted by
Messages on both sides.

As to the Additional Memorials presented to the Tzars Majesty against
Pronchissof, my Lord had at last an answer after a long solicitation, but it
was too much like their Reparation about the miscarriage of our Entrance at
Mosco. They said, that my Lord ought not to complain against him, that
whatsoever he was told by him in familiar discourses it was not out of
malignity, but after a friendly way, so that his Excellency might take care of
himself and of his affairs. As to the Reparation promised upon his Entrance at
Mosco, they do not so much as speak one word of it.

And now to put an end to a Negotiation, where so much is said and so little
effected, I shall add another important business that passed betwixt his
Excellency and his Commissioners. My Lord having newly received power and
authority from the King to offer his Mediation betwixt the Tzars Majesty and
the King of Poland, thought, that so kind an offer might perhaps bring his
business to a better end, than he had done hitherto. He acquainted his
Commissioners with it, and offered himself to do his uttermost in prosecution
of that affair, in what manner his Tzarskoy Majesty should direct for his
Service, Provided that He would first manifest a just value of his Royal
Majesty's most sincere and constant brotherly affection, by the grant of his
former demands. The offer did please them very well, because it came in very
good time, but the condition annexed was too hard, seeing they had doubtless
resolved not to grant the Privileges. Yet they desired my Lord Ambassador to
give this matter in writing at a Conference, which they agreed upon to be had
the first of June: and the mean while the Tzar appointed for that purpose new
Commissioners to treat of this matter that newly was come in hand. [So that at
last his Excellency was rid from Pronchissof, whom the Tzar had still employed
a great while when He sent any message to my Lord Ambassador, notwithstanding
the solemn Declaration made against him at the private Audience: and in his
stead there was another supplied for a Pristaf, who was indeed a civiller man,
but of lesser quality.] The Proposition given by my Lord in writing at this
Conference was written after this manner.

HIs most Serene Majesty my Master desiring to fulfill all parts of a most
sincere brotherly affection toward his most Serene Tzarskoy Majesty, according
to His promise in his former Royal Letters, and by me his extraordinary
Ambassador, taking into consideration the present war continued betwixt his
Tzarskoy Majesty, and the King of Poland, to the so great detriment of the
Common Christian Interest, has therefore, although He knows that his Tzarskoy
Majesty does neither want sufficient forces nor most prudent counsels, whereby
He may probably bring that war to a conclusion, yet for the better facilitating
of a firm and honorable peace betwixt his Tzarskoy Majesty and the King of
Poland, Empowered me (if it may be acceptable and desirable to his Tzarskoy
Majesty) to offer his Mediation toward so good a work, and has therefore laid
aside all respects to the contrary, believing that so laudable a design will so
much the rather find with his Majesty of Poland all effect and acceptance. And
this being but as an earnest of all those other counsels and good offices,
which his Tzarskoy Majesty may promise Himself continually from his Royal
Majesty, I do no ways doubt, but his Tzarskoy Majesty will manifest a just
value of his Royal Majesty's most sincere and constant brotherly affection.
Unto which I shall always strive to be in my place instrumental, according to
my duty to his Royal Majesty, and my great devotion toward the service of his
Tzarskoy Majesty, so great a Prince, and so dear a Friend and Brother of his
Royal Majesty.

Given at Mosco, 1. June 1664.
The Commissioners Answer to this matter was, that his Tzarskoy Majesty was
well pleased with this profer of his Royal Majesty, that his Excellency in
prosecution thereof should send a Post to his Majesty of Poland by way of
Smolensco, and proceed himself in the business as might be meet and fitting.
But it seems they did not or would not mind what his Excellency had required,
before he would engage his Prince in so long and chargeable a design.
Therefore he made them understand that otherwise he could not undertake it,
because his Royal Majesty took it for granted, that he had before this effected
his business, which was the reason of this His last generous profer. The
Commissioners postposing any thing to the Customs taken and the English
Merchants, my Lord took occasion to give over his Profer and to take his Leave
of the Tzar, having left into the hands of his Tzarskoy Majesty's near Boyars
and Counselors some Memorials of remaining business (besides that point which
he most insisted upon) that in time they might be redressed.

The 24. of June, He had his last Audience where he took his Leave of his
Majesty in few words.

Most Serene and most Potent Tzar.
THe King my Master has commanded me to make have from hence about his other
affairs committed to me, and since your Tzarskoy Majesty has not been pleased
to grant what I was sent for, the greatest Kindness You can show the King my
Master and the greatest favor to my self, is the allowing me this liberty of
taking my leave of your Majesty, and permitting me to depart with speed. I have
nothing to desire of your Tzarskoy Majesty at parting, but that, as is due and
right, there may be the same liberty to all other his Majesty's Subjects,
whenever the respective time of their Obligations shall be expired, and that
to those who must in the mean time remain, speedy and equal justice may be
afforded, which has not been hitherto. I return my thanks for the plentiful
en^ertainment I have had in your Country. (...) shall very truly give the King
an ac^ount of all the honors and favors I ^ave received, and with the same
^uth and candor give an account of all things that have passed in my
Negotia^ion, and shall pray to God to bless your Majesty with a long and happy
Government.

Whereupon the Tzar being on his Throne desired the Ambassador to salute his
Brother the King of great Britain, and delivered the Letter he sent him with
his own hand. He pretended to be much troubled that the State of his affairs
would not permit him to comply with his desires, and prayed God for the
prosperity of his Voyage. Upon which his Excellence kissed his hand, as did
likewise all his Gentlemen after him, and being returned they brought him his
dinner from the Palace.

This being the Negotiation and success of the Embassy, let us now take a
prospect of the most memorable passages that happened during our residence at
Mosco.

The first thing that presents it self is the description of a Feast which the
Tzar made to my Lord Ambassador the 19. of February in the hall wherein his
Excellence had Audience; it was a meal of near nine hours long, from two in
the afternoon till eleven at night. My Lord Ambassador was conducted thither
very solemnly, but being entered into the hall, the Tzar who was sitting upon
his Throne forgot not to retain his ordinary gravity, and though he had not
then his Crown upon his head, he thought it too great a condescension for a
person of his grandeur to veil his bonnet to the Ambassador. From whence it
may be easiely conjectured that his Excellence was not admitted to his table,
and indeed it was so far from that, that he was placed at another on his left
hand, some steps lower than his own, whilst his principal Boyars had not only
their table on his right hand, but at a less distance from his Throne. In so
much as in that place where my Lord Ambassador ought to have received all honor
and civility, there it was that they studied as it were to treat him
disobligingly. He was seated alone on one side next the wall, and on the other
there was one of the Tzars Councelors and a Stolnick to bear him Company. In a
direct line and near his table they placed my Lord Morpeth, and with him (by
express order from the Tzar) not only the Gentlemen and Pages but the Footmen
also, it being his pleasure to regale us altogether. As Soon as every one was
sat, his Tzarskoy Majesty unco^ered himself, and put not on his grave ^onnet
of black fox again till we went away, ^o that he continued bare as we did;
though is hair was so short, that one of our Company ^ook occasion to say, he
wondered so great (...) Monarch should want hair to cover his ^ars. But in my
judgment we had more rea^n to wonder, when we saw that we had no ^apkins, and
that the Table-cloth was no ^ider than the Table. In the mean time, ^r meat not
being presently brought, most of us employed our selves in observing the great
stone Pillar mentioned before, which they had adorned for a Show with a
wonderful quantity of Gold and Silver Vessels, amongst which there were many
curious pieces: In this manner we sat almost half an hour, before our meat was
brought up. At last the Stolnicks entered, with their great bonnets upon their
heads, and brought the first meat to the Tzars Table, presently afterward they
served the Boyars, and then my Lord Ambassador and his Train. Our first dish
was Caviare, which we eat as a Sallad, after which we had a sort of Pottage
that was very sweet, as also several sorts of fish baked, fried, and boiled;
but no flesh, because it was Lent. Yet that hindered not but that we had near
five hundred dishes, which were very handsomely dressed, had not the dishes
been so very black, that they looked more like Lead than Silver. Of all these
dishes they made as it were but one course, new coming in continually; but as
we had no napkins allowed us, so wanted we but little of having no plates also.
All we could obtain for so many dishes was but every one his own, and my Lord
Ambassador in that respect had no advantage of his Servants. Besides these we
were well provided with very good Spanish Wine, white and red Mead; Quaz, and
strong Waters, which they had tempered with sweet and odoriferous ingredients.
We were not much troubled nor importuned to drink to Excess, only they would
often advertise us not to forget their great Dukes health. Those that attended
us were all Gentlemen of quality, which perhaps was the reason we were not so
well served as we could have wished. When meat was brought in, there were
twelve of the Guards du Corpse ordered to enter, who put themselves in order
with their Halbards by the Hall door right over against his Majesty. After them
entered two Lords with the Swords Royal, who approaching the Throne, with a
profound Reverence, placed themselves of each side of the Tzar, with their
swords naked upon their shoulders. Night drawing on, they furnished their
Sconces with Wax-candles, and a while after the Tzar signified his desire to
discourse for some time with the Ambassador. Whereupon his Excellence rose from
the Table, and being come near the Tzar, he stood before him on the other side
of the Table, so that they discoursed face to face. His Majesty drank a Cup of
Wine to the memory of the late King of England in these words, To the memory of
that glorious Martyr Charles the first, who endured great afflictions here, and
enjoyes now a greater measure of glory. After that he drank a health to our
present King, and gave the Cup always to the Ambassador with his own hand. His
Excellence also at his turn began a health to the two young Princes, and the
Tzar seeming to neglect it, the Ambassador very gracefully entreated him to
remember it. Some serious discourse they had also about affairs of State, the
Tzar spoke to him about His Wars with the King of Poland, and his Excellence on
his side failed not to mention to him the subject of his Embassy, and to let
him know he expected success in it from himself only, and not from his
Commissioners. By this time the desert came in, and the Tzar invited the
Ambassador to rake his place at the Table again. The first things they brought
in, were little artificial trees with store of branches candyed and guilt at
the ends, on purpose for a show; the rest were nothing but a kind of fritters,
wafers, and such like trifles in paste, made up after their fashion. After we
had been about half an hour longer at the Table, the Ambassador rose again, and
turning toward the Tzar they drank to one another several times, the
Ambassador's Gentlemen having the honor to drink with his Tzarskoy Majesty,
and receive their Wine from his own hands. But his Excellence observing with
what ease the Tzar took off his Goblets, declared to him after a pleasant
manner, the just suspicion he had of his liquour, which apparently could not be
so strong as that which was given to himself. The Tzar being in a good humor,
gave him no answer, but laughed heartily at it. Yet a while after he found
himself so warmed, that he fell a bleeding at the nose as he was speaking to
the Ambassador; who departed thereupon, having first given his Majesty thanks
for his magnificent entertainment.

The seventeenth of March we celebrated as the birth of the present Tzar, who
was born on that day in the Year 1630. for which his Tzarskoy Majesty sent us a
great dinner, and three or four Boyars to rejoice with the Ambassador.

The third of April being Palme-Sunday we had the sight of a very noble
Procession, which is annually observed eight days before Easter, in
representation of our Saviors Entrance into Jerusalem. The Tzar invited the
Ambassador to see the Ceremony; and (their Sledges being then out of date, by
reason the Ice was for the most part dissolved) sent his Coach with a Stolnick,
and Gregory the Pristaf to accompany him. The Ambassador being about to enter
first into the Coach, the Stolnick had the presumption to thrust himself
forward and throw himself into it as it were headlong before him; and this with
such a disorder, that it cost him some trouble to recollect himself. His
Excellence observing his temerity left him in sole possession of the Coach, and
was returning up the stairs, when the Stolnick came out again in great
confusion to assure him, that he had done nothing but by express order, and
according to their Custom. The Ambassador replied, he knew very well, such
incivilities were not practiced in other places, and that in England the Tzars
Ambassadors had not been used in that manner. The Stolnick understanding his
Excellencies resolution not to go at all upon those terms, dispatched a
Messenger immediately to the Tzar, to advertise him of what had past, and of
the Ambassadors persistence. The Tzar was then at his Devotion in the Church of
Jerusalem (as they call it) near the Castle-gate, and all things were ready to
begin the Procession; insomuch as his Tzarskoy Majesty to accelerate the
Ambassadors arrival countermanded the orders of the Stolnick. Whereupon they
departed immediately, and being come to the place that was reserved for us, we
found the Tzar already gone out of the Church, and marching on foot with his
Crown on his head, in the midst of a great number of Boyars and Churchmen;
amongst which there were two of his principal Counselors of State, that led
him by the arms. The Patriarch (a handsome man and of a good age) had a kind
of a Diadem upon his head, and a great Cross of Gold in his hand: The rest of
the Clergy were in their Surplices, and carrying Books, Banniers, Crosses, and
Images upon long staves before them, some of them singing, and some of them
fuming the people with Incense. In this posture they advanced along upon cloth
to a certain Platform, where the Patriach presented Palms to the Tzar first,
and then to the rest. That done he took off the Tzars Cap, laid it upon a
Silver plate, and presented his golden cross to him to kiss. Which being with
great reverence performed, the Patriarch waved it on high to both sides; to
them first that were in the Platform, who received that Benediction with great
reverence likewise, and then to the People that were present, who at the same
instant cast themselves along upon the ground, but more especially the Tzars
Guards who were amongst them. After this they sang certain hymns, which
lengthned their Devotion a complete hour. At this time there fell out a very
pleasant accident, occasioned by the Lady Ambassadresses maid, mentioned at the
beginning of this Narrative; who desirous to see the glory of this Procession,
had slipped herself amongst my Lord Ambassadors Train, into the place appointed
for us to see the Ceremonies. The place being higher than the rest, and
uncovered, the Tzar lifting up his eyes often toward us, at length took notice
of this Maid, and observing her well dressed and near his Excellence (which was
more than he had discerned) he presently imagined it was the Ambassadors Lady,
and sent immediately one of his Boyars to enquire of her health. The Ambassador
altogether surprised with the Complement, returned his thanks to the Tzar for
his obliging intention, and withal gave him notice of the mistake, whereupon
the Maid was dismissed with a severe reprehension; and being amazed at the
strangeness of the adventure departed silently, confused betwixt the honor and
shame she had received at the same time. A while after for default of an ass
they brought the Patriarch to the entrance of the Platform a horse disguised
like an ass, with great artificial Ears, and (perhaps lest they should have
discovered him to be a horse by his Coat, or else have taken him for a red ass)
they covered him over with white Linen. And then having covered his sadle with
several very rich coverings, the Patriarch mounted by the help of a footstool,
and placed himself sideling upon the horse. After that, he blessed the people
with his Cross as he went along, and the Tzar having reassumed his bonnet and
Crown marched a foot before him leading his horse by the bridle; as soon as
they began their march there was a Chariot drawn by six horses covered with
white linen also, that went before them, in which Chariot there was a tree
garnished with a great number of apples, which they had fastened to it, and on
the Branches five or six men singing Hosanna. The motion of this Tree was so
strange to those who (not seeing the horses that drew it) were ignorant of the
cause, that some of them at first sight looked upon it as a Miracle.

Eight days after this Procession we had the Feast of Easter, in which the
Moscovites have a Custom of presenting one another with colored Eggs. When
they salute one they cry, Christos wos chrest, which is as much as to say,
Christ is risen, and the other answers, Wostin wos chrest, which is, He is
risen indeed. They do ordinarily kiss one another in their Salutations, and he
which salutes the other, presents him with a colored Egg. This Ceremony
continues fifteen days, insomuch as at that time there are many Shops, in which
they sell these Eggs ready dyed into a red or a Crimson color. The Tzar
himself makes use of them to his Military Officers residing in Mosco, who
coming all of them to kiss his hand, his Majesty gives each of them an Egg,
accompanying his present with his Royal Benediction for the Success of their
Arms.

On the nine and twentieth of May with great joy we solemnized both the birth
of his Royal Majesty, and his glorious Return to his Capital City. His Majesty
and the Tzar being born both in the Year 1630. there is no great difference in
their Age, only the Tzar was born the seventeenth of March, and is by
consequence ten weeks older. In this Feast his Excellence treated amongst
others the principal of the three Ambassadors, whom the Tzar had a while before
sent to the King, and who departed from London but some few weeks before us.
But that could not be done without the Tzars permission, who according to their
Politics was much in trouble, ere he could resolve to grant him this grace.
And this, notwithstanding the great amity they had contracted at London, was
the only opportunity they had of seeing one another again. The Tzar for the
augmentation of their Mirth, sent them a good quantity of Spanish Wine and Mead.

My Lord Ambassador entertained the Swedish Resident (who was at that time in
Mosco) very often also, by which means he had frequent conferences with him.

About this time the Marriage was consummated betwixt the good man that had
hurt himself with his fall at Gravesend the next day after his departure from
London, and the Maid I mentioned but lately. But the Bridegroom being as yet
something lame of his fall, as Vulcan was with being tumbled from heaven, it
gave occasion to one to say, and not unpleasantly, that if he played Vulcans
part, no doubt but she could play that of Venus as well.

I have before represented Mosco much Subject to fire, and we had three
instances of it during our residence there. The greatest of all happened on
easter day, but devoured only some hundreds of houses; and yet there was no
more notice taken of it than of the two other. For to make a conflagration
remarkable in this Country, there must be at least seven or eight thousand
houses consumed. But they have this advantage at Mosco, that they may buy
houses ready made, especially in that part of the Town called Scoradom; which
houses they take to pieces, and having carried them to the place where they
design their habitation, it requires no great time to put them together again.
Besides this they have other great markets where they sell wood for building,
and that in such quantity one may have enough there to build a whole Town.

In this place it was we had experience as well as at Vologda of the verity of
that saying of Juvenal.

Maxima quaeque domus servis est plena superbis.

Which is that great houses are commonly furnished with haughty Servants. And
without doubt there had been great disorder amongst the Ambassadors Gentlemen,
had not he prevented it by a resolution which he declared of not sparing any
one that sought to make division by unlawful ways. Notwithstanding there happened
one duel betwixt one of our family and a stranger that was a Lieutenant in the
Militia of the Tzar. The quarrel was, that being in company together, this last
though a Scotchman seemed to extol the grandeur and glory of the Tzar to the
diminution of the King of England, which the other disgusting magnifyed the
King as much as was possible contrary to the judgment of his Antagonist, and
challenged him thereupon into the field. And some few days after, this quarrel
was disputed by the sword, and (had the preeminence of these Princes depended
upon the success of that combat) his Majesty of great Britain had had the
advantage. For in a short time our Champion disarmed the Lieutenant, and came
triumphing amongst us that he had vindicated his King.

The sixteenth of June, which was four days after my Lord had taken his Leave,
the Tzar sent the Ambassador a present of Sables, for himself and his whole
family. His Excellencies portion was worth two thousand Crowns, that of the
Countess was worth fourteen hundred, and my Lord Morpeth's a thousand, the rest
were to be distributed according to every man's rank and imploiment in the
house. But the Ambassador considering he had been neglected in all his
affairs, would by no means admit of this obligation; but from a generous
principle returned the Present, as having been otherwise so much disobliged.
Nevertheless, that his refusal might not pass for an affront in the judgment of
the Tzar, my Lord designed to have prevented the sending of it, but he had not
time enough for that. For Golozof (of whom we had occasion to speak in the
Description of our Entry into Mosco) imagining without doubt he should receive
great kindnesses from the Ambassador, dispatched away one of his Clerks to
advertise him, that he was coming to him with a Present from his Tzarskoy
Majesty, wherewith he intended to honor him before his departure. And
presently after without acquainting any of the Pristafs (in which he did ill)
he arrived himself with four and thirty men bearing the Present in their hands.
The Ambassador took Golozof aside, and let him know, that he could not accept
of this Honor for the reasons which he alleged. Golozof extremely amazed ran
^ut immediately swelled up with rage, as he had been with vain hope of reward
at his coming in; he leapt down the stairs by half douzains, as if he had been
mad, and clapping his breast, cried out with a loud voice, That such a thing
had not been heard of, nor ever happened before in the whole Empire of Russia.
In short, he was in such a rage, that one would have sworn, he would have
caused us all to be banished into Siberia, as they sometimes did an Ambassador
of France, and that having refused the Great Dukes present, they would make us
hunt Sables in that Country, which is the penalty of their greatest
malefactors. But that which most afflicted the Ambassador's Domestics, was the
disadvantage they received by his refusal, in being so deprived of the Honor
of receiving so profitable testimonies of the generosity of so great a Prince.
However we comforted our selves in the Prudence of the Ambassador, and although
each of us was deceived in the hopes he had conceived, yet we could not for all
that forbear praising the generosity of his Conduct. Whereas on the other side
Golozof in very great passion mounted his horse, his footmen following him two
and two, whereupon his Excellence took great pleasure to behold them marching
in that Order, and the indignation which they carried in their faces. Every one
looked after them with a profound silence, imagining this refusal so
Extraordinary, that it affronted the Grandeur and Dignity of the Tzar, and that
his Tzarskoy Majesty would not fail to take exemplary vengeance upon an action
so presumptuously bold: others not knowing the cause suspended their judgments.
The Tzar being informed of this affair, and exceedingly surprised with it,
called his Council of State immediately, and was present there himself; the
result of which was, that Volinskoy (one of the new Commissioners) was deputed
to repair to his Excellence, to know the reason of this refusal, which he
performed with more mildness and discretion than we had occasion to hope for.
The Ambassador answered him, that he was so far from doing it out of any
contempt, that on the contrary he looked upon his Tzarskoy Majesty's Present as
an effect of his great Generosity, but that the acceptance thereof would oblige
him too far. He acquainted him how his affairs stood, that his Embassy had had
no success, and that in this case it was not proper for him to receive any
favor from his Tzarskoy Majesty till he had first received the Justice he
demanded. That otherwise he should have taken the least favor from his hands
as a perpetual Ornament to himself and his family, and that still he was ready
(provided any good order might be taken with his affairs) to receive any
testimony whatever of the Tzars affection. This gave Volinskoy satisfaction in
some measure, especially when he understood after what manner Golosof had
brought the Presents, that is, without the knowledge of his Excellencies
Pristafs, who ought first to have given him notice of the design, and thereby
prevented the dishonor of so public a refusal. So that Golozof had no
recompense for all his pains, but a grave reprehension, for having wanted
discretion in the discharge of this affair. On the other side the Tzar returned
the Present which he had received at his first Audience from the Ambassador to
him again, it was a Basin and Ewer of Silver, parcel gilt, two wrought Silver
Dishes, and another Dish of Silver parcel gilt also. His Excellence received it
with this Complement; I give his Tzarskoy Majesty thanks for this, and I
receive it with as great kindness as if it had been a greater Present. I shall
keep it always by me, because it has had the honor to be in the Possession
of his Tzarskoy Majesty.

Of his Excellencies Journey from Mosco to Riga.
THis Embassy being finished, and that which was to have been into Poland laid
a side, the Ambassador prepared for his departure toward Sweden, choosing the
way by Riga in Livonia to pass to Stockholm by Sea. And being to Cross Livonia,
which is (...) desert Country, he dispacht an Express with (...) Letter, to
Count Oxenstern Governor Genera^ of Livonia to desire, that being upon an
Embassy toward his Majesty of Sweden, he would please to give orders, that at
his arrival upon the frontiers he might be accommodated at his own cost with
fresh horses and wagons, for his train and baggage to pass that Country with
all.

In the mean time my Lord Ambassador attended by a Regiment of horse departed
from Mosco the 24. of June about the Evening, with intention to retreat seven
Versts that night from the Town. The 29. we arrived at Twere the chief City of
Twersco. The 3. of July we came to Tarsock, and from thence to Budeva. The 4.
to Wisny Volsock, the 7. to Zimnogoray and Volday, the 8. we past, by Rakina
and Vena two Towns, the 9. we lodged at Brunitze a little Borough. The 10. in
the afternoon we made 27. Versts by water in twenty boats they had provided
against our coming, so as (passing a small Arm of the Lake Ilmin into which the
River, that passes by Brunitze falls) we arrived within 3. Versts of Novogorod
the great. The 11. the Ambassador made his Entry into Novogorod. The 12. we
departed, and on the 13. we past 67. Versts, 37. upon the Ilmin before noon by
the favor of a good wind, and 30. after to a Town called Soltza upon the River
Solognae which casts it self likewise into the Lake. The next day the
Ambassador parted from Soltza by land, and advanced 35. Versts. The 17. he made
his Entry into Plesco, and the 20. at night he departed from thence. The 22. we
arrived on the frontiers at Nihuisen, a Village in Livonia, the 25. at
Marienborough, and the 3. of August at Riga.

Our Journey from Mosco to the frontiers (which was near two hundred leagues)
was made under the conduct of two Pristafs, one of them called Jvan Stepanovitz
Telepniof, one of the great Dukes Stolnicks conveyed his Excellence and took
care of our Carriages and provisions to Novogorod, the other (called Simon
Offonassevitz) conducted us from Novogorod to the Castle of Nihuisen upon the
frontiers. The greatest part of this Journey we made on horsback, except when
we went by water from Brunitze to Novogorod, and from thence to Soltza. For
which reason we had commonly threescore sadle horses in our company, besides
what were in out carriages which we had covered some to travail in, and some to
retreat to at any time upon occasion of rain. Besides these we had three
Coaches, one of the Ambassadors, and two of the grand Dukes, which he had the
Generosity to send along with us as far as Livonia, principally for the
accommodation of the Gentlemen. For our baggage we had usually two hundred
wagons, but little ones such as they are in Moscovie. Four times we changed
them in our Journey, as likewise our sadle horses, at Twere, at Wisny Volsock,
and at Soltze, at Plesco; We having always a party of Strelitz and another of
our own attending the baggage. This manner of travailing on horsback had been
very pleasant, had not the sadles been so hard and so high as they use them in
that Country: but they were made in that fashion, that most of us were in a
short time in as much torment as we could have been upon the wooden horse.

All the Lodging we had in this Journey, was like that of Soldiers in the
fields or woods, under the shelter of our Tents or covered wagons; upon which
consideration, the Tzar had amongst other things provided us with three tents,
one for the Ambassador which cost near five hundred crowns, another for the
Countess, and the third for my Lord Morpeth. The tents were sent before from
place to place with the Kitchen, and the greatest part of our baggage, and we
making ordinarily 20 or 25 Versts in the morning, and as much after dinner,
they pitched them where they found water, and fields convenient for so great a
number both of horses and men. So as his Excellence arriving with his train at
the End of his stage found his Tents ready pitched, and his meat almost ready.
At night his bed was made under his Tent: But most part of the Gentlemen and
Servants betook themselves to their wagons, and the wagoners to the ground for
a lodging.

For what relates to our Victuals we suffered almost for want of chimneys, the
same inconvenience we had done betwixt Vologda and Mosco. For besides that we
had generally nothing but Beef and Mutton, that was most commonly roasted only
by the Sun and smoke in some corner of the field where the Cooks had piched
their Tents to avoid the wind. But our greatest inconvenience was in our
drink, being constrained to drink Mead or Quaz, that was heated and quite dead
with the Carriage. Ice would have done very well to have revived it, but it was
so precious at that time there was scarce enough for the Ambassadors Table. At
Novogorod and Plesco (of which I shall speak hereafter) we were very well
treated, we had all sorts of provision in abundance, and sack amongst the rest
cost us nothing, but our pains to demand it.

True it is, we met several difficulties in this Journey, and besides those I
am speaking of, we suffered with the greatest impatience the persecution of the
flies. Yet in other respects it must be acknowledged, that our Journey was very
pleasant, if we consider the propiciousnes of the weather, the advantage of
travailing under the shadow of the Forests, for the most part covered with an
incredible quantity of excellent Strawberries, besides the delight of beholding
the Rivers gliding thorough these vast wildernesses. We observed seven or eight
Lakes also, of which the most considerable were the Ilmin, and the Sveto Ozero,
which signifies as much as the holy Lake. In the middle of this latter there is
an Island encompassed with several other little ones, which appear like so many
woods about it, and a fair Convent within it, which makes a very agreeable
prospect. As to the Ilmin, it is doubtless one of the goodliest Lakes in
Europe, being about fifty miles in length, and thirty miles broad, so that when
we past over it, we could see land but on one side of us. We had at that time a
boat, that sailed with a sail of Mat made of Bulrushes. And this abundance of
Lakes and Rivers, which gave us occasion of admiring the beauty of the Country,
gave us also a convenience not unnecessary at this time, and that was
opportunity of washing our selves, which we did very frequently in this
journey, and amongst the rest in the Volga, which we crossed once again at
Twere. But forasmuch as this Road is not so much used by Strangers, as the Road
to Archangel, our habits appeared so unusual to the Peasants, that they no
sooner saw two or three of my Lords Servants on horseback, but away they run
in all haste to their houses, clapping their doors after them, as if we had
been so many ominous Birds, or Spirits come on purpose to fright them; whereby
it came to pass that in case we wanted any thing, there was no hopes of being
supplied by them.

And thus you have had what properly belongs to the manner of our Travails, I
shall now speak something of the most remarkable passages therein.

It is a Maxim, it seems, in the Court of Moscovie, that the better to set
off the Honor they bestow upon Public Ministers, they must now and then
abuse and affront them, and as my Lord Ambassador was received at Mosco
according to this Rule, so the Court thought it expedient he should be used
after the same way at his departure. As to their Ceremony in conducting him out
of Town, and his accommodation during his whole journey after, it must be
acknowledged honorable enough, and to his Excellencies very great satisfaction.
And indeed to speak freely (considering the ardency wherewith his Excellence
had prosecuted his Negotiation, and the Prophesy of Pronchissof, who had told
him, That the Great Duke would send him away without any honor at all) their
civility was much greater than we had reason to expect. However the Ambassador
could not avoid the disorder which happened at his departure from Mosco, upon
occasion of one Calthof, who had put himself amongst his Gentlemen, with design
to return into England with them. This Calthof had been in the Tzars service
for some years, and the time for which he had obliged himself being expired,
his Excellence interposed for his dismission, and obtained it. Nevertheless the
Tzar having notice that he was going, he sent a Messenger immediately after, as
we were marching out of the Town, to recall him, and (which was the wonder) the
Messenger did not lose his way. The Ambassador not conceiving it proper to
oppose himself directly against the pleasure of his Tzarskoy Majesty, returns
Calthof to him, but with expectation he should be presently released. But five
days afterward being arrived at Twere, his Excellence understood they had upon
a false pretense clapped him in Prison, and used him very ill. For which cause
he dispatched a Post to Mosco with this Letter in Latin directed to Larivon
Lopookin, Diack or Chancellor of the Embassy-Office.

Domine Cancellarie,
NEscio quo fato aut consilio factum sit, quod improsperae nostrae Legationi
ultimus hic de Calthosio cumulus accesserit, nisi fortassis decorum
existimetis, ut exitus introitum nostrum referret, and postrema primis per
omnia responderent. Serenissimus Rex meus disertis verbis mihi mandaverat ut
Calthosium mecum reducerem. Dominis Consiliariis, and Tibi praesertim Domine
Cancellarie, saepius declaravi tempus effluxisse quo se Calthosius Czareae suae
Majestati devinxisset, ideoque petii ut mecum posset reverti. Cancellarius
etiam Czarei Areani significavit, nullam moram esse quo minus exiret. Quomodo
postea successerit non potes ignorare. Ecce primarius Scriba in ipso itinere
accurrit, and Czareae suae Majestatis nomine Calthosium postulat. Ego qui
optime novi quantum reverentiae and securitatis Legatorum dignitati debeatur,
ne tamen importuno loco cum Czarea sua Majestate altercari viderer, Moscuam
illum remisi, ubi contra quam speraveram, and contra jus and aequum, falso
praetextu eum in Custodia detineri audio. Quorsum haec vergant nescio, neque
vos ipsi scitis qui facitis. Me vero interim omnium infelicissimum, qui pro
summo meo Czareae suae Majestati inserviendi studio cum tam infausto nuncio sim
reversurus. Majus est hoc negotium quam primo ituitu videtur, and in hoc
Calthosio omnium Sacrae suae Majestatis Subditorum hic degentium res agitur,
number pro liberis deinceps, an vero pro servis and captivis sint habendi. Oro te
Domine Cancellarie, pro solita tua humanitate, and pro muneris tui officio, ut
haec Czareae suae Majestati sine hac acerbitate (quam tamen ipsa rei natura
mihi expressit) sed eadem cum efficacia protinus velis remonstrare, ut Czarea
sua Majestas mature de hac re providere and consulere queat, and Calthosius
(quod adhuc expecto) bona cum Czareae suae Majestatis gratia, me antequam
limitem transierim, assequatur.

Twere, 30. Junii Anno Dni. 1664. CARLISLE.


My Lord Chancellor
BY what destiny or design the unsuccesfulness of my Embassy should be
accumulated with this violence to Calthof, I cannot imagine, unless You esteem
it perhaps decorous, that my exit should bear resemblance with my Entry, and my
last usage be as disobliging as my first. The most Serene Prince my Master gave
it me expressly in command, that I should bring Calthof back with me. I have
often declared to the Lords of the Counsel, and to you my Lord Chancellor more
especially, that the time for which he had obliged himself to his Tzarskoy
Majesty was expired, and for that reason I desired his return. The Chancellor
of his Tzarskoy Majesty's Cabinet acquainted me he might go if he pleased,
there should be no impediment. But what is happened since You cannot be
ignorant of. When I was even in my Journey, the principal clerk of the
Ambassy-Office pursues me, and in his Tzarskoy Majesty's name demands Calthof.
Yet though I understood well the reverence and security was due to the dignity
of an Ambassador, nevertheless lest I should seem upon slight occasions and
unseasonably to contend with his Tzarskoy Majesty, I returned him to Mosco.
Where I am since informed he is upon a false pretense detained in Custody, not
only contrary to my hopes and expectation, but to all law and equity
whatsoever. How far these injuries may extend I know not, nor even You Your
selves that contrive them. In the mean time I am most unhappy, who
notwithstanding my great Zeal and affection for the service of his Tzarskoy
Majesty, must be constrained to return with this unwelcome tidings. This is a
greater business than it appears to be at first sight, and in this Calthof the
interest of all his most sacred Majesty's Subjects living in this Country is at
stake, and it is a question whether for the future they be to be esteemed
freemen or slaves. I conjure You my Lord Chancellor, by Your usual humanity,
and by the duty of Your place, that You represent these things to his Tzarskoy
Majesty, not with that sharpness (which notwithstanding the nature of the
business extorted from me) but with such efficacy, that his Tzarskoy Majesty may
apply some remedy in time, and that Calthof (which I expect) by his Majesty's
most gracious permission, may overtake me before I am out of His Dominions.

Twere, the 30. of June 1664. CARLISLE.


This Letter was so far from making any favorable impressions in the Tzar,
that it exasperated him to that height, he resolved immediately to dispatch an
Ambassador to the King of England to complain of his Excellences proceedings.
The design was principally taken upon a pleasant mistake on their side, of qui
for quid. For this Expression in the Letter, Quorsum haec vergant nescio, neque
vos ipsi scitis qui facitis, which signifyes as it is translated, how far
these thing may extend I know not, nor You Your selves who contrive them, the
Court of Muscovie mis-interpreted it thus, I know not what may be the end of
this business, nor do You know Your selves what You do. Which they conceived the
highest piece of insolence that he should dare to say, the principal Boyars and
Counselors of so great a Prince were ignorant and impertinent, as if they had
done all things at random with out deliberation or reason. And this translation
in appearance was Golozofs the great Master of Latin in that Court, and by
whose instructions they had played the Critics so exquisitely in the word
Illustrissimus, and who was much incenst against the Ambassador, since his
refusal of the presents. So as there might be some prejudice or malice in the
translation of the Letter.

However it was we found the Governor of Twere in so ill an humor, he no
sooner heard the noise of our approach, but he shut up his gates immediately,
as if the plague had been in the Country, so that we had nothing to trust to,
but the fields and the suburbs of the Town, near which in a plain we pitched our
Tents. The Town is built on the side of a hill, the Volga running by it,
besides another little River called Twere which denominates, the place. We
stayed there only two whole days least we should disturb the Governor too
long, who with out doubt was impatient till he saw us departing.

At Tarsock we had the divertisement of seeing a very large Bear dance, it was
so tame one might without any danger get upon his back, and ride up and down
upon him in that posture. At the same place our Chyrurgeon cut off with a
Raisor a finger of one of the Pages, which had gangrened at Mosco by occasion
of a nail wherewith he had unhappily hurt it.

At Budeva we had the news of the great fire which happened on the 29. of June
at Mosco (which was five days after we came away) consuming a third part of the
Town. I imagined immediately there was something fatal still in our departure,
when I remembered the fire had happened at Archangel also some few days after we
had left that Town. In like manner it was that Lot was preserved, and all his
family at the burning of Sodom.

The 10 of July Master Watson who had been recalled by General Monk in our
first Voyage came again to us at Brunitze, where we were arrived the day
before. He came from England to Riga by Sea with some Equipage for the
Ambassador, and past the rest of the way to us by land. We were surprised at
his arrival, and very much delighted to see him again in Moscovie, whose
absence had given us some regret. The occasion of his return amongst us was
chiefly, that he might have the satisfaction to travail with his Excellence the
rest of our Voyage thorough Moscovy, Sweden and Denmark.

At Novogorod (which signifies New-town) my Lord Ambassador was received very
solemnly. But his Excellence having just entered the Town, there was an unhappy
accident befell an ancient person of quality, that gave some interruption to the
formality. He was very richly apparelled and well mounted, but being weak and
his horse unruly, he was fairly thrown down in the sight of the whole Town, and
received much hurt by his fall. At this Novogorod our Pristaf from Mosco left
us, and committed us to the care of Simon Offonassevitz, with direction to send
back the Tzars Coaches and Tents, as soon as the Ambassador was arrived at the
Frontiers. Which much troubled the Ambassador, to whom Volinskey, one of his
Commissioners, had promised at Mosco, that the Tents should attend him as far
as Riga, in confidence of which promise his Excellence did not trouble himself
to provide any at his own charges. Being disappointed in this manner, and in no
condition to accommodate himself otherwise in that place, no wonder if he
expressed his dissatisfaction, seeing himself lest by this trick in a very ill
posture to travel from the Frontiers to Riga. This Novogorod has been formerly
one of the greatest and best fortified Towns in all Moscovie, of which there
are still some marks remaining round about the Town. But at present it is
reduced, and of no great circumference, however by reason of the Commerce it
injoies it is well peopled. The Lake Ilmin is within a League of the Town, out
of which comes the Volka or Volgda, a very fair River that runs by the Town.

But if we were well received at Novogorod, I must needs acknowledge the
reception we had afterward at Plesco was not inferior, as if the Governors
of these two Towns had been emulous, which should give hi^ Excellence the best
entertainment. Nevertheless by the favor of two accidents the Governor of
Plesco had the advantage; The first was by the unadvisedness of a Gentleman of
Plesco, who had seized, the night before our Entry, upon two horses belonging
to the Ambassador's Train, having found them in the night in his possessions.
The Governor was no sooner informed of this action but he apprehended the
Gentleman, and sen^ him bound to the Ambassador to beg his life which his
Excellence easily granted upon acknowledgment of the indiscretion of the fact.
The other was by the report of a Regiment of Thieves Polanders, that lay in wa^
on purpose for us, which was so common there was scarce any other discourse in
Plesc^ and (as the news went) they were about five hundred, under the Command
of an one-eyed Sergeant. This tidings alarmed us a little, especially when we
were told, they had done much mischief in that Province, and plundered several
Villages. But the Governor of the Town in this case also manifested his
Generosity, and the particular care he had to oblige his Excellence: for he
gave us a Convoy of five hundred foot well armed, to secure our bagage, and
defend our persons against the attempts of this terrible Cyclops: In this place
the Ambassador stayed in expectation of an answer from the Governor General of
Livonia, by the return of the Messenger he had sent on purpose to him from
Mosco the 14. of June, and who had Order to meet him again at Plesco. On the
19. of July, three days after we arrived there, the Messenger came to us with
this Answer from Count Oxenstern the Governor General, that he had already
deputed two Officers to receive his Excellence on the Frontiers, and that he
had Orders from the Crown of Sweden, to defray the charges of his Carriages and
Entertainment from thence to Riga. The Ambassador being surprised with the
Civility of the offer, and with the particular care that Crown had taken to
facilitate his passage thorough Livonia, prepared himself ^mmediately to
depart, but with design if possible to evade so great an Obligation. But before
he came away observing Calthof was not returned, he sent another Letter to
Mosco, making mention of the Extraordinary entertainment he had received from
the Governors of Novogorod and Plesco, as also of the design on foot for the
Carrying back his Tents, and these were the very words of the Letter, which had
the same superscription with the former.

Domine Cancellarie,
QVamvis ea sit nostra, and esse debeat de aquitate and prudentia Serenissimae
Czariae suae Majestatis opinio, ut si non ante saltem post literas meas 30.
Junij Twerae datas Calthofium dimissum esse speremus, quum tamen Plescuam
pervenerim, and nihil adhuc de eo compertum habeam, Veredarium hunc hac sola de
causa Moscuam remitto. Omnino enim, si non vobis (quod sane oporteret) at mihi
tanti est, ne Serenissimi Regis mei mandata, and hujusce subditi sui libertatem
negligere viderer. Iniquissimum enim esset, and a mutua inter Regiam suam
Majestatem and Czaream suam Majestatem benevolentia alienissimum, ut ille quem
Czareae suae Majestati nullo modo obstrictum ulterius aut addictum esse
innotuerit, tamen contra voluntatem suam, and nostram intercessionem, and
vestra promissa diutius detineretur. Quapropter te etiam atque etiam rogo
Domine Cancellarie, ut si Calthofius adhuc vobiscum haereat Serenissimae
Czareae suae Majestati haec exponere velis, ne in re adeo exigua tam magnum
amicitiae detrimentum patiatur. Me autem re magis injuriarum quam beneficiorum
memorem esse Existimetis, hac occasion tibi, adeoque Czareae sua Majestati
significandum esse duxi egregiam Boyarij, Knez, Jvan, Borissovitz, Repenini
erga me in itinere nostro per Novogorodam humanitatem (quam semper praedicabo)
and Majorem etiam si major esse posset Knez, Pheodor, Gregorevitz,
Romadonofsky, in hoc loco comitatem, qui ambo omnibus honoris and benevolentiae
indiciis me cumularunt. Neque enim ipsis imputandum est, si (quod dicitur)
sentoria (de Czareo suo curru minus laboro) in limi te Nihusiano mihi
auferantur, quae Czarea sua Majestas, si been Ockolniohey, Basilium, Volinskoy
intellexi, mihi Rigam usque commodavit, and propter quae ipse alia nostris
impensis mihi comparare omisi. Dona quidem a Czarea sua Majestate mihi oblata,
quoniam ita me decebat, recusavi, non itidem usum eorum quae ad itineris nostri
commoditatem faciebant. Et quum sub Pellibus noluerim, sub Tentoriis certe
pernoctare licuisset. Si autem ita omnino decretum est, non sum adeo mollis ut
per aliquot dies militari more sub dio agere nequeam, ne a Praefecto Suecico
petere videar quae a Czarea sua Majestate, suppeditanda esse credideram. Cui
nihilominus de omnibus beneficiis atque honoribus mihi delatis gratias ago quam
maximas, and ea Domino meo Regi fidelissime recencebo, Vale.

Plescuae, 14. Julii 1664. CARLISLE.


My Lord Chancellor
THough the esteem I have and ought to have of the justice and prudence of his
most Serene Tzarskoy Majesty, persuaded me that Calthof would be dismissed (if
not before) at least as Soon as my Letters from Twere on the 30. of June were
arrived, yet being advanced as far as Plesco, and having no advertisment
thereof, I have dispacht this messenger again to Mosco for that very affair.
Which (though to you it may not appear so considerable as it ought) yet to me
it is of that importance it can not be pretermitted without neglecting the
Commands of the most Serene King my Master, and the liberty of Calthof his
Subject. And indeed it would be unjust and contrary to the mutual amity betwixt
the King my Master and his Tzarskoy Majesty, should he who is manifestly now
under no farther Obligation, or engagement to his Tzarskoy Majesty, be contrary
to his own will, my intercession, and Your promises, detained any longer. I do
make it my request therefore, my Lord Chancellor, that if Calthof be still
amongst You, You would represent these things so effectually to his Tzarskoy
Majesty, that the amity of our sovereigns may receive no diminution from so
small and inconsiderable an occasion. For my own part, lest you should think me
better at remembering injuries than benefits, I have taken this occasion to
signify to You, and by consequence to his Tzarskoy Majesty the great civility
Boyar, Knez, Jvan, Borissovitz, Repenini showed me in my Journey by Novogorod
(which I shall always acknowledge,) and the greater (if greater can be) of Knez,
Pheodor, Gregorevitz, Romadonofsky in this place, both of them loading me at it
were with testimonies of honor and respect. Nor do I think it imputable to
them, if the Tents (for of his Tzarskoy Majesty's coach I am not so solicitous)
be taken from me at the Borders at Nihuisen though if I well understood
Ockolnickey, Basilius, Volinskoy his Tzarskoy Majesty was pleased to spare me
them as far as Riga, and for which reason I had neglected to furnish my self
at my own charges. It is true I did refuse (as became me) his Tzarskoy
Majesty's presents that were sent me, but not those conveniences that were
necessary in my journey. And though I did not for the reasons forementioned
accept of his furs, it might have been allowed me to have slept under his
Tents. However if it be peremptorily decreed, I am not so soft and effeminate
but rather than request those things from the Swedish Governor, that I thought
were to have been supplied by his Tzarskoy Majesty, I can like a Soldier for
some days take my fortune in the fields. I do notwithstanding return many
thanks to his Tzarskoy Majesty for all the honors and favors, I received from
him, and shall make a faithful enumeration of them to the King my Master.

Plesco, the 14. of July 1664. CARLISLE.


This Letter being dispatched, the next day ^y Lord Ambassador departed from
Plesco. ^his Town is not of any great circumfe^ence, but it is very convenient
and pleasant, ^aving a fair River which rises in a Lake about half a League
from it, running by the ^own.

Our Convoy from Plesco to the Frontiers ^eing so good, as I said, we had no
reason to ^pprehend the danger that threatened us, I ^ean the Regiment of
Thieves, who by their ^xploits had got themselves a great Name in ^he Province
of Pscove. We had as I said before, ^e hundred armed foot to secure our bagage,
which marched always before, besides a ^quadron of horse, that attended on the
person of the Ambassador. And if on the one ^de this Convoy was necessary for
our pro^ection, so on the other side, his Excellence ^ooked upon it as a great
honor and repu^ation to see himself the Object of so much ^are and respect. At
every Stage he was ^onourably received amongst the noise of ^rums, and the
Soldiers drawn up in very ^ood Order; and at night had very strong Guards
placed about him. Insomuch that in two days march we arrive at the Frontiers,
without any visible danger. And we had not ^een half an hour on the Frontiers,
but the ^wo Officers deputed from the Governor General of Livonia, and the
Governor of the Castle of Nihuisen, arrived to salute the Ambassador with a
Complement in Frenc^ very obliging and full of Civility. Among other things
they gave him to understand the King and Queen Mother of Sweden attended him
with impatience, and that knowing the difficulty of the Passage from Nihuis^ to
Riga, they had commanded he should (...) accommodated with all things that mig^
expedite his arrival, and be necessary for (...) journey. To which his
Excellence replie^ that he was already surprised to understan^ by the Governor
Generals Letter, the e^traordinary care that Crown had taken (...) his Voyage,
that there was nothing he aspire to with more passion, than to enjoy the honor
of seeing their Majesty's, but that he w^ very desirous to continue his journey
without loading himself with so great an Obligation which yet the
incommodiousness of the Country seemed to engage him to. Bu^ these Gentlemen
from Riga having broug^ store of Provisions along with them which were designed
for us; the Ambassador could not any long time defend himself upon the point.
And indeed we had been but in an (...) posture to have passed those deserts,
had w^ had nothing to depend on, but our own provision and conduct.

Livonia (to speak two words of it by the by) is a Country so desolate, that in
ne^ ^reescore Leagues that we passed from Ni^sen to Riga, we found only two or
three ^owns, and those remarkable for nothing ^t their Antiquity. In short it
is a Country (...) Forests, abounding with a great number (...) Lakes, as well
as Moscovie; and though it ^e not so plain and flat as that, yet it is
suffi^ently fertile in Grass and in Corn. As to the habitants, they are
generally very blockish ^d barbarous, and without contradiction ^finitely less
ingenious than the Moscovites. their Habits and their Caps are like theirs;
^eir Language is as unpleasant as their Be^viour, and manner of Converse, and
they ^rry upon their forheads all the tokens of a ^vage and uncivilized Nature.
For being ^y the frequency of their Wars reduced as ^ey are to an
inconsiderable number, and the ^wedes being in possession of all their Ports ^d
strongest Towns, there remains nothing (...) the Natives but the Tilling of
their ^ound; insomuch as they stand almost in ^e same Condition with the
Swedes, as the ^elotes did formerly with the Lacedaemonians. (...) as the
manner of their Solitude, their Sub^ction, and the poverty they are oppressed
^th, renders them more brutish and dange^us; and we had such experience of
their ^opensity to thieving, we were forced to ^ve still an eye over them as
over Birds of (...) prey. Their Religion is the same with the Swedes, viz. the
Lutheran: but they are so well pleased with the Superstion of the ancient
Pagans, and retain so much of their ridiculous maxims, that it is believed the
most of the^ make but a superficial Profession of the Christian Religion:

But, to return to what follows in ou^ Voyage, I shall give first an account
of the manner of our passage to the borders of Moscovy, after the journey we
had made of above five hundred Leagues cross that vast Country in eleven
months. It is not to be doubted, but the small civility we found in this
barbarous Nation, and the natural disposition each of us had to be returning
toward his own Country, prevailed with us to leave Moscovy with much pleasure
and satisfaction. And though there are many allurements in it, yet the very
conversation of the Inhabitants disgusted us, and every body, but the Great
Duke, being in slavery, we could scarcely believe our selves free, till we were
from amongst them. Whence it was that one of our Company, impatient till he was
out of their Country, and at a distance from the Communication of the
Moscovites, transported to see the Gentlemen from Riga, and their Train that
came to salute the Ambassador, cried out as soon as he descried them, Ay marry,
these people are like Christians indeed; as if the Moscovites had not had so
much as the least resemblance of them. Which questionless had very much
offended the Russes that were with us, had any of them that understood English
taken notice of it, and without contradiction the expression was rash enough,
being spoken before the face of five hundred Moscovites in Arms. At this time
(for it was about noon) there was a great debate where his Excellence should
dine, the cooks having not been able, for want of water, to get any thing
ready. The Swedish Gentlemen pressed the Ambassador to dine in the Castle of
Nihuisen. The Pristaf opposed it very zealously, as well for the natural
jealousy betwixt the two Nations of Swedeland and Moscovie, as for other
reasons. At last after much controversy, in which the Pristaf was very fierce,
it was resolved we should pass the Frontiers, and pitch our Tents by the side
of a brook, under the Castle of Nihuisen. The Ambassador passed thither on
hors-back in a quarter of an hour, so that in a short time his dinner was got
ready. The Swedish Gentlemen withdrew thereupon into the Castle, the Pristaf
and the Captains of the Guards (who bare us company into the Country of
Livonia) according to their custom, dined with his Excellence. After dinner
they took their leaves of the Ambassador, and the Swedish Gentlemen sent their
Coaches to attend him into the Castle, where we were received with several
pieces of Cannon: which to us was news, the Moscovite using no such Ceremony in
their Salutations, as I have intimated before. We had amongst us at this time a
young Polish youth who had been brought up in Moscovie and in their Religion,
which concealed himself privately in order to his escape, and finding the
Russians gone, he was transported with joy to find the house of the Ambassador
(in which he had served some months) a place of his refuge and liberty.

We were very well treated at the Castle that night, which gave us great hopes
(as indeed it did happen) the remainder of ou^ Voyage would not be so
troublesome. And to speak truth we had always a good quantity of victuals,
which was much better dressed than in Moscovie, our Cooks having Kitchens o^ huts
at least for convenient dressing of ou^ meat, whereas from Mosco to Nihuisen
they had nothing ordinarily but the open field.

But if on the one side we were well satisfied, on the other side we suffered
much from the manner of our Travailing; For, beside the small number of horses
which were provided us, they were so lean and lanke bodyed, that there was
great Art required to the making of them go. And the most of them were so ill
accoutred, that they had neither sadles nor bridles, and those sadle^ there
were, being for the most part of massy wood, tortured us in a most incredible
manner; besides, with all this many of them had not above one styrrup if any at
all. In so much that in passing the limits of Moscovie, we found as great an
alteration almost, as those do at sea who pass the Equinoctial line: which made
us in love with that good Country where we had as to those conveniences all
things we could desire. However this incommodity was sometimes a recreation to
us, some of us making their misery an occasion of their mirth. A Page of ours
(amongst the rest) was the first Actor in ^his Tragedy, at our departure from
Nihuisen ^e was mounted upon a small blind, and very lean horse, who had
neither bridle nor ^adle, his whole furniture being a simple lord made into a
halter, and that so short that he had much ado to make use of it. Being arrived
upon the draw bridge, the horse ^ell on a sudden to capring, and rushing forward
insuch manner at the noise of the cannon, that the Page very much surprised,
thought ^t best to leave him alone in that Kind of ex^rcise. And so the horse
went away as he ^ame without Eyes, or Sadle, or bridle, and ^he Page after that
time made his Voyage al^ost wholly in the wagons. Some there ^ere that day that
were forced to march on ^ot for want of horses, Others were so tired ^ith them,
they were sometimes constrained ^o the same thing for their refreshment.

But if we suffered in our travailing we were not much better accomodated in our
Lodgings, the most of us being forced to make use of some Barn, or Kitchen to
put our beds in to pass away the night. The Gentlemen for the most part lay in
their little coaches they had brought along with them from Moscovie. True it is
we were entertained in three or four Castles, and Marienborough amongst the
rest, where our accommodation was something better.

At Riga, the Ambassador was very well received, they did him all the honor we
could possibly desire, nor did he appear on his side less pompous and
magnificent. But our entry being followed immediately with terrible tempests,
and after the noise of the Canon with dismal claps of thunder, it was looked
upon immediately by the superstitious people as an ill omen and presage.

Of the Ambassadors Risidence at Riga.
RIga is situate upon the bank of the Duina, a River that rises (as has been
said before) in the Province of Twere o^ Twersco in Moscovie, and empties it
self in to the Baltic Sea some four leagues from this City. It is a Town of no
great extent, but compact, and very well peopled. Its buildings are all of
stone or brick, and fortifyed with a good wall, good ditches, and Ramparts on
that side toward Moscovie: besides toward the River it has a strong and well
for^efied Castle, in which the Governor Ge^eral of Livonia keeps his
residence. But this Town is principally considerable in respect of ^he great
commerce which it draws from all ^arts, especially by the Baltic Sea, from
whence the Vessels come up the Duina to the ^ery Gates of the Town. In winter
they maintain a great trade with Moscovy by the ^onvenience of their sledges,
in which the Mer^hants convey themselves and their Commo^ities as far as
Plesco, Novogorod, or Mosco. On the other side of the River lies Courland which
depends in part on the Duke of that ^ame, whose ordinary residence is at
Mittau ^ome six Dutch miles from Riga. The Lan^uage they speak in Riga is High
Dutch, and ^he Religion they profess is the Lutheran.

The next day after our arrival in this place, ^ount Oxenstern made a visit to
the Ambas^dor, who the next day returned him the ^ke in the Castle. His
Excellence expressed him^lf very sensible of the care which he had ta^en to
facilitate his Journey, and that he might (...) some measure discharge himself
of the Obli^ation he had to that Crown, for the expense which had been made in
his favor, and that the King his Master might not be brought into any new
Engagements, he made a proffer of reimbourcing them again. But the Governor
General replied, that what was done was by express order of his King, who was
willing to take that slender opportunity to testify the joy he conceived at his
arrival, and designed not thereby to put any Obligation upon his Majesty of
great Britain.

My Lord Ambassador was in like manner visited by the Mayor and Senators of the
Town.

Fifteen days we stayed in this place, partly in expectation of a Man of War,
that was to come from Stockholm to transport us, and partly for a good wind. So
that we had time enough to refresh our selves, after the Voyage we had now
finished. And indeed most of us did very well overcome the fatigues of our
Journey, especially by the help of the feather beds they use in Riga, as they
d^ in Swedeland, Germany, and Danemarke. Nevertheless these kind of double beds
being little in use in England, many of us could no^ endure them, and were
altogether surprise^ to find our selves sinking into a quagmire o^ feathers,
which constrained us to lie roule^ up in a heap. But they were no sooner in
commoded in this posture, but they began t^ declaim against these kind of beds,
in (...) much as one somewhat a Critic. took occ^sion to call them Beds of
Ignorance, according to that expression of the Poet.

Non jacet in molli veneranda scientia Lecto.

Learning's not found in Beds of Down.

For three days after our arrival we were entertained at the Charge of the
Town, in so much as the 7. of August was the first day his Excellence began to
provide meat for himself, since our arrival at Archangel. During our residence
at this place, the weather proved so ill in respect of the great store of
rain, lightning, and thunder which happened every day, that we were forced to
lead a very sedentary and recluse life. But that which was our greatest
consolation was, the joy we conceived in being out of all commerce with the
Moscovits, to find our selves amongst Christians of very good conversation; and
after a tedious association with a people barbarous and rude, to fall amongst
those that were civil and urbane. In short, to observe an exquisite neatnes and
cleanlynes in all things, after having lived amongst the Moscovits after a very
slovenly manner.

The 10. of August Count Oxenstern entertained the Ambassador with so much
splendour and Pomp, that (to give account of it in few words) it was more like
the entertainment of a King than an Ambassador. The place resounding with an
admirable consort of Music, Trumpets, Ketle-drums, and Cannon^ and every thing
seeming with emulation to contribute to the publication of the glory of this
Embassy. This entertainment being over the Ambassador prepared himself to
embarque as soon as possible, the Man of War being arrived, which was a Fregat
called the Amaranthe, carrying forty brass pieces mounted. My Lords Coach and
horses being to be transported by themselves, there was a shallop hired on
purpose for that.

Of his Excellencies Voyage from Riga to Stockholme upon the Baltick-Sea.
On the 18. of August the Ambassador departed from Riga by water, to go on
shipboard, about a League and an half from thence, where our Vessel was at
anchor, but the wind was so contrary, that we were constrained to yield to its
violence, and put to shore in the sight of the whole Town, and make the rest of
our way toward the ship by Land. We were no sooner out of the Town, but the
Castle made all things echo again, with the noise of their Artillery. But when
we came near the Vessel, we found the wind blowing so fiercely against us, that
we were glad to take a resolution of retiring ^o a Country House hard by, where
we past ^way the Night ill enough.

The next morning the wind not being so ^igh, the Captain sent two Boats to
bring us board, the Skif which carried the Ambas^ador came first to the Ship,
which saluted ^im at his Entry with twenty pieces of Can^on. The other being
more laden, arrived ^ot so soon, but coming close to the Ship, it ^caped very
narrowly being broken in pieces ^y it. For by the negligence of him that
^ommanded, they not slackning their sails when they came near to go on board,
the ^oat ran against the Ship with full sails, to ^he no small amazement of
those that were ^n it. Yet by good fortune the Boat being ^ery strong, endured
the concussion so well, (...) escaped with a little cleft in the Prow only.
When we came aboard, we were surprised to ^ee the Man of War so admirably neat,
and and all things in so good Order, that there ^as no great difficulty for us
to find sufficient ^ccommodation. But that which was most wonderful to us, was
the prodigious number ^f Cannon-shot, which they made in this Voyage, there
being scarce a Dinner in which ^hey shot not off above forty great Guns, whilst
at the Ambassadors Table they were ^rinking the Healths of the King of England
and King of Swedeland, and the Queens of ^oth the one and the other Nation.
Besides when ever the Ambassador went on shore for his divertisement, whilst
the Ship lay at anchor, they gave him always four guns, at his going out, and
as many when he came back.

At last on the 22. we set sail, but it was only to make a League and an half,
being forced to attend a proper wind to carry us, over certain Sand-banks, that
lie in the Mouth of the River, so as we cast anchor again near the Fort of
Dunemund, where we continued two days, having the Shallop with us, in which our
horses were embarked.

The 24. the Wind was favorable, so that we passed the Mouth of the River.
Upon which the Ship saluted the Fort with four or five great Guns, and the Fort
to requite us, gave us above forty, all laden with bullets which they directed
with that skill, we could, hear most of them whistling betwixt our sails, and
almost at the same time see them falling into the Sea at a great distance
before us. Some there were among us, who not assured of the dexterity of their
Gunners, chose rather to withdraw themselves under Deck, than stand exposed to
the danger of beholding them. For some time we sailed by the Coast of Curland
by the favor of the Wind; but toward night it turned so contrary, that,

On the 26. we were enforced to cast anchor by the Domeznez, which is a very
dangerous Island, by reason of many Sand-banks that incompass it: for which
cause there are constantly every night great fires made upon the Shores, for
the direction of such as are at Sea. And here it was we had time enough to
discharge our selves of our provision, which was laid in but for six days, but
what was remaining was so well managed by the Ambassador, we had wherewithal
to subsist till we came on shore. For he retrenched his own Table, not only of
superfluities, but necessaries, confining himself to one small meal in a day:
true it is we had music enough to to supply our want of victuals. But most of
us not being able to live upon Air and Wind like the Camelions, were glad to
eat such meat as the Captain of the Ship could furnish us with, which by
misfortune at that time was almost all corrupted. A strange thing it was to
find our selves in a starving condition, in a Voyage only of an hundred
Leagues, after we had past another of seven hundred and fifty, in great, plenty
and abundance. We were in a strait for every thing, as well as fresh meat; Beer
and fresh water amongst us were grown inestimable. And from hence it was, that
his Excellence reserving for his own Table that small quantity of Beer he had
left, he distributed freely to the greatest part of his Domestics, a good
proportion of his Spanish Wine, which was to serve them instead of Beer. At
first this Wine seemed to sweeten and alleviate the misery they were in, but
they quickly found it an aggravation rather: for there was nothing almost
excited thirst like it, and in a place where there was no possibility of
getting any thing to assuage it. But by Providence it fared not so ill with our
Shallop, for that no sooner observed the extreme violence of the Wind, but it
returned immediately for Riga. And it was very happy it did so, otherwise it
would have had much ado to have escaped the danger of a Storm that took us on
the 28. at Night, which indeed was very terrible and extraordinary.

The 29. the Wind being somewhat fallen, we weighed anchor, with design to
endeavor the doubling the Cape of Domesnez, which we happily performed, and at
night after a little calm the wind came about, and proved very favorable and
propitious. So that besides Domesnez, we had the sight of several other Islands
in this Voyage, as Runen, Abrick, and Ouzel. And it is this multitude of Isles,
that makes Navigation so difficult in the Baltic Sea, for from thence it
comes, that they meet every moment with Rocks, or Shelves, or banks of Sand.
And forasmuch as many Tacks must be made to avoid them, there is ordinarily a
necessity of several winds to make a very small Voyage. Upon which
consideration amongst others, his Excellence chose rather to ride three days
at anchor before Domesnez, exposed to the extremities of the weather, than to
return to Riga, and lose the advantage of the progress he had made already.

The 31. we arrived at the Rocks, called the Shares, where we found a passage
betwixt the high rocks, so strait, there was scarce room enough for our ship,
so as we were in all points in distress. When we had past that place, we cast
anchor, attending another Wind proper to carry us to Stockholm thorough the
rest of the Rocks. In the mean time the Ambassador dispatched Mr. Mar^el his
Secretary, and Mr. Tailor his Steward in the Boat to Stockholm, from whence we
were then not above seven Dutch Miles, or fourteen French Leagues. The
Secretary was sent to give notice of the Ambassadors arrival, and to inform
himself at what time he was to make his Entry into the Town. Mr. Tailor was to
prepare his House, and to make provision of Victuals, through scarcity of
which, we were at this time reduced to some Extremity.

The first of September we advanced some Leagues amongst the Rocks, which
divided the Sea into several Channels, as they had been so many Rivers: And as
the passages are very narrow, so we found several pieces of Ships that had been
wreckt there. But that which seemed most strange to me was, that I observed
most of these Rocks almost covered with trees, though I could not perceive any
substance, that could give them Nourishment, and where their Roots could
fasten; for there is nothing to be discerned, but solid matter and entire stone.

The next morning betimes, the Master of the Ceremonies came aboard our Ship,
to signify to the Ambassador from their Majesty's, the King and Queen Mother,
the satisfaction they received at his arrival. But before he could deliver his
Complement, we escaped ^ery narrowly from being cast away. For having weighed
our anchors in the morning, to take advantage of the wind that was something
favorable, the Pilot doubling a point to gain the greater benefit by it, the
Vessel on a sudden ran so near the Rocks; the Pilot in a great fright was
forced to tack immediately with all the dexterity he was able, which was not so
great, but the Ship struck with her Poop as she was turning about. But by the
Grace of God it was done without any other mischief than a concussion, that
waked and affrighted too, all that were then asleep in the Ship. After this our
Vessel was managed so well, that at length we gained the point that was so near
destroying us, and came to anchor within a League of Stockholm. At this time
the Master of the Horse, who was arrived the day before, came aboard the Man of
war, ^o give an account to the Ambassador of his Voyage, and amongst the rest,
of an accident ^efel one of his Coach-horses at Sea, which ^e had ordered to be
thrown over board, being fallen ill, beyond any hopes of recovery. ^n the mean
time my Lord Ambassadors Lady ^eing big with child, thought convenient to get
ashore as soon as she could.

The 8. of September the Ambassador made his Entry, where he received all
possible expressions of an Amity extraordinary. True ^t is, there was not that
Bravery and Ceremony as at his Entry at Mosco, but I dare affirm, there was
much more Sincerity, Frankness, and Decorum. And whereas in that the Moscovites
made demonstration only of their Grandeur and Vanity; The Swedes in this made
no other expression, but of Kindness and Civility. Their Artillery, which is so
dreadful in the wars, was become here the grateful Proclaimer of Peace and
Affection, nothing being to be heard about the Town for an hour together, but
the noise of their Cannon and great Guns. For as soon as the Ambassador had left
the ship, and was entered with his Train into the Boats, that were sent him by
the King, the Fregat gave us a whole round with his Cannon, and whilst we were
making for the shore, they saluted him with many from land, so that they made a
very strange clattering amongst the Rocks. As we past along, we had the sight
of a Diver, that came up out of a place twenty fathoms deep, into which they
let him down out of a shallop with a Cord, to look for the Guns of a Man of
War, that had been cast away there. He was clad all in leather, and sat under
a certain Engine, something like a bell, in which he said himself, he had space
enough to breathe, the water coming no higher than his breast. After this we
came to a Bridge covered over with Carpets of Tapestry, at which place his
Excellence was complemented from their Majesty's by one of the principal
Senators. And from thence he was conveyed in the Kings Coach, to a House set a
part for Ambassadors, Their Majesty's having joined several of their Gentlemen,
Pages, and Footmen to his Train. The Liveries my Lord Ambassador had in this
place, were new Liveries, brought him with several other goods by Mr. Watson to
Riga; They were (like those which they wore at Mosco) of Scarlet cloth, the
King of Englands Color, but trimed up after another fashion, according to the
Mode at that time, and in all points very rich and handsome.

Of the Ambassadors Residence at Stockholm.
HIs Excellence having spent but five weeks in this Town, I shall not have many
things to speak upon occasion of this Embassy, ^he principal end whereof was to
declare in ^he behalf of the King of great Britain, the ^incere desire his
Majesty had to enter into a ^ricter correspondence with the King of Swede^and.
But before we enter upon this subject, ^t will not be inproper to premise a
word or ^wo concerning this Court.

The word Stockholm is properly the name of the Isle in which the City is
built, which ^sland is called Stockholm, which signifies the ^sle of the Tronk
or body of a Tree ( Holme ^ignifying an Island and Stock the trunck of a Tree.)
For the Capital City being burned of ^ld, they which laid the foundation of
this did it (as they relate it) in this manner. They ^hrew the Trunck of a tree
into the water, and ^esolved that at what Island soever the same Trunck first
rested, in that place they would ^uild their Town, and the Trunck resting in
^his place, the Town was accordingly, built ^here and called Stockholm, as the
Island also ^s. The Town is very compact but even with ^he suburbs is not
altogether so big as Roven ^n France. The buildings are most of stone, yet some
also of wood; Of the first sort there are several very magnificent, and amongst
them that of General Wrangel, and the Chancellors. There are some parts of the
Town which being built off from the Island, stand like parts of Venice upon
piles, so that the Sea flows under them. The Palace has nothing in it very
remarkable, saving that it stands on the bank of the Sea, and has a fair
prospect of several Ships that ride hard by, and the Kings Men of War amongst
the rest. But that which is most considerable in Stockholm is, that in so
cragged and unpleasant a place, the people should be so courteous, and
friendly, and that amongst so many Rocks and uninhabited Islands (which are as
so many fortresses to the Town) we should find a Court so civil and benign. In
Moscovie we had experience of the contrary, where in a Country pleasant and
beautiful we found a people whose manner of living is very rude and austere;
Whereas here in a place that seems to be the very refuse of nature, we found
all manner of humanity and politeness. Besides the peculiar language of the
Country, the nobility do with great industry addict themselves to the French,
and indeed they speak it as freely as if it were their own. Their humor and
manner of living has great affinity with the French also, they are free and
open hearted, and no less affectors of Gallantry. As for their Religion they
follow, as they do in Denmark, the doctrine of Luther.

His Excellence being arrived at this Court, ^e was for three days entertained
at the ^harges of the Swedish King, and on the third which was a Sunday, he had
Audience from his Majesty. I shall not delay my self so much as to make any
description of their Ceremonies, they being the same that are ordinarily used
in other Courts of Europe. This only (...) shall say in relation to the person
of the King, that at that time he was not fully arrived at the ninth year of
his age, and yet was at that age endued with all the perfections so young a
Prince is capable of. He was very handsome, and had a certain kind of
cheerfulnes and alacrity in his Looks, that made all those that were present
admire him. In short he is a young King, in whom all the ^eroick virtues of his
Ancestors seem to revive. His hair was very light, his habit cloth of silver,
with his cloak and sword, and a ^aire plume of white feathers in his hat. He
stood before his chair of State under a Ca^opy with the Regents of his Kingdom
on each side of him, besides a great number of other of his Nobles. His
Excellence, as soon as ^e approached, after his reverences, made this ^omplement
to him, which the young Prince ^eceived with an admirable gravity and grace.

Most Puissant and most Serene King.
THe King my Master has sent me to Your Majesty to cultivate and celebrate the
Friendship already happily established betwixt Your Majesty's, to congratulate
in His stead and partake of Your Majesty's present felicity, wishing You the
same for the future, and to assure You, that wherein the affection of the King
my Master may add to all Your blessings, He will no ways be wanting. And when
His Majesty says that He speaks not only of that present Amity of State
betwixt You, He thinks friendship but narrow which is confined in Treaties, bu^
He understands therewith a personal and most particular affection to Your
Majesty an affection large and deep as the heart of Princes, without condition,
without reserve, upon all occasions wherein H^ may gratify Your Majesty. And
even the seeming lateness of these professions is s^ far from any contrariety
on his Maje^ties part, that indeed He has herein ^iven that precedence to this
Embassy, which the end has over the beginning, to ^e first in intention though
last in exe^ution; and if there be any fault it must ^est wholly upon my
misfortune, coming from a climate and people where it costs (...) much time to
do nothing. But therefor I cannot but so much the more esteem ^e honor I now
have to contemplate so ^reat a Monarch, who are in so young ^ars so
accomplished a Prince, and as he ^^ce said of that little Hercules, Parvusque
videri
Sentirique ingens.
and in so excellent a model represent all ^e magnanimity and grandeur of Your
^oyal Ancestors. I congratulate the hap^ness of Your Kingdom, for which it ^mes
that Gods Providence would, to (...) the more exemplary, alter its usual
^axime: and what he once threatened as a malediction, has made it the greatest
blessing of Your Subjects to have a Prince in His nonage to rule over them: And
in conclusion, I profess and offer my self to Your Majesty as a most ready,
willing, and (I heartily wish) as proper an instrument in all occasions to
witness and approve his Majesty's most sincere and constant desires of a most
perfect correspondence with Your Majesty, to Your mutual contentments and the
further welfare of both Your Kingdoms.

His Excellence having delivered himself in English with his hat on, his
Secretary rendered what the Ambassador had spoken i^ the following Latin.

Domine Rex
DOminus Rex meus ad Majestatem Vestra^ me legavit, ut excolerem and
concelebrare^ amicitiam inter Majestates Vestras jam optim^ auspiciis
contractam, ut gratularer, and sua vi^ participarem praesentem Majestatis
Vestrae fel^ citatem (eandem etiam in posterum augurando^ utque Majestati
Vestrae confirmarem, quod (...) quo modo fortunis Vestris superaddere suo
affectu, and contribueri possit, nulla in re Majestati Vestrae defuturam. Et
quum Majestas sua haec dicit, non tantum de presenti publica inter Majestates
Vestras and sua Regna societate loquitur, angustiorem illam amicitiam existimat
quae foederum hactenus and tractatuum veluti cancellis circumscribitur. Sed
intimam quandam and singularem benevolentiam innuit, benevolentiam quantum ipsa
Regum corda effutissimam and profundam, sine condition, sine limite, quacunque
in re Majestati Vestrae gratificare and commodare possit. Ne vero hoc tardius
quam pro summo, quo Majestatem vestram complectitur honor profiteri videatur,
hoc ipsum Majestati Vestrae honori datum est ut quo modo finis initia
antecedit, ita haec ad Majestatem Vestram Legatio, posterior quidem Executione,
sed meditamento and consilio prima existeret. Si autem alicubi hujus morae
culpa residat, sola mea fortuna argui potest, utpote qui ab illa regione and
gente recens adveniam ubi ad nihil agendum non nimori tempore opus Erat. Sed eo
jam impensius mihi gratulor dum Majestatem Vestram tandem con^emplor, in tam
tenera aetate jam consummatum Principem, de quo uti de parvo illo Hercule
merito dici potest.

Parvusque videri
Sentirique ingens
Et in quo tanquam in perfectissimo modulo heroicam omnium Majorum Vestrorum
magnanimitatem, caeteraque Regii tam animi quam corporis lineamenta
recognoscimus and videmus. Nec possum Regni Vestri fortunas satis laudare,
quibus ut magis velisicetur, ipsa Divina Providentia cursum suum mutavit, and
quod suo olim populo interminata est in summam subditorum vestrorum
faelicitatem convertit faciendo ut Pupillus super eos regnaret. De caetero
memet ipsum offero and profiteor uti paratissimum utinam and aptissimum
instrumentum ad contestandum and approbandum omni occasion constantissimum and
sincerissimum Majestatis suae vo^um perfectissimae, cum Majestate Vestra
amicitiae and societatis ad mutuum Majestatum Vestrarum gaudium and quodcunque
ulterius Regnorum Vestrorum emolumentum.

After this Interpretation, the Count Magnus Gabriel de la Guard returned an
answer in the Swedish language in the name of his Master the King, which answer
was likewise rendered in Latin. He said the King his Master thought himself much
honored by so splended an Embassy, in which his Majesty of great Britain had
done him the honor to salute him, and congratulate the felicity of his
Government: That he also bore his part in the prosperity of the King of great
Britain, and that on his side he should be always ready to entertain a nearer
and more strict amity with him. And at ^ength he intimated how great value and
^steem the King his Master had for the person of the Ambassador.

The next day my Lord Ambassador had audience of the Queen Mother in her own
appartement. She is a Princess which, besides the graces of her mind, is no
less embellisht with the advantages of her person. She was under a Canopy
before her Chair with several Ladies and Gentlemen of the Court attending her.
His Excellence being advanced near, delivered his Compliment bare in this
manner.

Madam,
THe King my Master has laid a peculiar Command upon me to salute and
congratulate Your Majesty on His behalf, both in respect of Your Quality ^s so
great a Queen, and of Your relation ^o the Government of this Kingdom with
which He is at amity, and of Your happiness of being Mother to a Prince his
Friend, who makes already so great a part of the discourse, and hopes, as He
will one day of the history of Christendom. His Majesty my Master rejoices
extremely in the happy constitution of all Your affairs, and under God
attributes it much to Your Majesty's Prudence, that in the conjuncture of so
young a King, yet there is no possibility of other contention here, then that
decent contest, whether You or the Kingdom have a greater share in Him. And his
Majesty my Master offers himself as a third to foment so amiable a controversy,
being resolved never to hold himself in neutrality thorough such blessed wars
of friendship and affection, as in all other things, He says he shall be most
happy to witness the singular esteem and honor, that for all these reasons He
bears to Your Majesty's person. The Qeen my Sovereign Lady has charged me
with all commands of the like nature to express how amorous and how great an
admirer She is of Your Royal person and virtues, and most desirous of showing
by all means the great honor She retains and cherishes for your Majesty, to
whom I beg leave on mine own part to present all due honor and service.

This Complement his Excellencies Secretary immediately interpreted into French.

My Lord Ambassador after this Audience employed most of that little time he
had to stay in that Court, in bringing the Amity and Alliance between these two
Crowns to a nearer and firmer Connection. And this was the reason he had several
conferences with the principal Ministers of that Kingdom both in public and
private. Amongst other things he intimated the design the King his Master had
to enter into a strict League with that Crown and the Kingdom of Danemark, he
demonstrated the great advantages would accrue thereby, and that without doubt
the security of the three Kingdoms of England, Swedeland, and Danemark would
principally depend thereupon. That for this reason his Majesty of great Britain
deputed two Gentlemen in quality of his Envoies Extraordinary, one to this
Court, and the other into Danemark, to the end this affair might be brought to
a happy Conclusion. The design was acceptable enough in this Court, which
always expressed a great inclination of uniting themselves more strictly with
the Crown of England. And as there seems to be naturally betwixt the two
Nations of England and Swedeland, a kindness and propensity one to the other,
so was it very material, that so good a principle should be actuated and
employed, and that Art might give perfection to Nature.

His Excellence interceded likewise in the behalf of several English Merchants
and others, that either had there some business of concernment, or that desired
some favor or other. And in this respect also my Lord Ambassador found this
Court so favorable, that he was sooner weary of asking, than they were of
gratifying his Lordship.

There being at Stockholm three Residents, one from France, the other from
Danemark, and the third from Holland, his Excellence had several Conferences
with each of them, and treated them afterward one after another with all
honorable entertainment.

In the mean time his Excellence had the honor to be regaled by their
Majesty's, the King and Queen Mother, in a most obliging manner, in a small
Palace some few Leagues from Stockholm; where as soon as he was arrived, his
Excellence was received with a Col^ation, and after he was shown all the
Curio^ities in the Castle, he was carried to Dinner with the King and the Queen
Mother. The King drank to the Ambassador the King of Englands health, but
drinking it with more zeal than ordinary, and the glass being too ^ig, it
happened he spilt a good part of the Wine upon his cloths; which put his Majesty
so out of countenance, that he looked as he would willingly have drunk it again
with more caution, if by that means he could have got that disaster forgotten.
After Dinner his Excellence went a hunting in a fair Park well stocked with
Deer. The King was there on Hors-back also, and observing his Excellence
scrupulous of shooting a large Deer that was within his reach, he asked him why
he did not shoot, who answering, that a smaller Deer would be sufficient for
him; the King replied he should take no care for that, if he left but one he
might dispose of the rest as he pleased. At length his Excellence retired after
a long chase, he being forced to shoot 2. or 3. times before the Do would
fall, and being of his own killing, it was sent immediately to his house.

Some few days after there was a great Ball at which my Lord Ambassador was
desired to be present: where we had opportunity to see the great Gallants of
Stockholm, and the politeness of those that made the most gloriou^ part of that
Court. Two days after his Exce^lence had the curiosity to go and see the King
greatest Men of War, which where then a Anchor near the Town, where indeed w^
found his Majesty was very well provided This visit ended in a very fair
collation which the Count Stenbock Admiral of Swedelan^ made for his
Excellence, in which he was entertained with Trumpets, Drums and Cannon. The
next day his Excellence was treated again with extraordinary pomp by the
Chancellor in one of his Country houses some mile^ from Stockholm, in the
Company of the principal nobility of that Court, where he received all possible
demonstrations of the friendship and honor they bore to his person, every
thing corresponding with his Dignity. As soon as he was arrived he was
presented with the Collation and excellent music, after that he had the
diversion for half an hour to see nine Earls run at the Ring in his presence
with great agility and address. From thence he was attended to the Table, where
he found enough to indulge every one of his senses, they remaining almost four
hours at the Table. Amongst other things there was a noble concert of Violins,
of Trumpets, Ketle-Drums, and at his departure of Cannon. And this
Entertainment was the occasion of another the next day in the Ambassadors
house, where his Excellence regalled the (...) me Company again with all manner
of ^anckness and civility.

The 3. of October his Excellence and all his ^tinue were treated again by the
English ^erchants residing in Stockholm. But this ^east was scarce over when
there happened a ^atal Quarrel betwixt two of the Ambassa^ors Gentlemen, one of
which was a German ^ollonel, whom his Excellence had received unto his Family
at Mosco, in the quality of a ^entleman of his Train. The other that kil^ed him
being of his acquaintance had lent ^im a considerable sum of money, with
promise and expectation to have it suddenly ^epaid. The Colonel having been a
prisoner ^ome time in Mosco, put himself with this ^oney into a good Equipage:
but instead ^f repaying it, as he had promised, he in^ratefully contented
himself with giving him ^ll language from time to time. So as being ^oth of
them present at this Feast, they took ^ccasion as soon as my Lord Ambassador was
^etired, to decide the controversy by the Sword. The Combat was fatal to the
Colonel, who received his deaths wound at the first pass, and he which brought
the first Tidings of it to the Ambassadors house, was ^he person himself that
killed him, who not contented to triumph amongst us, went out unto the streets
to declaim against his adversary, and publish the good office he had done in
exterminating a person that was not worthy to live amongst men. But however h^
was satisfied with himself, he was presentl^ apprehended in the midst of his
exultation and clapped in Prison, whilst his Excellenc^ (who was not yet
acquainted with the accident) was taking his ordinary repose. Bu^ the next
morning, as soon as he was informe^ of the business, his Excellence examined al^
the circumstances himself, and finding by a^ concurrence of evidence, that came
in against the Colonel, that the other had received the injury in the Quarrel,
he judged it a^ good ground to discharge him of his imprisonment, who had run
himself into it by his imprudence and indiscretion. It was deposed against the
Colonel, that he was a quarrelsome person, of an ill life, that he had nothing
but formal and exterior honesty, that he had cheated his adversary in matters
of Importance, and that upon the demand of his money, he had provoked him to
fight. This Evidence being confirmed, it was thought solid enough to justify
the business in some measure, so as the Defendant was discharged, but out of
respect to his Excellence he removed himself for some time from his attendance,
and went into Danemark to stay there till we came.

Mr. Henry Coventry being arrived at Stockholm in quality of Envoy
Extraordinary from his Majesty of great Britain, who having sent (...) Man of
War to attend the Ambassador to ^openhagen, his Excellence prepared with all
^eed for his departure for Danemark. But before his departure, his Lady was
obliged to ^ake a Visit to the Queen, for though she had before excused her
self by reason of her being ^ith Child, yet the Queen expressed so great desire
to see her, that she could no longer ^rbear paying her Majesty her respects in
the ^alace. Her Ladyship had not been long with ^e Queen (who discoursed with
her all the ^hile by the assistance of an Interpreter) but ^e King came in to
salute her, and a while after she took leave of both their Majesty's.

About this time the Ambassador had received noble present from the King, which
was a ^edail of himself, with a rich Sword set ^ith diamonds round about the
Hilt, and ^e pummel. For which cause his Excellence, that he might in some sort
make an acknow^^dgment of the value of the Present he recei^ed by the present
he made to the Gentlemen ^ages, Musicians, and other of the King and ^ueens
servants that had been employed about his Excellence during the entertainment
^e had there since his arrival, he gave them ^ear a thousand Crowns in Ducats
to be ^estributed according to their ranks. The ^arshal or Steward of the house
had given ^im for his share in a silver purse threescore Ducats, he that
introduced him to the Ceremonies had five and twenty in a purse of silver
likewise, his Cupbearer and Carver and the principal Gentlemen that attended
her Ladyship in an apartement where she had a Tabl^ by her self had each of
them twenty Ducats i^ a purse of silver, the rest was distribute^ without
purses.

The 11. of October in the night, his Excellenc^ took his leave of the King
and Queen Mother, and this was the complement which h^ addressed first to the
King in English.

Sir,
HIs Majesty having thus far satisfied by me the obligation due to that sincere
Friendship betwixt the two Crowns, has now commanded me hence. It was
necessary He should command me, otherwise like those that observe the Stars, I
might have forgot my self i^ admiring your Luster, so pleasant has i^ been to
me to see Your young Majesty sparkle among the Regents, and make up with them
the proper number of the Northern Constellation. I shall confirm his Majesty in
all that he has heard ^itherto of Your Majesty's Greatness and Virtues, in
which I assure You none ^oth more rejoice and take part than his Majesty. And
He has in the mean time ^ommanded me still to reiterate the same ^rofessions
of a cordial and universal ^ffection and friendship toward Your Majesty. For
mine own part I shall only ^esire this Character from Your Majesty, that seeing
the friendship betwixt Your Majesty's was so great that it could not ^e
augmented, however I have not dimi^ished it. In Conclusion, I render mine ^wn
thanks to your Majesty, entering ^owever all Your Royal favors upon His
Majesty's account, and shall heartily ^ray, that the same Amity may still last
^etwixt the two Crowns, the same Union ^ay always continue in your Majesty's
^ounsels, that your Majesty's Felicity and ^irtues may still increase at the
same ^roportion, and that the Triumphs of your Peace may surmount and outlast
the Trophies of all your Ancestors.

This afterward was rendered in Latin in this manner.

Domine Rex,
QVum Majestas sua Dominus meus clementissimus mutuis amicitiae inter duas
Coronas Officiis hactenus per me satisfecerit, Suo jam mandato accersor.
Accersi hinc and revocari opus erat, ne quod Stellarum studiosis usu venit in
splendore Majestatis vestrae contemplando semper defixus haererem, tantae
volu^tatis fuit Majestatem vestram admirari, ut inter Regentes scintillet, and
justum cum illis Septentrionum suorum Sydus ac numerum implere videatur.
Majestati suae de Prosperitate and Virtutibus vestris omnia fi delissime
narrabo, quo nihil optatius aut jucundius Majestati suae potest accidere. Ego
interim Majestatis suae jussu eadem qua prius asseveratione integerrimam and
constantissimam suam amicitiam Majestati vestrae confirmo. Et qu^m ea sit inter
Majestates Vestras mutua benevolentia ut augeri nequeat, sperabo saltem eam per
me non esse imminutam. Majestati vestrae gratias de regiis suis beneficiis
summas ago, quas quoniam ipse refer non possum, Regem etiam spondeo
debitorem. Quod reliquum est Deum Optimum Maximum discessurus veneror, and
precor ut eadem amicitia inter Majestates vestras and suas Coronas aeterna
permaneat, ut idem animorum and consiliorum consensus in hoc suo Regimine
perpetuetur, ut Majestatis vestrae Gloria and Virtutes paribus incrementis
semper eodem modo assurgant, utque pacis vestrae Triumphi Majorum Vestrorum
Trophaea excedere possint and superare.

To this it was answered in Swedish and in Latin, That amongst the great marks
his Majesty had received of the sincere Amity of his Majesty of great Britain,
he esteemed it a particular one, that he had chosen his Excellence the Earl of
Carlisle amongst all the Nobility of England for his Ambassador Extraordinary
toward him. And having made reflection upon the Prudence and Dexterity which he
had used to unite the Interests of the two Kingdoms of Swedeland and England,
he heartily wished he might have had a longer enjoyment of his presence there.
But seeing he was recalled by his Majesty of great Britain, the King of
Swedeland thought himself obliged before his departure to give him assurances
of his good affection toward the King of England. And lastly, he wished my
Lord Ambassador a happy return into his own Country, and withal assured him,
That he might be always very confident of his Favor.

This Audience being ended, his Excellence was conducted toward the Queen
Mother, of whom he took leave in these terms.

Madam,
BEing now upon my departure, I ought by commandment of his Majesty and
likewise of the Queen, to represent again in the most lively and effectual
expressions Their great Affection to your Majesty, and what part They take in
your Majesty's Interests, the same with the Interests of the King and Kingdom.
But as there are no words sufficient to depaint so real an affection, and being
moreover obliged in his Majesty's name to give You thanks for all the Honors
which in respect to Him your Majesty has conferred upon me. I find now a
decency even in my defects, and that my want of language has been but a
foresight of the King my Master, and a fit Complement upon His part, seeing
upon so extraordinary occasions as these, the boldest Eloquence would lose its
Speech, and had I an hundred tongues I should be struck silent. Therefore I
shall only pray for your Majesty's happiness and prosperity, and as the
greatest part thereof for the health of the King Your Son, upon Whom all the
joys and cares of your Majesty do so worthily center. And wheresoever I go,
but especially to Their Majesty's, I shall make report of ^our Majesty's
unparalelled Virtues, and shall my self preserve an immortal memory of all Your
Royal Favors.

This Complement was also interpreted in French.

Whilst the Ambassador was making this Complement, there happened an accident
that surprised all the Company. For about ^he middle of his Speech where he
says, That the boldest Eloquence would lose its ^peech, his Excellence made a
long pause, as ^f by that he had designed to have verified that he had said.
For my part at first I believed it was the sincerity of my Lord Ambassadors
discourse that produced this effect, and that it being too great a task for him
to represent to the Queen, the great honor his Master the King of England had
for her, and the great sense himself had of the Favors which he had received
from her Majesty, his Speech had failed him, according to that saying of
Seneca, Curae leves loquuntur, ingentes stupent; Small cares may be expressed,
great ones are unutterable. But when I saw the Secretary fall himself upon the
same rock, and stop in the same place when he interpreted the Complement in
French, then I concluded the thing had been so contrived. At length both of
them having recollected, they finished the Harangue, which in her Majesty's
name was thus answered; That her Majesty was very much obliged both to the King
and Queen of England by the new assurances of friendship, which his Excellence
had given her in their behalf; That her Majesty desired his Excellence to
testify to the King his Master with how much joy and satisfaction She received
those declarations, and that for her part She would not fail to employ the
utmost of her Care for the Religious conservation of the happy correspondence,
which was now established betwixt the King of Swedeland her Son and his Majesty
of great Britain; That She desired also, that he would signify to her Sister
the Queen of England, with what zeal She honored her Person and Virtues, and
what delight She took in her prosperity; And lastly, That her Majesty was very
well pleased with the generous Comportment of the Ambassador, and that she had
a very great esteem of his Person and merits.

His Excellence having taken his leave in this manner of their Majesty's, he
was conducted into a large dining Room, where in their Majesty's name he was
treated with all kind of Magnificence and Pomp, in the Company of the principal
Officers of the Court.

Of my Lord Ambassadors Voyage from Stockholm to Copenhagen.
THe long and tedious time his Excellence had spent amongst those Sons of
Winter in the Court of Moscovy, constrained him to make but a short stay here,
to the end he might return the sooner into England. And for this reason on the
13. of October, two days after he had taken his leave, his Excellence departed
from Stockholm toward Denmark, And the wind serving very well for the
beginning of our Voyage, he made all possible haste to embark in good time. And
notwithstanding the Extremity of the cold, we travailed the whole night almost
upon the water, that his Excellency might betimes reach the Man of War, which
for a fortnight or three weeks had attended for him, about some ten Leagues
from Stockholm. The next morning we embarked, and about evening the Master of
the Ceremonies, and the Queens Mareshal or Steward of her house, who had bare
his Excellence company so far, took their leave after the best entertainment
that could be made them there, amongst the thundering of the Cannon, of which
the Captain of the Ship was not at all sparing. The Ship was called the
Centurion, and had at least fifty Guns mounted, and an hundred and seventy
Seamen; so that it was no easy matter for the most part of the Ambassadors
Servants to find place convenient to lodge themselves. In the mean while the
Coach and Horses being judged troublesome to be transported by Sea, they were
dispatched away by Land, and arrived not at Copenhagen till after the
Ambassador.

In this posture we continued on board four days without power to depart, by
reason his Excellencies goods, which were appointed to have followed
immediately, made us lose the opportunity of the wind, by their arriving a day
or two too late.

The 18. of October the wind serving again we set sail, but the weather proved
so misty and duskish, that we were constrained to cast anchor: however in the
afternoon the clouds ^eing a little dispersed, we advanced three ^r four
leagues, till at night we were forced ^o come to an anchor again. This Road is
so ^angerous by reason of the narrowness of ^he passage, and the multitude of
Rocks in those parts (of which some are eminent above ^ater, others lie under
or are at most but ^evel with the water) that besides the be^efit of good
weather, a good Conduct and ^are extraordinary is required, to avoid Shipwreck.
For this reason the Captain took Pilots along with him from that very place,
^uch as had been used to convey Ships tho^ough that passage till they pass
those rocks, which from Stockholm to the Main-sea lie ^ispersed about four or
five and twenty ^eagues together.

The 19. day was so dark, that at first the Captain (a man of experience and
Conduct as ^ell as Valor) would not suffer us to weigh ^nchor, though
otherwise the wind was favorable enough. Nevertheless about nine (...) clock
in the morning, the day clearing up a ^ittle, my Lord Ambassador desirous to
lose ^o opportunity prevailed with him so far as ^o set sail. About noon we
thought we had mistaken our way; our Pilots surprised with ^he apprehension
knew not which way to ^urn themselves, and the C^^^ain himself gave us all for
lost, But at length we found our selves happily near Lantsort, which we left on
our right hand, and having dismissed our Pilots we arrived at the Main-sea.

On the twentieth in the morning leaving Gotland on our left hand, we came
within sight of the Isle of Bornholm on the 21. and on the 22. we came to an
anchor in the evening betwixt two Islands about twelve leagues from Copenhagen.
The principal divertisement we received all this Voyage was given us by a
couple of tame Bears, which we brought with us from Mosco. One of them was so
gentle, that one might beat him or play with him as with a Spaniel, for he
managed his teeth and his claws with that carefulness and dexterity, that he
never did any body hurt. And having been taught to wrestle, he in a short time
attained to perfection in it, and took great delight in that recreation. The
other that was something the bigger of the two was of another humor and
quality, his pleasure was to suck peoples fingers, insomuch that to endear ones
self to him, there was no more to be done but to put ones finger into his mouth
(which was very often done) and suffer him to suck it, as if it were a Teat.
Sometimes he would bite a little, or give a pat with his foot if one passed by
upon the Deck without treating him in that manner. This puts me in mind of what
certain Naturalists have observed of this kind of Animal, namely, that they
delight very ^uch in sucking, and that being in the win^er time reduced to any
great necessity, they ^ustain themselves by sucking their own claws, and make
the same supply the defect of other ^ood. Besides these two Bears we had two
^ild Cats, one of which had been presented ^o the Ambassador at Stockholm.
Their size ^as as big as that of a good Dog, and their skins ^potted almost
like that of a Leopard, but ^hey were extremely fierce and dangerous.

The 23. the wind was contrary till night, (...) which we made five or six
leagues by Moonlight, after which we thought fit to ^ast anchor, that we might
avoid the Shelves that were about us. On the 24. the Sea was ^overed with so
thick a mist, and agitated ^ith so great a storm, that it was judged best ^or
us to lie at anchor all that day.

The 25. the fogs being dispersed we fi^ished the rest of our Voyage so
happily, that ^e came to an anchor about ten of the clock before Copenhagen,
which we saluted imme^iately with twelve pieces of Cannon. About ^alf an hour
before we came to anchor, we ^iscovered a Dutch Man of War passing on ^er way
for Holland. For some time she ^ould not strike her Flag, which netled our
^aptain so, that he gave order seven or eight ^ieces of Cannon should be laden
with bul^ets to give them admonishment of their duty. And whilst he was
attending till the Hollander came within shot before he gave fire, we perceived
them take it down as we were just at an anchor. A quarter of an hour after the
Dutch Vessel passed by our Ship and saluted us with five piece of Cannon, which
our Captain returned with three of those he had laden with bullet, which he
ordered to be shot over them into the Air. The Hollander after that gave us
three more, which we answered again with one, and so we parted. After this the
Ambassador sent his Secretary into the Town, to give notice of his arrival, and
to carry his Credentials to the Chancellor. Whereupon the King sent his
Vice Admiral the same night, to let his Excellence understand, with how much
joy he received the news of his arrival, and withal to assure him that he
might make his Entry the next day into the City. At the same time Sir Gilbert
Talbot, who was but lately arrived in that Court from his Majesty of Great
Britain in the Quality of Envoy Extraordinary, came also to salute his
Excellence. The Vice Admiral and the Envoy came together in a very fair Barge,
in which, being it was night, the Ambassadors Lady took the opportunity to go
with them into the Town. And though it was very late, and our Ship at anchor
about two leagues from the shore, her Ladyship chose rather to expose her self
for some time to the darkness of the night, than to run the hazard of being
brought to bed on Shipboard.

The next day we were very near being cast away in the very harbor. For we
struck ^o desperately upon the ground, that instead of making our solemn Entry
into the Town, we had much ado to save our Vessel from a Wreck. After we had
weighed anchor about noon to come up to the Town according to the Vice-Admirals
Orders (who had sent us two Pilots for that purpose from Copenhagen) we were so
ill steered by them, that we ran on ground immediately, and that with such
violence, that our Ship was above a foot deep in the sand. Whereupon the
Captain ordered our sails to be furled and two piece of Cannon to be shot off,
to give notice of our Condition to the Town. A while after which the
Vice Admiral himself arrived with some Boats full of Anchors and Cables, by
means of which good office we dis-ingaged our selves by that time it was night,
and came to seven fathoms water. And if on the one side the Malevolence or
neglect of those two Danish Pilots was so dreadful, on the other side we found
the Heavens favoring us exceedingly in sending us a Calm on a sudden, after a
violent and impetuous wind that had blown very hard till then, so that we came
off without any other hurt than a great affrightment. And indeed had the wind
continued as strong as it had been before, in all appearance there had been no
saving of our Ship, and perhaps we should have had much ad^ to have saved our
selves; whereas by the propitiousness of this unexpected Calm, both we and our
Vessel were delivered from this great danger. His Excellencies Entry however
was put off till the next day, by reason the Ambassador of France (Mr. de
Treslona Knight of Maltha) who was lately arrived at Copenhagen, and was not as
yet removed from the House reserved for Ambassadors, since he made his Entry.
And upon this score it was, that the Vice Admiral was dispatched to his
Excellence to excuse this delay.

On Thursday the 27. of October my Lord Ambassador made his solemn Entry with
great Magnificence. And if from thence a judgment might be made of their
Friendship to his Majesty of great Britain, we might without all scruple
conclude, that the Amity of this Court in that respect exceeded the affection
of the Swedes. In the first place two noble Galleys and a Galliot came to
receive his Excellence and his Train: for the wind was come about so cross,
that it was impossible to get our Ship up into the Harbor. As Soon as my Lord
and his Attendants were entered into the Galleys, our Ship gave us twenty Guns,
and in an hour and an halfs time we arrived in the Harbor, where we ^aw his
Majesty's Men of War with all the glory of their Flags and Streamers displayed.
There were twenty pleasure Boats also very ^ell furnished to receive his
Excellence and ^is Train in the Harbor, and in these Boats ^e made our Entry
to the Town; The Footmen first, then the Pages and Gentlemen, after them my
Lord Morpeth, and next my lord Ambassador accompanied by the Vice Admiral and
the Master of the Ceremonies. ^n this manner our Boats following one another in
a File cross the whole Harbor, we ^ad the opportunity as we past to survey a
^reat number of the Kings Ships very nobly ^quiped, and to hear the noise of
the Cannon ^aluting his Excellence as he went by, every ^ne of them being laden
with bullet. At last we landed at a place which they had covered with Tapestry
and in which his Excellence was complemented from his Majesty. That done, he
went into the Kings Coach which was there ready to attend him, and was
conducted to the House of Ambassadors, where we continued during our Residence
in this Court.

Of my Lord Ambassador's Residence a^ Copenhagen.
COpenhagen stands upon the Sea, and though it be not naturally so strong, no^
of that circumference as Stockholm, yet it i^ artificially well fortified, and
(the Country being plain) of a much better Situation. There is a Canal that
has no more stream than there is before Stockholm, yet it is deep enough for
some Merchants ships to ride therein safely. The Palace has nothing worth the
Description, only there is a Tower which is very considerable for its height,
but especially for its ascent, which being paved (so broad that a Coach might
easily be drawn up and turned at the top) rises insensibly without stairs.
This Tower was built for the use of the Astronomers, out of which there is a
fair Library erected by the side of it. From hence are several marks of the
last Swedish Leagure to be seen, especially on a Steeple hard by, which was so
battered by their Cannon, that the King to perpetuate the Memory of that Siege
has ordered the holes of the several shot to be gilt over with Gold. I could
insert other Curiosities likewise that are to be seen in Copenhagen, but my
desig^ not being to give an exact Description of such things as are so well
known, I shall sa^isfy my self in giving this short Character of ^he Court.
That if the Swedish Court has a ^reat resemblance with the French humor, ^his
has much more the Genius of the Ger^an; and that if the former be more franck
and active, these are more solid and of better ^nvention. The Danish Language
differs not ^o much from the Swedish, but that the people ^an easily understand
one another. And as ^or French, the Nobility of Denmark are as ^ndustrious and
diligent in learning it, as those ^f the Court of Sweden.

Being arrived at this Town his Excellence ^as treated (as at Stockholm) three
days at ^he Kings charge, and had his Audience on ^he third. The Ceremonies
were all in the ^ame fashion as in the Court of Sweden, and ^here being no
Present to be made here more ^han was there, his Excellence had no more ^o do,
but to make his Complement from the ^ing his Master. The King of Denmark
ap^eared to us very grave and Majestic, and ^f a large Stature. He was booted
a la Cava^ere, and though he was then at least three^ore Years old, yet he
scarce looked to be ^fty. He had a Sword by his side, a long Coat ^overed with
broad Gold and Silver lace, and (...) noble Plume of white Feathers in his Hat.
^e stood under his Canopy with five or six ^f his chief Ministers of State on
one side of him, and in the midst of the Hall some ten o^ twelve of the
Life-Guards. The Ambassado^ being come into the Hall made him a lo^ Reverence,
and the King saluted him again^ and when he was come up near him, under his
Canopy of State, he put on his Hat at the same time his Majesty put on his, and
delivered his Complement in these Terms.

Sir,
AMong so many Prerogatives of the highest Fortune, yet Princes have one
disadvantage, that They can seldo^ attain to that reality and intimac^ which we
may see among private Persons. The equality of their Sovereig^ Power exposes
them to perpetual Competitions, the Interest of their People obliges them to a
constant Jealousy, an^ even the Fidelity and Prudence of the^ Ministers seems
rather made to entertain them in mutual Cautele and Susp^cion, than in perfect
Friendship. B^ betwixt the King my Master and Your Majesty it is all otherwise,
and You are per^aps the only two Princes in Christendom, ^ho in so great a
nearness yet can never ^ustle. And having betwixt You all the ^ndearments of
which private Persons ^re capable, Your Royalty only inclines and inables You
to cultivate and express them in a more honorable manner. that Subjects of one
King could ever ^ve so peaceably and kindly together as those two Excellent
Princes, His Maje^^ies Grandfather and Your Majesty's ^ather, by Whom those
bonds of Hospi^ality and Consanguinity were so closely ^oven betwixt You,
visiting one the ^her in their Kingdoms as familiarly as ^eighbours in the same
City, and taking ^unsel together as confidently as Bro^ers in the same Family.
And ever ^ce what mutual good Offices, what ^mmunication of Counsels have there
^en betwixt both Kings, both in adverse ^d prosperous fortune (with so much
constancy especially on Your part in that most turbulent storm of the English
Monarchy, that His Majesty must keep it in a most grateful and eternal memory)
and so universal a sympathy upon all occasions, that all Antiquity would be
troubled to furnish a parallel for so golden and real a Friendship! And as the
bonds of reciprocal Obligations and those animated ligaments of Blood and
Nature have knit both Your Majesty's in the most refined union, so as to the
grosser interest of Commerce and Navigation, (...) may say without a
similitude, that i^ has been moored on both sides even with anchors and cables
betwixt the People Therefore those affairs having bee^ regulated and
constituted at the time (...) the Extraordinary Embassage sent by Your Majesty
to England, His Majesty has now sent me to return that honor and obligation,
and to assure Your Majesty that as He shall most faithfully observ^ that
inviolable League then perfected b^ the prudence of Your Ambassador, betwixt
^our Majesty's, so shall He most gladly ^pprove on all occasions to Your
Majesty, that ancient radicated and private af^ection, which has from Your
Ancestors ^itherto flourished so happily betwixt ^ou. His Majesty is only
troubled, that that by the composition of his own af^airs and what by my slow
arrival this ^ffice is performed later to Your Majesty. ^ut He hopes your
Majesty will consider, that however the Embassy was then sent ^hen his Letter
was first subscribed, and that to recompense and excuse my ^ecessary delay, He
has taken care to ^pply it in the mean time by his Extra^rdinary Envoye, who
(I doubt not) according to his great abilities and ^ffection has already
herein sufficienly ^formed Your Majesty. So that I need ^y nothing more at
present than at the ^ginning, that as both Your Majesty's ^overeign Power is
free from all shock and competition, and your Peoples mutual Interest dispenses
you from al^ suspicions and jealousy; so I even out o^ fidelity to the King my
Master, besid^ mine own proper inclination, find my sel^ bound to contribute
all things towar^ the entertainment and certainty of the most perfect
Friendship betwixt your Majesty's, and shall make it my business to give all
the real proofs and testimonies thereof, during the time allotted me for this
Employment.

This Speech was rendered into Latin after this manner;

Domine Rex,
INter tot summae fortunae Ornamenta hoc tamen incommodi Principibus adhaeret,
quod raro ad intimam illam and apertam animorum communicationem aspirare
possint, quam inter tenuioris sortis homines saepius observamus. Regii enim
illa fastigii paritas perpetua fere aemulatione concurrit, diversae ut plurimum
Subditorum rations aut studia etiam Dominos trahunt, and ipsa ministrorum
suorum pruden^ia and fides ad cautelam potius and suspicionem quam ad amicitiae
inter Reges simplicitatem facere videntur. Inter Regem autem Dominum meum and
Majestatem Vestram res aliter omnino sunt comparatae, and soli forsitan estis
ex Europae Principibus quorum neuter in tanta vicinitate alterius liminibus
obstruat. Sed quum omnia quae etiam privatos conciliant benevolentiae and
charitatis irritamenta, inter Majestates Vestras intercedant, suprema Vtriusque
Potestas hoc tantum efficit, ut majori cum dignitate and fructu mutuam
amicitiam exercere and excolere possitis. Si enim felicissimam Majestatis suae
Avi and Majestatis vestrae Patris memoriam replicemus, quorum auspiciis
hospitalitatis and consanguinitatis jura inter Majestates Vestras propius
coaluere, nullius unquam Principis Subditi tam unanimes and concordes quantum
ipsi illi Reges fuerunt. Eadem familiaritate qua Cives in eadem urbe in Regnis
suis se mutuo inviserint, nec minori cum fiducia in commune consulebant quam
fratres in eadem familia. Quae deinceps officiorum reciprocatio, quae
communicatio consiliorum, quae prosperorum and adversorum inter Angliae and
Daniae Reges societas permansit? (tali praecipue ex Vestra part constantia in
turbidissima illa Regni Anglicani procella, ut istud gratissima and aeterna
memoria Majestas Sua retineret) tantus denique animorum urdequaque consensus,
ut neque ex ultima antiquitate tam sincerae, constantis, and aureae amicitiae
exemplum eruere possimus. Et uti beneficiorum mutui nexus and animata illa
sanguinis and naturae vincula purissima unione Majestates Vestras illigarunt,
ita quo ad Populorum communionem utramque Nationem crassioribus navigationis
and commerciorum nodis, tanquam rudentibus and anchoris obstrictam and inter se
contextam videmus. Quum autem publicae illae utriusque Populi rations tempore
extraordinariae a Majestate Vestra Legationis optime constituta fuerint,
Majestas sua Dominus meus clementissimus per me eundem Legationis honorem and
officium Majestati Vestrae nunc reddere and perfolvere voluit; Et Majestati
Vestrae per me testatum facere se non solum summa fi de perseveraturum in
sanctissimo illo foedere inter Majestates Vestras Extraordinarii Vestri Legati
opera and prudentia confecto, sed etiam omni occasion Majestati Vestrae
approbaturum esse antiquum, innatum, and singularem illum affectum qui ab
Augustissimis Vtriusque Majoribus propagatus inter Majestates Vestras hactenus
religiosissime conservatur. Hoc unicum Majestatem suam male habet, quod propter
urgentissima sua negotia and tardiorem nostrum adventum serius aliquanto hoc
officium reciprocare potuerit. Sperat tamen Majestatem Vestram reputaturam
Legationem hanc jam inde missam quum primum Literas mihi ad Majestatem Vestram
dederit, utque necessariam nostram moram melius compensare and excusare posset,
Se interea per Ablegatum Extraordinarium curasse. Neque dubito quin Dominus
Ablegatus Extraordinarius pro sua prudentia and optimo affectu Majestati
Vestrae hac in re abunde satisfecerit. Ita ut supervacaneum omnino foret in
praesens aliquid addere; nisi, sicut in Principio orationis dixi, Regiam
Vtriusque dignitatem hoc ipso Majestates Vestras melius conciliare, and
communes Subditorum Vestrorum rations ab omni invidiaesse sejunctissimas, ita
me Majestatis suae Ministrum praeter propriam animi nostri propensionem, etiam
pro fide quam Majestati suae debeo, omnia contributurum ad certitudinem ad
declarationem perfectissimae suae cum Majestate Vestra amicitiae, and quo ad
hic manebo totam in ejus argumentis and testimoniis operam nostram and tempus
collocaturum.

After this was done, the Chancellor of Denmark in the Name of his Master made
a reply, which was turned into Latin also. Amongst other things, he declared
the sense his Master had of the great Expressions of kindness which he had
received from his dear Friend and Allie, the King of Great Britain; That there
was nothing his heart was more inclined to, than to entertain a happy
Correspondence with him, and that he would be always ready to embrace a
Conjunction of Interests with the King of England. Lastly, that his Majesty was
very well satisfied with the Abilities and Affection of his Excellence, and
that he might assure himself of his Royal favor, and Good will. In the mean
while, the King and the Ambassador observed one thing punctually (as had been
done in Sweden) that every time the word Majesty was pronounced in English,
Danish, or Latin, both the one and the other pulled off their hats, and
afterward put them on again at the same time exactly.

After the Kings answer was made, his Excellencies Son, and all the Gentlemen
went in order, to make their Reverence to his Majesty; and that done, his
Excellence was conducted toward the Queen, whose Character is very well
expressed in the Complement the Ambassador made her, with his head uncovered,
which was interpreted in French.

Madam,
THe King my Master has commanded me to wait upon Your Majesty, and in His
Majesty's Name to make to You all the most entire professions of Friendship,
Affection and Esteem which are due to so Great a Queen, so near a Kinswoman,
and so admirably accomplished a Princess. But, seeing it is impossible to
execute those commands worthily and to the full, unless His Majesty could not
only imprint His Character upon me, but inspire me too, with his great Soul and
Royal Understanding. I must beg Your Majesty's pardon, if I fall short, where
His Majesty's sense is so far above expression, and Your own Perfections are so
ineffable. Therefore I shall only in my ordinary and safer way, assure Your
Majesty, that no Prince in Christendom does interess Himself more in your
Majesty's health and prosperity than the King my Master. And no less the Queen,
who as She makes His affections the rule and model of Hers, has yet moreover a
singular affection and admiration of Her own for your Majesty, has commanded
me to express how much She regards and loves you, considering your Heroical
Person, as the Example of Queens, and Glory of Women. After which, whatsoever
of thoughts or words can remain to my self, wherein to testify mine own great
Veneration and Service to your Majesty, I shall consecrate to your Fame upon
all occasions, but present them to your Self involved rather in a most devout
and respectful silence.

To which, in the name of the Queen received an answer with expressions of her
acknowledgment and affection.

From thence the Ambassador was conducted toward his Royal Highness the Prince
Christian, who was at that time about eighteen years of age: To whom his
Excellence made this Harangue with his hat on.

Sir,
THe King my Master has commanded me particularly to wait upon your Royal
Highness: And as He professes a signal obligation to His Majesty your Father,
that according to the old familiarity and kindness betwixt the two Kings of
England and Denmark, He was pleased so lately to entrust so great a Pledge as
your Royal Highness with Him; so He desires you to believe, That in that your
too short stay with Him, He nevertheless took such true Impressions of your
Royal Highnesses most Hopeful, Virtuous and Princely Disposition, that, were
there not all those other Obligations of Friendship, Kindred, and Confederacy
betwixt Him and the King your Father, He should for your own sake have a most
Sincere and Personal Friendship, Kindness and Esteem for your Royal Highness,
and accordingly wishes you all the happiness and health as to Himself, and
offers Himself upon all occasions to manifest His Royal inclinations and hearty
affection toward your Royal Highness. For mine own part, I shall from this
present, as I was from the first minute I had the honor to see you, desire to
be entered into the list of your Highnesses servants.

To which his Highness returned his Answer himself in two or three words.

After which, his Excellence Complemented Prince George in his own appartement;
he is a handsome young Prince of great hopes, and who is now much about fifteen
or sixteen years of age. This was the Complement his Excellence made him by
Command from the King his Master.

Sir,
THe King my Master has given me particular order to wait upon your Highness
from Him, as well out of Affection as Curiosity. For, whereas your Highness
being the second Son of Denmark has thereby a very just title to His Majesty's
Affection, so he having heard so much of you, as of a most accomplished Prince
in so tender an age, was very curious to know the truth of it. I am most happy
in this occasion to be able to certify His Majesty, with how much reason Fame
has said what she has of you, and I assure your Highness, that his Majesty
will take great interest and pleasure in it, and desire nothing more than to be
a witness thereof Himself, by seeing you one day in his Court, as you are
already in His heart. For mine own particular, I am perfectly your Highnesses
most humble servant.

The answer that was returned in the name of the Prince, contained Expressions
of his Acknowledgments and Respect for the King of England; and toward the
latter end the Prince gave his Excellence particular thanks, and an assurance
of his favor.

And now as to those things that concern my Lord's transactions in that Court
during the small time we continued there, after the first Audience, I shall
speak first (as I did in my description of the second Embassy) of the
Ambassadors Negotiation, next of his Entertainment, and last of all, of the
most considerable passages that happened besides, during the seven weeks time his
Excellence remained in that Court.

About this time it was, that preparations were making on all sides for that
unhappy War, which so long afflicted both England and Holland, and filled all
Europe with the noise of it. In order whereunto, the Estates of Holland and the
rest of the United Provinces inclining to the interest of France, did at the
same time endeavor to have joined the Forces of the Crown of Denmark with
their own. The King of England on the other side, labored as much to get the
Crowns of S d en and Denmark over to himself. The management of which affair,
was the province of Mr. Coventry in Sweeden, and of ^r. Gilbert Talbot in
Denmark, who before ^he Ambassadors arrival had made some pro^ress in the
business. Whence likewise it ^as his Excellencies principal Emploiment, ^uring
his residence there, to bring the propo^ed League to a happy conclusion, and to
con^ribute every thing that might conduce there^nto. True it is, that according
to the ge^eral opinion, it would have been a great ^ngratitude in the Dane, who
had received ^o great assistances from the Hollander in his ^te troubles with
Sweeden, to have not only ^bandoned his Alliance with the Estates, but ^pposed
them in this occasion, by a conjun^tion with England. But, considering all the
^anner in which the Estates comported themselves at that time, even the Danes
themselves thought they had reasons enough ^o have justified such a desertion.
But to pass ^y this gloss, I shall here only insert some ^ew Informations,
which the King of Den^arks Commissioners delivered to the Am^assador upon
certain points which he desi^ed might be explained before his departure, ^or
the greater facilitation of the treaty which ^r. Gilbert Talbot had begun. For
though ^he business succeeded not, and all things ^ent contrary, by reason the
Dane not being ^ble to come to any agreement with the ^weed, sided at last with
the Dutch, yet it will not be superfluous to give some small prospect of the
proceedings of Denmark in this Conjuncture.

And first of all the King of Denmark^ Commissioners declared, that his Majesty
would without any difficulty enter into a particular Alliance with Sweden,
especially if it were done by the interposition of the King of Great Britain,
with whom he was so nearly allied, that he could not conceive any thing would
be recommended by him, bu^ what would be effectually for the advantage of the
Crown of Denmark; according to hi^ Excellencies declaration, That his Master^
would not endeavor to bring the Swede to any conditions, that should be to the
prejudice of his Majesty of Denmark. And that i^ this confidence, he was very
willing the King of England should negotiate a Confederac^ with the Crown of
Sweden as strict as hi^ own affairs did require, and with as much advantage to
himself as was possible. An^ that furthermore for the better success in the
League which the King of England desired t^ establish betwixt the Crowns of
Denmark England, and Sweden, his Majesty conceived that one of the most
necessary points wa^ that the Swedes should be brought to aba^ and retrench in
some measure in the Priv^ledg they enjoyed of being exempt from Gabels and
Customs in the Sound, and t^ condescend that all Tolls in that place might ^n
respect of the Hollander, be restored to the ^ondition wherein they were in the
Year 1642. ^o the end, that the three Kingdoms of Denmark, England, and Sweden
might manage their Commerce for the future with equal ^dvantage. But if this
Proposition should not be accepted by the Crown of Sweden, ^he Commissioners
declared, that the King their Master left it to the judgment of his Majesty of
Great Britain what other means ^ight be used to accomplish the Union proposed,
and whether it would not be ^onvenient to offer the Swedes a proportionable sum
of money for the resignation of their Privilege, and to give them sufficient
^ecurity for the sum that should be so offered and accepted.

They thought it necessary moreover, that ^he Subjects and Ships of the three
Kingdoms might reciprocally trade into the Ports of each King, with the same
Privileges as the ^nhabitants of the same Country, without any difference or
limitation. And without doubt ^his equality would have been of great im^ortance
for the conserving the three Kings ^n a perfect and perpetual Union.

Besides this his Majesty of Denmark judged ^t expedient, that it should not be
lawful for either of the three Kings to permit the Trai^ors or Rebels of the
two other or either of them to have any shelter or protection in their
Kingdoms, and that the same rule should be observed toward such Subjects as
should convey themselves out of the Dominion of their Masters without his
consent.

To that which related to the exemption of the Subjects of his Majesty of Great
Britain from paing Toll at the Passage into the Sound (as was proposed by his
Majesty to the King of Denmark) The Commissioners gave his Excellence to
understand, that the Registers of the Gabels of the Sound having been examined,
how the same had been paid from time to time by all Nations trading into those
Seas, and particularly by the English, they had found that his Majesty of
Denmark could not demand less than an hundred and twenty thousand Rixdollers
(or Crowns) yearly, to exempt the King of Englands Subjects from the payment of
Tolls at their passage into the Sound. And that the King of Denmark would
reserve the right of Sovereignity which he pretends to there, entire to
himself, without any prejudice directly or indirectly by this Compact.

As to the design his Majesty of great Britain had to join with the King of
Sweden in removing and turning the trade from Archangel, and bringing it
thorough the Sound; The King of Denmark answered by his Commissioners, that
when he understood upon what conditions and terms the King of En^land would
join himself with the Swede in ^ursuance of this design, his Majesty would
^eclare himself more largely thereupon, and ^ive manifest Evidence of his
Inclination to ^romote as much as possible the Commerce ^f the Subjects of his
Majesty of Great Bri^ain. And that only in case the Proposal before mentioned
did not succeed: Other^ise the generality of the English Commo^ities which pass
through the Sound, would ^ot have need of any other Privilege. But (...) case
that should not be admitted, it might ^t least be accommodated by a particular
^ransaction touching the manner in which the Toll was to be paid in the Sound,
for all such Commodities as should be brought from Moscovy that way. The
Commissioners de^lared further as to what concerned the Pro^osition about
Moscovy, that his Majesty of Denmark was not in any particular League ^ith that
Crown, and that there was then ^ome differences depending betwixt them about
their Limits, where the Frontiers of ^orway are adjacent to the Dominions of
the ^zar.

As to that part which related to the sum ^f money which the King of Denmark
should ^emand in case he set out a Fleet for the ser^ice of his Majesty of
England, The Commis^oners made answer, that the King their Master intending to
set out twenty Men of War at the beginning of the Spring, with nine hundred and
fourscore or a thousand pieces of Cannon, and five thousand good Seamen and
Soldiers besides Officers, it would be necessary, that five and twenty thousand
Crowns extraordinary should be paid him at least, besides what charges he
should be forced to be at himself to maintain them at Sea.

In short, the King of Denmark insisted, that his Majesty would endeavor that
the King of Sweden should declare himself as to the Union proposed, and that
nothing should be transacted in this matter without his knowledge and consent.

And this being all we have to say of the Ambassadors Negotiation, it follows
that we say something of his manner of Entertainment in this Court, which was
almost the same as at Stockholm in Feasts and Treatments. For, besides the
Entertainments of the three first days after his arrival, (which some charged
of having somewhat in them of the Bacchanalian air) there were several other
feasts, as particularly, when his Excellence treated Mr. de Treslon the French
Ambassador, of whom I have spoken before. From which time there was so great a
friendship betwixt the two Ambassadors, as would have made one admire to behold
the extraordinary frankness and civilities which passed between them. They
visited one another very frequently, and that by surprise sometimes, and
treated one another with all imaginable Respect and Courtship. Mr. Treslon
being the first of the two at Copenhagen, made the first Visit to my Lord
Ambassador, who met him at the outward Gate next the street, giving him the
precedence and right hand whilst he was in his house, which was likewise
observed by the French Ambassador when his Excellence visited him, and this was
the commmon reception they used to one another. The business of that Embassy
from the King of France was for the consummation of a League, which was in
transaction betwixt that King and the King of Denmark. And it extended no
further, than a bare treaty of Amity for the security of both the Allies, and
(as my Lord Ambassador was assured) aimed not at the prejudice of any Prince,
much less of the King of Great Britain, who was expressly comprised therein, and
might have been received into the Alliance if he pleased himself. Mr. de
Treslon staid in this Court not above three weeks, and on the fifteenth of
November he departed from Copenhagen for Stockholme, where he had another
Embassy to make from the King his Master. But besides the feasting that was
occasioned by the intimacy of these two Ambassadors, there was one more than
ordinarily remarkable on the seventeenth of November, which was at the
Christening the child of my Lady Ambassadress, who was brought to bed about a
fortnight before of a Son. It was Christened by the King, the Queen, and his
Royal Highness, and was named Frederick Christian, on a Sunday at night in the
House where his Excellence resided. As soon as our Chaplain had administered the
Baptism according to the Liturgy of the Church of England, the King went to
salute my Lady Ambassadress in her Chamber, which was near the Room where the
Infant was Baptized. The Queen accompanied the King in this Visit, his Royal
Highness with the two Princesses his Sisters and several Ladies of the Court
following them. There were several of the chief Ministers of State came in also
to congratulate her Ladyship upon her happy delivery. From this Visit their
Majesty's past into a large Room, where his Excellence had prepared a Noble and
Magnificent Collation for them. The King would not sit down, but choose rather
to stand on one side of the table, as her Majesty did also on the other, with
the Prince Christian and the two Princesses. His Majesty continued bare all the
while, drinking several Healths with the Ambassador and other great Persons of
his Court, amongst which, the Lord Treasurer (who had been lately his
Ambassador to the King of England) was one. My Lord Morpeth, his excellence's
Son, entertained the Queen all the time, his Excellence taking only now and
then opportunity to address himself to her Majesty. The Gentlemen and Pages
that were attending on his Majesty were in the same Room, where they also had
their share of this Entertainment as well as the rest of the more inferior
servants who remained in the Court below. At length after about half an hours
time, his Majesty retired with the Ambassador waiting upon him. Three days
after his Excellence treated his Royal Highness again very sumptuously, and
after dinner, His Highness was pleased to divert himself in dancing some hours
with his Excellence and his principal Gentlemen. Besides these Collations and
some others which I pretermit, his Excellence had two or three days recreation
in hunting the Hare with his Royal Highness. At other times he took a survey of
whatsoever was most remarkable in the City, and amongst other things the
Arsenal, and some other magazins for their Anmunition and Instruments of War.
At our entrance into the Arsenal, which we found very fine and in good order,
we were surprised at first, to see a Coach passing before us, as it were by a
peculiar motion of its own: but the motion was performed by wheel-work with a
kind of rudder to steer it. For which purpose, there were two men placed
secretly within it, one to turn the wheels (which was the reason it moved) and
the other to manage the Stern. They showed his Excellence the Rarities also in
the Kings Palace, which were several very curious pieces of Mechanics,
besides many Curiosities brought from the remotest Countries. The Rareties were
disposed in five or six several appartements on one floor, and indeed were the
only observable things almost we saw in that Palace. Amongst other things, in
one of these appartements we had a sight of an excellent piece of Art, which
was a little Ship, ready rigged, whose Mast, Ladders, Sails and Cannon were
all of Ivory. But his Majesty having a particular desire to caress his
Excellence, he thought good to show him his Palace at Frederixburgh which
without contradiction is is a most magnificent and exact Pile.

In the mean time, the King had the Curiosity to go and see the Man of War
which brought his Excellence from Stockholm, and was then at Anchor in the
Harbor attending his departure. This Visit being made of a sudden, and in the
absence of the Captain and the greatest part of the other Officers of the Ship,
the Seamen were at no small loss to receive his Majesty as he ought to have
been. Nevertheless that hindered not but his Majesty left some tokens of his
being there, by a considerable Present which he sent to the Captain and all the
Seamen. The Captain at his return, being desirous to publish his Majesty's
generosity, thought he could not do it any ways more remarkably than by firing
his great Guns, which though in the Night, he discharged so freely at his
return to his ship, that the noise gave the Town an alarm immediately, the
drums beating through the streets, and all people running to their Arms, till
at last they understood the occasion, and turned their apprehensions into
laughter.

About this time my Lord Ambassador had advertisement from Mosco, amongst other
things, that Calthof (who was detained by the Tzar after our departure) was
constrained to re-engage himself for two Years in the Great Dukes service. He
had notice likewise, that his Tzarskoy Majesty had dispatched an Ambassador to
the King of Great Britain, to complain of him as a person that had been
deficient in his respects to the Tzar and his principal Boyars in the whole
process of his Negotiation. But the Ambassador having from time to time sent
Copies into England of all that had passed betwixt him and the Commissioners,
and being otherwise well advised, that the King his Master did well approve of
what he had done, he troubled not himself with what the Tzar should attempt,
being very well assured (as indeed it afterward happened) that all his efforts
would not be able to shake the reason and justice upon which his conduct was
founded.

About the latter end of our Residence there, there was a public combat
performed in the presence of the King, with portable Pumps, or Engines, such as
are used frequently in the quenching of great fires. It was managed before the
Palace, betwixt six or seven men one against another, having several others
appointed for the management of their Pumps, and for supplying them with water
from the Canal. Every one discharged upon his adversary by lifting up the Pipe,
and levelling it against his Enemy, exposing themselves to the force of the
Engines within fifteen or sixteen paces, and plying their business so well, that
they left one of the Champions but one eye to guide him back again to his House.

My Lord Morpeth departed for England on the first day of Dicember with four or
five Gentlemen and some Footmen in his retinue. His Excellence sent him by
Land, that he might have the advantage of seeing some remarkable places in the
way betwixt Denmark and England, but especially in Flanders thorough which his
design was to pass. The Ambassador in the mean time prepared to ^ake his own
Voyage by Sea, but the weather ^roving cold, and the Sea frozen before
Copen^agen so hard, that our ship which was to ^arry us was become unmovable,
his Excel^ence took a resolution of following his Son ^y Land, and according to
that design took ^is leave of his Majesty the 11. of December ^n this manner.

Sir,
BEing now ready to lay off the Public Character which his Majesty my Master
had given me, I am obliged by his Commands to reiterate the assurances of His
most sincere and constant Affection to your Majesty. For the performing of
which I shall not need much Oratory, both because his Majesty himself desires
rather to fulfill that Friendship in the effects, than to express it in words;
neither is it so pertinent to ^vary that in language, which is immutable in the
intention, beside that Your Majesty is your self already sufficiently persuaded
of it. So that without affecting any ornament, I shall only make use of that
force which the occasion naturally gives me, the words of those that are upon
departing being always the most real, serious, and weighty. I say therefore
that his Majesty my Master is by blood, by alliance, gratitude, inclination,
and interest a Friend to your Majesty, and that he will not fail upon all
occasions to make good all those relations to your Majesty. And as beside all
those there seems to be so near a similitude in Your Stars and fortune, that
both Your former adversities kept time together, and had but too great an
influence on each others affairs; so does He gladly see and hope and will
always endeavor upon his part, that His and Your present Prosperity may have
as strong a sympathy and reflection. Nor will He think himself the less obliged
to this by the great honors and favors which Your Majesty has for His sake
^hown me, who am by my Employment ^ut his Majesty's shadow, and that too made
darker by mine own imperfections. But therefore I shall not fail to give his
Majesty a most exact and full account of all Your Majesty's affection to Him,
and of all Your Royal graces to my self. Being most obliged and most desirous
to perform all offices whereby I may increase (as far as that which is perfect
can be increased) the good Correspondency betwixt both Your Majesty's. And for
mine own particular I pay, and shall perpetually, my thanks to your Majesty,
and shall always pray for your Majesty's health, long life, and prosperity,
and that the solidity and strength of your Government may be the delight and
pattern of all other Princes.

This Complement was thus expressed in Latin by my Lord Ambassadors Secretary.

Domine Rex,
DEpositurus hanc Legationem Majestati Vestrae iterum sincerissimum and
constantissimum Majestatis suae Domini mei Clementissimi affectum in hac ultima
salutatione confirmare debeo. Ad hoc autem faciendum non est apparatu and
ornatu Oratorio opus, tum quod Majestas sua amicitiam erga Majestatem Vestram
reipsa potius approbare, quam verbis adumbrare cupiat, tum etiam quod
immutabilem illam Regii sui animi sententiam and tenorem dicendo variare minus
decorum videatur, praesertim quum Majestas Vestra jam antea de illa re abunde
sibi persuasum esse testetur. Quapropter neglectis omnibus artis pigmentis eo
tantum utar orationis auxilio, quod ipsa hujus occasionis natura suppeditat.
Quae enim in procinctu and ab abituris verba dictantur, uti simplicissima in se
atque intentissima, ita majorem vim, efficaciam, and pondus apud alios habere
and obtinere solent. Dico igitur Majestatem suam sanguinis nexu, foederum
societate, obligatione beneficiorum, spontanea animi propensione, and
communibus rationibus Majestati Vestrae esse conjunctissimam, neque ergo
commissuram ut in ullo hujus amicitiae officio suae parts desiderentur. Et
quum praeterea occultior quidam Vtriusque Syderum consensus esse videatur
tantus, ut adversae Alterius res Alterum pariter tanquam ejusdem mali
con^agione olim afflatuerint, ita futurum sperat and Ipse allaborabit, ut
prospera Vtriusque fortuna non minus ad mutuum Amborum ornamentum and
utilitatem redundet. Neque immi^uetur haec Majestatis suae erga Majestatem
Vestram benevolentia, quum audiverit quantos ^onores sua causa Majestas Vestra
mihi exhi^uerit, qui in hoc Legationis munere umbram ^antum Majestatis suae
gero, and illam quidem ^ropter defectus nostros adhuc obscuriorem. ^deoque de
summo erga Majestatem suam Ma^estatis Vestrae affectu, deque tot honoris and
^enevolentiae erga me ipsum indiciis nihil ^eticebo, quandoquidem officii mei
esse duco and ^axime cupio omnia confer ad augendam (...) quantum quidem
perfectissima possunt augeri) ^utuam inter Majestates Vestras amicitiam. ^go
autem Majestati Vestrae Serenissimae gratias ^ostrus and nunc ago, and in
posterum semper ^m acturus, and Majestati Vestrae prosperam ^aletudinem, longam
Vitam, perpetuam Felici^tem precor and voveo, atque praesens haec Re^iminis sui
firmitas omnibus aliis Principibus ^cemplo and voluptati esse possit.

The Chancellor returned an answer in the ^ame of his Master, full of all
manner of ^rotestations of mutual Amity, which was ^ndred into Latin likewise.
After which ^e Ambassadors Gentlemen advanced to make their Reverence to his
Majesty. That done, the Ambassador went to take his leave of the Queen: which
he performed in these terms.

Madam,
I Could never answer it to his Majesty, should I not in best manner reassure
your Majesty of that great honor and esteem He has for You. But your Majesty
having done the King my Master that right as so easily to believe it, has
thereby acquitted me of my commission, and your own Royal persuasion has
excused the Ambassador; yet nevertheless, (...) cannot omit to witness how much
his Majesty rejoices to have heard so lately of the health and prosperity of
your Majesty and your whole Family, which as it is without competition the most
flourishing Family o^ all Europe, and worthy only to have sprung from such a
Mother, so hi^ Majesty wishes to all of them, as fair and suitable fortunes, as
the greatness of their Perfections, Virtues, and Extraction does promise and
challenge. And yet, this is but one part of that happiness, which in all other
things He prays for your Majesty, and which upon all occasions His majesty
himself will endeavor, and count Himself most happy, to promote to the
uttermost. For my self, I have so much to acknowledge for all the honors that
your Majesty has, in respect to the King my Master, done me, that should I
take the time to do it, it would frustrate my departure, and the frost or my
thanks would be the same thing. But I assure Your Majesty that I carry with me
an heart most sensibly touched with Gratitude and most humble Devotion to Your
majesty, and that I shall not fail to inform the King my Master of all those
Obligations.

The Answer that was returned in the name of the Queen consisted only like the
former of affectionate Expressions toward their Majesty's of Great Britain,
with assurances of the favor She had for the person of the Ambassador. After
which his Excellence was conducted to his Royal Highness in his Appartement, of
whom he took his leave in this manner.

Sir,
Your Royal Highness knows the King my Master so well, that I need no new
Credentials when I renew to your Royal Highness the assurances of his esteem
and affection. But if I stood need of witnesses, I would cite only Your own
merits, it being absolutely impossible, that a Prince so clear sighted as the
King my Master, should have an indifference for a Prince of the Qualities and
Birth of your Royal Highness. Or if the examples of others could prevail herein
more with his Majesty, than His own Inclination and Judgment, He could not fail
of loving and esteeming your Royal Highness, seeing all those who have had the
honor to know you do no less. But his Majesty pretends not to imitate others,
but rather to set them an Example, and excel them all in all the most Essential
Proofs of Affection toward your Royal Highness. In the mean time, He entreats
your Highness to furnish him, as He Himself will constantly search, occasions
of expressing it, never finding himself more happy, than when He may in any way
oblige You. For mine own part, who can never sufficiently acknowledge the
favors your Royal Highness has done me, I desire nothing with more ardour and
passion than to continue in Your good Grace. And I beseech You to honor me
with Your Commands, for I now divest my self of my Public Character, to enter
henceforward into the Quality of the most humble servant of your Royal Highness.

To which the Prince made answer himself in two or three words as he had done
before. And from his Highness the Ambassador departed toward Prince George
with this Complement.

Sir,
I am very happy that the last employment of this Embassage is to salute your
Highness once more in his Majesty's name; and I assure your Highness, that I
hold it for a Recompense too glorious and too pleasant of all my labors, that
I am to conclude them in this manner. For in this grand Tour of the North that
I here make an end of, I have indeed seen several things very remarkable, but
chiefly the King your Father, a Prince of an admirable Generosity, constancy,
and goodness, the Queen the most adorable Princess of the World, and whose
unparalleled virtues give no less courage to Fame, than despair to Imitation,
His Royal Highness who has traveled thorough all hearts, and without any
forces but those of his own merits, has won himself an universal Empire over
the Esteem of all Europe, the Princesses wonders of Nature, and miracles of
Education, But after all this I must avow, that I never yet saw a Prince so
little and so great as your Highness, or whose young mine did in his greenest
years promise and threaten so much and so handsomely. I leave it to your
Highnesses Judgment with how much pleasure and contentment the King my Master
will hear these news, for I assure your Highness, that he takes and will take
more and more interest every day in all that concerns You. And for mine own
particular I beseech your Highness to retain me in Your favor, and to dispose
always of my person, as consecrated to your Highnesses service.

Whereunto answer was given in the name of the Prince with great
acknowledgment, affection and respect toward the King of England, and his
Excellence had also therein several expressions of the particular affection his
Highness had for his person.

That same day there was a great Ball made in the Palace, in which my Lord
Ambassador past most part of the night. But in the mean while by the favor of
a Southerly wind, the weather became so gentle, that within three or four days
time the ice was dissolved, so that our Man of War was in a condition to set
sail. Whereupon my Lord Ambassador changed his design of going by land, and
prepared himself to embarque with all speed, for which reason he quit himself
of of his coach and horses, and presented them to the Master of the Ceremonies.

Of his Excellences Voyage from Copenhagen to London.
ON the fifteenth of December, four days after the Audience of Conge, his
Excellence embarked, and the next day we came to an Anchor before Elsinore
(six Dutch miles from Copenhagen) where we lay, in expectation of an Easterly
wind.

About this time the Public Peace began to be broke betwixt the English and
the Dutch, acts of Hostility being committed on both sides, and though the War
was not as yet formally declared, yet the Goods and Persons of either Nation
were subject to the outrages and depredations of War. Which consideration,
without doubt would have been enough to have made us apprehensive of some
disastrous event in our voyage, had not, our earnest desire of seeing England
again, and the advantage we had of being in a Man of War so well provided taken
away all impressions of fear. True it is we had daily advice of five or six
Dutch men of War, which lay to watch for us in the way, and doubtless for his
Excellences sake, would have done their utmost to have taken us. Yet the
greatest part of us thought little of being taken, and expected rather to catch
some prey or other.

For want of a fair wind we lay six days at Anchor before Elsinore, so that we
had time enough to take a view of the Town, and the Castle which secures the
same very well. In the mean time we had news of his Tzarkskoy Majesty's
Ambassadors arrival at London, and with what coldness he was received by the
King, who immediately gave him to understand his resentment of the small
satisfaction his Tzarskoy Majesty had given him in that honorable and splendid
Embassy which his Tzarskoy Majesty had received from him. And it being about
this time we made the first discovery of the great Comet that then appeared in
Europe, one of us took occasion to say, That the Great Dukes Ambassador had
already found the effects of it.

At length on the 23 of that month very early in the morning we departed from
Elsinore. We were scarce advanced twenty leagues in our way, but the wind
turned about and came cross as before, so that we were forced back to Elsinore.
My Lord Ambassador observing the uncertainty he was in, and that he was become
the pastime of wind and Sea, believed it his most expedient course to travail
by Land. The indignation he had against lying idle so long in a place, and the
Impatience of remaining in so tedious a condition, persuaded him to a
resolution of leaving the Sea, and making his journey by Land, in case the Wind
did not turn favorable within four and twenty hours. But the wind blew so
strong from the shore, that it was not possible for us to land, much less to
proceed in our Voyage by Sea. So that it seemed, that not the Sea only, but the
Heavens and the Earth also had set themselves in opposition to the Ambassadors
design.

And on the 28. we had a storm so dismal by reason of the obscurity of a very
dark night, that we were very much amazed to find our selves the next morning
at anchor near an Island about two leagues further from Elsinore than we were
before.

The 29. the wind not being so high as it had been before, his Excellence
prepared for his departure by Land, taking only nine of his Domestics with
him, and leaving the rest with his Lady, who made her Voyage by Sea. I was one
of the nine that attended on the Ambassador, and am for that reason obliged to
give a general account of the manner and occurrences of his Excellencies
Journey.

First we crossed the Island of Sealand passing to Fredrixburgh, so that we
arrived at Cossor the last day of the year. The next, being New Years day, we
passed from Sealand to the Isle of Funhen (which was four Dutch miles) in a
Galliot, and the same day advanced eight miles further cross the Island. The
next day, from Funhen we arrived in Holstein, making two miles in a
Fisher-boat, and from thence by Aldersleven and Frentsburgh we arrived at
Hamborough. From Hamborough by Bockstoud we came to Bremen, and from Bremen
into West falia, so that we arrived at Munster on the eleventh of January. From
Munster we came to Cologne upon the Rhine, from Cologne to Malines in Flanders,
and from Malines to Brussels on the 22. From Brussels in six days we came to
Calais, taking Alst, Gaunt, Bruges, Newport, Dunkirk, and Graveline by the way.
From Calais to Dover we made seven leagues by Sea, from Dover we came post to
Gravesend, and from thence on the 30. of January up the Thames to London.

The Consideration of the State of the times in which this journey was taken,
made his Excellence travail about in this manner, rather than follow his direct
road thorough Holland, which had been the shorter cut. And because we were to
pass near the Frontiers, the Ambassador thought good also to conceal his
Quality, and travel incognito, especially after he was out of the Dominions of
the King of Denmark; by which means he avoided at the same time another
inconvenience, which was the Receptions and Ceremonies, which his Dignity
without doubt would have drawn upon him in his jorney, which would have much
retarded him in his design of making all possible haste into England, whither
the King his Master had recalled him. In obedience to which, his Excellence so
much enforced himself, that from the day of our setting forth, to our arrival
at Cologne we traveled very often eight Dutch miles or sixteen leagues a day,
and so we were forced many times to travel in the night also, In the mean time
the weather, which was rainy at our setting out from Copenhagen, was returned
again to its former Extremity, and we making our passage almost all the way
from Elsinore to Cologne in Post-waggons which were uncovered, we were so
incommoded with cold, that we were almost convinced, that it was scarce any
thing colder in Russia. Betwixt Cologne and Calais the weather was more
favorable, ^e had the convenience to travel all this ^ay by Coach, except
about eight leagues ^etwixt Gant and Bruges upon the Canal.

At Cossor in Sealand we found his Royal ^ighness the Prince of Denmark's
Master of ^orse, sent thither by his Majesty to attend ^is Excellence thorough
his Dominions as ^r as Hamburg. At Hamburg we made so mean ^n Entry, that we
had scarce any thing to be seen in our Chariots but hay and straw, especial^y
in the Ambassadors, which was as well ^urnisht with them as any of his
followers. Yet this could not prevent a complement ^ext day from the
Magistrates, who expressed much trouble that the Ambassador had not ^een received
into their Town, with such ^ublick testimonies, as might have demon^rated their
Amity with the Crown of England, and the honor which was due to his Quality.
His Excellence having returned his ^hanks, gave them to understand, that in
that juncture of time he was obliged to pass ^s privately as was possible, and
that the greatest favor they could do him then, wa^ to comply with his design.
We stayed i^ this City but two days, the very first day being enough to
discover us. At our parting from thence, I met a young Merchant of tha^ Town,
with whom I had contracted a strict Friendship at Mosco, whither in a short
time he was to return. His Excellence being so well known here, he permitted
the English Resipent, and several English Merchants to accompany him out of the
Town. We pas^ the Elbe, as we had past the Volga in Moscovie, upon sledges; and
indeed the Elb^ was so frozen and covered with snow, that it would have endured
any kind of load whatsoever.

The same day we departed from Hamburg, we were surprised with an accident at
Bockstoud, a Town depending on the Crown of Sweden. For being upon the point of
departing after dinner, and having hired fresh wagons to make three or four
leagues that night, it happened that the Secretaries wagoner would not stir,
unless there might go along with him another wagoner his Comrade, who would
have been as useless to us as his wagon. The Secretary not able to bring him
to reason by fair means, tried what he could do by foul, and by clapping a
pistol to his head would have forced him along with him. But immediately his
pistol was wrested from him, and as they were putting themselves into a posture
to abuse him, we interposed so effectually, that he was rescued out of the
hands of a barbarous rout of peasants and Mechanics. But whilst the Secretary
was going to the Governor to desire him to take some order in the case, we
found the rest of us beset by above a hundred of them, some of them
endeavoring to rob us of our goods, and others to do violence to our persons;
so that besides a little Spaniel which they stole from us, we lost four or five
of our fire arms. Amongst the rest we had a Page lost his Periwig in the
Combat, and having then a garment on in the fashion of the Samojedes, which for
better resistance of the weather, he made no scruple to wear in his travels, he
looked in that habit so unlike a Christian, that the rabble took particular
delight to toss him up and down with his Furs in the snow. His Excellence that
was but just gone before, being surpised with the alarm of the skirmish, came
back thereupon, and at length the business was composed, but so, that whereas
we had usually five wagons before, we went from hence but with four, and the
Page made the rest of his voyage without his Periwig. The manner of our
Treatment at this place persuaded us very strongly, that the Ambassador was not
known in this Town, in which we found the People so unkind, that we might
perhaps with as much reason call it Poneropolis, as that to which Philip King
of Macedon gave that name, being inhabited only by a sort of rude and raskally
People.

The next day being arrived at Bremen we understood by the Gazette that my Lord
Morpeth was prisoner at Wesel, and that the Hollanders had taken him and his
Train, some two or three miles from Munster in his way to Cologne. True it is
the Gazette made not mention of his name, but all the circumstances of the news
were clear indications to us, that it was his Lordship whom it meant: which his
Excellence applied to himself as a dangerous Omen. And having designed to
follow him upon the same Road he took all possible care to avoid the like
misfortune; for which cause he had a particular care to make a short stay in
every Town, and to assume only the bare title of a Gentleman. In which act one
might have said, his Excellence seemed as well to represent the person of the
King his Master in his Exile, as he had lately done in the Pomp and Splendor
of his Restoration.

In short we were no sooner arrived at Munster, three days after our departure
from Bremen, but we understood the truth of the News, and all the circmstances
of my Lord Morpeth's being betrayed in that Town. For by accident we lay in the
very same Inn he had lain in before us. And because it was very easy for us to
have been discovered by the Liveries, though the same were something disguised,
to prevent all intelligence that might be given to the Governor of Wesel, his
Excellence thought good to remove with all speed from Munster, lest we should
be surprised in the same manner. So that we staid at Munster not above four or
five hours, which Expedition was so fortunate to us, that we escaped the like
danger thereby. After we were gone a day or two's journey from the Frontiers,
we were not much sollicitous any more, unless it were in our passage betwixt
Calais and Dover: but his Excellence managed this Voyage with that prudence and
caution, that at last we arrived very happily in England.

At Rochester we understood that the Ambassadors Lady was arrived at London,
fifteen days before, and as for himself, that the Court did not expect his
coming so soon after they knew the condition of my Lord Morpeth. Insomuch that
the Court was altogether surprised with his arrival, as they were soon after
with that of his Son, who arrived three days after my Lord his Father, the
States having released him and his Train, after some days confinement at Wesel.

The Ambassador being returned to London in this manner, went immediately to
pay his Duty to his Majesty, carrying with him the Letter which the Tzar had
delivered him at Mosco. The King having first signified the satisfaction he
received to see him returned from so long a Voyage, at length amongst other
things spoke to him about the Embassy which he had lately received from the
Tzar, and commanded him in order to his justification, to give in writing a
Narrative of all that had passed relating to himself in his first Embassy:
Which he performed to the confusion of the Ambassador that brought the
accusation against him. And for fear I should leave this work imperfect, I
thought it necessary to adjoyn to it my Lords Apology; for without doubt it
would have been a great indecorum, having brought the Reader thus far, to leave
him in suspense in a business of so great Importance. True it is, the most
things that are contained in it have been mentioned by me before, yet there are
several passages also which I reserved for this place, to give the Reader more
satisfaction and entertainment. The Style being plain, is therefore the more
proper for this Relation, whose business it is only to give an ingenuous
Narrative, entirely conformable to the truth, and which answers directly to the
Articles which the Tzars Ambassador presented against his Excellence. I thought
it not necessary to introduce the Articles by themselves, because they are all
of them particularly refelled in his Answer, made in the following form ^n his
Excellencies behalf, as a justification ^f his proceedings.

The Lord Ambassadors Apology.
HAving received a writing from His Tzarskoy Majesty's Ambassadors, where^ they
testify the extraordinary affection of His Tzarskoy Majesty toward his Royal
^ajesty, and the great honors therefore ^ewn to the Earl of Carlisle His
Royal ^ajesties late Ambassador, justifying more^er all the proceedings of his
Tzarskoy Majesty's Commissioners treating with the ^d Earl of Carlisle, and
laying on the ^ontrary an heinous charge of several Ar^les against the said
Earl of Carlisle con^rning his Demeanor and Conduct in the ^d Embassy; We
therefore return for an^er, a Narrative of the whole matter of ^ct as the said
late Ambassador extraordi^ry upon his Royal Majesty's Command ^th stated it for
his own just and necessary ^dication.

And first, at the said Earl of Carlisle^ first descent upon the bridge of
Archangel, there met him one Bogdan, declaring he was appointed his Pristaf,
whom therefore the said Earl of Carlisle saluted and respected accordingly.
And when they should have gone toward the place appointed for his lodging, the
said Pristaf took the right hand of the Ambassador, and said that he had such
orders from Knez Sherbatof the Governor of Archangel. Which the Earl of
Carlisle refusing to submit to, was forced to stand upon the open bridge, in
the sight o^ so many strangers of several Nations about half an hour, till the
Pristaf might send up to the Castle for the Governors further pleasure, who at
last, sent and altered the Pristafs orders.

Moreover the Earl of Carlisle being upon his journey from Archangel toward
Vologda, the Pristaf sent before to Knez Ivan Machailovitz Governor of the
Vaga, that me^ might be ready at Arsinoa for drawing up the boats. But the said
Governor threatened the Strelitz that was sent, reviled the Pristaf, and spoke
slightingly of the Ambassador, nor took any care for providing me^ necessary.
Insomuch that the Ambassador was left there in a strange Country, no^ knowing
how either to go forward or backward, till by his own great care he got me^
together, being enforced to hire them at his own expense from Arsinoa to
Yagrish. Which money indeed, at the Ambassadors departure from Mosco was repaid
him.

Further, the Stolnick Offonassy Evanovich Nestrof, and the Diack Evan
Stepanovich Davidof coming to Vologda as new Pristaves to conduct the
Ambassador to Mosco, the said Stolnick at his first coming to the Ambassador,
said to him, that His Tzarskoy Majesty had ordered them and the Ambassador to
come to Mosco, naming themselves before the Ambassador.

Likewise the said Stolnick refused absolutely to furnish the Gentlemen with
sledds convenient, and would only allow them such bare sledds as are used by
the common Mousicks, so that the Ambassador was forced to buy those sledds for
the Gentlemen with his own money.

Also the said Stolnick was so strict in matters of provision, that the
Ambassador was refused one single egg for his use, the Chalavalnicks or
Purveyors alleging that they durst not do it without the said Stolnicks order,
and that they durst not wake him.

Besides, at Yeroslaf, Troitza, and other places upon the way, the Ambassador
was unnecessarily detained several days from proceeding on his journey to his
Tzarskoy Majesty.

And at last, the Ambassador being arrived at the Yaws, some four English miles
from Mosco, and having staid there two days, was overnight upon the fourth of
February told by the said Stolnick, that he had orders for his entering into
Mosco the next day, and therefore desired him to be ready by nine a clock in
the morning, which he was. Nevertheless he and his whole retinue were staid all
the next day at the Yaws till four in the evening, without any meat or drink,
or the least refreshment whatsoever, and at that unseasonable hour, orders came
for their going on to Mosco.

And being more than half way thither, then came new orders, that the
Ambassador should not make his Entry that night but turn into a village yet
worse than the Yaws.

There came that night to the Ambassador the Diack Lookian Timopheovich Golozof
from the Tzar, laying the fault upon the messengers, sent with orders from
Mosco, who he said mist their way to the Yaws.

The Ambassador spoke neither then, nor at any time else of all or any of the
former indignities, but this being so notorious, he demanded reparation, and
that till then he would not stir hence toward Mosco,

And yet Demente Bashmacof Diack of the Taynich Deal coming to him the next
morning and promising in his Tzarskoy Majesty's name, he should have
satisfaction, in less than a quarter of an hours space he condescended to make
his Entry, and did not spend half an hour in setting forward.

But whereas his Tzarskoy Majesty Commissioners formerly, as now His
Ambassadors, say that the Earl of Carlisle spun out that day also until the
evening, it was not so. But all the time that was spun out, was partly by
Doomnoy Duoranin Evan Offanassevich Pronchissof, who though he were sent forth
to the Ambassador to be his Pristaf into Mosco, sat in his Sledd, formalizing a
long time, that the Ambassador should first come out of his Sledd to him, and
after a tedious capitulation and agreement before so many spectators whereby
they were to come out together, yet the said Doomnoy Duoranin making a feint of
stepping forward hung in the air among the arms of his attendants to cheat the
Ambassador.

And the other stay, which was very long, was by reason of those troops of
Gentlemen and others that were present, who to make the guard continue and hold
out to the eye were forced ever and anon to make a stand, while those that had
met the Ambassador before should under the blind of those next to him gallop
away behind to fill up a new station forward.

And so it was night again before the Ambassador could enter, which might have
been prevented by expecting one day longer, as the Ambassador moved the Diack
of the Taynich Deal.

But those great Wax-tapers, which the Ambassadors speak of in their paper,
were in so good order, that it is evident it was resolved upon a night Entry in
good time before hand.

As to the Ambassadors first Audience it was indeed agreed upon, that it should
be upon the ninth of February, and the Doomnoy Duoranin told the Ambassador
that was a great sign of his Tzarskoy Majesty's favor, yet it was afterward
put off that it must not be till the eleventh of February, for what contrary
reason the Ambassador knows not.

Also, although at his first Audience he told his Tzarskoy Majesty, that he had
particular commands from his Royal Majesty concerning Sir John Hebdon, yet the
Ambassador was refused to deliver that recommendatory Letter concerning him to
his Tzarskoy Majesty's own hand, but obliged to tender it to his Commissioners.

Also at coming to Conference, the Lords Commissioners stood up always within
the Room, without moving to meet the Ambassador, and also at all Conferences
they took the high end of the Table.

The Ambassador delivered at the first Conference a very treatable and courtly
demand of reparation for the miscarriage of his Entry.

And though he then signified that he could not proceed to other matters of
State till that were rectified, yet upon the Commissioners earnest motion, and
engaging their honors toward his Reparation, he at the same time delivered in
another Proposition concerning the restitution of the Privileges.

And the Restitution of the Privileges is a matter of State jointly concerning
the true brotherly love of both great Princes, and certainly the foundation
thereof was laid in the Privileges.

To these first Propositions of the Ambassador the Commissioners gave in their
answer, Wherein they assume all their own Titles, and name themselves before
the Ambassador Extraordinary, but him they call only plain Knez Charles Howard.

Also speaking of his Royal Majesty's Father, they call him only Slauopamite,
of glorious memory, but his Tzarskoy Majesty's Father Blagenniopamite, of ever
blessed memory.

Concerning the Ambassadors Entry they now add another pretense, the long time
of arraying the Courtiers and military Troops for his Reception.

They say the Ambassador ought not before he came into Mosco to have demanded
reason and reparation of his being staid the first day.

They accuse the Ambassador for staying the second day.

And they say the Messengers by whom the delay was caused had been punished,
which was not so: and if ever the least thing had been done in order thereto
the Ambassador had desisted, and he signified frequently to the Commissioners,
that he himself would have interceded for their pardon.

Then as to the matter of Privileges, for answer they raise an high accusation
against the whole Russia Company, word for word as it was delivered to Prideaux
Cromwell's Agent, of which nothing was then or ever since proved in particular.

But whereas his Tzarskoy Majesty had given to understand to his Royal Majesty,
as if the Privileges had been taken away in detestation of the late Rebellion
in England, that is only mentioned for numbers sake.

But they lay great stress upon a Letter sent (they say) by his late Majesty to
his Tzarskoy Majesty by Luke Nightingale, desiring the abrogating of the
Privileges.

And in this their first answer they conclude positively against the granting
any Privilege, not so much as blanching it in hansom words, as his Tzarskoy
Majesty did to Cromwell upon the same occasion, wherein he says thus, And now
we the Great Lord by reason of these times of War cannot enter upon a review of
these businesses, but for the future Our Tzarskoy Majesty's order will be to
the English Merchants, such as may stand with the quiet, advantage, friendship,
and amity of both great Nations.

Indeed in some Papers afterward the Commissioners, as now the Ambassadors, do
lay the excuse upon the wars, seeming to promise something when they should be
at an end, but in loose words, and to be expounded according to time and
occasions, as the Doomnoy Duoranin Evan Offanassevich Pronchissof did not
disown, when the Ambassador (not in order to treat or close, which he could not
upon any such conditions) but for better information discoursed with him
concerning the words wherein they expressed that overture.

And in this the Commissioners first paper aforesaid they conclude with an
exception against the Title most Illustrious given by the Ambassador at his
first audience to his Tzarskoy Majesty, according to the Title used in his
Royal Majesty's Letter, and by his Predecessors to the Predecessors of his
Tzarskoy Majesty. Whereas that first Speech of the Ambassadors was all thorough
composed of the greatest honor and courtship to his Tzarskoy Majesty that any
thing could be imagined.

Nevertheless the Posolkoy Diack Almaze Evanof one of the Ambassadors
Commissioners did also in open Precas say, that the Title most Illustrious used
by the Ambassador was an unmannerly expression.

The Ambassador being still further off any reparation of the former affront,
but rather finding it fixed upon him by the Commissioners first answer, and
considering the abrupt striking off the Privileges, was not in case to
propound any further matter of State, and therefore replied only according to
the occasions naturally given him by the Commissioners paper.

That as to the excuse of the Messengers missing their way within four miles of
Mosco, it was scarce possible and not probable, because the same first day
early in the morning, men that came to Sir John Hebdon at the Yaws from his
Tzarskoy Majesty upon a dishonorable occasion found the way very easiy.

And whereas this first pretense was now inched out with another, the long
arraying of the troops that they could not be in readiness the first day
(whereas to the contrary, the Ambassadors themselves say now in their Paper,
that those troops waited for the Earl of Carlisle that first day from morning
till night) he says, That it is hard for him to conceive, whereas his Tzarskoy
Majesty is able at so great distances, by the good orders of his Generals in
his absence, to embattle so numerous and victorious Armies upon the sudden
opportunities of fighting an Enemy, that after his so slow advancing from
Vologda, and lying three days almost under the Gates of his Tzarskoy City, the
continual attendants upon his own person, where they can learn nothing but the
most exquisite order, should not in a whole day be in a posture to receive the
Ambassador of a Friend; Which is so honorable as nothing can be said more, and
yet these are the words which the Commissioners, and now the Ambassadors,
complain against as reproachful to his Tzarskoy Majesty's Armies. And
afterward upon his saying, they herein perverted his meaning, the
Commissioners then, and now the Ambassadors, quarrel yet further; And so
wherein the Ambassador says, they are ill founded in their exception against
Illustrissimus, as though it were not lawful for a Stranger in Moscovy to speak
truth, and an Ambassador must discourse under tuition.

He also required in his Majesty's name the sight of that Letter of
Nightingales, and that being so false and reflecting so highly upon his late
Majesty's memory, it might be delivered into his hands. Which the Commissioners
would never produce, though kept it up still as a pretense, and at the last
being urged to it, said that it was lost, but as soon as they could find it
(which they never would) he should have it.

He also alleged his Tzarskoy Majesty's promise by letter to his Royal Majesty
to restore the Privileges at the coming of His Ambassador.

He answered the accusation against the Merchants, replied to their exception
against Illustrissimus, and admonished the Commissioners of their omitting his
Royal Majesty's Title, Defender of the Faith, of which the Ambassadors also may
do well to take notice.

After this the Ambassador was invited to dine with his Tzarskoy Majesty.

Shellimetof near Stolnick to his Tzarskoy Majesty when he came to tell the
Ambassador dinner was ready, said, The Tzar commanded him to come to dinner.

The Doomnoy Duoranin Evan Offonassevich Pronchissof propounded to the
Ambassador from his Tzarskoy Majesty, that the Cafemouskoy and Sibierskoy
Tzarwicks should sit at a table superior to the Ambassadors table.

His Tzarskoy Majesty, though he had only his cap on that day, yet did not stir
it to the Ambassador when he came in to dinner, as neither was he pleased to
stir His cap at the private Audience hereafter mentioned.

His Tzarskoy Majesty caused not the Ambassador to sit down with him at his own
table, but at a table below in the Hall with a Doomnoy Duoranin and a Stolnick.

The Boyars dined at a table at the upper end of the Hall, and their ceremonies
during dinner time were still performed to them before the Ambassador.

The Ambassador had not a napkin allowed him at dinner.

Upon the receipt and return of other papers betwixt the Ambassador and the
Commissioners, who satisfied him in nothing, but still affected to make the
breaches wider, he desired to have a private Audience of His Tzarskoy Majesty,
which though he moved the twenty second of March he could not procure ere the
twenty second of April.

And the Commissioners tell the Ambassador, that in case of such Audience he
must not speak of business.

In the mean time His Tzarskoy Majesty upon Palm Sunday, inviting the
Ambassador to see the Ceremonies, the Stolnick that was sent to conduct him,
stepped first into the coach and would have the upper hand. The Ambassador would
not go upon that condition, so that he was fain to expect till contrary orders
came from his Tzarskoy Majesty.

The Ambassador in that private Audience acquainted his Tzarskoy Majesty how
the affairs stood betwixt him and his Commissioners, answered the reasons
against the Privileges, revealed the secret of his Royal Majesty's affection
toward his Tzarskoy Majesty, desired reparation concerning his Entry, and
complained of the Doomnoy Duoranin Evan Offonassevich Pronchissof.

For he knew that the said Doomnoy Duoranin strove upon all occasions to make
his person odious and to obstruct his affairs.

For the said Doomnoy Duorarin, the Ambassador desiring that the English Women
might have leave to visit his Lady (there being a restraint to the contrary)
spoke of it to his Tzarskoy Majesty in so licentious a sense as made the demand
appear ridiculous.

Also the Ambassador desiring that Beuchlin a Dutchman (who dwelt in his house,
and had a continual free Cabal of Dutch Spies upon the Ambassador; while before
the first audience none were suffered to enter to the Ambassador, and always
after the admittance very severe, some examined, others repulst, others beaten)
might be removed, specially seeing the Lodging was so strait, that Almaz Evanof
the Posolskoy Diack and one of the Commissioners said, it was good for the
English Gentlemen to ly close together lest the Rats should run away with them,
and the Dutch openly bragging, that he should continue there in spite of the
Ambassador, the said Doomnoy Dvoranin as being the Ambassadors Pristaf, being
often urged to effect it, did either neglect or hinder it, so that he continued
there at pleasure.

Also the said Doomnoy Dvoranin telling the Ambassador one day, that the King
of Poland had sent a Messenger to his Tzarskoy Majesty, to beg the mercy and
grace of his Tzarskoy Majesty to grant him peace, and the Ambassador replying,
that those were terms which the most subjugated Princes did never descend to,
but that he was glad to hear his Tzarskoy Majesty's affairs were in so good a
posture, the said Doomnoy Dvoranin went forthwith and acquainted his Tzarskoy
Majesty with the first part of the Ambassadors reply, but so disguised and with
so ill a gloss, that he thereby incensed his Tzarskoy Majesty highly against
the Ambassador.

Beside his Tzarkoy Majesty having (as is said) done the Ambassador the honor
to invite him to see the Solemnities of Palm Sunday, the said Pronchissof
afterward asking the Ambassador how he liked it, and the Ambassador witnessing
his satisfaction in so venerable a Ceremony, the said Doomnoy Dvoranin went
strait to his Tzarskoy Majesty, and told him, the Ambassador said it was a
pretty Comedy, which also displeased his Tzarskoy Majesty, as good reason.
Whereas the Doomnoy Dvoranin himself only used those words to the Ambassador,
asking him if it were not a pretty Comedy.

Also the Ambassador discoursing with the said Doomnoy Dvoranin concerning Tzar
Evan Basiliwich, and his desire and progress toward a marriage with a Lady of
the blood Royal of England, he most irreverently as to both Princes replied,
that the said Tzar Evan Basilowich had many such women, speaking it in a very
ill sense.

Moreover the said Doomnoy Dvoranin took occasion several times to vilify the
Present sent by his Royal Majesty to his Tzarskoy Majesty in the presence of
the said Ambassador, and to say, that when he saw the Tin shine he was in good
hopes it had been Silver.

But of these things the Ambassador never spoke at any time, till upon this
forcible occasion of his own vindication. But the said Doomnoy Duoranin having
spoke dishonorably and fasly concerning the posture of His Royal Majesty's
affairs, and telling him to his face, as if he were a Posoulnick or agent of
the Muscovia company, and having told the Ambassador that he neglected his
Majesty's affairs in respect of the Merchants, and threatening him with his
Tzarskoy Majesty's displeasure and that His Tzarskoy Majesty would complain of
him to his Royal Majesty, as if he had transgressed his instructions (which
certainly the Doomnoy Duoranin was never acquainted with by the Ambassador) he
charged him therewith before his Tzarskoy Majesty.

The success it seems of that private Audience was this. The Ambassador having
together with the Enlish Copy subscribed, given in a Latin Copy, translated as
near as possible, but not subscribed but by his Secretary, having only prepared
it to save time, and as an help to their Russ translation, because one of the
Commissioners Golozof understood Latin, this Golozof was employed several days
to the Ambassador to persuade him subscribe ^he Latin translation also.

This Golozof pressed under that color and pretext, that so many things being
said therein to the honor of His Tzarskoy Majesty, and of his Royal Majesty's
affection toward Him, so that it was most fit to continue upon Record, this
also being subscribed, it would be so much the stronger, and as under two
witnesses. But the Ambassador refused, as not being his own language.

Yet at last, though he guest at the true reason, to give His Tzarskoy Majesty
that satisfaction, he subscribed it with this addition, Except any difference
with the English, which (...) soon as they had obtained they discovered
forthwith their true intention.

First they complain, as if he had spoke with dis-respect of Tzar Ivan
Basilovich, where he says, That first and great Founder of the Amity betwixt
the English and Russian Crowns, and of the Privileges to the English Nation
Tzar Ivan Basilovich, because he added not all his other Titles, and they
required the Ambassador should alter that expression accordingly, which, how
reasonable soever, he did.

Though the Commissioners, nevertheless the private Audience having been upon
the twenty second of April, gave to the Ambassador a paper of the twenty fourth
of May, wherein they named the late King only King Charles, and his present
Majesty's former Ambassador the Lord Culpepper, the messenger William
Culpepper. Which horrid, and probably wilful mistake they would never alter
till the Ambassador had taken his last leave of His Tzarskoy Majesty.

Then they, as now the Ambassadors, accuse him for an expression concerning the
falling in of the Windows at their first abrupt refusal of the Privileges;
which notwithstanding was very true.

And whereas they then, and now the Ambassadors, lay much load upon an
Expression about the loan of ten thousand pood of Silver desired by Knez Peoter
Semonovich, as if the Ambassador therein offered an indignity to His Tzarskoy
Majesty, an indignity to the friendship betwixt both Princes, transgressed His
Instructions, and his Tzarskoy Majesty would, (as he has now done) complain
thereof to His Royal Majesty: the Ambassador did then only speak in His Royal
Majesty's person, I hope that such a sum was not desired for such an end, etc.
And His Royal Majesty does still hope so.

Then as to the Doomnoy Duoranin, notwithstanding so just and high a complaint
preferred against him, he was the man chosen to come next from His Tzarskoy
Majesty to enquire of the Ambassadors health, and was so employed for many days
as before.

At last indeed there was another Pristaf appointed in his place, truly a much
civiler person, but of lesser quality, which is the present Ambassador of His
Tzarskoy Majesty. But it was signified from His Tzarskoy Majty. by Gregory
Cosmevich the other Pristaf to the Ambassador, that this removal was upon the
Doomnoy Duoranins own desire to be dismissed.

Also no Reparation was given the said Ambassador against the Doomnoy Duoranin,
but in a paper afterward delivered, he was justified in all these enormities,
and the Ambassador accused, that after all these provocations, and the charge
given up against him to His Tzarskoy Majesty, the Ambassador would not as
formerly discourse with him of affairs of the Embassy, as if he had there in
affronted the said Doomnoy Duoranin.

Concerning the Entry nothing of Reparation would be given.

The Ambassador had during this time a power that came for mediating betwixt
His Tzarskoy Majesty and the King of Poland, which he imparted to his Tzarskoy
Majesty, and He kindly accepted, but not being pleased to effect any thing in
the Privileges it fell to the ground.

And therefore the Ambassador having even from the 29. of February intimated
his desire to depart, and having been held up from time to time several months
to no end, so that he lost the Winter way to Riga, to the prejudice of his
Royal Majesty's occasions, pressed importunately for a dispatch, which it was
long before he could obtain, and when near obtaining in one and the same day
had three times contrary orders sent him about his departure.

At the Ambassadors taking leave of his Tzarskoy Majesty, recredentials were
given him, wherein his Royal Majesty's Title of Defender of the Faith was
omitted, and contrary to the mutual trust due to an Ambassador the Copy was,
although he demanded it, flatly refused him.

After he had taken his leave of his Tzarskoy Majesty, it seems his Tzarskoy
Majesty was desirous to have placed some marks of his generosity upon the
Ambassador and his retinue, and the not receiving of them is used by the
Ambassadors of his Tzarskoy Majesty in aggravation against him, whereas that
business past in this manner. The Ambassador, it is true, had for several
reasons hereafter expressed resolved, that it became him not to receive the
Presents, unless those things were rectified. And therefore, to avoid the ill
aspect of refusing them after they should be sent, he resolved also first to
send for the Ockolnichoy Vasilia Semonovich Volinskoy and for Larivon Mitrevich
Lopookin Posolkoy Diack to communicate his reasons: For which he thought he had
time enough, his Pristafs (whose office it is) not having yet advertised him.
But contrariwise Lookian Timopheovich Golozof the Diack, the Ambassador being
at dinner, sends him word by a servant, that he was coming with the Presents.
The Ambassador rising from Dinner, and about to send to the Ockolnichoy and
Posolkoy Diack aforesaid, desired the Servant to stay a little, when on a
sudden Lookian comes in with the Sables. The Ambassador began to discourse
soberly with him of his unexpected coming, and the reasons why he deliberated
upon refusing the Present. Which Lookian would not endure to hearken to, but
interrupting the Ambassador continually, without any patience and with great
clamor, flung rudely away from him and departed.

Vasilius Semonovitch Volinskoy came the next day to the Ambassador, desiring
from his Tzarskoy Majesty to be informed of the reasons why he had refused the
Presents.

The Ambassador it seems had in order to his departure demanded several things
of Common right or courtesy,

As Satisfaction to the English Merchants for their old debts and houses. For
this the Commissioners reduced the debts within twenty six Rubles according to
their account, and for houses nothing.

That all English Merchants desiring to repair home may have their Passes to go
over Sea with their Wives and Families without molestation. This had a
satisfactory answer.

But to the third, That justice might be done the English Merchants for their
debts, there was no care at all of it, but to the contrary great severity
toward them: so that this frustrated the former answer which was satisfactory.

That all his Majesty's Subjects of whatsoever other condition may upon their
desire have full liberty to return. To which there would no answer be given in
writing: But the verbal answer was, that they who have once taken service under
his Tzarskoy Majesty, though not expressed for life, yet if not expressed for
term of Years, are thereby Servants as long as his Tzarskoy Majesty pleases. As
it seemed they intended to practice it in the case of General Dyel and
Lieutenant General Drummond, who were forced so long to march about Mosco with
his Royal Majesty's Letter, and could get none to receive it.

That Colonel Baily accused of Treason by Cherillo Clopoue might be brought to
a speedy trial. Which though his accuser was in Town and promised, yet would
not be done.

That Colonel James Mein exiled with his Wife and Family into Siberia might if
guilty have mercy, if guiltless justice. See the Civility of the answer,
Colonel Jacob Mein is sent into Siberia for a great fault, and it is not fit
to recall him out of Siberia.

That Colonel Cuningham accused of Treason might be brought to a speedy trial.
Which would not be granted.

That Mrs. Francis Rose according to his Royal Majesty's desires by Letter may
have liberty to return into England, her Husband also desiring it. Which was
not granted, but her being of the Russian Religion alleged, as extinguishing
her allegiance.

The Ambassador upon a general review of these and all other passages in his
Negotiation gave for answer and reason of his Refusal, Defender of the Faith
omitted in the Kings Title, The late Kings Title and Lord Culpeppers not
amended, No satisfaction about his Entrance, Nor concerning Pronchissof, His
Tzarskoy Majesty holding himself for affronted, etc. The Privileges as good as
refused, Nightingales Letter pretended to be lost, No justice to English
Merchants, No liberty for his Majesty's Subjects upon expiring of their
obligations to depart, Affirmed in writing, that the Moscovy Company killed the
King, Mrs. Rose, Colonel Mein, Colonel Baily, etc. Concluding that all the
effect of this Embassy had been only the release of three English common
Soldiers (taken prisoners from the Pole) after long solicitation, and upon
condition that two of them should serve his Tzarskoy Majesty. Adding moreover,
That for all these reasons he knew, that not having done his Majesty's
business, and lying still under Pronchissofs aspersion of receiving the
Merchants money, and accused by his Tzarskoy Majesty of doing an affront to
Him, it befitted him not to receive any Present at his hand. Although otherwise
he should account the least favor from his Tzarskoy Majesty's hand a perpetual
ornament, honor, and obligation to himself and Family, and would receive though
it were but a Cap cloth from Him as a Coronet, and was prepared at any time
when these things were rectified to receive any testimony of His Tzarskoy
Majesty's remembrance and affection.

After this the 24. of June the Ambassador departed from Mosco, Calthof riding
publicly and openly in his Train. The Ambassador being about half a mile out
of Town, a Writer of the Posolskoy Precaz comes in His Tzarskoy Majesty's name
to demand him. The Ambassador at last let him got hinking it not prudent to
adventure his own journey on Calthofs, and hoping to gain his dismission; which
he tried by two Letters writ back, in his journey, to the Posolskoy Diack.

These are the Letters the Ambassadors complain of in two places, as if the
Earl of Carlisle told them therein, that they did not rightly understand
themselves; Whereas the words are only, Quorsum haec vergant nescio, neque vos
ipsi scitis qui facitis, What these things tend to I know not, neither do you
your selves that do them. For indeed who knows what will be the event of all
these actions, unless he had the spirit of Prophecy? And if the Ambassador had
meant to blame the Commissioners understanding, he gives them no worse than he
first assumed to himself in this expression.

But whereas his Tzarskoy Majesty's Ambassadors pretend that Calthof was taken
away because his time was not out, and the Ambassador desired not leave for him
at his departure, it is notoriously otherwise. For the Ambassador did day by
day urge his departure, and the Diack of the Taynich Deal answered, that he
might freely depart. For the the time for which he had conditioned was fully
expired, and accordingly by the Law of Nations he was free to have departed
with the Ambassador of his own Prince, without leave asking ar any other
formality. Indeed after the Ambassadors departure, the said Calthof was forced
by imprisonment and other hardship to take conditions for two Years more.

And this was the account his Excellency gave of his first Embassy. The Answer
given from his Majesty to the Tzars Ambassadors was, that he saw no reason he
had to condemn the proceedings of his Ambassador. That if the Earl of Carlisle
was not perhaps very well informed of the Customs of the Court of Moscovy, he
had nevertheless been so strangely used on several occasions, that he had more
reason to complain than his Tzarskoy Majesty. And whereas his Ambassadors had
very earnestly pressed the Friendship the the Tzar had for the King of England;
the King declared, that he could hardly be persuaded of his affection till he
saw the Foundation re-established, viz. the Privileges of the Merchants his
Subjects. His Excellency having in this manner been justified against the
attempts of the Russ Ambassador, who had used all the art possible to destroy
him, in civility he made him a visit. After which the Russ Ambassador departed
for his own Country, not over well satisfied with his Voyage; and a while after
his Majesty dispatched Sir John Hebdon thither in quality of his Envoye
Extraordinary, but without any success. So that things continue still in the
same posture, betwixt the two Crowns of England and Moscovy.

FINIS.
Books Printed for John Starkey, at the Mitre betwixt the Middle Temple-Gate,
and Temple Bar in Fleetstreet.
Folio's.
THe Voyages and Travels of the Duke of Holstein's Ambassadors into Moscovy,
Tartary, and Persia, begun in the Year 1633. and finished in 1639. Whereto are
added, the Travels of Mandelslo from Persia into the East Indies, begun in
1638. and finished in 1640. Illustrated with diverse accurate Maps and Figures:
Written by Adam Olearius, Englished by J. Davies. The second Edition. Price
bound 18. shill. 2. The World surveyed; Or the famous Voyages and Travels of
Vincent le Blauc of Marseilles, into the East and West Indies, Persia, Pegu,
Fez, Morocco, Guinny, and thorough all Africa, and the principal Provinces of
Europe. price bound 10. s. 3. A General Collection of Discourses of the
Virtuosi of France, upon Questions of all sorts of Philosophy, made in the
Assembly of the Beaux Esprits at Paris: Englished by G. Havers. In two Volumes.
price bound 30, shill. 4. A Treatise of the Sybils: Written in French by David
Blundell. Englished by J. Davies. price bound 7. shill. 5. The History of
Barbado's St.. Christophers, Mevis, St Vincents, Antego, Martinico, Menserat,
and the rest of the Caribby Islands, in all twenty eight, in Two Books;
containing the Natural and Moral History of those Islands, illustrated with
diverse pieces of Sculpture, representing the most considerable Rarities therein
described. Englished by J. Davies. price bound 10. shill. 6. The State of the
Ottoman Empire, in Three Books; containing the Maxims of the Turkish Policy,
their Religion, and Military Discipline; Illustrated with diverse Figures:
Written by Paul Rycaut Esquire, now Consul of Smirna. price bound 10. s. 7. The
Reports of Si^ George Croke Knight, in three Volums; the Second Edition,
carefullully corrected by the Original. price bound 45. shill. 8. The Second,
Third, and Fourth parts of the Institutes of the Laws of England: Written by
Sir Edward Coke, all new printed with necessary Tables. Price bound 28. shill.
9, An Abridgement of diverse Cases and Resolutions of the Common Law,
Alphabetically digested under several Titles, by Henry Rolls, Sergeant at Law.
price bound 40. shill. 10. Bentivolio and Urania, a Religious Romance, in Six
Books; Written by Nathaniel Ingelo, D. D. The second Edition. price bound 12.
s. 11. I Ragguagli Di Parnasso, or Advertisements from Parnassus, in two
Centuries; Written originally in Italian, by Trajano Bocalini: and Englished by
the Earl of Monmouth. price bound 8. shill.
Quarto's.
12. The History of Gavel-kind, with the Etymology thereof, containing a
vindication of the Laws of England; by Sylas Tailor. price bound 3. shill. 13.
Andronicus Comnenius, a Tragedy, by John Wilson. price One shill 14. Heraclius
Emperor of the East, a Tragdey, by Lodowick Carlel Esquire. price 1 s. 15. A
brief Acccount of Mr. Valentine Greatrak's, the famous Stroker, and diverse of
the strange Cures by him lately performed. price 1. shill.
Octavo's.
16. An Abridgment in English of the Cases reported by Sir Francis Moor,
Knight; by W. Hughes. price bound 2 s. 6 d. 17. The History of Algiers, and its
Slavery, written by Sieur d' Aranda, sometime a Slave there. Englished by J.
Davies. Price bound 3. s. 18. An Historical and Geographical Description of the
Great, Country, and River of the Amazones in America; with an exact Map
thereof, Translated out of French. Price bound ^. s. 6. d. 19. The Shepherds
Paradise, a Pastoral, by the Honorable Walter Montague, Esquire Price bound 1. s.
6. d. 20. Aminta, the famous Italian Pastoral, Translated into English. Price
bound 1. s. 6. d. 21. Il Nipotismo di Roma, or the History of the Popes Nephews
from the time of Sixtus the fourth to the death of the last Pope Alexander the
seventh. Englished by W. A. Price bound 3. s. 22. The Works of the famous Mr.
Francis Rabelais, Translated out of French into English, by Sir Thomas Vrchard,
Knight. Price bound 5. s. 23. The Art of Chemistry, as it is now practiced:
written in French by P. Thybault, Chemist to the French KING, and rendered into
English by W. A. Fellow of the Royal Society. rice bound 3. s. 24. Medicina
Instaurata, or a brief Account of the true Grounds and Principles of the Art of
Physic; with the insufficiency of the Vulgar Way of preparing Medicines, and
the excellency of such as are made by Chemical Operation: by Edward Bolnest,
Med. Land. Price bound 1. s. 25. A Confutation of the Millenarian Opinion of
Christ's personal reign on earth for 1000 years by Tho. Hall. Price bound 1. s.
Twelves.
26. The present State of the PRINCES and REPVBLICKS of ITALY. written
originally in English, by J. Gailhard, Gent. Price bound. 1. s. 27. A Relation
of the French Kings late expediton into the Spanish Netherlands in the years
1^^7 and 16^8. by G. H. Price bound 1. s. 28. A guide for Constables,
Churchwardens, Overseers of the poor, Surveyors of the Highways, Treasurers of
the County Stock, Masters of the house of Correction, Bailiffs of Mannours,
Toll takers in Fairs, etc. Showing the Extent and Power of the several offices.
Collected by George Meriton: Price bound 1. s. 6. d. 29. The present State of
the Republic of Venice, with a relation of the present War in Candia, written
by J. Gailhard. Price bound 1. s. 6. d. Accidence Commene'd Grammar, and
supplied with sufficient Rules; or a new and easy Method for the Learning the
Latin Tongue, by John Milton. Price bound 8. d.
FINIS.

