A VIEW OF THE DISSERTATION UPON THE EPISTLES OF PHALARIS, THEMISTOCLES, etc.
Lately Published by the Reverend Dr. BENTLEY. ALSO Of the Examination of that
Dissertation by the Honorable Mr. BOIL. In order to the Manifesting the
Incertitude of Heathen Chronology.

(...). Plutarch in Vit. Solon.

LONDON: Printed by H. C. for John Jones, at the Dolphin and Crown in St.
Paul's Churchyard, School.

THE PREFACE.
IT is not my purpose to intermeddle in the Controversy concerning the
Epistles of Phalaris, Themistocles, Socrates and Euripides. Whether they be
genuine or no, I shall not trouble my self to enquire; nor yet whether AEsop
was such a Monster for Vgliness as some make him, or whether the Fables that go
under his Name are his, or whether we have any thing now Extant of AEsop's own
Composing. I remember a Passage in Quintilian Instit. Orat. l. 5. c. 11. Illae
quoque Fabulae quae etiamsi originem non ab AEsopo acceperunt (nam videtur
earum primus auctor Hesiodus) nomine tamen AEsopi maxim celebrantur, etc. By
which it may seem that he was of Opinion that Hesiod was the first Author of
the Fables, which bore AEsop's Name in his time. But I shall not interpose in
any of these Controversies; that which I design is (if I mistake not) a Matter
of much greater moment.

There are many that have set themselves highly to Extol and Magnify the study
of Chronology, and seem to have thought that they could never exceed in their
Encomiums of it. And it is not my purpose to rob it of its due Praises. So far
as there are hopes of attaining any certainty in it, it is without doubt a very
laudable Study; and therefore the acquainting our selves with Scripture
Chronology is very necessary, and no less profitable than it is pleasant and
delightful. For whatsoever is plainly expressed in Sacred Writ, relating to
Chronology is no less certain, than it is that the Author of the Scripture is
Truth it self. Therefore when I speak of the uncertainty of Chronology, I am to
be understood of Heathen Chronology. I grant also that even that was of good
use to Josephus, Africanus, Clemens Alexandrinus, Eusebius, and other Ancients,
for destroying the Heathens pretensions to Antiquity.

By this it appears, That I do not go about to dissuade Men from all study of
Chronology; but there are sundry things which (I think) are greatly to be
disliked in many of our modern Chronographers, that I would have Men cautioned
against. There are who cannot contend more earnestly for the most necessary and
fundamental Article of Religion, than they do for a Chronological Trifle. They
cannot endure that any should dissent from them, and fall foul upon those that
do, treating them many times with very rude and unbecoming Language. There are
also who will presume to assign not only the Year, but the Month, yea, perhaps
the very Day, in which such or such things were done; Qui horas and singula
annotarunt momenta, cum de integris seculis nihil certi adfirmare potuerint, as
one says. But that which is most to be lamented, is Men's Expense of so much
time and pains in this Study, and after all, leaving their Reader as
unsatisfi'd as they found him. Some have spent a great part of their Life in it
(as appears by the large Volumes writ upon this Subject) and these Men of
extraordinary Parts, great Learning and Diligence; so that they might have been
serviceable both to the Age in which they lived, and to Posterity, if they had
set themselves with the like Application to more useful Studies.

These are some of the things which I could not but dislike in our modern
Chronologers, and a serious Reflection upon them has made me often desire,
that some Person fit for so great a Work would make it his business to convince
the World of the uncertainty of Chronology. But not hearing of any that did
apply himself to so necessary a Work, I thought it not amiss to lay hold of the
Advantage offered me by the late Dissertation upon the Epistles of Phalaris,
Themistocles, etc. wherein I found many Passages in which the Reverend and
Learned Author does plainly bear Testimony to the uncertainty of Heathen
Chronology, and more which may be made use of in order to the manifesting of
it. If Men were fully satisfied of this, methinks there should need no more to
prevent their falling into the forementioned Errors. We might hope that they
would not contend so earnestly, nor be so impatient of contradiction, in
Matters in which they are convinced, that it is impossible to attain to any
certainty; and that they would not throw away so many precious Hours in the
Study of them, nor lay so much stress upon the Arguments that are built upon
them, as many do. They would consider that it is not easy to build certain
Conclusions upon a sandy Foundation. How little Plutarch was moved with
Arguments drawn from Chronology, is apparent from those Words of his, which I
have Transcribed in the Title Page; and also refer to in Part II. when I
enquire after the time of Solon's Death. If others had relied upon such
Arguments no more than Plutarch did, it is probable that the unhappy
Controversy about Phalaris's Epistles had never been started.

The View of the Dissertation was finished not long after it was Published; but
I resolved to wait till I saw what Answer would be made to it, believing that I
should have more assistance from the Answer, than I have had from the
Dissertation it self. And my Expectation was not frustrated; for I found that
the Honorable the Author of the Examination, had not only more frequently, but
also more plainly and directly born Testimony to the uncertainty of Chronology,
than the Reverend Author of the Dissertation had done. So that I am now apt to
flatter my self with the hope, that the Authority of two such great Names will
be of force effectually to persuade Men, not to throw away so much time upon
the Study of Chronology, nor to rely so much upon it, as some have done.

A VIEW OF THE DISSERTATION UPON THE EPISTLES OF Phalaris, Themistocles, etc.
PART. I.
THE Time of Phalaris's Tyranny cannot be precisely determined; so various and
defective are the Accounts of those that write of him. Thus the Dissert. p. 14.

Here it is plainly acknowledged, That the Time of Phalaris's Tyranny is
uncertain, and the reason that is given, is, because The Accounts of those that
write of him are so various and defective.

If then it appear, That the Accounts given by those who write of the other
Persons mentioned in the Dissertation, are no less various and defective, we
may as firmly conclude that the Time of their Flourishing or Reign is
uncertain. The same may be applied to the Cities spoken of in the Dissertation.

Eusebius sets the beginning of it, Olymp. 31. 2. Phalaris apud Agrigentinos
Tyrannidem exercet; and the end of it, Olymp. 37. 2. Phalaridis Tyrannis
destructa. By which reckoning he governed 28 Years. But St. Hierome, out of
some unknown Chronologer (for that Note is not Extant in the Greek of Eusebius)
gives a different time of his Reign, above 80 Years later than the other,
Olymp. 53. 3. or as other Copies read it, 52. 2. Phalaris Tyrannidem exercuit
annos 16. Which is agreeable to Suidas, who places him (...), about the 52
Olympiad, Dissert. p. 14.

Here the Doctor declares the uncertainty of the time of the beginning,
continuance, and end of Phalaris's Tyranny. It begun Olymp. 31. 2. according to
Eusebius, but according to St. Hierome, Olymp. 53. 3. or (as other Copies have
it) 52. 2. so that there is above 80 Years difference. It continued according
to Eusebius 28 Years; according to St. Hierome only 16. It ended according to
Eusebius, Olymp. 37. 2. according to St. Hierome, Olymp. 57. 3. Thus the Doctor.

But the time of Phalaris's Government is still more uncertain, because the
Copies of Eusebius's Chronicon do here very much vary. It seems that the Copy
which the Doctor followed sets the beginning of it, Olymp. 31. 2. But other
Copies set it, Olymp. 31. 4. Vid. Edit. Paris. A. D. 1512. Edit. Basil. A. D.
1570, and Edit. Pontaci. A. D. 1604.

Likewise his Copy sets the end of his Reign, Olymp. 37. 2. but in Scaliger's
Edition, A. D. 1606. it is set, Olymp. 38. 2. and Pontacus's Edition, together
with that at Paris, and that at Basil places it, Olymp. 39. 3. So as to the
later account of the Time of Phalaris's Tyranny, which we have in Eusebius's
Chronicon, and which the Doctor ascribes to St. Hierome, his Copy refers it to
Olymp. 53. 3. and yet he himself tells us, That other Copies place it, Olymp.
52. 2. as Scaliger's Edition sets it, Olymp. 53. 4. and the Edition at Paris,
and that at Basil, Olymp. 51. 4. From all this I may conclude, That it is
most-certainly true which the Doctor says, that The time of Phalaris 's
Tyranny cannot be precisely determined.

Stesichorus was but 6 Years old at that supposed time of Phalaris's Death.
Dissert. p. 15.

By That supposed Time of Phalaris 's Death, the Doctor means, Olymp. 37. 2. so
that the Authors whom the Doctor followed, make Stesichorus to have been 6
Years old at that time and no more. But according to Suidas's account, he could
not be of the Age of 6 Years at that time, for he says expressly, That
Stesichorus was born in that very Olympiad, viz. Olym. 37. And Eusebius seems
not to agree very well either with the Doctor's Authors, or with Suidas. For he
sets Stesichorus's Death, Olymp. 55. 1. and we are told by Lucian, in his
Macrobii, That he lived to the Age of 85 Years, according to which account he
must be born, Olymp. 33. 4. and consequently (not 6 only, but) 14 or 15 Years
old at that supposed time of Phalaris's Death. And we may here observe, That
Suidas neither agrees with Eusebius, as to the time of Stesichorus's Death, nor
with Lucian, as to the Age to which he lived. For Suidas makes him to have
died, Olymp. 56. (not Olymp. 55. 1. as Eusebius.) And whereas Lucian says, That
he lived 85. Years, according to Suidas (who places his Birth, Olymp. 37. and
his Death, Olymp. 56) he did not reach 80. Add hereto, That Eusebius makes him
to have been famous, Olymp. 42. 1. at which time he was but 20 Years old (if he
was that) according to Suidas's account of him; but it is not probable that he
should be so famed a Poet at that Age. Though they that believe the relation of
Pliny, Not. Hist. l. 10. c. 29. That a Nightingal sung in his Mouth when he was
an Infant, may perhaps not think it strange, that he should be so celebrated a
Poet so Young. But what shall we say to the Marmor Arundel. which according to
Mr. Seldom, refers Stesichorus, to Olymp. 73. 3.? Or to Conon, who ap. Photium
Cod. 186. Sect. 42. makes him Contemporary to Gelon, of whom hereafter? If
these speak of the same Stesichorus, that Eusebius and Suidas do, there needs
no more to manifest the uncertainty of Stesichorus's Age at that supposed time
of Phalaris's Death, i. e. Olymp. 37. 3.

Aristotle and Iamblichus make these three to be Contemporaries; Dissert. p.
15.

The Three, of whom the Doctor speaks this are, Phalaris, Stesichorus and
Pythagoras. And it is true, that Aristotle Rhetor. l. 2. c. 21. makes
Stesichorus to be Contemporary to Phalaris, and Iamblichus in the Life of
Pythagoras shows, That he and Phalaris were Contemporaries. But if Pythagoras
lived in the Time of Numa, he could not be Contemporary to the other Two,
according to the account that is given of them. Now Livy, l. 1. n. 18.
acquaints us that there were who gave out that Numa was Pythagoras's Scholar;
and Dionys. Halicarnas. l. 2. says, That there were many that had writ thus. I
grant that these two celebrated Historians do not approve of that Opinion
concerning the Time of Pythagoras's Flourishing; but it shows however, that it
was not certain then at what Time he Flourished, as it is uncertain still.
Those that agree that he was not so early as Numa's Time, differ much among
themselves about the Time when he lived. Livy says, That he was in Italy when
Servius Tullius Reigned at Rome, but Cicero Tuscul. Quaest. l. 1. and A.
Gellius, l. 17. c. 21. say, That he came into Italy in the Reign of Tarquinius
Superbus. According to Pliny, Not. Hist. l. 2. c. 8. he lived about Olymp. 42.
according to Dionys. Halicarn. l. 2. after Olymp. 50. according to Diog.
Laertius, in Pythagoras, about Olymp 60. according to Clemens Alex. ( Vid.
Strom. l. 1. his) Olymp. 62. according to Eusebius, in Edit. Pontaci item
Paris. and Basil, Olymp. 63. 4. in Scaligers's Edition, Olymp. 65. 1. Plutarch
in Numa, bears Testimony to the uncertainty of the Time when Pythagoras
flourished, and also to the incertitude of Chronology in general. For having
acquainted us that some affirmed that Pythagoras conversed with Numa, but that
others made him almost 5 Generations later, he adds, That it is difficult
exactly to adjust the Times; (...), etc.

Alaesa was first built by Archonides a Sicilian, Olymp. 94. 2. or, as others
say, by the Carthaginians about two Years before Diod. p. 246. So that here are
above 120 Years slipped since the latest Period of Phalaris, Dissert. p. 16.

Here we have two that bear Testimony to the uncertainty of the time when this
City was built, viz. Diodorus Sic. and the Dr. Diodorus having said, that
Archonides built the City Alesa, a little after adds, That some say that Alesa
was built by the Carthaginians, about the time that Amilcas made Peace with
Dionysius; now the same Diodorus speaks of Amilcas's making Peace with
Dionysius, Olymp. 93. 4.

Thericles, the Corinthian Potter was Contemporary with Aristophanes the
Comaedian; Athenaeus, p. 470. -- Thericles, with the Cups that had their
Appellation from him, come above 120 Years after Phalaris's Death. Dissert. p.
19.

Athenaeus's Words are these, (...), which seem to leave it uncertain whether
Thericles lived at the same time that Aristophanes did, or only in the Times
near it. But let it be granted, that he lived at the same time that
Aristophanes did, still it will not be certain that he was above 120 Years
after the Death of Phalaris. It must be confessed that, if that was certainly
true which Suidas has concerning Aristophanes, that he lived, Olymp. 114. this
would make something toward the Proof of this, That Thericles was above 120
Years after Phalaris's Death. But the Authority of Diodorus Sic. does utterly
destroy the certainty of this account of Suidas, for l. 12. he affirms, That
Aristophanes was about the Age of Pericles, and withal, that Pericles died,
Olymp. 87. 4. so that according to him, Aristophanes lived before Olymp. 87. 4.
Yea, Eusebius makes him not only to have lived, but also to have been famous,
Olymp. 85. 4. and so Thericles (if he was Aristophanes's Contemporary, as the
Doctor says that he was) might be famous for his Cups then or before. Whence it
follows, that it cannot be certain, That Thericles was above 120 Years after
the Death of Phalaris, for from Olymp. 57. 3. to Olymp. 85. 4. are not 120
Years.

Thucydides, l. 6. p. 414. relates, That at the Time of Xerxes's Expedition
into Greece (which was, Olymp. 73.) Anaxilaus, King of Rhegium, besieged
Zancle, and took it, and called it Messana, from the Peleponnesian City of that
Name, the Place of his Nativity. The same says Herodotus, l. 6. c. 23. and
agreeably to this Narrative, Diodorus sets down the Death of Anaxilaus, Olymp.
76. 1. when he had Reigned 18 Years. Pausanias Messen. p. 134. places this
same Anaxilaus of Rhegium about 180 Years higher than they do, telling, That he
assisted the Refugees of Messana, in Peleponnesus, after the second War with
the Spartans, to take Zancle in Sicily; which thereupon was called Messana,
Olymp. 29. (...). -- The time of the Messenian War agrees with that
Computation, and the ancient Catalogue of the Olympionicae puts Chionis's
Victory at that very Year, (...). Dissert. p. 24, 25, 26.

Here are many Things very uncertain, as 1st. It is uncertain whether Xerxes's
Expedition was Olymp. 73. for according to Eusebius, Xerxes begun his Reign,
Olymp. 73. 3. and if he came not to the Empire till that time, it is manifest,
as by the account given by others, so by the relation of Herodotus, that his
Expedition into Greece was not Olymp. 73. For Herodotus says, l. 7. c. 7. That
in the second Year after the Death of his Father Darius, he made an Expedition
into Egypt to reduce it, and c. 20. that having done this, he spent Four Years
complete in Preparation for the War against Greece, and set forward in the
Fifth Year. I know that there are considerable Writers who do not agree with
Herodotus, as to the Time that was taken up in Preparation against Greece (
Diodorus Sic. l. 11. making it but Three Years, Justin. l. 2. c. 10. affirming,
That he spent Five Years in it, which number of Years, Julian Orat. 1. in
laudem Constantii, doubles, making it to have taken up Ten Years) but this only
renders it more uncertain in what Year Xerxes's Expedition into Greece was: To
return to Eusebius, he sets his Reduction of Egypt, Olymp. 74. 1. and his
making a Bridge over the Hellespont, Olymp. 74. 4. (Vid. Edit. Paris. and
Basil. and Pontaci) Diodorus Sic. l. 11. refers the Expedition into Greece to
the Year following, Olymp. 75. 1. with whom Dionys. Halicarn. l. 9. agrees, as
the Marmor Arund. according to Mr. Seldom, and others agrees with Eusebius, for
they make the An. 217. to which the Marble refers Xerxes's making a Bridge over
the Hellespont, to answer to Olymp. 74. 4. Clemens Alex. Stro. 1. sets this
Expedition 297 Years after the first Olympiad, as Thucydides, l. 1. places it
in the Tenth Year after the Battle at Marathon, so that if that Battle was,
Olymp. 72. 1. (as Eusebius sets it) Xerxes's coming against Greece, was Olymp.
74. 3. But Plato de Legibus, l. 3. says, That it was but almost Ten Years
between Datis's coming into Greece, and the Fight at Salamis. It must then be
confessed, that it is not certain in what Year Xerxes's Expedition into Greece
was, nor yet that it was, Olymp. 73. as the Doctor sets it, unless Olymp. 73.
be the Printers Mistake.

2dly. It is uncertain when Anaxilaus Reigned, and when Zancle was called
Messana. For the Doctor acquaints us, That Pausanias is so far from agreeing
with Herodotus, Thucydides, and Diodorus Sic. about the time of Anaxilaus, and
of his changing the Name of that City, that their Accounts differ about 180
Years. It may perhaps be said, That if the three other eminent Historians
plainly agree upon the Time, Pausanias's Dissent will not make it less certain;
for we may conclude that it was his Mistake. The Question then will be whether
Herodotus, Thucydides, and Diodorus Sic. do plainly agree about the Time. And I
shall grant that Herodotus, and Diodorus Sic. seem to agree as to the time of
Anaxilas, or Anaxilaus, or Anaxileos, (for the Name is written thus
differently,) Herodotus, l. 6. c. 23, 24. signifying that he Reigned in the
Time of Darius, the Father of Xerxes, and Diodorus Sic. saying, That having
Reigned 18 Years, he died Olymp. 76. 1. But of his changing the Name of Zancle
into Messana, Diodorus in that place has not a Word, and though lib. 4. he does
mention the change of the Name, yet there he does not tell us either when, or
by whom it was changed. Herodotus, lib. 7. c. 164. speaks of the change of the
Name from Zancle to Messene, as Eustathius upon Dionys. Alex. also does,
alleging Herodotus; but they do not mention Anaxilaus as the Author of the
Change, nor inform us when that Change was made. I grant that Herodotus speaks
of it upon occasion of his mentioning one Cadmus, who lived at the time of
Xerxes's Expedition against Greece; but he does not say that the Change was
made then; yea, he seems to signify that Zancle had changed its Name before:
His Words are (...), which had changed its Name to Messene. To come to
Thucydides, Herodotus and he seem not to agree very well in that which they say
of the King of Rhegium. By the persuasion of Herodotus's Anaxileos, the Samians
possessed themselves of Zancle, but Thucydides's Anaxilas, cast the Samians out
of it, not long after that the Samians had driven the Sicilians out of it; so
that perhaps it may be questioned, whether those two Historians speak of one
and the same Person. Besides, though the Doctor says, That Thucydides, l. 6. p.
414. relates, that at the time of Xerxes 's Expedition into Greece, Anaxilaus
took Zancle, and called it Messana; yet the truth is, That Thucydides does not
there make any mention of Xerxes's Expedition. He tells, That the Samians who
had driven the Sicilians out of Zancle, fled from the Medes, but we cannot
infer hence, that the Name of that City was changed at the time of Xerxes's
Expedition into Greece, much less that Thucydides relates it. The Conclusion
is, That Herodotus, Thucydides, and Diodorus Sic. leave us uncertain as to the
Time of Zancle's changing its Name, and Pausanias's Testimony alleged by the
Doctor seems to make the Matter still more uncertain.

3dly. It is not certain, that Chionis was Victor, Olymp. 29. though Pausanias
does affirm positively that he was; for in the (...), in Scaliger we read,
thus, (...). Where we see that it is left doubtful, some said that Xenophon,
others, that Chionis was then Victor. But of this see more in Part 2d.

Some Sicilians planted themselves, Olymp. 96. 1. upon an Hill called Taurus,
near the Ruins of Naxos, and built a new Town there, which they called
Tauromenion, (...), from their Settlement upon Taurus; so Diodorus, l. 14. p.
282, and 305. About 40 Years after this, Olymp. 105. 3. one Andromachus a
Tauromenite, gathered all the remnant of the old Naxians, that were dispersed
through Sicily, and persuaded them to fix there; Id. l. 15. p. 411. Dissert. p.
31.

The Doctor having said, That Andromachus persuaded the Naxians to fix there,
should have added that which follows in Diodorus Sic. viz. That having stayed a
long time there, he called it Tauromenium, (...). If the Doctor had not
concealed this, it would have appeared how uncertain it is, both when, and by
whom the Name Tauromenium was given, and also that Diodorus Sic. bears
Testimony to this incertitude, since l. 14. he says, That the Sicilians, that
planted themselves there gave it that Name, Olymp. 96 1. and l. 15. that
Andromachus gave it that Appellation, Olymp. 105. 3. I need not trouble my self
to enquire, how well Diodorus Sic. his Accounts of Tauromenium agree with
Strabo's, l. 6. who makes Tauromenium to have been a Colony of the Zancleans,
and Catana of the Naxians; whereas Diodorus Sic. his later Account makes
Tauromenium to have been inhabited by the Naxians.

Democritus was too Young to know even Pythagoras, (...), says, Diogenes ( in
Vit. Democ.) and yet Pythagoras survived Phalaris, nay, deposed him, if we will
believe his Scholars. Dissert. p. 34.

Diogenes Laert. (in Vit. Democ.) seems to say (not that Democritus was too
Young to know Pythagoras, but) that he was too Young to be his Hearer. But
Eusebius makes Democritus to have been famous before Pythagoras's Death,
setting the Death of Pythagoras, Olymp. 70. 4. and Democritus's being famous,
Olymp. 69. 3. in Edit. Pontaci item Paris. and Basil, Olymp. 70. 1. in
Scaliger's Edition. The truth is, he that enquires into the Birth, Age and
Death of Democritus, will find the time of every one of them to be uncertain.
As to his Birth, Thrasyllas sets it, Olymp. 77. 3. but Apollodorus, Olymp. 80.
as Diogenes Laertius testifies; and Suidas takes notice of this difference. I
know that (...), in Diog. Laert. and (...), in Suidas, are rendered Vixit, but I
translate them Natus fuit, because Diog. Laert. adds, That he was a Year Elder
than Socrates, and he from Apollodorus tells us, That Socrates was born, Olymp.
77. 4. See him in Socrate. Whether we translate it one way or the other, it is
evident, that the account of the time either of his Birth, or when he lived and
became famous is various, and so uncertain. As to his Age. Hipparchus in Diog.
Laert. gives him 109 Years, Lucian in Longaevis, and Phlegon de Mirabilibus and
Longaevis, allow him but 104 Years; Diodorus Sic. contracts it to 90 Years.
Lastly, as to his Death, Diodorus Sic. (ibid.) sets it Olymp. 94. 1. but
Eusebius refers it to Olymp. 94. 4.

Simonides was but Seven Years old, or as others say yet unborn, when Phalaris
was killed, Dissert. p. 34.

Here the Doctor plainly bears Testimony to the uncertainty of Simonides's Age,
acquainting us, that some say that he was but Seven Years old, others that he
was unborn when Phalaris died. Whereto I add, That it is not certain that he
was either but Seven Years old, or unborn at the time of Phalaris's Death. In
Eusebius, we have four different accounts of the Time when Simonides
flourished. It is set first, Olymp. 28. 4. Secondly, Olymp. 55. afterward,
Olymp. 60. or 34. lastly, Olymp. 73. 3. Now if we follow the second of these
accounts which makes him to have flourished, Olymp. 55. 1. (in Edit. Pontaci,
item Paris. and Basil,) Olymp. 55. 2. (in Scaliger's Edit.) it is so far from
being true, that he was unborn, or but Seven Years old, that he was famous Nine
or Ten Years before the time that the Doctor pitcheth upon for Phalaris's being
slain, viz. Olymp. 57. 3. And according to the first account he was famous
above 100 Years sooner. Clemens Alex. says, That Simonides lived (...), and
that Archilochus was known after Olymp. 20. Suidas refers him to Olymp. 56. and
adds, That others place him Olymp. 62. There were more than one of that Name,
which might be the cause of these so much differing Accounts. The Marmor Arund.
takes notice of two Simonides's, both Poets, and the one Grandfather to the
other. The former it makes to have flourished Olymp. 72. 4. the latter, Olymp.
79. 3. according to Mr. Selden's Computation.

From Aristophanes, the famous Grammarian, we know that Euripides's Philoctetes
was written, Olymp. 87. This also is uncertain, for though it is true, that
Aristophanes the Grammarian in his Argument of Euripides's Medea does say, That
Medea, Philoctetes, etc. were acted, Olymp. 87. yet others name his Phaenissae,
etc. as having been acted then; so Scaliger's (...), as also Scholiast.
Aristophan.

Alcestis, the first Tragedy of Thespis, was acted about the 61. Olympiad,
which is more than Twelve Years after Phalaris's Death; Marm. Arund. Suidas
(...), Dissert. p. 40.

I shall not enquire whether Alcestis was Thespis's first Play, it is not
plainly affirmed either in the Marmor Arund. or in Suidas that it was. Suidas
does not mention it, though he names other Plays of his: He says of Thespis,
(...), but that Alcestis was acted then he has, not a Word. The Marm. Arund.
is so defective, that little or nothing can be made of it. Part of the Name
which is supposed to be Alcestis is wanting, and likewise part of the Archons
Name, yea, part of the number that should denote the Years, so that it is only
by uncertain conjecture that some make the number of the Years to be 272 or
273, the Archon to be Alcaeus, and the Play Alcestis. And whereas the Marm.
Arund. speaks of a^ He-Goat being proposed, Eusebius refer that to Olymp. 47.
2. between which and Olymp. 61. there is an interval o^ many Years. I add, That
both Plutarch and Diogenes Laert. (in Vit. Solon.) testify, That Thespis made
Plays in Solon^ Time, and Plutarch adds, That Solo^ saw him Act; withal, he
says, That a^cording to Phanias, Solon died when Hegestratus was Archon, i. e.
(as some say) Olymp. 53. 4. but (as others) Olymp. 50. 2.

Thucydides, l. 1. p. 90. and Charon Lampsacenus say, That Themistocles, when
he fled into Asia, made his Address to Artaxerxes, who was newly come to the
Throne, wherein they are followed by Cornelius Nepos, and Plutarch (in Vit.
Themistoc.) against the common Tradition of Ephorus, Heraclides, and most
others, that make Xerxes the Father then alive. Dissert. p. 80.

Here the Doctor bears Testimony to the uncertainty of the Time of
Themistocles's coming to the Persian Court, and long before him we have
Plutarch, and Cornelius Nepos witnessing it. Plutarch writes, That Ephorus,
Dinon, Heraclides, Clitarchus, and many more say, That Themistocles came to
Persia in the time of Xerxes, but that Charon Lampsacenus agrees with
Thucydides; affirming, That Themistocles came in the Reign of Artaxerxes. And
when the said Plutarch comes to give his own Opinion, he only says, That
Thucydides seems to agree better with the Annals or Chronicles, and he judged
those Chronicles not to be exact, (...), so he. As to Cornelius Nepos, I grant
that he thought that we should believe Thucydides rather than the other; but
he, withal, testifies, That the most were against Thucydides. If the
incertitude of the Time of Themistocles's coming to the Persian Court was not
sufficiently proved already, it might be made more apparent from the
disagreement of other Eminent Persons about it. For though Diodorus Sic. l. 11.
and Valerius Maximus, l. 8. c. 7. together with Eusebius, refer it to the time
of Xerxes, yet Cicero ad Atticum, l. 10. epist. 7. following Thucydides, refers
it to the time of Artaxerxes, Non vidit quid Artaxerxi polliceretur; so he.

Hiero was come to the Crown some Years before Themistocles's Banishment and
Voyage to Corcyra. It Is true, the Chronology of this part of History is not so
settled and agreed, as to amount to a Demonstration against the Letters; but
however, when joined with the Arguments preceding, at least it will come up to
a high Probability. Theophrastus in his Treatise of Monarchy, ( ap. Plutarch
Themist. p. 225.) relates, That when Hiero had sent Race-horses, and a most
sumptuous Tent to the Olympian Games; Themistocles advised the Greeks to
plunder the Tyrants Tents, ((...)) and not to let his Horses run. It Is evident
then, if Theophrastus speak properly, that Hiero was Monarch of Syracuse, when
Themistocles was at Olympia; but it is most certain he never came thither after
his Exile. But to deal fairly, it must be confessed that AElian ( Var. Hist.
9.5.) in telling this Story varies from Theophrastus; for he says Hiero himself
came to the Games: But that he would go thither in Person after he got the
Government is wholly improbable. So that if AElian be to be believed, this
Business must have been done before Hiero came to the Throne. For even in
Gelo's Lifetime, who left him the Monarchy, he kept Horses for the Race, and
won at the Pythian Games. Pythiad the 26. ( Pind. Schol. Pyth. 1. and 3.) which
answers to Olymp. 74. 3. But besides, that Theophrastus is of much greater
Authority, the other refutes himself in the very next Words. For he says, That
Themistocles hindered Hiero on this pretense, That he that did not share in the
common Danger, ought not to share in the common Festival: Where its certain by
the common Danger, he means Xerxes's Expedition, when Gelo either refused or
delayed to give the Grecians his Assistance: This Affront then was put upon
Hiero, after that Expedition. But the very next Olymp. after Hiero was in the
Monarchy, Diod. 11. p. 29. Besides these Inferences and Deductions, we have the
express Verdict and Declaration of most of the Chronologers ( Schol. Pind.
Pyth. Diod. 11. p. 29, 41. Eusebius. in Chron.) who place the beginning of Hiero's
Reign, Olymp. 75. 3. and Themistocles's Banifhment seven Years after, Olymp.
77. 2. The Arundelian Marble indeed differs from all these in the Periods of
Gelo and Hiero, which would quite confound all this Argumentation from the
Notes of Time. But either that Chronologer is quite out, or we can safely
believe nothing of History. For he makes Gelo first invade the Government two
Years after Xerxes's Expedition. But Herodotus spends half a dozen Pages in the
account of an Embassy to Gelo, from Sparta and Athens, to desire his Assistance
against the Persian. And it is agreed among all, That Gelo's Victory over the
Carthaginians in Sicily, was got the very same Day with the Battle at Salamis;
Herodot. l. 7. and Diod. l. 11. Dissert. p. 83, 84, 85, 86.

It is here plainly acknowledged, That the Chronology of this part of History
which concerns Themistocles and Hiero, is not clearly settled and agreed. And
not only so, but the Doctor in his Margin also sets down the Words of Plutarch
in Themist. wherein that Great Man plainly declares, That the Annals or
Chronicles are not so exact, that they can be depended upon, (...).

The Doctor moreover confirms the Truth of that Observation, That the
Chronology of this Part of History is not clearly agreed. For First, he says,
That Theophrastus, if he speak properly, makes Hiero Monarch of Syracuse, at
that time when Themistocles advised the Grecians not to permit his Horses to
run at the Olympian Games. Whereas (says he) if AElian be to be believed, this
Business must have been done before Hiero came to the Crown. Secondly, he says,
That the Arundelian Marble differs from all those whom he had named, ( viz.
Scholiast. Pindar. Diodorus Sic. and Eusebius) in the Periods of Gelo and
Hiero. The Doctor perceiving that it was not very easy to loose these two
Knots resolved to cut them, by diminishing the Authority of AElian, and the
Arundelian Marble, and going about to prove that the former refutes himself, of
which Attempt of the Doctors I shall only say, That I humbly conceive that he
has undertaken a difficult Task.

We have seen how plainly the Doctor does acknowledge, that this part of
Chronology is not clearly settled and agreed, and yet there are some Passages in
him that seem to say, That it is at least pretty well adjusted and agreed. As,

First, He says, That we have the express Verdict and Declaration of most of
the Chronologers, who place the beginning of Hiero 's Reign, Olymp. 75. 3. and
Themistocles 's Banishment Seven Years after Olymp. 77. 2. But we may observe,
First, That he only says, That we have the Verdict of most of the Chronologers,
he does not say of all. Secondly, Though he say of most of the Chronologers, he
names only three, Schol. Pind. Pyth. 1. Diod. 11. p. 29, 41. Eusebius. in Chron.
And as to the first of these, the Scholiast. upon Pindar, he Pyth. 1. places
the beginning of Hiero's Reign, (...), in Olymp. 85. not 75. Possibly some bold
Critic will tell us, That 85 is by the Scribes or Printers mistake put for 75,
but still it will not well agree with that which the same Scholiast has, Pyth.
3. where he makes Hiero to begin his Reign, (...). As to the time of
Themistocles's Banishment, I have not found that the Scholiast gives any
account of it. Diodorus Sic. is the next, and it is true that he speaks of
Hiero's beginning his Reign in Olymp. 75. 3. and of Themistocles's Banishment
in Olymp. ^^^ 2. but we may observe, That he speaks of Themistocles's Death in
the same Year, viz. Olymp. 77. 2. whereas it is clear that his Banishment and
Death could not be in the same Year; and therefore from Diodorus's mentioning
Themistocles's Exile in that Year, we cannot conclude that it was his meaning,
that it was the very Year of his being Banished. In that Year Diodorus gives an
account as of Themistocles's Banishment, so also of his going to Argos, his
Flight from thence to Admetus, and afterward from Admetus into Asia, his
Journey from thence to the Persian Court, and what befell him there, and lastly
of his Death. Not that all these happened within the space of one Year (for
there was a considerable time from his Banishment to his coming to the Persian
Court, and a considerable time again from his coming thither to his Death,) but
the Historian thought it best to dispatch all that concerned Themistocles's
Fall at once. Eusebius's Chronicon only remains, in which it is left uncertain
whether the beginning of Hiero's Reign is to be referred to Olymp. 75. or Olymp.
76. We read first Hieron Syracusis regnat, Olymp. 75. 3. and presently after
Hieron post Gelonem Sycucusis Tyrannidem exercet, Olymp. 76. 2. As to
Themistocles's Banishment it is not mentioned in the Chronicon, though his Flight
to the Persians is. And if it were true, that according to Diodorus Sic. his
Banishment was Olymp. 77. 2. it must be confessed, that Eusebius differs very
much from him, who sets his Flight to the Persians, Olymp. 76. 4. whereas his
Banishment was a considerable time before it, as we have seen from Diodorus
Sic. already; and it may appear further from Thucydides, l. 1. who informs us,
That his living some time at Argos, and going into other Parts of Peloponnesus,
his flying thence to Corcyra, and thence to King Admetus, and from him to Asia,
did all intervene between his Banishment and Flight into Persia. By this which
has been said it may be judged, whether we have the express Verdict and
Declaration of most of the Chronologers, that Hiero begun his Reign, Olymp. 75.
3. and that Themistocles was Banished Olymp. 77. 2.

Secondly, The Doctor says, That it is agreed among all, that Gelo 's Victory
over the Carthaginians in Sicily, was got the very same day with the Battle at
Salamis. But though he says among all, he only names Herodotus, and Diodorus
Sic. And Herodotus, l. 7. c. 166. only says, That it was reported, (...), etc.
They say, that Gelo 's Victory over the Carthaginians was the same Day with the
Victory over the Persian at Salamis; so he.

And as to Diodorus Sic. he is so far from agreeing to this, that he says, That
Gelo overcame on the same Day that Leonides fought Xerxes at Thermopylae, (...)
(...); so Diodorus, l. 11.

Concerning this Gelo, I may observe, That the accounts of the Time both of the
beginning and continuance of his Government are so various, that we cannot
think it strange that it is so uncertain, when his Successor Hiero came to the
Crown. As to the beginning of Gelo's Government (not to take notice of the
Marmor Arund.) according to Pausanias Eliac Post. he begun to Reign Olymp. 72.
2. with whom Dionys. Halicarn. partly agrees, who, l. 7. speaking of an Embassy
which was in that Year, says, That Gelo was then newly come to the Government;
but Eusebius sets the beginning of his Reign, Olymp. 73. 2. and according to
Diodorus Sic. it begun Olymp. 73. 4. As to the continuance of it, Scaliger's
Greek Eusebius says, That he Reigned 17 Years, and yet the Time of Hiero's
succeeding him is there set, so that he Reigned but Twelve Years. The Latin
Eusebius, according to one account gives him Twelve Years, according to another
only Nine: Aristotle in Polit. l. 5. c. 12. allows him Seven, and something
more: Gelo (says he) Reigned Seven Years, and died in his Eighth Year. Finally,
Diodorus Sic. l. 11. allows him only Seven Years.

Diodorus, who has brought all his History into the method of Annals, places
the Death of Pausanias Olymp. 75. 4. and the Exile of Themistocles Six Years
after, Olymp. 77. 2. -- Plutarch in Themist. p. 224. makes Themistocles after
his Banishment to have private Dealings with Pausanias. Dissert. p. 87, 88.

If the Doctor have rightly represented these two Eminent Historiographers, we
have here a clear confirmation of that which I have lately inculcated, viz. the
Incertitude of the Time of Themistocles's Banishment, for it was before the
Death of Pausanias, according to the one, Six Years after it according to the
other. And it will not be easy to reconcile them, unless we shall say, That
Themistocles had Dealings with Pausanias, when Pausanias had been dead Six
Years.

Athenaeus, l. 11. p. 505. among other Errors in Chronology, for which he
chastises Plato, brings this in for one, that he introduces Phaedrus
Discoursing with Socrates, who must certainly be dead before the Days of that
Philosopher. Dissert. p. 93.

If Athenaeus do justly chastise Plato for Errors in Chronology, this alone may
seem to be a sufficient Demonstration of the Incertitude of it. For if Plato
could and did err in the Chronology of his own Time, or that which was near it,
how can we give Credit to the account that we meet with in any Heathen
Chronographers of things done long before their Time? Now the Instances which
Athenaeus 9. gives of Plato's erring, are in Things of his own Time, or nor
much remote from it, as any one that will consult him may see, both in the
Place alleged by the Doctor, viz. l. 11. p. 505. and in l. 5. p. 217. where
Athenaeus says, (...). We may content our selves with the Instance produced
here by the Doctor of Phaedrus and Socrates. That Socrates was in Plato's Time
will be readily granted, and if Phaedrus was Plato's Scholar, (as some Learned
Men make him to have been) he was in his ( i. e. Plato's) Time also. But it
will be said, This cannot be, for the Doctor informs us, That Phaedrus was
certainly Dead before the Days of Socrates. To which I answer, that it is true,
That the Doctor tells us so; but Athenaeus says no such thing. Athenaeus's
Words are these, (...), so that here is nothing of Phaedrus's being Dead: But
Athenaeus's meaning might be, That he was not born in the Time of Socrates, or
at least too young to Discourse with him in such sort.

I cannot but take notice, That Macrobius Saturnal. l. 1. c. 1. Transcribes
some of those Instances which Athenaeus does, but is not severe upon Plato as
Athenaeus is. Socrate ita Parmenides antiquior, ut hujus pueritia vix illius
apprehenderit senectutem, and tamen inter illos de rebus arduis disputatur.
Paralus vero and Xanthippus quibus Pericles pater fuit, cum Protagora apud
Platonem disserunt secundo adventu. Athenis morante, quos multo ante infamis
illa pestilentia Athenis absumpserat. Thus Macrobius. They that please may see
what Aristides Platonica 2da has to the same purpose.

Among the rest that writ Elegies and Encomiums on Gryllus, the Son of
Xenophon, Hermippus says, Socrates was one, Laert. in Xenophon. Which is a
Blunder of no less then Thirty Seven Years, the interval between Socrates's
Death, and the Battle of Mantinea. Socrates was put to Death, Olymp. 95. 1.
when Laches was Magistrate. This is universally acknowledged: See Diodorus,
Favorinus, Diog. Laert. Aristides, Marmor Arund. Eusebius. Argument. Isocrat.
Busir. etc. Dissert. p. 99.

I do not find, that it is universally acknowledged, that Socrates died Olymp.
95. 1. Suidas says, That he was born Olymp. 77. and lived 80 Years, according
to which account he died Olymp. 97. The Chronicon Alexand. makes him to have
died Olymp. 104. 1. about which Time the Battle of Mantinea was according to
the Doctor. Even some of these whom the Doctor here alleges for his being put
to Death, Olymp. 95. 1. do not acknowledge it. Eusebius in Edit. Paris. and
Basil. with Pontacus's sets his Death Olymp. 95. 3. in Scaliger's Edition,
Olymp. 95. 2. The Marmor Arund. (if Mr. Seldom computes right) sets it Olymp.
94. 4. In Argument. Busir. ap. Isocrat. it is only said that Socrates died
Laches being Archon, there is no mention of Olymp. 95. 1. The same may be said
of Aristides. There are then only two of all these whom the Doctor names, that
say plainly that he died Olymp. 95. 1. As to Hermippus, he does not say that
Socrates writ an Encomium of Gryllus being Dead, he only says in general, that
he writ an Encomium of him, which he might do while Gryllus was living.

We have it from good Hands ( Diog. Laert. in Socrate, Argum. Isocrat. Busir.)
that Euripides, in a Play of his, called Palamedes, using these Words, (...),
etc. designed to lash the Athenians for Socrates's Murder, and the whole
Theater perceiving it burst into Tears. Socrates therefore died before
Euripides. But it is well known that the later died Six Years before Laches was
Archon. Dissert. p. 100.

The Doctor might well infer from that which Diogenes Laert. affirms, touching
Euripides lashing the Athenians for the Murder of Socrates, that (if he really
did so) Socrates was Murdered before the Death of Euripides. And yet
Philochorus in the same Diogenes Laertius says the quite contrary, That
Euripides died before Socrates. Must we not then conclude that there is no
certain Constat whether of them died sooner? But the Doctor says, That
Euripides died Six Years before Laches was Archon, and so Six Years before
Socrates, who died in the Time of Laches's Magistracy. To which I answer,
First, The uncertainty of the Time of Socrates's Death has been already
manifested. Secondly, It is not certain that Euripides died Six Years before
Laches was Archon. If Laches was Archon Olymp. 95. 1. (as the Doctor makes him
to have been) according to Eusebius, Euripides died above Six Years before his
Magistracy, for he sets his Death Olymp. 92. 4. and the Marmor Arund.
(according to Mr. Selden's computation) agrees with Eusebius. But the Chronicon
Alex. differs from them both, placing Euripides's Death Olymp. 94. 3. (not 6,
but) only Two Years before Laches's being Archon, supposing that to have been
Olymp. 95. 1. Diodorus Sic. l. 13. saying, That Apollodorus sets the Death of
Euripides Olymp. 93. 3. (Six Years before Laches's being Archon) and withal,
That others make him to have died a little before those Times, plainly bears
Testimony to the uncertainty of the time of his Death.

Palamedes was acted Olymp. 91. 1. ( AElian Var. Hist. 2. 1. Schol. Aristoph.
p. 401.) which is Sixteen Years before Laches. Dissert. p. 100.

If Palamedes was acted after the Murder of Socrates, then it was not acted
Olymp. 91. 1. unless we will say that Socrates died before the time. But the
Doctor says, That we have it from good Hands, that Euripides in his Palamedes
designed to lash the Athenians for Socrates 's Murder, and then it must be
acted after it. And it cannot be proved either from AElian or Schol. Aristoph.
that Palamedes was acted Olymp. 91. 1. AElian speaks of Palamedes (not l. 2. c.
1. but) l. 2. c. 8. and as to the time of its being acted, his Words are (...),
of which nothing can be made; and the Latin has Olympiade prima supra
octogesimam. The Scholiasts Words are (...). But how it can be concluded from
them that Palamedes was acted Olymp. 91. 1. I know not. So that until it can be
made to appear from other Authors when it was acted, it must remain uncertain.

According to most Chronologers, Euripides was about Seventy, and by the most
favorable account above Sixty, when Archelaus came to the Crown. Dissert. p.
131.

Here the Doctor plainly declares the uncertainty of Euripides's Age, when
Archelaus came to the Crown, since according to him most Chronologers say, That
he was about Seventy, but others only that he was above Sixty. Further we have
no certainty as to the Time of Archelaus's coming to the Crown. Athenaeus, l.
5. p. 217. (the very Place alleged by the Doctor in his Margin) seems to say
plainly, That it was in the Third Year of the Peloponnesian War, but Eusebius
will have it to have been sooner, viz. at the beginning of that War. And the
time of the beginning of that War is not exactly agreed and settled. Diodorus
Sic. l. 12. and the (...) refer it to Olympiad 87. 2. but Eusebius to Olymp.
87. 1. and not Eusebius only, but also Thucydides, who writes the History of
that War, for he makes it to have begun when ^ythodorus was Archon, now he was
Archon Olymp. 87. 1. according to Diodorus Sic. l. 12. and the (...). Pliny, l.
30. c. 1. says, it begun a trecentesimo nostrae urbis anno, but circa annum
fere trecentesimum vicesimum tertium, says A. Gellius, l. 17. c. 21. Now if we
follow either Eusebius's or Athenaeus's account of the Time of Archelaus's
coming to the Crown, Euripides could not be at that time either about Seventy,
or above Sixty Years of Age. According to Diog. Laertius in Socrate, Euripides
was born Olymp. 75. 1. and according to Eusebius's account, Archelaus came to
the Throne Olymp. 87. 1. viz. Forty Eight Years after; so that as Clemens Alex.
Strom. 1. says, That there were Forty Eight Years between Xerxes's Passage into
Greece (at which time Euripides is said to have been born) and the beginning of
the Peloponnesian War, so by this account, Euripides was only the Age of Forty
Eight Years, at the beginning of Archelaus's Reign. According to Athenaeus's
account, Archelaus succeeded in the Kingdom when Epameinon was Archon, i. e.
(according to the (...)) Olymp. 87. 4. Epaminondas (who was Archon Olymp. 87.
4. according to Diodorus Sic. l. 12.) is believed to be the same with
Athenaeus's Epameinon. Now from Olymp. 75. 1. (the Year of Euripides's Birth)
to Olymp. 87. 4. are no more than Fifty One Years, which are far short of about
Seventy, or above Sixty.

Notwithstanding that the Doctor says, That according to the most Chronologers,
Euripides was about Seventy when Archelaus came to the Crown, yet after all, in
his Margin he only names Diod. Sicul. and alios apud Athen. l. 5. p. 217. But
he had done well if he had directed us to the place in Diod. Sicul. where he
gives this account of Euripides's Age; for my part I despair of finding any
such. And as to Athenaeus, in all that p. 217. to which we are referred there is
no mention of Euripides. I grant that there is an account of the time of
Archelaus's succeeding Perdiccas; but it is such as makes not for the Doctor's
purpose, but wholly against him, as I have just now declared. And now that I
name Perdiccas, what can make more toward the manifesting the uncertainty of
Chronology, than that which Athenaeus in that very place observes, touching the
wonderful Discord that there is about the number of Years that Perdiccas
Reigned? Nicomedes Acanthius (says he) gives him Forty One Years, Theopompus
Thirty Five, Anaximenes Forcy, Hieronymus Twenty Eight, Marsyas and Philochorus
Twenty Three: Thus Athenaeus. The accounts of the Time that Perdiccas Reigned
being so various, it must be more difficult to assign the Time of Archelaus's
succeeding him.

I know that a Learned Critic takes upon him to correct Athenaeus, making him
to set the Time of Archelaus's coming to the Crown much later than it is in our
Copies. But if this was so that he set it later, it would make the difference
greater between Eusebius and him. Withal, I am not satisfied with this Critics
Correction or Alteration, for First, I find that the (...) agrees exactly with
our Copies of Athenaeus, placing the beginning of Archelaus's Reign in the 3d
Year of the Peloponnesian War, when Epamelnon was Archon. Secondly, He does not
produce the Authority of any approved Copies to warrant his Alteration.
Thirdly, He does not allege any ancient Historian, that says expressly that
Archelaus begun his Reign that Year which he pitcheth upon, viz. Olymp. 93. 3.
He only infers this from the Words of Diodorus Sic. l. 14. whom he makes to
say, That Archelaus died Olymp. 95. 2. having Reigned Seven Years; and if both
these be true, that he Reigned Seven Years and no more, and died Olymp. 95. 2.
the beginning of his Reign must be placed Olymp. 93. 3. But not to take notice
that this Critic mistakes the Year of Archelaus's Death (for Diodorus Sic.
sets it not Olymp. 95. 2. but 95. 1.) the same Diodorus l. 13. relates, That
Archelaus King of the Macedonians besieged Pydna, Olymp. 92. 3. therefore he
was King then, and how long before that time we know not.

It appears then that there is no agreement, either as to the time how long
Perdiccas Reigned, or as to the time when Archelaus succeeded, or as to
Euripides's Age at the time of his succeeding, but they are all uncertain.

Planudes lived about 2000 Years after AEsop. Dissert. p. 149.

The Doctor does well in using this cautious Expression About 2000 Years, for
unless we could be assured both when AEsop, and when Planudes lived, we cannot
be certain how long the one lived after the other. The Doctor in his Margin
(from good Authority without doubt) makes Planudes to have lived A. D. 1370.
but others refer him to A. D. 1340. and have perhaps as good Authority for so
doing. And as we are thus uncertain how long Planudes lived after Christ, so
there is no certainty how long AEsop was before him. Suidas says, he was before
Pythagoras, but Heraclides de Politiis makes him to have been famous at the
Time when Pythagoras was. Plutarch in Vit. Solon. and in septem Sapientum
convivio, relates, That he was very much in the favor of King Croesus, as also
what passed between Solon and him, when Solon had incurred Croesus's
Displeasure; but Eusebius will have him to have been slain before Croesus's
coming to the Monarchy. For according to Eusebius, Croesus came to the Crown
Olymp. 54. 2. and AEsop was slain either Olymp. 54. 1. (for so Scaliger's
Edition has it, and that account seems to be followed by Suidas) or Olymp. 53.
4. as it is in other Editions. And as to the Birth of Christ, he sets it Olymp.
194. 3. so that according to him, AEsop died not much above 560 Years before
it. But if we follow Plutarch, we must place AEsop's Death later, viz. in the
time of Croesus's Reign, and then there were not so many Years between it and
our Savious's Birth; and if we follow those Eminent Chronologers that will not
allow that there were above 490 Years between the first Year of Cyrus and our
Savior's Death, we must still diminish the number of Years from AEsop's Death
to the Birth of our Savior, and say, That there were not complete 500 Years
from the one to the other. By this it appears, That there is not any certainty
how long AEsop lived before Christ, any more than there is how long Planudes
lived after him; but though we take the extreme accounts, and suppose the one to
have lived somewhat more than 560 Years before our Lord's Nativity, and the
other 1370 Years after, yet the whole time will fall considerably short of 2000
Years.

A VIEW OF THE EXAMINATION OF THE DISSERTATION UPON THE EPISTLES OF Phalaris,
Themistocles, etc. PART. II.
ZAleucus we are sure was a Pythagorean, Porph. in vita Pyth. p. 15. and Diod.
Sic. l. 12. p. 84. Thus Mr. Boil, p. 53.

If this be certain, we must confess that the Time both of the Master's and of
the Scholar's flourishing is most uncertain. The Scholar Zaleucus, is by
Eusebius in Chron. referred to Olymp. 29. yet the Master Pythagoras, is both by
the same Eusebius, and by several other Authors placed much later. And there
are others who make Zaleucus very ancient, as well as Eusebius does,
particularly Clemens Alex. Strom. 1. who writes, That Zaleucus was reported to
be the first Lawgiver, and that he received his Laws from Minerva; the later of
which he confirms by the Testimony of Chamaeleon, Heracleotes and Aristotle:
And I add, That Valerius Maximus, l. 1. c. 2. says the same, Zaleucus sub
nomine. Minervae apud Locrenses prudentissimus habitus est. But it will not be
an easy Task to reconcile this account to that of Diog. Laertius in Vit.
Pythagorae, who, though he says expressly, That Pythagoras was Zaleucus's Master,
yet sets Pythagoras's flourishing as late as Olymp. 60. above 120 Years after
the Time that his Scholar Zaleucus was so much celebrated among the Locrians
according to Eusebius.

Instead of Olymp. 37. he means, I suppose, Olymp. 38. as it is in Eusebius --
I Will suppose 37 a false Print. Thus Mr. Boil, p. 118.

When Dr. Bentley, Dissert. p. 14. says, That according to Eusebius, Phalaris's
Tyranny ended Olymp. 37. Mr. Boil is so Ingenuous as to suppose, That by the
Printers Mistake, Olymp. 37. is put for Olymp. 38. But when the same Honorable
Person adds, That it is Olymp. 38. in Eusebius, it is manifest, That he follows
Scaliger's Edition of his Chronicle, for in other Editions, it is not Olymp.
38. but Olymp. 39. as in that of Paris, A. D. 1512. and that of Basil, A. D.
1570. and Pontacus's; so that it is altogether uncertain to what Olympiad
Eusebius refers the end of Phalaris's Tyranny, as it is likewise uncertain to
what Year Eusebius referred the beginning of it, whether to Olymp. 31. 2.
according to Scaliger's Edition, or to Olymp. 31. 4. according to the other.

Page 13th, he says, Xerxes's Expedition was Olymp. 73. Page 85th, he says, the
very next Olympiad after Xerxes's Expedition, Hiero was in the Throne; and
quotes Diodorus (11. p. 39.) for it: Where we read, That Hiero came to the
Crown Olymp. 75. 3. Therefore here Dr. Bentley is of Opinion, That Xerxes's
Expedition was in the 74th Olympiad. And yet if Diodorus is to be believed,
Xerxes Expedition was neither in the 73d, nor 74th, but 75th Olympiad. Thus Mr.
Boil, p. 119.

Here (if I mistake not) are two false Prints, one in Mr. Boil, another in Dr.
Bentley. In Mr. Boil, the Printer has put Page 13 instead of Page 24, for it
is in his Dissert. p. 24. that Dr. Bentley speaks of Xerxes's Expedition. In
Dr. Bentley, I conceive, That by the Printers fault, Olymp. 73. is put instead
of Olymp. 75. I somewhat suspected this before, but am now fully confirmed in
it by considering, First, That I cannot meet with any Author that refers
Xerxes's Expedition to Olymp. 73. and then Secondly, That the very same
Historian, who is alleged by Dr. Bentley, Diss. p. 85. to prove that Hiero was
in the Monarchy the very next Olymp. after Xerxes's Expedition ( viz. Diod.
Sic.) places Xerxes's Expedition Olymp. 75. Supposing then as I now do, That
Dr. Bentley makes Xerxes's Expedition to have been (not in the 73d, but) in the
75th Olympiad, then it is most true, That according to Diod. Sic. Hiero was in
the Monarchy the very next Olympiad after it, viz. Olymp. 76. And it is to be
observed, That Dr. Bentley here ( Diss. p. 85.) does not take Olympiad for the
space of Four Years, but for the time when the Olympic Games were celebrated;
and if we understand it thus, Hiero according to Diod. Sic. was not in the
Throne in any Olympiad before the 76th. To conclude this, from Dr. Bentley's
quoting Diod. Sic. I infer that his meaning is, That Hiero was in the Monarchy
Olymp. 76th, and that being according to him the very next Olympiad after
Xerxes's Expedition, it follows that with Diod. Sic. he refers that Expedition
to Olymp. 75. But then I have showed in the former part of this View, that
there are who differ from Diod. Sic. as to the Time of it, and so nothing can
be certainly concluded concerning it. I have showed there also, that it is
uncertain when Hiero came to the Monarchy.

He begins his Chronological Observations with the AEras of some Cities; a very
slippery Foundation to build an Argument upon: For all these Cities are so very
ancient, that it would puzzle a good Chronologer to trace their Originals. The
olded Historians now Extant had but very slender Memoirs of those Times, and
accordingly we find their Accounts so confused and contradictory, that none
should pretend to draw Demonstrations from 'em. I hear the famous Mr. Dodwell
is now Printing some Lectures at Oxford, in which he shows how very obscure and
uncertain the Histories of those Ages are; and that from the concurrence of
those rude Accounts he meets with, he has made it probable, That Phalaris must
be brought much lower than even St. Hierome places him -- I hear Mr. Dodwell
brings Phalaris down to Olymp. 70. Mr. Boil, p. 120. and 154.

Here Mr. Boil bears Testimony so plainly and fully to the uncertainty of
Chronology, that a clearer Evidence cannot be desired. Eusebius sets the
beginning of Phalaris's Tyranny, Olymp. 31. St Hierome brings it down to Olymp.
52. or 53. Mr. Dodwell thinks it must be placed still lower, viz. Olymp. 70.

Thucydides says, That Anaxilaus beat out the Samians from Zancle, and called
it Messana; but fixes the Time of this Action no otherwise than only by saying,
'Twas not long after the Samians flying from the Medes possessed it. Dr.
Bentley calls this Xerxes Expedition, as if the Medes had never made an
incursion upon Greece, till the time of Xerxes. What Herodotus says, l. 6. is
so far from being the same with Thucydides's Story, that it contradicts it; for
he says, not that Anaxilaus expelled the Samians from Zancle, but that he
assisted 'em to take it. That Anaxilaus changed the name of Zancle into
Messana, is agreed between Dr. Bentley and me; the only Question is about the
Date of this Change. Thucydides fixes upon no Date: Diodorus places the Death
of one Anaxilaus in the 76th Olympiad, but does not say this was the Anaxilaus
that named Messana. Herodotus in the place cited, says nothing about the change
of the Names, but tells a story of the Samians seizing Zancle, a little after
Miletus was taken; and all the ground that we have from this Passage of
Herodotus, to conclude the change of the Name Zancle into Messana, to have
happened after this Time, is his calling the City Zancle, and not Messana
throughout this Story: Which, I think, proves nothing more, than that the old
Name was not yet so utterly abolished, but that it was called indifferently
either Zancle or Messana still. So that hitherto we have had no direct and
positive Testimony about the Time of Zancle's changing its Name. Mr. Boil, p.
127, 128, 129.

All this manifestly declares how uncertain Herodotus, Thucydides, and Diodorus
Sic. leave us, as to the Time of the name Zancle, its being exchanged for
Messana; so that there is no need of making any Remarks upon it.

Pausanias is the only Author, that speaks fully up to the Point: and he
expressly affirms this to have happened in the 29th Olympiad, and tells the
story with a great deal of Solemnity and Circumstance. -- Against an indirect
and dubious Proof, built chiefly on a disputable Passage in Herodotus, we have
the express and full and undoubted Authority of Pausanias. Mr. Boil, p. 129.
and 131.

Though Herodotus, Thucydides, and Diod. Sic. leave us uncertain as to the Time
of the change of the Name, yet it seems in Mr. Boyle's Judgment, we may rely
upon the undoubted Authority of Pausanias, and conclude certainly that it was
Olymp. 29. But I crave leave to question, whether we can rely so certainly upon
Pausanias's Authority in this case. For, First, Though Thucydides does not fix
the Time of the change of the Name any otherwise than by saying, That it was
not long after the Samians flying from the Medes, possessed Zancle: Yet this is
sufficient to make us doubt of Pausanias's Assertion, that it happened Olymp.
29. unless some Records can be produced, which may certify us, That the Medes
made any Incursion upon Greece so early as before that Olympiad. Secondly, when
Herodotus, l. 7. c. 165. mentions the change of the Name, he is speaking of
things done about the time of Xerxes's Expedition; now is it not strange that
he should speak of it so late, if the change was made (as Pausanias sets it)
Olymp. 29. i. e. about 180 Years before? Especially when he had occasion to
speak of Zancle before. Thirdly, Mr. Boil, p. 130. makes Pausanias to differ
from Herodotus, and to reject his Testimony concerning the Age of Anaxilaus;
now if the Name was changed from Zancle to Messana in his Time (as they say it
was) from their differing as to the Age in which Anaxilaus lived, it must
follow, that they also differed as to the Time when the change of the Name was
made. Now whatever Pausanias's Authority may be in other things, I question
whether it is such, as that we can certainly rely upon him, when two such
Historians as Herodotus and Thucydides differ from him. I may add, That if
Diodorus Sic. who places the Death of one Anaxilaus Olymp. 76. speaks of the
Anaxilaus that named Messana, he also differs from Pausanias.

In the 29th Olympiad, when Chionis won the Prize the second time. Mr. Boil,
p. 129.

It is true, that Pausanias in Messenicis, p. 134. has these very Words, and
yet afterward in the same Page he says, That Xenophon the Corinthian won the
Prize in the 29th Olympiad; so that I know not how to reconcile him to himself,
unless by putting a difference between (...). He uses the former Words
concerning Chionis, the later concerning Xenophon; and the later we must
translate (not In, but) About the 29 th Olympiad. But then what is the meaning
of About the 29 th Olympiad? If it be said that his meaning is, That Xenophon
was Victor in the next Olympiad to it, viz. the 30th, I ask why did he not
plainly say so? Besides, Pausanias in Arcadicis, p. 269. says (not that
Xenophon, but) Chionis was Victor the third time in the 30th Olympiad. Here I
might also observe, That Pausanias agrees not with himself as to the Time when
Miltiades was Archon. In Messenicis, p. 134. he says it was in the 29th
Olympiad, in which Chionis won the Prize the 2d time; but in Arcadicis, p. 269.
he says it was in the 2d Year of the 30th Olympiad, in which Chionis won it the
3d time.

The most Eminent Chronologers, and Men best versed in these Things, fall in
with this account of Pausanias. Vbbo Emmius follows it in his History of
ancient Greece, l. 1. p. 18. Lydiat, in his Notes on the Chronicon Marmoreum,
Ios. Scaliger, in his Animadversions upon Eusebius, p. 27. and in his (...); so
does Petavius too, Rat. Temp. par. 1. p. 38. and Meursius Lect. At. l. 2. c.
23. Mr. Boil, p. 130, 131.

Such Eminent Chronologers following Pausanias's account of the time of the
change of the Name from Zancle to Messana, some Persons may be apt to look upon
it as certain: But on the other side, I say, First, Suppose it true, That they
do all follow his account, yet if they do not allege some other ancienr
Historian that agrees with it, it signifies little; for it depends upon
Pausanias's sole Authority still. Secondly, It does not appear that they follow
it. Vbbo Emmius, in his first Book mentions Messana, but of the change of the
Name from Zancle to Messana (as far as I perceive) he says nothing. In his 7th
Book, he speaks of the change of the Name, but is wholly silent as to the Time
of it. I add, that in his first Book he quotes Pausanias, when he is speaking
of the Arcades, and the second Messenian War; but certainly we cannot conclude
hence, that he followed Pausanias's account of the Time, when the new Name
Messana was given to the City, which was before called Zancle. Scaliger both in
his Ammadversions, p. (mihi) 21. and in his (...) (if that be his) refers the
change of the Name to Olymp. 30. not to Olymp. 29. as Pausanias does. Petavius
agrees not either with Pausanias or Scaliger, but as Scaliger fixes the Time
latter than Pausanias, so Petavius sets it sooner, viz. Olymp. 27. See him, de
Doctrina Temporum, l. 13. and in Rat. Temp. par. 1. l. 2. c. 8. Meursius is so
far from agreeing with Pausanias, that he plainly shows how little Pausanias is
at agreement with himself; and he takes upon him to correct Pausanias, instead
of following him. Lydiat only remains, and if by his Notes on the Chronicon
Marmoreum, Mr. Boil means the Notae Historicae ad Chronicon Marmoreum, I grant
that he does fall in with Pausanias's account. To conclude then, since none of
these Modern Chronologers (except Lydiat) do agree with Pausanias, and since
the ancient Historians, Herodotus and Thucydides do less agree with him, what
certainty can we have as to the Time when the City had the new Name Messana
given it?

Diodorus in his 14th Book says, That some Sicilians planted themselves upon
Taurus, and from their settlement there, called the place they built
Tauromenium: In the 16th Book he says, That about Forty Years after this,
Andromachus planted some of the old Naxians upon Taurus, and from his long stay
there, called the place where he planted them Tauromenium. Mr. Boil, p. 132.

Here this Honorable Person observing, That Diodorus plainly gives two
different accounts of the Time when the place was named Tauromenium, and those
contradictory one to the other, says enough to satisfy us of the Incertitude
of it.

There was a River Tauromenius (if Vibius Sequester is to be credited, who says
the Town had its Name from thence) before there was a Tauromenium. Mr. Boil,
p. 133.

Here the Time when the Town was first called Tauromenium, is made still more
uncertain; for if it had its name from the River Tauromenius, it might have it
long before the former of the Times mentioned by Diodorus Sic.

Diomedes Grammaticus, l. 3. the Scholiast. of Aristophanes in Prolegom. and
Clemens Alexandrinus Stro. 1. attribute the invention of Comedy to Susarion.
But that he was not the inventer of it, the Chronicon Marmoreum does more than
intimate, when it says only of him, That he first erected a Stage in Athens, to
Act Comedies upon. Mr. Boil, p. 141.

All this tends directly to manifest the uncertainty of the Time when Comedy
was invented. The Authority of Clemens Alex. with the other two, affirming,
That Susarion was the inventer of it, is opposed to that of the Marm. Arund.
which more than intimates, That it was invented before Susarion, and attributes
this only to him, That he erected a Stage at Athens, to Act Comedies upon. But
then suppose it was certain, That it was not invented before Susarion's Time,
and that he was the inventer of it, what certainty have we of the Time when
Susarion lived? All that Mr. Boil can say of it, is, That according to the
Marble, his erecting a Stage at Athens must be before the Tyranny of
Pisistratus, and that those Learned Men, who have taken pains to illustrate
that Chronicle, have by the concurrence of other Histories plainly shown, That
the Time of Susario must fall between the 610 th and 489 th Year before Christ.
Thus Mr. Boil, p. 140, 141. But by the Printers fault 489 is put instead of
589. This will appear, if we consult Lydiat's Annotations upon the Chronicon
Marmoreum, Epoch. 40. where his Words are Susarion innuitur claruisse inter
annum, 610. and 589. ante Evangelium. So that according to Lydiat, the Marm.
Arund. makes Susarion to have flourished between the 610th, and 589th Year (not
before Christ, but) before the Gospel, i. e. before the Time of the first
Preaching, or Publishing of the Gospel. In the Notae Historicae ad Chronicon
Marmoreum, Epoch. 40. we read thus, Susarionem inter Olympiadem 50. and 540.
sloruisse indicat mutilum Marmor; but 540. is by the fault of the Press instead
of something else, perhaps instead of 54. for as Mr. Seldom computes the Marm.
Arund. sets Susarion between Olymp. 49. 3. and Olymp. 54. 4. All this while
Susarion's Time is made to depend upon the sole Authority of the Marm. Arund.
if there be Learned Men, who have by the concurrence of other Histories plainly
shown, That the Time of Susario must fall between the Years which Lydiat
mentions: As Mr. Boil does not tell us who they are, so I have not seen them.

If there are several material Circumstances that disparage this one Witness's
Testimony; if he lived at a great distance from the Time he writes of; if he
speaks by report and hearsay only, without vouching any Authority; if he
expresses himself, so that we have room to doubt, whether we know his Mind; or
should we know his Mind, yet if he contradicts himself immediately afterward: I
say, if these things appear against him, then this one Witness is so far from
being as good as a Multitude, that he is as good as none. Mr. Boil, p. 148.

Mr. Boil says all this of Athenaeus, and both in this, and in the six Pages
following, makes it his Business to Demonstrate, how little credit is to be
given to his Testimony concerning the Age in which Thericles lived, and to
which we owe the invention of the Thericlean Cup; so that more needs not be
said to manifest the uncertainty of it.

Solon was Archon Olymp. 46. 3. Mr. Boil, p. 166.

Diog. Laertius alleged by Mr. Boil in his Margin, says, That Solon was
Archon Olymp. 46. 3. if we may believe Sosicrates, (...). Sosicrates is
followed also in the (...). But what shall we say then to Tatianus Orat. con.
Graecos in fin. who makes Solon to have been Archon about the 40th Olympiad,
and to A. Gellius, who makes him to have writ his Laws about the 49th Olympiad?
Now as Diog. Laertius in Solon. observes, He writ his Laws when he was Archon.
The Words of A. Gellius, l. 17. c. 21. are these, Solonem accepimus, unum ex
illo nobili numero Sapientum, leges scripsisse Atheniensium Tarquinio Prisco
Romae regnante anno regni ejus tricesimo and tertio. Now if Tarquinius Priscus
begun his Reign Olymp. 41. 2. (as Dionysius Halicarnassaeus, l. 3. says he did)
his 33d Year must be Olymp. 49. 3. Mr. Boyle's Margin tells us, That Eusebius
in his Chronicon puts Solon 's Archonship a Year later than Olymp. 46. 3. but
he should rather have said, That he sets it a Year sooner, for so it is in all
the Editions of his Chronicon that I have seen.

Solon died at the end of the 53d, or the beginning of the 54th Olympiad; Plut.
Vit. Sol. Mr. Boil. p. 166.

Plutarch only says, That according to Phanias, Solon died when Hegestratus was
Archon, and there is no Constat as to the Year in which he was Archon. Some say
in the first Year of the 55th Olympiad, others in the fourth Year of the 53d,
others in the second Year of the 50th Olympiad. Diog. Laertius gives us an
Epistle from Solon to Croesus, and it is apparent, That it was writ after that
Croesus came to the Kingdom. In it, Solon tells Croesus, That he would come to
him, which he accordingly did; not immediately after his writing that Letter,
but from Athens he went to Egypt, thence to Cyprus, and thence to Croesus,
with whom he remained some time. Thence he went to Cilicia, and at last died in
Cyprus; Thus Laertius. By all which it appears, That Solon's Death was long
after Croesus's coming to the Throne, and therefore if Croesus did not come to
it till Olymp. 54. 2. (as Eusebius has it) Solon must have lived long after
Olymp. 53. or 54. And this is confirmed by the Testimony of Theophilus ad
Autolycum, who makes Solon to have lived in the Time of Cyrus and Darius, and
according to Eusebius, the beginning of Cyrus's Reign was not till Olymp. 55.
1. But we need go no further than Plutarch the Author here quoted, who says
indeed, That Phanias makes Solon not to have lived two Years after the
beginning of Pisistratus's Tyranny; but withal, tells us, That Heraclides
reports that he lived (...) a long time after it. Can we desire a clearer and
more authentic Testimony of the uncertainty of the Time when Solon died than
this is? And here I cannot but take notice of another passage in the same Life
of Solon, which shows how little Arguments drawn from Chronology did sway with
Plutarch. Some (as he tells us) would refute the History of Solon's conversing
with Croesus, (...), by Arguments drawn from the consideration of the Times;
but (says he) their Chronological Canons (as they call them) will not persuade
me to reject so illustrious an History, attested by so many Writers, and so
agreeable to Solon's Prudence, Magnanimity and Manners. (...) (...), etc. So
Plutarch.

That Pisistratus siez'd the Government of Athens some Years before Solon's
Death, Dr. Bentley, I dare say, will grant me: That he was turned out in, or
rather before Phalaris's Reign, he will not I hope deny me; because he has
owned it in Terms, p. 41. of his Dissertation. Mr. Boil, p. 167.

Whether Dr. Bentley will grant that Pisistratus siez'd the Government some
Years before Solon's Death I know not, but I am sure that they who are moved
with the Authority of Phanias ap. Plut. Vit. Sol. will not grant it; for he
says expressly, That the interval of Time between Pisistratus's invading the
Government, and the Death of Solon was less than two Years, ((...)) and
therefore according to him, the one was not some Years before the other. It is
true (as was lately observed) that according to Heraclides ap. Plut. the one
was some Years, perhaps many Years before the other, but this difference
between Heraclides and Phanias only shows how uncertain it is, how long it was
before Solon's Death, that Pisistratus's Tyranny began. Phanias ap. Plut. says,
That Pisistratus siez'd the Government when Comias was Archon, and that Solon
died when his immediate Successor Hegestratus was Archon; but it is not agreed
in what Year either of them was Archon. Some refer Comias's Archonship to
Olymp. 53. 3. others to Olymp. 50. 1. in the Marm. Arund. it is referred to
Olymp. 54. 4. (if the Learned Men who have taken pains to illustrate that
Marble, interpret it rightly) as it also makes Pisistratus to have begun his
Tyranny then. But the (...) refers the Government of the Pisistratidae or the
Sons of Pisistratus, to Olymp. 50. 1. as both Tatianus Orat. con. Graecos, and
Clemens Alex. Stro. 1. say, That the Time of their Government was about the 50
th Olympiad: So that, if these be in the right, the Time of the Fathers siezing
the Government must be set much higher. For Justin, l. 2. c. 8. says, That
Pisistratus Reigned 33 Years, with whom agrees Heraclides de Politiis, and also
Aristotle de Republica, l. 5. c. 12. if I dot not mistake his meaning, when he
says, That in Thirty three Years Pisistratus Reigned only Seventeen Years, i.
e. (if I understand him rightly) though there were Thirty three Years in all
between Pisistratus's invading the Tyranny and his Death, yet he enjoyed it
only Seventeen Years, the other Sixteen Years he lived in Exile. After all, I
freely confess, That, if it could be made out, that the Word Pisistratidae is
not always used strictly as it denotes the Sons of Pisistratus, but sometimes
in a more comprehensive Sense, as including Pisistratus and his Sons too, this
Argument from the Authority of Tatianus, and Clemens Alex. would lose all its
force: But till that be made appear, it plainly Demonstrates how little
certainty there is of the Time when Pisistratus first seized the Government.
Nor is it more certain when he was turned out of it. Dr. Bentley, Diss. p. 41.
says, It was in the Days of Phalaris, but Mr. Boil will have it rather to have
been before Phalaris's Reign; both which accounts leave us uncertain when he
was driven out, unless it could be certainly known what time Phalaris Reigned.
Besides Herodotus, l. 1. c. 5. informs us, That Pisistratus was driven out
twice, and as often recovered the Tyranny; therefore we should have been
informed of whether turning out they speak, otherwise we cannot so well judge
of the Time of it.

It is not to be doubted, but the Alcestis of Phrynichus (that Phrynichus, who
was Thespis's Scholar) was acted before Olymp. 67. Mr. Boil, p. 168.

But (craving this Honorable Persons leave) I cannot but doubt of it, for as I
know not that any Author affirms it, so he does not declare what ground he has
for such assurance. I know that Suidas affirms, That Phrynichus won the Prize
in that very Olympiad, and mentions Alcestis as one of his Plays; but it cannot
be inferred hence, That Alcestis was acted before that Olympiad; Yea, if I
should say that it was one of those Plays of his that were acted then, and by
which he won the Prize, or that it was acted after that Time, it would not be
easy to disprove it.

Tragedy is of ancient Usage in this Country, nor did it take its Rise from
Thespis and Phrynichus, as some imagine; but if you consider the thing well,
you find that it is extremely ancient; Plato in Minoe. Mr. Boil, p. 170, 171.

Here Plato bears Testimony to the uncertainty of the Antiquity of Tragedy, in
telling us his own Opinion, viz. That it is (...), very ancient, and yet
withal, that others were of a contrary Opinion, that it took its Rise from
Thespis. Besides, he does not tell us how ancient he believed Tragedy to be. I
know Mr. Boil says, That he (i. e. Plato) thought it almost as ancient as
Minos, and that the reason of his introducing the Reflection shows it; but, if
we consult Plato, we shall find that the reason of his introducing it shows no
such thing. Whether Plato thought Tragedy more ancient than Minos, or only as
ancient, or but almost as ancient, cannot be determined from the reason of his
introducing the Reflection. Mr. Boil knows not what to make of a Passage of
Plutarch, in his Life of Solon, (...), i. e. Thespis now beginning to move or
set on foot the Play called Tragedy; but (says he) he could not mean, That
there was no such thing as Tragedy of any kind before the Days of Thespis, and
be consistent with himself; for he expressly tells us in another place (the Life
of Theseus) that the acting of Tragedies was one part of the funeral
Solemnities which the Athenians performed at the Tomb of Theseus: Thus Mr.
Boil, p. 176. But I do not find any such thing in the Life of Theseus. Indeed,
in the Life of Cimon, there is a Passage which some Ignorant or less
considering Persons may possibly construe to such a Sense, but Mr. Boil could
not. I add, that if there be any such Passage in Plutarch, it does not
contradict this, That Tragedy took its Rise from Thespis, for Theseus had no
Tomb at Athens, before the Days of Thespis. So that notwithstanding any thing
that Mr. Boil alleges, Plutarch by those Words in the Life of Solon might
mean, That there was no such thing as Tragedy of any kind before the Days of
Thespis. To proceed, Mr. Boil, p. 171. brings Diog. Laertius as a Witness,
That Tragedy is more ancient than Thespis; but on the other side, p. 177. he
speaks of Authors in the Plural Number, who make Thespis the Inventer of it,
and p. 176. he calls them old Writers; so that he acknowledges that there are
ancient Writers for the one Opinion, as well as the other. I know that he would
persuade us, That when these Authors make Thespis the Inventer of Tragedy,
their meaning is, That he was the Improver of it, or that he was the Inventer
of that sort of Tragedy which consisted in Imitation, and a Fable, (See him, p.
174.) whereas there was Tragedy (though not of that sort) before: But he himself
is not very confident that this was their meaning, for he says, p. 177. In this
Sense it is that we must understand those Authors who make Thespis the Inventer
of Tragedy, or allow that they spoke inconsiderately. We are left (you see) to
our liberty whether we will understand those Authors in the forementioned
Sense, or allow that they spoke inconsiderately. But for my part, I am not
forward to pass such a Censure upon ancient Writers, that they spoke
inconsiderately and unwarily, particularly I am not forward to believe either
that Clemens Alex. spoke inconsiderately, or that he spoke of this or that sort
of Tragedy, but of it in general, when speaking of the Inventers of other
things he comes at length to Tragedy, and says, That Thespis ((...)) devised or
invented it. But it may be said, If Thespis was the Inventer of it, then the
Date of Tragedy is not uncertain. To which I answer, That this would follow, if
we were certain of the Time when Thespis lived and flourished; but Mr. Boil
sufficiently makes it appear how far we are from being certain of that. For p.
166. he says, That Plutarch and Diog. Laertius expressly affirm, That Thespis
was Contemporary with Solon, telling us very particularly what passed between
Solon and Thespis, in relation to the Plays of the later; and adds, That Solon
died at the end of the 53, or the beginning of the 54 Olympiad. In p. 167. he
says, That the Arundel Marble fixes the acting of Alcestis, one of Thespis 's
Plays as low as the 60 th Olympiad. And p. 170. he tells us, That Suidas says,
Thespis flourished in the 61 st Olympiad. Mr. Boil further tells us, That
taking our account at the lowest, we must make him to have written according to
Plutarch, and Diog. Laertius two or three Years before Solon' s Death; but we
may take it higher, and make him to have begun to write Plays near the time of
Solon's Archonship, which according to Mr. Boil, was Olymp. 46. 3. and we may
the rather do this, because Eusebius Chronicon places the Rise of Tragedy at
the 47 th Olympiad, as Mr. Boil observes, p. 166. Now between Olymp. 47. and
Olymp. 61. are above Fifty Years. Thus it fully appears from the Authors
alleged by Mr. Boil, how little certainty we have of the time of the Rise of
Tragedy; those that say it is more ancient than Thespis, not ascertaining us
how much more ancient it is, and those that make Thespis the Inventer of it,
not being agreed about the Time when he lived, and begun to write Tragedies.
Need I after all this take notice of that which Suidas has to this purpose,
acquainting us, That some make Thespis the first Tragedian, but others Epigenes
Sicyonius; some saying, That Thespis was the 16th from Epigenes, and others
that he was the 2d? An old Scholiast alleged by Iul. Caesar Bulenger de
Theatro, l. 1. c. 2. mentions one Theomis, who (...), etc. first found out
Tragical Melodies, and was admired for them among the Grecians, in the time of
Orestes (they that please may see his Words either in Bulenger, or in the
Tractatus de Tragaedia, prefixed to the late Cambridge Edition of Euripides)
but of what Authority that Scholiast is I know not.

Eustathius's Time was about 200 Years before Planudes was born. Mr. Boil, p.
270.

Nicetas Choniat. Annal. l. 1. verse. fin. makes Eustathius to have lived in the
Time of Andronicus Commenus, and he came to the Empire (as we are told) in or
about An. Do. 1182. As to Planudes, when he was born I know not, but as to the
Time of his flourishing, Dr. Bentley, p. 149. places it An. Do. 1370. but
other Learned Men set it An. Do. 1340. And it must be allowed, That he was born
at least 20 Years before: And so according to one account, he was born at or
before An. Do. 1320. according to the other, at or before An. Do. 1350. If then
we make Eustathius to have lived about An. Do. 1182. the interval between his
Time, and the Birth of Planudes will fall considerably short of 200 Years; so
that the Account which Mr. Boyle's Authors followed differs from these; but
which is the truest cannot be determined.

Thus I have taken notice of most of the Passages in the Dissertation and
Examination of it which relate to Chronology, and conceive that with the
assistance of the Learned and Worthy Persons, the Authors of them, I have
manifested the uncertainty of the Time, when the Persons lived, or the Cities
were built, or the Things were done, which are mentioned in those Passages. And
we may believe that other parts of Heathen Chronology being strictly examined,
would be found to have no juster pretensions to Certainty, than these which
have been now considered are found to have.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Read

IN the Title Page, l. 18. (...), and l. 19. blot out the Comma after (...),
and place it after (...), p. 7. l. 27. (...), p. 8. l. 14. Imilcas's, p. 10. l.
19. (...), p. 18. l. 21. 3 or 4. p. 20. l. 10. (...), p. 22. l. 3. and p. 25.
l. 16. (...), p. 22. l. 3. (...), p. 24. l. 14. Pyth. 1. Diod. p. 30. l. 1.
(...), and stop in the same line thus, is there set so, that, p. 32. l. 11.
blot out 9.] p. 37. l. 4. before that time, p. 64. l. 1. (...), p. 67. l. 2.
(...), p. 71. l. 8. you will find.

Books Printed for John Jones, at the Dolphin and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
PRactical Discourses upon several Divine Subjects, viz. Of Religious Discourse
in Common Conversatition. Of the Fear of Death. Concerning the Extent of
Christ's Satisfaction. Concerning Practical Atheism. Of Walking by Faith.
Concerning Charity to the Poor. Concerning the Right Use of the World.
Concerning the Successive Vanity of Human Life. An Admonition Concerning Two
Late Books, Called A Discourse of the Love of God. Vol. IV. Written by John
Norris, M. A. Rector of Bemerton near Sarum.

Treatises upon several Subjects. viz. Reason and Religion, or the Grounds and
Measures of Devotion. Reflections upon the Conduct of Human Life. The Charge of
Schism continued. Two Treatises concerning Divine Light. Spiritual Counsel, or,
The Fathers Advice to his Children. Written by John Norris, M. A. Rector of
Bemerton in Sarum.

The Present State of the Universe, or an Account of I. The Rise, Births.
Names, Matches, Children, and near Allies of all the present Chief Princes of
the World. II. Their Coats of Arms, Motto's, Devices, Liveries, Religions, and
Languages. III. The Names of their Chief Towns, with some Computation of the
Houses and Inhabitants, their Chief Seats of Pleasure, and other Remarkable
things in their Dominions. IV. Their Revenues, Power and Strength. Also an
Account of Commonwealths, relating to the same Heads. The Second Edition much
amended and enlarged, with the Addition of the Styles or Titles of the several
Potentates and Republics.


