MYSTERIES IN RELIGION VINDICATED: OR The Filiation, Deity and Satisfaction of
our Savior asserted, against Socinians and Others.

With Occasional Reflections on several late Pamphlets.

By LVKE MILBOVRNE, a Presbyter of the Church of England.

(...), Barnab. Ep.

(...), Tatianus contra Gentes.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's Head in S. Paul's
Churchyard, 1692.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in GOD HENRY Lord Bishop of LONDON, Dean of the
Chapel Royal, and one of the Lords of their Majesty's most Honorable Privy
Council.
MY LORD,
I Pretend not to do Honor to Your Sacred Character by the little Address of
an obscure Writer, but by representing Your Lordship to the World as treading
in the glorious steps of ancient Saints, Martyrs and Bishops, Your great
Predecessors in the Government of the Church of God.

When busy Ignorants are doing their Fathers Work, and scattering their Tares
among the good Seed of Evangelical Truth, it is time for those in Your
Lordship's station not only to Countenance those who oppose encroaching Error,
but to scatter these Midnight Workers with a just severity, and to frown
effectually on such as the most condescending Laws have thought fit to exclude
from any interest in them.

That Your Lordship's Sentiments are agreeable to Mine, I conclude from Your
declared Willingness to accept so small a Present; yet small as it is, it is
offered with the greatest Affection to our Holy Mother the established Church
of England, which that it may recover it is pristine Luster in spite of all the
malignant influences of Heresy or Schism, and Your Lordship live long as its
Zealous Supporter, is the hearty Prayer of,

MY LORD, Your Lordship's most Humble, Faithful, and Obedient Servant, LVKE
MILBOVRNE.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
IF any wonder the subsequent Discourse should be so near the Form of Sermons,
and though large should little answer its own Title, let him know that the
Author's circumstances would allow him to reduce it to no better Method, and
were enough to discourage him from any Undertaking either usefully close or
laborious.

If making Brick without Straw, laboring hard without so much as the Reward of
a competent Livelihood among a People not overfond of Learning, might make his
Intellectuals move like the Egyptian Chariots with their Wheels off, very slow
and heavily, none but those who are lazy, ignorant or better provided for can
wonder at him.

But whatever measure He has had, He knew himself Originally dedicated to the
Service of the Church of God; that however his Hearers might be careless or
ignorant of their own Good, he was still their Watchman, to give notice
carefully of approaching Dangers, and to make use of those Talents God had
entrusted Him with to prevent Superstition, false Doctrines and Heresies from
overrunning His Congregation.

This sense of Duty made him vigorously oppose the Ingress of Popery in the
last Reign, it made Him too contribute his Handful of Water to quench the
growing flames, and freely to expose himself to the Anger of an unhappily
Bigoted Prince, and the impotent disgusts of hotheaded Renegadoes from the
Church of England.

This made him as jealous of that impudent Pamphlet assuming the Title of the
Naked Gospel, which finding very busily scattered abroad, he designed it a
particular Answer: when a very Reverend Prelate of our Church --

-- Cujus Nomen -- semper acerbum, Semper Honoratum, sic Dii voluistis habebit
-- giving him notice of Dr. Sherlock's excellent Performance, and Dr. Jane's
Promise with a peculiar respect to that Pamphlet, He stopped his Pen, as judging
Himself too mean a Second for so learned and able Undertakers.

But the News of increasing Socinianism and a clear apprehension of the
Pestilent and Irrational Nature of that Heresy made Him cast his thoughts that
way again: and since it would be Pushing out, He believed his Pains could not
be ill spent in Exposing what the Wisdom of the Nation thought fit to except
from their too much abused Indulgence.

He thinks too many Hands cannot be employed in so necessary a Service, and
since our Unitarian Zealots by their numerous Pamphlets are opening the Way, in
Conjunction with other Sects, for Atheism and Irreligion, and so many Beaux
Esprits, the would-be Wits of the Age, try to cloak Atheism under the Pretense
of asserting The Rational Religion, He should think himself very guilty, were
He silent when He had any thing to say against them.

The Refutation of these daring Errors is said to be Undertaken by several of
the Reverend London Clergy, Men doubtless of sufficient abilities to baffle a
thousand such little Whifflers in Reason as We are now pestered with: But while
they delay the Work too long, the Author of this will think it happily
published if it serve only to excite their pious Zeal, and oblige Them to make
up the Defects of this by their more accurate and Learned Arguments.

It has affixed no small scandal upon some otherwise Venerable Names that they
have made their Converse too cheap to the bold Spreader of Socinian Papers, and
while He takes Courage to break Laws under Covert of their Patronage, They can
no way better vindicate the Church of God or their own Reputations, or repress
Impudent Ignorance, than by a vigorous and speedy opposition to his Pernicious
Endeavors.

As for his own Performance in the following sheets, the Author has endeavored
to give its due force to a Text He thinks very plain for the eternal Deity of
our Savior, and to expose Socinian Criticism on that and other places of
Scripture, and has laid open some of those pitiful Artifices they make use of
to pervert the Word of God.

He has essayed to set Humane Reason in its true Light, to give it its just
Weight in Religious Matters, to show the influence Divine Revelation ought to
have upon it, and yet after All, He believes not that any Divine Revelation
does or can supersede any truly Rational Principle.

Many are taken up as such, which yet invalidate themselves by that Opposition
they meet with from Others of as Acute Parts as those who first vend Them, only
such wherein all Discursive Souls agree can properly be called True Principles
of Reason, and these too are only such in the particular Parts of Knowledge to
which they belong, an Euclidean Demonstration can have no Place in
Metaphysics, Nor can the Assertion of a Trinity prove the impossibility of
squaring a Circle.

Weak Eyes are ill Judges of the various Modifications of Light, and Deaf Ears
of the delicate Harmony of Sounds: Reason in the Soul may meet with as many
Obstructions from the different Organization of that Body in which the Soul
acts; and however large the Minds of Socinus, Crellius, or his present Nephew
may be, T. F's Capacity must be very well tenter'd ever it can comprehend all
their Niceties, or see clear Reason confirming every one of their ill-connected
Heterodoxies.

Though the incomparable Bishop of Worcester has managed that Subject, as He uses
to do All, with the greatest Clearness and Learning, this Author too had
endeavored to prove Mysteries not unreasonable in Religious Matters, and it
being done before the preaching of that Great Man's Sermon, He was unwilling to
Expunge it: The Author thinks He too has proved in some Measure that there may
be a God, though We cannot comprehend Him, that there may be such a thing as
Religion, though God should be somewhat Wiser than Men, and that, though
Ignorance be no Mother of true Devotion, yet Men of improved Understanding may
meet with some Religious Matters above their reach, and that it is possible,
the more a modest Man knows, the more truly sensible He may be of his own
Ignorance.

He has proved Jesus Christ to be the Son of God, the manner of his Filiation
is debated out of its proper place, and indeed was not designed at all, had not
some Anonymous Pamphleteers given occasion for it, who coming to his Hand after
the former part was finished, He was obliged either to crowd it in elsewhere,
or else to omit it altogether.

The Argument inserted to prove Scripture the Word of God to those who
acknowledge such a Being is indeed a (...), yet He hopes not wholly useless, We
have too many pretended Christians who doubt it, and He justly questions
whether Socinus's Discourses De Authoritate SS. Scripturae, or such like are
sufficient Proof that He thought the Books of the Old and New Testament were
written by Inspiration.

Whatever He did, his Atheistical Confederates own their suspicions, but veil
their madness under a more plausible Name, and this Author can scarce
distinguish between an Unitarian and a Deist; if our sparkish Wits, or Gentile
Haberdashers of Paradoxies, or Fop Despisers of the Tribe of Levi will but
stand to that Deism they Profess, the following Discourse may afford them
somewhat of Reason to believe the Book known by that Name is really the Word of
God.

From that Disquisition the Author enters more directly on the proof of our
Savior's Divinity, and shows what He ought to have been, and therefore what He
was. He Is apt to think several Writers Ancient and Modern have drawn some Texts
into the Service impertinent enough and quite beside their Original sense; but
believes He has named some, and could have added more, which unless we renounce
understanding men's Minds by their Expressions, must prove that our Redeemer was
true, was perfect God.

Those of the Roman Communion have not more tricks and wretched subterfuges
from clear Texts and rational Arguments urged against Transubstantiation or
Idolatry, than our Unitarians make use of to elude plain Assertions, and the
common Notions of the Ancient Jewish and Christian Churches.

If the Old Testament afford good Evidence in the case, the New does so much
more; And the Evangelists and Apostles were a company of Trapans and ill
designing Men to tell us stories of Christ's Words and Actions which should
make us believe Wonders of Him and conclude Him a partaker Essentially of the
divine Nature, when He was really no more than a mere Man, moved but in a
common sphere, lived Innocent by the infused activity of Divine Grace, and
without that Influence ab Extra might have sinned and incurred Damnation as
well as others.

What He himself did in his Own, and what his Apostles did in His Name, was of
so transcendent a Nature, that should the same things be done now by any other
Person, or in his Name, the World would in spite of all the Unitarian Arguments
conclude such a Person True and Real God: We see the Lycaonians for one
Miracles sake were so possessed with the Divinity of Paul and Barnabas, that a
Socinus or a Crellius, with all their pretty Pleas to that purpose, might have
met with Pentheus's fate among them, and have dyed the Martyrs of unplausible
Sophistry.

The Author has given a short account of the Primitive Faith in the Point under
debate, and nothing but extreme Ignorance could make any of our Unitarians
pretend to true Antiquity for his fancy. Our late Putney Convert indeed could
find Transubstantiation among the Rabbis, and our great Rationalists have
sometimes dreamed of proving our Savior's mere Humanity by the suffrages of
the glorious Anti-Nicene Fathers.

It was not his Happiness to have read Mr. Bull when he wrote this, nor indeed
had He, living in an obscure quarter of the World, at that time heard of that
learned work; Dr. Whitby's came out since it was finished; if this weak Attempt
give any farther Light to any thing, or has touched on what was praetermitted
by their greater Industry, it may add somewhat to the Tale, and Socinian
ill-grounded Confidence may begin to shine with the more notorious Luster.

He has insisted more largely on the General Practice of Praying to our Savior
and making Him the Ultimate Object of our Religious Adorations, and thinks he
has demonstrated the impossibility of defending that practice on the
supposition that our Savior is no more than a mere Man, the Notion of a made
God ridicules it self, and no Contest fairer or more diverting can be set on
foot than between an honest zealous Papist and a Socinian Reason-Monger
concerning the Obligation of the first and second Commandment.

That particular end of our Savior's Incarnation, viz. That He might destroy
the works of the Devil, is perhaps no inconsiderable Evidence of his
Superiority both to Angels and Men, The debate concerning the Abrogation of the
Jewish Law evinces the same Truth, and by the common tracks of Sense and
Reason, which the Socinians pretend to appeal to, leads us to understand the
necessity of our Savior's being True and Eternal God as well as True Man, an
inferior Person could not have consummated the Types, nor could a mere Man,
however alleging a Divine Commission, have repealed what Almighty God himself
had settled and commanded under the most terrible Penalties in the World.

In conclusion, the Author proves the Necessity of our Lord's giving
satisfaction to his Father's Justice for the sins of mankind, and is Himself so
fully convinced of it, that He takes it for granted Those who reject it, either
take Salvation in general for a fond Chimerical Whimsey, or would obtrude upon
us some new and uncouth Idea of the Divine Nature, or think Mankind capable of
Perfection in this Life and meriting Salvation for themselves by their own
supererogatory Sanctity. He generally turns their own Evidences against
themselves, and imagines He has no where misrepresented their Sentiments in the
things under debate between Christians and Unitarians.

He has, as Occasion offered, touched upon some Anonymous Pamphlets of the late
Asserters of Socinian and Arian Paradoxes; it was not worth his while to pursue
them (...), there is little in them but the twice boiled Crambe of the Racovian
Club, commonly worse dressed than in the Originals: nothing but Sophistry and
Confidence runs through them; the Conscience of which made them employ a pert
smatterer in Ignorance as their Hawker to disperse their new fangled Theology
about the Country, as if it were fit one employed so much in the dispose of
Public Charity should, to keep the Balance even between Heaven and Hell,
while he supports their Bodies, pervert and poison the Souls of the
impertinently curious, unthinking and injudicious part of Mankind.

If they have offered any new Reasons in defense of Errors, Apparent rarae
nantes in gurgite vasto, it is almost lost labor to hunt for them, and the
Quarry scarce worth stooping for when found. It may be some may think those
things considerable which He has reflected upon, if so, it is what He wished
for, presuming his Reflections might pass for a sufficient Refutation; at least
He hopes He has placed some things in so fair a Light, that others may the more
easily baffle their Novelties and secure the Foundations of our Christian
Profession from the insolent attacks of Libertinism and prevailing Heresy.

If what the Author has done may be any way acceptable to the Pious and Learned
World, it will encourage Him to proceed farther, and in due time to vindicate
every Article of our Faith from the Insults of Socinians and Atheists, and to
offer them somewhat else wherein the Church of England is immediately
concerned, and which He hopes will do her no disservice, however drooping her
present Looks may be; Otherwise He begs Pardon for what He has done already,
and will for the Future either Write better, or leave that Work to those who
are better able to defend the Cause.

If He has offered any thing New or Solid in vindication of our Ancient Faith,
it will tend extremely to his Satisfaction. If He have erred in any Matter of
weight, He begs his Holy Mother's Pardon, to the Censure of whose Lawful
Governors He humbly submits All He has written, and can conclude his Preface
with nothing more apposite than that Petition of our Sacred Mother in her
Litany, From all false Doctrine, Heresy and Schism, from Hardness of Heart and
Contempt of thy Word and Commandment,

Good Lord, deliver us.
IMPRIMATUR.

Guil. Lancaster R. P. D. Henrico Episc. Land. a Sacris Domesticis.
October. 17. 1691.
1 Timothy 3.16. And without controversy, great is the mystery of godliness: God
was manifest in the flesh.


IT IS our business and design for the securing of those, who shall read this
discourse, from damnable Errors: for the glory of the eternal Son of God, whose
Divinity we find boldly impeached and blasphemously denied by a pestilent crew
of subtle and insinuating Heretics: for the confirmation of that Faith in
Christ which we profess, and in which we hope to dye: to encounter several of
those Arguments through God's assistance, which those enemies of Christianity
assault the World with. To which end, it will be absolutely necessary to clear
the sense of these words from those artificial clouds which some have
endeavored to obscure them with, and here we find the Socinians not so much
disputing about the meaning of the first assertion, without controversy great
is the mystery of godliness; as about the connection of these words with the
particulars following. For if they can prove that the Incarnation of the Son of
God is no part or member of our Faith, or no mystery of our Religion, they
deprive us of one of the best and plainest Texts of Scripture for the
maintaining of his Divinity. Again, if they can so bafflle all mysteries in
Religion, that nothing must be regarded but what can easily be comprehended by
weak and corrupted reason, our holy Religion stands upon a lower ground than
the wretched Systems of Pagan Divinity; and God must stand reproved himself, if
he speak any thing by inspired Prophets, which the meanest person cannot fully
and clearly understand. In our entrance therefore on our intended discourse, we
must first remove these difficulties before we speak to the particulars.

And here we cannot but take notice that the Socinians generally profess
abundance of respect for the Scriptures, and seem to take a great deal of pains
to assert their authority; and it is upon the pretendedly genuine explication
of that Word of God they build those Heretical Opinions, with which they
disturb the Church. Socinus makes it a strange thing that any man professing
Christianity should make any doubt of the authority of the books of the Old and
New Testament, Vid. Socin. de author. Scrip. op. v. 1. p. 265.
especially the last, since the Writers of it were men of reputation and
exactly acquainted with those things they writ about; since the Writers were
very well known, since the books themselves are not corrupted or depraved, and
because there are no full or clear testimonies to be found that those books
deserve not that credit we commonly give them. Catech. Sect. 1. c. 2.
The Racovian Catechism asserts the sufficiency of Scripture to make men wise
to Salvation. Eousque sunt sufficientia ut in rebus ad salutem necessariis iis
solis acquiescendum est, they are so sufficient to that great end, that we
ought to depend upon them only in matters of Salvation. And for their assertion
they add this among other reasons, That it was not likely in so large a book,
and where so few things were absolutely necessary to Salvation, Ibid.
those very few things should not be fully laid down; or that in a book where
God had ordered so many things unnecessary, he should have forgotten any thing
that was absolutely necessary to Salvation: And farther they avouch the
integrity of Scripture, that those holy Books are not corrupted or altered, and
that principally because they say it is inconsistent with God's Providence and
goodness to permit those writings in which he had declared himself and
manifested his Will, and showed the way to eternal Salvation, and which as such
were immediately received and approved by all good men, to permit such Writings
to be any way corrupted: besides that there were so many Copies of those Books
transcribed at first, in places so far distant one from another, and they were
translated into so many several languages presently, that if any corruption or
alteration had been attempted, Ibid. c. 1.
it had been impossible they should all have conspired in the same reading: and
therefore we may observe where the least change has been made, the Copies
disagree. In this observation we close with them, and by their own rule the
better answer their cavil with this Text.

For they tell us that some Copies read this Text not as we do, (...), God was
manifest in the flesh, but (...) which was manifest in the flesh, without any
mention of God at all. Erasmus was the first in this observation, Grotius
follows him and tells us (...) God is wanting in the vulgar Latin, Grot. in loc.
the Syriac and Arabic translations, and that St. Ambrose takes no notice of
it, and that Hincmare Bishop of Rhemes says it was foisted into the Text by the
Nestorians. Curcellaeus tells us the same, and of an old Greek Copy mentioned
by Morinus, wherein part of the word was written by a later hand. This Critical
observation the Socinians with one consent lay hold on, by that means
endeavoring to avoid so plain a Text for the Divinity of the Son of God. So
Volkelius tells us plainly that our Text is one of those Scriptures, Volkel de
^^^d ^elig. Edit Am l. 5. p. 462. c. ^1.
quas ad errorem suum stabiliendum detorquent adversarii, which those who
believe Christ to be God wrest to the maintenance of their own error, for the
name of God is not in all the Greek Copies, as may be seen by the vulgar Latin
and Syriac Versions, but all the following particulars are to be referred to
the Mystery of Godliness mentioned before, which mystery of Godliness was
manifested in the flesh: and this Grotius before cited on the place, takes to
be very good sense. Crellius on this place observes the same thing, yet owns
Quod Graeci constanter pro o legunt THe, that the Greeks, whose the Original
is, read the name of God unanimously in the Text, though some Versions want it.
He tells us a story of Macedonius the Patriarch of the Pneumatomachoi, or those
Heretics who denied the divinity or personality of the Holy Ghost, or of some
other of that name of which more hereafter, that he attempted the depraving of
this passage, and that there is no question but he inserted the controverted
word into the Text afterward. He refers us to an abridgment of the case of
Nestorius and Eutyches, Crellius i^ loc. Bibliot. fr. Pol. inter opera Cr. v.
2. p. 18, 19.
written by Liberatus a Deacon of Carthage, who tells us that Macedonius Bishop
of Constantinople was deprived by the Emperor Anastasius as a falsifier of
Scripture, and particularly for inserting the word God in this place of S.
Paul: He tells us indeed that, In eo consentiunt omnes malam manum huic loco
fuisse adhibitam, fraudemque a Macedonio attentatam. All agree in this that
some foul play was offered to the Text, and that Macedonius was concerned in
the cheat; but for this we must take his word, for he gives us no other
authority: and all this is repeated in the Racovian Catechism, Catech. Raco. p.
55. Sect. 4. c. 1.
and the short note of Andreas Wiscoveatius upon the question about the sense
of our Apostle. Schlicktingius another of the same Tribe, and a great hearer of
Crellius, yet here contradicts his companion and tells us boldly and roundly,
Schlicktingius in locum. oper. t. 2. p. 150. Contin. Ir. Ir. p. 106. par. 58.
that several Greek Copies read it otherwise than we do, i. e. they omit the
word God, but proves it only by the forecited translations: and to name no
more, Zwicker in the defense of his Irenicum Irenicor. against Comenius, calls
this Text locus dubiae lectionis, a place read several ways. Now the inference
these Heretics make from this Criticism is, That this Text is indeed no proof
of any thing: for since we know not how it was written at first, by reason of
the difference among the Copies now extant, it is not to be admitted as a proof;
so Crellius, Crell. ubi supra.
Cum nemo ambigat tentatum esse aliquid circa hunc locum, varientque hodie
lectiones, nil ex illo solidi, ad aliquod in Religione Dogma stabiliendum duci
posse certum est, Since none doubt there has been somewhat attempted about this
Text, and that the Copies at this time differ one from another, no solid
argument can be drawn from thence, for the confirming any Tenet in Religion.
With him agrees the Racovian Catechism in express terms: but here we may answer
them, according to their own position before mentioned, That since the original
Greek Copies, in which Language the new Testament was written by the inspired
authors, do all agree in reading this Text as we do in our Bibles, we need not
trouble our selves about the disagreement of two or three Translations, since,
having to do with men highly pretending to reason, we may rationally conclude
God's goodness and providence would take more care to secure the Originals than
those Translations, and that he really did preserve the Originals unperverted
on purpose to prevent the ill effects those imperfect translations might
otherwise have had: for who but a proselyte of Rome or a Socinian would run to
an uncertain stream, when he might with the same ease drink at the fountain
head where every thing is pure and clean?

But if we examine the matter more strictly, the whole pretense of different
Copies is false or impertinent. Vid. Gothofr. in Poli Synop.
Gothofredus in a particular discourse on this Text could find no difference in
the original Books, and all Grotius and Schlicktingius, and Curcellaeus and
Crellius have said, amounts but to one among 1000. and that one very
questionable too: The Syriac translation indeed does want the word in our
Polyglot Bibles, but the Arabic version has it God appeared in the flesh: (...)
nor do I find any various readings there. The vulgar Latin has not the word
indeed: but when Grotius, and from him the rest tell us that St. Ambrose read
it not, they show more craft than sincerity; that Father reads the text without
God in it, but he interprets it as we do, that the mystery here spoken of was
Christus in carne, Christ appearing in the flesh. Ambros. com. in Epist. 1. ad
Tim. Edit. Par. 1549. p. 2056.
Tamdiu aspectu humilis visus est per carnem, quamdiu devicta morte resurgeret
a mortuis and videretur majestas ejus qui natus ut homo non erat totus homo: He
appeared humble in his flesh so long till having conquered death, he rose
again, and that his Majesty might be seen, who though he was born as a man, was
not merely a man, i. e. he was God as well as man. Not to take any notice that
St. Ambrose really was not the author of those Commentaries on St. Paul's
Epistles printed commonly among his works, but Hilary the Deacon a stout
adversary of Arianisme in the fourth Century. As for Crellius his story of
Macedonius, it is loose and impertinent. Macedonius indeed who was thrust into
the chair of Constantinople by the Arrians upon the death of Alexander in the
year 342. was Heretic enough, and consequently like enough to attempt an ill
thing. But that Macedonius mentioned by the Deacon Liberatus, was thrust out of
his See by the Emperor Anastasius for his not complying with Heretics in the
year 515. when it was too late to attempt an innovation in Scripture, and who
beside could have no design in so doing, since he held no peculiar opinions
about our Savior, to which such a corruption could be subservient. Brev. c.
19. Council t. 5. p 762.
Liberatus indeed tells such a story in his abridgment, but it is so
impertinent, that even Crellius himself concludes he was mistaken in it, and we
may go farther and pronounce it wholly false, since a Manuscript Copy of the
new Testament presented to Charles the first of blessed memory, by Cyrill then
Patriarch of Constantinople, reads, as we do at this day: and that Copy being
about 1300 years old, was written long before the latter Macedonius was born:
so that there was no need of running himself into danger by inserting that word
into St. Paul's Text which was there before; the Socinians, though daring enough
to impose upon the world, could not but see the absurdity of their own
pretense: therefore they try to weaken the force of this Text by another
artifice.

For so they tell us, that allowing the word God in the Text, it is not to be
understood of Jesus Christ, but of God the Father; and in this they have
Grotius, though at a distance, their Leader too, who gives us this general
interpretation of the Verse: We are not here concerned about any ordinary
truth, but about that part of it, which no man of himself was able to make out,
which has an extraordinary faculty to generate true piety in our hearts, vid.
Grot. in locum.
a part of truth in comparison of which all the Precepts and Principles of the
Mosaic Law and of Philosophy are idle and of no effect, and this mysterious
truth amounts to this, That the Gospel was published not by Angels, but by
poor, infirm and inconsiderable men, as our Lord and his Apostles seemed to the
World; so the great mystery was manifest in the flesh: this Gospel was
justified in the spirit, i. e. it was approved to the World by many Miracles,
these being wrought by the influence of the spirit: it was seen of Angels, and
that with the greatest admiration, for Angels came to the knowledge of the
Gospel by the means of Men; it was preached to the Gentiles, not only to the
Jews, who before were God's peculiar people, but to the Gentiles who were mere
strangers to the true God; it was believed on in the World, a great part of
Mankind entertaining it, and it was received up in glory, i e. it was exalted
very gloriously, because it introduced a far greater degree of Holiness into
the World than any former Opinions did. So much pains did that learned man take
to obscure a plain Text of Scripture, and his gloss upon it was but impertinent
and absurd at last. He Is mighty willing to let the Verse pass without that
emphatical word in it, but his fancy about the Gospel's being manifest in the
flesh, and seen of Angels, being justified in the Spirit and received up into
glory, are so poor and dilute, as became not a man of learning and sense to
obtrude upon the world: therefore his Socinian followers, though they touch upon
this gloss of his; yet they quit the Gospel, which he insists upon, and take
God the Father in its room. So Volkelius asserts, Deum Patrem in carne
manifestatum fuisse intelligendum esse, that by the Text we are to understand
that God the Father was manifest in the flesh, and pursues that assertion with
this Paraphrase of the whole, That God by Christ and his Apostles, who suffered
many things on that account, did more clearly then ever discover himself and
his will unknown to all precedent Ages. In the mean time though he revealed these
things by inconsiderable men, he took care by that divine power he showed in
them, to evidence his own justice and truth, and to have his will approved:
that at that time and not sooner, this will of his was known and understood by
the very Angels, and the extraordinary wisdom of God which shines in it, lay
open before them; that this same will of God was preached to foreign Nations
unacquainted with him before, and destitute of divine revelation; vid.
Volkelium ubi supra cum reliquis.
that the World in all parts gave credit to it, and that it was openly received
by Men with a great deal of Honor. So far Volkelius, with whom agree Crellius,
though dilating more largely upon the place. Zwicker, and the Racovian Catechism.
Schlicktingius, goes along with Grotius, and will by no means admit of the word
(...) or God, and in plain terms tells us, Schlicktingius in loc.
Deum manifestatum esse in carne dicere, nugari est; it is mere fooling to say,
God was manifest in the flesh, and that Godliness and God manifest in the world
were very different things. But this we shall have occasion to animadvert upon
afterward.

As for this (...), or the great mystery mentioned in the Text, Suidas
interprets (...) by (...), holy rites of a secret nature, Vid. Suid. in Lex. v.
1. Vid. Vossii Etym. ling. latinae and Dieterici Lex. nov. testam.
or not commonly known, that they were so called (...), because those that
heard them stopped their mouths, that they might not divulge or explain them to
any. Vossius and Dieterichus from Casaubon and Hornius choose rather to derive
it from the Hebrew word (...) which signifies to hide or to conceal, from hence
comes (...) a concealment or a place to hide one in: so that whencesoever its
derived, they agree it signifies somewhat of a secret nature not easily to be
found out, In Ecclesia ea vox generatim accipitur pro re Sacra naturae lumine
incomprehensibili, says Vossius, as used by Ecclesiastical Writers, it is
generally taken for holy things incomprehensible by the light of nature, though
sometimes it has a more restrained signification relating to Symbolical rites;
and so the two Sacraments of Baptism and the Lord's Supper are frequently
called mysteries: but in the Text where we are told the mystery of Godliness is
great, and that assertion proved by the following particulars, we learn that
the whole affair of the Incarnation of the blessed Jesus with its consequences,
by which the Redemption of Mankind from the slavery of sin and death was
effected, is a deep and profound mystery, or secret, not to be comprehended by
any humane understanding, and yet so necessarily to be believed, that no man
can rightly assume the name of Christian, or pretend to give a due credit to
the doctrine of the Gospel, without embracing and fully believing it.

But here we lie open again to the insults of our Socinian adversaries, for
they seem very unwilling to allow any such things at present as mysteries in
Religion: for though they do believe there were in former ages, as particularly
before our Savior's time, many things tending to humane salvation, which yet
to humane understandings were inscrutable and never to be found out; yet these
things are now revealed, and consequently comprehensible enough by sound
reason, and certainly to be fathomed by discourse and sense. Thus
Schlicktingius in his disputation against the Doctrine of the Trinity, opposed
to Meisner, a Lutheran Divine, Schlicktin. in Meisner. de Trin. etc. p. 70.
Mysteria Divina non idcirco mysteria dicuntur quod etiam revelata omnem
nostrum intellectum captumque transcendunt, sed quod non nisi ex revelatione
cognosci possint: Divine Mysteries are not therefore called mysteries, because
they transcend our understanding after they are revealed; but because they
cannot be known without divine Revelation. For what need is there of a
Revelation, if they are no more intelligible afterward than they were before?
wherefore Humane reason may determine concerning divine Mysteries when they are
once revealed, nay it ought to do so: for how should it give any credit to them
unless it had first passed a judgment upon them? And so soon as ever our reason
has passed a true and incorrupt judgment upon them, it always finds those
mysteries to be very true. Thus He. Elsewhere he asserts, that our ignorance of
divine mysteries proceeds not from the corruption of our nature through the
fall of Man, but from the extraordinary sublime nature of those Mysteries;
Disput. pro Socino. p. 101. 1 Cor. 15.51. De vera Relig. l. 1. p. 344.
and therefore after they are once revealed to us, whether by God's word or by
his Spirit, Tantas habemus vires, ut eas animo comprehendere valeamus, we have
so much strength of mind that we are able to comprehend them. The same Doctrine
he preaches in his Commentary on that of the Apostle, Behold I show you a
mystery; and Crellius speaks to the same effect. But this reasoning is not such
as should make us much admire our own faculties with respect to the mysteries
of Religion: It Is true indeed our reason may serve us so far as to convince us
such or such a truth is revealed, our eye sees it in that Book which we call
the word of God, our ear hears it; therefore by discourse we conclude that that
Truth stands so revealed there, and our reason enables us to judge whether the
revelation be authentic and fit for us to depend on or no. But according to
their acknowledgment, wretched man involved in sin, could with all his wit and
sense discover no remedy for his misery, the more he discoursed with himself,
the more plainly he would find, that He who had offended a Being wise, knowing, and
powerful to punish, could rationally expect nothing but punishment from one so
offended: Mercy could take little place in Man's thoughts in the case; he could
see reasons enough why he should be punished for his sin, but no reason why he
should be pardoned, since he had sinned: God now had decreed a remedy for him,
but God's decree was secret and indiscoverable. As man could not naturally feed
himself with any reasonable hopes that such a remedy should be: neither could
he contrive how that remedy should be effected, or by what means he an offender
should escape the stroke of Justice; since Mercy as well as justice must have
some ground or reason to move upon: the means then as well as the decree was
hitherto mysterious. Well, Almighty God in his wonderful commiseration of
humane weakness was pleased to promise somewhat comfortable to our first
parents, in the strength of which promise they were enabled to live, though under
the weight of those calamities sin had laid them open to: God afterward
besides these extraordinary promises of the same nature made to the Patriarchs,
inspired several holy Men, who spoke as influenced by him, and they foretold
man's redemption by a Messiah, one that should be Anointed to that purpose.
Here then the mystery was revealed, and what man before could not rationally
have hoped for, he was now assured of by God himself. But did not the whole
matter continue a Mystery still? Nay, was not the Mystery now more inscrutable
than before? Could Man give a reason, or comprehend the matter in his Soul, why
an exceedingly provoked God should express such love or pity for those who had
provoked him? If they could have done so, they might have done it as well
before, and consequently have concluded, that though they had incensed God, yet
his wrath would certainly be atoned, and therefore there was no need of a
Revelation: or after this Revelation, could Man tell certainly what the meaning
of this Messiah was? They saw him sometimes described by the Prophets under all
the glorious characters of a mighty King, nay, equaled with God himself in his
titles and in his name. Sometimes they saw him charactered as very mean and
contemptible, as riding on an Ass instead of a triumphant Chariot, as one who
had no form nor comeliness in him, no beauty for which he should be desired,
nay, despised and rejected of men, a man of sorrows and acquainted with grief.
Could common reason so easily discover what manner of person he should be in
whom these particulars so seemingly contradictory should meet? If so, what made
the Jews, who had enjoyed a greater portion of divine light than the rest of
the World, what made them stumble so extremely at the person of the Messiah
when he appeared, or think it so impossible to reconcile Prophecies so
seemingly contradictory to one another? were the Jews the only persons utterly
deserted by reason, or grown brutes on the sudden? What shall we say to the
existence of a God, one supreme Being who manages all things? That there is a
God, though the Socinians deny it, Nature, and the various works of the Creation
teach us; for reason will persuade us that the Apostle speaks plain enough to
that purpose, when he makes it a reason why the Heathens should be inexcusable,
because that which may be known of God is manifest in them, for God has showed
it unto them, for the invisible things of him from the Creation of the World
are clearly seen, Romans 1.19.20.
being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and
Godhead: This same existence of a God is revealed to us in Scripture, but in
the mean time we must own that by Scripture we really know no more of God than
Nature and the works of Nature had discovered before: for that which may be
known of God was visible in them as the forecited Text informs us; nay, had not
Nature impressed upon our Souls some Idaeas of the divinity, had not we been able
to read his eternal power and Godhead in them, all the revelations in Scripture
would have appeared very impertinent and unsatisfactory, since all the
discourse in it concerning God might easily have been interpreted into a
religious fiction, contrived merely to get reputation to that Book of which God
was the pretended Author. But after Nature and revelation have done so much,
are we able to comprehend the nature of the Almighty? is not every thing that
bears the character of infinity dark and mysterious still? we know God is, we
know that he is a rewarder of those who diligently seek him, but can we tell by
what methods his prudence manages the universe? can we tell how he is
infinitely wise, just, good, merciful, true, etc. or though we know God is so,
can we tell what it is to be so? No, we know the positive part, but for us to
go farther would argue us Gods and not men: But does the revelation of a
certain truth that was mysterious, change its nature? is not that which was a
mystery before, a mystery still? The Christian Religion or the Principles on
which it was built were once mysterious, a Socinian will assert, they were so
before Christ's coming into the world: but, if we may give any credit to our
Apostle who wrote after the Ascension of our Savior into Heaven, the mystery
of Godliness is great still, and it will continue so as long as Heaven and
Earth endure? But here for our better procedure in countermining the Socinian
Heresies, it will be necessary briefly to discuss that question how far humane
reason is to take place in matters of Divinity: For Smalcius tells us
positively, Small. Hom. 8. in c. 1. Joan. p. 89.
Nullam esse religionis particulam, quae cum ratione non conveniat: and quae
cum ratione non convenit opinio eam etiam in Theologia nullum locum habere
posse. That there is no little point of Religion which does not agree with
reason; and whatsoever opinion does not agree with reason can have no place in
Theological matters. Now for the better clearing this matter, I shall lay down
these Propositions.

That the Reason of Man is the Candle of the Lord, according to that of
Solomon. 1. Prove. 20.27.
Its the real Image of God in man, given to Man, that he might be able to
discourse with himself, and argue concerning the nature of every object laid
before him. It Is that whereby he is able to distinguish between things, to
judge of what tends to his own happiness, and what may any way be prejudicial
to it. It Is that whereby Man comes to see God in his Creatures, from the frame
and contexture and management of which he understands the wisdom and power of
him that made them, and to observe his own dependence upon that Almighty
Sovereign. It enables him to argue from observations upon himself concerning
the goodness and mercy of God, and how fit it is for all created Beings to
adore and magnify the Creator. It shows how fit it is that those who so
entirely depend upon him should devote all their services to him, how they
should all seek to him in every distress, and worship him, so as may be
acceptable to him. When I give humane reason so high a character, I understand
it only as imparted to him in his first Creation, when he was equally clothed
with native beauty and innocence, his discursive faculty was then so high and
clear, that we, miserable creatures, have at present only some poor defective
glimpses of it; or we see it like some glorious light indeed, but fixed at so
prodigious a distance, that we cannot with all our present skill take it is true
magnitude. As it was then, it fitted Man for that mighty Sovereignty over the
inferior parts of the Creation, which he was then invested with; it taught him
to cultivate the garden of the Lord, so as became a faithful Steward and
Servant; It gave him such a view of the Divine Nature, that nothing could
possibly seem more absurd or shameful, than any thing he could do that might
offend God. And so true an insight into that which we call Natural Philosophy,
that the nature of every creature was obvious to him at first, and he capable
of naming all things according to that nature. So that it was really not a want
of reason which made him sink under the temptations of Hell, but it was
carelessness, not standing duly upon his guard, nor adverting seriously to the
tenor of what was offered. He had the weapon, but he made no due use of it: he
was created indeed in a state of perfection, but his passions and affections
were alterable, his body passible, nay, his reason it self capable of a
countermine when the design of opposition centered in a being created to as
great advantages as himself. And when parties of equal strength and courage are
engaged in a contention, the first that is guilty of an inadvertency must
certainly be foiled; had not love and beauty like the pipe of Mercury, lulled
the hundred eyes of original reason into a fatal sleep, death could never have
found entrance into the world, nor sin have been the dreadful harbinger of its
ruins. But we see Sin and Death have overpowered and prevail every day more
and more upon us without any considerable opposition, which had reason retained
its primeval vigor, it would certainly have met with, therefore we conclude,

That reason stands now extremely impaired by the fall of man, and in a great
measure incapacitated for prosecuting those noble ends for which at first it
was bestowed. It Is true, reason is the very form of the Soul, the Soul it self
a substance pure, immaterial, Divine, but it is immerst in a body of a grosser
nature, organized indeed originally exactly for its reception, and every way
fit to be actuated by it, and by virtue of that exact preparation of its
subject, it moved originally with ease and freedom: but forms may admit of
alteration, and sin has effected such an alteration in the Soul, it has not
quite extinguished that candle of the Lord, but it has made it burn very dim
and uncertainly; it has not entirely separated reason from the Soul, but it has
made it slow and unactive, or else only perversely active; and whereas the body
was exactly fit at first for the operations of an unpolluted Soul, that body it
self is much disordered now, and even where the Soul would act better, it finds
it self oppressed with that body of Death which sin has loaded it with: that
Death as its preparative has thousands of diseases and distempers, many of
which extremely impair that little reason we are still possessed of, not that the
Soul is immediately prejudiced in it self by them, but as the curious Artist
can yet do nothing without his tools, so the Soul moves, heavily because the
body is wholly unfitted for its exerting its activity: and so farther as we
observe the Artisan's work is worse or better according to the excellency of
his tools, so daily experience teaches us, the mind applies it self more nimbly
to work, is more curious in its fancy, more large and various in its
inventions, more calm and solid in its judgment, according to the temper and
constitution of that body it resides in. Hence we conclude that those we call
Idiots or Fools have Souls immortal and rational as well as our selves, but
those Souls have no proper organs to demonstrate their innate reason by: these
unhappinesses are all the fatal consequences of sin, and we could hardly
believe that sin had had any ill consequences at all, had not reason suffered
by it: for if we can, as really we do, observe, that reason teaches every one
who now adverts seriously to it, to aim at quiet and happiness; so had not sin
clouded it strangely, it had been impossible any temptation whatsoever
contrived by Hell or its emissaries could have baffled it. But it is plain that
by our present incapacities to answer the sophistry of the tempter, we are
continually betrayed to sin: reason in its height and purity would have
convinced us of the madness and folly of every thing that is ill, reason as it
now stands perverted suffers us, unless prevented with a great deal of
industry, to embrace ill under the notion of good, and it is no small argument
of a great weakness in our rational faculties to be so imposed on: We
oftentimes now entertain our capital adversary the Devil as an angel of light,
we misprise vice for virtue, falsehood for truth, sophistry for solid arguments,
novelty for antiquity, superstition for devotion, noise for sense, interest for
zeal, confidence for great parts and ingenuity: and reason it self as now it
stands, when we have a few lucid intervals, shows us the extreme ridiculousness
of those mistakes, and the abilities which some have to expose the follies of
others, and at the same time to betray their own, is unanswerable evidence of
the imbecility of humane reason in general. It Is doubtless possible for some
of excellent constitutions to argue themselves into a strong persuasion that
there is a God. It Is again possible, nay we see it too too common for men of
delicate intellectuals to pretend to answer all the arguments brought to prove
the being of a God, and they do it so plausibly, as to get proselytes, and to
make abundance of room for horrid Atheism. We make no question but that we have
proofs really unanswerable of the Divinity of the Son of God; the Socinians
with whom we are now concerned, deny it, and pretend to demonstrations of the
contrary, and all from principles of reason or Scriptures rationally
interpreted; and many well meaning men think they are in the right, and
therefore close with them: These oppositions of Reason could never have
happened, had the Soul or mind enjoyed its original freedom and activity; for
nothing could possibly have been offered in opposition to reason wholly clear
and perfect, that having been incapable of stooping to mean arts and trifling
sophistry. But we need indeed no more but to reflect a little on our first
Parents, and on our selves, to prove the truth of this conclusion. It Is
impossible to overlook the prodigious difference there was between Adam as a
knowing Monarch, giving names to all Creatures according to their natures, and
Adam sowing Fig Leaves together to hide his nakedness from Creatures whom some
conclude irrational; and flying to the shelter of the Trees of Eden for a
security from the presence of an all-seeing God; one argued excess of wisdom,
the other the extravagance of folly: and for our selves, as the Jews proved
themselves dull and senseless, who could not be convinced or reduced by him,
who spoke as never man spoke; so we cannot without extreme difficulty find any
impressions of good made on our Souls by the most forcible discourses: whereas
reason in its primitive glory could admit of nothing, but what was holy, just
and good; all this notwithstanding we conclude,

That Humane reason corrupted as it is, has yet so much of light and strength,
as to show and convince us of a general necessity of Religion: This we assert
of the light of nature, which really is nothing but mere reason, as it stands
at present affected. Now if the works of nature are such, as according to the
assertion of the Apostle, do evidence the Almighty's power and Godhead, this
evidence must be clear to somewhat that is able to comprehend it; and if it be
so very full and plain, that they who neglect it are altogether inexcusable,
then that reason which we now enjoy, which alone is capable of apprehending
natural evidence, must still have that strength that those who by its conduct
cannot find out a God, and their general duty to him, are therefore not to be
excused. God has made the World, and all things therein, and gives to all life
and breath, Acts 17.24, 25, 26, 27.
and all things, and has made of one blood all Nations to dwell upon the Earth,
that they might seek the Lord, if happily they might feel after him and find him:
but it would have been very ill argued of the Apostle from such Topics, if
such observations had not really been enough to guide those who search after
God to make a discovery of him. And here the Socinians seem to act by very
strange measures, they conclude as before I observed from Smalcius, that
there is nothing to be admitted into Religion but what is agreeable to reason;
but we cannot tell what is agreeable to reason, unless we can fully and clearly
comprehend it: for otherwise we may be mistaken, and suppose that agreeable to
reason, which really is not so. But at the same time, Socinus himself looks
upon the light of nature as not sufficient to impress on Man the notion of a
God, Socin. praelect. Theol. c. 2:
but will have that general opinion of the existence of God to flow only from
traditional knowledge, or from revelation: yet after this assertion of his,
Crellius one of the most learned of his followers and defenders, goes about in
his Book de Deo and ejus attributis, to demonstrate the being of a God from the
works of the Creation. But if Man has not sense enough, by considering the
works of nature, to argue to the being of a God, such a demonstration is
extremely impertinent. Socinus would prove his opinion among other things by
that of the Apostle, He that comes to God must believe that he is, and that he
is a rewarder of those that diligently seek him, which is prefaced with that:
That without faith it is impossible to please God. Heb. 11.6.
But this is no proof at all, for Men may by considering circumstances come to
the acknowledgment of some supreme power; and yet never believe in him, nor
ever own or practice their duty to him: and therefore St. Paul takes notice of
some holding the truth in unrighteousness, who when they knew God, glorified
him not as God: though they were convinced of his existence, they were not
careful to perform the duty of Creatures or servants to a Supreme Creator; they
were not thankful but became vain in their Imaginations, Romans 1.21.
and their foolish hearts were darkened, etc. Now those St. Paul there reflects
on were Heathens in general, who being under a necessity of believing that
there was a God by rational discourse, yet out of a supine laziness, troubled
not themselves to improve reason so far as they might and ought to have done;
and therefore, without any consideration of the divine Nature, fell to worship
Idols, or to respect the Creature more than the Creator; yet even that Idolatry
it self is an uncontrollable evidence of the general notion of God's existence,
since no man possibly could be drawn to adore several, if he really believed
there were no God at all. Nor farther does it follow, that because I Am
satisfied there is a God, therefore I must necessarily be acceptable to God;
for though my sense of his Divinity may of it self be pleasing to my Maker, yet
if that sense have no operation upon my life and conversation, my continuance
in sin must cancel all those advantages I could hope to receive upon an
inevitable conviction. Nor does Scripture any where tell us of such as believe
there is no God. Ps. 10.4. Ps. 14.1.
It Is true, we read of some in all whose thoughts God is not, of the foolish
body saying in his heart there is no God: but wicked men, even assisted by
Divine Revelation to the knowledge of God's existence, may forget him; nay the
very best of men do so when they fall into sin: and for a wicked man to say in
his heart, there is no God, i. e. to wish heartily there were none, and to
believe there is none, are very different things. Caligula that Roman Emperor
said in his heart there was no God, when he would needs supply the worlds
defects by assuming Divinity to himself; but Caligula owned that he was
otherwise convinced, when upon a thunder-storm he sculk'd into vaults, and hid
his head from the fury of an angry Superior. And we have now adays but too
many Atheistical wretches, who employ all their wits to prove to themselves
and others that there is no God, who yet when death approaches, or some
terrible distemper shakes their bodies, tremble at approaching judgments,
submit to old innate notions of a God which they had long endeavored to have
stifled, and are ready to cry to the mountains to fall upon them, and to the
rocks to cover them from his wrath whose very being they formerly pretended to
defy. Nor yet are there really any Nations discovered who are wholly without
such notions of a God as flow from a due contemplation of Nature. vid. Blavii
Atlant. maj. in America Brasliana^.
Nay the very Brasilians themselves to whose story Socinus refers us, though of
all other nations the most ignorant and barbarous, are not so wholly
Atheistical, but that, if we may believe Geographers, they believe the Souls
immortality and existence after its separation from the body, a thought alone
which must be attended with the owning of a God: and hence Crellius well enough
observes, De Deo and attr. l. 1. c. 3.
Quod sacri libri non semel ad rerum in natura existentium contemplationem nos
vocant ut Divinae Majestatis radios in eis relucentes and admirandarum ejus
proprietatum vestigia illis impressa lustremus. That the holy Scriptures do
more than once call upon us to meditate on the various parts of Nature, that we
may see the rays of Divine Majesty shineing in them, and the footsteps of God's
power wonderfully impressed upon them. For not only all the works of Nature in
a body, but every single thing gives us a particular argument of the being of a
God. But supposing we pursue the opinion of Socinus recommended by Smalcius to
the University of Heidelberg; if withal we observe what the Racovian Catechism
asserts, that Man's free will is not impaired by Adam's sin, and conclude,
what is very natural, that the other faculties of the Soul are no more weakened
than the Will, it will plainly follow, that Man even in the state of Innocence
was not capable naturally of knowing there was a God: and therefore Socinus
fairly refers his knowledge in that kind to God's revealing himself at first to
him. And certainly that natural light which even in primaeval purity could not
reach to the bare existence of a God, must be at this time very insufficient to
judge of every thing God has revealed, and to comprehend every mystery which is
concerned in man's salvation. Farther, if such as the Brasilians or Indians are
really wholly without the apprehension of a God, it will appear from thence,
that Traditional knowledge may be worn out; but as for divine Revelation as
extant in the Word of God, it can have no credit among Heathens till they are
first convinced there is a God whose that Word is; therefore there must be
arguments drawn by discourse from the worlds structure, that must first prove
that principle, and then that there are really divine Revelations; and that
those writings which we call the Word of God contain those Revelations, will be
demonstrable enough. Tertul. de resur. carnis.
For as Tertullian says, Praemisit Deus naturam magistram, submissurus and
prophetiam, quo facilius credas Prophetiae, Discipulus naturae, God sends
Nature as a mistress before, designing to assist it with revelation or
prophecy, that being first the disciples of Nature we might the more readily
give credit to revelation. Therefore S. Basil calls the school of Nature,
(...), the school of rational Souls, and the disciplinary of the knowledge of
God. And the ancient Monk Anthony answered the inquisitive Philosopher very
well, when he asked him how he could live without books. Socrat. Hist. Eccl. l.
4. c. 23.
(...): My book is the nature of all existent things, a book which is always
ready when I would know the words of God. Though the words of Tully a Heathen,
are more directly opposed to Socinus, De Divination. l. 2.
Esse praestantem aliquam aeternamque naturam, and eam suspiciendam
adorandamque hominum generi pulchritudo mundi ordoque rerum coelestium cogit
confiteri: That there is some excellent and eternal nature, and that to be
adored and admired by mankind, the very beauty of the world, and the curious
order of celestial bodies, will force us to confess. If then an Heathen by
natures light could discover not only the being of a God, but the necessity of
worshipping him, it is sufficient evidence of our conclusion, That humane reason
or the mere light of Nature may show us the general necessity of Religion,
notwithstanding those decays it has undergone by Sin. For if that notion
naturally imbibed that there was a God urged men to serve him by several
methods of Religion, it is plain that notion enforced Religion in general upon
all mankind; we conclude

That humane Reason as it now stands corrupted, when it applies it self
industriously to Religion or the adoration of a God merely on general notions,
as a reward for that industry, certainly meets with divine assistances, by
which means those intentions which at first are honest and sincere are made
really effectual to Gods glory and the improvers happiness. Humane reason no
sooner discovers the existence of God, but upon a farther pursuit of that
notion in enquiry after God's nature, it finds it self lost in a vast abyss,
nothing but immense infinity being the object of a faculty unquestionably
finite and limited, must of consequence confound it, unless there be some guide
or director found out for it. This made Simonides of old, (who was not only
Poet a suavis, verum etiam caetero^^^ doctus sapiensque, Cicero de Not. Deor.
l. 1. p. 27.
as Tully calls him, a sweet Poet, but a man otherwise learned and wise) when
Hiero King of Sicily asked him what God was, require a days time to ^onsider of
the question, when the day after Hiero repeated his question, he desn'd two
days, and when he asked still more and more time, and Hiero wondering asked him
the reason, Quia quanto, inquit, diutius considero, tanto mihi res videtur
obscurior, because, says he, the longer I consider of the matter, the more
obscure I find it. Tully seems indeed to impute this to his general Skepticism:
but since he owned a God, and had no other guide but Nature, it showed his
wisdom to acknowledge the deficiency of that principle in carrying him farther.
It was Socrates's modesty which made him confess he had only learned this, that
he knew nothing. And it was Simonides's prudence which made him own his
ignorance in so mysterious a particular. Reason teaches a man that has lost his
eyes how great inconveniences he is liable to by that loss, when he knows his
helpless condition, though Reason with all its arguments cannot restore his eyes,
reason can teach him to seek for a guide who can see, and will satisfy him how
far the kindness of the guide may repair his misfortune. The same Reason in
matters of Religion, though it find out a God, yet shows Man his natural
blindness in relation to the consequences of that principle. Now the Soul being
always covetous of knowledge, hoping ^y it ^o repair in some measure the ruins
of the f^^, i^ a M^^ but follow its i^^^ation, con^ (...) to apprehend the
(...) and to seek for one qu^ (...) p^^^^^^. Here then we must own, (...) God
h^s called upon mankind so earn^^^ (...) ^ome to him, and has promised that
those who do so he will by no means reject, and that he will assist such by the
gifts of his Spirit, that they may improve the farther in divine knowledge; we
must own that it would be inconsistent with these engagements and promises, and
consequently with Go^'s veracity, if he should not be ready to rew^^d with
suitable assistances all such who acco^^ing to their abilities diligently seek
(...): As a full proof of his readiness in the case, he has imparted his Will
to mankind in Scripture; the reading of books is the ordinary means of
attaining knowledge, or at le^st a due converse with such who have leisure and
capacity to read and underst^^d them, such reading is useful even to inspi^^d
persons, 1 Timothy 4.13, 14.
whence St. Paul advises Timothy an Evangelist to give attendance to reading,
as well as to exhortation and doctrine, and not to neglect the gift that was in
him. And howsoever some may contemn th^^ ^^^^ane learning which they cannot
reach, we have no reason to believe that S. Paul was prejudiced in his
Apostolical abilities by having been brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, or by
having bestowed some time in reading the Poems of Aratus or Epimenides. That
God himself might comply with this ordinary means of acquiring knowledge, He
committed his own Will to writing, and that in such a manner that the weakest
might not complain the book was wholly unintelligible, nor the wisest make
their boast that they comprehended every thing contained there. The man that
seeks to improve his reason by reading, in search of books must act very
irrationally if he pretermit the Book of God; For he that believes there is a
God, and takes him for a Being infinitely superior to himself, when he thinks
it worth his while to converse with humane writings, cannot but judge it much
more so to examine a book which carries the name of God himself as its Author
in the frontispiece: He Would read it, though it were to no other end, but to find
whether it were agreeable to that august title it bore, and what real
characters of the Divinity were to be found in it. But when such a man comes
once to read it seriously, though he is not able to comprehend all he reads, yet
his rational faculty must run very low if he find not more improvements of it
there than in all other writings whatsoever. It Is observable of the Mariners
that carried Jonah for Tarshish, that when the storm sent by the God of Israel
lay hard upon them, the Mariners in their fear called every one upon his God;
they believed in general there was such a being, but a multitude being adored
by the greater part of the world, instead of one, every one had his particular
idol to address to. Jonah 1.4, 5, 9, 10.14, 15, 16.
But when Jonah, sensible of his crime, and that vengeance which pursued it,
had confessed the truth and persuaded them to throw him overboard, and they
though unwillingly complied with him, they, before they would do an action so
severe and extraordinary, applied themselves to the true God; and finding the
storm to cease upon their Prayer, they offered Sacrifices to him, and made
vows; thus Pagan Mariners grew a kind of converts to true Religion. So when Men
in consulting Scriptures, especially at first, find their Souls disturbed under
a sense of former ignorance, and meet with advices in that sacred book
sufficient to extricate themselves out of that perplexity; promises of the true
God's readiness to hear and to assist those who desire to know him, occur
frequently too: as particularly that of the Psalmist in the old Testament, Ps.
69.32.
Your heart shall live that seek the Lord; and that of Wisdom, I love them
that love me, and they that seek me early shall find me. Prove. 8.17, 20, 21.
I lead in the way of righteousness, in the midst of the paths of judgment,
that I may cause those that love me to inherit substance, that I may fill their
treasures, i. e. that I may furnish them with solid knowledge, and make them
rich in understanding: and that more clear yet of our Savior, when the Spirit
of truth is come, Joh. 16.13.
he will guide you into all truth. The Reader of these promises though very
dubious in himself before, will be apt to send up his petitions to that God who
made these promises; who will be as ready to hear such, as he was to hear the
ignorant Mariners before. Thus light may shine into the Souls of those who are
soberly inquisitive, and that so great and clear, as may be very unaccountable
to the receivers of it, but extremely pleasing. It was such an industrious
reading and a real desire to understand, though at that time he confessed his
ignorance, that prepared the Ethiopian Eunuch for the instructions of Philip,
sent unto him on that particular errand. And though God do not presently send an
Evangelist to convert every one that seeks after what is good, yet he has a
thousand ways as efficacious to draw men to a sense of true Religion, and what
matter is it to us what way God makes use of, provided he do but work the same
glorious effect in us at last? God takes delight in those that honor him, as
those who seek him certainly do. Sincerity and humility are required indeed as
preparatives in the case, yet no more than what is requisite in those who study
books of humane learning. For he that does not seriously desire to profit by
study, never will profit; and he that is too opinionative of his own sense, can
never make any advantageous use of what he meets with in the discourses of
other men: and there is no reason we should expect to improve in those things
which concern the weightiest matters in the world, viz. our eternal future
happiness or misery, upon lower terms, than in those really of a frivolous and
inconsiderable nature. But to encourage men to a right application of their
reasoning faculty we conclude,

That the farther a man advances in the study and practice of true Religion,
the more clear and comprehensive his Reason grows, and comes so much the nearer
to its primitive acuteness, and consequently, is able to dive so much the
farther into divine Mysteries: And this indeed is what true Religion aims at;
We have lost our Innocence, by that loss we have impaired our Reason; that we
may assure to our selves that happiness our first Creation had sitted us to,
God has found out for us those ways, that we endeavoring to retrieve our
Innocence, may retrieve our Reason in a good measure too: And having howsoever
the infinite merits of a Savior on our side, at last may attain to the first
intended happiness. Reason is certainly a talent bestowed upon us, not to lay
it up in a napkin, but to use and to make the best of it. Had such a Book as
Scripture been delivered to Adam before his fall, I make no question, but it
would have been in every point intelligible to him: as things stand now we may
and ought to exercise our reason about it, but not so as to limit Scripture by
our reason, but to limit our reason by Scripture. It Is true, Scripture may by
mere reason be proved to be the Word of God, but that operation is very slow,
and requires a very unusual application; therefore God in the infancy both of
the Jewish and Christian Church made use of Miracles to work more strongly and
swiftly upon the Soul, not that he designed to supersede our reason, but to
quicken it and to set it so much the more industriously on work, and withal,
by a reducing it to an acknowledgment of its own defects, to make it submit the
more entirely to him whose power was able so far to outreach its utmost
capacity; Miracles were the common objects of Men's senses, and indeed appeals
to them: and when the Jews had known a Man from his Childhood that was born
blind, and when they saw him about forty years of age blessed with sight, they
had no reason to distrust the truth of that, of which they every moment saw the
effects; where there was lodged a power sufficient ^o produce so extraordinary
an effect, and the kindness and usefulness of the mi^^^ wrought would vindicate
it from (...) of any malignant spirit, it (...) conclude, that in the same
person was centred a veracity agreeable to that power, and consequently it was
reasonable to believe what ever was delivered by so great and so benign a
Power. But after all, as reason could not possibly give an account of the
manner of working so sensible a miracle, but by resolving all into omnipotence,
nor was it necessary it should: so neither was it necessary reason should
comprehend every thing that was spoken by God, and yet it lies under a
necessity of believing every thing true that is so spoken, and that again upon a
rational principle, viz. that He who speaks, being God, can neither deceive nor
be deceived. But as those who engage themselves in the study of any particular
Science, understand but little at first of its reason, but by assiduity and
diligence come to see thoroughly into it; so it is in matters of religion, he
that is but a Babe can bear no stronger nourishment than milk, he that is
stronger can digest substantial meats, i. e. the beginner in those studies must
pretend to nothing farther than what is very plain and easy; but when by
continual meditation be has made those plain things familiar to him, there will
some consequences offer themselves, not so plain, but every whit as true as the
first principles, and that reason which at first was ready to stumble at the
most obvious notions, will afterward digest those at a greater distance, and
be as strongly convinced of them as of the former; but in the chain of
consequences somewhat will occur at last beyond the reach of the largest
unbeatified Soul. Thus that Man is naturally miserable. is a truth undeniable
by reason of our every days experience, natures light has confirmed the World
in the truth; yet Man is very apt to stumble and perplex himself at the
occasion and ground of his being so: doubts arise in the case from some weak
reflections upon God's justice and goodness; yet its universally believed, and
the reading of Scripture farther confirms the truth; that Man, miserable as he
is, making use of such and such means, may be happy, is a truth revealed, and
without revelation imperceptible; yet now its once revealed, reason can
properly argue, that the same things or qualifications which would have secured
happiness to Man at first, must do so now, and the attainment of Innocence, was
that original mean, Innocence the indispensible qualification; But reason
proves again that that primitive Innocence is really unattainable now, and it
will proceed thus far further, that either there must be some way discovered to
make up that unhappy defect, or else Man must sink in his natural misery, and
all the care he can take to prevent it will do him no service: here divine
revelation goes along with him too, and what reason, as now affected, could
never have dreamed of, we have a revelation relating to the making up of this
defect, and that by the Incarnation and Passion of the Son of God, but there
Faith rests upon Revelation alone, and gets no assistance at all from reason,
but only from that distant principle, that the revealer cannot deceive nor be
deceived: reason can come no nearer, nor can it judge of the revelation by any
other principle, yet the Man who believes not this, how little soever he can
understand of it, is in a state of damnation. The wonderful wisdom and goodness
of Almighty God appears in this, as acting in the most difficult case and in
the kindest manner, but to suppose the wisdom and the goodness of God in so
prodigious effects should not surpass our discursive faculty, is absurd, as
reducing divine perfections to humane rules; but it never can be unbecoming to
an ordinary Christian to express himself in these things, as the Apostle does
in what relates to them, O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and
knowledge of God! Rom^^. 33.
how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out! where
Schlicktingius himself tells us his judgments are unsearchable: Quod eorum
causam ac rationem and illa ipsa nemo perscrutari possit, because none can find
out either the cause or reason of God's judgments, or the judgments themselves:
and afterward, Idem ille qui solus haec potest facere, Schlickt. in locum.
solus etiam potest cognoscere, He alone can understand these things who can do
them, that is, only God: yet these considerations should be no discouragement
to any, from improving their reason, even in matters of faith, since though
reason can never in this life comprehend them all, yet many of those things
which appear very strange, uncouth or mysterious to a young unexperienced
Christian, are very clear and intelligible to those who have their senses
exercised. As the very doctrine of the Cross, absurd and foolish to a novice,
appears so necessary to one experienced in Christianity, that he knows not how
to reconcile it to true sound reason without it; since Philosophy aims at
something of that nature, and Christianity, if truly asserted, must infinitely
transcend Philosophy in the excellence and usefulness of its instructions.
Maximus therefore answers well to that objection of Heretics against the use
of reason in matters of a Divine nature, (...), etc. But there are some things
in them which transcend our understanding: I own it, but let us learn this too
from Scripture, that there are some things to be searched after by our reason,
because they are attainable. For as it argues no piety to be prying into every
thing, so it argues as little to look into nothing: what we adore we all know,
vid. Vedelii rationale. Theol p 766.
according to that Text, we know what we worship but to enquire how great, what
his nature (...), how or where he exists, is direct mad^^^^^ our Rule therefore
with respect to chosen ^^^^hs revealed, must be this, Not only to believe
what is laid down there, because we understand it, but because we believe it as
laid down there, therefore to endeavor to understand it; so reason comes into
its proper place, it owns its imperfections and its powers both; it puts it
self into the way of divine assistance, and grows capable every moment of
improvement toward perfection. But we conclude,

That this perfection is not completely attainable till all our enquiries after
happiness are completed in the enjoyment of it: as the good Christian is ever
growing in grace, so he is ever growing in the knowledge of Jesus Christ, which
knowledge despises not the use of reason, but considers it, (...), Strem. l. 6.
as Clemens of Alexandria calls it, as the lowest step of the ladder of
Christian philosophy, the lowest step indeed, but yet a step which they that
would clime higher must make use of; and if they would but carefully observe
how in all Christian improvements reason has still its share, that it grows
stronger and stronger in its aspiring after what is good, that faith it self as
it finds reason treading in its footsteps, grows more vigorous and
unconquerable, that yet at best there are a great many clouds hanging upon it
arising from that mortal and declining state we are in in this world: These
observations would reduce the extravagant hopes of some in this life, and
excite in them the more earnest longings after the perfections of a better; and
who, when he sees the glorious image of his Maker blotted and defaced, and
knows there is a time to come when it shall be restored to its pristine
integrity, would not think it extremely reasonable to long for that season?
Faith and Hope and Charity are Christian Graces, the wings, if I may so call
them, on which the divinely originated Soul soars toward Heaven; yet great and
necessary as they are, the two first expire with mortality, the last immortal
Charity survives beyond the limits of time. Heb. 11.1.
For Faith which is by the Apostle described as the substance of things hoped
for, and the evidence of things not seen, can have no place when we come to
enjoy all we long for in the beatisick vision; we are to live by faith while on
earth, that bearing us up above all those troubles and perplexities which
attend us: but those are all past, and not to be repeated by all the malice of
Hell it self, when we come to the Celestial Canaan, that land of everlasting
rest. And as for Hope it respects futurity, and somewhat greater than we yet
enjoy, but as that Apostle argues, Hope that is seen is not hope; for what a
man sees, Romans 8.14.
or is in possession of (for that is the meaning of the phrase) why does he yet
hope for? In Heaven we see and are in possession of unallay'd bliss, we hoped
for it here, we have it there, so Hope having no farther object, dies too, but
Charity survives still. The life of Heaven is nothing but peace and joy and
love: all other passions which distract the Soul, have had their periods
before; all that promote its blessed state continue still: but let Charity bear
never so glorious a Character, Reason merely Humane in that glorious state
outvies it still, and comprehends it as the greater does the less. We see
there, beyond possibility of contradiction the reason of all God's
dispensations toward Mankind, those intricate providence, which have so
puzzled our Intellectuals here below, will then be plain and intelligible, nay
fully and actually understood by all the Souls of just Men made perfect; all
the unfitnesses of a corrupt carcass will be then removed, and a glorified body
answer readily and naturally all the motions of the glorified Soul. And since
we look upon knowledge as the end and perfection of the rational Soul, we may
be assured that in a state of bliss, it shall have attained that perfection, 1
Cor. 13.12.
for as St. Paul teaches us, We now see through a glass darkly, but then face
to face: now we know in part, but then shall we know even as also we are known:
and as St. John agreeably with him, though it does not yet appear what we shall
be: for we see but darkly now and in part, yet we know that when our Lord shall
appear at last, 1 John 3.2.
we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. And when reason once
comes to use sense so far, as to see God as he is, infinitely happy, infinitely
good, infinitely glorious, it has gone far enough. And thus far have I given an
account of Humane reason, or the light of Nature, for I think I may well enough
use them, as Synonymous, and how far it may be useful in matters of a Divine
nature. I shall draw only a Corollary or two from thence; and then proceed.

That our obligation to Almighty God is infinite, in that He who might have
taken from us wholly that natural light, because we had so extremely slighted
it, was yet pleased to continue it so far, as that rightly applied, it might
still be useful to us even in matters of salvation: It Is true, we cannot
examine things with that clearness and satisfaction, which Adam's first
enquiries were accompanied with: our understandings are somewhat parallel to
that Earth, which fell under a Curse for the sin of Man: It was naturally
fertile before in good things, but then it was to bring forth only briars and
thorns; yet Man might eat bread from it still, only it must be in the sweat of
his brows, He must take pains for that now, which he might have had without any
trouble before. So our Natural reason was clear and free at first, common
occurrences needed no deep meditations, nor extraordinary passages any tedious
study to apprehend them in every circumstance. The case is now otherwise, our
reason busies it self naturally about trifles, and only puzles and perplexes
it self in matters of no weight or moment; yet still it may move to good
purpose, but it requires abundance of care and pains to cultivate it so, as it
may produce any thing that is good; and even with a great deal of pains too,
sometimes it makes conclusions only vain, troublesome and miserably false:
this unhappiness is the consequence of our own follies at first, and it is God's
unmerited goodness, that we can yet by making use of due means distinguish in
some measure between truth and falsehood, at least in the more obvious parts of
religion: and his goodness yet appears farther, in that where our decrepit
reason fails, he is pleased to interpose with the influences of his blessed
Spirit, and to preserve the Modest and Humble from falling into damnable Error:
that our Reason may have a subject profitable to employ it self upon, God has
given us his Word, blessed are they who meditate on that word day and night: he
calls upon us to apply our selves to the Law and to the testimony, to search
the Scriptures, to search them with the same care and diligence as those who
work in Mines seek for the golden Ore. Whereas he lays in his Word several
Commands upon us; He would have us examine them so as we may be convinced that
they are not grievous, but Holy just and good: These Commandments therefore
must be examined by the rule of right Reason, which whosoever follows, will be
infinitely satisfied in them. In his dealings with mankind he calls upon them
to examine their own ways, by the same rule he enters into arguments highly
rational with mankind himself, he bids them to judge in their own causes
between himself and them, and see if discussing things rationally, they must
not necessarily fall upon that confession, That God's ways are equal, but the
ways of men unequal. When he recommends his mercies, when he would terrify
with his judgments, He appeals to Humane Reason still, or that share of light
which we are now partakers of. Now he that will employ that light he has upon
such noble subjects, if he be not prejudiced with wicked principles before, or
puffed up with self-conceit, must necessarily be a very religious man; for, the
clearer any man's rational faculty is, the more pious he must be; only men of
very low abilities can be either Atheists or Heretics. It Is confessed indeed
some Heretics, as the Socinians in particular, with whom we are at present
concerned, pretend highly to Reason, but they only sham us with fond pretenses,
and their reason is all empty and sophistical; and Atheists are the Men of
sense, if we may believe fools and madmen: but there is a vast difference
between a flashy Wit and a ridiculing Humor, and sound judgment, and solid and
weighty argument. But God who knew before what artifices Hell and wicked men
would make use of to pervert truth, calls upon us to exercise our reason
farther, in discovering and baffling those cheats the enemies of our Souls
would fain put upon us, wherein, as Heretics and Schismatics generally make
their appeals to God's Word, and we have warning in that very Word, That in
those doctrines where there is any show of difficulty, those who are unlearned
and unstable wrest the Scriptures to their own destructions: We are warned to
try the Spirits whether they be of God; and Scripture being the rule of trial,
we are obliged to study the true sense and meaning of that. To which end our
rational faculty carries us along in studying the original Languages, in which
Scripture was written, and finding out the true meaning and import of words and
phrases in other authors, and the modes and customs of countries to which any
Texts refer. Reason goes with us in comparing text with text, and matters of
faith or practice laid down in one place with those laid down in another, in
observing the force of those arguments drawn from such and such Texts, their
real dependence upon or direct consequence from the places alleged, and the
general consistency of opinions offered with the end and design of those
positive truths laid down in Scripture, Reason has here a large field to
exercise it self in. And whereas we are urged by some to abjure that utterly
with respect to those points of faith or practice that are under debate,
pretending they would insist only on the letter of Scripture, Maximus tells us well
in the formerly cited discourse of his, (...), they drive you from examining
Scripture too strictly, insinuating that it is dangerous to pry too narrowly
into secrets, (...), Maximi disceptatio inter opera Athan. T. 2. p. 296.
but dissuading it indeed that they might avoid the reproof of their Errors
from thence: where he takes farther notice, how such persons if they meet but
with a word that at first hearing sounds favorably to their fancies, they run
away with it without ever considering the design of the inspired Writer, or
examining the agreement of their own shallow glosses with the general tenor of
Holy Writ: an humor that prevails with too many still, who prefer the sound of
words before the truth and pertinency of texts of Scripture; and therefore
imagine themselves to argue very piously and agreeably to God's word, when all
their talk is nothing to the purpose. But mysteries, the great mysteries of
Religion are revealed in Scripture: it proves God's goodness yet farther, he
has by that means given Reason a task proper for its exercise. For though our
Reason be not able to fathom all the depths of those mighty revelations; yet as
Chemists seeking after their great Arcanum, though they miss the main design, yet
by the way they make a thousand useful experiments, never otherwise to have
been found out. So those who take due measures, and industriously insist in the
searching the nature of mysteries in Religion; though they can never in this
life reach their utmost extent, yet they attain many things in their quest, of
a very useful and a very comfortable kind. Thus we see the Weeks of Daniel, the
Visions of Ezekiel, the whole book of the Revelation have given abundance of
employ to the best and wisest Christians, who yet have never been able to come
to any considerable agreement in the Interpretation of them; yet the learned
labors of many have been so far from lost, that many excellent truths have
been fully cleared, many pious Souls wonderfully supported, and many
controversies happily resolved to the security and edification of the Church of
God. And we have found plainly that some have seen into those mystical secrets
much more clearly than others, which argues their quicker apprehensions, and
their more powerful assistances in their studies, and is withal a great
encouragement to others to prosecute the same studies with patience; since though
their progress is not great, it may be sure, where something is attained to,
more may be; and we believe it was not without reason that the author of the
Apocalypse in particular begins his Visions with that, Revel. 1.3. c. 22.7.
Blessed is he that reads, and they that hear the words of this prophecy, and
keep those things which are written therein, and to conclude them to the same
purpose. And in his Vision of that beast with seven heads and ten horns to whom
the Dragon imparted of his power which arose out of the sea, and of that other
which came up out of the earth, that had horns like a Lamb and spoke like a
Dragon, he gives a kind of challenge to humane Reason, Here is wisdom, Rev.
13.18.
let him that has understanding count the number of the beast, for it is the
number of a Man, and his number is 666. i. e. Here Is a task fit for a man to
engage himself in, here is enough for him to exercise all his abilities upon.
But it would be no such extraordinary blessing for a man to read a book, of
which he could hope to understand nothing at all; and it would be no great
evidence of a man's extraordinary wisdom, to spend his time in poring after the
interpretation of a mystic number, and to find out to whom it belonged, if the
whole was never designed to be in the least intelligible. No, God never set man
at work in any inquiry, but he intended the profit should at least be worth the
pains. It must be confessed that what Schlicktingius asserts is very true,
Prophetae novi Testamenti, Christo jam exorto, arcana Dei ita explicarunt ut ab
omnibus intelligi possint; and quae in novo Testamento scriptae extant
futurorum praedictiones, claris verbis conceptae sunt: That the Prophets of the
New Tastament after Christ's appearance explained the secrets of God in such a
manner as that they might be understood by all. And the predictions of future
things in the New Testament are expressed in plain words: plain words may
express very hard matters, and there is no need of uncouth Hyperboles, or
aenigmatical or ambiguous expressions to make a thing mysterious. Our Savior
preached in as plain a manner as ever any did or could; yet how did the Scribes
and Pharisees, Schlicktin. in 2 op. Petri c. 1. v. 21.
nay, how did the Disciples themselves stumble at his familiar Parables? and
though we have them in some measure interpreted to us in the Gospel-story, yet
many learned and good men disagree in explaining several particulars contained
in them still; And I have not yet found that our adversaries themselves pretend
to an infallible exposition of any considerable difficulties: and the forenamed
Author speaking concerning the book of the Revelation, tells us it was laid
down in Visions and representations, Non tam ut Christiani distinct
cognoscerent quid futurum esset, id enim nec Ecclesiae, nec divinis consiliis
expediebat, quin potius ut ex eventu praesignificatum id esse quod evenit,
intelligerent: not so much that Christians should know what was in future times
to come to pass; for that was neither agreeable to the Churches necessities nor
to Gods designs, but only that by the event of things Christians might be able
to understand, that what happened had been foretold long since. This very
comparing of predictions with events would require no small intention of our
rational faculties; yet here he owns these Visions and representations to be
mysterious so long till the event unriddle them. And there is no truth of so
profound a nature, no expression in Scripture so difficult, but that futurity
will make it all plain and delightfully intelligible to the Souls of just men
made perfect: yet here is constant work for the soundest head, and the more such
a one discovers of the mysteries of Religion, the more he will be sensible of the
defects of his own understanding, and he will find the more reason to bless the
name of God who has yet continued to him the ruins of a complete
understanding: and given him such subjects to exercise it upon as may gradually
raise it toward its original strength, till heavens glory gives it a
consummate perfection. But as we are obliged to be thankful to God for giving
us the use of Reason, so we must take care

To use our Reason in all debates about matters of Religion with that sober and
humble Modesty as becomes Creatures so much decayed as we are in our most
glorious endowments. It has been the abuse of reason, and a strange confidence
in that which in it self at present is extremely weak, that has introduced so
many Errors and Heresies into the Church of Christ, a humble and a modest
Christian would always secure himself with the famous resolution of St.
Augustine, Errare possum, Haereticus esse nolo, I may fall into an Error, but I
will never be an Heretic, i. e. I Will never be obstinate in any singular
opinion of mine own; too much diffidence of our selves makes us slaves to every
one that has boldness enough to contradict us; too much confidence renders us
incorrigible in our follies, even when much wiser Men would undertake to
instruct us; and nothing can provoke God more to baffle us in all our
inquiries, than that innate pride which makes Men value themselves above what
is fitting, for as St. James tells us, God resists the proud, Jam. 6.4.
but he gives grace unto the humble; there are some things which relate to
Religion, wherein God has delivered himself so, as to let us know words and
names, but has not revealed enough to give us an insight into the matters which
are intimated under them, Men need not trouble themselves too curiously about
such things; Moses taught the Israelites very well, Deuteronomy. 29.29.
The secret things belong unto the Lord our God: and the Son of Syrach gives an
excellent lesson, Seek not out things that are too hard for thee, neither
search the things that are above thy strength, Ecclus. 3.21, 22.
but what is commanded thee think thereupon with reverence, for it is not
needful for thee to see with thine eyes the things that are in secret. What if
among such things I should reckon Men's overcurious enquiries into the nature
of God's decrees, which enquiries have produced a great many foolish and
uncharitable controversies even among good men; there is employment enough for
a good Man's whole life in things more needful to be known: I will not say it is
absolutely unlawful to be prying into what God has thought fit to express
himself very obscurely in, but this I Will say, that whosoever will be walking in
those private paths had need to tread with a very gentle foot, to look
frequently backward, and on each side, as well as forward, to be very
distrustful of his own ability, very submissive to the judgment of Superiors in
office, age or gifts, very earnest and indefatigable in his prayers to God for
his assistance, as he shall see fit to impart it on such an occasion; very
tender of imposing his own judgment upon others, and of being too positive in
those opinions he takes up: since the corruption of our reason, a man
frequently thinks he has made a very great discovery in some weighty point, and
hugs himself with the plausibility of his thoughts, he imagines, (as we are
generally apt to be very fond of the products of our own brains,) every thing
he has laid down, or methodiz'd in his thoughts, to be so very plain and clear,
that it is impossible any man of sense should not immediately be his proselyte;
and some perhaps are ready to flatter such a one in his overweening conceit,
by a pretended concurrence in their sentiments with him: after all, it happens
as often, that another of as great natural abilities, and as searching a head,
discovers a great many mistakes in the others beautiful Scheme of thoughts, and
baffles the whole invention the other had admired himself for: such things
ought to make all, especially in religious matters, where it is dangerous
jesting or innovating, to act with abundance of circumspection; and indeed
rather to confine themselves to lower studies than to hazard the over-setting
their own Intellectuals, by engaging into boundless enquiries. Those things may
in themselves be lawful, which yet cannot be very convenient: Some such
curiosities are very idle and ridiculous, as disputing what God did before he
made the World; Whether He could have pardoned Men's sins without a Mediator,
etc. He was fatally answered to such a Question, who asking an Eminent
Christian, what the Carpenter's Son, meaning Christ, was then a doing, was
told, He was making a Coffin for such a lewd Inquirer as himself, who died in a
very few hours after. Ecclus. 3.23.
The Son of Syrach advises well, Be not curious in unnecessary matters: for
more things are showed unto thee than men understand. i. e. God has laid open
such infinite treasures of Divine wisdom before us, and our understandings are
so very short, that we need not look out strange subjects of our meditations,
it is enough if we can in some tolerable manner comprehend those sacred truths
that are delivered to us: and we are more concerned to endeavor to do so, than
some are ready to imagine. For though a Socinian may tell us, God has declared
several things in holy Scripture, that are no way necessary to Salvation, the
assertion is absurd and false; that old Axiom, Deus and Natura nihil faciunt
frustra, That God and Nature never do any thing in vain is enough to refute it:
for since the end of Scripture is the making Men wise to salvation, it is very
bold to say God knew not how to frame such a Book, without abundance of
impertinencies, when we see many Men, setting much slighter ends before
themselves, will yet prosecute their discourses in so close and exact a manner,
that the most critical judgment may perhaps find what to add, but cannot find
what to take away from their writings; there is therefore no positive truth
asserted in holy Writ, but what is really useful to Man's Salvation, since
there is nothing throughout the whole, but what serves to illustrate God's
goodness, and mercy, and truth, etc. or Man's misery by Sin, or happiness by
Grace, or lays down rules of life and practice, or gives us examples of Virtues
or Vices in others, from all which something very instructive may be drawn; nor
can we believe that even the genealogical Tables in Scripture were, as a late
Writer impudently suggests, designed only to amuse and confound us, but to set
us in a way to find how all the ancient Prophecies centred in Jesus Christ, the
promised Messiah. As the positive assertions, so their true and genuine
consequences are in some sort, and to some Men necessary to salvation, God,
having given greater capacities, and larger Souls to some than he has to
others, expects proportionable improvements from them, and a Man of wisdom and
learning cannot be saved only on the same terms on which a person of low and
mean endowments may; therefore those of greater parts are bound to look into
every thing divinely revealed, and to what may be regularly deduced from it;
but as perfection in good works is required in every one that is to be saved,
and yet many are saved, though none are perfectly good; so it is in relation to
things contained in Scripture, every one is bound to study them: things of
common practice are plain and obvious in them, things at first to be believed
are taken for granted, but Man is for his lifetime employed, and to be so in
farther search into the meaning of those things that are more obscure. Could
Man once in his lifetime attain to a perfect understanding of every thing set
down there, there would quickly be an end of all sacred study; but since the
wisest find in the Word of God more than they can understand; and yet find they
every day by study understand more and more; and the meanest wits upon a due
care and industry find proportionable advances, there is always enough to
excite man's utmost diligence and care; and as in practical piety, so it is
here, he that improves his time best to get knowledge, though he cannot reach to
all he should, his defects shall be pardoned for his sake, who in himself
contains consummate wisdom. But it remains still true, that it could not
reasonably be required that a man should engage himself in the study of the
whole Book of God if there were any thing positively asserted there, the
knowledge and understanding of which would be lost time, as the studies of all
impertinencies are. But howsoever necessary these studies are, if they are not
prosecuted in a due manner, i. e. with an humble sense of our own natural
defects, with a sober and submissive judgment, and with all that modesty which
becomes one who is desirous to learn; they will prove but mischievous, and make
Heretics, Schismatics or Atheists, instead of knowing and improving orthodox
Christians. It Is true, that nothing ought to be admitted into Religion which is
contrary to reason, but it must be understood, which is contrary to reason in
its primitive integrity, for that which we call reason now we every one find
extremely subject to mistakes: and for me to measure those truths which are
revealed by an infallible God, by the standard of that sense or judgment which
I know to be mistakeful and fallible, is unreasonable, with any sober
discourser, to extremity: and it argues too great a pride in our low condition
to imagine, that because once we were made perfect, that therefore we should in
any respect continue so, though we had sought out to our selves many
inventions. Many are deceived by their own vain opinion, ver. 24.
says the Son of Syrach, and nothing can certainly be more prejudicial to a Man
in his disquisitions after truth, than a great conceit of his own abilities to
find it out. God commonly blasts such fond pretenders to ingenuity, and makes
them take a great deal of pains only to procure infamy and perpetual disgrace
to themselves. Such mischiefs would be avoided, yet Humane Reason have it is due
use and esteem if the Apostles injunction were well obeyed, that no man should
think of himself more highly than he ought to think, Romans 12.3.
but to think soberly according as God has dealt to every man the measure of
faith. Men ought when they meet with any difficulties in divine Writings, not
to make their Reason the measure of Truth, but to make Truth the measure of
their Reason; and rather to suspect their own apprehension of it, than the
weakness, or ambiguity on the defectiveness of the authors assertions or
expressions. And so much for the use of Humane Reason in matters of Religion;
it is a great blessing to us still though impaired by sin, and if soberly and
modestly used will by divine assistance rise to a greater strength and vigor,
and be able to comprehend every day more and more of the mystery of Godliness,
till it comes in a glorified state to comprehend every thing that can any way
contribute to its consummate happiness.

Having gone thus far in the debate concerning the use of Humane Reason in
matters of Religion, and declared how careful we should be not to indulge our
selves in vain and useless curiosities; for the vindication of our selves as
Christians we are to consider, that a full proof of the Divinity of the Son of
God is a task that comes under no reproof in the case. That the blessed Jesus
the great captain of our Salvation is God as well as Man, that he is God of
God, light of light, very God of very God, as the Nicene Creed expresses it;
that he is perfect God, not a factitious or an aequivocal God, as some would
have him; but that He who is God the Son is infinite in all his Attributes, God
over all blessed for ever, as God the Father is, is Articulus stantis aut
cadentis Ecclesiae, such an Article of our Christian Faith, so essential to the
Mystical Body of Christ, that while it is embraced, the Church has a real Being;
when it is laid aside, the very Being of the Church expires at the same time.
It Is so necessary an Article of Faith, that except a man keep it whole and
undefiled, without doubt he shall perish everlastingly: for he that believes in
such a Messiah, such a Savior who is not God, is really an Idolater, as fixing
his belief in one that is not able to save. For Man's misery is too great to be
relieved by any inferior power; and the blood of Bulls and of Goats might as
well have served for the expiation of Humane guilt, as the sufferings of one
who was a mere man, and consequently could have no proper merit to plead for
us, no inherent power wherewith to assist us. Some of those Heretics who deny
the Divinity of the Son of God, have been so sensible of this, that they have
maintained and preached it in those Congregations where they have been
concerned, That it is as lawful to pray to the blessed Virgin, or to any other
Saint, or any Angel, as it is to pray to the Son of God: and that all those are
really guilty of Idolatry, who make any such Prayers or Supplications to him.
Now tho other Socinians call these blasphemers on this account: they are really
injurious to 'em; for if that which they all agree in be true, viz. That Jesus
Christ is not the most high God, then whosoever worships him as God, breaks the
first and second Commandments as much as those of the Church of Rome do, and
are as notorious Idolaters, as we shall hereafter have occasion to prove. In
quest then of the truth of this doctrine, That Jesus Christ is the true God, we
are to bend our Reason, and to meet and baffle those great pretenders to it
with their own weapons, and to prove to them that tho we think the mystery of
godliness to be great, as the Text asserts it, to be (...), as S. Chrysostom
expresses it, to be unexpressible and wonderful and incomprehensible; yet we
receive some considerable advantages from its being revealed: for by that means
we know the (...), the positive truth, that he who appeared in the flesh
visible to humane eyes, and so far humbled to atone for humane Crimes, was
really God: hence to be adored by us, hence able to perform the work he came
about, and to save to the utmost all those that come to the Father in and by
him; and this we firmly and steadfastly believe, though we cannot comprehend the
(...), or the manner how so great a miracle of Mercy should be brought about:
and those proofs by any particulars whatsoever laid down, of this truth, using
reason with that sobriety and modesty which we ought, we may examine and try
thoroughly, and judge how far they come up to those things they are designed to
make good; and so our Faith it self may be rational and thence invincible, though
every particular of it be not intelligible to us in its full extent. With
relation to the Text then we assert

That the Mystery of Godliness which the Apostle tells us is great, cannot be
applied to the several particulars laid down in the latter part of the verse:
for let us with Grotius, by the mystery of godliness understand the Gospel, as
we commonly understand it, and which we own does contain the mystery of
godliness. That the Gospel was preached by weak Men we own, nay, that our
Savior himself in his state of exinanition, or in his humane nature appeared
weak and contemptible enough we own too: but that the Gospel appeared in the
flesh, or clothed with flesh, which is the proper import of the Apostles
phrase, we deny as absurd. That the Gospel was justified in or by the Spirit,
the miraculous effusions of that, confirming the truth of the Gospel preached,
we may own well enough; but that the Gospel was seen of Angels is scarce sense,
that it was never known before it had been declared by Men is false, for the
Angels could not be unacquainted with the several Prophecies of the old
Testament concerning the Messiah to come; nor could they be so far to seek in
the meaning of those Prophecies, many of which they had been instrumental in
delivering: and the Angels themselves were indeed the first preachers of the
Gospel; So the Angel Gabriel tells Zacharias concerning the Son that should be
born to him, Many of the children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord their
God. And he shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elias, to turn the
hearts of the fathers to the children, Luke 1.16, 17.
and the disobedient to the wisdom of the just, to make ready a people prepared
for the Lord. The same Gabriel afterward tells the blessed Virgin; Behold thou
shall conceive in thy womb and shall bring forth a Son, and shall call his name
Jesus. v. 31, 32, 33.
He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the highest, and the Lord
God shall give unto him the throne of his father David. And he shall reign over
the house of Jacob for ever, and of his kingdom there shall be no end. It was
an Angel that appeared to Joseph in a dream, Matthew. 1.20, 21.
and told him that his espoused wife was with child of the Holy Ghost, And she
shall bring forth a Son, says he, and thou shall call his name Jesus, for he
shall save his people from their sins. Again, an Angel of the Lord tells the
Shepherds who were watching their flocks by night, Luke 2.10, 11, 13, 14.
Behold I bring you good tidings of great joy which shall be to all people; For
unto you is born this day in the city of David, a Savior, which is Christ the
Lord. To which Gospel a whole Choir of Angels subjoyned their Eucharistical
Hymn, Glory be to God on high, in earth peace, good will toward men. These
instances are enough to prove that Angels knew the Gospel before men preached
it: not to mention their administering to our Savior in the wilderness, when
entering on his prophetical Office, and their publishing his resurrection, the
great confirmation of the Gospel before his Apostles had any apprehensions of
it. The Gospel was indeed preached unto the Gentiles, and believed on in the
World; but it was far from being received in glory: for it was scorned and
derided, and cruelly persecuted both by Jews and Gentiles: the Devil raising
all the powers in the world as far as possible, for the extirpation of what was
so great an enemy to his Tyranny; the Gospel then will not answer all those
particular marks set down in the Text.

Neither yet are they applicable to God the Father, as several of the Socinians
would have them, for to say God the Father was manifest in the flesh, because
his will was preached by Men, who were but flesh and blood, besides that such
an assertion quits the Suppositum, or Subject which was God the Father, unless
God and Gods will be one and the same thing, which cannot be asserted, It Is so
uncouth an expression, as is no where to be paralleled either in Scripture, or
any Ecclesiastical Writer. We read not any where that God the Father ever
appeared in the flesh, or assumed Humane nature, nor did ever any dream of such
a thing, unless we recur to the ancient Patropassians, so called, because they
believed it was really God the Father, who being Incarnate suffered death on
the Cross, for the sins of Mankind, but of that we have no footsteps in holy
Writ: nor was the Deity it self ever made manifest in the flesh, but in the
flesh of the blessed Jesus, Col. 2.9.
in whom dwells all the fullness of the Godhead bodily: not in his doctrine,
as the Socinians would have it, but in himself; Vid. Schlicktin. in loc.
and according to their own demands on the like occasion, we would have them
show us some other clear place of Scripture, wherein God the Father is said to
be manifest in the flesh, or to be manifest in Christ and the Apostles, and
then we may the better consent to their interpretation: Again, it is as odd and
unusual to say, God the Father was justified in the Spirit, for what need was
there of any such justification? his Eternal Power and Godhead were visible in
the Universal fabric of nature, and all the Miracles done by our Savior,
(which Socinians refer to the influence of the Spirit,) were done that Men
might know he was the promised Messiah; and those done by the Apostles after
his ascent into Heaven, carried along with them the same respect; but we never
heard of any public declaration made by the Spirit, for a more peculiar
conviction of the World, that the most High God, was God indeed, or the true
God: we may understand things thus, as the Socinians say, but we may a great
deal better let it alone, and not run into such interpretations of God's Word,
as we can neither reconcile to truth nor sense. If we go farther, the matter is
not mended at all, when we say God the Father was seen of Angels, for what
novelty was there in that? had not they stood continually before his face from
the instant of their first Creation? or should we fly to God's will, was not
that known to his peculiar Ministers, till such time as they came to learn it
by the preaching of mortal men? who can imagine so short a Text of Scripture,
and designed to make known the greatest mystery in the world, should lash out
into such absolute impertinencies? but to proceed, God the Father was preached
to the Gentiles, but where? he is mentioned often doubtless as the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, in those Epistles written by the Apostles, to their Gentile
Converts, but the Gospel it self is styled the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and the Apostles pretend to preach, nay to know nothing among their Converts,
but Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 2.2.
and him crucified, as St. Paul expresses himself, if we must say God the
Father was preached, he was certainly preached most to the Antediluvian World
by Noah and the elder Patriarchs, or he was preached to the Jews, of whom we
acknowledge that they had no such distinct notions of the Trinity, as we by the
Gospels assistance have at present; but yet both among Jews and Gentiles he was
declared by other names, than that of God the Father: and if, according to our
common Logical notions, Relatives do mutually suppose or remove one another, if
Jesus Christ was not really and actually the Son of God, pre-existent to his
incarnation, the name of Father could not properly have been applied to the
supreme God, nor he be preached to the World under that character; so that in
fine, we conclude that the preaching of God the Father to the World, was no
part of the Mystery of Godliness: Nor is it properly so to say, that God the
Father was believed on in the World, for that too was nothing newly effected by
the appearance of our Savior, the World in general from its first original
believed there was a God, if there were any who from those apprehensions they
had of the existence of a God, set themselves to live virtuously, as
considering that God under the notion of a knowing and severe Judge, and one
capable of rewarding men according to their works, such Persons believed in God
according to our own sense, when we repeat the Creed: Now that some did thus
believe before our Savior's appearance in the flesh is unquestionable; all
those who lived religiously before the promulgation of the Mosaic Law, did thus
believe in God, and are some of them remembered as the great Heroes of Faith, in
the beginning of the Eleventh Chapter to the Hebrews: If then this were a
Mystery, it was of a very ancient standing, and discovered long before the
coming of Christ. The application of the particulars thus far failing, we have
some reason to believe, that neither will the last agree any better to that
imposed sense; He was received up in glory, or into glory: Here our adversaries
fly to God's will again, so confounding God and God's will, as if they were
not to be considered as distinct, but this we have considered before, where we
observed that contradiction the Gospel met with in the World: As to God the
Father, where or when, or how, or by whom was he received up in glory, the holy
Scriptures give us no intimation of his having descended at any time from
Heaven to Earth, and He that is received up into glory ought to be so received
by some Being superior to himself, which a Socinian knows God the Father cannot
have, now as the Apostle teaches us, He that descended, Ephesians. 4.10.
is the same also that ascended up far above all heavens, that he might fill
all things: but God the Father never that we hear of in Scripture descended,
therefore God the Father who ever of himself was surrounded with infinite
glory, never was by any received up into glory: And thus have we shown the
vanity of those glosses, which the Socinians, and others have fixed upon this
Text; we shall now show to whom the particulars in the Text do properly and
unquestionably belong.

And here, since Scripture makes it very plain, that the whole method of
serving God in an acceptable manner, is laid down by our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ: That, as himself tells us, He is the Way, the Truth, John 14.6.
and the Life, and no man comes to the Father but by him: The whole mystery of
Godliness or of true Christian Religion can consist in nothing, but what refers
to him, who is the author of it, that is the blessed Jesus; concerning whom,
and whose doings and sufferings for us, there is nothing revealed in the
Gospel, or in the foregoing prophecies, but what is mysterious: He was indeed
God manifest in the flesh, God blessed for ever, yet for the sake of wretched
Sinners descending to Earth, and taking our Nature upon him, being clothed with
flesh, and all those encumbrances and infirmities attending upon a mortal
state, sin only excepted; He is that eternal Word which was in the beginning
with God, nay that Word that was God, John 1.1.14.
and that Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us, as we learn from St. John:
Now if Christ really was God, the most opinionative of the Socinians would
conclude the Text plain enough, for that Christ was certainly and literally
made flesh: but if we cannot read this Text of the Apostle truly without
inserting the word God: And Smalcius one of the great promoters of the Socinian
heresy declares; Smalc. de verbo incarnato. c. 18.
Nos Graecum textum Vulgatae long esse anteponendum censemus, is vero habet
Deum in carne esse manifestatum, We look upon the Greek Text as far to be
preferred before the Vulgar Latin, and the Greek reads it, God was manifest in
the flesh: and if neither the Gospel, nor the will of God, nor God the Father
can properly or truly be said to be made flesh, and yet God was manifest in the
flesh, then that Jesus who was truly and literally clothed with our flesh, must
be that God; the farther proof of Christ's real and eternal Divinity belongs to
another place: but his true and indisputable humanity is the first plain and
most obvious assertion of the Apostle here: This same blessed Jesus was as
plainly justified in the Spirit, since not only the miracles he did justified
him in the sight of all Mankind, and proved that he could be no cheat or
Impostor, as the Jews were willing to have him thought, but at the time of his
Baptism by John in Jordan, while he was praying, the Heaven was opened, and the
Holy Ghost descended in a bodily shape, like a Dove, upon him, and a voice came
from Heaven, which said, Thou art my beloved Son, Luke 3.21, 22.
in thee I am well pleased: Now the Holy Spirit would not in so open a manner
have descended on him, who had pretended to that relation to Allmighty God,
which really never belonged to him: Therefore John the Baptist makes a right
inference from that descent; I saw, says he, Joh. 1.32,
the Spirit descending from Heaven like a Dove, and it abode upon him: And I
knew him not, v. 33, 34.
but he that sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me, Upon whom
thou shall see the Spirit descending and remaining on him, the same is he which
baptizeth with the Holy Ghost. And I saw and bare record that this is the Son
of God. Our Lord himself makes it one of his last instructions to his
Disciples, that when the Comforter, that Holy Spirit whom he would send, should
come, he should, amongst other things, convince the world of righteousness;
because He, the blessed Jesus, went to his Father, and the world should see him
no more: c. 16. v. 8. 10, 14.
and that that Holy Spirit should glorify him, for he should receive of his
and show it to men. And thus effectually that Sacred Spirit when he was so
plentifully according to promise poured out on the Apostles and their
companions, enabled them to prove that Christ was the Son of God: and to
confirm their rational arguments and deductions from the Old Testament by a
thousand signs and miracles, such as made the most stubborn of mankind bow
their necks to the yoke of Christ, and own that He was truly what he called
himself, the Son of God, and the Savior of the World. If we proceed according
to the Apostles method, Jesus Christ God Incarnate was seen of Angels, seen
with the greatest admiration, since even Angelic intellectuals could never have
reached so far as to imagine God's love to mankind, which yet they knew to be
extraordinary, should show it self in so prodigious a condescension: Yet when
he was pleased to stoop so low, the Angels saw, and knew, and praised him though
wrapped in swaddling clothes and lying in a manger: they adored him, and
administered to him, though tempted forty days and forty nights by the Devil in
the wilderness; they attended him with their ministerial comforts, when in that
bitter agony in the garden when praying more earnestly his sweat was as it had
been great drops of blood falling down to the ground; Luke 22.43, 44.
They attended his sepulcher, when he shook off the fetters of Death, Matt.
28.2, 3, 4. Acts 1.10.
and broke through the confinement of the grave, striking terror on the
trembling Watch, but bringing comfort to the women whose early zeal brought
them first to the sacred Sepulcher; and they waited as diligently on his ascent
into Heaven, so that they saw him, and admired that immense love which appeared
so glorious in his humble, and so powerful in his exalted state. This Savior
of the world, that he might really be so, was preached unto the Gentiles, the
Word of God was now confined no longer to the Jewish nation, that vail of the
Temple rent in twain when he gave up the ghost upon the Cross, took away that
wall of separation which was between those Jews and the rest of mankind, and
through him both Jews and Gentiles have access by one Spirit unto Ephesians. 2.28.
the father: Now of himself, in this case He taught his disciples after his
resurrection, That thus it behoved Christ to suffer, Luke 24.46, 47.
and to rise from the dead the third day: and that repentance and remission of
sins should be preached in his name among all nations beginning at Jerusalem.
Thus Philip preached Christ in Samaria, Paul preached him every where in the
Synagogues; Paul declares to the Corinthians, We preach Christ crucified, 1
Cor. 1.23, 24.
to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness: but unto them
which are called both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God and the wisdom
of God. And many Texts we meet with declaring the same thing, and teaching us,
that it is the great incumbent duty on all those who call themselves Pastors of
the flock of Christ, to preach him, and him only to the world. For he who was
so preached to the Gentiles was indeed believed on in the world; The three
Eastern Sages, who adored our Savior in his infant age, were the first fruits
of the Gentile world, and even Samaritans were profelyted to his Doctrine while
he converst with the world; to believe in him was that condition without which
Salvation could not be attained. So he teaches Nicodemus, John 3.16.
God so loved the world, that he sent his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes on him should not perish but have everlasting life. v. 18.
He that believes on him is not condemned, but he that believes not is
condemned already: because he has not believed in the name of the only
begotten Son of God. It was a just sense of the indispensible nature of this
condition, that made men submit so readily to the first preaching of the
Apostles, and fly out so eagerly and so early into that Question, What shall we
do to be saved? 'Twas that which in Judaea brought multitudes daily into the
Church, of such as should be saved: and enabled S. Paul to preach the Gospel
fully from Jerusalem, and round about unto Illyricum, and that with
extraordinary success: and gave Tertullian in the Second Century a just ground
to boast of the vast multitudes of Christians in every quarter of the Roman
Empire. And to this day the same blessed Jesus is the only rational hope of all
that dwell on the earth, and of those that remain on the broad Sea. To conclude
this explication of the Text, this same Jesus after he had done and suffered so
much for our sakes, while he converst with and blessed his Disciples, Luke 24.51.
he was parted from them, and carried up into heaven: He had at last that
Petition answered which in the days of his flesh he put up to his Father. Now O
Father glorify thou me with thine own self, John 17.5.
with the glory which I had with thee before the world was! And if it was
glorious for Elijah to be carried up to Heaven in his fiery chariot while
Elisha was a spectator of his translation; how much more glorious was it when
our Savior in the open view of all his followers, had the clouds themselves
humbly bowing to his feet to raise him thither, where he sits continually at
the right hand of his Father making intercession for us miserable sinners.
Having thus given the true interpretation of the Text, take its full meaning
together in this Paraphrase, S. Paul still speaking to and instructing Timothy
as in this Verse he does.

It Is not without great Reason that I have given thee, who art thy self a
Bishop in it, such directions about those whom thou art to admit as Ministers
in the Church of God. That Religion our blessed Master has bequeathed to us,
has nothing in it but what is Holy and Pure, too pure to be touched with
unclean hands, and not fit for every unlearned and presuming Novice to meddle
with. The whole Body of our Faith is founded upon such things as are infinitely
true, but of so sublime and surprising a Nature, that the strongest Humane
Reason can never wholly comprehend them all: let me but name them as revealed,
and all mankind will soon agree, that the most soaring and capacious Soul must
falter in its enquiries after them. The eternal Son of God, God equal with his
Father, the great Creator of all things; rather than perishing man should be
eternally lost, resolved to atone divine vengeance with his own sufferings, and
since without blood there could be no remission, and the immense Divinity could
not suffer so, He took flesh and blood, our weak and passible nature upon
himself, and in our nature offered himself a sacrifice to his Father for us.
This glorious Sacrifice produced the great effect, and reconciled our angry
Judge; but that undertaking was too great for man, though so deeply concerned, to
believe; the chasm between an holy God and polluted man too wide and hideous
deep ever to be made up. It Is true, when God himself was mentioned as the
undertaker of so great a work, even despairing man might entertain some dawning
hopes; but when they saw a poor Carpenter's Son, one who had not so much as
where to lay his head, assume yet the glorious title of the world's Redeemer
and Savior, their hopes slagg'd, their almost grasped joys seemed just
vanishing into empty air: When the Holy Ghost, God too, infinitely good, and
powerful, and wise, interposed, and attended that humble Man with so much
vigor and constancy, that He, by a thousand glorious actions, and by a close
and perpetual correspondence with Heaven, visible even to vulgar eyes, proved
the entire Union that was between himself and his Father, and that Sacred
Spirit: and justified himself in the thoughts of very aliens themselves, who
could not but acknowledge, of a truth, that, for all his mean appearance and
his scandalous Passion on the Cross, He was the Son of God. But could men have
doubted still, the happy Angels those purer and more discerning Spirits saw him
too, they saw him and knew him, and adored him, they saw their mighty Lord,
though veiled in all the rags of poor mortality: And though sin might have made a
former breach between those blessed Spirits and polluted man; yet now where
their Lord loved they loved too, and always looked, and always waited on him
while he wrought the worlds redemption: while he was so justified and so
attended on, diverse gave up themselves absolutely to his service, whom he
loved, and taught, and protected, and endued with miraculous knowledge,
eloquence and courage, and sent them on that blessed errand to preach to the
Gentiles the glad tidings of Salvation in his name: They boldly undertook the
work, and though they had ignorance and prejudice, and malice and cunning to
contend with: mere men contemned before, but then inspired, broke through all
opposition, and the forsaken Gentiles heard the gladsome sounds of peace; and
though there were too many enemies to their own good, yet those laborious
messengers of Heaven preached with that power and efficacy, that men began
every where to call on the name of the Lord Jesus Christ. Nay, the more men of
perverse minds crossed the designs of that Gospel preached in the name of the
Son of God, the more those who believed in him were multiplied. As for himself,
when he had finished that stupendous work, and by his own Death had conquered
Hell and Death; He broke those fatal chains, and rose again, no more liable to
humane rage. His Almighty Father who had viewed all the prodigious efforts of
his Love to mankind with an ineffable complacency, reached out his holy arm to
receive that very humane Nature in which his beloved Son had done and suffered
so much: from him the cheerful clouds were sent for a Chariot, and he went
upwards flying upon the wings of the wind, while j^cund Angels, those
ministerial flames, waited on his triumphs, and taught his wondering followers
what they were afterward to expect from their Redeemer: These are those mighty
mysteries, on which our most holy faith is built, their truth, however
unintelligible to us, is our security, and the sincerity of our faith will
necessarily show it self in an holy conversation and godliness. The Verse I
have explained, then imports,

That without Controversy the Mystery of Godliness is great; or in more words,
That the Basis or foundation of that Religion introduced into the World by the
Doctrine of Christ's Gospel, is indisputably and agreeably to the nature of
Religion, to Humane reason extremely profound and unintelligible. To prove
this, we shall enquire,

Into the Universal agreement of all persons, of what Religion soever; That
Mysteries are essential to Religion.

Whether our Savior intended the entire abolition of all other Religions, for
the settlement of his own, or rather to unite what was good in every distinct
Religion into one, and to sublime or perfect that so, as it might tend most to
God's glory, and Man's happiness, and whether that could be effected, Men
standing in their present corrupt state, without the retaining of old, or
instituting of new Mysteries in his Religion.

What considerable advantages can accrue to Religion, from those Mysteries it is
founded upon?

that Universal agreement of all persons whatsoever, that Mysteries, or some
principles or circumstances of a more secret and abstruse nature, are essential
to all Religion: But here to prevent all mistakes, it must be remembered, That
so much as concerns the practical part of Religion, as contained in the Word of
God, is so clear and evident, that the words of St. Paul are justly applied to
them, If they be hid, they are hid to those that are lost, whose eyes the God
of this World has blinded, that the light of the glorious Gospel of Jesus
Christ should not shine upon them: 2 Cor. 4.3, 4.
The words whereby all things necessary to be done toward the attainment of
eternal life, are expressed, are such and so plain, that the simplest Christian
may understand them: And that person who goes about to involve the practical
duty of a Christian, whether in respect of his communication with God or man,
in obscure and mysterious terms, crosses the end of the Gospel, which is to
instruct the weakest understanding in an easy and intelligible way how to live
godly, righteously, and soberly in this present evil world; yet it must be
acknowledged, that, even in relation to practice, there are some apparent
difficulties; and notwithstanding all that plainness apparent in God's word, a
Man has a very hard task sometimes to distinguish between what is lawful and
what is unlawful; such cases are commonly known by the name of Cases of
Conscience, or such matters wherein so many arguments, seemingly strong and
plausible, appear on both sides to the understanding, that it knows not which
way to act, and all that hesitancy or doubtfulness arises only from a fear of
offending God: These generally respecting Christian practice, create a great
deal of trouble, frequently to very good Men, (for others are seldom troubled
with such religious fears) and these are sometimes by various and unusual
circumstances rendered so very intricate, that the wisest and most discerning
Men are often at a loss to clear and resolve them to the Querent's
satisfaction: Here the Jews were ordered to have recourse to their Priests,
whose lips were supposed to preserve knowledge, and the Priests when there was
any thing of a more inextricable nature, had the Vrim and Thummim to appeal to:
The Heathens had some emergent doubts, as to matter of public management of
themselves, which sometimes perplexed them too, and they had their imaginary
wise Men the Priests, attending their desecrated altars, who would assume, as
if they had the art of resolving doubts; those who profess Christianity have
still a severer task in these matters, as having no Oracle immediately to
consult, and having doubts more numerous and obscure to contend with. But here
learning, and study, a strict familiarity with God's Word, and an exercised
experience carry the Christian Priest through a great many vexatious enquiries,
and a modest consultation with others, who are blessed with such qualifications,
tends much to the settlement of dubious minds; but after all, these are
properly no mysteries, for the rules of Scripture, by which such inquiries are
ultimately determined, are very plain and obvious to every understanding, their
nature being like that of a Light in a dark place, which serves to guide and
direct Travelers in the way they should go; but the occasion of these doubts
is the misapplication of rules to matter of fact, the misapprehension or
misrepresentation of circumstances, etc. wherein the distempers of the Soul are
much like the diseases of the body, if the Patient can give a just and rational
account of those parts about him which are grieved, and how he finds himself,
the Physician easily understands the disease, and is able to apply the proper
medicines: but if the Patient gives a broken and uncertain account of his
condition, even a skilful Physician may grossly mistake the disease and its
remedy to the Patient's ruin; so when doubting Christians understand not the
state of their own Souls, nor the first motives or occasions of their fears, or
where they are afraid or ashamed to lay open themselves with all sincerity to
him, from whom they expect relief, it is not to be wondered at, if excellent
advices fail of their proper effect, whereas a true insight into a Man's self
makes the greatest seeming difficulties easily and certainly determinable.

As for matters of Faith they are of another nature, and (though matters of
practice, so far as practice is religious, depend upon what the Christian
believes altogether and are so very plain as I showed before) yet those objects
of faith, are so far beyond the reach of reason, as it is from Earth to Heaven;
nay, that very faith without which, as we are sufficiently assured, it is
impossible to please God, though it be inherent in the pious Soul, is
absolutely mysterious and inexplicable. We feel the prodigious force of it in
those acts whereby it raises the Soul to a contemplation of Divine things, but
it is as the Prophets of old felt the inspiring energy of the sacred Spirit,
when they spoke what it dictated, but could give no account of the methods of
its operation in them; the Apostle when he tells us of it, that it is (...),
Heb. 11.1.
the substance of things hoped for, and that it is (...) the argumental evidence
of things not seen; though he gives us doubtless an authentic description of
that necessary grace, yet shows the unintelligible nature of it by his very
expressions: for what difference is there among Learned Men, and how much pains
taken to clear the meaning of this description? It imports indeed that true
faith is of so efficacious a nature, that though it have respect only to things
which are at a distance, yet it represents them to the Soul so plainly and so
powerfully, that the Soul reaps equal satisfaction from that distant view as it
would from an immediate possession. Meginhardus the German Monk writes well of
it, when he says, Faith is called the substance of things hoped for by a
figure, not that it is really their proper substance, but because that faith
which works by love, by which the just live, and by which power is given to us
that we should be called and really be the Sons of God, that faith in the
troublesome pilgrimage of this life meditates on the reward of eternal
happiness with so firm and certain an hope, Vt in little cordibus qui charitate,
quae per spiritum sanctum in eis diffusa est, dilatantur, Vid. Dictericum in
voce.
jam nunc per ineffabile desiderium ea faciat subsistere, that even at this
time by that ineffable ardency of desire they are possessed with, it makes them
subsist in their hearts who have hearts enlarged with that charity or Love
which is poured into them by the holy Spirit; and Jaeobus Capellus in our
Critics explains the same Apostolical expression thus, Fiducia est velut in
statione manens ac rem promissam expectans cum animi submissione, habensque
simul vim and statuminandi sperantem, and sistendi rem speratam; i. e. This
faith is a confidence well fixed and settled, waiting for the thing promised with
a due submission of mind, and having a force in it self sufficient to support
him that hopes, and to bring to hand the thing hoped for. Again, it is the
evidence of things not seen, therefore out-going humane reason in this life,
for if humane reason were clear enough to prove to us those things undeniably
which we expect in a future state, there would then be no need of any other
evidence, at least we should not by the Apostle be referred to an evidence
naturally more obscure, when reason, that by which we do or should most
commonly act, could give us what was much more plain and obvious; but our
reason being notoriously defective in the case, our firm belief that there is
an Heaven of joys, and an Hell of woes to be met with hereafter, is an argument
not to be answered, that there are really such things; for the Soul of Man is
not easily carried out of it self into violent longings after a mere
fantastical good, nor is it ordinarily terrified with apprehensions of Mormoes
or bug-bears, but where it runs out most into fabulous or figurative
expressions of its expectations, there is somewhat real and sound in the bottom;
so those that talk of infernal Judges in Hell, and various kinds of sensible
pains to be there felt, and of Furies torturing Souls, etc. all agree certainly
in that, that vengeance does certainly attend ill actions, and that though Men
may escape plausibly in this world, they shall certainly suffer terribly in the
next, though they cannot make a tolerable conjecture how a guilty Spirit should
suffer to such extremity: In the same manner, those that tell us of Elysian
fields adorned with variety of beautiful Flowers, blessed with a serene Air and a
continual Spring, where those that have done well, happy in each others
society, shall live in undisturbed pleasures beyond the reach of fates malice,
or times consumption, All such prove their certain belief, that there is and
shall be a reward for the righteous, that is an unallay'd felicity to be
attained; but what a kind of felicity that is which is infinite and eternal,
who can tell? nay who would value them as the Saints do, if they could possibly
comprehend them? No, it is because eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor has it
entered into the heart of man to conceive how great those things are, which God
has prepared for those that love him, Therefore the holy and the wise are
always panting after those enjoyments, as the thirsty Heart pants after the
water brooks, therefore they are willing to undergo every thing that a
malignant World can lay upon them, as being certainly assured, that whatsoever
the joys of Heaven are, all the afflictions or sufferings they can meet with in
this World are not worthy to be compared with them; Impressions looking toward
these things are so natural to the Soul of Man, that all the artifices of
wickedness are not able to efface them, and yet the consequences of these
impressions are so great and mysterious, that all the wit of Man cannot
possibly comprehend them, yet faith goes through with all, and is not, cannot
be mistaken in its confidence at last.

If Faith it self, the continual security of the Soul, be so dark and
undefinable, what must we judge of the objects of it, they being generally so
vast, that Faith it self, soaring as it is, can go but a very little way in its
Idea's of them: that the objects of Faith are real and true, is evident from
what has been said, that their Nature is incomprehensible, and their Reasons
inscrutable to created Beings, is as true, but not at all to be wondered at;
since there are a thousand common effects of Nature, the truth of which we are
beyond contradiction convinced of: but why they should happen so or so, the
cunningest Philosophers are no more able to resolve than despised Idiots or
Naturals. Agreeably to what I am urging I instanced before in the being of God,
a truth which Men cannot balk though they take never so much pains to that
purpose; that this God, this supreme Governor or Manager of all things must
some way or other communicate himself to his Creatures, for that otherwise they
could neither pretend to a well being, or a being, is as clear by rational
discourse: but how God should communicate of himself to these creatures, where
there is so vast a disproportion in their Natures, is a riddle which we have
not yet found any Apollo subtle enough to resolve; and yet that God does
communicate himself to his creatures is as plain, and undeniable. Those who
engage themselves into enquiries about these things do but lose themselves in
inextricable Labyrinths, and indeed, according to the genuine rules of right
reason, do but take pains to no purpose; it was that general sense which
mankind all along has had of these things, that has made them endeavor to
frame some short Idea's of the Deity to themselves, and so, though they could
conceive nothing adaequate to his Nature, yet they have run high as words can
carry them, when they style God a being infinitely just, powerful, good,
merciful, wise, etc. These general notions of theirs in some measure influenced
the lives of many, but much more all the external and visible parts of their
religious Devotions: And when they have showed their utmost skill in contriving
Schemes of divine Worship, those men have done best and most sutably to the
nature of Religion, who have contrived the outward parts of it so, as they
might a little shadow out the necessary apprehensions of the divine Nature, and
yet so too that the Devotoes, who made the nicest observations of things, might
be sensible, that those external religious shows referred to a great deal of a
darker and more inintelligible nature, and which no Symbols whatsoever could
possibly illustrate or represent; and those Divine Oracles which were spoken of
in all parts of the World, as they rendered Religion more August and Venerable
to the eye of the World, so the nature of those Oracles convinced the World yet
more strongly of the defectiveness of humane understanding, the certain
knowledge of futurity where men imagine themselves free agents, being Essential
to the Deity, but one of the most puzling things humane Reason can possibly fix
upon: This the Romans and their predecessors the Latins represented by a Janus
with two faces, the Hetrurians by a Janus with four, which might, as some tell
us, refer to the four parts of the year, but more genuinely it represented the
Deity looking every way, so that nothing past, present or to come could
possibly avoid its knowledge; and the Prophets of old had that character as
communicated to them from the inspiring Deity, that they knew, (...), Didymus
in Hom. Iliad. 1. v. 70.
it being as Didymus tells us, (...), the part of a complete Prophet to
understand exactly the three differences of times. Men are apt to be presuming
enough on the depth of their own understanding, but we find Heresies, since the
propagation of Christianity, have taught men much more confidence than ever
Nature did; and therefore as we find Philosophers of old the more rational the
more modest, but that those who set up for senceless Paradoxes made it their
business to hector every body into their own notions, and to make up their want
of argument by face and metal, as we may see in Lucretius his Epicurean Poem,
So Schismatics and Heretics in the Christian Church, the farther they fly
from the genuine practice of ancient Christians and the Doctrine of the Gospel,
the more positive and daring they are in their assertions, the more close
Communion they pretend to hold with God, and to be the very privadoes of
Heaven; as the profligate Gnostics of old pretended to know every thing, when
indeed they knew nothing; and some wretched Ignorants of late years, when they
have been led Captives by the Devil at his will, have yet talked of being
godded with God and Christed with Christ: And our followers of Socinus who run
violently against the stream of Reason, bear themselves for the greatest
rationalists in the world: Whereas Nature though corrupted taught Men modestly to
own their own ignorance, to confess their inability to comprehend all those
mysteries attendant on the Deity, to look upon shadows and representations of
things at a distance, as the best way of imprinting reverence upon Men's minds,
and therefore to satisfy themselves with such shadows and figures, lest by
pretending to more they should fall into absurdities, and by that means render
themselves and Religion contemptible and ridiculous.

remembrancers of things past, as the great goodness and mercy of God shown to
the people of Israel, and his justice or vengeance on their enemies; or
otherwise they were so many types and shadows of things to come, and
particularly of that Messiah or Savior of the world to be born into it in
fullness of time: Now the manner of Gods avenging himself on his own and his
peoples enemies was uncouth and prodigious; but the birth of a Savior, one who
by his interest with Heaven should visit and redeem his people, to procure
Salvation for the whole world, was altogether a mystery, a means of procuring
the worlds happiness, which all the Wits in it could never have pitched upon.
There was not among the Jews the least garment belonging to those who
officiated in holy services which had not something mysterious in it, I own
these Mysteries were not like those wherein our Faith is so deeply concerned,
but they were Mysteries still, though of a lower fourm: and such Mysteries as the
generality of the Jewish people were very far from diving into; yet Reason
would have gone a considerable way in teaching the Jews what God insinuated to
them by such prescriptions: All the circumstantials of Jewish worship were
rendered the more considerable by those never-failing Oracles issued out from
between the Cherubims, and by Prophets raised up among them by God himself
frequently, till such time as they lost the glory of their Nation by Captivity
and Slavery to prevailing strangers: Those Revelations which such Prophets had,
extending particularly to future events of things, were such as really
entangled the Jews strangely, and they, who, among Mysteries revealed, had
unhappily pitched upon a wrong interpretation of things, were incapable at last
of applying events to Prophecies and so ruined: It Is true the Priests
themselves at first understood the meaning of things well enough, but time
corrupted them, and introduced ignorance among them as well as among the
vulgar; but whatsoever the Priests understood at first, or how much soever of
the true meaning of things they understood at last: they were yet not to cast
pearls before swine, nor holy things to dogs, they were not to prostiture
Mystical matters to every common enquirer, though at the same time ready to teach
Gods statutes and judgments to every one that humbly sought for information;
but as to the manner of God's delivering their Law to Moses in Horeb, and his
writing the Ten Commandments with the finger of God on the stone-Tables, his
guarding and directing them by a Cloud all day, and by a pillar of Fire all
night, his Glory shining at particular times and on particular occasions in the
Tabernacle of the Congregation, his delivering his Will from the Mercy-Seat,
and being said to dwell peculiarly between the Cherubims, his oracular
resolution (...) difficulties by Vrim and Thummim, etc. These were matters of
so profound and inextricable a Nature, that neither Priests nor people were
ever able to give any considerable account of them.

If among the divine Institutions of the Jews there were so many matters of a
mystical Nature, it is not to be wondered that Their Worship, who had no
assistance by divine Revelation, should be more than ordinarily encumbred with
them; the Notions which the Gentile world had of a Deity, though positive and
uncontrollable enough, were, according to the means they had for acquiring
divine Knowledge, much more obscure than those of the Jews: if yet they would
have a show of any Religion, they were under a necessity of suiting it with
some circumstantial rites, which when they had tried their utmost skill had a
meaning, but that meaning was very obscure: We may believe that many of their
Priests endeavored to make as deep impressions as they could of Religion upon
the minds of those men they were concerned with, but the greatest satisfaction
they had in their own inventions was but this, that the notorious obscurity of
their public Rites, was very exactly representative of that God whom they
acknowledged a Being infinite and incomprehensible, and those things which were
mysterious even in the sense of their first Inventors, were much more so when
they fell into the hands of their Successors, who being blind Leaders of the
blind, all sense of true natural Divinity was quickly lost both among Priests
and People: thus we have reason to think the Hieroglyphical Theology of the
Egyptians was in a great measure raised from those hints they had taken of
Man's duty to the World's Creator, from their converse with the Jewish
Patriarchs, that the first contrivers of it were capable of making it
considerably useful and instructive to the World, and from thence those seeds
of Moral Virtues, which bore some fruit in ancient Heathens, had their
originals; but when sloth and negligence took place among their degenerate
posterity, and the cruelty of Cambyses King of Persia destroyed all the Priests
of that Nation without distinction, the whole body of their Divinity was lost,
some of its characters may be still remaining among old pillars or obelisks and
other ruins of their ancient magnificence, but as unintelligible to us as the
Chinese writing is to a common labourer, or the squaring of a Circle to one
that never heard of Mathematics.

All Men from the world's beginning acknowledged God's Universal Sovereignty by
offering Sacrifices. That Men offered Sacrifices and of living creatures too,
very early, is apparent by the History of Cain and Abel, Gen 3.1, 2, 3, 4.
where we are told that in process of time, i.e. as soon as they were in a
capacity of doing so, Cain who was a tiller of the ground brought of the fruit
of the ground an offering to the Lord, and Abel who was a keeper of sheep
brought of the firstlings of his flock and the fat thereof: But that these were
the first Sacrifices offered, we have no reason to conclude, since Adam had the
same sense of things, and the same motives to offer Sacrifices which They had,
and doubtless set them an example of so doing. Eusebius of Caesarea, though
observed to be singular in the case, gives much the best and most rational
account of this Sacrifice. I take, says he, the ground of this action not to
have been mere chance, or a device merely humane, but to have risen from a
divine thought: for whereas good Men who were illuminated with the divine
spirit, and lived in a near familiarity with God, plainly saw there was a
necessity of some extraordinary means for the expiation of damning sin, they
concluded it necessary to offer to God the giver of the Life and Soul something
by way of a ransom or redemption price to procure their own Salvation, and
since they had nothing which they could offer to God better or more valuable
than their Souls, instead of them they Sacrificed beasts, De Demonstr. Evang.
l. 1. c. 10.
so (...), offering the Souls of others in lieu of their own, and this was
certainly the best Sacrifice and most significant of their apprehensions: Where
that reason given by Eusebius, and made use of by Justin Martyr, and the author
of the Answer to the Orthodox, printed among Justin's works, and by St.
Chrysostom and other ancient Christians, and by Rabbi Moses ben Maimon and his
followers among the Jews, why Cain and Abel should pitch on offering
Sacrifices, and Abel particularly of living creatures, viz. their wisdom and
near converse with heaven, suits yet more exactly with Adam himself, who had
converst with God in a state of perfection as well as imperfection: And though we
know the ruins of reason to have been very great in Adam by his fall, yet they
were not so great in him as in the rest of his posterity, and Adam having a
right apprehension of that promise concerning the seed of the woman, without
which right apprehension he could have derived very little comfort from it; to
fix in his own mind and in the mind of his posterity the true meaning of that
promise, he offered, as soon as without prejudice to the multiplication of
Creatures he could, such Sacrifices as might shadow out the promised
redemption, and make so early a faith in the promised seed, that Lamb who was
slain from the beginning of the world, appear and really be rational: nor was
there any need of divine institution or command in the case, where original
reason yet retained so much strength and vigor; And whereas some learned Men
have written whole discourses to prove that Men were allowed to eat flesh
before the flood, Vid Maii Hist. animal. sacror. l. 1. c. 2. p. 32, etc.
I am so far from being convinced by what I have met with to that purpose
(building my contrary opinion on that vast difference between God's commission
given to Adam, Genesis 1.29, 30. and that given afterward to Noah, Genesis 9.2,3,4.)
that I conclude one of the violences the Gigantick race were afterward guilty
of was their transgressing their first limits in that matter, and that Adam
seeing living Creatures fixed in an higher state, as being exempted from that
servility to which Plants and Fruits and the Herb of the field was subjected,
and yet observing a certain Dominion over those nobler Creatures invested in
himself, he concluded he could no way more rationally exercise his government,
nor express his expectations of a Savior, than by killing of those Creatures,
not for his own luxury, but to offer them in Sacrifice to that God whom he had
before so ingratefully offended: Thus Gods power and Man's necessity were
acknowledged both in one and the same Sacrifice: I conclude farther, in
relation to the first custom of offering beasts in Sacrifice, that what Reason
taught Adam to do, God set his Seal to and approved it, by sending fire from
Heaven to consume it, which was an unquestionable evidence of God's acceptance,
an encouragement to Adam to proceed in that course, and to his posterity to
imitate him: And this I am the more confirmed in, because I find both Jewish
and Christian Writers generally concluding, that the visible difference which
God put between the Sacrifice of Cain and Abel was, that he consumed Abel's
with fire from heaven, but not Cain's, by which means Cain was able to judge of
his brothers acceptance and his own rejection; and he might be the more certain
in his judgment, because he had often seen his Father's offerings so consumed
before. That Adam was a Priest in his own family as every Father is, and that
Cain and Abel were so in theirs, and the rest of the ancient Patriarchs, is
unquestionable, but when upon the World's increase Men began to unite into
larger Societies, private and family devotions or religious observances were
not looked upon as sufficient to show men's deference to the supreme Lord of all
things, God was to be reconciled and rendered propitious to public Societies as
well as to private members of such Societies, which considerations in process
of time were the occasion that particular bodies or numbers of Men were set
apart to attend more peculiarly on the services of Religion, which bodies of
Men took care to settle the methods of those services, wherein according to the
clearness of their understandings those methods were more or less obscure or
incoherent. God taking a peculiar care of the seed of Abraham taught them not
to leave off sacrificing, but to order their Sacrifices in so holy a manner, as
might best agree to that end for which they were appointed, i. e. to
foresignifie that great mystery of the worlds redemption by the sacrifice of
the death of Christ: But the Devil Tyrannizing over the greater part of the
world beside, and under the same religious pretexts of atoning an angry God and
acknowledging his sovereignty, soon converted all that worship and those
Sacrifices intended to the true God, to himself: So that great enemy of Souls,
got to himself the name of God, he was adored as the author of all good, and
revered as the executor of vengeance upon all wicked Men, He made use of
diverse artifices to maintain his usurpation, among the rest he made special
use of ignorance as the mother of Devotion, a principle which the Church of
Rome has made great use of of later years to the same purpose; his Priests,
urged by interest, were excellent Agents in his cursed designs, and by his
direction loaded every part of Idolatry with such a Mass of Mystic rites and
Ceremonies, necessarily so, lest their lewdness and scandalous nature should
have made them generally odious, that it was impossible for the greatest part
of Mankind to see through the clouds and dust they had raised about themselves;
with these Mysteries all the whole rabble of Deities were continually
accoutred, all which false Gods were but one Devil, who assumed so many names
to himself, partly that he might the better suit himself to the various humors
of Men, partly that he might entrench as much as possible upon that honor due
to Almighty God, by assuming all the Divine Attributes to himself, and partly
that if he happened to lose that Honor he had usurpt under one name, he might
at least preserve it under another.

Isis and Osiris so much celebrated among the Egyptians, the Eleusinian, so
famous over all Greece, among the Athenians, wherein so strange an obscurity
was affected, that the very Rules and Orders for their public performance were
unknown to common worshipers, and not under pain of death to be divulged to
any, unless initiated for five years together in them, which course of
initiation once past, there seems to have been no great fear the initiated
should make them public, the world at worst not having been bad enough to have
approved such abominations; But the Religion of Sacrifices went farther, and
those who were sensible how just God's anger was against the World for Sin,
concluded the most precious Offerings must needs be the most acceptable to God
for their expiation, therefore they came to pitch upon Humane Sacrifices,
thinking a rational Soul the most proper (...), or ransom for a rational Soul:
Hence grew those Enthusiastic extravagancies of the Priests of Baal, who when
they found their God deaf to all their invocations, and insensible of their
Sacrifices, and themselves derided for their folly by Elijah, 1 Kings 18.26,
27, 28.
They cried aloud and cut themselves after their manner with Knives and Lancers
till the blood gushed out upon them: And that was pretty fair for their own
personal zeal; but this was not enough; therefore in a pressing extremity we
find the King of Moab taking his eldest Son, who was to have reigned after him,
2 Kings 3.26, 27.
and offering him for a burnt-offering upon the wall of his besieged City: The
misery he was reduced to required something of extraordinary to allay it, and
nothing could show a more eager desire to atone his angry Gods, to whose
displeasure he imputed his present calamity, than to offer a Sacrifice so dear
and valuable to himself to atone them. Where before I pass on, I cannot but
take notice of that passage in the contents of the now Cited Chapter in our
English Bibles, viz. The King of Moab by sacrificing the King of Edom's Son
raises the Siege: In which passage they follow the opinion of Junius, though
without any ground at all: For how came the King of Moab, so straightly
besieged, to get the King of Edom's Son into his possession? We read of his
desperate attempt to break through to that King of Edom with 700 valiant Men,
v. 26. But the consequence of his attempt was, He could not effect what he
desired, the failure in which bold design made him, in the extremity of his
despair, fly to as astonishing a remedy; besides (not to mention it, that the
King of Edom in those days was but a Deputy, a Viceroy, and his Government not
hereditary) We find the confederate Kings raising their Siege upon that strange
action, but had Moab so cruelly sacrificed the Heir of Edom, reason will teach
us it must have exasperated the more, and made them press the Siege the more
straightly, to have been revenged on so extreme a barbarity: Again, some would
persuade us with as little sense, that that great Indignation which is said to
have been against Israel, was from the King of Edom, enraged to see the Jews
prosecute the Siege so far as to cost the life of his Son: For indeed that
anger against Israel was from God, who having formerly given them a charge not
to dispossess the Children of Ammon or Moab, as being the Posterity of Lot,
Abraham's Nephew, was displeased now to see them carry on a War so far, as to
make a considerable Prince commit in his extremity so great an abomination:
Their inveteracy against him forced him to it, and God required mercy from them
to their kindred, and therefore the Israelites, though late, sensible of God's
anger and the reason of it, raised their Siege and gave over so inhumane a War;
Nor yet could it have been reasonably accounted so dear or precious a sacrifice
to have offered the blood of an enemy, as that of an only Son, as we may
conclude from the aggravating circumstances of that severe command to Abraham,
Genesis 22.2.
to take his Son, his only Son, the Son whom he loved, and to offer him a
burnt sacrifice; and from God's accepting nothing less than the death of his
only begotten Son, for the Redemption of Mankind from the damnation of Hell:
Besides this unhappy Prince, the Israelites themselves, though so often cautioned
against such things, are justly charged by the Psalmist, That they offered
their Sons and their Daughters unto Devils, Psalm. 106.37, 38.
and shed Innocent blood, even the blood of their Sons and of their Daughters,
whom they sacrificed unto the Idols of Canaan, and the Land was defiled with
blood: Where God's own people failed, it is no wonder the Gentile world fell
into such madnesses, Praepar. Evang. l. 4. c. 7.
therefore we find the Carthaginians and Phoenicians burying Slaves alive on
some extraordinary exigences, as Eusebius from Porphyry informs us, or offering
them to Saturn: The Romans running into the same follies in the second Punick
War, in obedience, as they pretended, to the Sibylline Oracles; Now all these
and the like Sacrifices were supposed to have some secret meaning, and to
represent imperfectly some mighty future events, being things the vulgar might
gaze and wonder at, but could never understand; yet they showed that general
sense of Mankind, that Religion could not subsist without Mysteries, and the
Devil he made too good use of those natural notions, furnishing the Heathen
world with such Mystic Rites, as might keep Men at the greater distance, lest
too plain discoveries of himself should have undeceived thinking Men, and have
taught them to turn to the worship of the true God.

That the Devil might ape God the more exactly, and over-aw Men the more
securely, as Idolatrous Priests in Scripture pretended to receive answers from
their Gods; so he in several places, under several names, had his Ammonian,
Delphian, Pythian, Dodonian, Ephesian, Paphian Oracles, where he used to return
ambiguous and puzling answers to such as came to enquire of him concerning the
events of things, by his ambiguous expressions he endeavored to conceal his
want of omniscience, and secured himself from the accusations of his deluded
worshippers, he likewise had his Prophets, such as inspired with a Devilish
fury raved out obscure and insignificant nonsense, which yet were generally
received with the greatest veneration, and preserved as rules of practice for
Men in their necessities to have recourse to, out of which if in an exigence
they were able to pick any thing, they were ready to admire his veracity whom
the Sons of Wisdom knew to be the Father of lies: Such Prophets were Tiresias
and his daughter Manto, and Amphiaraus and Calchas, the answerers from the
Delphick Tripos, from the Sibyls Cave, and from Trophonius his Den, etc. These
filled weak heads with mighty wonders, that the Gods should so freely impart
their secrets to Men, whose sanctity they admired as much as Cyrus of Persia is
said to have done that of Bell and his Priests, in the Apocryphal story, and
were as grossly cheated.

But though by these Devices of Satan the far greater part of Mankind were
miserably abused, as to the object of their Devotions, yet the reason and
design of their Devotions was good and true, nothing could blind them so far,
or lay them under so deep a stupidity, but that they plainly observed their own
unhappy and defective state, they were able still in many moral cases to
distinguish between good and evil, virtue and vice, and having a true sense of
the existence of a God, they had still so much natural Logic as to infer from
their own extraordinary inclinations to wickedness, or to be guilty of
Immoralities, that Heaven must be atoned, that there must be some way of
Mediation found out between God and Man, otherwise they must be wholly
miserable, therefore they kept up their Sacrifices and solemn Devotions, as
some shadows or weak representations of that mediating work; but even while
they did so, reason prevailed and acted them so much farther that they
concluded, an upright, a sincere and well purged mind was much more acceptable
to the Universal Sovereign than their sacrifices for any intrinsic worth could
be, and this truth was so firmly fixed in the hearts of Men, that the Devil
himself never durst undertake to oppose it, though it were so cross to his own
wishes, lest Men should have been roused from their dead sleep by such
irrational and damnable insinuations, and so have seen with horror and
amazement what Gods they worshipped; Yet neither could the more sagacious part
of Mankind be satisfied with these things, they saw the distance between God
and Man was too great to be made up by any typical or representing Sacrifices,
and that a complete purity was far beyond the reach of mere humane nature,
therefore the Gentiles, who had some sense of that weight which oppressed them,
groaned and longed earnestly to be freed from the slavery of corruptions, by
some means sufficiently powerful to that end, and so to be brought in to the
glorious liberty of the Sons of God; hence rose those frequent discourses of
the Gods assuming Humane shapes, coming down to earth and conversing with Men,
which though we find most frequently mentioned in Poetical Writings, yet
unquestionably had its foundation from those accounts in the Writings of Moses
concerning the apparitions of Angels, as particularly to Abraham, and Lot, and
Jacob; hence grew that prevailing rumor, about the times of Augustus Caesar,
that an universal King should be born in Judaea, to whom all other Monarchs
should be forced to bow, and who by wonderful means should make up the breach
between God and man; this too had a farther confirmation from the translation
of the old Testament into the Greek Language, and from some fragments of the
true Sibylline Oracles not unknown to Tully or Virgil, and from Balaam's
predictions, as plain as any Jewish Prophecy whatsoever, which he being of
another Nation would certainly acquaint his own Countrymen with, from whom it
quickly might be spread over the whole World: From some or all these Originals
arose the Expectation of those Eastern Sages, who no sooner saw that prodigious
Star shining at Noonday, but they concluded, that glorious Light which was to
lighten the Gentiles, and to be the glory of God's people Israel, was then
risen; but though Men did generally apprehend the necessity of those things,
and lived in continual expectation of them, yet how such things should be, how
such prodigious, but excellent effects, should ever be produced, was a Mystery
hid from all ages, a dark, obscure, unfathomable abyss of Divine goodness and
wisdom, never offered to be explained to any, because incomprehensible by all.

As it was the unhappiness of the Gentiles to be encombred with a great deal of
Ignorance, so it must follow, that their Mysteries, where clearest, had but a
very indirect aspect to their acknowledgments and expectations. But the Jewish
solemnities and predictions had a more exact and direct aim at the coming of
the promised Messiah, their Prophets were more numerous, their prophecies
better attested, and more commonly known and enquired into, their Rites and
Ceremonies all of Divine appointment, and consequently not one of them
insignificant or superfluous, till they were vacated by the appearance of the
Messiah himself, in and by whom they were unridled and accomplished. Yet their
Religion was Mysterious still to the most understanding Persons among them;
their prophecies, though so much inquired into, yet like a Book sealed to them,
and they as unable to conceive how the Son of God should take upon him humane
nature, how he should put an end to all Typical Sacrifices, though of never so
Divine an Institution, by offering himself one perfect and all-sufficient
sacrifice, oblation and satisfaction for the sins of the whole World, which so
should really effect that mighty reconciliation which all other did but
imperfectly hint at, they were as unable to conceive of these things, as a
People who had long sat in darkness could have been, as by their prejudices
against him, and their absurd fancies about him appeared, when no other Messiah
could serve their turn, but some powerful temporal Prince raised up by the hand
of God, as Moses, Joshua, or the Judges of old had been, to free them from the
slavery they then lay under, and once more to restore the Kingdom to Israel:
The result then of all is this, that the World has known no Religion or
Religious worship but what has had some circumstances and fundamentals too, not
obvious or easy to be understood either by the unthinking vulgar, or by the
more curious and inquisitive understandings, it is enough for my design, if the
World concur in that one principle, That something may be necessary to be
believed, which yet no mere humane reason can comprehend: Nay, I may proceed
farther, and say, That some points of faith are so very sublime, that even
revelation it self cannot make them intelligible to Men, as Moses when he had
seen the back parts of God, the shadow or reflex of his glory was as far off
comprehending his full glory as before; and the Apostles when in their
transfigured Master they saw a glorified body, yet were unable to express what
they saw but by very weak resemblances; and S. Paul when ecstasied in the third
heavens, could no more completely comprehend the felicities or glorious visions
of that place than he could before: Since then natural reason led the Gentiles
to believe mystic truths, and God led his own people of Israel to the like,
from both together we may conclude, That Religion it self cannot subsist
without them, and that those things which are called mysteries in Religion are
not therefore to be rejected, because they are mysteries indeed, i. e. because
every little pretender to sense cannot comprehend them. And so we come to the
second enquiry propounded in the beginning of this discourse, and that is,

Whether our Savior intended the entire abolition of all other Religions for
the Settlement of his own, or rather to unite what was good in every distinct
religion into one, and to sublime or perfect that so as it might tend most to
God's glory and Man's happiness, and whether that could be effected Men standing
in their present corrupt state without the retaining of old or declaring of new
Mysteries in his Religion? where for our better satisfaction we must again
examine these things.

What Sentiments Men generally had of the ends of Religion before our Saviors
appearance in the world?

How far they had depraved or perverted those ends? The reason of these
enquiries will appear afterward.

We enquire then what Sentiments Men generally had of the substance and ends of
Religion before our Saviors appearance in the world? And here, if we would
give Religion as it is true, a definition, we may take it thus, Religion is the
worship of God in such a manner as is most agreeable to those revelations he
has made of himself to the World, this the Jews confirm, The Author of the book
Kosri, or a Dialogue between the King of Cosar and Rabbi Isaac Sangar
concerning Religion, infers from a precedent discourse, Libri Cosri pars 3. p.
234.
That Men can have no access to God, i. e. they cannot be admitted as true
worshippers, but by the commands of God, i.e. by Worshipping him according to
his prescriptions, and we cannot come to know the commands of God but by
Prophecy or Revelation: Or we may rest in the Apostles definition, that true
Religion is the acknowledging of the truth which is after godliness in hopes of
eternal life; Tit. 1.1, 2.
But if we respect Religion in general, as taken up by all Nations we may
describe it, as, The method of worshipping God by all men suitably to those
notions they had of him and of their own duties: As for the Jewish Nation they
were once the sole professors of true Religion, and for the hardness of their
hearts were loaded with abundance of Ceremonial institutions, but yet in the
law of Moses, and in the Prophets, we find sincere and hearty obedience to the
moral Law very much urged and insisted upon, as the best evidence of true and
unfeigned piety; and where God expostulates sharply with his people for their
rebellion and disobedience, He tells them plainly, Ps. 50.8, 9, 13, 16, 17, 23.
I will not reprove thee for thy Sacrifices, or thy burnt offerings to have
been continually before me. I will take no bullock out of thy house, nor
he-goat out of thy fold. Will I eat the flesh of bulls, or drink the blood of
goats? No, these things God could pardon, But unto the wicked, God says, what
have thou to do to declare my statutes, or that thou should take my covenant
into thy mouth? the reason of the expostulation follows, thou hate
instruction and castest my words behind thee, by which words the great folly of
those is expressed, who pretend themselves the servants of God and instruments of
his glory, and yet live disagreeably to their profession, wherefore it is added,
Who so offers praise glorifieth me, and to him that orders his conversation
aright will I show the salvation of God. Thus again, God by the Prophet Samuel
argues with Saul, 1 Samuel 15.22.
Has the Lord as great delight in burnt-offerings and sacrifices as in obeying
the voice of the Lord: Behold to obey is better than sacrifice, and to hearken
than the fat of rams: So the Prophet Isaiah, Isa. 1.11, 13, 16, 17, 18.
To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto me? I delight not in
the blood of bullocks, or of lambs, or of he-goats, Bring no more vain
oblations, incense is an abomination to me, it follows, wash ye, make ye clean,
put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes, cease to do evil, learn
to do well, seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the fatherless, plead
for the widows: Well, what should be the effect of all this reformation? as
much as a wretched sinner could hope for from the most benign Being, Come now
and let us reason together, says the Lord, though your sins be as scarlet they
shall be white as snow, though they be red like crimson they shall be as wool: So
the Prophet Micah, Micah 6.6, 7, 8.
Wherewith shall I come before the Lord, and bow my self before the high God?
Shall I come before him with burnt-offerings, with calves of a year old, will
the Lord be pleased with thousands of rams, or ten thousands of rivers of oil?
shall I give my firstborn for my transgression, or the fruit of my Body for
the sin of my soul? No, God requires not these things at our hands, but He has
showed thee, O man, what is good, and what does the Lord require of thee, but
to do justly, and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? Nay, Solomon
himself, who was so personally profuse in his offerings, that a man would have
suspected he had fixed the whole substance of Religion in such exterior
services, when he comes to draw up what was incumbent upon Man in a few words,
passes sacrificing by as inconsiderable in respect of this sincere obedience,
Eccl. 12.13.
Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter, Fear God, and keep his
Commandments, for this is the whole duty of man. Thus far the writings of the
Old Testament received by the ancient Jews show us the ends of Religion, viz.
That where it really had a place it necessarily produced purity and sincerity
of mind, without which no sacrifice though never so costly could be accepted with
God; David teaches us the lesson plainly, Ps. 51.6, 7, 10, 19.
Behold thou desire truth in the inward parts, and in the hidden part thou
shall make me to know wisdom, purge me with hysop and I shall be clean, wash me
and I shall be whiter than snow. Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a
right spirit within me, and much more to the same purpose, then he concludes
all, Then shall thou be pleased with the sacrifices of righteousness, with
burnt offering and whole burnt-offering, then shall they offer bullocks upon
thine Altar. But since the Jews are for the most part hardened against their own
greatest interest, and so may be thought to have now changed their minds, being
known for such bigoted ceremonialists, I shall add the confessions of one or
two modern Jews: So Rabbi Isaac Sangar in the book Cosri before cited, Cosri.
pars 3. p. 157.
for thus he tells the King he converses with: A holy and pious man is not the
rigid man for every ceremonial punctilio, but he who, where he dwells, with a
prudent and impartial hand gives every one their right, who loves justice,
oppresses none, defrauds none, nor bribes any to be his slaves or tools upon
occasion. Again, Because the eyes of the Lord run to and fro through the whole
earth, therefore the holy man neither does, nor speaks nor thinks any thing,
but he believes the all-seeing eye of God to be upon him, ready not only to
reward for what is well, but for what is ill done too, and to visit for every
perverse and wicked word or action, p. 168.
etc. To him I shall add Rabbi Moises ben Maimon, who in his More Nevochim,
More Nevoehim, pars 3. c. 28. p. 419.
or explainer of difficulties, teaches us, that every precept of God, whether
it be affirmative or negative, aims at these things, first, that it may take
away all violence from among men and beget good manners necessary for the
conservation of political Societies: and secondly, that it may instill true
principles of faith, such as are in their own nature necessary to be known, for
the expelling of wickedness and encouraging honesty and virtue. Now if these
sober and necessary virtues, which are of no value if not sincere, be the
ultimate intention of all God's Laws; it follows that those virtues are more
accounted of with God which are inward and affect the Soul, than all outward
performances how pompous soever, as much as the end of a thing is more
excellent than the means conducing to it: The Son of Sirach agrees admirably
with this truth, He that sacrifices of a thing wrongfully gotten, Eccl. 34.18,
19.
his offering is ridiculous, and the gifts of unjust men are not accepted, the
most high is not pleased with the offerings of the wicked, neither is he
pacified for sin by the multitude of sacrifices: and thus much may suffice to
show us whereon the Jews laid the whole stress or weight of their Religion.

Nor did the Heathen world among their wiser thoughts much deviate from the
same paths of truth, to this we find the whole Doctrine of the Stoic
Philosophers inclining, as it is summed up by the learned Gataker in his preface
to Marcus Antoninus. For they believing and maintaining That there was really a
God, who did take a constant care of worldly affairs, and that his Providence
did concern it self with the actions of single men, as well as of entire
Societies, from thence very rationally concluded, that He alone ought to be
adored by man, invocated to all humane undertakings, that He should possess all
our thoughts, overruled our words, terminate our actions, that Men should give
themselves entirely to the celebration of his name, and that by a simple
voluntary and complete obedience whithersoever his Providence is pleased to
lead us, without any tergiversation or murmuring, and should endeavor to adorn
that vocation he is pleased to fix us in by solid virtue, and that with an
inflexible courage, though by so doing we should incurr the hazards of a thousand
deaths: This is so rational that it looks almost like Christianity it self:
Plato declares himself excellently, speaking concerning the uselessness of any
great pomp in religious sacrifices, (...), etc. Plato in Alcibiade. vid. Cragii
resp. Lacedaem. l. 3. p. 180.
For it would be a very hard case if the gods should respect only or
principally the nature of our gifts and sacrifices, and not our souls whether
they be holy and just; but I think they much more regard these, than all the
pompous expense of sacrifices, in spite of which a man either in a private
station, or as a public magistrate, may in one years space be guilty of a
thousand trespasses both against the gods and men: The same Plato, who was
himself an Athenian, tells us this remarkable story, There being long and
continual wars between the Lacedaemonians and Athenians, the Athenians were
always beaten both by Sea and Land, the Athenians extremely troubled at their
misfortune, and debating among themselves by what means they might prevent the
like for the future, thought it was worth their while to consult the Oracle of
Jupiter Ammon, and amongst other things the messengers were to enquire of the
Oracle what the reason was, that they gave the Lacedaemonians continual
victories rather than themselves, for the case was plain, that the Athenians
always offered the most and the best sacrifices of all the Grecians, and
enriched the Altars of the gods with the noblest presents, and spent more money
upon their august annual religious solemnities, than all the Grecians put
together; whereas the Lacedaemonians though every whit as rich, never troubled
themselves with any such cares, and were mighty sparing in their sacrifices, to
all which plea the Oracle very briefly answered, that the (...), or the sincere
and honest devotion of the Lacedaemonians was more valued by the Gods than all
the costly Sacrifices of the Grecians: Thus sometimes would the Devil himself
speak what was rational: Suidas in verbo. p. 1101.
Suidas in his interpretation of (...), touches upon this story, and infers
from it, (...), That sincere piety is a matter of no burdensome expense, no
extreme curiosity, but full of modesty: Thus too Philostratus, a man otherwise
of design bad enough, in the life of Apollonius Thyanaeus, one whom he would
equal for sanctity and miracles to the blessed Jesus, brings in that Apollonius
discoursing with the Priest of Aesculapius, and telling him, That the Gods
acting with infinite justice, (...), where they find any man of a sound mind
and uninfected with wickedness, they reward him not with a golden Crown, but
with all internal good, but where they meet with one stigmatized and corrupted
with sin, they reserve him to punishment, and are but the more angry when such
miscreants dare to enter their Temples and attend their Services: Then turning
to Aesculapius the pretended God, He tells him, Thou O Aesculapius do wisely
and as becomes a God, not permitting wicked men to approach thee, though loaded
with all the riches of the Indies, or of Croesus, for such do not sacrifice nor
make their offerings out of reverence to thy Divinity, but because they have
deserved punishment for their Impieties, they would buy it off with money, which
divine justice will by no means admit of: The same Apollonius afterward to a
Cilician Prince that seemed afraid to approach the Altar, Philostratus in vita
Apollon. c. 8, 9.
and to admire Apollonius his happiness in being so familiar with the God,
speaks thus, My love to and studying of virtue has procured me this freedom,
(...), and if thou will take but the same care to be honestly virtuous, come
boldly to the God, and petition freely for whatsoever thou can wish for. I
shall not seek into later Philosophers, such as Seneca, or Plotinus, or Arrian,
or Hierocles, whose noblest Sentiments I look upon as drawn, not from Zeno, or
Plato, but from their converse with Apostolical Writings, or the Books of the
Eldest Christian Fathers, whose Doctrines they endeavored to transfer to the
reputation of declining Idolatry: Only we may take notice that not only
Philosophers, whose grave studies might promise as much, but the loose Scenes
of a Plautus or a Terence will inform us, That they must be men of the best
lives to whom the Gods would bend the gentlest ears, that others may importune
Heaven to no purpose, while the innocent Soul shall compel the Gods themselves
to be obsequious: How agreeably all this to that of the Son of Syrach, the
offering of the righteous makes the Altar fat, Eccles. 35.6, 7, 10.
and the sweet savor thereof is before the most High, the sacrifice of a just
Man is acceptable, and the Memorial thereof shall never be forgotten: Do not
think to corrupt with gifts, for such God will not receive, and trust not to
unrighteous sacrifices, for the Lord is just, and with him is no respect of
persons; and a Man would almost think that old Tragedian cited by Porphyrius
and Clemens Alexandrinus had some such passages as these in his eye, when he
cried out, (...), etc. i. e. What Man can be so weak a fool, so supinely
credulous, as to imagine the Gods are pleased with bones quite bare of flesh,
and stinking vapors, things which hungry Dogs would never care for? or who
would believe that Gods would take themselves to be highly honored, and
obliged to abundance of gratitude to thieves, or pickaroons, or tyrants, vid.
Gatak in Antonin. l. 10. p. 360.
when making gaudy offerings to them? No, let but the hand free from guilt be
lifted up to the Altars of the Gods, not the most rich or costly hecatombs
shall sooner reconcile the angry Deities than those. I shall add no more to
show that sense the Pagans had of the ends of religion, but only make a short
reflection, upon God's justice in dealing with Mankind, as set down by St.
Paul, He tells us, God will render to every man according to his deeds, Romans
2.6, etc.
to them who by patient continuance in well doing seek for glory and honor and
immortality eternal life, but to them that are contentious and do not obey the
truth, but obey unrighteousness, indignation and wrath, tribulation and anguish
to every soul of man that does evil, to the Jew first and also to the Gentile;
Now that the Jews and Gentiles, who stood upon no equal ground, yet should
suffer equally in case of disobedience, seems to some very harsh, but if again
it be considered, that that God who gave the Jewish Nation such great
advantages, required of them proportionably great returns, whilst the Gentiles
who had been partakers of less light, were only required to walk in that light
they had, to come up as near to a perfection in faith and virtue as that would
admit of: This considered, the Gentiles were every whit as guilty in neglecting
their duties which were lighter and fewer, as the Jews in neglecting theirs
which were more numerous and difficult, since the disobedience to the Divine
commands is as notorious in one case as in the other; and this reflection
reaches farther, and teaches those, who are more weak and ignorant, not to
presume too much upon God's mercy because they know so little, since it is as
reasonable they should perform that little they know, as that we, who know
more, should do our duties, and their negligence and proportionable
unfruitfulness in good, and ours, proceed from one and the same damnably
offensive principle; for as the Apostle urges it, v. 12.
as many as have sinned without Law shall perish without Law, and as many as
have sinned in the Law shall be judged by the Law; This every Man must
acknowledge to be the greatest equity in the World; the faith and works of the
Jews and so of Christians shall be canvas'd and examined by those rules of
faith and practice extraordinarily imparted to them; the Gentiles had no such
Law, but the light of Nature was their guide, therefore their works shall be
tried by that and by no other light, now a defect in obedience to the innate
light of nature, is as much a contempt of God, and so as criminal, as a defect
in obedience to the written Law of God, and consequently as justly punished;
now how far this natural light extends, as these passages I have quoted from
Heathen Writers considerably evidence, so the Apostle tells us, That the
Gentiles which have not the Law, i. e. the same Law that was given to the Jews,
v. 14.
do by nature the things contained in the Law, they not having the Law are a
Law unto themselves: This proves that truth, that God's written Law is not a
disannulling, but a confirming and enlarging upon the Law of Nature, in the
manner of a Commentary upon an intricate Text, to illustrate and explain it;
well then, The Gentiles show this natural Law written in their hearts by the
witness of their consciences, and their thoughts in the mean time accusing or
excusing one another; v. 15.
for having as I showed before clear apprehensions of the Being of a God, and
having made very considerable discoveries of his nature so far as legible in
the works of the Creation, they cannot upon a serious debate with themselves,
and weighing their own actions by their own notions and rules, but have an
infallible certainty of the rectitude or pravity of their actions, and this is
as much as a Jew or Christian can do by his public Laws, and an exact scanning
of them: Now if my Conscience can certainly inform me of things essentially and
eternally so, whether they be good or bad, the same Conscience will give me as
infallible a certainty that God is and must be just when he rewards me
according to my actions, whether they be good or evil; he calls me to account
for what I do know, not for what I do not know, and punishes me for
transgressions within the reach of my understanding to have avoided, and not
for those that were unintelligible without a positive revelation, and this even
corrupted Reason will own is agreeable to the strictest rules of equity and
justice.

to trouble himself about that religion he certainly knew to be false) We are
to enquire how far both Jews and Gentiles had depraved and perverted those
ends, and what care they took to manage themselves according to that knowledge
they really had, when our Savior appeared in the flesh; And here again we may
begin with the Jews, among whom if we find an extraordinary degeneracy, we can
the less wonder at it among the Gentiles; If then we examine the state of
things among them, we have it thus; It was once among them, Do this and live,
i. e. Live here on Earth in a strict obedience to those things commanded you in
the Law, and you shall be rewarded with an happy future life; Now when the
terrors and glories of Mount Sinai were fresh in memory, and Parents, according
as they were ordered, took care to inculcate God's power, justice and goodness
particularly exerted toward the People of Israel into their Children, and gave
agreeable examples in themselves, obedience was the common study, and peace
here, and a glorious expectation hereafter, the common consequence: But when a
new generation arose who had not seen God's wonderful dealings with his people,
and the too prevailing examples of neighboring Idolaters, taught the
Israelites a wicked ingratitude, the Law of God was slighted, and (as it is
among us at this day) the Man who could defy Heaven with the greatest
audacity, was the most set by: And though frequent judgments over-took their
Impieties, there was no thorough purgation made among them, but they went on to
add sin to sin, so that among the Scribes and Pharisees, the great Zealots of
the Law at the time of Christ's coming in the flesh, things were at that pass,
that the blessed Jesus had reason when he told his Auditors, that Except their
righteousness should exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees,
Matthew. 5.20.
they should in no wise enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: If therefore the very
best among the Jews, as they were generally esteemed, were utterly incapable of
eternal happiness, what may we think of the multitude who were instructed by
them? and what reason may we conclude our Savior had to admire the Centurion's
faith, Matthew. 8.10.
and to declare, he had not found so much, no not in Israel? It Is needless now
to look back upon that gross Idolatry, which once, like some subtle poison, had
infected every vein of that unhappy Nation, though other lighter punishments
had failed, the Captivity of Babylon had pretty thoroughly purged out that
folly, nay so far, as made that headstrong people fly out into the other
extreme of a superstitious aversion even to ornamental Statues, and where there
could be no danger, of which humor Josephus gives us several instances: But
about our Savior's time, though not the same, yet Errors every whit as fatal
and pernicious had overspread them, they were not visible Idolaters, they
worshipped not the Host of Heaven, nor the ridiculous Idols of the adjacent
Nations, but they idolized the empty figments of their own brains, making void
the Law of God by their own traditions, Matthew. 15.9.
and teaching for doctrines the Commandments of Men: Their different Sentiments
in Religion had divided the whole Nation into factions, and all Men were grown
the followers of the Pharisees, or Saducees, or Essenes, and among the several
Parties, Religion it self was almost crushed to nothing: As for the Saducees,
though they made a powerful Faction in the State, yet their Opinions were so
gross and absurd, as virtually overthrew all the reason of Religion; they
denied the Resurrection of the Dead, Acts 23.8.
an opinion taken up by some professing Christianity in Tertullian's time, whom
therefore he calls, Propinquos Saducaeos Christianorum, De carne Christi. Vid.
Drusium de tribus Sectis. l. 3. p. 138, etc.
the Christian Saducees, and Partiarios sententiae Saducaeorum, followers of
the opinion of the Saducees; of whom since that Father speaks somewhat
dubiously, if I might put in my own conjecture, I should conclude, they
maintained the same Error which some now adays are propagating, viz. That we
shall not rise with the same bodies with which we die, but something of a finer
composition, which is in effect to deny the Resurrection it self; for such a
thing as they propound is not a resurrection, but a new creation or a new
formation at least of somewhat which was not before, so that indeed it is only
Saducisme, a little more cunningly insinuated; In that the Saducees denied the
existence of a Spirit, they asserted of consequence the Corporeity of God,
Belli Judaici l. 2. c. 12.
and denied the Soul's immortality: (...), says Josephus, They deny the
permanence or continuation of the Soul; they denied any rewards or punishments
hereafter, so the same Historian, (...) They take away all punishments and
rewards after Death, and Origin more at large; Fragmento in Matthaeum.
Saducaei censent post hanc vitam nihil homini repositum praemii, sive ad
virtutem profecerit, sive nunquam vel studuerit a vitiorum terminis excedere,
The Saducees hold, that after this life, whether a Man live virtuously, or make
himself a slave to vice, it is the same thing, since there is no reward attending
either: Now adding to these, what Scripture charges them with, El^ncho
Trihaerefews Setrarii, c. 16. ad number. 120.
that they say there are no Angels, (a passage which puzles the great Scaliger
extremely, because the Saducees are said to receive the five Books of Moses as
Divine, in which Books Angels are often mentioned,) for any to be Religious
where there is nothing to be hoped for from it, no effects to be found either of
God's anger or his love, is what seems very irrational, and takes away the
whole design of the Messiah's coming, and vacates all the promises to piety in
the Gospel. Such absurdities made the Saducees odious to those who had any
sense of Religion among their brethren, and they were generally looked on as
unfit for any to hold communion with, therefore we may observe, that whereas
our Savior owns the Scribes and Pharisees as sitting in Moses's Seat, and
commands his disciples to hear them, i. e. to obey their prescriptions, so far
as agreeable to the Law of Moses, He utterly excludes the Saducees, whom he
charges with Ignorance of God's Power and his Word, from any such Prerogative,
and bestows very little pains to confute such absurd and palpable Heresies.

As for the Essenes they were the spawn of the Pharisees, a very severe Sect,
if we may believe Jewish authors; Scaliger in El^nek^ c. 25.
we find 'em no where mentioned in Scripture by name, of which some imagine the
reason to have been because they lived privately in the Country, not
concerning themselves at all in civil or public affairs, by which means they
escaped our Saviors reproofs; and well they might, if Scaliger's account of
them be true, That they were not an ambitious crew of cheats, as the Pharisees,
nor grossly impious, as the Saducees, however having so scandalous ancestors as
the Pharisees, we may rationally conclude they were somewhat tainted with their
vain superstitions: Nay, if Josephus the Jewish Historian were any way prudent
in his choice, the Essenes must have been the more superstitious of the two
parties, or some other way the worse, since Josephus, who knew the Essenes very
well, and observed their customs and their manners thoroughly, chose rather to
associate himself with the Pharisees than with them: their public tenets were
for the most part good, according to those accounts now extant of them, but
whereas their Ascetick life seemed to recommend them much to the common vogue,
and that no where commanded, we may conclude, that when our Savior denounces
so many woes against the Hypocrisy of the Scribes and Pharisees, they were not
without their shares in the intention of his reproofs; for indeed we find the
blessed Jesus generally reflecting upon those who were the guides of the Jewish
people in matters of Religion, they being blind and leading the blind both fell
unhappily into the ditch: and such blind guides were those as well as others;
otherwise they who have the character of being in extraordinary manner (...),
Josephus ubi supra.
or extraordinary lovers of one another, would certainly have taken greater
care to instruct the vulgar in the real import of that Law, of which they
themselves had so venerable an opinion: and a sort of men, who were so very
eminent for their virtues themselves, would by their Doctrines and examples
have prevented the vacating the Laws of Morality so grossly, by the silly
niceties of impertinent Traditions: And Men who had their minds so wonderfully
adapted for the most sublime matters, would certainly have closed very readily
with our Savior, who spoke so incomparably, and taught with so unusual and
therefore surprising an authority: but we meet with no such extraordinary
effects of their pretendedly divine Philosophy, but the Jewish people generally
corrupted, and none of these admirable men taking any pains to stay the deluge
of public impieties.

But, Non enim eadem sacra coluere, nec iisdem sacrificiis deo litarunt.
howsoever silent the Scripture may be concerning these devout and applauded
Schismatics, we meet with the Pharisees often enough, to their eternal
ignominy; They were, besides their pretenses to extraordinary knowledge in the
Law, and a supererogatory purity in their lives, great intreaguers in affairs
of state, and finding the Saducees a powerful and encroaching faction, they
countermined them, and taking the advantage of Queen Alexandra's superstitious
humor (who had a particular charge from her dying husband to close with them
as powerful and indefatigable, De bello Judaico. l. 1. c. 4.
and therefore the more capable of supporting her authority) they engrossed
almost all public interests into their own hands, as Josephus teaches us: so
they assumed a kind of Papal prerogative, would be infallible in opinion or
judgment, and supreme in dignity, and so be truly Custodes utriusque tabulae,
the great guardians of the whole Law of God, as respecting both matters of
faith and of practice. A long habit of fear gotten into men's minds, makes them
at length forget how they came to be possessed with it, and that which arose from
the force and violence of those whom they found able to compel them to any
thing, grows in tract of time to an apprehension of some great intrinsic merit
in the person whom they fear; thus when the Pharisees were clambring to that
height of power they grasped at, the steps they mounted by were visible and
odious, but their powers too great to be resisted; when they had gotten a long
and quiet possession of Authority, the people, who had forgot their former ill
practices, and violence, grew into a strange opinion of pharisaick sanctity;
they found themselves no better than slaves to a prevailing faction, and were
willing to hide the scandal under the plausible pretext of only being admirers
of and therefore servants to the Saints of the most high; That these wretches
might stand the higher in the worlds opinion, the common people were persuaded
to believe, That if but two were destined to inherit eternal happiness, the one
must be a Scribe, the other a Pharisee, now the Scribes were not all
necessarily Pharisees, though some of them were, the account given of their
difference by Tostatus, Petavii animadv. in Epiph. ^ 1. tom. 1. ad Haeresin, 15.
as quoted by Petavius in his notes on Epiphanius, is very good, and it is this,
Though the Scribes and Pharisees are joined in the same Gospel text, yet as
distinct one from another, its to be observed, that they are not distinguished
as the Pharisees and Saducees, i. e. as if they were direct opposites, for no
Saducee can possibly be a Pharisee at the same time he is a Saducee: but they
are distinguished one from another, as a Grammarian and a Logician may be, for
though its one thing to be a Logician, and another to be a Grammarian, yet the
same person may very well be both; so its one thing to be a Scribe, another to
be a Pharisee, for he that is a Scribe must be a man learned in the Law of
Moses, he that is a Pharisee must enter himself into a particular Sect, and
engage in a peculiar method of living, but he that is a Pharisee, that is a
Sectary, may be a Scribe too, i. e. a man learned in the Law at the same time:
With these we have Lawyers named by our Savior, but their employment being to
explain the Law to the people, which was the employment of the Scribes too,
they seem to be one and the same sort of men, and the case is the plainer, if
Maldonate's opinion be true, Maldona^. in Matthew. c. 2.
That some Scribes were as public Notaries, others as public Teachers, so
having a double office incumbent upon their party: Take these Scribes, Lawyers
and Pharisees together, they were notorious Hypocrites: They had reduced
Religion to nothing but air, to a mere empty show, they had a form of
Godliness, but they denied the power of it: They were extremely ambitious and
vainglorious even to ridiculousness. They laid heavy burdens upon the
shoulders of others, but would not touch them themselves with one of their
fingers, they did all their works to be seen of men, they made broad their
Phylacteries, that they might seem the greater zealots for the Law, and
enlarged the fringes upon the corners of their garments for the same purpose;
they loved the uppermost rooms at feasts, and the chief places in the
Synagogues, and greetings in the market places, Matthew. 23.4-7.
and to be called of men Rabbi, Rabbi, all this contrary to that simplicity and
modesty which their Law in several places required of them. Again these, in
conjunction, shut up the kingdom of heaven against those that were desirous to
enter it. They abused prayer by running it out into an impertinent length, that
the world might not suspect men of such fervent devotions could have any
thoughts of devouring widows houses. They abused the intent of Proselytisme,
that being to bring strangers to the knowledge of God, but they made theirs
twofold more the children of hell than they were themselves: They allowed
perjury, paid Tithes of Mint, Anise and Cummin, but omitted the weightier
things of the Law, Judgment, Mercy, and Faith: They were outwardly clean, but
inwardly conscious to themselves of infinite extortion and excess: They
appeared outwardly righteous to the eyes of undiscerning men, but within were
full of hypocrisy and all iniquity, as our Savior informs us in the
continuation of that chapter. The Pharisees particularly were so infamous for
these things, that one Joshua an ancient Rabbine, and if his age be rightly
calculated, antecedent to our Savior's Incarnation, reckons the foolish
severities of the Pharisees as one of those things that brought a general
infelicity upon the world, and yet by those hypocritical severities they
pretended to merit Heaven and more, they judged their own wills so absolutely
free, their own abilities toward performance of the Divine Law so very great,
that They esteemed a reward of mercy or happiness attained by God's free grace
a matter not worth their acceptance, but glory purchased by merit was really
great and honorable: they encouraged impieties admirably, by entayling
felicity, or a portion in the future world, upon every one that was born an
Israelite, were his circumstances never so discouraging, a principle
re-asserted and maintained by their modern Rabbines: Which corrupt opinions,
extreme superstitions, and shameful Hypocrisies, as they filled them with
abundance of prejudices against our Saviors Doctrine and Person, which carried
nothing but love and meekness, humility and sincerity along with them, all
direct contradictions to their opinions and practices, so after our Savior's
time they exposed 'em to all the contempt and derision imaginable; hence they
got those ridiculous nicknames given 'em by the Talmudical writers, as cited
out of the book Sotah by Buxtorf, Buxtorf. in voce (...) Lex Talmud.
Where first they are called Sichemites, because as Hamor and Sichem consented
to be circumcised, so these, not out of any respect to God's honor, but to
advance interest and serve their own carnal ends, this was their (...) the
second sort of them was the (...) I might call them Creepers from their
pretended humility, whereby they seemed afraid to raise their feet from the
ground, as being far from any thing of a lofty humor, by which means they
stumbled often and fell down, the inconvenience of which they bore with a great
deal of apparent patience, the next was the (...) a Blinking Pharisee, or one
that breaks his face against the walls, a name given them on occasion of their
imaginary purity and spirituality, which was so great, that for fear a maid, or
a woman, or any other unclean thing should fall into their sight, they walked
with their eyes so far shut, that they could not choose their own way, and so
often ran their heads against walls and posts: The fourth sort was the (...)
these may be called Crook-backs, from an humor some of them had taken up, of
stooping so much out of humility too, as they called it, that they seemed
almost to walk double, or to be very crooked, and this was, lest by walking
upright, they should disturb the Almighty, or hit his feet, which they
concluded to be very near the earth, that being his footstool, and he filling
all things with his presence: The fifth is (...) This Pharisee I would call a
Supererogatorian, or one who superciliously asks, what you can show him more
that he has to do and he will do it, intimating thereby that he has already done
every thing God has commanded, and has now time and ability to perform a new
task: The sixth kind is the (...) This though it sounds favorably, and signifies
the Pharisee of Love, yet the Talmudists tell us plainly, it signifies no more
than a mere Mercenary, or one that endeavors to observe the Law, not out of
any principle of fear or love of God, but of a fondness of that reward that is
promised to those who do so, which reward though we may have a due respect to, as
the Apostle assures us, yet the love of God must principally constrain to that
filial obedience which God requires at our hands: the last nickname the
Pharisee carries is, that he is (...) The Pharisee of fear, or he that keeps
the Law, or pretends to do it, merely out of a wretched slavish fear of
punishment. These several names were justly bestowed upon them as so many
characters of infamy, from those several observations the world made of them:
Their long clothing carried somewhat venerable in it, but Rabbi David upon that
of Zephaniah, where the Prophet in God's name threatens to cut off all that
wear strange apparel, tells us, Zeph. 1.8. Vid. Drusium de 3. Sect. l. 2. c. 1.
That by that expression some understand those men who to make a show of piety
and holiness to the world, put on garments that are not like the garments of
other men, that by those garments they may be taken notice of for very pious
and holy men, but in the mean time their ways are wicked, such were the
Pharisees who, in a word, at our Saviors appearance, had perverted the Law of
God so as to be a mere stale of their ambition and false interest; they were
religious in show, but the greatest enemies of Religion in reality.

If after the Jews we come to take notice of the Gentiles, we shall find they
were fallen into the same or greater corruptions, The precise Stoics, so
famous for their Morals, were both themselves and their followers as infamous
for their effeminacy and luxury; those great enquirers into the wisdom of God
discovered in the works of Nature, lost themselves and their admirers in a
thousand follies, they recommended continence and sobriety, themselves in the
mean time being bauds and panders to their own unnatural Lusts; they declaimed
against pride, yet thought themselves too good to converse with earth; their
chief Philosophers ptetended to unite a rational Soul to the Divine Nature, and
at the same instant made ignoble Magic and Diabolical contracts the very crown
of all their endeavors; the generality of the Pagan world, though they
multiplied their Deities so fast, scorned the slavery of a devout fear, and
dared and hectored the greatest of their Gods with their extravagancies: they
fell into the foolery of deifying one another, and by such a superfetation of
Divinities, came to have no fear at all of God before their eyes; what enormous
crimes they fell into, S. Paul gives us a just account of, where for their
senceless Idolatries, he assures us, God gave them up to uncleanness through
the lusts of their own hearts, to dishonor their own bodies between
themselves, and as they did not like to retain God in their knowledge, so God
gave them over to a reprobate mind to do those things which are not convenient;
hence they were filled with all unrighteousness, fornication, Romans 1.24.28 --
32.
wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness, they were full of envy, murder,
debate, deceit, malignity, they were whisperers, back-biters, haters of God,
despiteful, proud, boasters, inventers of evil things, disobedient to parents,
without understanding, covenant-breakers, without natural affection,
implacable, unmerciful, and these knowing the judgment of God (that they which
commit such things are worthy of death) not only did the same themselves, but
took pleasure in those that did them: Sin was grown among them then, as at
present it is with us, one of the most fashionable things in the world, so that
even their own companions, the Parasites and Sycophants, of those irreligious
ages, could not but now and then Satyrize upon their vices; it was indeed no
wonder that in our Savior's time, and the immediately precedent and subsequent
Ages, they should be so miserably corrupted, the degeneracy began betimes, for
Maximus Tyrius tells us a story of Anacharsis the Scythian, (a man of a truly
philosophical spirit and of ancient simplicity, and living about the time of
the great Cyrus, who restored Israel to their country after the Captivity of
Babylon, Maximi Tyrii Dissertat. 15.
) that he came into Greece in quest of a wise man, or one whose words and
actions were of a piece, Athens that eye of Greece, and where all the various
Sects of Philosophers were in their splendour, could show him no such man, nor
could the rest of Greece satisfy his inquiry, till at last, in an obscure
corner of the Country, he found one Myson, a man of no name nor reputation in
the world, but one that really spoke and acted too as became a wise and good
man: And if Greece which seems to be the world's glory for the learning and
valor, and the yet greater reputation of it is inhabitants, could afford no
better store of men who lived virtuously, how meanly must we conclude the rest
of the world was stocked with them! therefore Lucian, that impious but witty
scoffer at Christianity, could not forbear lashing the Philosophers themselves,
who knew so much, and exposing them to the world's contempt, so in his
Icaro-Menippus, Menippus tells his friend a story of his being in heaven,
where, among other considerables, a Council of the Gods was called by Jupiter
their supreme, to discourse with them concerning the Philosophers, and Jupiter
tells the rest, that the Philosopers were a race of Men lazy, quarrelsome,
vainglorious, choleric, gluttonous, silly, proud, abusive, and in a word
according to Homer 's phrase, (...), an unprofitable burden to the Earth, some
of these call themselves Stoics, some Academicks, some Epicureans, some
Peripateticks, and by several other more ridiculous names these assuming to
themselves the venerable character of Virtue, they walk about with a
supercilious and disdainful look, a long reverend beard, a starched habit, but
under all the most detestable manners in the World, yet these wretches,
forsooth, despise all the World beside themselves, they talk lewdly and sillily
of the Gods, and, getting a company of unexperienced youths about 'em, they
make a mighty noise of virtue, and always commend sobriety and modesty among
their followers, and rail against wealth and pleasure, but when they get once
by themselves, they gorge themselves without measure, they indulge themselves
in all manner of lust, and are base enough to rake a kennel for a leaden
farthing, and what is worse in them than all the rest, when they themselves do
nothing toward the good of mankind either privately or publicly, when they
are neither fit for the Wars abroad, nor for consultations in private, they are
always accusing others, and with bitter expressions and studied abuses, Luciani
^. 2. p. 208. etc.
they reproach and rail upon their neighbors, and he is the greatest man among
them who is most noisy, impudent, and has the foulest tongue: Had St. Paul and
Lucian lived together, though one were so holy, the other so much an Atheist, a
Man would have thought they had agreed together in their accounts of the
degeneracy of those, who were accounted the wisest part of the World; to these
I may add Philostratus, who giving us an account of a discourse between
Apollonius Thyanaeus and Phraotes an Indian Prince, he introduces the Prince,
reflecting upon Apollonius and his Companions thus, I hear, says he, there are
many among you, who make Philosophy their trade to get by, and putting it on,
like a Garment which they can as easily throw aside, they bear themselves high
upon an habit that belongs not to them, and most certainly as common thieves,
who look upon themselves as sure of hanging whenever they are caught,
Philostrati vita Apollon. l. 1. c. 12.
are for a short life and a merry, so these Philosophical rogues among you
indulge their lusts and their guts, and are the tenderest and most effeminate
Creatures in the World, and this I take to proceed from the defect of your
Laws. He that counterfeits the public Coin dies for it, and so does he that
cheats an Orphan, or any thing of the like nature among you, but, as I am told,
there is no Law among you that punishes Quacks in Philosophy, who only abuse
and corrupt it, nor is there any Magistrate appointed to take cognizance of
them: Thus far he. By which we learn that as to the Divine Law, where there is
no Law there can be no transgression, so in respect of worldly matters, where
there is no Law there is nothing but transgression, and by the concurrence of all
these so very plain testimonies we find, that the ends of true Devotion in that
part of the World which was without the pale of the Jewish Church, was not
only perverted about the time of our Lord's appearance on Earth, but it was
worn out of memory, and God so represented by Men, that there seemed to be no
better way of approaching his nature, than by an irresistible ingenuity in all
manner of brutish violence and extravagant wickedness.

Thus have we at large considered the ancient Maxims of Religion, and seen
wherein the World in general believed it to subsist, and we have seen how far
both Jews and Gentiles had declined from their own principles; by the whole it
will appear, that the fullness of time was come in every respect, that humane
wickedness was grown to that height, and consequently that great God whose eyes
are purer than to behold sin, so infinitely provoked, that, had not the blessed
Jesus the Son of God interposed, as great and universal a deluge of vengeance
must have overspread the World, as that of Water heretofore; but withal it will
appear as plain, that notwithstanding all these abuses and depravations of
Religion, the foundation of it still stood good, the Laws of God were as really
believed to be holy, just and reasonable, and obedience to them as necessary
among the Jews, and Virtue and solid Honesty was as much commended, though
perfectly starved, among the Gentiles, as ever before, it was the practice of
what they so commended that so miserably failed among Men, so that there was
indeed no kind of necessity to extirpate the whole of all former Religions for
the settling that of Christ, but only of a reformation of abuses and clearing
the old foundation from all that rubbish, from all those briars and thorns that
had overgrown it, and there was need of reinforcing those duties appertaining
to Religious converse whether with God or Men, upon all sorts of persons with
new and more forcible arguments than former Ages had offered, that Men might
re-entertain their first Love, and do their first works, so bringing forth
fruits agreeable to repentance: Therefore our Savior professes of himself with
respect to the whole Mosaic Law, that he came not to destroy, but to fulfill it;
i.e. to show its whole design and intention, to perform every part in his own
Person, Mat. 3.15.
upon which reason he offered himself to John's Baptism, though in its own
nature but a deduction from, or an appendix to the Law, and when John made a
modest refusal, Jesus said to him, Suffer it to be so now, for thus it becomes
us to fulfill all righteousness. He came to fulfill it farther in suffering upon
the Cross, by which Sacrifice of his, it being the end of the Law, all Jewish
Sacrifices were vacated, the substance being once come, the shadow could have
no longer place in the World, and consequently all those Ceremonies conducing
to their Sacrifices had an end too: So he fulfilled whatsoever the Mosaic Law
had prefigured to the Jewish people. He came to teach Men the very
comprehensive nature of the Law, to show his own Disciples and Followers how
much more was required at their hands, than what the strictest Zealots among
the Jews thought themselves obliged to, to convince them that it not only
reached the outward Man, and so might be slighted by evasive subtilties, but it
was to engage all the inward affections of the Soul, and so must necessarily
exclude all collusion and Hypocrisy; this method our Lord followed in that
admirable Sermon upon the Mount, wherein He cancelled no part of that Law given
to the Jews of old, but commented upon it; And so the Apostle St. Paul acted
with relation to the Gentiles, and therefore when he was at Athens, though his
Spirit was stirred up in him, moved equally with grief and anger to see that
populous City so wholly given to Idolatry: yet He fell not immediately to the
reproaching of their Religion, nor to the taking it away both root and branch,
but he took an happy occasion from that Inscription upon one of their Altars,
(...), To the unknown God, to assure them that he preached no other God to
them, but him whom they ignorantly worshipped, He being that God who made the
World and all things therein, Acts 17.23, 24.
and therefore could not be confined to Temples made with hands.

Thus from the beginning of the World, Religion, as to its Essence, has been
immutable; what was fixed in Man by nature, so long as Nature is, must be the
same too; God planted in man his own fear, and whatsoever tended to the
promotion of that, and an earnest desire of self-preservation, with respect to
this and to a future life; whatsoever byasses men now to a wretched slavish
fear only of Divine displeasure, and makes them therefore rather avoid evil
than do good: And whatsoever engages men in unlawful ways of securing
themselves from any apparent danger, all that arises from those corruptions
nature at present is embarrassed with: these things are to be mended, but God
is still to be feared, and Men shall still get a good name by doing real good
unto themselves; Obedience was the great first end of every Law, and a Law was
given our first Parent to put him upon a trial of original prudence, which
could never put him upon any thing but what was excellent; when prudence seemed
drowsy, sin crept upon him, and ruined him and his prosperity, but because Man
sinned, God did not therefore change the nature of his commands, but he
explained and improved them, by adding particulars coincident with them; he
supplied the defects of reason impaired, and revealed those things at which it
might have stumbled beyond recovery: Noah and his Sons had not a new Law, but
the same again illustrated farther, and more cleared up by additional
revelation, to supply the greater decays of humane abilities: Nor did God
change his mind when he chose the Seed of Abraham from the rest of Mankind, or
give Israel any new Laws essential to Religion, for Circumcision and the
Paschal Feast were not of the essence of it at all, since Man might have kept
all the moral Law without ever participating in either: The rest of the
ceremonial and political injunctions were necessary to the Jews necessitate
praecepti, as they were commanded by a God infinitely powerful and wise, and
who could enjoin them nothing that was unfit or unjust, but the moral Law which
was the Law of nature, and obliged all Mankind, as well as the Nation of the
Jews, was necessary, necessitate Medii, as an absolute and indispensible means
of salvation, or as containing such duties, and forbidding such sins, as
without an exact care in each of which it was impossible for any man living to
be saved: and whereas the circumstantial Laws of the Jews were such as had no
intimate connection with or dependence upon one another, all the parts of the
Moral and perpetually obliging Law are of so close an alliance, and in their
execution so inseparable one from another, that as S. James says, James 2.10.
Whosoever shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty
of all: for the whole sum of the Law being comprehended in those few words,
Thou shall love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and
with all thy strength, and with all thy mind, and thy neighbor as thy self, If
therefore any man bow to an Idol, or worship more Gods than one, or profane the
name of the true God, or be guilty of perjury, or refuse to devote one day in
seven to the worship and service of God, by any of these sins he proves he does
not love the true God so entirely as he ought. And again, He that dishonours or
rebels against his parents natural, spiritual, or civil, or that commits murder
with his hand or in his heart, or that submits to the enticements of lust, or
that defrauds and purloins from another, or that by falsehood endeavors to
prejudice the life or estate or reputation of others, or who indulges himself
in covetousness, or gives way to the first motions of the heart that incline to
envy, Whosoever sins in any one of these particulars, though at the sametime he
be a rigid observer of all the rest, cannot be said to love his neighbor as
himself, since he would not be willing, either that by himself, or by any
other, any injury of what kind soever should be done to him: and how much more
essential to the body of Religion the Jews thought these perpetual Laws, than
their own Ceremonial Institutions, is plain from their practice, since they, as
much as possible, hindered all mere Heathens from co-habiting with them, and
yet admitted those whom they called Proselytes of the gate, upon their
renouncing a plurality of Gods, and submitting to the seven precepts of the
sons of Noah, to the privilege of performing their Devotions in the exterior
Court of the Temple, and kindly supposed them too capable of a portion in the
world to come. As God made no alteration in the natural Law by what he gave
Israel by the hand of Moses, so neither did he innovate any thing when he sent
his only begotten Son into the world for it is Salvation, the Law of Christ was
the Law of Moses, which was the Law of Noah, which was the Law of Adam, which
was the Law of pure original Nature, which was the Law of God; as Moses was the
Lawgiver of the Jews, so was the blessed Jesus the Lawgiver of the
Christians, but if we look on them both as mere Men, their legislative power
was not original, but as Stephen tells the Jews, Acts 7.53. Numb. 21.18.
the Law was given them by the disposition of Angels; Moses yet is called a
Lawgiver in the Song of the Israelites, but it is in the same sense as a Judge
on the Bench, who has no power to make any thing a Law of his own contrivance,
or by his own Authority: God himself, on whose services myriads of glorious
Angels always attend, is a Lawgiver, as a King on his Throne, who has no
superior, and therefore what he there decrees, has the force and sanction of a
Law, the Lord is our Judge, Isa. 33.22.
says the Prophet, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our King, he will
save us: As our Savior was Man, he too, though superior to Moses, and
peculiarly faithful in all the house of God, had no authority to make
alterations in that original Moral Law, and as he was one with his Father, and
so conscious of every determination of his, it was impossible he should vary
from himself, i. e. from his blessed Father, or should openly in the world act
as if it were possible any thing imperfect should come out of the hand of God:
Hence we rationally believe, that if salvation be a thing really attainable, it
must be attained by the same means by all persons whether Jews or Gentiles. Of
the Patriarchs several have that testimony given of them in Scripture, that
they pleased God; now there being no variableness nor shadow of turning with
God, but he the same yesterday to day and for ever, whatsoever pleased God in
those, the same and nothing else can please him now. And whereas our blessed
Savior in the days of his flesh made it his business to please his Almighty
Father, and did so by performing every punctilio of the Mosaic Law, so we who
are to follow his example, must perform the same; but whereas the very
circumstantial appendages of a Law, though nothing essential to it but the mere
evidences of the Sovereignty of the Lawgiver, are not yet to be cancelled, but
by a power equal to that which gave them their first obliging authority;
therefore it was necessary that Jesus Christ, in and by whom the ceremonial
sanctions of Moses's Law were vacated, should be God and so have the same
original Divine Authority in himself; and his fulfilling and re-confirming all
the substantial parts of that Law, made it yet the more publicly authentic,
and taught his followers to have their due respect to him, which was due to
both an Almighty Lawgiver, and an infallible Interpreter. And whereas that
insupportable burden of Ceremonies is taken off from the necks of Christians,
it being laid upon the Jews partly for the hardness of their hearts, and partly
for to shadow out to them their expectations of a Messiah, who being himself
come in the flesh has now no need of types and shadows to prefigure him; so the
old Natural Law is urged upon them with the greatest strength and reason in the
world, and the force and intent of it is more clearly showed them; from whence
the Apostle S. John, who tells those he writes to, that he gave them no new
commandment but the old which they had heard from the beginning, yet in the
very next verse subjoins, 1 John 2.7, 8.
Again a new commandment I write unto you, the substance of which is, that you
love one another, this was an old commandment, in that Nature enjoined it, and
it was co-incident with that, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self; it was
a new Commandment, in that it was reinforced and inculcated so very often by
our Savior, in that He gave so many powerful reasons why his followers should
practice it; and yet the result of all amounts only to this, that the design of
Religion being to restore Nature to its first happiness, and that being
rationally concluded to be the best and purest Religion which has the greatest
effects in that design, if those who were his Disciples would but take care to
evidence their Discipleship by that mutual love and endearing charity, they
would, at the same time, convince the world that the Lord whom they followed
was truly authorized by Heaven, that the Doctrine which He preached was really
agreeable to the Will of God, and that Love being the first intention of pure
and uncorrupted Nature, That which raised and encouraged men most powerfully to
it must needs be the most suitable to that original purity of Nature. And hence
it is that we observe, many are prejudiced against Christianity by those cursed
feuds and animosities to be found among Christians, they having an eye
generally to the restoration of Nature, but quarrels and contentions being
wholly barbarous, brutish and unnatural; hence it appears farther too, that
whereas the Apostle seems to distinguish between the Gospel and the Mosaic
dispensation, as if the first were the Law of Faith, the last the Law of Works,
and that such a Law as by which Salvation could never be obtained, The works
the Apostle reflects on, are not the duties of the moral Law, but the
Ceremonial punctilio's of the Levitical Law, which, as the author of the
Epistle to the Hebrews, agreeably to what I asserted before, assures us, were
not able to make any man perfect; but for the Moral Law he is so far from
invalidating it, that where ever he dehorts from any vices, such as he calls
the works of the flesh, Gal. 5.19, -- 24.
which are these, adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lasciviousness, idolatry,
witchcraft, hatred, variance, emulations, strife, wrath, seditions, heresy,
envyings, murders, drunkenness, revellings, and such like; of which he tells
us, that they who do such things shall not inherit the kingdom of God: Again,
wheresoever he exhorts to any virtue, such as Love, joy, peace, long-suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance, against which there is no
Law; Wheresoever he does thus, He enforces the Moral Law with expressions as
strong, and reasons as weighty as the Holy Ghost could inspire him with; and
where the same Apostle assures us that in Jesus Christ neither Circumcision
avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, Gal. 5.6.
he shows what works are excluded from any efficacy in our Salvation, for
Circumcision is put for the whole Ceremonial Law, and where he adds that Faith
working by Love is available, he shows the inefficacy of all pretenses to Faith
without good works, agreeing with S. James, that Faith without works is dead,
James 2.26.
and with his own severe reflection elsewhere upon those, who profess they knew
God while in their works they deny him, Tit. 1.16.
being abominable disobedient, and to every good work reprobate.

Since then it was the great end and design of the Gospel to confirm the Moral
and eternal Law of God, and so by just degrees to reduce fallen Man again to
the rules of perfect reason, to make him sensible of the noble nature and
spiritual inclinations of the Heavenborn Soul, that so he might the more fully
apprehend, how much below himself he falls in yielding himself a slave to Sin,
and how much he retrenches his own true liberty by that unbridled exorbitancy
he aims at: the Gospel being intended to set Man's natural misery in a true
light, and withal to show the sole remedy for that misery in the undertakings
of a Savior: It remains an inquiry still whether Man could, in the state he is
in at present, arrive at a full and plain satisfaction in these matters? And
here we are to call to mind our second Position relating to Humane Reason,
which teaches us, that by the Fall, humane reason is exceedingly impaired, and
very much incapacitated for those great ends for which it was first bestowed on
Man; and it is plain that though our Savior has appeared, though he has brought
us the glad tidings of life and salvation in and by himself, though he has taken
the kindest care imaginable for the propagation of this Gospel, we are still by
birth the same naturally miserable and misunderstanding Creatures that we were
before; and therefore we are in some sense actually regenerate or born again in
Baptism, being in it born members of the Christian Church, and so having a
right to all Christian privileges, and it being a Symbol or sign of our new
birth or resurrection from dead works to serve the living God; yet after our
Baptism, our intellectuals are still the same poor, weak, and miserably
foolish; and hence it comes that Catechetical instructions in the principles of
Christian Religion, and frequent Sermons or exhortations to true piety and
sincere goodness, or dehortations from Sin, and explications of hard and
difficult expressions or doctrines in Scripture, and vindications of divine
truths from the assaults of Heretics, Schismatics or Infidels, and the
refutation of those errors, endeavored by such to be impressed on the minds of
Men, all these things are absolutely necessary for advancing our knowledge in
Divine Matters, for keeping us from the paths of error, and for teaching and
showing us how to live godly, righteously and soberly in this present evil
world: And the more improvements we make according to these means of grace
which we enjoy, the more powerful assistances and encouragements we meet with
from Heaven in our work, as was before observed in our fourth Position
concerning humane reason. Yet after all, we remain but on the positive side of
those great truths laid down in Scripture, we believe them firmly and
steadfastly, because we have an irrefragable and infallible testimony of their
truth, the veil that was upon the hearts of men is indeed taken away, the
types, shadows and ancient Prophecies, relating to the Messiah, are all made
good in his appearance upon earth, the way to life is made clear, and according
to right reason, very easy and agreeable to those who endeavor to walk in it;
and Man so endeavoring, is reconciled to God by the blood of his dear Son
Jesus Christ, and there is a nearer and more close Communion between God and
man than heretofore, all these things and the infinite love of God in them, are
now so plainly deciphered, that he who runs may read them. But for the rational
part of these things, or what means an Almighty God could make use of to effect
things so stupendous, how that dismal distance between a pure Divinity and
corrupt Mortality, should be made up; how God himself should stoop to man, when
man notwithstanding all his inordinate ambition, could never rise to God, how
that strict communication between God and Man should be maintained, etc. All
these things are such mysteries, that its impossible for even Angelical
Intellectuals to comprehend them fully, since common reason will give us this
maxim, that Nothing but an infinite being can perfectly understand all the
operations of an infinite being: Therefore we have the Communion between God
and Man still shadowed out to us in the Symbols of Bread and Wine, consecrated
into a clear representation of the body and blood of our Savior to us in the
Sacrament of the Lord's Supper: Nor can we believe (whatsoever Grotius, In
tract. An. semper sit communicand. per Symbola.
a man of more learning than orthodoxy, would persuade us to,) that we, while
we have the means and opportunities of communicating with one another, and
holding a close communion with God, by participating of those Symbols which our
Lord himself instituted to that very end and purpose, can possibly communicate
as well without them, or that we may make at any time the Bread and Wine a
Nehustan, a sign of no account or value at all, because perhaps it may have
been abused to ill purposes by a factious or an Idolatrous Crew: but not to
insist upon that; Though it be with S. Chrysostom and many other Ancients,
(...), a dreadful and tremendous Mystery, and will be always so accounted by
the most understanding and humble Christians; there is not an article of our
Faith, not one of the principal heads of the Apostles Creed, which we so often
repeat, but its a body of Mysteries. Mysteries, after all the pains of the most
learned and pious men, unintelligible otherwise than as to their positive truth
by all mankind; and more particularly those clauses concerning our blessed
Savior are so true, so essential to our eternal salvation, and yet so far
above our reach, that while we meditate on them seriously, our Souls have
nothing but miracles of power, wisdom, mercy, and love in view, but being known
for such, they all hold their miraculous nature still, and can never be fully
deciphered either by Men or Angels; and that we should yet be obliged
steadfastly to believe these things, though we cannot comprehend them, will
appear no way unreasonable, if we consider these things, belonging to the 3d.
Inquiry, which is,

What considerable advantages can accrue to Religion from those Mysteries it is
founded upon? we consider in pursuit of this Query,

That by a due reflection upon the nature of such Mysteries as are really
necessary, and consequently of very great weight and importance, men are
brought to a due acknowledgment of the deficiency of their own reason, they
learn how weak and shallow all the utmost flights of wit and reason are, when
they come once to stand in competition with the results of infinite wisdom and
unlimited understanding: Men of the most presuming abilities find it very hard
to unriddle ancient parables, and to give a clear and evident explication of
aenigmatical writings and figurative sentences and expressions; the youthful
Philistines, Men without doubt of very brisk parts in their own esteem, as we
may conclude by their ready acceptance of Sampson's proposition, faltred
pitifully when they set their wits on work to expound his riddle, and the
Pharisaical Allumbradoes, those men of light, who (like the modern Chinese)
concluded almost all the World blind except themselves, when our Savior put
that Dilemma to them concerning John's Baptism, viz. Whether it were from
Heaven or of Men, it confounded them so as all their mighty wisdom could never
dis-intangle them; if these things were difficult, the fundamental Mysteries of
Religion are much more so; Men have attempted several ways to solve the
appearances of Nature, and some have made such ingenious researches after them,
and have laid down Hypotheses so very rational for the solution of difficulties
in them, that they have got themselves the applauding vogue of the World, and
their Dictates have been valued by learned Men as the great standards of
Philosophic reason: Nay, the acquists of some in these matters, have puffed them
up with that ridiculous vanity and pride, that they have dared to trample upon
all Religion, nay upon the Deity it self, imagining themselves able to
demonstrate, how the World and all the parts of it might be constituted,
regulated, and continued, without any concurrence of a Divine and unbounded
Providence: but when these same mighty pretenders to wit and sense, have come
to look into the shallow Mystic rites of ancient Heathens, they have but
fooled and disgraced themselves: but when such fall upon the foundations of
Christianity, they prove like that Stone our Savior speaks of, which whosoever
shall fall on shall be broken, Matthew. 21.44.
but on whomsoever it shall fall it will grind him to powder; they only show
themselves egregious fools, and endeavor to ridicule every thing which they
find themselves unable to understand. Thus Lucian or some of his Contemporaries
in his Philopatris, a Dialogue of that name, makes it his business to scoff at
several things, revealed in Scripture, and at several of the Mysteries of
Christianity, though neither he nor his followers, not Celsus, nor Porphyry,
nor Libanius, nor Julian himself, nor any other of that witty scoffing tribe,
were ever able to confute the Writings of the Prophets or the Apostles, or to
baffle their Christian Antagonists by any serious argument. In the forenam'd
Dialogue Critias offering to swear to Triepho, or to give him an oath for his
security from any danger, having named several of their Heathen Gods, Triepho
derides them all with reason enough, Critias at last breaks out thus, By whom
then shall I swear that I may be believed? The other answers, Thou shall swear
by that God who rules above, Philopatris, Oper. Luciani. T. 2. p. 770.
the great, the immortal, the Heavenly God, (...) The Son of the Father, the
Spirit proceeding from the Father, one of three and three of one, (...) Reckon
of these as of Jupiter, esteem these God; after this the same Buffoon proceeds
to scoff at that great Apostle of the Gentiles, St. Paul, calling him that bald
highnos'd Galilaean, who mounted upon the air into the third Heaven, and there
learnt wonderful matters, (...), He regenerated or renewed us by water, and
gently guided us into the footsteps of the blessed, and redeemed us out of the
regions of the wicked; and again he burlesques the original of all things,
where he tells his Companion, that there was light incorruptible, invisible,
incomprehensible, which put an end to darkness and disorder, (...), only with
speaking one word, as that slow-tongu'd Man, meaning Moses, has written; and
more to the same purpose, and of the same scurrilous stamp; and this is the wit
of Atheistical heads, who think it is enough to expose a Doctrine they
understand not, or cannot edify by, as some would express it, merely to name
it and no more; where, as the true Sons of Religion, though they are far enough
from pretending to fathom the great objects of faith, cannot yet but derive
ineffable consolations from the positive truth of those Mysteries contained in
Holy Writ; but this overweening of their own extraordinary wit, made many
persons of excellent natural abilities, of well exercised reason, and
inimitable diligence, in the first ages of the Gospel, stumble so foully at the
Doctrine of a crucified Savior; for as a just punishment for that foolish
pride and self conceit, God destroyed the wisdom of the wise, 1 Cor. 1.19.
and brought to nothing the understanding of the prudent, so the Stoic and
Epicuraean Philosophers were mightily puzzled with those new Gods, as they were
pleased to call them, Acts 17.18.
viz. Jesus and the resurrection, as if because they could not understand what
the meaning of a resurrection was, therefore the Apostles who preached it up
must needs either make a God, or a Goddess of it: Thus the same doctrine of the
resurrection; and that of Christ's being the Son of God, and several other
mystic truths were cast in the teeth of suffering Christians, as if they could
be no better than mad men, who would undergo so many hardships for assertions
so very unintelligible, as that they could deserve nothing less than derision;
and it was often urged as an evidence of a bad cause, that it had so many
strange and incomprehensible postulates attending on it.

The same is the plea of the Atheistical, what if I should add of the Heretical
wits of our age, who labor hard to expose whatsoever they meet with beyond the
reach of their debauched understandings, and would therefore have all sound
Religion banished out of the Commonwealth, because, forsooth, they cannot
comprehend How God should become Man, should be born of a pure Virgin, should
converse with men, should dye for their sins, rise again for their
justification, and ascend up into glory with that humane body he had assumed
unto himself, from whence before the Worlds dissolution he should certainly
come to be the Supreme determining Judge of all both Men and actions, upon
which Faith the whole Christian Economy is built, and without the certain
truth of all which, Christianity would be the most absurd and unreasonable
religion in the World: Thus Heretics, thus Atheists discourse, as if it were
indeed impossible there should exist a God of greater wisdom and power than
themselves, or however, that he must dispose of all things just agreeably to
their Capacities, on pain of being dethroned for a default, when yet every day
they see men like themselves born into the World, but can give no possible
account of the reason of their acquiring such and such particular shapes or
features in the World; they see a man born naked into the World, but cannot
tell us why they are not all covered with hair, or scaly armor like Beasts, or
with scales and fins as Fishes, or with feathers as Birds: they see and know
they have naturally but two feet, but cannot tell why they should not be born
without any, as Worms, or Fishes, or why they should not have four, as the
greater number of Beasts, or why not greater numbers, as most insects; they see
Man, a Creature of a noble and Majestic frame, endued with a discursive
faculty, ready to descant upon every visible object, yet cannot tell why nature
should have given man but two eyes wherewith to survey so vast and
unaccountable a variety, when at the same time she has studded the head of a
contemptible Fly with several thousands; they find themselves able to call to
mind a mighty number of particulars, seen, heard, read, talked of, but cannot
inform themselves certainly where the numerous Idaeas of sensible things past
should be lodged, when at the same time the mind is crowded with a World of
present objects, and roving too after the most uncertain future contingencies;
and yet, after all these notorious instances of their wretched Ignorances, God
must lay his whole Divine power and wisdom at their feet, or else he must be no
God for them: We may say with a little alteration of David's words, Man
overvaluing his own wisdom has no understanding, but is like the beasts that
perish; if he could comprehend God, he would despise him, since he cannot, he will
deny him, an humor uncouth and unnatural even to corrupted reason; but the
truly wise man, when he sees himself thus puzzled with every little effect of
common nature, is so far from thinking it strange, that the great Sovereign of
all things should say or do any thing above his understanding, that he rather
would wonder (did he not acknowledge both omnipotence and omniscience in God)
how so excellent a Being should possibly stoop so low, as to make any thing
concerning himself intelligible to a corrupted transgressing Creature; the more
he looks upward to God the ordainer of all things, the readier He is to break
out into that expression of the Psalmist, When I consider the Heavens the work
of thy fingers, Psalm. 8.3.
the Moon and the Stars which thou have ordained, Lord, what is man that thou
should consider him, or the Son of Man that thou visitest him! The more he
meditates on God's infinite perfections, the more humbly sensible he grows of
his own wants, and easily can see at how sad a loss wretched Man would have
been for obtaining that Divine favor which he had forfeited by Sin, had not
somewhat Almighty interposed: nor can he be but extremely humbled in his own
thoughts, when he sees how unsearchable God's wisdom is, and his ways past
finding out, since He, out of such strange confusions as Sin had brought into
the World, could produce order, and by the most improbable and unsuspected
means, could once more lay open to Men the way to eternal happiness, that way
which Sin had shut up before; the more a contemplative Man learns to admire his
God in this case, the more he learns to undervalue himself, and never to depend
upon his own dreams and imaginations.

By those Mysteries attending Religion in general, men are in the better
capacity to make a judgment of Religions of all ages, and to fix themselves
upon that alone which is proper to conduct us through a troublesome world to
everlasting happiness: The nature of any religious profession may be
distinguished by such characteristicks; for since God, as he manifests himself
to mankind, is unquestionably a very benign and merciful Being, that Religion
which has the closest correspondence with such manifestations of himself, must
certainly be the most pleasing to God, and consequently the best: Mystic Rites
and Ceremonies have been various, and though the Devil had his design in the
invention of several, yet Men too, who used them, had, as before I proved, in
all of them some particular respects to futurity, and that happiness expected
by means of a Mediator between God and Man; but as God was never pleased by
unclean offerings, so much less could he be pleased with humane blood offered
upon Altars devoted to him, (however such Sacrifices might be thought to
prefigure best the shedding of Christ's blood, that blood without which there
could be no remission); and therefore we find, that though God tried Abraham's
faith and obedience by that severe command, that he should offer up his only
Son a burnt offering to him, and though he permitted the good old Patriarch to go
on a great way toward putting the command in execution, yet when he was ready
to give the fatal stroke, he stopped his hand, and accepted the readiness to
offer it better than he would have accepted the sacrifice it self when actually
made; therefore whatsoever mystery savored any thing of cruelty, was enough,
if there were nothing more, to desecrate that persuasion which admitted of such
things. Again, whereas those who pretend to any considerable notions of a God
will acknowledge him to be infinitely holy and pure, and consequently to love
the same holiness and purity in his Creatures. Wheresoever any mystic rites
have at any time trespassed upon such purity, we may be assured God has nothing
to do with such worship; a brand in this case the Pagan zeal endeavored to fix
upon the Christians, as well knowing how odious such a charge would render
them: Thus Caecilius in Minutius Foelix, having before charged the Christians
with murdering and devouring infants, he adds, Minutii Foelicis Oct. p. 90.
Edit. Hackian.
On a certain day the Christians, men, women and children of every age and sex,
meet together at a feast, after much junketing, when their incestuous lust
grows hot, a dog tied on purpose to the candlestick, pulls it down,
extinguishes the light, and then in the dark they promiscuously pollute one
another with fornications, adulteries, incests, and what not: But Pliny, as
much a heathen as himself, vindicates the abused Christians from that horrid
calumny in his Epistle to Trajan, where he informs that Emperor, That he had
found by certain intelligence, that the Christians on a set day were wont to
meet before it was light, and alternately to sing an Hymn to Christ, as if he
were God: Seque sacramento, non in scelus aliquod obstringere, sed ne furta, ne
latrocinia, ne adulteria committerent, ne fidem fallerent, etc. i. e. And they
did by solemn oath engage themselves, not to any wickedness, but that they
should not steal, nor murder, nor commit adultery, nor perjure themselves, etc.
Now how those who entered into such solemn mutual engagements not to commit
such sins, should yet be so notoriously guilty of the worst of crimes, and how
such very guilty persons, and such horrid abominations, Plinii Epistol. l. 10,
Ep. 97.
should have escaped Pliny's cognizance, who had made it his particular
business to enquire into the behavior of Christians, its very hard to imagine.
But howsoever falsely these things were charged upon Christians, they were true
enough among the Heathens, where the Eleusinian rites among the Graecians,
those of the Bona Dea among the Romans, with their Bacchanalia, etc. were
nothing but so many subtle contrivances to render all manner of lewdness and
villainy authentic and valuable, on which account the Apostle exhorts his
Ephesians, Ephesians. 5.11, 12.
to have no fellowship with such unfruitful works of darkness, but rather to
reprove them, for that its a shame to speak of those things which are done of
them in secret. Farther yet, whereas God has now really by his Son accomplished
that great work of the worlds redemption, those mystic Rites and Ceremonies
which fore-signified that to be done, are now vacated, and those who would have
mysteries of that nature still continued, do as much as in them lies, to drive
the world into an aversion from him, who alone is able to save to the uttermost
all those who come to God by him: For those rites continued, will move the
world to belive that the Messiah is not yet come, that the Faith so long
professed in him, as if he were come, is vain, that He who once pretended to that
name, only imposed upon the world, and was no better than a cheat, and that
therefore the Jewish Religion is and ought to be still in its full force: Now
this will appear very absurd and unreasonable to any one who has seriously
weighed all those arguments brought to prove that Jesus Christ was the Son of
the living God, and therefore could be no Impostor, and therefore must be that
Messiah he declared himself to be; which being true, it will follow, that our
Saviors coming must of necessity put an end to so much of the Jewish Law as
was not co-incident with that of Nature, and consequently not perpetually
obliging. That many of the Jews themselves ever looked upon their Law as of a
mutable nature in it self, is proved sufficiently by Raymundus Martini in his
Pugio fidei against the Jews, and that it could never be more properly actually
changed, than by the Messiah, appears in him who proves, from Jewish writers
themselves, that the Messiah, the King, shall be greater than Moses, nay
greater than the ministering Angels, and therefore the fittest for such a work;
and, as he shows, their own gloss in the Midrasch Koheleth upon that of
Solomon, Eccles. 11.8. Pugionis fidei p. 3. did. 3. c. 20
tells us, That every Law of all people whatsoever, every Law that a man can
learn in this world, is all but vanity in comparison of the Law of the Messiah:
Things of a less perfect and lasting nature must then vanish when that appears
which is more perfect and eternal: Whatsoever therefore crosses that end for
which God sent his Son into the world, and retains mysteries now altogether
insignificant, as being fully accomplished, that cannot be pleasing to God, and
consequently, the present Religion of the Jews cannot be the true Religion.
There are indeed some mysterious truths in which all Religions agree, viz. The
existence of a God, his spirituality, invisibility, incomprehensibility, etc.
they all agree, That his Providence governs all things in the world, however
trifling and inconsiderable they may appear in the eyes of the world: that He
hears, sees, knows, understands every thing, though they know not how, according
to the objection of Atheists, to reconcile such things to his want of eyes,
ears, soul, or any other parts, which are all inconsistent with a spiritual
being: All agree together in granting the present state of Man very wretched
and deplorable, in looking upon him yet as capable of happiness, provided a
suitable mean for its procurement could be found out, and in expectation of some
proper help for that purpose: These things being agreeable to the general sense
of mankind, and being the original reasons of men's putting themselves into a
religious course, must still be approved by every one; and every one of these,
that Religion settled in the world by our Savior and his Apostles, does advance
yet more plainly, and confirm more strongly to the world: And whatsoever
mysterious truths it farther propounds, they are all so far intelligible by
every one, as may serve sufficiently to confirm those first principles;
whatsoever is farther to be seen in them, is what moves mankind to lay aside,
all brutish, malicious, and unmanly humor, as the meditation upon that
extraordinary love of God to mankind, of God the Father in sending his only Son
into the world to die for it, of God the Son in leaving the bosom of his blessed
Father, and in our nature and for our sake suffering that bitter and scandalous
death upon the Cross; of God the Holy Ghost in pursuing us continually with his
influences and assistances, and so working in us to will and to do according to
God's good pleasure; this meditation naturally runs into that Apostolical
conclusion, Joh. 4.11.
if God thus loved us, then ought we also to love one another. If we
contemplate our own monstrous demerits, our aversion to every thing that is
good, our inclination to every thing that is evil, and so offensive to God, our
ingratitude for mercies received, our unfruitfulness under the means of grace
and Salvation presented to us, our natural enmity to God and goodness: And if
withal we seriously consider, that all those forementioned favors are
conferred on us in a state of obstinate enmity, the inference is easy as our
Lord has laid it down, Matthew. 5.44.
That we should love our enemies, bless them that curse us, do good to them
that hate us, and pray for them that despitefully use us and persecute us. If
again, we think on that wonderful mercy of God whereby, for the merits of the
blessed Jesus, he is pleased to forgive us our sins, those natural bars between
us and heaven, the consequence we must of course draw from thence is, that of
the Apostle, That we should be kind, Ephesians. 4.32.
tender hearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake has
forgiven us: Thus we see what excellent influence these very truths, the nature
and reasons of which are above the reach of our grovelling minds, may have upon
us. If we proceed, and reflect upon the purity and holiness of that God with
whom we have to do, that he is a Being who cannot endure sin, who punishes it
for its odious nature even in his dearest children, all those mysteries
revealed to us in the Gospel are so far, by any fair consequence, from
perverting our minds, that they give us all the motives imaginable, 1 Pet. 1.15.
that as he who has called us is holy, so should we be holy in all manner of
conversation. A man may be a good heathen and yet a filthy Sodomite, a
through-pac'd Jew and yet be blind, hard-hearted, carnal; but a man cannot be a
true Christian but he will endeavor to avoid all appearance of evil, Jude 2^.
and to keep himself unspotted from the world: he will live in a continual
abhorrence of whatsoever may prejudice his soul, or pollute his body, and
knowing that he is not his own, James ^^.
but that he is bought with a price, he will follow that advice, he will endeavor to
glorify God in his body and in his spirit, which are gods: 1 Cor. 6.^^
and, to go no farther than what I had instanced in before, a man that
meditates on that account the Apostles and Evangelists have given us of the
appearance of the Son of God in the flesh, and on the ends and designs of such
his appearance, he will never spend his time idly about types and shadows, when he
is invited to embrace the substance, he will study to conform himself to the
Doctrine of the Gospel, to be, so far as belongs to a mere man, a perfect
imitator of all those excellent virtues so apparent in our Savior during his
converse with the world: he will carefully avoid all sin, which was incapable of
pardon from an offended God but upon the terms of the passion of his dearly
beloved Son; and will be thoroughly satisfied of the danger of such
transgression by a rational assurance, That if men sin wilfully after they have
received the knowledge of the truth, Hebr. 10.26, 27.
there remains now no more sacrifices for sins, but a certain fearful looking
for of judgment and fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries: If
then true Religion consist in worshipping God according to those revelations he
has made of himself to the world, and we cannot propound any reason to our
selves why God should have made any such revelation of himself to us, but only
that when we have a rule, we might have an example too, then whatsoever
religion that is, whose most obscure and incomprehensible mysteries highly
promote that excellent work of following our exemplar or growing up into an
assimilation to God himself, by endeavoring to be holy as our heavenly father
is holy, and perfect as he is perfect, That Religion must certainly carry us by
the surest ways to eternal happiness; but such a Religion is that instituted by
our Savior in the Gospel, therefore that is a Religion above all others, for
the sake of such mysteries, so profound, but withal so very profitable and
instructive, to be embraced by all wise and considering Men.

A due reflection upon those mysteries any Religion is founded upon, with a
just apprehension of the deficiency of our own reason in tracing them, is a
very proper means to create in men's minds a due and exact reverence for it.
Thus that very notion that we have of God's infinity, of his dwelling in
impenetrable darkness, or in inaccessible light, of the unsearchableness of his
ways, the incomprehensibility of his wisdom, etc. All these things make awful
impressions upon men's souls, and make them to fear before God, and to reverence
him; and this God him self intended when by his Prophet he assured the Jews, My
thoughts are not your thoughts, Isai. 55.8, 9.
neither are your ways my ways, says the Lord, for as the heavens are higher
than the earth, so are my ways higher than your ways, and my thoughts than your
thoughts: This prodigious distance between the nature of God and Man was enough
to overawe man, on whose side there was so very great a disadvantage: God's
prohibition so often repeated to the Jews, that they should not represent him
to themselves by any figure or image whatsoever, with the reason as frequently
inculcated, that they never had seen any thing which could look like any
representation of him, was to prevent that contempt which too much familiarity
with superiors naturally produces: for representing a God by any thing of a
gross or material nature, is apt to create as gross an Idaea of the Divinity it
self in the mind of a Man, and those once entertained, produce a sawciness and
familiarity, not at all agreeable to that immense distance there is between a
divine and a mortal Being. Thus it is observable, that the Gentiles generally
were upon several occasions extravagantly free with those Gods they worshipped:
Hence the Tyrians when Alexander the great besieged them, chained the Image of
Apollo to that of Hercules, lest the God should leave them, because one of
their Citizens had had a melancholic dream, forsooth, that he designed to
serve them such a slippery trick in their necessity: So the Athenians clipped
off the wings of the Image of the goddess Victory, lest she should fly away
from them: So Dionysius the elder of Sicily, took off a golden mantle from the
statue of Jupiter and put him on a woolen blanket, with that scoffing reason,
that the blanket was fitter for all weathers, being lighter in Summer, and
warmer in Winter; So he took off the golden beard of Aesculapius with that
Witticisme, That it became not him to have so long a beard, when his father
Apollo had none: It Is true these affronts were proper enough for those Idols to
whom they were offered, but they were very unbecoming those who offered them,
since they professed to believe that they were really gods, so that they were not
those Images or Statues which were abused, but it was the true Divinity it
self, which they imagined resident in or about those Images; And of this
Inconvenience from material Images even of material Saints, the Romanists are
sometimes sensible, witness that action of a Spanish Peasant, who making his
offering to the Image of the blessed Virgin, and imagining she looked not so
kindly on him for it as he expected, He very briskly told her, she need not be
so proud, for He remembered she was but a sorry piece of timber the other day;
it was yet the more effectually to prevent such inconveniences, that God
appointed a part of the Tabernacle first, and of the Temple at Jerusalem
afterward, under the Sacred name of the Holy of Holies, to be wholly
inaccessible to any but the High Priest, who bore an extraordinary Character
among the Jews, nor might He enter into it above once a Year, and that with a
great deal of respect and ceremony; This made God to strike the men of
Bethshemesh with so terrible a judgment for daring to pry into what God
intended to keep secret; 1 Samuel ^.19.
and to strike Vzzah dead upon the place; for presuming to do what was above
his station, and touch the Ark, though it seemed an action proceeding from a
good zeal, or a fear that the Ark, the peculiar Symbol of God's presence among
his People, should have fallen to the ground; 2 Samuel 6.9.
but we may see what a terror that signal vengeance struck upon David himself
and all his Company; v. 10.
and it is observed of Pompey the Great, that after He had been so bold as to
look into the Holy of Holies, upon his taking Jerusalem, that though He saw
nothing there, nor offered any violence to any thing about the Temple, but
expressed a great deal of reverence toward the place and those that attended
on it; yet that God's judgments pursued him from that time, that He prosper'd
in little or nothing that He undertook, all things from thence verging hastily
to his final ruin: So jealous is God of his honor, so terrible to those who
will be struggling to know what he would have kept secret from the World. That
great reverence, which a due distance between God (and the things belonging to
him) and Man creates, is so well known in the World, that wise Men have thought
it convenient, that there should be somewhat of a Mysterious Majesty in those
who are God's representatives on earth, which has taught the great Eastern
Monarchs that prudent piece of state, to show themselves as seldom as possible
to the People, by which means the Vulgar not being capable of any diminutive
thoughts of those, whose weaknesses they are unacquainted with, almost
reverence their Kings as Gods, and conclude no submissions can be too great to
them; But what should I talk of Princes, when even those arts every day made
use of, have some darker parts, on which reason we see some Men infinitely
curious in comparison with others, and that every Art has its every days
improvements, and to make them the more valued, their first Inventers are very
careful, not to prostitute what has cost them a great deal of pains and study,
to every one that would be prying into their methods and discoveries; Hence
Ocellus Lucanus, an old Astrologer, adjures his Readers, by every thing he
thought mysterious in his Art, to keep what he imparted to them among their
most religious secrets, and not communicate them to profane or illiterate
persons, and that they should repay their kind Instructor with that reverence
he deserved; Such solemn engagements Orpheus and other ancient Heathens
required of those who were initiated in their mystical Theology: For the
religious among the Gentiles, were thoroughly convinced of this, that the more
unintelligible the meaning of their religious rites was, the greater restraint
they laid on vulgar and untutour'd Souls, and made them the more resolute in
their superstitions: Hence one concludes, That those things which are easily
understood, are generally despised by the vulgar, so that to make such plain
things have any due effect on inferior Souls, they must be attended by
somewhat of a prodigious nature.

Though the Writers, from whom I allege these things, were but Heathens, yet
they discoursed rationally, and but with too much truth; For every one has seen
the proof of what they assert notoriously made good; It has been charged on our
English Church as an unpardonable crime, as a robbing Souls of that food
designed by God himself for their entertainment, that they have omitted
Solomon's Song, a great part of Ezekiel's prophecy, and the Book of the
Revelation, in the Lessons of their daily service: It Is true they have done so;
the Jews did more, for notwithstanding their great diligence in reading
Scripture, they thought it fit, not to allow the reading Solomon's Song, or
Ecclesiastes, or a good part of Ezekiel's or Daniel's Visions, till they were
more than thirty years of age, concluding those mysterious Writings to be far
above common understandings, and we do not find Men's wits now adays so
infinitely outstrip those of their Predecessors, that every illiterate
mechanic, or ordinary auditor can understand them; Those who complain of not
having those Books read in our Service, should never complain of the obscurity
of rational and coherent discourses, nor pretend to be most edified by the
plainest things: If we must judge of Peoples edifying in attendance upon Divine
ordinances, by their lifted Hands and Eyes, by their loud sighs, and seemingly
passionate groans, I have known them frequent in a numerous Congregation, where
falsehood, blasphemy, and unintelligible nonsense, has taken up the greatest
part of the Preacher's discourse; and I have observed the same in the wild
extempore effusions of some eminent Dissenters: This plainly shows, that there
are too many who understand not what is meant by plain preaching: they call
noise, and earnestness, a furious action, and a tone sometimes melting and
whining, sometimes sobbing and roaring, by that name, which is all so far from
deserving it, that nothing can possibly be more offensive to Almighty God, nor
more destructive to the precious and immortal Soul: Plain preaching consists in
truth laid down in proper and significant terms, urged by pertinent and solid
arguments, and defended by well connected reason, drawn chiefly from that great
Fountain of light and truth, the written Word of God: it teaches men, who
attend it with due diligence and humility, a great many of those things they
were utterly unacquainted with before, it lays down before them the whole
counsel of God which has respect to their eternal Salvation, it explains God's
Word where it seems obscure, shows the connection of Divine truths with one
another throughout that sacred Book, and not only warns men of encroaching
Errors, but solidly confutes them: The plain Preacher supposes Christians are
not always to continue in an Infant state, always to stand in need of
inculcating the first Elements of Religion: He supposes men's younger years
should be thoroughly seasoned with those Principles, that a greater age should
have proportionable improvements, for he is infallibly assured, that those who
are always learning and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth, are
neither better nor worse, than vessels of wrath fitted for destruction: He
believes, every Ambassador of Christ has reason to expect, from professors of a
mature age, what that Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews expected from them,
That leaving the Principles of the Doctrine of Christ, they should go on unto
perfection, not laying again the foundation of repentance from dead works,
Hebr. 6.1, 2,
and of faith toward God, of the Doctrine of Baptism, and of laying on of
hands, and of the resurrection of the dead, and of eternal Judgment: It seems
then the inspired Writer thought the preaching of faith and repentance to be so
far from being the sole duty of a Preacher, that he thought it unreasonable and
highly reprovable, that the Preacher should have any occasion to inculcate them
at all to truly edifying Christians; It was neither credit nor advantage to the
Hebrews, that they were dull of hearing, Hebr. 5.11, 12, 13.
that they were unskilful in the word of righteousness, that whereas they ought
to have been teachers for their time, they had need to be taught again
themselves: Nor can the same dullness ever be commendable in others; Yet every
age has been unhappily furnished with such pretenders to Religion, who talk
much of it, but never grow the better or the wiser for it: Such our Savior met
with, and such his Apostles, especially that great Apostle of the Gentiles St.
Paul, who were full of their complaints of hard sayings, such as none could
bear, and on that reason were always ready to follow false teachers, and false
Apostles: The vulgar thought them much more edifying than either the Son of God
himself, or those whom he had peculiarly sent and fitted for the promoting of
men's salvation; and so they would always have thought, had not they in pity to
prevailing Ignorance, and that it might be inexcusable, done so many authentic
and undeniable miracles, to prove their own Divine Commission, which once
proved, a more serious regard to what they preached would be acknowledged
necessary, and even dark parables, and profound speculations about the deepest
points in Divinity, would appear very comfortable and instructive; Our Savior
speaking in parables to the Jews, reflected severely upon them, in his reason
for so doing, I do so, says He, because they seeing see not, Matthew. 13.13, 14,
15.
and hearing they hear not, neither do they understand, and in them is
fulfilled the prophecy of Isaias, which says, By hearing ye shall hear and
shall not understand, and seeing ye shall see and shall not perceive: Well, did
this proceed from the difficulty and obscurity of what was preached? No, though
he taught them in parables, things not obvious to every one, their unhappiness
proceeded from another reason, This Peoples heart is waxed gross, and their
ears are dull of hearing, and their eyes they have closed, lest at any time
they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and should
understand with their hearts, and should be converted, and I should heal them:
Therefore he tried to open their eyes with miracles, it being then but the dawn
of the Gospel, and men were not so easily wrought upon by clear reason, and by
earnest persuasion: They were not the repeated tenders of mercy, nor threats of
eternal damnation, that could convince them of the necessity of obedience to
and belief of that Word which was Divine and Saving, had not Miracles been
exhibited, such whose events they could give no account of to themselves or
others, in them, therefore they could be content with that want of plainness
which they knew not how to satisfy themselves with before.

The force and convincing power of Miracles lay indeed wholly in the
inexplicability of their reason: So long as Jannes and Jambres could work
wonders, in appearance, parallel with those of Moses, they believed him no
Messenger sent from God, but a cunning Jugler like themselves, and how they
wrought such surprising wonders, they knew well enough; but when Moses had once
outreach'd the utmost of their skill, they who thought themselves before
unconquerable in juggling sleights and Magic skill, presently acknowledged that
the finger of God was there, and began to tremble at what they had derided
before; so, when he that spoke as never man spoke, could by no other arguments
convince the stubborn Jews that he was their long expected Messiah, He bids
them believe him for his very works sake; nay and indulges them so far as to
allow, John 15.24.
that if he had not done among them the works which never man did, they had had
no sin: And the Pharisees were very sensible what advantages accrued to the
Apostle's doctrine by the miracles they did, as appears by that question among
them upon St. Peter's healing the impotent Man, What shall we do to these men?
for that indeed a notable miracle has been done by them is manifest to all
them that dwell at Jerusalem, Acts 4.16.
and we cannot deny it. But we find not our Savior upon every miracle he did,
presently giving the Jews an account how or by what power he did them, but he
left them to make their conclusions from what they saw: And the Apostles, upon
their Examination before the Jewish Council, only answer, If we this day be
examined of the good deed done to the Impotent man, by what means he is made
whole, be it known unto you all, and to the whole people of Israel, that by the
name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye crucified, Acts 4.9, 10.
whom God raised from the dead, even by him does this man stand before you
whole; by which account they left them but in a maze of mystery and wonder more
inextricable than before; But if the unwonted cures of distempers, the ejection
of Devils, the restoration of dead bodies to life, could over-aw the most
obstinate stubbornness, how much more must the mysterious subjects of our
faith, the appearance of the Son of God in our nature, his suffering death for
our redemption, his resurrection and ascension up into glory, truths of a more
sublime and incomprehensible nature, and confirmed too by those very
astonishing miracles, work men to a profound veneration of that Religion
grounded upon them! I Will add, that had it been possible for God so far to have
laid aside his own immense glory, that men might have seen it fully and with
open face, that they might have plainly read how all those wonders of love and
mercy had been wrought, it would have been altogether unfit, since the pride of
man would have been apt to trample upon, and despise the known cause of the
most unexpected productions.

It Is necessary then that the fundamentals of Christ's Religion should carry
with them somewhat of that awful Majesty inherent in its founder, nor is this
wisdom of God in a Mystery to be laid open to scoffing Atheists, or Men only
impertinently curious after novelties; Pearls are not to be cast before Swine,
nor Holy things to Dogs: The Christians in the primitive Church were very
strict in this respect, insomuch that the Gentiles objected it against them,
that they kept the very God they worshipped unknown to the rest of the World; So
Caecilius in Minutius Foelix very passionately, What silly and absurd opinions,
says he, do these Christians take up, when they would persuade us that God whom
they worship, a something, whom they can neither see themselves, nor show to
any body else, does strictly examine the actions, manners, words, nay the very
inmost thoughts of Men? And Maximus Madaurensis, in a more submissive style,
speaks thus to the great St. Augustine; Show me now at length, O thou wisest of
Men, what God it is ye Christians claim as yours, and whom ye own as present
with you in your most private recesses, as for us we expose our Gods to public
view, and adore them, and with offerings of Incense endeavor to reconcile them
to us in the hearing of all the world; The ancient Christians would neither
discourse of the Mysteries of their Faith, nor of their Sacramental Symbols
before Ethnics, who would then, as the conceited Socinians do now, deride every
thing they could not understand: So Lactantius, speaking of the Resurrection, a
Doctrine which Christians ever owned as a fundamental, and which Heathens
thought the most absurd and irrational principle in the World, subjoyns at
last, This is that Doctrine of the Prophets which we Christians maintain, this
is our wisdom which Idolatrous pretenders to Philosophy contemn as vain and
silly, because we make it no subject of our public disputations, but God has
commanded us, that we should peaceably and silently lay up his secret in our
hearts and consciences, not pertinaciously wrangling with profane persons, who
violently oppose God and his religion, not with a design to sift out the truth,
but to expose it to a public scorn; Nor ought the Mystery to be discovered by
us especially, who denominate our selves from that faith: Nay, even those who
were Converts to Christianity were but gradually entered into these things; the
Catechumeni and Energumeni being shut out of the Church so soon as the Sermon
was done, and not permitted to be so much as Spectators of the Sacramental
Mysteries.

From what has been hitherto discoursed, we may justly conclude, That since
Religion can have no part or interest, ordinarily, in the hearts of Men, unless
it be ushered in by causes Mysterious, supernatural, or in their full extent
incomprehensible: Since our blessed Savior by introducing his Gospel into the
World, has not taken away, but strongly confirmed the necessity of obedience to
God's Laws, whether written or natural, which was, as we have before observed,
the general intent of Religion, and agreeable to those notions the World
commonly had of it: Since, for the better carrying on this end, Mysteries are
so very advantageous to religion, as to make Men have reverend apprehensions of
it, upon account of its incomparable Excellencies in its causes and effects,
and upon account of the weakness and shallowness of their own understandings,
since all these particulars are true; it is likewise absolutely necessary, that
the Christian, the only true, Holy, pure Religion, should be built upon such a
foundation, as might appear to all Men, upon the strictest inquiry, beyond all
doubt or controversy, Mysterious, inexplicable, incomprehensible. Nor could it
be an impertinent labor to clear this truth, because it totally ruins all the
pretenses of the Socinians, that, after the Revelation once made of the great
fundamentals of our Faith, there could remain nothing of so obscure a nature,
but that we by the pure strength of our own reason might be able to comprehend
it, In short, that though it be true, that Scripture, as sufficient for that
purpose, is and ought to be the sole rule of Faith, yet reason ought to be the
rule of Scripture, Reason, as it now stands, loaded with all the miserable
consequences of sin, reason so blind, as without the extraordinary light of
holy Scriptures, to be wholly unable to lead a Man to Eternal life; it obviates
their assertions, that the true ancient Catholic Interpretation of this and
other Texts of Scripture, that speak of the eternal Divine nature of the Son of
God, or of that glorious Trinity subsisting in the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
is false and unreasonable, merely because it introduces an unintelligible
incarnation and unity of the Divine and Humane nature in Christ: a Mysterious
co-essentiality of God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost, etc.
notwithstanding all those glorious revelations God has made of himself in
Scripture; For if it be certainly true, that Religion in it is general notion,
cannot subsist unless built upon a mystic foundation, and that therefore
Christian Religion in particular cannot subsist without it, then it will
follow, that the continuing Mystic nature of the great Articles of our Faith,
can create no prejudice in any person whatsoever against our Religion on their
account; since especially it will remain impossible to draw any genuine
consequences from those mysteries, but what will be so far from impeaching,
that they will strongly confirm and reinforce all those duties relating to God
or man, which are laid upon us by the natural or written Law; and it will
follow farther, that the Socinians themselves, by their endeavors to level all
the Articles of our Faith, the great saving principles of the Gospel, to
impaired reason, or by endeavoring to leave Christiany naked of all Mysteries,
do what in them lies, to disannul all the Religion of Christians, to take away
all the use and advantage of the Gospel, leaving the world so involved in
Atheism, or in mere Deism, at this time very little to be preferred before the
other.

Having done now with the positive assertion, our next work is, with all
exactness and humility, to consider the illustration of this Proposition in the
severals laid down by the Apostle, which altogether afford us the whole sum and
substance of the Gospel; for all that glad tidings sent from Heaven to Earth
for the comfort of mankind, consists in this, That for their sakes, to procure
their Salvation, God was manifest in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen
of Angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up
into glory: all which particulars, (though the full prosecution of the first, be
all our present task) are incomprehensible mysteries, yet as well worth our
enquiring into, as the Apostles writing them, who without doubt would never
have laid the weight of piety, or godliness, or true Religion, upon those
grounds, had they not been worth our looking into, or their truth worth our
vindicating from all the attacks of prejudiced, opinionative, or haeretical
men: It Is true a late author tells us, Naked Gospel, p 34. c. 1. l. 20.
That to dispute concerning a Mystery, and at the same time to confess it a
mystery, is a contradiction as great as any in the greatest mystery; the
expression is worth our remark, for the boldness and absurdity it contains:
It Is bold not to say impious, to insinuate so broadly, in a discourse where
Christianity's concerned, that all great Mysteries are made up of, or at least
contain contradictions; what have we then nothing at all Mysterious in
Scripture? what is that love between the blessed Jesus and his Spouse the
Church, so admirably charactered in the book of Canticles? can our Author find
nothing Mysterious in all those adumbrations of ineffable love? or can he
easily give us a Catalogue of the Contradictions there? the real Contradictions
I mean, for things that are of no mysterious nature at all on any other
account, may seem to contain somewhat contradictory, but seeming contradictions
are not real: Can he fathom every thing relating to Daniel's weeks? Men of a
great deal of learning, industry and sobriety have taken a great deal of pains
to explain the mystery of them, and have scarce yet given the world
satisfaction, were not the Vision mysterious, it would be more easily cleared,
but because it is not, must it therefore be contradictious to it self? or to
make a yet closer instance: the nature of a God, can He or any Socinian make it
comprehensible to humane understandings? or else will the very notion of a God
imply a contradiction? He must be a very new fangled Son of the Church of
England who will assert that: but why must it imply a contradiction to dispute
or discourse about, or to enquire into a confessed mystery? That God was manifest
in the flesh is true we believe, that every circumstance relating to his
Incarnation as laid down in Scripture is true, according to the genuine and
common interpretation of such words whereby these circumstances are expressed,
we believe too: That as they are true we may dispute about them, and clear them
from all that Sophistry, whereby some subtle men would fain baffle us out of
them, is no uncouth or irrational opinion; yet, after all, we take the whole
account of this Incarnation, as laid down in Scripture, to be a very great
mystery: But where lies the Contradiction, either in believing it a mystery, or
in defending it as such? This truth that God was manifest in the flesh, is as
before intimated, that upon the literal truth of which the whole Salvation of
mankind depends, How he should have been so, is to all mankind mysterious and
incomprehensible, yet may we without any contradiction explain, defend, prove,
and draw inferences from it: Hear what a Bishop of our own, a genuine son of
our sacred Mother the English Church, says of this manifestation of God in the
flesh: How it was effected, Vid. Montacut. Norvic. in Act. and Mon. Eccles. c.
1. par. 39. p. 27. 1 Pet. 1.12.
by what means made possible, heaven and earth cannot understand nor deliver,
(...), It was a mystery from the beginning, the Angels understood it not,
(...), it will be a mystery to eternity: the Angels as yet can go no farther
than their (...) to receive a glimmering of it, as it were by the crany of a
window, or by the chink of a door, and how shall we dare to enquire, how it was
done? (...), this question is indissoluble, that inextricable, Faith alone has
power to resolve them both; this we submissively agree to, and therefore we
enquire not how, or in what manner God was made flesh, any farther, than some
particulars relating to that Incarnation are plainly laid down in Scripture;
far be any such presuming curiosity from us; only since the Apostle, in the
consequent parts of the Text, has asserted, that God was made flesh, which
according to the natural sound and common acceptance of such words in all
languages and writers, is, that he who was made flesh, or appeared in the
flesh, was God, since the Apostle has asserted the positive truth, and has made
it the first part of the great mystery of godliness, and such a part, as all
the other particulars do but serve to prove and confirm: We must assert too,
that this particular point or article of Faith, that He who was made flesh for
the Salvation of mankind, was really God, God properly so called, the most
high, the eternal God, blessed for ever, not any made or subordinate God, but
the maker of all things, in a word, the true God, exclusive of all created
Beings whatsoever. We assert that this is an Article of our Faith, so true and
so important, that upon a true embracing it in the sense so laid down, the
Salvation of all men depends; as much, as upon believing in Christ the Son of
God at all, or on being neither impious, nor blasphemers, nor idolaters: And
therefore we assert farther, that how great a mystery soever this may appear,
(and it never ought to appear otherwise) to enquire into and seek for all such
Scriptures, as may render it indisputable, is neither impertinent to our Lord's
design, in being so incarnate, nor is it fruitless to those who make it their
business to inquire into such proofs, nor is it dangerous to any, who make that
enquiry with due humility and care: But on the contrary it is very dangerous,
nay fatal, as before, not to enquire into it, or not to be fully satisfied
about it.

I know we have in this point more enemies than the mere Socinians, some
capital asserters of the Arminian tenets, being desirous to give such a
latitude to Religion, as may take in all their friends, are very willing to
persuade us, that it is not very material, or necessary to believe, that Jesus
Christ the Son of God, is God of the same substance or nature with his father.
So Episcopius a man of great learning and ingenuity in his fourth book of
Theological Institutions, c. 34. Traite sur la Divin. de J.C.S. 1. c. 1. p. 10.
etc. the sum of whose plea amounts to this, That the essence of Christian
Religion consists not in mere contemplative knowledge, but in practice, and
that it consists much more in obedience, than in abstracted speculations on the
Deity, which, though it be true enough, has really no place here, for can we call
those principles mere or simple speculations, which are so important, that we
our selves are or are not Idolaters, accordingly as they are true or false? If
Christ be of the same substance with his Father, or if, which comes to the same
end, Christ be the supreme or sovereign God, he ought to be adored in that
quality; and Socinians themselves cannot without impiety refuse to acknowledge
him as such, and to honor him under that name: but if he be not so, we cannot
confound him with the Sovereign God, without Idolatry: The great concern here
then is, to avoid impiety, or idolatry; and by consequence, those inquiries
must be of a practical nature, which are of so very great and extraordinary an
importance. Episcopius makes several vain attempts to show, That it is not at
all essential to Salvation to know if Jesus Christ be God by an eternal
generation; or that, being but a simple creature, or which is the same, a mere
man like one of us, he is called God upon account of his ministry: for when he
goes about to make us see that these are no fundamental inquiries, in showing
us that those, who believe Jesus Christ is a mere Creature, may worship him
without being guilty of Idolatry, because they adore him not as he is man, but
as he holds the place of God, as his Ambassador or Substitute: this proof is
imperfect and insufficient. For to prove that these questions are impertinent
or unnecessary, it is not enough to show that Socinians, without being
Idolaters, may worship him, whom they believe to be no more by nature than a
mere Man, which supposition yet we shall in due time prove, God willing, to be
false. But he ought to show withal, that we without Idolatry may worship Jesus
Christ as the supreme God (as we really are taught to do by the Church of
England) though at the same time he really be not the sovereign God; which seems
to be a very hard if not an impossible task, as I question not but hereafter it
will more plainly appear. At present I shall only touch upon an argument, urged
by Episcopius, from a Topic very easily found out; the reason then given by
him, why it is not necessary that we should believe Jesus Christ to be perfect,
or the true God, is, Quia nuspiam in Scriptura id necessarium creditu esse
asseritur, nec per bonam, nedum necessariam consequentiam ex ea elicitur,
Because it is a doctrine of which the Scripture no where affirms, that it is
necessary to be believed, nor can it be drawn from thence by any good, much
less by any necessary consequence: And he goes on to show, that this argument
ought to be of very great force among those of the reformation, because they
profess there is nothing necessary to be believed, but what is either directly,
or in plain terms contained in Scripture, or drawn from thence by very clear
consequence; the last indeed, the sixth Article of the Church of England agrees
with, but what she thinks of his first assertion, may very well be gathered
from the second, wherein she propounds this Doctrine as necessary to be
believed, The Son, which is the word of the Father begotten from everlasting of
the Father, the very and eternal God, of one substance with the Father, took
man's nature in the womb of the blessed Virgin, of her substance, so that two
whole and perfect natures, that is to say, the Godhead and manhood, were joined
together in one person, never to be divided, whereof is one Christ, very God
and very man, etc. With the Church of England agrees, the Helvetic Confession,
Vid. Harmoniam Confessionum in notatis.
c. 3. that of the French Churches, Artic. 6. the Scotch Confession, Artic. 1.
the Synod of Dort, Artic. 8. the Synod of Czenger. in Hungary in their own
Argument against the Socinians, and in Artic. 2. the Confession of Augsburg, c.
1. of Strasbourg, c. 2. the Saxon Confession exhibited to the Synod of Trent,
c. 1. that of Wittemberg, Art. 2. the Confession of the Prince Palatine, Art.
2. that of Bohemia, Art. 3. and 6. of Basil, Art. 1. and finally the Orthodox
consent of all the Fathers with holy Scripture, Artic. 2. c. 1. and it is
observable, that the authors and subscribers of all these Confessions, imagine,
that they ground this particular Doctrine of the eternal Godhead of our Lord
Jesus Christ, upon Scripture; so that they declare they either find it there in
express terms, or at least thought they drew it very naturally from thence, and
certainly they were not mistaken; for, let us reflect a little on the
Commandments of the Old Testament, there Israel received this charge, Hear, O
Israel, Deuteronomy. 6.4. Exodus 20.2, 3.
the Lord our God is one Lord; I am the Lord thy God, thou shall have no other
God before my face: Observe what the Prophet adds to these precepts, Remember,
says he, to the same Israelites, the former things of old, Isai. 46 9.
for I am God, and there is none else, I am God, and there is none like me; the
same Prophet introduces Almighty God speaking thus, I am the Lord, Isai. 42.8.
that is my name, and my glory will I not give to another, neither my praise to
graven Images, and this particularly in such a place, where God is comforting
his people with a description of the office, power, excellency of the Messiah,
and teaching all to rejoice upon the certainty of his coming: Our Savior
himself when he contested with the most subtle and powerful adversary in the
world, alleges this against him, Matthew. 4.10.
get thee hence Satan, when he had endeavored to hire him to worship himself,
for it is written, Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou
serve: This then of the Unity of the supreme being, and the incommunicability
of divine worship to any other Being whatsoever seems very Authentic Doctrine,
and to be very well attested; yet after all this (to prevent that damning sin
of Idolatry) whereas S. Peter refused the adoration of Cornelius with that
reason, Acts 10.26
Stand up for I my self also am a man; And the Angel, who had shown S. John all
those wonderful Prophetic schemes, refused the worship of that Apostle with
those words, Rev. 22.9.
See thou do it not, for I am thy fellow servant, and of thy brethren the
Prophets, worship thou God; yet the blessed Jesus, He who being the Son of God,
at least in some sense, should have been of all others the most careful, for
securing his fathers honor, yet He tells the Jews, that his father had
committed all judgment to him, Joh. 5.23.
that all men should honor the Son even as they honor the father, i.e. with
the same kind of, or with equal honor; now every one will own, that the Father
is to be worshipped as the supreme Being, or as the most high God, therefore
Christ there assumes to himself the glory, honor or worship belonging to the
most high God: nor could this be strange in him who being in the form of God
thought it no robbery to be equal with God: Phil. 2.6.
The same Jesus suffered himself to be worshipped, without any reluctance or
prohibition of the worshippers: He forbad not the wise men from the East, Matt.
2.11
when they fell down and worshipped him, and made their offerings to him; nor
did the blessed Virgin (who doubtless knew what it was to be an Idolater)
reprove them for their misapplied adorations: nor did the Angel, Matt. 8.2. c.
9.18.
who was their guide and director in their journey, inform them of this error:
No more did Christ forbid the Leper, who worshipped him, nor the Jewish Ruler,
who begged his goodness for the healing of his daughter; Nor his Disciples when
by his power delivered from the storm; Nor yet all the Disciples when after his
resurrection they all came and held him by the feet and worshipped him: c.
14.33. c. 28.9.
now Scripture in all these places puts no difference between that worship that
is given to Christ, and that which the same persons generally rendered to the
supreme God, therefore they knew nothing, but that he really was of the same
nature with God: nor could he be so kind, or good, or wise, as he is
charactered to us, who could see so many guilty of so damning a sin as
Idolatry, (which they must have been guilty of, if they gave to him, a mere
Creature, that sovereign worship which belonged to the Creator,) without any
reproof or check for it. Now though this danger may seem to infer a great deal of
necessity of knowing Christ to be the true God, yet we may press it farther:
For S. Paul tells us in plain terms, Romans 10.13.
Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord shall be saved, where he is
speaking of no other but our Lord Jesus Christ, now this laid together with
that other text, Acts 4.12.
that there is no salvation in any other, for there is none other name under
heaven, given among men whereby we must be saved, joining these together, as
they assert the positive, so they include the negative of equal truth, that
Without calling on the name of the Lord Jesus, Salvation can never be attained:
but then it follows, How shall they call on him in whom they have not believed?
v. 14.
or in whom they have not had faith? but Faith may not be fixed on any, but on
him who is the true God: true Faith is only toward God; Heb. 6.1.
as the Apostle's phrase teaches us, and the Socinians themselves in the very
Text we are now upon, would persuade us to believe, that it was only God the
Father who was believed on in the World, Heb. 11.6.
because he only was the proper object of Faith, and we are told that without
Faith it is impossible to please God; but to imagine, that any Faith can please
God which is placed in any Being beside himself, is foolish and absurd; Yet
whereas God declared by his Prophet of old, Cursed be the Man that trusts in
Man, and makes flesh his arm, and in his heart departs from the Lord: Jer.
17.5.
Christ a little before his Passion, bids his Disciples, as they believed in
God, John 14.1.
so to believe also in Him: But now if without believing in Christ eternal life
and happiness cannot be obtained, and that be saving Faith which is fixed on
Him, and if we be reasonably commanded to believe in him, and yet true saving
Faith cannot be fixed in any but in God alone, then it will follow, that Christ
must be God, the true, the Supreme God, and it will follow too, that it is
indispensibly necessary that all Men should know he is God, that they may know
in whom it is that they believe, that he is the proper object of Divine Faith,
and able to answer all the expectations of Faith: For otherwise, as, a
proposition may in it self be true, and yet I may be a liar, when I swear it is
true, because I know nothing of its being so: So, though Christ may be in
himself the true God, yet I am an Idolater, for worshipping him as the true,
while I know not that he is indeed the true God: And St. Paul acquits not the
Athenians of Idolatry, in consecrating an Altar to the unknown God, though that
God, unknown to them, was the same God whom he preached unto them: Nor will
that of the Apostle St. John, be easily avoided, where having before told us,
We know that the Son of God is come, 1 John 5.20.
and has given us an understanding to know him that is true, and we are in him
that is true, even in Jesus Christ; he subjoyns, This is the true God and
Eternal Life: These words, if we interpret them as they lie, and they seem to
have no figure or Hyperbole, or foreign relation in them, may pass for a very
plain Text to prove, that it concerns no less than our Eternal Salvation, to
know that Jesus Christ is the true God, and this Interpretation gives the
clearer reason, and stronger Emphasis to his following rule, v. 21.
Little Children keep your selves from Idols: If then our Lord's design was to
procure Man's everlasting Salvation, a right and certain knowledge of that on
which Eternal Life depends, cannot be impertinent to our Lord's design: And if
to worship God according to his declared Will, be the purpose of every one that
embraces Christianity, exclusively of all other Religions, he that thinks it
necessary, in his worship, to distinguish between these respects due to a mere
Creature, and those Honors belonging to the Creator cannot miss his purpose,
or lose his labor: and He who, by solid proofs, drawn from clear and pertinent
places of Scripture, makes his Faith in this particular, rational, cannot
easily incur any extraordinary danger: though, without so doing, he may incur a
fatal hazard, and thus we come to a direct discourse on that Particular, where
these things will be more fully considered.

Having concluded the first words of this Verse, Without Controversy great is
the Mystery of Godliness, to signify to us the concurrence of the Christian
Faith with the Worlds general vogue in relation to Religion, and that Mysteries
great and obscure are very necessary to the perpetuation of that Faith, and
rend'ring it venerable among conceited and presuming disputants, it cannot be
unuseful to discourse on the first instance the Apostle makes use of to
illustrate the Mystery of Godliness, or of the Christian Faith, viz. God's
manifesting himself in the flesh; or appearing and showing himself to humane
eyes clothed in humane nature; for though God manifests himself a thousand
several ways in his works of Creation and Providence, where his Truth, Justice,
Mercy, Power, Wisdom, etc. are notoriously evident to diligent observers, yet
all these manifestations of himself are at a distance, and such as though they
give us a very fair Idea of divine Goodness as in himself, yet conduce little
to Humane happiness while Men reflect upon themselves as miserably degenerate
from that original excellency they were created in: and as such who have
extremely abused all those evidences of God's power and influence upon the
World, which have been given for restraining them within due bounds, and making
them submissive to a superior Law: such reflections teach Men to look upon
themselves as in a ruinous state, fit subjects for eternal displeasure, and of
themselves wholly incapable of satisfying divine justice, or retrieving
forfeited happiness, and upon God only as a severe Judge and powerful
revenger, of whom they could only conclude, that he would vindicate his own
honor upon those that injured it, and punish those to extremity who had not
duly improved those overtures of himself which he had made in his visible
works. What Man in such a case might wish for is easy enough to conjecture, He
that is falling down a precipice would bless the Hand that would save him from
death, and he that is going immediately to execution, would be overjoyed to hear
of a pardon; so would almost despairing, wretched, sinful Man do, wish for some
proportionable power to interpose between himself and vengeance. But such a
power only could be in God, and yet so great a benefit could be procured for
Man only by such an adequate satisfaction to God's anger as could be given by
a Man; Here Humane conceptions were entirely at a loss, the universal
imperfection of their nature they plainly understood, and so the impossibility
of mere humane satisfaction; they easily found it was no created being, it was
no mere man though strengthened by Divine assistance, nay it was none of those
pure and happy Spirits who attend on celestial Ministrations, that could stem
that prodigious tide of immense wrath, therefore God himself must interpose;
but how Infinity should be confined, how He who grasped the Universe in his
hand should stoop from Heaven for the sake of those who had affronted his
goodness before, how He should condescend to assume Humanity, the necessary
Medium of peace, were Mysteries too great for Man to fathom, and Hopes too
large for guilty souls to please themselves with; but what was so very obscure
to Man was plain and easy to the Almighty; and when the time of his redeemed
was come, when he looked and there was none to help, Isay. 63.4, 5.
and wondered that there was none to uphold, then his own arm brought salvation
to the World; It was then in that absolute fullness of time, when sins and
miseries, and anger were at the height, and all things seemed inevitably
running to eternal destruction, that God sent forth his Son made of a Woman,
made under the Law, to redeem them that were under the Law from those burdens,
and that death to which they were enslaved: to stop the fatal final sentence
then ready to be past, God himself was so made manifest in the flesh; In
relation to which great action we shall assert,

That Jesus Christ the Messiah appearing in our Humane nature, or clothed with
flesh and blood, was really the Son of God.

That the same blessed Jesus was God, equal with his Father, or really and
truly God, as well as real Man.

That it was necessary, that to effect our Salvation, God, and particularly God
the Son should assume our nature to himself.

We shall make some deductions from these Considerations.

That that Man called Jesus Christ, and reputed the Messiah, or the Savior of
the World, who appeared in our nature, was really indeed the Son of God: It Is
he whose Genealogy we have in Scripture descended according to the flesh, from
the Royal Line of the House of Judah, the true and legal Heir of David's sacred
Family: whose birth into the World, as it was mean and despicable, so it was
very public and unquestionable: We find his actions set down at large in the
Gospels, and Him, according to their history, a Man of a blameless life and
conversation, and of inexpressible condescenscions and goodness, we observe him
going about and doing good (the proper character of a great Person) in the
Country of Judaea; healing Diseases, casting out Devils, forgiving Sins, and
that not by a precarious or surreptitious power, but by a really supreme
inherent Authority of his own: We meet with him afterward accused by Jews,
condemned by Romans, and according to their Law, crucified between two Thieves,
on Mount Calvary, buried by Joseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus, raised again in
a stupendous manner, conversant among several Persons who were his Companions
and admirers before, talking, eating and drinking with them forty days
together, and afterward in public view lifted up above the Clouds, beyond the
utmost reach of humane Eyes, this Man called Jesus Christ by the Writers of all
these things, was really the Son of God.

He that would recommend a new discovery to the World, gives a considerable
advantage to its reputation, by the extraordinary worth and merit of the
Author; and therefore whereas the Gospel, or the glad tidings of salvation were
the newest and most glorious discovery the World was capable of, and though the
most welcome to a declining Age, yet with all the most incredible, it was
incumbent upon the first divulgers of it, to recommend it upon the wisdom and
power of its founder. The reputed wise Men of old, to render them more
venerable to the multitude, were wont to derive the first Originals of their
great Benefactors from the Gods; But never was any benefit conferred on any
place or Person by the kindest Patron which could stand in competition with
that which the blessed Jesus conferred on the whole World, therefore never
could any such public Benefactor be with equal reason derived from Heaven with
him: From thence therefore the inspired Writers deduce his Pedigree too, as
well as from David, and tell us boldly, that that great Man, whose praises they
celebrate in their Writings, was indeed the Son of God; which they assert not
in a Metaphorical sense, as the Psalmist calls Rulers and Governors, Psalm.
82.6.
I have said ye are Gods, and ye are all of you Children of the most high: As
the Angels are styled by God himself, in his question to Job, Whereupon are the
foundations of the Earth fastened, or who laid the corner stone thereof? When
the Morning stars sang together, Job 38.6, 7.
and all the Sons of God shouted for joy? as believers are styled by the
Evangelist: As many as received him, to them gave he power to become the Sons
of God, even to them that believe on his name; John 1.12. 1 John 3.2.
And again, Beloved, we are now the Sons of God; But the holy Writers make him
the Son of God in a plain literal sense, as Seth is called the Son of Adam,
being begotten of him, as Isaac of Abraham, as Solomon of David, or as we
generally understand the word in our common expressions of the nearest
Relations, declaring him so the Son of God, begotten of his father before all
worlds, in contradistinction to creation: But it would not have been enough to
satisfy the world in the truth of that extraordinary original for them to
assert it; for though men value great discoveries according to the credit of
their Authors, yet the weight and greatness of the discoveries make them nice
and curious in their disquisitions about them that they may not be imposed on,
for how wretched a disappointment would it have been for a whole world, to be
big with the violent expectation of a Savior, to be thoroughly sensible of
their own necessity, to have a company of men boldly publish to them, that the
expected Savior was really come and qualified suitably to those wonderful
expectations they had of him, and yet to find nothing but a sham or an
imposture at last, a Bar-cozbi the Son of a ly, instead of a Barcochab, the
Star that should have risen in Jacob, as the unhappy Jews were deluded at last.

In such a case Men are wont to look for clear and uncontrollable evidences of
the authority of the discoverer, and had not God himself afforded such to the
world in relation to the descent and original of our Savior, it would scarce
have been reconcilable to infinite justice, to have condemned the world for
not believing on him; Nor would Almighty God have made use of those effectual
means to satisfy humane doubts, had he not himself judged it highly rational
that those creatures of his for whom he intended so great a good, should
receive entire satisfaction in the truth and nature of that good bestowed. In
the evidences of his being the Son of God, lay all the strength and weight of
his Doctrine, and the validity and efficacy of that Repentance preached by the
Apostles in his name; had he, after all those glorious pretenses, been one of
an inferior rank, there never had been so great an Impostor in the world as
Christ, nor such frontless cheats as his Apostles, nor such abused, besotted,
bewitched Creatures in Nature as the Christians in all ages have been:
Therefore to vindicate both their own Credit and that of their Master, the
Evangelists in their writings, first appeal to the common knowledge of those
who lived at the same time that Christ conversed on earth, at which time had
what they published been false, it would certainly have been quickly confuted
by the interested Jews and Romans: For the Jews who saw themselves exposed
under the characters of the most obstinate and ungrateful infidels in the
world, and the Romans who saw themselves traduced as tools in the hands of
their own vassals to carry on the most barbarous and unreasonable cruelties;
would certainly have vindicated themselves to the utmost against their
slanderers, could they have found any flaws in those things they delivered; yet
the Jews never went about to deny the existence of Jesus the supposed Son of
Joseph, nor the reality of those mighty works performed by him, but rather to
show the possibility of all those things though Jesus were not the Messiah,
wherein they were easily baffled, and the Gentiles endeavored to confront his
Miracles by the pretended wonders wrought by Simon Magus, and Apollonius
Thyanaeus, and so to depretiate the Messiah's reputation, but with as little
success: And indeed it was almost inconceiveable, that a company of mean men,
looked upon generally with an evil eye, should resolve to publish a parcel of
notorious falsehoods, which every man upon his own knowledge could have
confuted, and thereby have exposed themselves to the just fury of a deluded
multitude: it was inconceivable that so many in their writings and preachings
could at such different times and such distant places agree together, to put a
sham upon mankind, and to do it so coherently in it self, and so agreeably to
one another, as it was apparent these men did. Now in writing a History of
immediate transactions, there can be nothing fairer in the world than for men
who are eye and ear witnesses of the things in question to compile the story,
and to publish it in their times who knew the same things whether they were
true or false, as certainly as themselves, and an History so written, that
passes through such an age without reproof, may justly pass for authentic, nor
can any mere humane testimony attain a greater certainty. And where the subject
of such a History is Divine, where many things are declared beyond the reach of
humane capacities, where they are yet laid down so exactly agreeable to those
things obvious to humane understandings, and where there appears nothing
disagreeable to the common expectances of the world, nor to those best and
fairest Idea's we have of the Divine Nature, there the History grows it self
divine, and proves it self dictated by a Being superior to all terrene
defects: such a History is the History of the Gospel, and such an appeal to
humane sense and knowledge, and carries such demonstrations of inspiration with
it; where we find God himself declaring by a voice from Heaven, (the nature of
which the Jews from their ancient records must necessarily apprehend,) at the
Baptism of Jesus by John the Baptist, Luke 3.22.
This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, which voice, as being
designed for the Introducing of our Savior into the world, was audible not
only to John the Baptist, but to others, and when it was repeated at the
transfiguration, Matthew. 17.5.
it was audible to all those who accompanied him, and John the Baptist himself,
of whose Commission the Jews seemed very well satisfied, declares, John 1.33,
34.
He that sent me to baptize with water, the same said unto me, Upon whom thou
shall see the Spirit descending and remaining on him, the same is he which
baptizeth with the Holy Ghost: and I saw and bare record, that this is that Son
of God. Now though the stubborn Jews seem not to have depended at all upon these
declarations, nor to have been by them convinced of the truth of what was
asserted in them, yet their acknowledging John the Baptist to have been a
Prophet, and their never denying the truth of these accounts as here set down,
are indeed very considerable proofs of their truth, especially since nothing
could represent them worse, than relating such things as truth, and describing
them as incredulous and refractary still.

The Evangelical writers as they give us this account concerning voices from
Heaven, and the testimony of John the Baptist, so they inform us of Christ
himself that he owned and asserted his own original too, so he tells Nicodemus,
a person of sense and curiosity, as appears by his discourse with our Savior,
God so loved the world, John 3.16.
that he sent his only begotten Son, that whosoever believed on him should not
perish but have everlasting life: Which declaration refers to himself, he
mentioning that sending of the Son of God, as a thing now accomplished, which
title none assumed, nor was it given to any before himself. They tell us how
justly he rebuked the Jews for charging him with blasphemy because he called
himself the Son of God; John 10.36.
for the nature of those works he did openly in the world's view, was a
sufficient proof of his being sent by God, since nothing less than a divine
power and assistance could possibly effect such things, as the Jews if they had
not been resolved upon ruin, could not but know: But God was not wont to send
such on his errands, who puffed up with pride would usurp great and improper
titles to themselves, or who would impose on the world by daring falsehoods; the
Jews were not wholly irrational in thinking he deserved death for calling
himself the Son of God, if really he were not: John 19.7.
No Politics yet could fairly give a toleration to open blasphemy: But the
Jews, though very angry with him for calling himself by so august a name, railed
at him indeed, and accused him and persecuted him, but never went about to
disprove him; nay, when he challenged them if they could to convince him of
sin, John 8.46.
to show any crime whatsoever that he had been guilty of, they answered him
only with an acquitting silence; they were excellent at generals, but the worst
in the world at particulars; and yet to be without sin, was so extraordinary a
quality as could be compatible only with one descending from Heaven: Unclean
Spirits terribly sensible of his power, frequently howsoever unwillingly
confessed him to be the Son of God, Matthew. 8.29. Mar. 3.11.
and they were too much his enemies to acknowledge a thing so very
disadvantagious to their own designs, had it not been truth. Nathanael a
prudent and a pious man, upon discourse with him, easily confessed Thou art the
Son of God, Joh. 1.49.
thou art the King of Israel; The disciples when they saw how with one word
Jesus laid that storm which had threatened their destruction, confessed, Matt
14.33.
of a truth thou art the Son of God: Humane power could not quell the loud and
violent storms, but he that made them could easily allay their fury. The Roman
Centurion who was his guard at his Crucifixion, when he saw how at his giving
up the ghost, the earth quaked, Matthew. 27.50 -- 54.
the rocks rent, the veil of the Temple was split in twain from top to bottom,
and the graves opened, and long buried bodies arose from their heavy sleep,
could not but submit his faith to such prodigious visions, and profess that
truly this was the Son of God: Nature was not wont to undergo such dreadful
convulsions, for the death of an inferior person, but when its great Creator
suffered, it was time to own its sympathetick pangs; after these things it was
no wonder to hear the Apostles declare, Acts 3.13, 36.
That the God of their fathers had glorified his Son Jesus Christ, and again,
That unto us God having raised up his Son Jesus Christ, sent him to bless us in
turning away every one of us from our iniquities. But after all, had either
Jews or Romans proved as well as called Christ a deceiver before, it must have
been a very unordinary confidence in the Apostles to act over the baffled farce
again, and to set up their Master for the Son of God, who had justly suffered
before for blaspheming that Divinity he pretended so near a relation to. But
though what I have said already may go a good way toward the proof of that, That
Jesus was the Son of God, yet for the farther clearing this matter, we may
enquire

Into the promises and predictions concerning his birth, or appearance in the
world as an Intercessor for it.

Into the manner and circumstances of his Birth.

Into the intent and design of his Doctrine.

Into that influence Scripture history in these cases ought to have upon all
those who own the being of a God whether they be Christians or not.

promises and predictions current in the world concerning such an Incarnation
of the Divinity, or its extraordinary appearance in the world for the
restoration of its bliss, before by the increase of wickedness perverted and
ruined: for Promises and Prophecies concerning a person yet unborn, and these
public and obvious to an inquisitive world, are wont to signify such a person
wholly extraordinary, especially when the same spirit which imparts the
foreknowledge of him gives his very name to the world; so we find, when the
Man of God cried against the Altar in Bethel, 1 Kings 13.2.
he prophesied, That a child should be born unto the house of David, Josiah by
name, who upon that Altar should offer the Priests of the high places
themselves and pollute it with dead men's bones; that Josiah spoken of there so
long before his birth, made good the Prophets word to the utmost, and has that
admirable character bestowed upon him by the Holy Ghost, 2 Kings 23.16, 25.
That like to him there was no King before him, that turned to the Lord with
all his heart and with all his soul and with all his might, according to all
the Law of Moses, neither after him arose there any like him: So the name of
Cyrus was foretold long before his birth by the Prophet Isaiah, He Is there
styled God's shepherd, his anointed, the man whose right hand God himself had
holden, but he was to be a perfect Hero, and such heathen as well as sacred
Historians represent him, and God by Isaiah predicts his glory, Isai
44.28.45.1, 2.
even That he should perform all his pleasure, saying to Jerusalem thou shall
be built, and to the temple, thy foundations shall be laid, which Cyrus so
named by the Prophet was indeed a type of our Jesus, our Savior and deliverer.

How numerous, and how plain soever the Prophecies of him in Scripture were, we
shall more particularly consider hereafter, but some principal passages we must
on this occasion take notice of: And first of that foundation of humane hopes,
the Proto-evangelium Paradisiicum, or that promise made to our first Parents in
their lapsed state, though before their expulsion from Paradise, for it was a
promise to them, though a threat to the Serpent to whom the speech was more
immediately directed, Genesis 3.15.
And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her
seed. It shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel: This being by
all Christians and ancient Jews interpreted of the Messiah, was the first glad
tidings of hope to those who were just fallen into a ruinous condition, this
supported our great Parents spirits, when otherwise nothing could present it
self to them, but fears, terrors and desperation: after this we find God
promising as a peculiar blessing to Abraham -- and in thy seed shall all the
nations of the earth be blessed, Genesis 22.18.
which the Jews too of old understood of the Messiah, to be of the stock of
Abraham according to the flesh, nor could it otherwise have been made good; for
the Jewish nation, though they were partakers of particular and infallible
oracles, yet were but an obscure nation in respect of the rest of mankind, and
though they were active in the degeneracy of their Church, to make Proselytes to
their Law, yet the numbers were not great, and if that of our Savior be truth,
That they made their Proselytes two fold more the children of wrath than they
were themselves, Matt. 23.15.
that care of theirs was no very great blessing to the world; Therefore S.
Peter in the close of that Sermon he preached on occasion of the lame man's
cure, Acts 3.25, 26.
applies this promise to our Jesus, and more distinctly and determinately S.
Paul in his Epistle to the Galatians, Gal. 3.16.
Now to Abraham and his seed were the promises made, He says not unto seeds as
of many; but as of one, and to thy seed which is Christ. And further we have in
the early ages of the world that famous and indisputable prophecy of dying
Jacob, The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, Genesis 49.10
nor a Lawgiver from between his feet, until Shilo come, and unto him shall the
gathering of the people be, the exact accomplishment of which, as Shilo means
the Messiah, that is, the Christ, we shall afterward take notice of. It were
no difficulty to show how many of those institutions and Ceremonies of the Jews
prefigured this same Savior, but I shall rather confine my self to prophetic
words than actions, as tending more directly to my purpose. Famous was that
prediction of Balaam, Numb. 24.17,
I shall see him but not now, I shall behold him but not nigh, there shall come
a star out of Jacob, and a scepter shall rise out of Israel, and shall smite
the corners of Moab, and destroy all the children of Seth. Out of Jacob shall
come He that shall have the Dominion, and shall destroy him that remains of
the City; by which general destruction is only meant that Idolatry, and those
Idolaters which the Doctrine of the Gospel should confound, and this, as
Christians have all along applied to Christ, So the Jews proved sufficiently
they understood it so, by their eager following the Barcochab, whom they
thought pointed out by this Text, as I hinted before.

Nor did the Jews till afterward when they came to seek subterfuges for their
obduracy, question the meaning of their Lawgiver, when he told them, The Lord
thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet, Deuteronomy. 18.15.
from the midst of thee, of thy Brethren, like unto me, unto him ye shall
hearken, this could only be made good of Christ, since Moises Ben Maimon, the
most learned of Jewish Writers of late, has largely proved the disparity
between Moses and all other Prophets mentioned in Scripture, and Scripture it
self asserts, That there arose not a Prophet since in Israel like unto Moses,
Deuteronomy. 34.10.
whom the Lord knew face to face: Our Savior only spoke out Divine Mysteries
in the day time, and in the face of the whole world, he needed not, as others,
the mediation of Angels, or of Dreams, or of Visions, to make him understand
the will of God, but saw and knew every thing past, present, and to come,
clearly and fully in himself: His humane nature lived not only in a strict
friendship, but in a close and complete union with the Godhead, and therefore
felt no Convulsions or ecstasies, no violent emotions of his rational
faculties, nor was he confined to time, or place, or common rules, and methods,
but as the fullness of the Godhead dwelt in him, so he delivered Oracles to
Mankind at all times, as he himself pleased, for God did not give the Spirit to
him by measure. Job 3.34.
Thus inspired David, publishes that Eternal Decree, Thou art my Son, this day
have I begotten thee: ask of me and I shall give thee the Heathen for thine
inheritance, Ps. ^.7, 8.
and the utmost part of the earth for thy possession, which could never be true
in respect of David, who never acquired so vast an Empire as is there promised,
but it was really acquired by our Savior, who by his holy Gospel subdued the
Universe, and made all Mankind partakers of that redemption wrought for them by
himself: And so Saint Paul preaching Christ to the Jews at Antioch in Pisidia,
tells them, That the promise made to their Fathers, God had fulfilled to them
their Children, having raised up Jesus again, as it is written in the second
Psalm, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee; Acts 13.32, 33.
and the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, proves his Superiority to Angels
by that Argument: For to which of the Angels said God at any time, Hebr. 1.5.
Thou art my Son, etc. And again, to prove the mission and authority of Christ
having said before, That no man takes the Priestly honor to himself, but he
that is called of God, as was Aaron, he pleads, So Christ glorified not
himself, to be made an High Priest, Heb. 5.4, 5.
but he that said unto him, Thou art my Son, to day have I begotten thee; and
so we are certain of the due application of the Prophecy, which we shall dilate
on farther in another place.

Such again was that of David in the Person of Jesus, afterward to appear in
the World, Psalm. 40.6, 7, 8.
Sacrifice and burnt-offering thou did not desire, mine ears have thou
opened; intimating by that the inefficacy of all those legal and typical
Sacrifices which the Jews and, in imitation of them, others had been used to;
for if these Sacrifices could have availed for the taking away of Sin, they had
no longer been types and shadows, but things of a real and substantial
excellency; which since they were not, Burnt-offering and Sin-offering have
thou not required, Then said I, Lo I come, in the Volume of the Book it is
written of me, I delight to do thy will, Hebr. 10.5-10.
O my God, yea thy Law is within my heart: And thus this Prophecy is applied by
the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, only with that difference, that
whereas the Psalm has it, Mine ear have thou opened, according to the Hebrew,
the Apostle follows the translation of the Septuagint, and renders it, a Body
have thou prepared for me, the sense amounting still to the same, for as the
Hebrews, according to the Law, made a Servant their own for ever, by opening
their ears or boring them, Exodus 21 6.
so God made his Son Jesus obedient as a Servant, by preparing him a body,
which was opened too and fastened to the cross, as the Servants ear, in boring,
to the posts of the door; Nor was that less plain or considerable, The Lord
said unto my Lord, Sit thou on my right hand until I make thine enemies thy
footstool. The Lord has sworn, and will not repent; Psalm. 110.1-4.
Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedeck: The first part of
this our Savior, who undoubtedly knew its true meaning, assumes to himself,
and confounds the Pharisees, by asking them that Question, That whereas it was
expected the Messiah should be the Son of David, yet David calls him Lord,
Matthew. 22.41-45.
How could he be his Lord and his Son too? which was a mystery inexplicable to
those who had mere carnal and mean notions of the Messiah; but a difficulty
which when they got over, it would not be so very hard to believe him, humble
and despicable as he appeared, to be the very Messiah they looked for; For if
he who was David's Lord, and indeed God blessed for ever, could condescend so
low as to be David's Son, it could not be strange that he who was David's Son
should stoop lower yet, and appear in the form of a servant: The latter part of
this prediction relating to a Priest, is by the Writer of the Epistle to the
Hebrews applied to Jesus, Hebr. 7.17-21.
as a proof of the legitimacy and eternity of his Priesthood; Of the same
authority is that, (...) 18, (...) ^^.
The Stone which the builders refused is become the head of the corner, this is
the Lord's doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes; which (not to mention the
Jewish fable of such a stone, being real, met withal in the building of the
second Temple, which had by several been thrown aside as useless, yet
afterward by miracle was found fit for the joining of the corners of the
building) our Savior makes use of to convince the Jews of their folly and
obstinacy in refusing to own him in his great Mediatorian office, and to let
them see that their contempt of Him could be no prejudice to his sacred dignity
and Honor, but that he, who was now thought too inconsiderable to be of any
use to the Jews, one of the smallest of the Nations, Matthew. 21.42, 43, 44.
should afterward appear great enough to join Men of all Countries and Nations
together in one Sacred bond, and to crush all his Enemies in dreadful ruins;
for so he adds, on repetition of those before quoted words, Therefore I say
unto you, the Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a Nation
bringing forth the fruits thereof, and whosoever shall fall on this Stone shall
be broken, but on whomsoever it shall fall it will grind him to powder: And
this advancement and dilatation of Christ's power St. Peter justly takes notice
of, from the same Psalm, in the case of the Cripple newly cured, Acts 4 9, 10,
11, 12.
If we be this day examined of the good deed done to the impotent man, by what
means he is made whole, Be it known to all the people of Israel, that by the
name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, whom ye crucified, whom God raised from the
dead, even by Him does this Man stand before you whole; This is the stone which
was set at naught of you builders, which is become the head of the Corner.
Neither is there salvation in any other, for there is none other name under
Heaven given among men whereby we must be saved.

That of Isaiah is wholly extraordinary, and, as I hinted before, it was a sure
sign of some extraordinary Person intended, it gives us the very name proper to
our Jesus, as he was the Son of God, Behold a Virgin shall conceive and bear a
Son, Isai. 7.14.
and shall call his name Immanuel; where the thing foretold is so much a
miracle, that it cannot be believed to have occurred more than once in the
World, nay, the prodigiousness of the thing has made some, great pretenders to
reason endeavor to weaken the very authority of Scripture it self, from the
impossibility of the thing foretold: And the Jews have endeavored to affix a
large sense upon the Text, as if no more was meant than barely, That a Woman
should be with Child, and so the miracle is wholly taken away: But all these
little stratagems of unbelievers have failed, and the very Name added would
convince considerate Men of some great thing designed, since a mere Man, or one
coming into the World, according to the ordinary course of nature, could not be
truly called Immanuel, or God with us: This declaration of the Evangelical
Prophet, as He Is justly called, is soon followed by another of the same nature;
For unto us a Child is born, Isai. 9 6, 7.
unto us a Son is given, and the Government shall be upon his shoulders, and
his name shall be called, Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty God, the
everlasting Father, the Prince of peace, of the increase of his Government,
there shall be no end, upon the Throne of David, and upon his Kingdom, to order
it, and to establish it with judgment and with justice, from henceforth even
for ever: In all which the Prophet seems to write a perfect History of things
past; he speaks with that assurance and confidence, as if he had seen that hope
of Israel born into the World, and wholly ecstatick in his contemplation of so
infinite a blessing bestowed on the World, he fixes such Titles upon him, as
were compatible with no mere man, nay he makes him God, an Infinite, an
everlasting God, the Universal Monarch of Earth and Heaven, yet leaves him
dressed in flesh and blood at last, a Child born, a Son given to us, miserable
perishing Creatures: But Isaiah's reflections on the promised Savior are so
many, as not to be instanced in, more particularly we may just name that, Isai.
11.1.
And there shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a branch shall
grow out of his roots; And the spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the
spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of Counsel and might, the spirit
of knowledge and the fear of the Lord, with righteousness shall he judge the
poor and reprove with equity, for the meek of the Earth, and he shall smite the
Earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall he slay
the wicked; and more to that purpose, which St. Paul in his discourse to the
Antiochians in Pisidia alludes to; And that again, Acts 13.22, 22, 24.
The voice of him that cries in the Wilderness, Prepare ye the way of the
Lord, make straight in the desert an highway for our God, every Valley shall
be exalted, and every Mountain and Hill shall be made low, and the crooked
shall be made straight, and the rough places plain, ^^i. 40.3.4, 5.
and the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it
together, for the mouth of the Lord has spoken it, which John the Baptist
applies to himself and his Master: Joh. 1.23.
Such is the whole fifty-third Chapter, a complete, though compendious
Chronicle of our Savior from his Cradle to his Tomb, happily read by the
Ethiopian Eunuch; since from thence the Evangelist Philip took occasion to
preach to him Jesus: Acts 8.34, 35.
Such that, The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, because the Lord has
anointed me, to preach good tidings to the meek, he has sent me to bind up the
brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the Captives, and the opening of the
Prison to them that are bound, Isai. 61.1, 2. Luke 4.17, 18, 19.
to proclaim the acceptable Year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our
God, applied to himself by our Savior.

Agreeably to these Predictions the Prophet Jeremy foretells, Behold the days
come, says the Lord, that I will raise to David a righteous branch, and a King
shall reign and prosper, Jerem. 23.5, 6.
and shall execute judgment and righteousness in the Earth, in his days Judah
shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely, and this is the name whereby he
shall be called, The Lord our righteousness; Which is again repeated by him,
Jer. 33.15, 16. To the same purpose Ezekiel, I will save my Flock and they
shall be no more a prey, and I will set up one Shepherd over them, and he shall
feed them, even my servant David, he shall feed them, and he shall be their
Shepherd, and I the Lord will be their God, Ezekiel 34.22, 23, 24.
and my servant David a Prince among them, I the Lord have spoken it; Which is
repeated and enlarged, Ezekiel. 37. 21 -- ad fin. Daniel yet more plainly, I saw
in the night visions, and behold one like the Son of Man came with the Clouds
of Heaven, and came to the Ancient of days, and they brought him near before
him; And there was given him dominion, and glory, and a Kingdom, Dan. 7.13, 14.
that all People, Nations, and Languages should serve him, his dominion is an
everlasting Dominion, which shall not pass away, Rev. 14 14.
and his Kingdom that which shall not be destroyed; Which St. John alludes to;
not to mention any thing of Daniel's weeks, Micah gives us that, Thou Bethlehem
Ephratah, though thou be little among the thousands of Judah, Mica. 5.2.
yet out of thee shall he come forth to me, that is to be ruler in Israel,
Matt. 2.6.
whose goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting, which those
Priests Herod afterward enquired of, could remember very well: And lastly,
Malachi as plain as any, Mat. 3.1.
Behold, I will send my messenger, and he shall prepare the way before me, and
the Lord whom ye seek shall suddenly come to his Temple, even the Messenger of
the Covenant whom ye delight in, behold he shall come, says the Lord of hosts.

These are a few of that very great number of Prophecies which raised the
expectation of the Jews for the appearance of a Savior, whom they expected as
a mighty temporal Prince, not considering that the things foretold of him were
beyond the atchievments of the greatest Potentate in the world: For to be the
great messenger of that Covenant which was between God and his people, and at
the same time the God whom they sought, and whose their Temple was, who yet
were taught to worship only the true God; to be the glory of a private town as
of Bethlehem, yet of an eternal original with respect to the time past, and the
worlds everlasting head and governor with respect to the time to come; to be a
David, a man after God's own heart, who should do all his will, after David's
natural death; to be infinitely happy, just, compassionate, Anointed by the
sacred Spirit of God, to have the greatest of those born of a woman his
harbinger, and by him acknowledged for a God, though shaded from vulgar eyes by a
cloud of humane frailty, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of
Peace, yet a child, a Son, brought forth in the world and given to us; To be
born of a pure and spotless Virgin, so Man, yet the hopes of all the ends of
the earth, and of those that remain in the broad Sea, and so God: To be
despised by the great and wise, yet the great Center of Unity for all the
Nations in the World; To be at once David's Son and David's Lord, and seated at
the right hand of God: To terminate all material typical sacrifices in his own
flesh, and unlimited obedience, yet to be owned by God himself, as his only
begotten Son, and heir to the government of all things: To surpass their
admired Moses, as a Master his Servant in the Prophetic gift, and an intimate
familiarity with God; To be the utter ruin of Idolatry, that seed which should
be the blessing and therefore the desire of all nations, that seed which should
break the head, ruin the policy and Tyranny of that old Serpent the Devil; To
be a real and visible Man, yet our Immanuel, God with us, which is the sum of
all those Prophecies and Promises; To be all these things is not consistent
with a temporal Monarch whose breath is in his nostrils, though all the nations
in the World adored him: The absolute conquest over prevailing wickedness, the
triumph over Death and Hell and all the obstacles of a blessed Immortality, the
redemption of a guilty world from impendent vengeance, by a swift and entire
obedience to the Almighty Will, the making up that prodigious Chasme between an
infinitely pure and holy Deity, and a depraved and provoking world, are
thoughts and enterprises too vast and glorious to be undertaken by any child of
Man; therefore whosoever it was, that all those mighty things should be
accomplished in, whosoever should be so infinitely beloved by Heaven, and so
prodigious a Benefactor to mankind, must be according to those titles fixed upon
him, the Son of God, his Son in a true literal sense, and as such he may really
be capable of doing more for us, than we our selves can ask or think.

The blessed Jesus, as I intimated before, was not only the expectation of
Israel, but the desire of all nations, and therefore promised to all nations in
the forecited passages as well as them; and though the Jews were not so good
natured as to be very Communicative of their divine treasures, yet the Gentiles
who had their concerns in so just an hope, had their predictions too, and though
not so clearly, foresaw the approaching days of their Redeemer; the elder
Prophecies, such as that to our first Parents in Paradise, or that to Abraham
might get abroad into the world, the prophecies themselves being originally
known to others, as well as those whom they more immediately concerned; and
that passage of Job, I know that my redeemer lives, Job 19.25, 26.27.
and that he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth, and though after my
skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God, whom I shall see
for my self, and mine eyes shall behold and not another, though my reins be
consumed within me, is a sufficient evidence, that those who lived without the
pale of Jacob's family were sensible of what they wanted, and that their hopes
were reasonable that those wants should be supplied; and Balaam's predictions
being heard by Moabites, strangers to Israel, were without all question taken
great notice of by the heathen nations: Hence arose the fame of the Sibylline
Oracles, talked of so much by ancient writers, and by what we find spoken of
'em by Tully, De Divinat. l. 2.
and transcribed from them by Virgil, sufficient to raise men's expectations and
desires for some very great and happy event; hence grew those common discourses
of the Gods descending in humane shapes to converse with and instruct men,
Which showed men's general apprehensions of the love of the Deity to mankind, of
the possibility of an Incarnation, and the useful consequences it might have
for the reformation of corrupt nature. Hence that prophetic advice of
Confutius the famous Chinese Philosopher who lived 550. years before our
Savior's birth, t^^ Prince to be virtuous, Huetii Demonstr. Evang. Prop. 7. c.
32.
for says he, The actions of a good Prince ought to be agreeable to the Laws of
God and Nature, and he should not doubt, but that when that expected holy One
shall come, his virtue shall then be as much honored, as it was before while
he lived and reigned. And I cannot but think it reasonable to conclude, that
Balaam's prophecy might be known there and better preserved by their learning,
so ancient among them, than in other places, and that excited by that, the wise
Men came from thence to worship our Savior at his birth, especially since the
length of a journey from thence seems most agreeable to Herod's calculation,
when to be sure of reaching the new born King, He killed all the children in
Bethlehem and its coasts, Matthew. 2.1, 2, 9, 10.
from two years old and under, according to the time that he had diligently
enquired of the wise men. About our Savior's time, and before and after, for a
while, a rumor was spread abroad every where that One should be born in Judea,
who should be the Universal Monarch, as Suetonius in the life of Augustus, and
in that of Vespasian, and Tacitus in the fifth book of his Histories, tells us,
which fame Josephus the Jewish Historian laid hold on to flatter with
Vespasian, and to get his own liberty by persuading him the prophetic rumor
pointed him out for the Roman Empire. Here again, That ever-living Redeemer,
that glorious child, who should reduce the frame of Nature to so happy a
condition after all the disorders it had suffered, who should banish sin and
wickedness, That looked for Holy One, who should give virtue its due reward,
that Jewish native who should command the humble world, must of necessity be
concluded somewhat more than Man by the longing Expectants: He must be God to
effect such wonders, and yet must be a Man to be a native of Judaea, he must
have humane nature to be born with into the world and to converse with men, and
to take away the very smallest footsteps and tracks of Sin he must at least be
partaker of Divinity; thus all the Prophecies both among Jews and Gentiles
conclude in a necessity that the worlds Redeemer from that misery and those
dangers it lay under, must at least be the Son of God. The Chara Deum soboles
magnum Jovis incrementum, as Virgil expresses it: And thus much may serve for
those Prophecies fore-running the Birth of our Savior, I proceed now to enquire

manner and circumstances of his Birth, which notwithstanding its outward or
appearing meanness, was exactly agreeable to the grandeur predicted of him; for
his being born in a public Inn, and in a place of contempt, his being laid in
a Manger, and having as some tell us Oxen and Asses for his Companions, were no
prejudice to his dignity, its not the place of birth but the parents of whom
Men are born that makes them vile in the worlds eyes: A Beggar may be born in a
Palace, nay, wrapped in purple too, and concluded great by incurious fools, and
great Princes have been born in forests and deserts, lost to all humane helps
and respects suitable to their descents; yet he that is born of Parent beggars is
a beggar still, and he that is deduced from the just Possessors of a Throne, a
Prince: and such was our blessed Savior being God of God, light of light, very
God of very God, though manifest in the flesh; and to show that he was such, He
that had been so often promised before, when the time of his manifestation in
the flesh came, had no less than an Angel from Heaven to notify his very
Conception, and his too, who was to prepare his way before him. Luke 1.11-21.
An Angel told Zacharias of John the Baptist, when age made him past the hopes
of such a blessing, an Angel too foretold the blessed Virgin, That she should
conceive in her womb and bring forth a Son and call his name Jesus, v. 30, 31,
32, 33, etc.
who should be great, and be called the Son of the Highest, to whom the Lord
should give the throne of his father David, and who should reign over the house
of Jacob for ever, and of whose kingdom there should be no end: So proving that
Isaiah's prophecy, c. 7. v. 14. was presently to be accomplished; it being a
Virgin to whom the Angel foretold those great things, who without a miracle
could not conceive, and the design of his Birth being that he might be Jesus
the Savior of the world, which none could be, but who was Immanuel, or God
with us. After such preparatives, it was no wonder if other prophetic passages
came to be made good too; the fullness of time required such an accomplishment,
as well as the completing of Sins, which were the occasion of those gracious
promises to the sinners, as they moved the merciful God to pity and
compassion, which he chose then to show when danger and misery was in its
extremity. Prophecies concerning persons and places have generally their fixed
times to be performed in, which though they are very difficult to be found out by
others before hand, who are not possessed by the same spirit which inspired the
Prophets, are yet very plain and easily intelligible to considering Men, when
they come to read and seriously to weigh the Histories of things past; and we
who stand at that advantage of time, who have the History of the blessed Jesus
faithfully delivered down to us, and the predictions foregoing his Birth into
the world, may so compare them together, as to make them strongly confirm the
truth of one another. And thus, whereas we find the repeated promises to
Abraham and Isaac, that in their seed all the nations of the earth should be
blessed, which could not be effected by any temporal Interests or extent of
Empire: For though wise Governors are a blessing to any nation, yet all nations
together are too great a Body to he managed by a single hand, and a Solomon
himself can be no great blessing to those that never heard of him: But when he
appeared who was to save the people from their sins, Matt. 1.21.
as the Angel in a dream informed Joseph, Luke 1.78, 79.
When the dayspring from on high visited the world, to give light to them that
sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death, to guide their feet into the way
of peace; When that common Salvation was presented to humane eyes which was
prepared before the face of all people, Luke 2.30, 31, 32.
to be a light to lighten the Gentiles, as well as the glory of the tribes of
Israel, as old holy Simeon expresses himself, then that Universal Blessing was
really bestowed, and Jesus taking flesh of the blessed Virgin, was really that
sacred branch who scattered his goodness as the Sun his beams, through all the
quarters of the Universe. Remission of sins, Redemption from the powers of
Death and Hell, Reconciliation of sinners to a terribly incensed God, were all
favors of an Universal influence, none could be exempted from their glorious
effects but those who coveted their own ruins, and were resolved not to accept
of an offered blessing. That celebrated prediction of Jacob, That the Scepter
should not depart from Judah, nor the Lawgiver from between his feet till Shilo
came, was as punctually made good at the time of our Savior's appearance in
the world, who was the Shilo promised, or the person to be sent to take the
Government upon him; which Prophecy though the Jews have endeavored to render
as obscure as possible, and though others by their needless curiosity have made
us no fewer than six several interpretations of it, yet it seems to have no
such extraordinary difficulty in it, if that particle which is in our Bibles
translated, and, be but, as usually it is, translated, or, for so the import of
it will be that either, a regal Government should be continued in the tribe of
Judah, or at least a Lawgiver, when that Government ceased, should be found
among them, i. e. a legal expositor or determiner of the meaning of the Law of
Moses, till the Messiah should be ready to come. Now he that considers that as
Judah had the superiority among his brethren, that he was the Leader of the
Israelites to the war against the Canaanites, Judges 1, 1, 2.
that his tribe was abundantly the most numerous of all the rest, as may be
seen by the several accounts of their increase, that the tribe of Judah had
much the noblest and the largest share in the promised Land, and that the
Royalty was at last regularly settled in the house of David in that tribe, to
which family in particular the Messiah was confined; He that shall consider
these things carefully, and shall observe withal; That upon the defection of
Jeroboam, the tribe of Levi in their zeal to the honor and service of the true
God, left the rebelling tribes, for so we are told, 2 Chronicles. 11.13, 14.
That the Priests and the Levites that were in all Israel, resorted to Rehoboam
the son of Solomon out of all their coasts, for the Levites left their suburbs
and possessions and came to Judah and Jerusalem, by which means the tribe of
Levi, to the chief family of which the Priesthood belonged, came to be in some
measure incorporated into the greater tribe of Judah, if withal he take notice
that, though the regal power in the tribe of Judah ended with the Captivity of
Babylon, yet the Priesthood continued in the family of Aaron, he may easily see
the fulfilling of Jacob's words; for we may see Aaron the first Patriarch of
the Priestly family breaking out of his own into the tribe of Judah and
marrying Elisheba the daughter of Aminadab and sister of Naashon of the tribe
of Judah, Exodus 6.23.
which Aminadab and Naashon are particularly reckoned among David's
predecessors by S. Matthew, Matthew. 1.4.
by which means the Regal and Sacerdotal line were intermingled as well as the
tribes were afterward: nor were such alliances altogether extraordinary, for
we find afterward Jehoiada the high priest marrying Jehoshabeath the sister of
Ahaziah King of Judah, 2 Chronicles. 22.11.
of the house and lineage of David: Now the Scepter is assigned immediately to
the hands of Judah, the royalty being fully and entirely in the hand of that
tribe without any competition either with the Benjamites or Simeonites, part of
which tribes stuck fast to Judah's interests after the revolt of the ten
tribes: but the Lawgiver is placed between his feet, not according to the sense
some affix to that phrase, as if Jacob spoke modestly of the original birth of
such Lawgivers, as if being between the knees were an equivalent to being born
from the womb of such a one, as it is true it sometimes means, but it signifies
the Lawgiver shall be in his protection, or within his jurisdiction and limits,
as a great Officer between the feet of the Sovereign on some solemn occasions,
or as the Bishop of Rome is said to have set the Archbishop of Canterbury
between his feet at the Council of Lions with that expression, Includimus hunc
in orb nostro tanquam alterius orbis Papam; and so the Lawgiver was
continually within the proper bounds and limits of the tribe of Judah both
before and after the Captivity of Babylon: But as the Scepter departed from
Judah at that Captivity, so the legal expounder of sacred writings to the
Jewish nation was taken away about the time of our Savior's Incarnation, the
family of Aaron being then lighted, and every one admitted to the
high priesthood who could give most money for that office, and the Civil
Government though under the title of Herod being a mere vassal to the Roman
Empire: When these things were both come to pass, then Shilo the promised
Messiah came, in whom those particular assurances to David were made good, That
out of his loins the Messiah should come: In him the Royal and Priestly line
were united, he was legal Heir to both Houses; he was a King and Priest for
ever, to whom the gathering of all Nations is, and ought to be; Luke 1.27 32.35.
Now that the blessed Virgin was of the House and Lineage of David, as well as
Joseph, we learn from Scripture, and if the Tribe of Judah was exalted by the
advancement of David to the Imperial Throne, it was much more exalted and more
adorable to the rest of the Tribes by the birth of Jesus the Savior of the
World, and the King of all things both in Heaven and in Earth.

How Moses his word was made good, of the Prophet to be raised up like to
himself, I showed before, that being made truth in the birth of Christ: but
it is more complete application belonging to our Savior's manly age when he
made himself public, and undertook to preach repentance to his obstinate
Countrymen; But that of a Body have thou prepared for me, came to pass, when
the Angel's word was effected, The Holy Ghost shall come upon thee, and the
power of the highest shall overshadow thee, therefore also that holy thing
which shall be born of thee shall be called the Son of God; Luke 1.25.
It was an immediate Divine power that gave a beginning and increase to that
Sacred Body in the Virgin's Womb, nothing could be produced between Man and
Woman, as under the ancient curse, and miserably corrupted and polluted in
their natures, that was fit for those great things at that time designed for
us, for who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean? therefore a Virgin
untouched by man was chosen for his habitation, who was to redeem lost mankind,
and was overshadowed by the power of the Almighty, Genesis 1.2.
which did incubare in Virginem, as the same Spirit is said to move upon the
face of the Waters, to cover it as the Bird covers her Eggs to make them
prolifick, as the word imports; now a body so prepared, and so inhabited, as
our Savior's humanity was, could not be but pure and undefiled, since if a
corrupt Tree cannot bring forth good fruit, neither can a good Tree bring forth
evil fruit; the reasons of both their productions being the same. Nor was it
unreasonable he should be David's Lord, though his Son according to the flesh,
whose birth was intimated by holy Angels, whose Father was Almighty God
himself, and whose Kingdom was to endure from everlasting to everlasting, all
which circumstances rendered him infinitely more considerable to pure reason
than ever David was; nor could the humble manner of his entrance into the World
be any just prejudice to his mighty title: David was mean and inconsiderable
too, when God took him from attending on the Sheepfold to feed his People
Israel, and the Prophet Zachary gives him notwithstanding his apparent
meanness, his due Honor, Rejoice greatly O Daughter of Zion, shout O Daughter
of Jerusalem, Zach. 9.9.
behold thy King comes unto thee; he is just and having salvation, lowly and
riding upon an Ass, and upon a Colt the foal of an Ass: He might then be a King
still, how despicable soever he appeared to humane eyes; and as a King
according to the extent and proportion of his Empire, might be Lord of David,
and of all the Kings upon Earth. Isaiah had long since foretold he should be
born of a Virgin, and so in the event he was, Mary his Mother was a Virgin,
even beyond the confutation of the malicious Jews, it was to such a one the
Angel was sent, it was such a one who was according to his assurance to be
overshadow'd by the Holy Ghost, it was such a one who was to conceive and bring
forth: And the Evangelist openly declares of Jesus, That when as his Mother
Mary was espoused to Joseph, Matt. 1.18.
before they came together, she was found with Child of the Holy Ghost, and of
Joseph he asserts, That he knew her not until she had brought forth her first
born Son, v. 25.
and he called his name Jesus: And whereas, the Prophet had been ecstasi'd with
joy at the knowledge of a Child, a Son of so Divine a nature being given to his
People, when that Child was born indeed, the Sacred Host of Angels was
rapturous, as the Prophet had been before, for when one of that heavenly Chorus
had told the watchful Shepherds, Behold I bring you good tidings of great joy
which shall be to all People, Luke 2 10.11. v. 14.
for unto You is born this day in the City of David a Savior, which is Christ
the Lord: Presently the whole Quire in a joyful transport praised God, and
said, Glory to God on high, and on Earth peace, and good will toward Men; and
his being really born of the House and Lineage of David, gave him a claim
sufficient to an Interest in that Prophecy, that the Messiah should be a rod
out of the stem of Jesse, and a branch out of his roots; and whereas a voice in
the Wilderness, was to cry before our Savior's preaching in public, Prepare
ye the way of the Lord, etc. No sooner was John the Baptist born, who was
Christ's forerunner both in birth and in that work too, but his inspired Father
Zachary declares of him, Thou Child shall be called the Prophet of the Highest,
for thou shall go before the face of the Lord to prepare his ways, Luke 1.76,
77.
to give knowledge of Salvation to his people for the remission of their sins.
The Messiah was to be the Prince of Peace, according to the Prophets, and he
eventually proved himself so, when he made his first entrance into the World in
the time of the most universal peace the World had known, the swelling Roman
Empire was then in a profound calm within it self, after all those Civil broyls
which had almost torn out its bowels before, and it was at peace with all its
Neighbors round about, which had not happened of several Centuries before, in
such a juncture what could rationally have been expected but what was suitably
great and wholly extraordinary? That subtle old Serpent began to feel his
influence even before his birth, when all those stratagems of his, whereby he
was wont to embroil Mankind, were broken: he saw too easily that fatal
offspring of the Woman, which should break his head, ruin his arbitrary
Tyranny and Power, and easily dissolve those seemingly irrefragable chains
whereby he formerly had miserably enslaved humane nature: This was that great
and glorious King which God himself in spite of all the tumultuary insults and
oppositions of terrene powers in conjunction with infernal malice, settled upon
his holy Hill of Zion: It was He concerning whom so many gracious promises were
made, as upheld the Church of old under those many dangers, difficulties and
oppressions it was ordinarily engaged in: God knew and pitied his Peoples
calamities, and had promised, that he would find out an adequate remedy for
their extreme necessities, this they believed, they knew that God who had
promised was truth it self, and could not disagree with himself, and therefore
when their condition was most cloudy, they saw the day of their Redeemer at a
distance and were glad, and resolved though God killed them, they would yet
trust in him; This hope and confidence made them patiently endure the torture,
not accepting deliverance, that they might obtain a better resurrection,
resolving never to quit the hope of Israel, their faith in the Messiah, that
they with him, suffering for the faith in him might rise again to the
resurrection of Salvation.

But as the blessed Jesus was that Star himself, which Balaam had foretold
should arise in Jacob, so a Star attended his Birth, not only shining like the
Pillar of Fire in the Night; but giving a surer guidance than the cloudy Pillar
in the day time, leading the observing Sages from the utmost quarters of the
East, to give an Alarm to the Jews, and make them curious too in observing the
signs of the times, that they might be sure not to miss at last, when he should
come, of Him, whose coming they had expected so long: And indeed the Priests
and Rulers, and Herod, nay, and all Jerusalem were troubled, Matt. 2.3.
and disturbed at that happy news, which should have been their greatest joy
and satisfaction; The chief Priests and Scribes trembled, to think if that were
true, that their imposing upon the People with a spiritual Tyranny and
Hypocritical sanctity would be at an end: Herod was justly startled at the name
of a King, as Princes are generally very jealous of Competitors in Empire, and
the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, who had often felt Herod's fierce and bloody
temper before, might justly fear an Inquisition to be made among them for this
young Claimer; Herod yet of all the rest had the deepest impressions of fear
and passion made upon himself, which, when the Wise men had deluded him, he
vented upon the miserable Bethlehemites. The poor laborious Shepherds received
the News with calmer minds, they had no Governments, no Interests to lose, but
lived in harmless Peace, and humble content in ignoble Cottages, and if their
Flocks did well, they would never be concerned in the cares of Kings and
Potentates, therefore they flew eagerly to the Presence of their Savior, and
agreed with the Eastern Sages in their Prudence, not esteeming the newborn
Infant, according to the meanness of his circumstances, but according to the
glorious presages and indications of his Birthright: So happy are the lowliest
minds, and so much more capable of Divine impressions, than those distracted
with the thoughts of worldly grandeur: So much more suitable they are to him,
who tells us, He was meek and lowly in spirit, not puffed up with the Hosanna's,
nor yet dejected with the Crucifiges of the impetuous and variable multitude;
but though Herod were angry and raged, God would not permit his madness to take
place, cheerful Angels were ever ready to wait their Master's errands, and they
warned Joseph of the impendent danger, so opening the way to the accomplishment
of every word of God; for when Joseph fled into Egypt for security, whose low
condition in the World made him both unsuspected to the Jewish frontier guards,
and to his Egyptian entertainers, who little suspected that a mighty King
entered under their Roofs, under the tutelage of a contemptible Mechanic, or
that a little harmless Infant concealed a God; when this was done, an Angel too
in due time gave Joseph such intelligence, as put an end to his voluntary
banishment; and yet things were ordered so, that upon the news of Herod's Son's
reign, Joseph turned aside to Nazareth, instead of returning to Bethlehem, that
so the Son of God might at once be called out of Egypt, and be styled a
Nazarene, that no Prophetical circumstance or Punctilio might be wanting to his
Birth, which was necessary to convince the World of his being that real
Messiah, which had been so long promised to the Fathers; from all which it was
no wonder that Christ himself afterward referred the Unbelieving Jews to these
very Considerations, Joh. 5.39.
Search the Scriptures, says He, for in them ye think ye have Eternal Life, and
they are they which testify of me.

Now that He who before his appearance in the flesh had been the Author of a
strong and impregnable faith in God's people, and who created such fears and
made such terrible concussions in the souls of wicked and ungodly men, that he
who when born, was to do things beyond the utmost reach of any thing but
Omnipotence, to do a Creator's work, and restore all the decays of ruined
Nature, that he should make his entrance into the world in a miraculous manner,
was rationally to be expected, since the causes in supernatural as well as
other things must be proportioned to the effects: And certainly to any thing
but a Jew, these prodigious appearances at the birth of our Savior would have
signified as much as golden Scepters and imperial Diadems, and all the gaudy
shows of victories and conquests; and especially it should have been so since
the Jews themselves, stupid as they were, expected wonders in and at his birth;
but above all things their behavior was strange to him in that, if the Messiah
were to be the King of the Jews themselves, the Jews themselves as his Subjects
should with the first have submitted to him, by which means, if any, he might
have grown formidable to their enemies, and have, as they expected, restored
the kingdom again to Israel, whereas indeed, John 1.11.
He came to his own, but his own received him not: So that if he must have been
so great and victorious, his Conquest must have been made at first upon his
native rebels, before he could have spread the terror of his arms abroad; They
who expected only a Man, though very great, to appear, should have looked for no
such effects of his appearance but what might justly have consisted with
humanity, armies are not wont to grow like Mushrooms in a night, and those who
cannot have the assistance of their Subjects for their own good, can scarce
expect suitable supports from others to carry on or secure the interests of
ingrates or rebels. If any thing of worldly greatness were indeed to have been
expected at the Messiah's advent, it should have been, that in so depraved an
age of the world, he should have come attended with miraculous vengeance to
destroy the adversaries of divine goodness and their own happiness: That Those
his enemies who would not admit that he should reign over them, should have
been brought out and slain before his face: But on the contrary, as his design
was Mercy, so he came in a way proportioned to it, the lenity and softness of
his ingress into a sinkking and undeserving world was wholly astonishing; Born,
as it was foretold, of a pure and spotless Virgin, a descent agreeable to that
prodigious innocence apparent in his life and converse, and according to the
very tendencies of nature, more likely to incline to pity and compassionate
tenderness of the miseries of others, such a temper being the ornament as well
as the expected companion of a Virgin state: He was born a King, that he might
with the greater intention study the good of his Subjects, yet born in a low
and contemptible estate, that he might the better instruct the too aspiring
sons of Men, that all the most substantial greatness is founded in humility; He
was not wellcom'd into the world with the dreadful shouts of conquering armies,
but with the softer Hallelujah of joyful Angels, gentle and kind Spirits, whose
triumphs were raised, not from the dismal groans of an impenitent tortured
world, but that glory arising to God's eternal Name, from that peace brought
down by him to earth, and that good will which was then undeniably demonstrated
toward the sinful children of men: His Birth was not first notified to Kings or
Emperors or other worldly Grandees, that they might have cast their Crowns at
the feet of him who lives for ever and ever, but to innocent and toyling
Shepherds, who were watching their flocks by night, Men whose veracity none
could reasonably suspect, and who could have no bye perverse design of their
own to carry on, no intreagues to manage by imposing cheats and shams upon the
credulous, who were the most proper witnesses of his Birth, who himself fed his
flock like a shepherd, Isal. 40.11.
who gathered the Lambs with his arm and carried them in his bosom, gently
leading those that were with young; as it was predicted of him. Nor was the
Royal Palace of a Monarch honored with his nativity, but a mean and scorned
stable, to show That God had chosen the weak things of the world to confound
the things which were mighty, and that the base things of this world, and
things which are despised were chosen by God, and things which are not, to
bring to naught things which are, 1 Cor. 1.27, 28, 2^.
that no flesh should glory in his presence; and yet that it might not be
pretended that He who was rightful Monarch of the world wanted the due
acknowledgments of his Sovereignty and divinity too, from his wiser and more
considerate vassals, the Eastern wise Men, whom yet we dare not with those
Legendary Authors, conclude to have been Kings, made their Presents to him of
Gold, Frankincense, and Myrrh, proper offerings to so extraordinary a person,
and sufficiently divulged both his birth and title, though that interstice of
time between his birth and preaching publicly made all those premonitions
forgotten.

But was he merely, as he was esteemed, the Son of an inconsiderable tradesman
in Israel, of a poor person thrust into the stable of an Inn to give place to
his Superiors? was it a slighted infant the companion of beasts it may be at
his nativity, and beneath the notices of Men of birth and fortune? was it such
a one that could be born by divine operation of an untouched Virgin of the
sacred royal Line? was it such a one that was received into the world with the
homage of blessed Angels, attended with a prodigious Star at his birth, adored
by humble foreigners, blessed and admired by Judaean Saints, and holy Men? Could
such a one employ the dreams, visions, revelations, and the calmer studies of
so many inspired Prophets both among the Jews and Gentiles, employ the care of
active Angels for his preservation from the malignant fury of envious powers,
and the happy Pens of faithful Evangelists to transmit the series of his
glorious actions, as well as the account of his miraculous birth to inquisitive
ages? Could such a one be the Prince of Peace, the everlasting God, the
infinitely wise Counselor, that blessed seed in whom all the nations of the
World should be blessed, that rock of Ages on which was fixed the faith of the
Prophets and Patriarchs, the Saints and Martyrs of old, so firmly, that neither
the force nor subtilty of Men or Devils could prevail against them? No, these
were works only fit for a divine Being to undertake, nothing but God could be
so waited on by humble and acknowledging nature, nothing but God could so
strongly affect the hearts of holy Men; to raise the drooping soul above all
the gay prospects of a flattering world, above all the dangers generally
attending despised piety, to make Men sit loose to all those exterior blessings
they meet with in this world, and to account all things but as loss and dung in
comparison of that Salvation wrought for them by Jesus, to make them scorn the
rack and wheel, and smile at flames and lingering tortures, and all this only
upon the credit of a future happy state, for the purchase of Crowns and
kingdoms invisible to all eyes but those of faith, and this too when all such
sufferings and inconveniences might be avoided by a few short words and some
little inconsiderable actions, these achievements are far beyond the most
ambitious thoughts of mere mortal Creatures, beyond their most aspiring hopes,
though influenced by those united powers, which acted so vigorously in all the
several Prophets of foregoing Ages. It Is extremely derogatory to God's justice
and wisdom to imagine, that Man, who was not able to support himself in his
innocent state when once attacked by a slight temptation, (though there were then
no defects of any kind in his intellectuals,) should be able now when every
faculty in him is weakened and perverted by the spreading infection of sin, to
work his own redemption: or should God have ordered a greater price to have
been paid for satisfaction for sin, when a lower would have effected it, or
have sent a partaker of the eternal Godhead, to take upon him and suffer in
humane nature for the worlds crimes, when an inferior person might have
compassed the great design as well. Nor had the benefit conferred upon us been
so valuable, had God only wrought that for us, which, had he not done, we could
as easily have wrought for our selves: But the case was otherwise; fallen Man
was now in a state of damnation, perfect innocence and complete satisfaction,
for inveterate guilt must retrieve him from Hell, but fallen Man was incapable
of any such innocence or satisfaction; Angels who had sinned, were incapable of
pity, who had not sinned were incapable of merit, their Creation from nothing,
and their support in original sinlesness, were benefits so great, that all
their cheerful attendances on celestial services were too little to requite;
he must therefore be somewhat greater and more perfect than either Men or
Angels, who undertook the mighty work, who was in a capacity of meriting and
not under a necessity of mercy, which only the eternal Son of God could be; he
alone who was of himself impeccable, could fully satisfy the utmost
pretensions of infinite justice: who was a voluntary in his exinanition or
humiliation and sufferings, and who needed no sacrifices for his own sins could
perfectly atone the wrath of God: and therefore he took Man's cause into his
own hand, and came in our nature, bringing Salvation along with him: then
Natures Laws justly yielded to him who was the God of Nature, the Heavens then
declared the glory of God, and the firmament showed his handy work, the faith
of pious Men was vigorously re-inforc'd, by the full and miraculous
accomplishment of ancient Prophecies and Promises, and Angels themselves owned
it an honor to be the first Evangelists.

To prove that Jesus Christ was and could be no other than the Son of God, we
come to consider the intent and design of that Doctrine introduced by him, and
by his Apostles and Ministers preached to the world in his name, where we are
to observe, That as the writings of the Old and New Testament are to be the
great standard of whatsoever is at this day published to the world as the will
of God, so before the writing of the Gospel, the Law of Moses and of the
Prophets was the true and certain Test by which all Doctrines were to be tried,
and as the Apostle writes to the Galatians, Gal. 1.8.
Though we or an Angel from heaven preach any other Gospel unto you, than that ye
have received, let him be accursed, So had Jesus whom we conclude the Messiah,
gone about to propagate any other kind of Doctrines than what the Prophets had
before, or than what was in every point agreeable to their precepts and rules,
instead of being the worlds Savior, he had proved himself an accursed
impostor; and therefore when the Jews thought to take the advantage of him on
this very score, he prevents them with that open declaration, Think not that I
am come to destroy the Law or the Prophets, I am not come to destroy but to
fulfill, Matthew. 5.17, 18, 19.
for verily I say unto you, till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle
shall in no wise pass from the Law, till all be fulfilled, whosoever therefore
shall break one of these least Commandments, and shall teach men so, he shall
be called the least in the kingdom of heaven, i. e. That he shall be of no
esteem or value at all in the true Church of God: But whosoever shall do and
teach them, the same shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven; Luke
10.25, 26, 27, 28.
Agreeably to this when the Lawyer stood up and tempted him and said, Master
what shall I do that I may inherit eternal life? Christ goes not about to give
him any new rules of life, but referred him to the old, what is written in the
Law, says he, how read thou? And when the Lawyer had answered, Thou shall
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all
thy strength, and with all thy mind, and thy neighbor as thy self; which was
the real summary of the Mosaic Moral Law, as our Savior himself elsewhere
informs us, Christ replies upon him, Thou have answered well, This do and thou
shall live: Now if life, i. e. life eternal were to be obtained by the
practicing according to Legal instructions, there was no need of prescribing
any new way of obtaining that everlasting happiness; and therefore when Christ
gives us that parable of the rich Man and Lazarus, and introduces the tormented
rich Man supplicating that Lazarus might be sent to forewarn his five brethren,
lest they also should come into the same terrible place, Luke 16.17. ad fin.
Abraham tells him, they have Moses and the Prophets let them hear them; and to
show the fullness of their writings for reforming of sinners, Abraham upon his
farther importunity subjoyns, If they hear not Moses and the Prophets, neither
will they believe though one rose from the dead: By which passage our Savior
plainly informs us, that even himself and his own Gospel after his resurrection
would never take any place where Moses and the Prophets were despised before,
the Law being the Gospels foundation, and preparing the devout soul for it is
entertainment; for Christ still took notice of what we ought to consider, That
truth is always agreeable to it self, and consequently the God of truth must be
so too, and therefore if the writers of the Old Testament were inspired from
heaven, which all wise men have hitherto believed, then the writers of the New
Testament had no other way to prove their own inspiration but by agreement with
the former, lest the holy Spirit, to whose conduct both pretended should seem
inconsistent with himself, or variable as men's humors could apprehend him.
It Is not now to be doubted but that our Savior who knew what was in Man,
therefore all along gave just preventives of those Cavils which the malicious
Jews could afterward raise against him, and therefore in his first Sermon upon
the Mount he shows himself so far from evacuating what was in its own nature
moral and perpetually obliging, that he on the contrary clears it from all
those putid glosses the Jewish readers or Rabbis had fixed upon it, and whereas
they had endeavored to find as many starting holes from the severity of good
Morals, as the Jesuits of later years have done, he gave his hearers the full
sense and meaning of the Law, that so, by pretending to liberty from its
rigours, they might not run themselves into eternal woes; and in plain terms
lets them know, that whereas they were ready simply to imagine the severities
of the Scribes and Pharisees very extraordinary and meritorious, they were
infinitely deceived, and that except their righteousness should exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees they should in no wise enter into
the kingdom of heaven. Matthew. 5.20.


It was doubtless the full end and design of Moses and the Prophets to advance
the honor of that God who employed them, to make his Name and his Laws
respected, not only among the tribes of Israel, but among all those nations to
whose knowledge their writings were likely at any time to come: who by the
rationality and tendency of the Laws would certainly judge of the wisdom,
goodness, and integrity of the Lawgiver; but when those Prophets and others,
had done their best, their endeavors were mixed with so many failures and
imperfections, that sometimes they fell themselves a great way under God's
displeasure, as Moses by his infidelity and presumption at the rock. The man of
God that Prophesied against the Altar in Bethel, by yielding to the lying
suggestions of the old Prophet: Jonah by his frowardness because of God's
superseding his prophetical denunciation by his long suffering and mercy
extended to penitent sinners, etc. And besides, in all those services those
holy Men performed they could claim no higher a title than that of undeserving
servants, for that they had only done what was their plain duty, and in case of
failure they were obnoxious to very severe penalties; and Moses though he have
that honorable character, that he was faithful in all God's house, it was but
as a servant still, and for a testimony of those things that were to be spoken
after, Heb. 3.5, 6.
But Christ as a Son over his own house took a more exact and effectual care in
all things to promote the glory of his Father. It Is natural for the Son to be
more sollicitous in such cases than a mercenary servant, who does what he does,
prompted both by a fear of punishment and an earnest expectation of reward,
above both which things a pious Son always lives; and therefore, whereas the
rest always call God their Lord and King, etc. the blessed Jesus continually
calls him his Father, his heavenly father, and by that relation he so stands in
to the Almighty, and by what he has done for us in taking our nature upon him,
and the consequences of that assumption, he has procured the same privilege,
(superior to what was apprehended by those of old) with assurance of being
heard to say in our Prayers, Our Father which art in heaven. But to effect all
this in relation to his Fathers honor and our good, how many scorns, abuses,
persecutions and barbarous cruelties did he undergo from wicked Men! yet as
freely as if he had been altogether unconcerned, so long as Men could but any
ways be reduced to an acknowledgment of their errors, and a serious repentance.
What he underwent so, made him as Man the more fit to prescribe Laws to others
who were likely to suffer extremely from the same foolish world for embracing
those truths he delivered them, as we always esteem an Humble man most fit to
teach others humility, and a Charitable man charity, and a Patient man
patience. For though others may declaim as well in commendation of the same
virtues and in reproof of the same vices, yet the discourses of exemplary
persons are justly expected to make the deepest impressions upon their hearers.
With this advantage our blessed Lord instructed every one, that would receive
his Doctrine, in the ways of happiness; he used all the allurements of
irresistible Wisdom and unanswerable Reason, all the motives of Mercy and
Goodness, to procure their attendance and obedience, He set them a complete
pattern of obedience to God, and of innocence and holiness in his converse, and
then gives that as a standing rule, that his Disciples should follow his
example, and let their light shine before Men for that very end, that others
seeing their good works might glorify their Father which was in Heaven.

But when the blessed Jesus designed the reformation of a sinful World, the
nature of his Doctrine, and the manner of its propagation was adapted rightly
to so admirable an end: And therefore, whereas the wretched Heathen part of
Mankind did infinitely dishonor their Creator, whereas they exactly answered
that account of the Apostle, When they knew God, they glorified him not as God,
neither were thankful, Romans 1.21, 22, etc.
but became vain in their Imaginations, and their foolish hearts were darkened,
they changed the glory of the incorruptible God into an Image made like to
corruptible Man, and to Birds, and to four-footed Beasts, and to creeping
things, they changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped and served the
creature more than the Creator, whence they were filled with all
unrighteousness, fornication, wickedness, covetousness, malice, envy, etc.
Whereas this was their real condition, infinite numbers of them by this means
running headlong into everlasting damnation, and yet the ill-natured Jews, to
whom the Oracles of God were at that time committed, took no care for their
recovery, pleasing themselves only with a fond conceit of their own
righteousness, crying to all the rest of Mankind, Stand by your selves, come
not near us, for we are holier than you: Since they only talked of their being
the people of God, and boasted of his Temple, studying more to proselyte Men to
an outward Circumcision, and a few empty Ceremonies, than to real inward
holiness and integrity; since these very Jews did but abuse their own greater
advantages, and trample upon the most excellent and obliging part of the Law,
our Savior rectified their Error by the dilatation of his own Doctrine, and
taking exact care to have it spread as far as humane guilt had extended before;
so that had but Men been as careful to improve their virtues as their vices,
none upon Earth could have been ignorant of God's will, but the knowledge of
that must have covered the Earth, as the waters cover the Sea: As he took his
flesh of the Jews, so he took the earliest care to reduce the lost sheep of the
house of Israel, preaching and doing miracles among them in his own Person,
beside sending out his Disciples to preach in all their Cities: But the veil of
the Temple was quickly rent in twain, and the Holy of Holies, the highest
Heavens laid open to all that sincerely believed on him, whether they were Jews
or Gentiles. He came not as an Herald to proclaim War, but with the glad
tidings of peace, and as an ambassador of reconciliation; he resolved to make
Mercy triumphant over Justice, to give light to them that sat in a more than
Egyptian darkness, and to guide them in the ways of everlasting life; and
therefore as himself vouchsafed to talk with the Samaritan Woman, and others of
that Nation, to show that he was not so rigidly uncharitable and unconcerned
for Universal welfare, as the Jews were, so he gave his Apostles a very large
commission, to carry his Doctrine to all Nations, that all People, if careful
of their own Eternal Interests, might come to the knowledge of his truth, and
be saved.

That Doctrine, and those Laws, by which he intended to effect these great
things, to reduce a corrupted World to a sense of duty, were so Innocent, so
Pure, so Rational and Divine, that nothing less than a common Reformation could
have been expected from them; for let a Man examine the Gospel through, let him
do it with the most violent prejudices, the severest Eyes, he will find no
footsteps of self-interest in our Savior's management of himself; he sought
not the applauses and honors of the vulgar, as appeared by those frequent
offenses he gave them in his plain and open reproofs, and those disagreeable
propositions he commonly made to them; otherwise the vulgar were not so dull,
but that He who spoke as never man spoke, might in a great measure have
influenced them, and drawn them to an easy rebellion against their foolish and
obstinate Superiors; notwithstanding all his care to the contrary, the
predominant humor was once to take him by force and make him a King, which he
was so far from indulging, Joh. 6.15.
that he quietly withdrew himself from their disorderly zeal. He exposed
himself indeed to all manner of hazards, but never sought to advance himself
any farther, than to a bare vindication of his Innocence: What he aimed at was
the good and safety of others, to snatch them who were falling into everlasting
flames, from that dreadful place, to make them wiser, and every way better;
what he propounded to them was the Cross, self-denial, patience, humility, a
constant expectation of afflictions, things not popular among vain men, but
such as would stand them in more stead than all the trifling honors and
pleasures of the World; If then only to aim at public good, if to lay down
and command such Doctrines, as himself could reap no benefit by, but those to
whom he spoke might; if to declare openly against all high and ambitious
thoughts, and to be the great Example of his own Instructions, argue the
harmless nature of that design a Man carries on, doubtless what our Savior
taught tended to the most Innocent purposes in the World: Had he privately
composed a Law, and afterward without propounding it to public examination,
endeavored to settle it by force of arms, by an eager persecution of those who
should have rejected it even to extermination, howsoever good the Law might
have been, the very method of its propagation would have been an insuperable
prejudice against it, and would have made all Men conclude its deficiency as to
reason and justice; But our Savior pursued another Method, He trod in those
steps so many had traced very happily before, He endeavored to advance only
such notions as were confessedly of Divine original, He propounded them to the
Judgment and censure of all, He was ready to answer all Questions, to resolve
all doubts, to silence all cavils, and though He carried on his purpose with
the utmost Zeal, yet He made use only of gentle persuasions, and of
unanswerable arguments, which none who were not direct enemies to reason, could
refuse: He pleaded a Divine authority for his undertaking, yet desired not that
his Plea should be regarded any farther than he confirmed it by his works, and
by the Innocence of his life; his works were truly miraculous, all works of
mercy not of terror, obliging not only his friends by them, but his very
enemies, witness the cure of Malchus's ear; He called for no fire down from
Heaven, no Earthquakes, no storms of Sulphur, or Universal Deluges to force Men
to submission, but endeavored fairly to convince all who had not heard of his
Doctrine before, how much it tended to their welfare, not forbiding their
objections, or studying little shifts and artifices to evade them. Now if those
who have made men better than they were by plain force are justly celebrated by
all as Benefactors, how much more do they deserve the name, who do as much good
by gentler means? The Peruvians were wont to account their Yncaes the Sons of
Heaven, because they made it their continual business to civilize a barbarous
World, to do which they propounded their own Laws first to the inspection of
strangers, and endeavored to persuade them of the great benefits they were
like to receive by submitting to them, producing examples of the felicity of
others by the same obedience; but where they were rejected, those Yncae's
introduced civility by force of arms, yet stand not condemned in record even
for those rougher proceedings: and it could not argue an inferior Original for
our Savior, that he used no violence at all; and yet if we compare the
successes of his Gospel, enforced by nothing but reason, a charitable Zeal and
profitable Miracles, with the progresses either of Moses's Law, which was from
Heaven, or that of Mahomet, which has been spread prodigiously by Wars and
Conquests, or that of the Peruvian Yncae's, which was promoted by the calmest
ways that ever any mere humane politics were; the Gospel has prevailed
infinitely beyond them all, having been truly Catholic, when others have been
confined to particular Countries, having out-stood all arguments raised against
it, when the rest have been baffled by almost every undertaker: and having
out-stood the strength of time, when the very name of several others are almost
lost; and even Mahometism it self (of a much younger standing) though it has
thriven beyond the rest, has fallen very short of the progress of the Gospel:
This Universal prevalence is an irrefragable evidence of the Gospels
excellence, and proves the Contriver of it not to have been of an Earthly
original, since nothing but Heaven could recommend and practice what was so
indisputably innocent.

Again, to aim wholly at the extirpation of vice, of all sin and wickedness,
and the promoting and recommending of virtue and goodness, carries the highest
purity and sanctity along with it. If miscarriages in government, and
trespasses upon humane Laws produce terrible convulsions of state, and
unexpected revolutions in political affairs, (of which at this day we live to
see unaccountable instances) it is easy to infer from thence, that
encroachments upon the Laws of God and nature, must have the same influence
upon general affairs, and create strange disorders in the World, and mightily
prejudice all the bonds of humane Society. It naturally excites God's
vindictive justice, and makes him scatter vengeance every where; it creates
nothing but mutual distrusts and jealousy of one another among men, so that
they grow like Wolves or Devils in their mutual animosities and injuries. As
these things are the consequence of wickedness, so they are certain proofs and
indications of the prevalence of Sin in any place or Nation; they show a
general infection to have spread it self in a very corrupt people; and
therefore he that endeavors to purge out the malignant humors of men
laboring under such pernicious distempers, employs himself in the purest and
most desirable work, since he endeavors only to reconcile guilty nature to an
incensed God, and waspish and ill humored Men to one another. A full and rigid
execution of Laws against impudent vices may keep some under by its terror, and
make them at least seek the darkest corners for the perpetrating of villainies,
but it represents not Sin a whit the more in its native ugliness, nor gives any
ordinary satisfaction, that Sin is exceeding sinful; for it is easy enough to
conclude that God and Men may prohibit and punish such or such an action out of
their own arbitrariness, to show their own absolute and uncontrollable power,
upon which account, though Force may restrain them for a while, yet there
remain in perverted minds some strange Gustos of delight in finding
opportunities to do what they are forbidden, and which they conclude may be
things good enough notwithstanding such prohibitions; but when vice is
delineated truly by Instructors appointed for that purpose, who are neither
afraid nor ashamed to speak Truth, when they find Sin decried by solemn and
weighty arguments, more than by authority, where on the other hand, they find
virtue and goodness described fairly as it deserves, recommended by earnest and
gentle perswasives, set out with all its circumstantial beauties, discovered in
its happy effects, with relation both to earthly and heavenly influences; when
they see blessings shour'd down from Heaven upon them, and their very Enemies
at peace with them, when they see how all this only propounds a pure and
unmixed goodness in Devotions toward God, and in Converse among Men; such
Observers have nothing to say for themselves, in case they choose the worst
part; they cannot pretend so much as to excuse themselves, that they embrace
evil not voluntarily but by mistake, and sub specie boni, since vice and virtue
ly both unveiled and naked before them; Or they must acknowledge themselves
only to be resolutely wicked, to be so because they will be so, which puts
them easily past all hopes of pity or of Pardon. But since devotion and
ordinary converse were so exceedingly depraved, and since the wisest among mere
Men had made so many attempts for reforming them, and yet had been so miserably
mistaken in their measures to that end, as to convince them of the
impossibility of such atchievments from their hands, when one person, howsoever
despicable and mean in his outward appearances, could reassume the forsaken
design, and not only assume, but apparently accomplish it, laying down such
Rules, as if exactly followed, must necessarily restore all things to an
absolute perfection; when Men observe all his instructions to agree closely
among themselves, and with the ancient authentic methods of doing well, and
all concurring still in the same center of Universal Sanctity, it must be
necessarily concluded, That the Undertaker was somewhat more than Man, that
nothing less than infinite holiness and wisdom could effect such things, which
being yet apparently effected by One who was a true Man, that true Man must
withal be acknowledged the Son of God.

And whereas the generality of inquisitive Men in their searches after truth
and wisdom always observed strange deficiencies in humane reason, whereby
ancient wise men broke into so many several divisions in their inquiries after
the Chief good; whereas they found, that none could lay down a fair project for
pursuit of That, but that presently he was assaulted by whole Armies of
adversaries, and all projects found absurd and unprofitable for acquiring that
they aimed at: When the Gospel of our Savior came to be divulged, though it met
with adversaries enough, they were all too weak to inval date its strength and
reason. It was neither the juggling fair-tongu'd Pharisee, nor the absurd and
ambitious Saducee, nor the wrangling Sophister, nor the Skeptical or cunning
Philosopher, nor the undermining Heretic, that were able to ruin the
reputation of the Christian Doctrine, but it still grew upon them though they
were cruelly assisted by earthly powers, and indeed made use of all the
roughest means for the extirpation of the Professors of the Gospel. And what
was very considerable, though the great promoters of Religion after the Apostles
and their immediate Successor's times, neither had the gift of languages, nor
had much of the learned education of those Ages, yet they were able, having
truth on their side to baffle all the learning of the great wise men among both
Jews and Pagans, which could never have happened, had not what they preached
and defended been highly rational. For keen adversaries, who pretended to the
greatest acuteness of Wit and Sense, would never have quitted arguments that
had been stronger for the sake of mere cant and impertinent jangling. But
indeed the common scope of the inquiries of wise men, being to discover what
was really the greatest degree of humane happiness, and the highest and
chiefest good, (by which they confessed somewhat Lost, and though possibly to be
retrieved, yet not without the greatest difficulties imaginable) there was no
proposition made by any for the full discovery and attainment of that Good, but
it was eagerly listened to, and the probabilities on all sides being duly
weighed, and the effects of the several propositions being carefully
considered, Christianity gained the victory, whose effects were the most
considerable, whose Professors the most innocent, whose promises were the most
excellent and punctual, and whose rules the most general, intelligible and
unquestionable. Pagans and Jews if they were not wilfully ignorant, could not
but see all those principles of reason which themselves pretended to, extremely
advanced by this doctrine introduced by Christ; for whereas they were wont to
decry pride and haughtiness of spirit, arrogance and contempt of others, very
earnestly, its true the vice was so notorious that they could not want
arguments to disgrace it: yet while ambition and an enterprising humor were
commended, while their applauded Philosophers were the persons who above all
others contemned and vilified the vulgar, and since their very gods were
represented to them as tainted with the same fault, their ingenious Lectures
and fine discourses against it were generally lost. But when Christianity
teaches the miserable natural condition of Men, how they are all the heirs of
wrath, and just inheritors of eternal damnation, because they broke an easy
Law, and forfeited their original Innocence; when it shows how Angels those
purer Spirits fell from that glory they were at first enstated in, by a pride
and haughtiness superior to that of Man, when it shows us, how short and
transient our life here is, how uncertain and flitting all our comforts and
enjoyments, how little power we have to help ourselves under any extraordinary
calamity or temptation, and yet that we are born to trouble as the sparks fly
upward, when it represents us to our selves as too weak by any strength of our
own, to get the mastery of Innate lusts and sensual desires, and God's anger as
just hanging over our heads and extremely hard to be atoned, nay plainly
impossible to be satisfied, had not a very powerful Mediator interposed on our
accounts, all these things are so many mortifying considerations to the proud,
that whosoever allows himself but a few serious thoughts on these heads must
certainly be very mean and humble in his own eyes, looking upon himself as too
inferior for divine mercy to take notice of, too unworthy to be partaker of
any great hopes or extraordinary future felicities; and such Humility is
propounded to us as an excellent foundation for extraordinary grace, and as the
best way to be exalted by God in his due time. Again, Jam. 4.10.
whereas Pagans recommend friendship and fidelity to all persons, and give us a
great many extraordinary examples of the noble effects of those virtues, yet
they commend revenge, and applaud that internecine hatred which concludes in
nothing but blood, and therefore represent their greatest Heroes, such as
Achilles and Aeneas and Alexander, as desiring only to live till they might
thoroughly revenge the fair deaths of their friends, and can scarce tell how to
condemn their barbarous Tydaeus whom they make when dying of his wounds
himself, yet gnawing the bleeding head of his enemy Melampus, (who had hurt him
in a fair war,) with an expiring rage: Whereas we see Joab murdering Abner in
cold blood, on pretense of revenging the death of his brother Asahel, whom
Abner had killed purely in his own defense; and find our Savior reckoning it
as a Jewish maxim, Thou shall love thy neighbor, Matthew. 5.43.
and hate thine enemy. Yet a good Christian looks upon revenge as so unmanly a
humor and so disagreeable to those principles he owns, that he scorns to be
thought guilty of it; for what advantage is it to me if one have killed my
Brother or my Father, to kill him for it? will it restore any life to my dear
departed relation? will it contribute to the peace and satisfaction of the
departed soul? Or, will it not rather show a devilish temper only delighting in
murder, and committing that very crime my self which I think I can never punish
with severity enough in another man? are there not a thousand inconveniences
attend such practices, deadly and immortal feuds not terminating between
particular men, but legacy'd down to entire families, and concluding at last in
mutual utter excisions, or by both of them falling under the impartial strokes
of a superior's Law? Revenge is brutish, Dogs and Bears and Wolves and Tigers
outdo Man at it; but it is noble and God-like to forgive, and therefore our
blessed Savior teaches all men who expect pardon from heaven for themselves,
to be ready to forgive their brethren here, i. e. those who are partakers of
the same humane nature with themselves; He commands us, To love our enemies,
Matthew 5.44, 46.
to bless them that curse us, to do good to them that hate us, and to pray for
them that despitefully use us and persecute us, for if we love them that love
us, what do we more than others? The meanest souls, the greatest aliens to
virtue are capable of such things: Publicanes, esteemed the mere scandal and
refuse of mankind among the Jews, could do them, but those who followed Christ
were to act in softer methods. They may design to make the world their slaves,
but it must not be effected by rage and a studious revenge on every little
supposed affront, that sets men upon their guard, and he that by such courses
strives to subject me, must expect the same measure from me if I can get him at
advantage: but He that studies to do good to all, is consequently beloved and
admired by all; a forgiving and reconcilable temper obliges all mankind, and
every one is a willing servant or slave to him whom he loves. How easily does
this compassionate temper slide into a true and universal Charity? and our
Savior plainly shows by the course of his doctrine, that as it was Man's great
ambition in his first sin to become like to God, though he miserably mistook the
way, so he now accounts it the greatest honor to God, that Man should indeed
be what he then aimed at, that that Image of God which was imprinted upon the
Souls of Men in their first Creation should be restored to its primitive
perfection and luster: but there was no way to bring this about more
effectually than by implanting this real and extensive Charity in the hearts of
Men, which makes them the true representatives of that God who is love and
goodness it self. It changes that state of war corrupt nature's engaged in, and
diffuses a Catholic and agreeable serenity through the world; it abolishes
that Wolvish humor predominant among Men, and makes every one a God to his
fellow. God makes his Sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sends his
rain upon the just and upon the unjust, he allows means for the conversion of
sinners to repentance, as well as for conducting the righteous to that glory
prepared for them; and Charity teaches us to resemble him in this, where he
pardons and blesses, that we should do so too, and not neglect, or despise, or
implacably persecute those of whom God himself is pleased to take care.

Intemperance in meats and drinks was one of those vices which Paganism very
rationally condemned and exposed so far as to make wise Men ashamed of it: They
saw plainly how it impaired men's reason, how it engaged them in frequent and
senceless quarrels, destroyed health and confounded estates; yet they had but
very small apprehensions of the influence it might have upon men's future
conditions, how displeasing it was to Almighty God, how certain an evidence of
Men's brutish and carnal inclinations; Our Savior therefore heightens their
reasons against it, by showing the certainty of judgment after death, the
severity of that judgment, the uncertainty of the time of our leaving this
world, the immediate consequence of judgment upon death, and that there is no
intermedial state of reconciliation to heaven, and therefore he advises his
disciples, Luke 21.34.
Let not your hearts be overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and so
that day come upon you unawares, he refers them to the instance of the old
world where they lived in mirth and jollity till the flood came suddenly upon
them and destroyed them all, and to the instance of the Sodomites who practiced
the same dissolute Libertinism, Luke 17.27, 29.
till it rained fire and brimstone from heaven, and destroyed them all: Now if
there be reason to avoid these vices, to escape some temporal inconveniences,
Men should do so much more to shun shame and scandal and eternal torments. Thus
did the blessed Jesus in all the instances of sin or goodness use so much
stronger arguments for the first and against the last, than the most studious
mere humane zeal could reach to, that consequently Men were infinitely more
obedient to him than they were to other Dictators in virtue: For if Scipio
Africanus could truly make it his boast, That among all his soldiers there was
not one but at his bidding would throw himself off the highest rock into the
sea though certain to be drowned, how much was our Savior honored, when so many
thousand zealous Christians voluntarily exposed themselves to the most
exquisite torments in assertion of that truth He had transmitted to them? When
not the angry insurrections of the headstrong multitude, nor the threatening
frowns of raging Tyrants, nor the lingering tortures of racks and wheels could
affright them from their obedience; when all the pitiful subterfuges of mean
and common souls were generously scorned, and the Crown of Martyrdom esteemed
much more than the Imperial Diadem? But it was the clear and unanswerable
reason of our Saviors commands, of his Laws, that convinced so many: and those
who were unwilling to renounce their own reason, were as unwilling to
relinquish the precepts of the Gospel; though they could not be fond of extreme
misery, yet they would endure any thing rather than to believe they were no
Men; and it was no sign of predominant madness or Hypochondriacal vapors for
men to discourse more intelligently than before, to be more earnest in pursuit
of wisdom, to be more humble, more sober, more charitable, more devout, more
blameless in their lives and conversations than others. But could a mere Man
dive so far into the depths of reason beyond the rest of the World, who wanted
all visible and external means for the improvement of his knowledge and natural
abilities? Christ had not what we call liberal education, the Jews who knew it,
objected that against him, How knows this Man Letters, having never learned?
But he answers them appositely enough, My doctrine is not mine, but his that
sent me; and adds, He that speaks of himself seeks his own glory, John
7.15, 16, 18.
but he that seeks his glory that sent him, the same is true, and there is no
unrighteousness in him: Now to advance Reason beyond humane reach, to promote
God's glory not as a Servant, but with greater strength of argument and zeal
than a mere man could do, proves beyond contradiction, that the Man Christ
Jesus could be none other than the Son of God.

Scripture-history in those cases ought to have upon all those who own the
Being of a God, whether they be converted to Christianity or not, which will
necessarily take in that authority which the Word of God, as such, ought to
have with an Infidel; which enquiry, though it be of a nice and speculative
nature, yet it will necessarily convince All of that value they ought to set
upon Scripture, when they call themselves Believers and Christians, how careful
they should be to punish and discourage all slights and contempts thrown upon
it, and how ready to lose their lives, or any thing that is dear to 'em, rather
than part with those truths contained in it.

It were easy to prove Scripture equally valuable to the greatest strangers to
Christianity with any other Humane writings whatsoever; For Heathens never
pretended any such veneration for those Writings they had opportunity to
converse with (how great names soever they bore in their titles) as to be
afraid to oppose or confute them, and to distinguish among them between truths
and falsehoods, and proper subjects of Credibility and Incredibility; for though
the Opinions of some Persons were looked upon as more rational than those of
others, and the Writings of some Historians as more Authentic, yet they were
all acknowledged full of mistakes, and naturally liable to such; nay their very
Divine Writings, those which they thought written, and which tradition told
them were written by divine instinct, were frequently called in question; and
so their Poets the first Authors of their Divinity were generally reputed great
Fablers, and they deserved it well; and their Sibyls whose Oracles were so much
celebrated among them, were by Tully in his 2d. Book de Divinatione, before the
name of Christians, or of Christ himself was heard in the World, cried down as
a cheat for the most part; and where Acrosticks (as some of those so called)
were incapable of that divine Original they pretended to; Which instance,
whether Tully were in the right or no, proves yet certainly the dubiousness of
Men's minds among the Heathens, as to the authority of their most sacred and
esteemed Writings, and how small a Crime they held it to impeach any of them.
Yet they valued many Authors so much, as to take a great deal of care to
preserve their Writings, and to transmit them very carefully to Posterity. Now
to raise Scripture to this proportion of esteem among them, no more needs to be
alleged, than that the Subjects they treat on, are generally very good, as the
Writings of any old Philosophers could pretend to be; that though the Nation
principally concerned in it, was not so famous as many of the rufling or
Politic founders of other large Empires were, yet there were such a People
really in the World as the Jews, and afterward as the Christians were; that
they had Laws given them, and lived under particular forms of Government, and
that the Historical account given of Jewish Politics and Monarchs, and of the
first Founders of Christianity, and their industry, and success, were as
Rational, and as likely to be true, as the Histories of other Political
transactions; and a great deal more likely to be true in the eldest parts of
its History, as that of the World's Beginning, of the Long Lives of those
before the Flood, of the Flood it self, and the escape of a very small number
from it, of the Reparation of the World by a new increase of Mankind, and other
Creatures, of the Original of that called the Dead Sea, from the Conflagration
of Sodom and Gomorrha, Admah, and Zeboim, by fire from Heaven, of the Ascent of
the Jews out of Egypt, and the Calamities suffered by the Egyptians upon
their account, of the Original of the Jewish Government, Sacred and Civil, etc.
These accounts of Antiquity, and many more of the same nature, looked
infinitely more probably, than the dreams and forgeries of their eldest
Authors, for whose sake they looked upon all their own stories, relating to the
first Ages of the World, as only obscure and fabulous. These Pleas, as I said
before, might serve to bring any into as good an opinion of that Book which we
call Scripture, as of any other mere humane writing: But that is not enough;
Scripture may, to Infidels themselves, be proved to be far superior in the
original, nature and use of it, than any thing else the World pretends to; the
certainty of which lays open a fair way for the conversion of Infidels to
Christianity, and indeed is such a medium, as without it, or unquestionable
miracles, which Miracles too must tend wholly to the confirmation of the
authority of Scripture, it is wholly vain to pretend to their conversion.

What I mentioned at first, that the excellency of Scripture might be proved,
or its authority have a due influence upon such as acknowledge only the being
of a God, was spoken with relation to Atheists, who deny any such Being at all;
for though we have not met yet with any Nation so barbarous, but it has had some
notion of a God, (as wherever there is any pretense to divination or
predictions of future contingencies, there must be such) yet since some will
pretend to Courage enough, utterly to deny the existence of a God, and make it
their business to make proselytes to the same nonsense: I confess no
Arguments, of that nature I aim at, can have any effects on them; those who
deny a God, will scarce acknowledge any particular Writing to be the Word of
God; but to those who do acknowledge a God, these things will be obvious
enough, and past dispute.

That if there be a God, i. e. One great supreme Being, who presides with an
absolute and illimited power over the World, and all transactions in it: This
God must necessarily have all those Attributes, due to himself, which are
requisite for the exercising such a power, for he that believes not this, has
no true notion of a God, without which yet no Man can pretend to any true or
solid religion; for as the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews tells us, He
that comes to God must believe that he is, Heb. 11.6.
and that he is a rewarder of those that seek him; so the Stoic Philosopher
joins with the Apostle, when he makes the greatest part of true Religion to
consist in having (...), true opinions of the Gods, so as to know that they
are, and that they manage all things well and justly, that all ought to obey
them and acquiesce in those things which are done by them, Epict. Ench. c. 38.
and to act in agreement with them, as being governed by an All-wise Mind; now,
according to these Models, none can have a true or exact apprehension of a God,
but he who represents God to himself as capable of performing all those things
for which he thinks it necessary to believe He is: And from hence it was that
Epicharmus tells us, Cudw. Intel. Syst. p. 263.-4.
(...). Nothing escapes the eye of the Divinity, this you ought to take notice
of, He Is the Overseer of us all, and there is nothing that he cannot do; which
shows he understood the God of all things to be omnipotent, omniscient and
omnipresent, three of those great attributes Christians give to God, and that
it was necessarily to be understood by all others who pretended to the same
knowledge of a God. Hence God, or he whom Pagans owned to be the supreme God,
known to them by the name of Jupiter, is called by them, the great Architect or
Maker of the World, the Prince and chief Ruler of the Universe, the first or
chief God, the first Mind, the great God, the greatest of the Gods, the
highest, the superior to all Gods: the most transcendent God, the God of gods,
the Principle of Principles, the first Cause, He that generated the Universe,
He that rules over the whole World, the Supreme Governor and Lord of all
things, the God without beginning, self-originated, and self-subsisting, He
that is far beyond the reach of Humane Minds and understandings, that Eternal
Being which can never change and never perish. The beginning, the end, and the
middle of all things. He who is one God only and all Gods in one: now the
result of all these titles is, That the Supreme Being which governs the World
is infinitely perfect, which if drawn down into Christian words and principles,
amounts to this, That God is infinitely powerful, just, true, merciful,
glorious, loving and good to all his Creatures, and all these things are so
essentially constitutive of the Deity, that without the concurrence of them
all, there could be none; for what is perfect, must be so in all instances, for
any one exception ruins the whole assertion, and makes that Being, what ever
he may pretend to really, imperfect.

Amongst these several Attributes which render God adorable to the World, that
Love or Goodness of his whereby he regulates and provides for all his Creatures
is one, and as he originally desires, so he promotes their real happiness, and
of this Goodness the Heathens had notions as well as our selves, though not
perhaps so clear or convictive as those God has blessed us with in Scripture;
thus Platonists persuade us, that God himself was turned into Love when he made
the World, that order in which he had set, and that providence by which he
governed all things, showing the most prodigious effects of Love or goodness.
So the Greek Comedian gives us an odd Idea of the World's Original, Aristoph.
in Nubibus.
That in the beginning Confusion and Night, and Hell and Darkness had an
existence, there was then no Earth, nor Air, nor Sky. In the first place
black-winged Night laid a prolifick Egg in the inscrutable bosom of profound
Darkness, from which in succeeding Hours was produced desirable Love,
glittering in the Air with golden Wings, and like the breeding Winds, coupling
with prepared Chaos, or dark confusion in the infernal regions, p. 121.
exposed our kind, first of all, to light; nor had the Gods themselves any
being, till Love it self had mingled all things. Which Poetical expressions
being duly explained, or reduced to plain sense, and the Gods in the last
passages meaning only Angels, Moses his history of the Creation, Genesis 1. and
St. John's discourse, John 1. concerning the Creation of all things by Christ,
with his assertion often repeated, That God is Love, are not very different from
them; For, though they were of a more obscure and impenetrable kind, yet Paganism
in general had very considerable notices of the immense goodness of the Divine
nature, and those amongst them who opposed Atheism, and asserted Providence,
took no small care to set off divine love, or the necessary care God had of his
Creatures good, with the greatest Luster; and the Ancient Christian Doctors,
nay, the Apostles themselves, witness Saint Paul at Athens, and St. Peter with
Cornelius, and the Ancienter Prophets and Holy Writers found God's Goodness
exerted to his Creatures, an excellent Argument to draw Pagans, as well as
others to Repentance and Obedience.

Among other apprehensions Pagans had of God, that of his Purity and Holiness
was very considerable; they who ascribed Perfection to him, and knew what
Perfection meant, looked upon him as necessarily infinitely Pure; for where
they tell us of God's being impassible, they prove he cannot be guilty of any
thing ill, that being contrary to the original nature of a Spiritual Being,
which therefore must be supposed to suffer, when it is supposed to sin. But as
they had these notions of God's immense purity, so they had as quick a sense of
the depravation of Man's Nature, and were ready to lament it with almost as
great an Emphasis, as St. Paul himself could lament his own corruption; hence
that ingenious Platonist Maximus Tyrius acknowledges, Dissert. 26.
(...), etc. For the Soul of Man is too weak to extricate it self by force of
Reason from all those perplexities it meets with, especially being while in
this life involved in many dark and gloomy Clouds, and always miserably wearied
and distracted with the noise and tumult of occurring mischiefs, for what Man
is there so good, who can live without offense or without fault? but Men might
live easily enough without fault, did not the general depravation of their
natures prevent it, for of what is Good nothing but Good can come. But though
this Purity in God and Corruption in Man, must necessarily put God at a great
distance from Man, yet as God was Lord and Master at first, both by right of
Creation and Preservation, he is so still, (as he that was owner of a Kingdom,
does not lose his right in it, because it is visited with the Plague, and the
Infection it may be fatal and almost Universal) so Man owes Obedience and
Subjection to God still, as he that was my Slave when perfect and in health, is
not therefore set free of course because he is sickly, or has lost an Arm, or a
Leg; Or he that was so when in his wits, does not cease to be so now because
he is distracted, and does not understand his Duty: The Relation between God and
Man stands good, and is believed to do so by Heathens as well as Christians, as
a Son owes a Duty to his Father, when his Father's angry, as well as when he is
pleased; and when himself has really offended him, as well as when he has not;
and this relation is necessarily on man's part to be maintained to the utmost,
since by its failure he loses all hopes of Happiness, and on God's part in
vindication of his own Goodness.

He therefore that rightly understands Humane Pravity of Nature, and yet
believes he owes a duty to the supreme Being, must conclude it necessary, that
he should have some Positive Rule or method whereby to manage himself: nor is
it enough in this case to fly to the Law of Nature as if that were sufficient:
That had been so indeed, had Man continued in that rectitude of faculties which
he had in the first beginnings of the world; but Heathens have been very
sensible there is no such thing to depend on now: For though the Laws of Nature
are as Just, as Reasonable, as Necessary, and as Obligatory now as ever, yet if
men have not Reason enough to understand it, what does the excellency and
compleatness of Natures Laws signify to them? as, though I am blind, the Sun
shines at noonday as bright and clear as ever it did, but I see never the more
for all that. It was the Apostle's complaint, that the good that he would that
he did not, Romans 7.19,
and the evil that he would not that he did, the reason of which was that
general Corruption of Mankind, which He, as one of them, He saw another Law in
his members, waring against the Law of his mind, and bringing him into
captivity to the Law of Sin which was in his members; the same is the complaint
of Medaea in the Poet when meditating upon a dreadful revenge she designed on
her husband Jason -- video meliora proboque, Deteriora sequor; Now let the Laws
of Nature be never so admirable, which way can a Man thus distracted within,
compose himself so, as to take a fair view of that Law, or be enough himself to
practice upon it? The Law of Nature is really obscure and mystical, to be
traced through a thousand dark and perplexing Labyrinths, which require more
than a Man, as now fixed, to travel through; therefore it cannot be enough to
satisfy Man's want, and to give him full and clear direction to do the Will of
God, which obedience to his Will is yet His Duty.

He again who has a just Idaea of immense Goodness in God, will never be
capable of reconciling His refusal to give Man a Law to walk by, to such
goodness; For while no Man that acknowledges a God doubts but that he will punish
sinners, none can doubt but to clear his own Justice from all cavils, he will
punish them only as Sinners against some Law, for sin is defined to Christians
a Transgression of the Law; but that Law must be some such Law as the
Transgressor was really capable of knowing: As our Justiciaries punish the most
ignorant Clowns when they break our Laws (though perhaps the suffering persons
never knew of those Laws) and yet very justly, because there were such Laws
really extant, and in such a Language as they understood, and it was their Duty
and Interest to be acquainted with, and to enquire after those Laws, the breach
of which might any way be penal to them. It Is as little doubted, that God will
reward those who keep such Laws, and will encourage them, by the easiness of
the Laws propounded, to a ready and exact obedience; These things were so
strongly fixed in the minds of ancient Pagans, that it set their Philosophers
at work to read Lectures, and to prescribe Laws concerning Virtue and Vice, to
all people, declaring previously, That there was an absolute necessity of such
Laws for Men who indeed were engaged in the dark, and some of them could almost
have pretended to Divine influences upon them, though their Priests and
Fortune Tellers did it with more applause: But all this was to bring men's minds
to a greater veneration of their Principles; and Empedocles in particular,
thought it no ill Policy to Teach his Philosophy first, and commence a God
afterward, for which end he threw himself alive into the mouth of Aetna in
Sicily, and received his Apotheosis in the midst of flames. Yet, after all,
Philosophy was capable of doing very little, and could not, nor ever was
received by Men as any parcel of that Law they wanted to guide them, because
they were wholly unable to determine among them what that one great and chief
Good was, the fruition of which they were to aim at: and in submission to which
they were to admit of the propounded Law; on account of the weak title of these
Pretenders, the Priests, who attended on the public services of their more
celebrated gods, pretended to extraordinary Inspirations; and some of them,
especially, such as the Cumaean Sybil, Tiresias, Amphiaraus, the Priests of
Jupiter Hammon, the Delphian, Dodonian and Trophonian Priests, etc. seemed to
be in frequent Raptures and sacred Agonies, as if they had been newly
conversing with some Gods, and in these fits they delivered strange obscurities
uncouth and wild, as we find by Homer, Apollonius, Virgil, Statius, Sophocles,
Seneca, and others: These Priests thus obtaining a great reputation for
sanctity, and it being thought they were but as so many Engines conveying the
speeches of the Gods down to Men, their Dictates bore a great sway in the
Heathen World, and they were much consulted in the inventing and making of
Laws; But these again were so disagreeing among themselves and with one
another, their Fancies generally so irrationally extravagant and
unintelligible, the self-interest in them, so notoriously apparent to every
body, and their Lives and Manners so absolutely undivine, (which was a very
considerable prejudice among Heathens themselves) and matters of fact delivered
by them to posterity in writing, were commonly so wild, so trifling, or so full
of falsities, that all these things quite ruined their claims, and still the
Heathen World had new Laws, and new Lawgivers to seek. Hence their Gods
themselves, that is, the Devil who usurped the Divine name, and under that
name, at several times and in several places procured divine Honors to
himself, took courage to give answers to enquirers and a kind of Directions for
Men to act by; and that he might look the liker a God indeed, he would now and then
adventure upon some little Truths, such as had a very considerable Moral import
in them, such as (...), Noli altum sapere, and some few more of a like nature,
but these Oracular Rules, proceeding from so great a Patron of real impiety and
abominable Idolatries, were commonly received accordingly; and though, as to
Sacrifices and all the gaieties of a costly Worship, they were willingly enough
ruled by that usurping Impostor, and if any barbarous offering was to be made
in blood of Slaves or Children, or the like, Superstition was but too obedient;
Yet, in those things that were really Good and worth taking notice of, they
were so distrustful as they came to nothing among them. Maximus Tyrius
therefore, in those cases, prefers Philosophy it self, so far as concerns the
Conduct of Men's lives, to all these Oracles, for, as he argues, the Gods
pretend to tell us what is sodden in a boiling Caldron in Lydia, Dissert. 19. p.
189.
they tell us of a wooden Wall, of ohe danger of cutting through the Corinthian
Isthmus, sometimes they talk of a future Earthquake, of a threatening war, and
an approaching Plague, but as for those things which are much more worth our
knowledge, such as how Wars may be avoided, by what means we may live without
any need of Walls and Fortifications, how we may behave our selves so as to
have no reason to fear a Plague, not one word, neither Apollo at Delphos, nor
Jupiter at Dodona, nor any other Gods, have any thing to say to these things,
only Philosophy teaches these things. Yet afterward, he flies even from That
too as insufficient; For, says he, I require such an Oracle which may teach me
without ambiguity to live quietly, answer me then, whither will you send
Mankind? which way must they go in the case? where must they end? let the Rule
of Life be one, let it be common to and concern All? Thus He, neither satisfied
with Philosophy, nor any way to Happiness, yet known to him, no nor with the
additional stories of God's descending down to Earth, in Humane Forms to
converse with and to instruct Men in the method of acquiring Happiness.

Now this Rule, thus sought for among Heathens, we say the Scripture is: They
know not that it is so; We prove it, because the Scripture is the Word of God:
There Is no ingenuous Pagan but will agree with us, that if it is the Word of
God indeed, it must of necessity be the thing they look for, and sufficient to
effect those great things they desire from it; it is our part then to prove what
we call Scripture to be God's Word, and thus far they meet us in the way, They
acknowledge the absolute necessity of such a Word, the absolute necessity of
Man's obeying him who governs all things, the absolute incapacity Men are in to
know of themselves how to perform that duty, its extraordinary consistency with
Divine Goodness that there should be such a Word given to Mankind, whereby they
may be guided to happiness, and their joy and readiness to receive such a Word,
sufficiently proved to be such, when exhibited; all which infer their
supposition, that God may, if he please, impart his Will in such a manner to
the World: Now what a Heathen would require in such a Word which should be the
rule of his life, could only be,

That it should be One, that it should be of equal concern and respect to All,
that it should not be clogged with Ambiguities, that it should be Practicable,
that it should be sufficient for the end it is designed for, and that it should
be suitable to, and worthy of its Author, these are the most comprehensive
Qualifications a stranger to Christianity would have in that Word which is
ascribed to God, and these it will not be very difficult to show in that
Scripture which we believe, for

If we look into the Moral and Perpetually obliging part of God's Word as a
Rule of Life and Practice, it is but One, and that a very short one too, as laid
down in the Decalogue by Moses the Jewish, and as Epitomized in the Gospel by
Jesus the Christians Lawgiver, Thou shall Love the Lord thy God with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy strength, and with all thy mind,
and Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, and upon these two, as our
Savior teaches, depend all both the Law and the Prophets; the whole body of
the Old Testament and the New is but one large and plain comment upon these few
words, showing their full import in abundance of particular instances; so as
there are no Emergencies of Humane life, but what are reducible to them; There
is set down the just Commendation of that one short Rule, the miserable
failures of Men in putting this in execution, the true grounds and reasons of
their failures, their falling under divine displeasure on that account, the
means found out to atone that divine displeasure, and the extreme difficulty of
atoning it, the continuing Defects of Humane Obedience, the Mercy of God yet
equally continued for the sake of that complete atonement made, and God's
acceptance of an upright heart and sincere endeavors, (according to the
doctrine of Pagan wise men themselves) instead of absolute and unattainable
perfection in Virtue and Goodness, and Crowning such sincerity and integrity
with that happiness due to a total perfection: And all these things are
illustrated with such an Historical deduction of things, as serves exceedingly
to confirm all the particulars, and to convince the World how angry the True
God is with those who transgress, and how infinitely pleased He is with those
who endeavor to walk by this Rule; and All compared together show abundantly,
that the whole body of Scripture is indeed but one and the same Rule, agreeing
with it self in all particulars: and the Matters of fact laid down with that
simplicity, impartiality and probability, and so agreeably to those broken
fragments of Antiquity themselves esteemed most highly, and so very pertinent
to the drift of the Book it self, i. e. to make Men devout toward Heaven, and
sociable among one another (all which things were never pretended to meet in
any one Writing whatsoever before) that, till any firm instance can be produced
to the contrary, Scripture in this particular must be owned the Word of God.

If its general and equal respect to all Mankind be enquired after, the very
manner of expression used in Scripture shows it to be really Universal, for
when the Rule says, Thou shall love the Lord thy God, and Thou shall love thy
Neighbor, and yet nominates no particular person to whom the sense should be
restrained, Scripture in that speaks to every individual person who hears or
reads it, as Nathan to David, Thou whether Jew or Gentile, bond or free, young
or old, learned or unlearned, Christian or Pagan, Thou art the Man. When, in
relation to any branch of this short Rule, any doubt is proposed and the
solution given to a particular Person either in plain terms or in a Parable,
that particular solution concerns every man living; so when the Lawyer asked
Christ, Who is my neighbor? and Christ had answered him by that Parable of the
Man robbed and wounded between Jerusalem and Jericho, and relieved by the good
Samaritan, and upon the Lawyers declaring for the Samaritan's charity, Christ
replied upon him, Go and do thou likewise, though the discourse be to one Man,
the import reaches You and Me and every Man who at any time may meet the same
Objects of Charity, and be in the same Circumstances; and when in pursuance of
the great Rule any thing is forbidden, and it is said, Thou shall not do This or
That, it means, No Man on any pretense whatsoever shall do it, and every
Judgment against a particular Criminal tells us, that Except we repent we shall
all likewise perish; and every Blessing following Goodness, speaks, Thus shall
it be done to any Man, whom the King of all things delights to honor; and as
happiness eternal is propounded to All, which is unquestionably Man's chiefest
good, so the means propounded for attaining it, are the same to All, All
purchase it at the same rate, and acquire it with the same spirit; and in this
particular all Humane Writings whatsoever own their defects.

Happiness in Scripture being the end proposed, and we being taught wherein it
consists so, as to have all sorts of Pagans concurring in the persuasion, that
it consists in the fruition of the Love and presence of the Supreme God, the
way to gain it is set down so plain, that none who have common reason can doubt
of its meaning; for though a 1000 Queries, and impertinent enough, have been
made by Casuists, in what instances we ought to love God, yet never any but
Jesuits, who had heard the Rule of Scripture, Thou shall love, etc. could doubt
whether Scripture taught us to have any love for God or no; Men must resolve to
read it backwards, as they say Witches do, who can doubt its meaning; neither
can they doubt, but that we ought to love God, so great and pure a Being, in
all instances whatsoever. The very Pagans themselves were sensible of the
little Artifices of that subtle Spirit, which was wont to speak in their
Oracles, when they sought to secure themselves from a charge of falsehood, by
speaking what was dubiously to be interpreted: and though sometimes for things
Past or Present they would speak tolerably, yet in all future matters they would falter
miserably, as Croesus King of Lydia found to his cost, who chose a God to
himself among the multitude by his Veracity, having contrived it so that
several of his Messengers should at one and the same hour enquire of a several
Oracle what Croesus was then doing, of all which One only answering right,
that One He devoted himself to, and yet that One, when he came to enquire the
event of his intended War against Cyrus, cheated him with a paltry ambiguity to
his ruin; their subtilties in that kind quickly grew proverbial, to the
dishonor of the Impostor; but that divine spirit which influenced Holy
Writers, needed no such subterfuges for apparent weakness, nor have any yet
been able to discover any such thing in Scripture; and though some Prophecies
are very dark and obscure at present, yet the event of things has so exactly
explained many of the most difficult, that none can doubt but just periods of
time will unriddle them all, and make the Apocalypse it self as plain as any
other part of it.

Scripture runs upon no vain and trifling speculations, such as might disturb
and heat the fancy, but its whole scope and import affects the practices of
Men; it advances real knowledge only, and such Knowledge will show it self in
our actions. To Love God and our Neighbors, are things infinitely useful and
rational, and on that account were admired by Pagans in the primitive
persecuted Christians; the duties are so often, and by such variety of
Arguments urged in Scripture, that as it is almost impossible Men should be
ignorant of what is required at their hands, so it is as impossible they should
not know how to perform it, that Book lays no task upon us, but what is
pleasant, safe, and certain; commands nothing, but what it gives us numerous
instances of, as performed by others, and therefore possible to us; it shows us
God's Perfection, and requires Ours, as knowing the fairest Copy excites the
greatest ingenuity and study to equal it; and whereas we cannot but be sensible
of our own Errors, it shows how God accepts the sincerity of our endeavors,
and gives us the instance of One great real Man, who reached that consummate
perfection in our nature, and that for His sake we are received; in all these
things Heathen wisdom failed, either prescribing gay impossibilities for
practice, or propounding happiness as the mark to aim at, but teaching Men to
shoot the contrary way, by engaging them in mean pleasures and downright
sensualities; and where the speculations were best, they had none to appeal to,
who had ever lived up to their own principles, their most famed Sages being
mere prostitutes to notorious immoralities, notwithstanding all the fair show
some late Writers have endeavored to make with them; only Pagans had some few
scattered extracts out of Scripture, which were in themselves excellent, but
being only fragments injudiciously culled, and incoherent, and wretchedly
misunderstood, were wholly useless.

Whereas all Rules and Methods of living before discovered were lame and
imperfect, not sufficient to carry Men through those extraordinary difficulties
and objections they might meet with in a course of virtue, (as appeared by the
Famous Brutus, who because he saw it unfortunate, concluded Virtue was nothing
but an empty name;) Scripture is complete and every way sufficient for the
design it carries on, and therefore stands at advantage against all other
Rules, because Whoever follows others most exactly, cannot be happy at last,
but He that sticks close to our Rule cannot be unhappy; it informs the Mind, it
resolves Doubts, it answers Objections, it encourages Weakness, it dissipates
Fears, it reproves Errors, and makes Sufferings easy, of which there are so
many thousands of instances, owned by Infidels themselves, that from hence too
it is past dispute that our Rule has this quality of the Word of God.

In fine, there is nothing through the whole tenor of it, either in its
Doctrine or History, that is beneath the Majesty of an infinite God; if God
would speak to Man, he could speak no better, therefore he must speak thus and
only thus. He that finds Princes composing Sacred Hymns infinitely beyond
their Orpheus or Callimachus; Moralizing as far beyond their admired Antoninus,
as he beyond Porters or Scavengers; He that reads Prophets more soaring and
divine than their Plato's, or Zeno's, or Pythagoras's, and in a strain more
soft and charming, as well as more Majestic; and Herdsmen more profound and
more truly fatidical, than their Sibyls, or Apollo, and Fishermen more
accurate, argumentative, and rational, than their Philosophers of the noblest
Sects, able to baffle 'em in Disputes, to out-reach them in discovering the
causes and natures of ordinary appearances in the World: He that observes Men
of various lives and conditions, of different tempers, different times, distant
places, different natural abilities, writing a series of Historical passages,
with more clearness, better digested ^n point of Chronology, more probable in
^atters of fact, more full, exact, and im^artial in the Characters of Actions
and Persons, more agreeing with one another, and ^he best Pagan Writers, than
all other Hi^^orians whatsoever, nay, than Old and ^ublick Records themselves,
though preserved and managed with the greatest apparent care and exactness; He
that can find nothing low, flagging, and uneven among such variety of Penmen,
nothing trifling, useless, or superfluous, let his persuasion be what it will,
let him be Turk, African, or Indian, if he have but his Reason free, he must
conclude, if God ever did impart his will to Man, it must be in this Book which
we call Scripture; and if He then return to his own principle, of the
necessity, in point of justice, that God should give a Rule to Man that might
procure his Happiness, it will as necessarily follow, that our Scripture, our
Rule must be the Word of God. Which proves its own Immortal Original farther,
in that notwithstanding the continued malice and subtilty of Enemies, it could
never be destroyed, it could never be disproved, it could never be
interpolated, or any thing be added to it, nor be made shorter, or any thing
taken from it; but while other Humane Writings have been easily abused, and
additions and alterations made in them, not discovered or well distinguished to
this day by the most exact Critics, nothing could so be fastened upon Holy
Writ, nor any inferior Writer or uninspired impose his own upon the World for
the Word of God.

Assured of these things, We, as Christians, among other parts of Scripture,
embrace the History of our Savior's Incarnation, and these things, being
unanswerable by an Infidel upon his own principles, as a Deist and a
Rationalist, he must own the whole History of Scripture to be true; and amongst
the rest, this of the Birth of Christ: for as I have no reason to suspect his
Veracity, who gives me an account of somewhat to his own advantage, who yet has
always told me truth, in things that made against himself; So a Pagan, who
thinks he has reason to receive all the other parts of Divine History, because
he finds them exactly true, has no reason to suspect the Faith of the same
Writers in one particular: And besides, the thing has been so often attempted,
but with so little success, that He may justly conclude, That matters of fact
impossible to be confuted by any argument, cannot possibly be false: This
obliges an Infidel to acknowledge the truth of our History of the Incarnation
in particular; and Scripture in general, owned to be Divine, is a certain
foundation to build the Conversion of Infidels upon. And thus much for the
first head, That Jesus Christ the Messiah, who appeared on Earth, in our
Nature, was really the Son of God.

That the same Blessed Jesus, who was the Son of God, was God equal with his
Father, or really and truly God as well as real Man: He was God, though
manifest in the Flesh; To prove the Truth of which might seem needless, had
there not been of old, and were there not of late Years revived a Generation of
men, who, under pretense of sacrificing to Reason, have set themselves wholly
to explode the Belief of a Trinity; as a means to make good which adventure of
theirs, they positively deny the Divinity of the Son of God; they cannot well
admit of any Mysteries in Religion which themselves cannot comprehend, the very
pretense to which comprehension is enough to make a Mystery no Mystery, for if
They who employ themselves in this work can comprehend it, every one may do so
too, or at least the generality of the Intelligent World, but what is generally
understood cannot be a Mystery, and yet our Apostle in the words preceding the
Text, tells us, that That Mystery of Godliness, of which this Text is a part,
is without all controversy a great Mystery. But that Jesus Christ the Son of
God was God equal with the Father, we shall prove by these Considerations.

By those accounts of his Appearance, and of his Nature, laid down in the Old
Testament.

By the Declarations of Himself, and of his Apostles in the New Testament.

By his Actions during his converse with the World in our Nature.

From the Faith of the Primitive Church.

From that common and on every hand approved practice of adoring and presenting
our prayers to Him.

We are to consider that account the Scriptures of the Old Testament give of
Him, and of his Appearance in the World, where I will not undertake an exact
estimate of every thing that has by Ancient Writers been applied that way, nor
every thing that Modern Controversie-Writers have insisted upon, but upon some
particular and more remarkable passages only. Among which the First is that of
three Angels appearing to Abraham just before the destruction of Sodom, Genesis
18.2.
where I shall not insist on that, that Abraham ran to meet them at their
approach, and bowed himself toward the ground, because I look upon that, and
the consequent words, as only expressions of kindness and hospitality,
suitable to the custom of that Age and Country, and to that respect, a Person
of Abraham's goodness and sagacity would express to Strangers of a promising
miene and venerable aspect: But after this, v. 22.
we find the Angels going for Sodom, but Abraham standing still before the
Lord; Two only went forward, so Lot in Sodom met with, and entertained but
Two; the Third continued still with Abraham, with infinite condescension,
declaring to him the reason of this extraordinary appearance upon Earth; this
favor hindered not the design, but the other Two passed on while Abraham had
the liberty to argue the case with him, who is particularly styled the Lord, so
the Writer, so Abraham in that converse frequently styles him, and that not by
the same word originally which Lot made use of to the two Angels appearing to
him, c. 19.2.
which is only (...) which the Jews account a name applicable to any, but by
that sacred and ineffable name (...) A name, as they say, only applicable to
the most High God; and here we find Abraham continually speaking, as any who
ownes and reveres the Eternal Majesty of God, would supplicate to Him, and
making use of that particular argument in his request, Shall not the Judge of
all the Earth do right? c. 18.25.
He then to whom Abraham applied himself was the Judge of all the Earth,
therefore no created Angel, for such were never honored with that Character,
but it is properly attributed to the Supreme God by the Psalmist, Ps. 94.1, 2.
O God to whom vengeance belongs, show thy self, lift up thy self, thou Judge
of the Earth! and by the Apostle, Heb. 12.23.
where he tells the Hebrews, They were come to God the Judge of all, or as your
Margin reads it, To a Judge the God of all. If we look yet forward into this
story, when Lot was conveyed safe from the destruction which fell upon Sodom,
Genesis 19.24
we are told, The Lord rained upon Sodom and upon Gomorrha brimstone and fire
from the Lord out of Heaven, Epiph. Haer. l. 3. p. 832.
where Photinus, from whom some denominate our Socinians, owns, it was the
(...), the Word which rained from the Lord, Sandii Hist. Enud. l. 1. p. 118.
but that Word was God, as we learn from the Evangelist, John 1.1. By this we
gain the certainty, that our Savior, the Son of God had a Being before he was
born of the Virgin Mary, that the Title, Power, Acknowledgment, belonging to
the true God were given to him, therefore that He was the true God. To this
might be added the History of Jacob's wrestling with the Man, when he was left
alone; The Man he wrestled with, Malac. 3.1.
antiquity generally understood to be the Angel of the Covenant, so Christ is
named, Heb. 12.24.
and this interpretation is no way disagreeable, since the wrestler from the
very contest gives Jacob the name of Israel, which signifies a Prince, Genesis
32.28
or one that powerfully prevails with God. The Person wrestling with Jacob,
refuses to tell his name, which created Angels were not wont to do. Gabriel
told Zacharias his name, the name of Michael is often mentioned, Luke 1.19.
and the Writer of the Apocryphal book of Tobit, supposes it no unusual thing,
when he introduces Tobias's companion, calling himself Raphael, one of the
seven Angels that stand in the presence of God, i. e. are in a more glorious
state than the rest of that Heavenly Host; Again, Jacob expresses his sense of
his Antagonist, in the Name he gave to that place, and the reason of it, for,
says he, I have seen God face to face, and my life is preserved; And lastly,
Jacob prayed to him for a blessing, and would not part without it, which argued
his acknowledgment of a Divine power in him; and the Prophet Hosea makes such
an interpretation of the Text scarce disputable, where speaking of Jacob, He
had power over the Angel, says he, and prevailed, Hos. 12.4, 5.
He wept and made supplication unto him, (that was to own Him the true God) He
found Him in Bethel, and there he spoke with us, Even the Lord GOD of HOSTS,
the Lord is his Memorial; (...) An expression so great and so high, as never
any created Being pretended to.

We may then take notice of the 45 Psalm, a Psalm by all the ancient Jews
applied to the Messiah, and rightly, as will appear; that Messiah was Jesus
Christ, in that both Arians of old, and Socinians of late, as well as the
Orthodox agree, his very Name carries it, He is Jesus the Savior, He is the
Christ, the anointed of God the Father. The Psalmist there represents him at
first, as a Man, though Fairer than the rest of humane race; Ps. 45.2.
but he subjoyns, Thy Throne, O God, is for ever and ever, the Scepter of thy
Kingdom is a right Scepter, Thou love righteousness and hate wickedness,
therefore God thy God has anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy
fellows, where that God to whom the Apostrophe or exclamation refers, is called
by the same name with that God, who is said to anoint him, in the original, and
the whole Text is authentically applied to the Son of God by the Apostle, Hebr.
1.8, 9.
even to that Son whom he there shows to be so far above all Angelick Beings,
that when his Father brings his first begotten into the World, he says, And let
all the Angels of God worship him, which the Apostle quotes from the Psalmist,
Psalm. 97.7.
not literally, according to the Hebrew, but according to the then current
translation of the Septuagint, which though varying from our Hebrew a little in
words, is the same in sense. That the word by us translated Gods, signifies,
and is applied to Created Beings, sometimes, we admit of, as no way prejudicial
to truth; but if the Angels are commanded to worship Him, and that Angel whom
Saint John would have adored, forbad him, because He, though an Angel, Rev.
22.9.
was but a fellow Servant, a Creature, and ordered him to worship God, i. e.
the Supreme Being, then that must be a Rule to Angels too, and they might not
adore or worship a Creature, no more than the Apostle might; therefore the Son
of God was no Creature, since they are commanded to worship him; therefore He
must be God, for we know of no intermedial power between a Creator and a
Creature; We are to worship the Lord our God, Mat. 4.10.
and him only are we to serve, as our Savior himself alleges, but We are to
worship the Son of God, Angels are to do so too, therefore the Son of God is
God. And since we are gotten into this first Chapter of the Epistle to the
Hebrews, we may add, in evidence of our assertion, that other quotation, Thou
Lord in the beginning have laid the foundations of the Earth, Ps. 102.25.
and the Heavens are the work of thy hands, Heb. 1.10, etc.
they shall perish, but thou remainest, and they all shall wax old, as does a
garment, and as a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be changed,
but thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail; which Text is so home to
the proof of the Divinity of the Son of God; that Schlicktingius twists and
winds himself every way to evade its force in his Commentary on the place, and
after all does but Magno conatu magnas nugas agere, as the Comedian, he makes a
great stir to no purpose, He finds fault with the Author of the Epistle, If He,
says he, designed to persuade us Christ was the most high God, why did he not
say so without any farther circumstance? the matter had been then past dispute:
But we suppose it is so plain as nothing can be more already, it is as plain as
those words he would prescribe could have made it, to All, but men of perverse
wits, who wrest the Scriptures to their own destruction; for if, as He owns,
none but the Supreme God could be the Maker of Heaven and Earth, and the
Creation of Heaven and Earth be here by the Apostle ascribed to the Son, then
the inevitable consequence which the Heretic would have had laid down at
first, is, that the Son is the Supreme God, or God equal with the Father: And
whereas the main foundation of the Arrian and Socinian Heresy is, (as Sandius,
another of that tribe, owns) that there was a time when the Son was not, if the
Son of God was indeed the Creator of all things, then he was before all things,
and consequently before time it self, and so their foundation is apparently
false; for he that had a Being before time was, must of necessity be Eternal.
But Schlicktingius would persuade us that, of the whole Text produced by the
Apostle, only the sense of the last words is to be referred to Christ, and
that it is quoted only to prove, that the Dominion of Christ shall not expire,
but with the abolition of all things, Schlicktingius in locum.
Quod Regni Christi, quod nunc in terris administrat, terminus, cum inimicorum
ejus omnium abolitione, quos Coeli and Terrae ruina involvet, sit conjunctus,
are his words, That the end of Christ's Kingdom, which he administers in this
World, is joined with the utter abolition of all his Enemies, who shall be at
once involved in the ruins of the Universe; As for the first part of the
quotation, he makes it altogether impertinent, but that the Apostle took the
Text whole as it lay, because he knew the Hebrews, to whom he wrote, were in no
danger of interpreting the Creation of the World, as referring to Christ, whom
they knew well enough to be no other than (...), a mere Man, and no more, and
adds, that had the Apostle designed any more by that Text, it had been
altogether beside his purpose: But here I conclude, our Adversary mistook the
Apostle's meaning wilfully, which is this.

Writing to the Jews, his first design is to convince them of the Messiahship
of Christ, whom they knew to be a Man, they had seen evidences enough of that
in what he did and suffered among them, they had seen him crucified, dead, and
buried, so that they could not dream of his having only a fantastic body,
being only an apparition, as some Heretics afterward asserted, a phantasm,
or a Spirit had no flesh and bones as they saw him have; The Hebrews were so
certain of this, that they would believe him to be no more than a Man, a man
weak and inconsiderable, a perfect cheat, pretending to the noble character of
being their long expected Messiah, but no way answering that Character, having
appeared in no such glory as the Prophets had foretold, and having wrought no
deliverance for Israel, according to their reasonable expectations. Now, to
convince them of their Error, he asserts Christ to have been the Son of God, v.
2. He proves the Messiah was to be so from their own Books, v. 5. He asserts
Him to have been the express Image of God's Person, the brightness of his
glory, the Vpholder of all things by his power, v. 3. That the Messiah was to
be so, he proves from his superiority to Angels, v. 6, 7. Nay, he asserts him
to be God, and proves the Messiah was to be so, v. 8, 9, 10, etc. In the
Epistle afterward he shows the accomplishment of the Legal Types in him, with
the excellency of his office in every respect, particularly of his Priesthood,
the conclusion of all which to them is this, That if the Types of the Law were
accomplished in him, (which they could judge of by comparing the Law with his
Actions) if He were the Son of God as himself asserted and proved, he then
could be no cheat, how meanly soever he appeared in the world, but was capable
of being the Messiah, and having owned himself to be so (since he was incapable
of deceit) He really was that Messiah they expected, and had wrought a
Deliverance greater, and more valuable than they dreamed of, not only for them,
but for all the World: and to make good this Truth, the applying the Creation
of all things to him was not impertinent; God made the Worlds by his Son, v. 2.
of this Chapter: Therefore he by whom the worlds were made, had a being himself
before they were made, which is what St. John asserts of the Word which was
God, John 1.1, 3.
All things were made by Him, and without Him was nothing made that was made,
all which considered, it is no wonder the Psalmist prescribed so to the Church,
Hearken O Daughter and consider, and incline thine ear, forget also thine own
people, and thy Father's house, so shall the King greatly desire thy beauty,
Psalm. 45.10, 11.
for he is thy Lord God, and worship thou him; He that was God was really and
lawfully to be worshipped.

The next place I shall urge is that of the Prophet Isaiah, Isai. 9.6.
Unto us a child is born, unto us a Son is given, and the government shall be
upon his shoulder, and he shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the mighty
God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace: That this was a Prophecy of
the Messiah to come, has never that I know of, been doubted, and it has been as
universally applied to the blessed Jesus; but that he should be called the
mighty God, and yet not be God, would appear very strange! The title of God is,
we know very well, applied in Scripture to Angels, to Princes, to those to whom
the Word of God was sent, but none of these ever wore the name of the mighty
God; The mighty God here is emphatical and equivalent to the Almighty, and the
only God: and that we should be the less doubtful of his meaning; the same Son,
who is called the mighty God, is called the everlasting Father, or the Father
of eternity, the Father is as much as the Author or Commander of eternity,
which could not without absurdity be applied to him, who once was not, or had
no being himself. The Chaldee paraphrast calls him (...) The Messiah living to
eternity, the name indeed is very proper to God the Father, nor could it with
any probability be applied to the Son, did not our Savior himself solve the
difficulty effectually when he tells us, Job. 10.30.
I and my Father are one; if they be One, the same Epithets belong to both; and
yet that we may the less doubt to whom the whole text belongs, Ephesians. 2.14 2 Thessalonians. 3.16. Heb. 7.2.
this mighty God and everlasting Father is styled the Prince of Peace, so the
blessed Jesus is said to be our Peace, to be the Lord of Peace, and the just
successor of that Priest of the most high God Melchizedech, who was king of
Righteousness and king of Peace.

Again the Prophet Jeremiah, in that plainest Prophecy of his concerning the
certain Advent of the Messiah, teaches us thus, Jer. 23.5, 6.
Behold the days shall come, says the Lord, that I will raise unto David a
righteous branch, and this is the name whereby he shall be called the Lord our
righteousness, (...) That name there too is applied to him which belongs to
none but to the supreme God; It Is the name, as Ben Maimon assures us, which
signifies the Divine essence purely by its self, without any respect to the
Creatures: now that the Divine Essence it self should be attributed to a mere
Man is downright blasphemy; but here it is attributed to that Branch promised to
David, which all the ancient Rabbis, and the eldest Fathers of the Church
interpret of the Messiah, that Christ was the Messiah every one who receives
the Gospel must acknowledge, therefore Jesus the Messiah was God, and so the
Lord our righteousness. If we farther compare this with that of the Prophet
Isaiah, Surely shall one say, in the Lord have I righteousness and strength, In
the Lord shall all the seed of Israel be justified and shall glory, Isai.
45.24, 25. 1 Cor. 1.30.
and that again with that of the Apostle, Christ Jesus is made of God unto us
wisdom and righteousness and sanctification and redemption, We shall find
somewhat more attributed to Christ than lies within the power of the holiest
mere Man that ever was or could be in the world; Israel is to be saved, Man to
be justified by him: now let a Man be never so pure, never so innocent, if he
be but a mere Man his Righteousness and Innocence is nor can be no more than
may serve his own necessity, it is what God requires at every one of our hands;
it is true for ten righteous Men God would have spared Sodom, but that was only
temporally, God's judgments might have been deferred for a while, and yet the
Sodomites have been damned at last: But the Righteousness of Christ is
meritorious and available on our account, he is our righteousness, and
consequently by him and upon his account we are justified from the guilt and
punishment of sin, our sins being pardoned through his merits and for his sake,
and we instead of damnation, being made Inheritors with the Saints in glory:
hence it comes to pass, that we, who are forbidden to glory in Man or in any
child of man, v. 31.
because there is no help in them, are allowed and encouraged to glory in the
Lord, and well we may since he may be and is our Righteousness, therefore he
whom we are allowed to glory in must be more than Man, but he is no Angel,
therefore he must be God.

The last place I shall insist on is that of the Prophet Micah, Micah 5.2
But thou Bethlehem Ephrata though thou be little among the thousands of Judah,
yet out of thee shall he come forth to me, that is to be ruler in Israel, whose
goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting; That this Text referred
to the Messiah we are put beyond doubt by that of the Evangelist, where he
tells us that when Herod had demanded of the Jewish chief Priests and Scribes
where Christ should he born, they presently answered him it should be in
Bethlehem of Judaea, Math. 2.4, 5, 6.
and bring this Text to prove their assertion, the application then being
certain, we may observe how directly this Text contradicts the Arrian and
Socinian Position: They say, there was a time when the Son was not, the Prophet
says, his goings forth have been from of old, from everlasting, or as the
Septuagint, (...). His goings out are from the beginning from the days of
eternity, if his goings forth were from eternity, he himself was from eternity
too, if from eternity, there was then no time wherein he was not, therefore he
was God, for there is nothing to which eternity can be truly attributed but
God; or if we should with some learned Men translate the Hebrew word (...) from
the East, our Interpretation would not suffer at all, it would then be, his
goings forth have been from the east from the days of old, therefore he was or
had a Being before the date of this Prophecy; therefore, he had a Being before
he was born of the blessed Virgin, therefore he was eternal, therefore he was
God: I might have urged more passages out of the Old Testament, but these may
suffice to evidence that That Messiah of whom the Prophets spoke, was believed
by them to be God as well as Man; their Prophecies indeed were by that means
the more obscure and unintelligible to the Jews, who saw Christ frequently, but
they saw only his Humane Nature, they understood no more of Him, nor did they
then expect their Messiah should be God, but only some great Man, which they
saw the blessed Jesus as to his outward appearance was not, and therefore they
picked a quarrel with him as guilty of Blasphemy, Joh. 10.33.
because he being a Man made himself God.

His declarations of Himself, and his Apostles declarations concerning Him, in
the New Testament, which we shall find of such a nature as may sufficiently
prove the Divinity of the Son of God, and here we will begin, as Enjedine a subtle
and industrious Unitarian does, with that of S. Matthew, where having given us
an account of the Angels charge to Joseph concerning his espoused wife, then
with child by the power of the Holy Ghost, he tells us, that in all this, that
of the Prophet was fulfilled, Behold a Virgin shall be with child, Matthew. 1.23.
and shall bring forth a Son, and they shall call his name Immanuel, which is
being interpreted, God with us, this the Evangelist quotes from Isai. 7.14.
Here Enjedine makes the Evangelist a very impertinent Writer, alleging Old
Testaments-texts upon every little hint, though never so far from the purpose;
which argues very little reverence for an inspired Writer: He tells us The name
Immanuel could not signify that Christ was God, because the Prophet where he
names him, says he was sometime to be born, that he should eat butter and
honey, that he should sometime be ignorant of the difference between good and
bad, etc. therefore he could not be God; but all these things were and were
necessarily true of him as he was Man, since he assumed a real and not a
fantastic body. We know he was born in the fullness of time, taking flesh of
the Virgin Mary, that what was the diet of other infants in those parts of the
world, was his too, that it might be evident to all the world he had assumed a
real body like other men, in every thing but sin; We believe his Humane Body
grew and increased as that of other men, and that rational Soul joined with his
body, by which he was a true Man, had its advances in understanding, though at a
greater and more early rate than others, all this we believe, and yet Christ
might be God and God with us for all this: For the reality of his Humanity was
not any prejudice to the truth of his Divinity, he was perfect Man and no less
perfect God. Our adversary questions farther whether the name Immanuel be here
given to Christ or not, because he finds him no where else called by that name:
But neither was there any reason for that, this prophetical name being chiefly
designed to signify his Nature, Enjed. in locum.
as Christ was to signify his Office, and since it is certain the name does
belong to some body (for it is not put there for nothing) either it belongs to
Christ, or that Author ought to have named some body to whom it did belong, but
he is silent in that matter, therefore we conclude it belongs to the Son of
God. He alleges farther, that supposing the name Immanuel be the name of Jesus
in the Text, it signifies no more, than that God was in and with him as he was
with other of his Prophets: but that is impertinent, since the name does not
import that God was in or with him, but that, upon his Incarnation, God was
with us, i. e. God did then assume flesh and appear to and come among us, which
could not be unless he were God. He tells us, Moses might as well have been
called Emmanuel while he converst with the Israelites, and the Ark of God
(especially since the Israelites expected to be saved by it, and upon its being
brought into the field the Philistines cried out, God is come into the Camp)
but was Moses conceived of the Holy Ghost? was the Ark of God really a living
Savior? God might have given them what names himself pleased, but we no where
find that he gave them this, which shows that he designed to appropriate this
name wholly to his own Son, when he should send him into the world, that under
that very state of exinanition or humiliation we should see him, we should know
how great a Being converst with us. What else he objects is absurd even to
ridiculousness, viz. That many since that time, have born the name of Immanuel,
and yet we never took them for gods, as several Emperors of Constantinople,
and many private men, among the rest Immanuel Tremellius, as he instances, a
learned Protestant of later years: He might as well have proved, that because
several Jews and others have been called Moses, and yet none of them were
Lawgivers to Israel, therefore Moses the Son of Amram was no such Legislator;
or that, because there were several Jews who bore the name of Josua or Jesus,
who were not the Saviors of the world, that therefore our Jesus was not so;
what signifies what name I or another fix upon my Son? Or what is more ordinary
than for Men to baptize their children by Scripture-names, without ever
reflecting on or knowing the meaning of those names? But where God gives a
name, and where the Spirit of God interprets it, neither the Name nor the
Interpretation can be insignificant, nor is it so here, but being by the
Prophet of old assigned to, by the Evangelist here applied to the Son of God,
it sufficiently teaches us that He was God eternal, even God with us.

In the next place we may consider that Command of our Savior himself to his
Apostles when he gave them their Commission for executing their Apostolical
Functions, Matthew. 28.19.
Go ye and teach all nations baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; Where the Son and the Holy Ghost being set
equally with the Father, as the objects of our Baptismal Faith, either prove to
us their certain equality, or seem of a very dangerous import, ready to impress
upon us false notions of the Deity, and to make us think those really equal,
whom we see by Christ himself joined together, without any particular mark of
distinction or inequality, when indeed they are not: But this were to represent
the Evangelist under a very ill Character; I shall not insist upon that in this
place, that the Father, Son and Holy Ghost are here named as three distinct
Beings, and one as much and really a person as the other, Enjed. and
Wolzogenius in loc.
(which the Socinians deny of the Holy Ghost) but shall only take notice of
those evasions they make use of, for here they tell us, That we may as well
infer from that of the Apostle concerning the Israelites, 1 Cor. 10.2.
That they were all Baptized unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea, that Moses
was the most high God, as that Christ was God from this command of Men's being
baptized in his name; We know well enough, that to be baptized into Moses is,
to be initiated into that Church which is governed by that Law given by God to
Moses: and that to be baptized into Christ is, to be entered into that Church
which receives God's Law as delivered by Christ; but where, in any divine
precept, do we find God the Father and Moses, and the Holy Ghost linked
together, as if there were an equality among them? We are told indeed by
Wolzogenius, that that passage after the Israelites having gone through the red
Sea, is a parallel, Exodus 14.31.
Having seen that great work which God had done upon the Egyptians, having
drowned them, while themselves were safe, we are told, the people feared the
Lord, and believed the Lord, or in the Lord, as your Margin reads it, and in
his servant Moses; but that is indeed no parallel, for there is distinction
enough made between God and Moses, one is the Lord, the other but the servant:
but there is no such distinction in the Text, no servant, no intimation of an
inferiority, but only the order of nature followed, and the Father put before
the Son, and both before the Holy Ghost which proceeds from both: Then, whereas
Enjedine tells us, That to be baptized into Moses was not to believe that Moses
was the most high God, and consequently, That to be baptized into the name of
the Son of God, is not to believe any such thing of him, he forgets, that to be
baptized into the name of the Father, is to declare our belief of His being the
most high God, by his own confession: (yet that belief is the very Character by
which those Heretics distinguish themselves from us, whom they call
Trinitarians) and if that be owned, our baptising in the name of Christ, must
infer our acknowledgment of his Divinity, since the Father and the Son are
joined together in the same expression, and we are baptized alike, and as much
into the name and belief of one, as of the other. But they would prove that
Christ is not here made equal with his Father, because S. Paul afterward ranks
him but with himself and others, as in his reproof of the Corinthians for
saying, 1 Cor. 1.12
I am of Paul and I of Apollos, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ. Here indeed
they confess there is a real superiority in Christ to any of these mentioned
with him: That acknowledgment was inevitable: But farther, though the Apostle
condemn the Corinthians for calling themselves by his name, or the name of any
of his fellow laborers, yet he approves their calling themselves by the name
of Christ: for so he tells them with respect to Creatures and their
circumstances, 2 Cor. 3.22 23.
All are theirs, whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or
death, or things present, or things to come, all are yours; but then he changes
his style, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods, and so he was, the Messiah,
the Anointed sent by God into the world. In conclusion they tell us, that these
words were never designed as a formulary of Baptism, which they prove, because
there is no account in Scripture, particularly in the History of the Acts, of
any baptized by this form, but will they assert there was no form at all, no
significant words made use of in the administration of that ordinance? that
would be to leave the meaning of the outward Ceremony uncertain, and to take
away the Sacramental nature of baptism; if there were any words used, either
they must allow these, or assign some other, which none that I know of have
attempted. It Is true, they say, the Eunuch only declared to Philip, before his
Baptism, Acts 8.37.
that He believed Jesus Christ was the Son of God, and there was no need of
more, Philip questioned not his belief of a God, He was a Jewish Proselyte, and
if he owned the Sonship of Christ, he would by consequence believe whatsoever
should be revealed to the world by him: But we read not of any words used by
Philip in the act of baptising him; they say this silence proves the words in
the Text we are treating of, were not used: I say no, but Christ's particular
institution being very well known, and his disciples using to obey his
commands, S. Luke's silence infers that Philip used those very words so
instituted, otherwise the Evangelist would have taken notice of some other; and
thus after all, God the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, being joined together in
the words of institution in Christian Baptism without any mark of inferiority,
these words prove the Son of God to be God equal with his Father.

The next place we shall insist upon is that remarkable beginning of S. John's
Gospel, In the beginning was the Word, John 1.1, 2, 3.
and the Word was with God, and the Word was God, the same was in the beginning
with God, all things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made
that was made; where we have these two great men Erasmus and Grotius agreeing
with us, That they are an unanswerable argument of the Divinity of the Son of
God, who yet are apt enough to betray that article of our Faith, by weakening
other considerable evidences of the same truth. As for the person here meant by
the (...), the Word, the Socinians themselves as far as I can find, excepting
the Annotator on the Racovian Catechism, acknowledge, that it is the Son of
God: to tell all their discourses, for the eluding the force of this Text,
would be a work too tedious, only this we may observe, they tell us, That
whereas Moses begins his History of the Creation with a like expression to this
of our Evangelist, its rational to believe, that the Evangelist here is only
going to describe a second or a better Creation, or rather the renovation of
all things by Jesus Christ, which had been ruined by the fall of our first
parents; which renovation of things began at the time of our Savior's
Incarnation, and therefore the Evangelist means no more by that phrase, In the
beginning was the word, but that Jesus Christ the word of God had a being when
the Almighty God first set upon this work of re-creation or renovation of all
things. And that indeed the design of the Evangelist is only to obviate an
objection, that might be made on the behalf of John the Baptist, who stood fair
to have been taken for the Messiah, because he first entered upon his office,
and preached repentance, and baptized, which were truly Evangelical works;
whereas Christ himself lay hid, and wholly undiscovered to the world: But to my
best apprehension, there was very little need of all this care, for though some
such thoughts might have entered into Men's heads when they were all full of
expectation of a Messiah, that John, whose holy and severe life, and whose very
useful doctrine was generally known, might be that Messiah, as we see by that
message which the Jews sent to him from Jerusalem, Art thou the Christ or
Elias, or that Prophet, or who art thou? though men might entertain some such
thoughts, the Evangelist represents John the Baptist as very careful to prevent
any such dangerous mistakes; therefore he not only answers negatively to their
particular enquiries, viz. That he was not Christ, nor Elias, nor that Prophet,
but he answered positively too to their General question, v. 19-23.
that He was the voice of one crying in the wilderness, Prepare ye the way of
the Lord, make his paths straight, as says the Prophet Esaias. Now the Baptist
being so very much reverenced, and so mightily followed as he was, his answer
could not but be spread about through all Judaea, and the expectations of Men
be the more raised, because the person there prophesied of by Isaias, was to be
the forerunner of the Messiah: he therefore being come, the other could not be
far behind. Besides, if we interpret the Gospel of the glad tidings of
Salvation brought to all mankind, the Evangelists expression will be untrue.
For, not to mention the Promise to our first Parents, and those afterward
repeated to the Patriarchs, and frequently declared and enlarged upon by the
Prophets, that of the Angel to Zacharias, the Father of S. John Baptist, and
that of the same Angel to the blessed Virgin (and they were ^^^^einly tidings
of great joy, and the real beginnings of that which is peculiarly styled the
Gospel) both these were before the very conception of our Savior, therefore He
as a mere man, was not, or had no being in the beginning of the Gospel; and
doubtless the Evangelist here, in the beginning of his History, taking up the
very expressions of Moses in the beginning of Genesis, and using his very words
as translated by the Septuagint, supposed his Readers would take his words in
the same sense as they understand those of Moses, and so, in the beginning in
both places, signifies as much as before there was any thing existent: so
before any thing, but the eternal God himself, had a being, God out of nothing,
produced all things: and so before any thing, God excepted, had a being, the
Word was: therefore that Word was God, because God only could exist in the
beginning or before the Creation of all things: and thus the Evangelist says
something peculiar of Christ, and what might really set him above the Baptist,
or blessed Angels, or any other Creatures whatsoever: Otherwise the Apostle,
according to the Socinian fancy, would have taken pains to prevent an Objection
never brought, at such a time too as never any Man could have raised it, for he
wrote his Gospel, according to all accounts, about the 90th. year of our
Savior, toward the end of his own very long life, and when the Gospel was
spread in all quarters, and Heresies had gotten a great footing in the Church,
when that Objection about John Baptist would have appeared nonsensical and
ridiculous: Whereas, had he designed his Master's honor or the advantage of
mankind, he would have made haste, and have penned his Gospel very early, when
such poor objections might have appeared with some countenance. But it follows,
In the beginning the Word was with God, this seems to prove very plainly, that,
if the Word here spoken of be indeed the Son of God, he had a being before he
was visible in our Nature, and that above, or in Heaven, or in the peculiar
place of the Divine presence; which granted, is enough to destroy all the
Socinian Doctrine of Christ's being a mere Creature, or a Man like one of us,
and no more. That Christ really had such a Being antecedent to his Incarnation,
we have reason to believe on the authority of concurrent Texts of Scripture,
for so our Savior calls himself before the cavilling Jews, John 6.51.
That Bread which came down from Heaven: But if he came down from heaven, He
must first have been there, and that at least some time before he told them so.
The Jews in general, nay his own Disciples, thought this a very hard saying, an
expression that was very hard to be understood; and so it was to those who were
wholly taken up with carnal thoughts; our Savior cures their amazement or
incredulity with a strange intimation, What and if you should see the Son of
man ascend up into heaven? v. 61, 62.
This question plainly enough asserts, that he had been with God before they
converst with him here on earth, and this Socinus himself acknowledges, for he
knew not how to disengage himself from the force of this, and that yet more
astonishing declaration of our Savior to Nicodemus, No man has ascended up to
heaven, Joh. 3.13.
but He that came down from heaven, even the Son of Man which is in heaven;
which expression, according to the Socinian Rational way of exposition, as they
call it, is mere riddle or contradiction: but according to the Catholic Faith
concerning the eternal generation of the Son of God, is easy and intelligible
to every man. For if it were God that was manifest in the flesh, and continued
the same eternal God still, He might in his divine nature always be with his
Father, and yet in his Humane Nature be conversant among Men, at the same time.
But though Socinus and his followers sometimes own the literal truth of these
expressions, they cannot hold true to what they allow, for one while they would
change it is nature, and make it figurative, So Jesus Christ was in heaven by
the divine raptures or meditations of his Soul, Explic. loc. S Script. Op. v 1.
p. 146.
or he was in heaven by that perfect knowledge he had of all divine matters;
thus Socinus himself: But he quits it at last, and flies to that wonderful
discovery, filium hominis vere and proprie de coelo descendisse and in coelo
fuisse, That the Son of Man was truly and properly in heaven, and descended
from thence, before he discoursed these things with the Jews. But would you
know how? it was as S. Paul, who though but a mere Man, was caught up into the
third heavens, 2 Cor. 12.2, 3, 4.
into Paradise, and heard unspeakable words which it ^s not lawful for a man to
utter; so the blessed Jesus was taken up bodily into heaven, and there was
conversant some time with God, and was there as in a School, taught those
things he was afterward to preach, and do in the world: Would you know when?
It was, say some, when he was twelve years old, and his parents mist him at
their return from Jerusalem, and after three days found him among the Doctors.
Wolzog. in Jo. c. 3. v. 13.
Wolzogenius supposes it during the forty days fast in the wilderness, for
whereas Socinus thinks it highly fit that as Moses the type was with God upon
the Mount, that he might there learn those Laws and Ordinances he was to
deliver to the Israelites, so it was very reasonable, Christ the Antitype,
should have some such like converse with God, for the same purpose, in a nobler
place, therefore this Author, to carry on the parallel the farther, would pitch
it on that time to which the Evangelists allot forty days, because Moses was
the same space of time in the Mount, and this was the great Invention of
Laelius Socinus, which cost him so much study, so many fastings, and earnest
prayers to Almighty God: and Schlichtingius pursues the fancy with a great deal
of heat and violence; Crellius joins with it too, so that this may pass for
their general solution of the difficulty, a difficulty which could never be
found till they created it, and with their mighty pretenses to Reason and clear
interpretations of difficult places, shut all true Reason and clear
Scripture Light out of doors. It Is certain, that the Evangelists mention
nothing of this formal ascent into heaven, and is it likely that they who set
down all the circumstances of his birth, to his very wrapping in swaddling
clothes, and lying in a manger, they who mention his flight into Egypt, his
wandering from his parents, his several ascents to Jerusalem, his
Transfiguration on mount Tabor (a matter much less glorious and important) his
talk with Moses and Elias, (a very unnecessary discourse, if he had learned all
those things from God himself before) is it likely, that those who set down
these things so punctually; nay, S. Luke himself (of whom, when it serves their
turns, they say, that He was so inquisitive, as to omit nothing of consequence
wherein our Savior was concerned) that these should omit so prodigious an
Ascent into heaven as this, which would naturally have conciliated so great an
authority to his person and his doctrine, and would have been very necessary
too if he had been no more than a mere man? Had there really been such an
Ascent, it would have been very improper in his younger years, for besides the
weakness and insufficiency of that age for the most divine speculations, we are
told plainly, after that dispute of his with the Doctors, and his return with,
and obedience to his parents, Luke 2.52.
that He increased in wisdom, and in stature, and in favor with God and Man,
which must be false and ridiculous, if he had been in Heaven before, and had
been fully instructed in all divine matters by God himself. As for that second
time allotted for this Ascent, viz. immediately after his Baptism, the
Evangelists tell us plainly, the design of his being led by the Spirit into the
wilderness was, that he might be tempted of the Devil: Luke 4.2.
Nay, and as S. Luke asserts, He was tempted by the Devil forty days, this
could not have been true, had he been in Heaven any or all those days; and
whereas the Evangelist adds, that in those days he did eat nothing, and when
they were ended he afterward hungered; this story must be both false and
disgraceful too: for how could he, who had corporeally attained the glorious
vision of the Almighty, be so soon affected with the inconveniences of flesh
and blood, when we never find Moses, though fasting as long several times,
complaining of any such hunger? Or can we believe the Devil, so very diligent
and violent an enemy to Man's happiness, would have given our Savior so
glorious a respite, which, in all probability too, must have been so
prejudicial to himself? When the Socinians can show us any thing like a proof
of their dreams in God's word, we will consider it, till then we will entertain it
only as a ridiculous, not to say a blasphemous Romance, and adhere to the
natural and genuine interpretation of these words, the Word was with God, viz.
that Jesus Christ, or, he who in his humane nature bore that name, was from
eternity actually existent in the presence, and in the bosom of his father,
that therefore that Prayer of his was rational and intelligible, Now O father
glorify thou me with thy self, Joh. 17.5.
with that glory which I had with thee before the world was: This Prayer is
intelligible enough, according to the common Doctrine of the Christian Church,
that Christ had a being before the beginning of the world: quit that sense and
we have nothing but figure upon figure, incoherent, inconsistent, and very
profound Heterodoxy and nonsense. And may we not fairly assert that old way of
explaining such passages as these, when the Evangelist in the continuance of
his discourse, says plainly, and the Word was God? That the Word was with God,
say they, is as much as if the Apostle had said, though he was unknown to the
world, he was very well known to God in his privacy, and that is very likely to
be true, if God be Omniscient, that he knew his Son: But if it be said, He only
knew him, then it is false; for God himself had, by his holy Angels before, made
him known to the blessed Virgin, to his supposed father Joseph, and to the
Shepherds of Bethlehem, and to the Wise Men of the East; nay, he was known to
most of them, by the name of the Son of God, by the office of saving his people
from their sins, etc. and good old Simeon, in his Eucharistick song, gives us a
complete Compendium of the Gospel, Luke 2.31, 33.
and we are sure, He knew the infant Jesus to be the salvation of God, who was
to be a light to lighten the Gentiles, and to be the glory of God's people
Israel. Here then we find, the adversaries of our Faith wholly mistaken: in the
consequent gradation of the Evangelists, they are yet engaged in more
difficulties, but what methods do they fix upon to disengage themselves?
According to the ordinary acceptance of the words, a man would be ready to
conclude that the Evangelist meant as he said, and that if the Word was God, he
was so indeed, and therefore not simply a Creature or a mere Man; but (what may
look very suspitiously) it is observable, that those who are unwilling to own
any such thing as a Mystery in the Objects of our Faith, make every word in
this beginning of S. John's Gospel Mysterious; so, by God we must understand
Man, or one that really is no more than a Man, only honored with the name of
God, as being his Deputy or Vicegerent, or as the Psalmist speaks to Kings,
Psalm. 82.6, 7.
I have said you are Gods, and all of you are children of the most high, but ye
shall die like Men, and fall like one of the Princes: Well, we allow it; Princes
are so styled there in a figurative sense, because of their deputation from
heaven, and the derivation of their authority from thence: And in David we have
a King, a Man after God's own heart, but was ever any thing like this in this
text spoken of him? Would not the Author be impudently ridiculous, who should
preface a History of David's life thus, In the beginning of the Israelitish
Kingdom was David, for so he really had a being, as soon as ever Saul had any
title to that kingdom; and David was with God, i. e. He was known only to him,
for God had cut out his Prophet Samuel a way to anoint him King unknown to
Saul, to prevent any jealousy in him of any such intended Heir to his Crown,
and Israel in general were as ignorant of his Unction to their government; and
David was God, because he held the place of God, and in his room and by his
appointment managed that people? You see the reason of beginning so would be
the same which these Men assign to our Evangelist: but would you not look on
such an Historian as an impious blasphemer, or could ever any, without the
spirit of Prophecy, imagine, that by such expressions any thing of this nature
could be meant? It Is true again, that God promised Moses, Exodus 4.16 c. 7.1.
he should be instead of God to his brother Aaron, that he should be a God to
Pharaoh King of Egypt, and what looks yet greater, that Aaron should be his
Prophet; We would conclude that by these expressions God meant no more, than
that Moses should interpret the Will of God, or make it known to Aaron,
dictating always to him what He should say and do in the name of God: and that
Pharaoh should show a respect to him as to a Divine Person, and should be no
more able to offer him violence or to do any injury to him, how angry so ever
he might be, than if he had really been a God: and that, because of his slow
speech, Aaron should deliver his mind and errand to Pharaoh for him: this
Interpretation is natural, and the sequel of the story confirms it; but would
ever any Man, that desired to be soberly understood, have said of Moses, even
when he was upon the Mount, that Moses was with God, and that Moses was God? No
Author sacred or profane can afford us any parallel to this bold and impious
assertion, that the Word was God, or that any Person was God, and yet no more
than a mere Man. Socinus tells us, that certainly if God had designed that we
should believe Jesus Christ was the most high God, he would have told us so in
plain terms; Now had not Socinus himself and his Partners endeavored to have
persuaded the world otherwise, all mankind would have concluded this expression
of the Evangelist such a plain passage as he required; and was the want of a
single particle enough so to obscure the whole discourse of the Evangelist,
that, without a 1000. fictitious stories added to him, he must become
absolutely unintelligible? God in that expression, the Word was with God, and
in that again, the same was in the beginning with God, is, by themselves
understood to signify the most high God, and why should it be otherwise
interpreted in the middle sentence? But Schlicktingius here sets upon us with
an absurd paraphrase of his own contrivance, the necessary consequence, of the
current interpretation of the Evangelist, For, says he, it will amount to this
as if the Evangelist had said, Schlicktin. in locum.
In the beginning was that one God, and that one God was with that one God, and
that one God was that one God, and that same one God was in the beginning with
that one God, and that one God made all things by that one God: Absurd and
ridiculous enough! but our own learned Dr. Hammond has furnished us with one of
a more genuine and sensible complexion, thus, In the beginning of the World,
before all time, before any thing was created, the Son of God had a real being,
and that Being with his Father, of whom he was begotten from all eternity, and
was himself eternal God, and being by his Father, in his eternal purpose,
designed to be the Messiah, who was among the Jews known by the title of the
Word of God, and is here fitly expressed by that name, The Word, This eternal
Word of God, I mean, by whom all things were at first created, He brought with
him the Doctrine of life, etc. Here we have the meaning of the Catholic Church
set down, and a full explication of the Evangelist, without any such nonsense
or Tautology as Schlicktingius would amuse us with: But as if the Spirit of God
had resolved to prevent the Socinian Cavils, the Evangelist, to make us more
certain who this Word was, adds this to his Character, ver. 3.
All things were made by him, and without him was not made any thing that was
made; but to evade this they give us a new cast of their subtilty and boldness:
For here the word, All things, must lose its sense, and be understood only of
some particulars; for they recur to their (...), their original false
principle, which is, that in the beginning is only in the beginning of the
Gospel, and so by all things here are meant only such things as have a
particular respect to the promulgation of the Gospel, of all which things he
was the Author; but their first principle is yet very far from being made good,
nay had our Evangelist expressly said, In the beginning of the Gospel was the
Word, which yet neither was, nor could be his meaning, All things were made by
him, could not admit of their restrained sense, the following words forbid it,
without him was nothing made that was made: and for fear these words should be
liable to any exception, the Apostle interprets their meaning by that, He was
in the World, and the World was made by him, v. 10.
and the World knew him not: But here (rather than not elude the force of the
words) they will in one verse make the word (...) the World, to carry no fewer
than three several senses, as it is three times repeated; for first by his being
in the world is meant, his Conversing with all men in general, for there by the
World is meant All men, by the World which was made by him is meant, all those
who were created anew in Christ to good works, they are those upon whom his
Doctrine had its due effect; Schlicktin. in locum.
Renovantur autem and restaurantur homines per sermonem cum ad fidem in ipsum
adducuntur, etc. Men are renewed and restored by the word, when they are
brought to Faith in him, and draw a new Spirit, even the Spirit of Adoption,
through him, whereby they mortify the Flesh and the Works of the Flesh, from
sinners and slaves to vice they are made Saints, and from persons condemned and
lost, they are made certain of eternal life: Such persons then as these
constitute the second World, that World which was made by him: but because it
would sound very odly, that these new Creatures, Men thus renewed in the Spirit
of their minds, should not know Him who had renewed or created them again,
therefore they have thought of a third World, that World which did not know
him, and that is the World of obstinate and contumacious Men, who would not
listen to the Word, though speaking never so powerfully: nor could the Word work
at all on them, though in it self of so efficacious a nature: those indeed are
sometimes called the World, because they are men of earthly and degenerate
minds, Men, who give themselves wholly to mind earthly things; but never yet
did any inspired Writer call Holy Men, Men converted from the vanities of this
World, from all the Lusts and Follies attending it, never did they call such by
the name of Worldly Men: But is not this a very hard shift, to chop and change
so often in so very short a sentence? Whereas if we believe, as we ought, that
this Habitable World, and all things therein were created at first out of
nothing by the Son of God, the sense will be easy enough, that God the Son was
in this World, this World the Universal fabric of which his own hand had made,
and yet the World, so far as capable of sense and knowledge, understood it not,
or were not able to distinguish between the Creator and a mere Creature. That
we should believe the Son of God made all things at first, the Scripture seems
to take a great deal of care, for so S. Paul teaches us, that God created all
things by Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 3.9. but much more fully, Coloss. 1.15, 16.
Where giving thanks to God the Father, who has delivered us from the power of
darkness, and translated us into the Kingdom of his dear Son, he describes that
Son thus, He is the image of the Invisible God, the firstborn of every
Creature, for by him were all things created, that were in Heaven, and that are
in Earth, visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones or Dominions, or
Principalities or Powers, all things were created by him and for him, and he is
before all things, and by him all things consist, and the Author of the Epistle
is acknowledged to apply that of the Psalmist to our Savior, Heb. 1.10.
Thou Lord in the beginning have laid the foundation of the Earth, and the
Heavens are the works of thy hands: A man would be apt to think these Texts
were very plain and positive; yet here too they will make their impious attempts,
for All things in heaven and in earth, must mean only Angels and Men; be it so,
how come the Angels to be renewed by the Word? They will not say the fallen
Angels were reduced to a state of Salvation, S. Jude will contradict them
there, who tells us, Jude v. 6.
The Angels which kept not their first state, but left their own habitation,
God has reserved in everlasting chains under darkness to the judgment of the
great day: They cannot say the Good Angels were so restored or renewed, for
they were created absolutely happy, and they had not lost that happiness; and
our Savior himself asserts, that He came not to call the Righteous, but
sinners to repentance, that the Whole need not a Physician, but those that are
Sick: The words then are as they sound to us, they are general, and whereas the
Apostle particularises in Thrones and Dominions, etc. after those general
words, all things visible and invisible, it is only to supply us with an
argument a Majori ad Minus, that if even those superior happy Beings, who
might seem almost to be above the rank of Creatures, if they yet owed their
first originals to the hand of the Son of God, how much more may we conclude
the visible or grosser parts of the Universe might owe their beginnings to his
power?

Indeed the design of the Apostle is to set before our eyes in the beginning of
his Gospel, the wonderful Condescension of the Son of God on behalf of
miserable sinners, so to work in us a due fence of what we owe to so infinite a
goodness, and a forward readiness to accept Salvation from so all-sufficient a
hand, upon the terms propounded, i. e. Faith and Obedience; but what Topic
could the Holy Penman better begin his design with, than from that of Christ's
being God blessed for ever, or from all eternity, from his existing always in
the glorious presence of his Almighty Father, and being infinitely blessed in
himself, as being One and equal with his Father, (for a complete and every way
perfect Union or Identity can only be between equals.) The Evangelist proves
this eternal Greatness by that sufficient argument of his being the great and
sole Creator of all things. This God, this Creator of all things, appeared upon
Earth, where, even those who were the Work of his hands, were grown to that
Blindness through the greatness of their Sins, and the corruption of their
natures, that though the whole Creation longed for the glorious day of his
appearance, Yet all the Worl'd seemed utterly unable to discover him: this
glorious and eternal Word yet assumed Humane Nature, that he might be Visible
to the eye of the World, and that he might be able to offer himself a Sacrifice
for the Sins of the World, that he might atone his Father's just anger, and
reconcile us to him by his own most precious blood: To this end He underwent
all the inconveniences ordinarily attending Mankind, and it was a severe
beginning of his debasement or humiliation for our sakes, that whereas he
honored the Nation of the Jews by being born among them, and whereas, out of
particular commiseration for that poor lost people, he made himself first known
among them, and Preached, and did Miracles, that they might the better
understand him; yet, after all, he came to his own, but his own received him
not, i. e. the generality of that Nation rejected him, but those who did
receive him were empowered by him to become the Sons of God, they were so
influenced, assisted, supported, and dignified by his Sacred Spirit, that they
attained the Spirit of Adoption, whereby they were able to cry Abba Father, or
to call upon God with that confidence and security, which a dearly loved Son
may have in an indulgent and well pleased Father; He was such, because that
Holy Lamb, to whom John the Baptist gave his testimony, did really take away
the Sins of the World, and this Lamb whose nature and goodness was so little
understood, appeared yet (especially after his Resurrection, when their minds
were opened) to his Disciples, full of Grace and Truth, they beholding his
glory as the glory of the only Begotten Son of God; such luster would appear in
him to the true believers eyes through the thick veil of his flesh, and all the
dismal clouds of his unparalled sufferings. Now this glory which the Apostles
saw in Christ, must be somewhat capable of distinguishing him from others, he
might have appeared as a Son of God at large, in the same sense as all those
who live piously are called the Sons of God: but that would not at all have
answered to what the Evangelist tells us his Glory made him appear, i. e. the
only begotten Son of God, begotten of God in such a manner as never any mere
Creature could be, glorious in such a Manner as no mere Man was ever capable
of; but if he could be no Creature, he could be nothing but God, there being no
Intermedial Essence between the Creator and the Creature; If then it be the
distinguishing Character of the Almighty, that he has had a being from
eternity, that he is God, that He has made all things, and that there is
nothing made but what is made by him: that He has made the World, that He has
created all things visible and invisible, whether in heaven or in the earth,
that He has founded the Earth, and the Heavens are the work of his hands: if
all these things are the Characters of the most high God, Our Savior justly
wears them all. He was in the beginning before all things, He was then with
God, He was God, all things were made by him, and nothing without him, He made
the World, and all things in it whether visible or invisible, etc. therefore he
was the most high God: notwithstanding which exalted nature, he was pleased to
manifest himself in the flesh, or to become flesh, which could be no diminution
of his eternal glory, infinity being absolutely incapable of any such
lessening; The Godhead was not converted into flesh, as the Athanasian Creed
expresses it, i. e. by taking our Nature, the Son of God did not cease to be
God, but he took the manhood into God, that which was limited and finite into
that which was infinite. Thus have I very largely insisted on this beginning of
S. John's Gospel, it being such a discourse as asserts the Divine Nature of the
Son with the greatest clearness and the most of circumstance of all others, and
therefore the whole body of the Socinians level all their skill and strength
against it, knowing very well, that a conquest here gained would go a great way
to make them victorious in every quarter.

In the next place, Our Savior discoursing with the Jews, who were always
seeking occasion to quarrel both his words and actions, when we may assure our
selves, that if he had but the discretion of an ordinarily prudent Man, he
would have spoken with the greatest caution in the World, Joh. 10.30
He then tells them, without any limitation or allay, I and my father are one.
Schlicktin. in locum.
Hoc Christi dictum ad essentiam trahere nugari est, says Schlicktingius
roundly, It Is perfect fooling to infer an essential unity between the Father
and the Son from these words of Christ: Mirum est hunc locum urgeri a
quibusdam, Enjed. in locum.
and ex eo velle eandem Patris and Filii essentiam colligere, says Enjedine,
It Is strange that some should urge this place, and conclude from it that the
Essence of God the Father, and of God the Son is the same, and he alleges Beza
and Calvin, and Bucer, as all declaring that it is no proof in the case; but
it is not what Men of great names say, or boldly assert; but the reasons why
they say so or so, that we much respect; and therefore we cannot overpass this
particular Text. The Jews, as we find in the verses before, came about our
Savior, and require he would tell them plainly whether He were the Christ or not?
The Question in it self was reasonable, and might merit a direct answer, and
doubtless would have had it, had it been propounded with that ingenuity and
sincerity which became those who were prepared to receive the Gospel: But our
Savior, who knew the malice of the Question, refers them to what he had said
before, and the wonderful Works which he had done among them: They knew what
the Prophets had foretold should be done by the Messiah, They saw what He did,
and They heard in whose name he pretended to do what he did, it was easy for
them to compare his present actions with the ancient Prophecies, and to find
out whether there was any thing prejudicial to God's glory or Man's happiness,
in all those miracles he had done among them: But they not being his Sheep, nor
submitting themselves to his conduct, who was the Good Shepherd, they had not
Honesty or Prudence enough to examine and weigh things impartially, and
therefore stumbled at noon day: They could not see how the Innocence of his
life, where they could convince him of no Sin; how the purity of his Doctrine,
which he uttered so as never Man did before him: how the greatness of his
Miracles, which were unquestionable and extremely kind: did prove beyond
contradiction of any, but those who were wilfully mad, that He could be no
Impostor, no Cheat as they imagined: Had they been his Sheep, they would have
listened to him, and have been safe, for all those were so who followed him, He
would give them eternal life, and no man could take them out of his hand, for
his Father who gave them him was greater than all, Therefore no man could pluck
them out of his hand; but He and his Father were One, therefore none could
pluck them out of his hand, therefore He too was greater than all. This would
seem to the natural consequence of the Words; and it is certain the Jews thought
it was so, for they presently took up stones to stone him, i. e. to give him
that death which was the peculiar punishment of the Blasphemer; and such they
took him for; for when Christ reproached their baseness, v. 33.
and asked for which of his good works they stoned him, they readily answer,
They stoned him, not for a good work, but for blasphemy, because that He being
a Man made himself God: This they thought they concluded very reasonably,
because he had said, I and my Father am One. Well, did our Savior in his
reply, tell them they were mistaken, that he meant no such thing by those
words, that his meaning only was, that He and his Father were both of one mind,
exactly agreeing in that kind intention of preserving his Sheep from perishing?
did he make any such plea? Not at all; but he sharply reproves their folly in
challenging him as a Blasphemer for those words, and takes up an argument
against them from that passage of the Psalmist, I have said ye are gods. v. 34,
35, 36.
If he call them gods to whom the word of God came, says our Lord, and the
Scripture cannot be broken, say ye of hi^ whom the father has sanctified and
sent into the World, Thou blasphemest, because I sai^ I am the Son of God, i.
e. If earthly Princes deserve the name of Gods, because they are God's
Vicegerents, or if Angels carry that name because they are the Ministers of
God^ glory, would not that title much more justly belong to the Son of God made
flesh, sanctified from the womb of his mother, and sent from heaven to be the
Savior of the world? he must then by the very force of this argument be
greater than either the greatest of Men, or the holiest of Angels; but what
middle Being is or can there be between Angelick substances and the Deity, that
should be above Angels, and yet not God? We Will allow then, that for Two to be
One is often used for that unity or agreement of mind, which our adversaries
speak of, but we may retort their question, and ask, Is it possible two should
be exactly of one mind, and yet not both of one nature? I fear they will find no
instances of that: Friends may be said to be One, Husband and Wife to be One,
Two People to be One, but are they not all of a mortal nature, and consequently
capable of equal thoughts and apprehensions of things? if therefore God the
Father and Jesus Christ be One in their sense, it must be by Identity of
Understanding, and Will, and Intention, which cannot be but between Persons of
equal nature, therefore Christ must be partaker of the Divine Nature, and
therefore he must be God, and so, what he farther adds in his discourse with
the Jews is easily intelligible, and a strong confirmation of what we have laid
down, If I do the works of my Father, believe not Me, but believe the Works,
that ye may know and believe, that the Father is in me, and I in him: this
passage if interpreted of unity of Will, can be no where paralleled; and indeed
it intimates a yet closer conjunction than that agreement: This Union takes as
much of the Subject on one part as on the other, therefore if the father be
every where, and more peculiarly in the Son, the Son is every where too, and as
peculiarly in the Father, and therefore when Enjedine would make a show of some
parallel expressions of Christ's being in good Men and they in him, he
unluckily, among other places, hits on that of S. Paul, where he speaks of
Christ's dwelling in the heart by Faith, Ephesians. 3.17.
which indeed explains all the rest; for Christ being a Mere Man, as the
Socinians say, cannot any otherwise be united so to men, as to be said to be in
them, but by Faith, nor can good Men, pious and holy Persons be in Christ
otherwise than by Faith; but sure it was never thought of, that the Son of God,
was in his Father or his Father in him by Faith: yet that must be said, be it
never so absurd or blasphemous, if their appeal to that of our Savior stand
good, That they all may be one as thou Father art in me, Joh 17, 21, 22, 23.
and I in thee, that they also may be one in us: that they may be one, even as
we are one, I in them and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one;
here the unity between Christians, or those who should believe in Christ, must
be that unity of mind, consisting in mutual Love and Charity, that Unity must
be maintained by the vigor of their Faith; but cannot that Unity between the
Father and the Son be maintained, without the same Faith? If the expressions
must be explained all one way, it will then follow, That God loves those who
believe in his Son, as well as he loves his Son, for so it follows in the
forecited place, That they may be made perfect in one, ver. 23.
and that the world may know that thou have sent me, and have loved them as
thou have loved me: but this would quite ruin all their pretenses to an
extraordinary reverence of the Person of Christ, whom they pretend to prefer,
in all privileges, infinitely before the Holiest of other men. Indeed the
Prayer of Christ imports only this, He begs of his Father that Christians might
be as closely united with respect to their mortal state, and in proportion to
it, as he and his Father were in their immortal Nature; and that believers
should enjoy his presence as effectually to their advantage, by their Faith in
him, as he enjoyed the infinite glory and happiness of his Father, by his
Identity or Coessentiality with him; and this is the greatest happiness they
could wish for themselves, or Christ for them. The Jews then were not mistaken
in the meaning of our Savior, when in saying, He and his Father were one, they
thought he made himself God: nor did they mistake him, when they sought to kill
him before, because he said, God was his Father, Joh. 3.18.
making himself equal with God. For Christ's permission of any to worship him
was a better interpretation of his words, than all the glosses of the Socinians
put together; and as reason commonly teaches us to understand, that the
begetting Father, and the begotten Son, are both of one and the same Nature
here, so the same reason taught the Jews to apprehend, that if Christ were the
Son of God, he then must be of the same nature with his Father, which they who
saw him in the form of a servant only, thought as absurd and impossible, as the
Socinians do now: if the Jews committed a mistake in their apprehensions of
Christ's words, nothing can possibly excuse either Christ himself, or his
Apostles from extreme unkindness, since they would take no pains to rectify a
Mistake in all appearance involuntary, a Care, which might in probability have
cured them of their unbelieving humor.

Let us then proceed farther to that Confession of the Apostle S. Thomas, when
he called our Savior his Lord and his God: Joh. 20.28
Where we may take some notice of the occasion of those words, which was this,
Our Savior to satisfy the world of his Resurrection; and more particularly to
satisfy his own Disciples in that point, had appeared to them in that body in
which he suffered for them, and all the World; when the Disciples were
assembled together, their doors shut with a great deal of privacy for fear of
the Jews: there he blessed them, his presence gave them an extraordinary
occasion of joy, the transports of which being over, he blessed them again,
breathed upon them so effectually, as by that breath they received the Holy
Ghost, and with that that Commission and power, which afterward they were more
particularly authorized to exert, for the management of the Church. During this
gracious visit of his Master, Thomas one of the twelve was absent, afterward
returning to his company, they joyfully assure him they had seen the Lord;
their words carry somewhat extraordinary in them, they tell him not, We have
seen our Lord, or thy Lord, they use no limiting particle, but speak positively
and generally, We have seen the Lord, so giving him that title by which the
Septuagint translate the name (...) so that it seems here given to Christ, as
elsewhere it is to him who by all is acknowledged to be the most high God,
emphatically and exclusively of all other Lords whatsoever. But not to insist
on this, The report of his brethren to Thomas seemed extremely incredible; the
Doctrine of the Resurrection, though it was a thing which Jews had no reason to
stumble at in general, nor had the Disciples in particular, (for they had seen
their Master raise Lazarus, and the Son of the Widow of Naim, and they had
doubtless seen those holy bodies, which arose from their graves upon the
dreadful convulsion of nature, when Jesus gave up the Ghost upon the Cross) yet
the memory of all these things, and the testimony of his own Companions, whose
very looks and discourse, the evidences of unwonted joy, carried a great deal
of innocence and sincerity in them, could not prevail with him, but he
positively declares, Except I shall see in his hands the print of the nails,
ver. 25.
and put my finger into the print of the nails, and thrust my hand into his
side, I will not believe; such an unreasonable infidelity, that seemed resolved
neither to submit to the testimony of others, nor to his own sight, might
justly have been left unsatisfied: but our Savior had a respect to the rest of
the World to whom the Gospel should be preached, and the Resurrection be
propounded as necessary to be believed, therefore he condescended to the
Apostles weakness, and after eight days when the Disciples were again together,
and Thomas with them, he appears to them again, and with his usual blessing,
applies himself immediately to his unbelieving Disciple, He shows himself the
great Searcher of the heart and reins, and tells him, without the help of a
teacher, how great a folly he had been guilty of, he commands him to do what he
had before desired, he by that means leaves him no opportunity of doubting any
longer: He then, who had of all others been the most distrustful, to make
somewhat of a public compensation for his former dullness, breaks out into that
earnest and emphatical confession, My Lord and my God! the words seem very
plain and proper to express a man's acknowledgment of his Divinity to whom they
should be applied. Enjedine yet denies it, His verbis quidem, Enjedine in locum.
non Christum compellat, neque eum Dominum and Deum suum vocat, sed rem
inusitatam and admirationem suam summam significat, In these words really, He
does not speak to Christ, nor call him his Lord and his God, but only signifies
his admiration of so very unusual a matter; yet the Text tells us plainly
Thomas answered him and said unto him, that is, to him who bad him reach out
his hand to him, in the precedent verse, that is, to Jesus Christ, My Lord and
my God! He would have it signify no more than what a frighted Papist would
bless himself with, i. e. the outcry of Jesus Maria, or as we ordinarily say,
Good God how strange a thing has happened lately, etc. and for this conceit he
alleges some such like passages in profane Authors: a very strange method and
as little approved of by those of his own party. Wolzogenius utterly condemns
this fancy, and declares of them who first invented it, Nullo modo audiendi
sunt, Wolzogen. in locum.
they are no way at all to be listened to, and owns this the first place wherein
the Disciples after his resurrection owned him to be God: Schlicktingius too
declares against it, and tells us, Schlicktin. in locum.
This passage proves, that upon our Savior's reprimand, Thomas, fully
convinced of the truth, quitted his former vicious incredulity, and believed,
and therefore he calls Christ his God and Lord, as if he should have said,
Agnosco te Dominum meum and Deum meum esse, I acknowledge thee to be my Lord
and my God; but he spoils all at last with this, that Christ after his own
resurrection, was only, Deus factus, a made God, not the great God, not the
eternal, not the most high God, not Maker of all things, by which names yet,
and others of the same kind he is frequently called in Scripture: Socinus
himself in an Epistle to Franciscus Davidis, another Antitrinitarian,
vindicates our common interpretation of these words, and will not admit of the
others arguments, whereby he pretended to prove, that these words are no
evidence of Christ's being called God: for, besides his alleging that all
Copies read it as we have it at present, and that there is no instance in
Scripture where such an expression is only a proof of an extraordinary
admiration: Socini Epistola ad Franc. Dav. p. 395.
he shows farther, that whereas our Savior in the following verse shows his
approbation of Thomas 's faith, there could be no reason of any such
approbation, if Thomas by these words had only signified his wonderment of what
had come to pass with respect to his resurrection; and to say truth, such an
extravagant amazement would have argued some diffidence still remaining in him:
but indeed here is no sign in the story of any such wondering at the thing, but
only here is a plain confession made of what the Apostle's Faith now was,
namely, that the blessed Jesus was his Lord and his God, wherein too, he is the
mouth of all the rest of the Apostles, and there was reason for this
Confession: S. Thomas had heard his Master's disputes with the Jews, the
evidences he had given of his being the Messiah whom they looked for, or the
Christ, he had heard him often call himself the Son of God, declare his
equality with his Father, and that absolute and indissoluble unity which was
between his father and himself, he had heard him declare what he was to suffer,
and that he was to rise again the third day, the suffering he had seen, the
Resurrection he was not so fully satisfied in, but when he saw him, and felt
his wounds now, which he had known were really given him before, that
extraordinary truth which appeared in all the words and actions of the Son of
God, opened his Eyes to see and his Heart to confess, that this same Jesus,
whom he had followed so long, was really his Lord and his God: Thus his Faith
with respect to the Messiah, was complete, he had seen enough to prove him to
be Man in all that time of converse with him before his passion: he had seen
enough now to prove him to be God, not a finite God, or an holy Man Deisied;
but the true, the eternal God: for though Kings or Magistrates may be called Gods
in Scripture, was it ever heard that any called Kings or any other created
Being whatsoever My Lord and my God, without being charged with Idolatry? The
Israelites when Aaron had made them a golden Calf, Exo. 32.4.
cried presently, These be thy Gods O Israel which brought thee out of the land
of Egypt, (...) these are thy gods, it is expressed there by that equivocal
word, which the adversaries of our Faith have so often their recourse to:
therefore the Israelites might have pleaded for themselves, that they meant not
by so saying, that the golden Calf was the most high God, and it is plain they
did not, for they presently proclaim a feast to the true God, (...) of whom
this Calf was only designed to be a Symbol or memorial, but such a plea was not
accepted, but for the crime the Israelites were looked upon and punished as
I^olaters. The Prophet Isay, setting out the practice of Idolaters, and the
general original of Idol Images, among other things, tells us, Isa 44.17.
He that had just made the golden Image, falls down and worships it, and prays
unto it, and says, Deliver me, for thou art my God: Doubtless the Engraver and
Carver, etc. would readily plead for themselves, they looked upon their Images
but as Symbols of a real Deity, or places of residence for more Spiritual
Beings, or at most but as subordinate Gods: yet all this will not excuse them
from the charge of Idolatry; for God first, declaring of himself, that He is
the true God, that He is the living God, and an everlasting king, Jer. 10.10,
11.
at whose wrath the earth should tremble, and the nations should not be able to
abide his indignation, adds farther, The Gods that have not made the heavens
and the earth, even they shall perish from the earth, and from under these
heavens: that is then the characteristick or the test of a true God, the making
of the heavens and of the earth, on which reason begin we our Creed with that,
I believe in God the Father Almighty maker of heaven and earth, and whosoever
it is who has not made Heaven and earth, in that same sense in which the
Prophet here speaks, He Is an Idol, and all those are guilty of Idolatry who put
any confidence in him. Vid Martial. l. 5. Epig. 8. Suet. in Domit. c. 13.
And such were Caligula and Domitian, those proud Emperors, who knew not how
to sit down with an inferior title to that, Domini Deique nostri, of our Lord
and our God: and very Heathens themselves thought this was assuming divine
Honors to themselves, and such as were no way becoming mortal men: But I know
the Socinians allow those who are made Gods by Men to be Idols, but those who
are made by Almighty God himself are not so. Neque enim unus ille deus falsos
deos facit, homines hoc faciunt, says Schlicktingius, for he who is the one
supreme God, does not make false Gods, they are only Men who do so: hence,
according to them, Kings and Princes are true Gods, because they are
constituted by God himself to represent his own person to the world; but to
this we answer, never King upon earth, but only such as those before-named,
Caligula or Domitian, pretended to such a name, nor were there ever any but
sordid Parasites and flatterers, who offered to call them their Lords and their
Gods: Alexander the Great himself, though foolish and ambitious to be called the
Son of Jupiter, yet could not but expose their baseness who complied with his
mad fancy, when he saw the blood trickling from a wound he had received, and
asked them whether that were like the (...) which Homer made to fall from his
Gods? They allege, on their own behalf, that passage in the Psalmist, Thy
Throne O God is for ever and ever, Psalm. 45.6.
which say they is there spoken of Solomon, which we as positively deny, and
are assured they can never prove: God by his Prophets is not wont to tell
downright falsehoods, as he must do, if this were to be so applied; for which
way shall we make it out that Solomon's Throne was everlasting, when all the
glories of it sunk in his immediate Successor? which way shall the Scepter of
his kingdom be made a right Scepter, whose immediate Successor, and several
after him, have that character in Scripture, that they did that which was evil
in the sight of the Lord: What great and terrible things were those which were
done by the sword of peaceable Solomon, who was to be no man of blood, no
conqueror o^ what worship do we ever read was paid by Pharaoh's daughter, or
any other of his numerous wives and concubines to Solomon? and the Holy Ghost
directly applies these words to Jesus Christ the Son of God, ^
without the least mention of Solomon. Beside this then, they have no Text
which looks like any thing of ascribing those names, My Lord and my God, to any
created being whatsoever; and when they have said all they can, Christ himself
must be an Idol to Thomas, and to all those who own him at any time to be their
Lord and their God, if it be not He who has made the Heavens and the Earth
according to the Letter: Princes may be Metaphorical Gods, but they are not set
up for humane Adorations; Men and Angels are to adore the Son of God, therefore
he is no Metaphorical God: and we need beg no pardon for saying, it is not in the
power of an Almighty God to create or make a true or an eternal God, or another
being Almighty as himself, it is Nonsense to talk of Monarchs subordinate one to
another, or of Monarchs coordinate with one another in the same territory, and
it is plain nonsense to tell us, Christ is a subordinate God to his Father, or
that there can be two supreme Gods over all blessed for ever: Therefore when
the Apostle calls his master, My God and my Lord, his meaning must be, that the
Son of God is the true God, one God, coessential, coeternal with his Father.
From hence then we proceed to

Rom 9.5.
Of whom as concerning the flesh Christ came, who is God over all, blessed for
ever, Amen. The character here is very high, the Text plain, and it may justly
be concluded those must adventure very boldly who can elude its force. If we
look into the occasion of the words, we there find the Apostle expressing an
extraordinary affection to his Contrymen, being willing to become a curse
for his brethren, his kinsmen according to the flesh; whose condition he
commiserates the more, because of those extraordinary privileges they had
before enjoyed; for there is no greater aggravation of misery than to have made
a great many fair steps toward happiness, and to have fallen short of it at
last. These privileges they had enjoyed were extraordinary, they were
Israelites, so God's proper or peculiar inheritance, beyond all other nations
whatsoever: To them pertained the adoption, or they were adopted to be the Sons
of God, and are called so in the Old Testament: to them appertained the glory
of God's peculiar presence among them, owning them for his people, and
delivering them gloriously, with a mighty hand and stretched out arm, from
their cruel enemies: To them belonged the Covenants, the two Tables written
with the Finger of God himself, the giving of the Law, that Law Moral,
Political and Ceremonial, which made their Religious Ordinances, their Civil
Government, and their Manners far superior to those of all other Nations; to
them belonged the service of God, the only true external form or method of
worship; and the Promises, for all the Prophets, among those severe menaces
they denounced against Israel for their Sins, yet always brought the Promises
of a Messiah, a Redeemer to come, to comfort them; their's were the Fathers,
all those Men so eminent for their favor with God, such as Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, Moses, Joshua, Samuel, David, and all the rest of the Prophets: Of them
came Jesus Christ according to the flesh; that particularising of his deduction
from them according to the flesh, intimates plainly enough, that according to
somewhat else he had another Original, he was not wholly of the Jews: This the
Socinians are forced to own, because of that entire story of our Savior's
Conception by the Holy Ghost in the womb of the blessed Virgin. To show how
great this privilege was, the Apostle adds, that this Jesus Christ, who came of
the Jews according to the flesh, was God over all blessed for ever, but that
they might avoid the force of this Text, they would fain ^ly to one of their
ordinary shelters, a vari^us reading; but there is no such thing in any of the
original Copies; and Versions (if there be any which intimate such a thing) are
little to be regarded. Then they would fain alter the Pointing, which if
allowed, would do them little service; but there is no ground for allowing
that. In locum.
Enjedine pleads that the word (...) blessed, used by the Apostle here, is
never applied any where in Scripture to any but only God the Father, for this
he alleges, that of the same Apostle concerning the Gentiles, that they
worshipped the Creature more than the Creator, Romans 1.25.
who is over all, blessed for ever: But if it be true, that Jesus Christ, as
the eternal Son of God, was the Creator of all things, as it seems to be, his
instance turns against himself; and methinks it follows as well, that if the
title of God above all blessed for ever belongs only to the supreme God, (for
that he means when he speaks of its belonging only to God the Father) then the
Son of God, to whom it is given here, should be the supreme God; for it is no
less than Sacrilege and Blasphemy to attribute a title so peculiar to the
Sovereign, to any one who really and in his own Nature is not the Sovereign
God. Others of the Socinian Tribe cannot see, or take no notice of this
peculiar usage of the expression, as if it belonged only to God the Father,
they acknowledge that Christ, as Made God, is above all Men and Angels, above
all Principalities and Powers, nay above all things whatsoever, only, 1 Cor.
15.27.
He Is not above him who put all things under him; This the Apostle asserts,
This we own, but withal we assert, that our Savior, as Man in that body in
which he humbled himself to the Death of the Cross for Man, is thus exalted
above all things, and thus as Man he is the head of his Church; as God, we say
not that he is superior to his Father, but that he is equal to him; he is of
the same Nature with his Father, and therefore is God over all blessed for
ever, as his Father is. Now, that He who is thus God over all blessed for ever,
should condescend to take our Nature upon him, was an effect of infinite Love
and pity to all mankind, that he should condescend to take this humane Nature
of any one of the Jewish Nation, was the greatest Honor that could possibly be
done to that Nation: We see how Towns and Countries strive for the Honor of
being the birth-places of great Men, and they have been frequently not a little
jealous of one another on that account; nay Scripture it self makes such a
thing a considerable advantage; in that of the Prophet concerning the Messiah,
as alleged by the Chief Priests and Scribes to Herod, And thou Bethlehem in
the land of Judah art not the least among the Princes of Judah, Matt. 2.6.
for out of thee shall come a Governor who shall rule my people Israel, the
present Hebrew reads it, though thou be little among the thousands of Judah: The
birth of such a one was enough to make the most inconsiderable place glorious;
miserable people then were they, who had so great an honor conferred on them,
and yet at last denied him who conferred it on them.

S. Paul gives this advice to the Philippians, Phil 2.5-1^.
Let this mind be in you which was also in Christ Jesus, who, being in the form
of God, thought it no robbery to be equal with God, but made himself of no
reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and was made in the
likeness of Man, and being found in fashion as a man, he humbled himself and
became obedient to Death, even to the Death of the Cross, wherefore God also
has mightily exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name, that
at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in Heaven, and things in
earth, and things under the earth, and that every tongue should confess that
Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father. We might refer the matter
to any who had no acquaintance with Christianity, or with Scripture before, and
such a Man, on reading these words, would certainly conclude, that he who
carries here the name of Christ Jesus, was described as every way equal with
God the Father, whosoever that might be; and that we may understand such a
conclusion would be just and rational, we may look into the occasion of the
words. The Apostle is persuading the Philippians here to Unity, Love and Peace,
and particularly to a mutual care and solicitude for the good and happiness of
one another, urging them not altogether to employ themselves upon their own
private or public, inward or outward Interests, but to allow some charitable
thoughts toward the Salvation of others, Gal. 6.2.
to snatch them as firebrands out of the fire, agreeably to what he elsewhere
advises them to, i. e. that they should bear one another burdens; this kind
care he urges them to, from the example of him in whom they believed, and whose
servants they professed themselves to be; Who though eternally and immutably blessed
in himself, yet, out of that infinite love he had to perishing mankind, was
pleased to take humane nature upon him, that in that humane nature he might
suffer, to atone his Father's displeasure against Sin and Sinners, and procure
everlasting Salvation for as many as should believe on him; that to be of this
charitable temper would be much to our advantage he proves by this
consideration: That God the Father was so highly pleased with this action of
his Son, that he raised even that humane nature, in which he suffered, to the
highest glories, and sanctified that very name, which his Son assumed as Man,
and as the Messiah, to be above every name, to be admired, reverenced, adored
by all created beings whatsoever: which adorations could only be rendered just
and reasonable by that intimate and indiss^luble union between that humane
natu^^ (...) eternal Godhead: If God then so exal^^^ ^^sus Christ on account
of his compassion and tenderness for us, he likewise will exalt us, if we be
kind and tender hearted one toward another, if we endeavor to promote one
another Salvation by all those means which by Providence are put into our
hands. In this argument the Apostle makes use of such expressions, as stumble
the enemies of the Divinity of the Son of God very much, and give them a great
deal of pains to shift off and to evade; so the form of God, they determine to
be nothing but a resemblance or representation of God in his Works; Christ was
in the form of God when he did those many wonderful works during his converse
upon earth, those Miracles importing somewhat of a divine power; but what is
there in this peculiar to our Savior? Moses might as well have been said to
have been in the form of God, since he too did a great many prodigious things,
and the Skies, the Air, the Waters, the Earth, seemed all as obedient to him as
to our Savior afterward: Elijah and Elisha might have received the same
Character, and the Apostles much more, since Christ himself had promised them,
that they should not only do the same, but greater miracles than he himself
did: yet Scripture never talks of these at any such rate as their being in the
form of God. If it be objected, that Moses, the Prophets mentioned, and the
Disciples, after our Lord's Resurrection, did indeed many and great Miracles,
but they were not done in their own names, we acknowledge it: but if our
adversaries may be believed, our Savior was in the same circumstances, for his
Miracles were only done in the name of God, and so were the Mosaic and
Prophetic Miracles done. If they will own that our Savior did his Miracles in His
own name, they grant what they take so much pains to disprove, for none can do
a Miracle in his own name, but he who has an inherent power in himself,
commanding all the parts of the Creation, having no need of leave or assistance
from any superior Being; but such a power is and only can be inherent in the
most high God, therefore if our Savior had that power, he was and is the most
high God, if he had not, he is in the same rank with other holy and good Men,
and any of them might have been instanced in as patterns of as great
condescension and love to Souls as himself. They criticize upon the word (...),
the form of God, as if it signified only an outward shadow and appearance, and
therefore not the real divine essence; and therefore, whereas the Apostle makes
mention afterward of the (...) the form of a Servant, they are under a
necessity of denying that that signifies his assuming humane nature, though the
words following are indeed an explication of these, being in the form of a
servant, and being found in likeness of men, are but explicatory one of another
and so Schlicktingius owns it; but (upon what reason we know not) upon that
last phrase of being found in likeness of men, he writes thus, Figura, i. e.
non reipsa sed apparenter and externa specie tantum, in the form or figure of a
Man, that is, not a Man indeed, but only to outward appearance, and to common
view; a Commentary to me unintelligible, since they own Christ to have been a
real man, and nothing else; the reason of their niceness here is only this,
They fear that if they own, the form of a Servant signifies the humane nature
of Christ, then the form of God must signify the divine nature of the same
person, which they cannot endure to hear of: but the Fathers with one current
interpret it so, that the (...) is the (...), the essence of God, so Theodoret
on the place, Gregory Nyssen, Athanasius, Chrysostom, Theophylact, etc. and
the (...) is the (...), the nature of a servant, in the same sense, so
Theodoret, Athanasius, Paedagog. l. 3. c. 1.
Theophylact, and Clemens Alexandrinus, who cannot well be suspected of
partiality in the case; and this authority is much better than theirs, who only
assert the contrary arbitrarily and without reason. That Christ thought it no
robbery to be equal with God, they would have to signify only this, That he
thought it not so great an advantage to be in the form of God, or like him, as
to be obstinate in the retention of that likeness, but would humbly quit it to
be used and suffer like a servant; and for this Enjedine runs to some phrases
in Heliodorus his Aethiopic Romance (where (...) rapina, signifies as much, if
he interpret it rightly) but that is too modern an authority to interpret
Scripture by, and too slight a work to teach us how to understand the dictates
of God's Holy Spirit. After several Cavils, they yield, that to be like to God,
is to be equal to God, but equality must be between distinct beings, for none
can be equal to himself; We own it, and say, the Father and the Son are
distinct persons, but of one nature, as Father and Son must be, if their
relation be real; but if God the Father and God the Son be of one and the same
Nature, they must have one and the same Essence, because two infinite Essences
are a contradiction; our Savior being in the form of his Father, and equal to
his Father, could not look on it as a crime, or think it any Sacrilege or
robbery, to own that equality, as he did by his expressions of himself, and by
those adorations he permitted to be paid to himself. Here then was Love and
Condescension indeed, that He, who was God equal with his father, should assume
to himself poor infirm servile flesh and blood, and in that humble himself and
be obedient to death, even that scandalous and painful death on the Cross, for
our sakes: This Passion and this Obedience was truly meritorious, it
intrinsically and in its own real value, merited the redemption of all mankind:
it effectually and in its outward operation merited and procured the Salvation
of all those that believe in him. As a reward for this Humility and Obedience,
God has highly exalted the Humane Nature of his Son, that is enclosed in, or
substantially united to the Divine Nature, and consequently partakes of all
that bliss, that eternal glory and happiness which the Deity it self enjoys; by
which means it comes to be lawful for Christians to worship Christ as Man, though
not as mere Man, as well as, as he is God, a practice which could never be
excused from being the greatest Idolatry in the World, if there were no such
union, as will hereafter be proved in course. For that exception to this Text,
that Jesus is the name of Man, not of God, and Christ the name of an Office, it
signifies the Anointed One, the Messiah, and therefore cannot belong to the
most high God, it is extremely impertinent; they are not our Savior's names as
he is God, but as he is Man; but as none question his bearing the name of the
Son of God, so every one knew that he bore the name of Jesus, and that it had
been beyond contradiction proved that he was the Christ; his Relative name
then, of the Son of God, his Humane name of Jesus, his Name of office as
Christ, being all equally known, it was certainly free to the Apostle to speak
of him by any of those names, and we see that those together with that of our
Savior, our High Priest, our King, our Mediator, etc. are all indifferently
used by the Apostles in their writings, without any kind of diminution of our
Savior's dignity, or detraction from his eternal divinity. Abundance more
Texts might be added, but these are sufficient on this head.

third Head propounded, from whence to prove That the blessed Jesus was really
God manifest in the flesh, 1 Timothy 3.16 comm. 2.
God equal and co-essential with his father, and that is, from those Actions
done by him during his own converse on Earth, or in his name after his
Ascension into Heaven; where again we shall not be so curious as to examine
every particular, but only some of the more remarkable. The Socinians
themselves would have him be in the form of God, only on this account, because
all the parts of nature seemed to obey him as their Lord and Master: the
Prophets too had commanded them before; but some things were done by our
Savior of so singular a nature, as the greatest of the Prophets could pretend
to nothing of that kind. Thus when Jacob was afraid of Esau, he wrestled with
God in Prayer, and God turned the heart of Esau toward his brother, and took
off those barbarous and revengeful thoughts he had entertained before; so Jacob
escaped his fury. Moses when terrified with the anger of the king of Egypt,
fled for it, and saved himself: and so Elijah himself was forced to flight that
he might escape the feminine rage of Jezebel; and the rest of the Prophets, how
great and considerable soever, had only flight or sufferings to prepare for. It
was otherwise with our Savior: for when he had enraged the people of Nazareth
by speaking what was true and necessary to them, and they resolved to put an
effectual end to His preaching, who could flatter them no better, they thrust
him out of the City, they lead him, to be sure, with Guard strong and numerous
enough, to the brow of the Hill on which their City was built: their design was
to cast him down headlong (not to persuade him to cast himself down, Luke 4.29,
30.
as the Devil would have had him done, from the Pinnacle of the Temple) they
resolved to ease him of that trouble, and to do it violently and cruelly
themselves: We read of no relenting among them, none who went about to persuade
them to give over so barbarous and unjust a design, but our Savior in the open
crowd, past through the midst of them and went his way: there was no flight
before, no calling fire down from heaven now, no other sudden consternation
among them, but what appeared in their countenances when they missed him, whom
they thought they had held fast enough. We meet not with any interposition of
Angels, no blindness laid upon them as a penalty, but He went from amongst
them, they no more able to oppose his Motions, than a Man in a dream would be
able to fight a Duel with a waking and terrible adversary; here then Almighty
power showed it self even in the Man Christ Jesus, he showed his enemies how
invisible, how every way indiscernible Humane Nature assumed into the Divine,
must necessarily be. The Turks, perhaps taking their hint from this passage,
tell us, that when our Savior was led to be crucified, he vanished, in the
same surprising manner, out of their hands, and left them only to exercise
their rage upon one of his Judges, of whom they say, that he resembled Christ
in an extraordinary manner. An humane body acted merely by a rational soul,
must of necessity be perceptible by those who compassed it round, and could
they once have been sensible of his motions, it had been easy to have stayed
him, but, where a divine Power interposed, it was impossible for any to
observe, or at least to observe with a capacity to hinder his moving. Virgil
tells us, how Venus wrapped her son Aeneas with his companion Achates in a misty
robe, but he brings him on the stage of Carthage in the same invisible
circumstances, and therefore there were no offers to hinder him going where he
would, but when he was once seen, his Mother her self was not able to muffle
him up so from humane eyes, as that he should fall into no danger: Therefore
Homer makes both Mars and Venus, the last not visible at the time, to be
wounded by Diomedes, when he was so very eager in pursuit of the Trojans: This
then in our Savior proved his rank yet higher than that of Man, his Power
greater and more effectual, as working of it self, so upon humane Spirits, that
either they could not discern him at all, or had no power to show their
displeasure, though never so violent and revengeful before; there needed no Angel
here to stop the Lions mouths, his Will without any outward expression of it
was suffient. And thus he showed a Power equally Divine, when merely by asking
the Officers who came with that Traitor Judas to take him, whom they sought?
and telling them that He himself was the Person, John 18.5, 6.
they went backwards and fell to the ground: it must certainly be a strange and
terrible power that from the mildest words could produce such amazing effects:
Men bred up to blood and slaughter are not wont to be affrighted with one
another looks or words, but God even in the still small voice is to be feared.
We must necessarily conclude that he who was the Son of God, who was his only
Son, that Son to whom he gave so extraordinary a testimony that in him he was
well pleased, we must conclude, that this Son would take all occasions to
advance the honor of his Father; that He Would not only forbid others doing any
thing that might detract from it, but he would be above all things careful not to
do any thing of so impious a complexion himself. As this was a duty incumbent
upon every servant of God, so we find the Prophets always careful in the case,
and therefore prefacing all those Miracles they wrought with solemn Prayers,
and with the name of that God from whom all their miracle-working power was
derived. Moses seems to have failed a little only in the point, when he was to
bring water out of the rock for the Israelites, but Moses sinned; nor could the
reasonableness of his zeal excuse him from a severe punishment on that account.
But, if we run over the general Histories of our Savior's miracles, we find
Him, for ought is upon record, not at all careful upon this matter; He does
them frequently, too many to be registered, but all in his own name: He Wills
this, and He Commands the other thing to be done, so the Winds, the Waves, the
various Distempers afflicting Mankind, the Devils themselves tremble at and
obey his Word; the Dead rise at the hearing of his Voice, every thing he speaks
is powerful and authentic, yet no Praying before, no making use of his
Father's name, no more notice taken of him in the operation, than as if the
Father and the Son had stood in no kind of relation to one another. Nay, even
in the case of Lazarus, which, if any, must carry the face of an exception; We
see our Savior praising his Father indeed for his readiness to hear him, yet
expressing himself so only for their sakes that were by: Joh. 11.43.
but afterward speaking to him in the Mandatory style, and only in his own
name bidding him come forth. Now from this carriage of our Savior, we must
either conclude him to have been One with his Father, and so whatsoever honor
came to himself, must also by so doing come to his Father; or else we must
conclude him a careless, ambitious, sacrilegious Person, one ready to rob God
of his Honor, to take all opportunities of assuming that to himself which
belonged to God; for that is plain he did, because he permitted those on whom he
wrought Miracles to offer the same adorations to him which belonged to the most
high God, which never any Man, though never so holy, had admitted of before. Here
then we are reduced to a necessity, either of saying with the blaspheming Jews,
that He had a devil, and only by his power wrought all his miracles; and that
Almighty God, either for want of power to hinder him, or out of design to have
Mankind deluded and abused to their own ruin, permitted him to do so many
wonderful works: Or else, that the blessed Jesus was really that holy, meek,
just, eternal Son of the eternal God, that he assumed no more to himself, than
what really belonged to him, therefore that he had really power in himself, and
originated from himself, to do whatsoever he pleased, therefore that he was
God, the true, the most high God. That we may be the better assured that his
Power was so innate and inherent, we may observe, that whereas his Apostles,
after his ascent, did many miracles, and those of an extraordinary nature; so
that Aprons and Handkerchiefs brought from the body of S. Paul, and the very
shadow of S. Peter, carried a healing power with them, yet there was nothing in
all that equal to what happened to our Savior upon the Woman's cure of her
bloody Issue, who had but touched the hem of his garment: The Apostles utterly
disowned the working any cures by any power of their own, therein they acted
modestly and piously; but on the contrary, our Savior ascribes the miraculous
cure done upon the woman, only to Himself; he takes notice of his garment, and,
by it, of himself being touched, and that at such a time as a crowd of people
thronged him, and he says, not that his Father's power, or the hand of God, or
any thing of that nature, was gone out to cure her. But, says he, Luke 8.46.
somebody has touched Me, for I perceive that virtue is gone out of Me: and
it is recorded of him before, that the whole multitude sought to touch him, Luke
6.19.
for there went virtue out of him and healed them all. Now though we know well
enough that nothing but his humane nature, and the accidents attending that,
were the objects of common sense, yet we know withal that mere flesh and blood,
though it be never so pure and innocent has no inherent power, by a distant or a
mediate touch to cure any distempers, or to be sensible of such a cure wrought
by any Passion in themselves: The Kings and Queens of England have often cured
that disease, from thence, sencelesly named the Kings Evil, by a touch, the
effect is wonderful indeed, but we never heard of those Kings or Queens
pretending they were sensible of any virtue passing out from them for the cure
of the Patient, nor have any, that have pretended to the sanative faculty, yet
dreamed of any such thing as a self-originated power in themselves to that
purpose: the King, the Prophet, the Physician touches, but God only heals, this
inherent Power then in Christ was derived from that Union betwixt his divine
and humane Nature, that enabled him in every respect to bear our sins, and to
carry our infirmities, so that from him, as from an inexhaustible fountain, all
the health both of our bodies and souls is derived; but such a fountain can
nothing but God be, therefore He is God.

We said, the Health of Souls is derived from Him as from its fountain or
original: a mere Man may be an instrument in God's hand to help forward the
salvation of a Soul, his Prudence, Learning, Industry, Charity may, by God's
assistance, conduce in a great measure to that excellent end, but Man of
himself can do nothing in the case: Our Savior here makes that just Invitation
to Mankind, Matt ^1.28.
as from himself, Come to me all ye that are weary and heavy laden and I will
give you rest: it is not come to God, or come to my Father, but come to Me: but
it would be intolerable Presumption, not to say Blasphemy, to use such an
invitation, if coming to Christ were not an equivalent to coming to God and the
Father; He that sees me, sees my Father, says our Lord, for I and my Father are
one, he that comes to me comes to my Father, for my Father gives rest to Souls
weary and heavy laden with sin, and so do I: My Father does so, not by any
adventitious or precarious but by his own inherent and essential Power, and so
do I. No Apostle, no Prophet ever used such language, only the Son of God and
his blessed Father, and the Holy Ghost can say, as of himself, Come to me, I
will give you rest: And well may He pretend to give rest to the laboring Soul,
who can authoritatively from himself forgive sins, a thing which our Savior
frequently does in the Gospel. The mentioning of that action gives us a strange
representation of the stubborn senceless obstinacy of the Jewish nation; our
Savior, when the Man sick of the Palsy was brought to him for cure, says to
him, Matt. 9.2.
Son be of good cheer, thy sins are forgiven thee, and to Mary Magdalen, when
at His feet, Luk 7.48.
thy Sins are forgiven thee: We cannot doubt but this was spoken as for the
good of the persons to whom they were applied, so for the good of those who
stood by; for these things were not spoken in a corner. Now the Pharisees
stumbled upon a question proper enough on the occasion, v. 49.
who is this that forgiveth sins also? So the Scribes on another occasion, push
the question home, Mar. 2.7.
Why does this Man thus speak blasphemy? Who can forgive sins but God only? The
question was rational enough, and employed a weighty Truth, that none has any
inherent authority to forgive sins but God only; others may declare or
pronounce it by a derivative authority, only God can do it by his own: but the
reason of these Questionists left them presently; They saw Christ holding a
strict Communion with their Church as settled by the Mosaic Law, They could not
convince him of any sin against that Communion, they heard him, of himself and
in his own name, forgive sins, this was a plain public claim to a Divine
Authority, and they understood it so: They saw him with the very same breath
work a prodigious cure, a cure not likely to be wrought by the influence of a
Malignant Spirit, it was of too benign and advantageous a nature to the
Patient, it must then be wrought by a Divine Power, but the Divine Power would
not concur with a gross sinner, a notorious blasphemer, therefore Christ of
necessity must be no sinner, if no sinner, then an extraordinary Person, for
his miraculous actions would admit of no middle state, then he could be no
Impostor, no Deceiver; therefore, Forgiving sins and asserting his Power by an
undeniable miracle, upon their own Principle, he must be God, the True God
emphatically; for who can forgive sins but God, but the True God only? For they
respected only the True God when they asked the Question.

It Is a peculiar Attribute of the Supreme God to know the hearts of Men, he
assumes that Power as his own due, in which none can be partakers with him, the
heart is deceitful above all things, says he, and desperately wicked, who can
know it? Jer. 17.9.10.
I the Lord search the heart, I try the reins even to give every man according
to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings: The same title our Lord
takes to himself, Rev. 2.23.
All the Churches shall know that I am he which searches the reins and hearts,
and I will give unto every one according to his works: it is true this was in
his glorified state: but if Christ were a mere man before his Resurrection, he
was no more afterward, the giving him Honor, and Power, and Glory, could not
alter his Nature, or make him any more than a Metaphorical God, but a bare
Metaphor, applied to a Man, will not make him immediately commence a God, or
appropriate the most eminent of the divine Attributes to him. But not to insist
on that, this particular faculty of knowing men's hearts he really had, and
sufficiently evidenced, before his Ascension into Heaven; so in one of the
beforementioned instances, when Christ had said to the Man sick of the Palsy,
Thy sins be forgiven thee, Mat. 8.24.
the Scribes murmured or said in their hearts, this Man blasphemes: the
Evangelist adds, Jesus knowing their thoughts, said, Wherefore think you evil
in your hearts? Mat. 12.25
Again, when Christ cast out the Devil out of one that was possessed, and the
Pharisees, hearing of it, said he cast out devils by Beelzebub Prince of the
devils: We are told, He knew their thoughts, and presently gave them a reproof
suitable to their folly. The Disciples, as they were following their Master,
fell into a dispute among themselves who should be greatest? Their Master when
in the house, asked 'em of their dispute, their inward guilt shut their mouths,
but he presently lets them know he was, Mar. 9.33, 34, 35, 36.
without their information, Master of their mighty secret, and took an
immediate occasion to teach them how to employ their time better, than in such
dangerous and impertinent disputes. Our Lord was preaching in the Temple to a
very captious Auditory, they admire his boldness, but never pitch upon his
Office, which he had then undertaken; nay, they argue among themselves the
unlikelihood that he should be the Christ, We know, say they, this Man, whence
he is, but when Christ comes, no man knows whence he is: Our Savior, as if
he had been privy to all their discourse, in the midst of his doctrine tells
them aloud, Ye both know me, John 7.27, 28.
and ye know whence I am, etc. When the same blessed Jesus was in Jerusalem at
the Passover, on the Feast Day many believed in his Name when they saw the
miracles which he did: John 2.23, 24, 25.
but the Evangelist tells us plainly, Jesus did not commit himself to them,
because He knew all men, and needed not that any should testify of Man, for he
knew what was in man; If he knew what was in Man, it must be either perfectly
or exactly, or it must be imperfectly, if imperfectly, he might easily have
been imposed upon, the Prophets of the ancient Jewish Church were often so; so
Joshua and all Israel in the case of the Gibeonites: So Samuel in his opinion
of the fitness of David's brethren for the kingdom of Israel: So the man of God
by the old Prophet who dwelt at Bethel: The Apostles afterward, though
influenced frequently by the Spirit of God, were liable to Error, Philip an
Apostolical person, in admitting Simon of Samaria to Christian Baptism; S.
Peter in making a difficulty of preaching the Gospel to one that was
Uncircumcised, in dissembling afterward for fear of the Jews, etc. S. Paul in
admitting false hearted Demas to the Pastoral Charge; but this we find no
instance of in our Savior, none were able to deceive him, nay, not so much as
to fasten a temptation on him; He chose indeed twelve Disciples, and one of
them a Devil, Joh. 6.70.
but he knew him to be such, and declared him such, though not by name, long
before he betrayed him. So neither the treachery of his pretended friends, nor
of his professed enemies, could take any place upon him. If Christ's knowledge
of those things was perfect, it was as much as God's knowledge is: No Being can
do more than know the heart of man perfectly, that heart which Man himself is
so generally unacquainted with. This is a Knowledge no way compatible with
humane nature, That since the fall being defective in a thousand particulars,
besides the necessity of Vbiquity attending a perfect universal knowledge of
the thoughts of all, which a Body can never be capable of; If then the
knowledge of Christ in reference to the Hearts of men, was equal with God's, if
it were impossible for him to be deceived, if it was no Sacrilege in him to
ascribe to himself this peculiar Attribute of the most high God, He then must
be equal with God, therefore he must be the True God.

If we reflect upon our Lord's behavior after his Resurrection before his
Ascent into Heaven, if he be no more than a mere man, it is wholly
unaccountable. The Holy Ghost is by the Socinians denied to be a Person, or to
be God; yet it is allowed by them to be the power of God, a virtue flowing out
of or from the Supreme Deity, under this Notion we may rationally assert, that
this Holy Spirit can be commanded no way but by the Supreme God himself, none
else can promise it, none can give it; for if the Spirits of the Prophets are
subject to the Prophets, much more certainly must the Spirit of God be subject
to him, it subsisting wholly in him, and being according to our Adversaries,
one of those qualifications necessarily in the Supreme God: Granting all this,
if our Savior was a mere man, as they say, he could not possibly command this
Sacred Spirit, this Spirit so much superior to mankind, though considered as no
more than a mere Appendage to the Almighty. Yet our Savior seems to employ
this Spirit as he will; that is no wonder, if the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost though three persons be all one God: That exact concurrence in their
eternal wills taking away all difficulties: Thus when the Lord met with his
Disciples, and showed them the necessity of things happening with relation to
himself, as they did, then He opened their understandings that they might
understand the Scriptures, Luke 24.45
this opening their understandings, did not consist barely in explaining some
particular Texts to them; they were yet but very dull and slow of understanding
in themselves, and though they had heard a thousand Texts authentically
explained, they might have continued very inapprehensive still: Nor is it an
usual manner of speech to say, when a man explains any Author to others, that
he opens their understandings; he may open the meaning of such or such Books,
or Passages very well, yet those who hear him may not improve in their
intellectuals; this opening their understandings therefore argued some force
upon their minds, some extraordinary Energy of the Spirit within them, whereby
their natural and inveterate Dullness went off, and they had more of
spriteliness and vigor in their Souls than formerly: they seemed as Slaves
with their fetters knocked off, nimble and active, and therefore more capable of
apprehending any thing offered to them than formerly. This was the first
beginning to fit them for that great work they were in a few days to engage in,
it was to make them capable of satisfying themselves gradually in the Truth and
Reason of those things which they were afterward to preach to the world
abroad, and which they were completely fitted for by the following
extraordinary effusions of that Holy Spirit upon them; The first operations of
it upon them then were gentle and easy, but it was the operation of that
Sacred Spirit only, and of that Spirit as ordered by the blessed Jesus, by
which their understandings were thus opened. We may agree to this the more
easily, if we consider that Promise Christ makes to his Disciples after this,
Behold I send the promise of my father upon you, Luk 24.49
but tarry ye in the City of Jerusalem until you be endued with power from on
high: The Father promises it, but I send it. Now this uses not to be a task for
a man, to make good the Promises of God, it is out of his power, especially if
the Promise be to be made good in some particular wherein God has a more
peculiar interest: Is my Spirit my breath? none then can give it to another,
though my Spirit be not originally my own, but breathed into me by an Almighty
Creator: Is the Holy Ghost, the Breath, the Spirit, the Influence of God? none
then can dispose of it from him, and the rather because it is originated in
him, and must be one with him; it was then a strange presumption in our Lord,
to take upon him the making good Gods Promises to others, since, if he were no
more than a Man, He promised what was not in his power, and pretended to make
up some defects in his veracity, who was the God of Truth, and Truth it self.
But our Savior went farther yet, for making a visit once to his Disciples
after his Resurrection, His Blessing being bestowed, he gives them a Commission
of an extraordinary nature, As my Father has sent me, even so send I you, i.
e. Job. 20.21.
As my Father sent me to reform the World, so I send you to ca^ry on that same
work, and as my Father's mission of me gave me a sufficient authority to do
those things necessary to so great an end, so my sending you gives you as great
and unquestionable authority in proportion to those things which are laid on
you; this intimates, that Christ had power to send men to govern and manage his
Church, as his Father had, and in the same degree; for if our Savior was only
his Father's Ambassador to them, and so inferior to him that sent him, this
had been an extravagant vanity; it was never heard that an Ambassador from a
King or Emperor pretended to send another Envoy from himself, with such kind of
expressions as these, As my master the King has sent me, so send I you, nor are
Princes wont to entrust their Agents with any such Power, and the Credentials
of such sub-ambassadors would appear very ridiculous to all those to whom they
should be sent: But from this Commission our Lord proceeds, And when he had
said this, He breathed on them, and said unto them, ver. 22.
Receive ye the Holy Ghost, Spiritus Sanctus est virtus seu efficacia a Deo in
homines manans, iisque communicata qua eos ab aliis segregat and suis usibus
consecrat, say the Socinians in the Racovian Catechism, The Holy Spirit is a
virtue or efficacy flowing from God upon men (from the True the Supreme God
they mean) and communicated to them, by which he separates such men from
others, and consecrat^ them to his own use. If it be the efficacy or Power of
the Supreme God, how comes one, whom they suppose to be a mere Man, to confer
it with his breath? It was given afterward by the laying on of the Apostles
hands; they gave it not by any virtue inherent in them, but where they laid on
their hands God sent it, and that in different manners and proportions, as he
judged fit for the Receivers, whose fitness the Apostles knew nothing of: Our
Savior bestows it with his breath, It must therefore be his own, therefore he
must be the Supreme God; for in this action our Savior did not mock his
Disciples, as Schlicktingius confesses, Caetechisme^ Rac. sect. 6. c. 6.
but he did certainly separate them, by this action, from the rest of the
world, and consecrated them peculiarly to his own service, and this, at the
appointed time, they engaged in, according to his orders. In the forementioned
Catechism, when they ask what the gift of the Holy Spirit is? the answer is,
Est ejusmodi Dei afflatus, quo animi nostri vel uberiore rerum divinarum
notitia vel spe vitae eternae certiore, atque adeo gaudio ac gustu quodam
futurae felicitatis aut singulari gloriae divinae, pietatisque ardore,
complentur. It is such an influence of God, as by which our minds are filled
either with a more plentiful knowledge of Divine things, or with a more certain
hope of eternal life, and consequently with joy and a taste of future
happiness, or a peculiar heat of divine glory and piety; this may look somewhat
like cant, but however it teaches us to ascribe this sacred influence to the
most high God, and to ascribe very great effects to this influence, but these
effects the breathing of the blessed Jesus had, therefore there must either be
two Holy Ghosts, one the influence and Power of a mere man, the other the
influence or Power of the most high God, or else the Power and influence of the
most high God, in its full force and vigor, must be at the disposal of Christ,
and therefore he must be equal with the most high God, since he bestows the
same Divine Gift with the same power and efficacy, and therefore he must be the
most high God.

Thus have we animadverted on our Saviviour's own Actions while conversant upon
Earth, and have seen how far they contribute to the proof of his Divine Nature.
We may read the same in the Actions of his Apostles after his Ascension. S.
Peter makes his Speech before the feast of Pentecost to the Apostles and
Brethren about filling that vacancy made in the Apostolical College by the
miscarriage of Judas the Traitor. A sufficient evidence this, says
Schlichtingius very truly, that He had indeed received the Holy Ghost with
effect when his Master breathed, as before, on Him and his Companions: but
there was yet a more plentiful effusion of the Holy Ghost upon them, to come;
their Master had promised it, and he took occasion, on the most public and
solemn Occasion to fulfill it, namely, at the feast of Pentecost, when Jerusalem
was extremely full of Strangers from all parts. The Apostles were no sooner
endued with power from on high, but presently they employ the Heavenly Gift,
and preach to purpose to the wondering multitude. S. Peter's discourse is
particularly upon record, and in it, after a severe and plain recollection of
their great sin in crucifying the Lord of life and glory, he gives them an
account of their present miraculous gifts, which he derives, not from God the
Father, but assures them, that Christ being exalted to the right hand of God,
and having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Ghost, he, Acts 2.33.
the same Christ, had himself shed forth that which they then saw and heard,
thus the Holy Ghost proceeded equally from the Father and the Son, the first
promised it, the last gave it: but this was not all, when the wounded multitude
came to the Apostles with that weighty question, Men and Brethren what shall we
do? Peter said unto them, v. 37, 38.
repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ: Was Jesus
Christ then God, or was he a mere Man, or, what is the same, a mere Creature? We
find no example of a mere man so honored as that any should be baptized in his
name: S. Paul indeed tells the Corinthians that the Fathers, the predecessors
of Israel, were all baptized into Moses in the cloud and in the sea, 1 Cor.
10.2.
meaning the Red Sea and that Cloud which parted them from the Egyptians at
first, and afterward covered the Tabernacle: This is of the same import with
that of being baptized into Christ, and both signify, Gal. 3.27.
being by virtue of a sacred Ordinance admitted into or made members of those
Churches, of which Moses in the name of God founded the one, and Christ in his
own name founded the other: But we never read of any Sacramental Institution,
by virtue of which any should be baptized in the name of the Father, and of
Moses, and of the Holy Ghost; nor do we find any footsteps of Men's being,
circumcised in the name of Moses, nor were the Israelites ever called by the
name of Moses; Christians yet bear the name of Christ to this day, and justly,
since he did and suffered so much for them, and they are baptized in his name:
1 Cor. 1.13,
it is the Apostles argument against the dividing Corinthians. And the Apostle,
though a chosen instrument in the hand of God, for the conversion of the
Gentiles, though inferior to none of the Apostles, and therefore as holy as the
holiest of mere men, yet makes it a matter of satisfaction to himself with
respect to the Corinthians, that he had personally baptized so very few, v. 14,
15.
lest any should have said he had baptized in his own name. What the Apostle
there writes is worth our more serious consideration: That the Corinthians who
believed, were baptized in the name of Christ, we need not doubt, we see it was
one of the first conditions of eternal Salvation propounded by S. Peter, by
Philip, by Paul in the Jaylors case, therefore not neglected here: Why then
should S. Paul be so well pleased on this account, that He, in person, had not
baptized them? it seems an enquiry thus only and truly to be answered: The
Corinthians being naturally of a very fickle and dividing humor, were desirous
to have some considerable persons to Head, and so to countenance their several
Parties, this humor made them catch so eagerly at the great names of Apollos
and Cephas, as well as of S. Paul himself: this was very unhappy: but when only
Elders, or Deacons of a common reputation and inferior rank, Vid. Clement. Ep.
ad Corinth. Coc. t. 1. p. 154. Edit* Lab. and Cos.
appeared in the work of Baptising Converts, their names made none ambitious to
be called after them, nor would it ever enter into any man's head, that such
should have baptized Christians in their own Names, as it might have done, had
the principal Apostles been the general ministers of that Ordinance: so S. Paul
is very fearful here, lest among a Capricious People, his name should seem to
stand in competition with that of his Master the Lord Jesus Christ: He appears
in this case, as tender of Sacrilege or robbing Christ of his, as he was of
robbing the most high God of his Honor, when at Lystra he rent his clothes for
grief at that levity and madness, whereby the Lystrians were moved to offer
Sacrifices to him and Barnabas, as if they had been Gods; but there would not
have been so great reason for this extraordinary solicitude of the Apostle, if
Christ himself had not been of a Divine Nature, or robbing Him equal to robbing
the supreme God of his Honor; and if it had been so great a crime for S. Paul
an holy Man, to encroach upon God's Honor, by ascribing any thing of it to
himself, it could be no less a crime in our Savior, if he were but a mere Man,
a created Being (though he were never so holy) to appropriate any thing of that
glory belonging to the supreme God, to himself. Yet, if he were a mere Man, we
find him strangely guilty in this point; for as before his Passion, he requires
of his Disciples that they should believe in him, as after his Passion he joins
himself with the Father, and with the Holy Ghost, in the institution of Baptism
without any difference at all, so after his Ascension into heaven, he seems to
take all care possible, to confirm such an opinion in his Apostles and
followers, as according to which they must treat him as the Supreme God; for
when our Savior bids his Disciples have Faith in God, Mat. 11.22.
doubtless he would not lay that injunction upon them, if Faith, so placed, had
not a sanctifying power for such Faith is sufficient to make men Holy and
acceptable in the sight of that God with whom they have to do. But when the
same Jesus appears to S. Paul in his journey to Damascus, he tells him, He had
appeared to make him a Minister and Witness of what he had seen, Acts 26.16,
17, 18.
Delivering him from the people and from the Gentiles to whom he designed to
send him, that he might open their eyes, and turn them from darkness to light,
and from the power of Satan unto God, that they might receive forgiveness of
sins, and an inheritance among them which were sanctified by Faith which was in
Him. Here then, besides Christ's assuming to himself a sovereign and universal
power of delivering his servants from all dangers, of Commissioning them for
the most weighty Work in the World, of enabling them to open the Eyes of those
that heard them, and to turn them from darkness to light, (all which are the
effects of a power truly Divine only) He in plain terms asserts, that that
Faith which is in him, sanctifies those that have it exclusively of all other
Faith whatsoever; for by his words it appears, that forgiveness of sins, and an
everlasting inheritance, are only attainable by that Faith: and again the
Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews reckons Faith in God, Heb. 6.1*
among the fundamentals of our Religion; these things laid together, will
oblige us to conclude, either that there are two kinds of justifying Faith, or
such as may render men holy, and acceptable in the sight of God, or else, which
is true, that Faith in the most high God and in Jesus Christ is one and the
same thing, fixed upon one and the same inseparable Object, and so saving and
sanctifying to all them that have it, and S. Paul, in the forecited Chapter of
the Acts, having showed what help Christ promised him, in prosecution of his
discourse, declares, he received his help from God, whereby he was enabled to
bear that witness Christ had assured him He would help him in, therefore God
and Christ were all One, or the Son of God and his Father were one Supreme God.

That there was this Identity of nature between the Son of God and his Father,
will appear farther, from that account S. Peter gives to the People of the Cure
wrought upon the poor Criple at the beautiful gate of the Temple; where
reproving them, and telling them they had killed the Prince of life, a very
strange title, by the way, to be given to a mere Man, and such as can be
paralleled in no Author Sacred or Profane, He adds, And his Name, Acts 3.15, 16.
through Faith in his Name, has made this Man strong whom ye see and know, yea
the Faith which is by him, has given him this perfect soundness, in the
presence of you all: here again, the Name of Christ and Faith in his Name, are
both set in the highest rank, and whatsoever was before professed to be done in
the Name of the True God, was now done in the Name of Christ. Moses and the
Prophets appealed still in all things to the name of the most high God (and I
doubt if Gehazi, when he laid his staff upon the Shunamite's child's face, had
commanded it in the name of his Master, to arise, or if his Master afterward
had done as much in his own name, they would both have lost their labors) the
case was otherwise here, S. Peter's word to the Criple was, ver. 6.
In the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, rise up and walk: the Cure was
immediately effected: the people wondered: They assert the glory of the Miracle
only to the Name of Christ, Acts 4.9, ^^.
and they repeat their assertion to the High Priest, and the rest of the
Members of the Jewish Council. Had not the name of Christ been powerful enough
to effect the greatest miracles, it had been a foolish presumption in them to
have appealed to it: the Priests of Baal would not have appeared more silly in
their violent addresses to their paltry Idol, nor the Sons of Sceva in calling
over those possessed with evil Spirits, the name of Jesus whom Paul preached; Had
their invocation failed, it would have exposed all that Religion they pretended
to advance, to the common scorn and contempt of all mankind; but that Sacred
Name prevailed, those Miracles which had formerly been performed in the name of
the most high God, were now performed in the name of the Son of God; God did
not and could not give his glory to another, for he had before declared he
would not, therefore that Jesus, the Son of God, in whose name this astonishing
Cure was wrought, was really the most high God: It may perhaps be objected,
that All power was given to Christ after his Resurrection, by virtue of which,
he could give his own name that virtue and authority by which such mighty
Miracles as these might be performed: We answer to this, it is true, our Lord
did tell his Apostles that all Power was given to him, in heaven and in earth,
Mat. 28.18
and He told them so after his Resurrection, but it does not therefore follow
that he was not possessed of such an universal power before his body was raised
from the grave; he adds no word intimating that this power was now invested in
him and not sooner, for He might very well forbear to inform his Disciples of
it, till he came to his state of exaltation, commencing from his being raised
from the dead. But allowing what such Objectors would have, that there was no
such Power given him, or that He never had such Power till his Resurrection,
They and All know the Philosophical Axiom is of universal truth, Quicquid
recipitur recipitur ad modum recipientis, Whatsoever is received is received
according to the capacity of the receiver: and Volkelius tells us in plain
terms, De vera Relig. l. 3. c. 20. p 106.
that after his Resurrection the body of Christ was of mortal nature, and no
otherwise partaker of immortality, than by the will of his Father: Now if this
be true, though God Almighty be able of and from himself to give an universal
Power, as having it inherent originally in himself, yet it implies an absolute
contradiction, that he should be able to confer such an infinite Power upon a
finite or a mortal Subject; for that would be to setle a double Almightiness in
the world, of which one should not be Almighty: or, whereas Omnipotence is such
an attribute, as wherever it resides it must constitute a True and Supreme
God, and whereas its such an attribute as cannot stand alone, without a
concurrent-infinity in every respect, yet it may rest in a Subject neither God,
nor yet Supreme, but in such a one as is still, though highly exalted, mortal in
its own nature, and capable of destruction or annihilation: For if it depends
only on God's Will, that Christ's Body, now exalted to the right hand of his
Father, is no more liable to Death, then, had it pleased God, he might have
invested Moses, or Elias, or Enoch with this same Omnipotence as well as our
Savior, and our Savior is no more secure of the continuation of that
Omnipotence he is at present possessed of, in himself, than the good Angels are
of continuing in their present state of bliss, i.e. so long as the supreme God
upholds them they are safe; if He withdraw, but for one moment, they are as
miserable as their fallen companions. But the very thought of these things are
absurd and blasphemous, however not to be avoided without acknowledging the
eternal Divinity of the Son of God.

Faith of the Ancient Church, and see how this Doctrine, that God was manifest
in the flesh, or that, He who was manifest in the flesh was God, the True, the
Supreme, the most High God, is asserted in it. This inquiry we make, not
because we think Antiquity infallible, nor because we imagine every opinion,
maintained by any Father of the Church, ought to be an authentic prescription
to us. Where any of them have in any particular deviated from the sense of
God's holy Word, we value not their opinions a-whit the more for their being
ancient. But this we must own, that those who lived nearest the times of our
Savior and his Apostles, had the best opportunities of knowing what they
meant, or how those, who personally converst with them understood them; as it is
easier for me, who have seen and known my Father, to learn from him what were
the thoughts of my Grandfather, or great Grandfather, both which it may be my
Father may have seen and converst with, than to find out what particular
Opinions were entertained by my Predecessors before the Conquest, and so
upwards. Again, where Scripture, and Reason improved from thence, give us a
full evidence of any truth, the concurrence and harmony of Antiquity with these
evidences, is of great weight, and gives us a fair deduction of divine and
necessary Truths through all ages, and shows us how, in spite of all the
oppositions and artifices made use of by the enemies of Truth, yet God has been
pleased to preserve it entire, and to derive it by various channels down to us,
that we, embracing and asserting the same Holy Faith, may be partakers of the
same eternal happiness with our predecessors, Prophets, Apostles, Martyrs,
Confessors, who have all dyed in the True Faith and fear of God; on this
consideration we shall, by God's assistance, give you a short account of the
Primitive Faith in this particular: Here then in due order of time

We begin with that Clement, remembered with Honor by S. Paul, Phil. 4.3.
as one of those fellow laborers of his, whose names are in the book of life:
This Clement was afterward Bishop of the Church of God in Rome, on which
account, and by reason of his great eminence in the Church of God, some of the
Factors of that See, have endeavored to fasten several spurious writings upon
him: but the abuse was too gross to impose upon a learned world; However, of
his we have one Authentic Epistle, written in the name of the Church of Rome
to the Church of Corinth, Conc. Genesis Lab. and Cossart. T. 1. p. 133. B.
upon account of a violent Schism broken out in that Church, to the great
scandal of the Christian Religion, and to the obstruction of the progress of
the Gospel: In this Epistle, (though nothing were purposely written on the
subject we are now treating on) yet there are some not obscure evidences of
what opinion He, and the Church of Rome in whose name he wrote, had in those
early days of our blessed Lord: He calls him (...), a name very great, and such
as is no where given to any mere Man: it is designed here to illustrate the
extraordinary dignity of our Savior, for, by so setting him off, the
Apostolical writer enforces his argument upon the Corinthians, to persuade them
to Humility, which would be an excellent foundation for Charity, for, though our
Lord Jesus Christ were so great, though he were the Scepter of the greatness of
God, yet he came not, as he might, in an assuming and lofty manner, but with
the greatest Humility, and this argument, S. Hierome in his commentary on the
52 of Isaiah, and the three last verses, according to our translation, makes
use of to the same purpose, owning Clement for his Author; but now, if the
Argument of these great Men was good, it must necessarily follow, that our
Savior had a Being, and a glorious Being too, before he was born of the
blessed Virgin, which Birth of his into a calamitous World, has always been
accounted one part of his Humiliation; this Humiliation could not have been
thought so considerable had he not been very great and happy before, Christ
could not have been so great and glorious, antecedently to his Birth, but He
must have been God, and therefore the True the most high God: for there could
be, even in a Socinians account, no more but One True God before the
Incarnation of our Savior; You see, my beloved people, says the good Man, what
an example is set before you, and if our Lord so humbled himself, viz. if he
descended from Heaven to earth for our sakes, how humble should those be who
take upon them the yoke of his Gospel? Twice afterward, this same Holy Man
concluding his period with Jesus Christ, p. 137. C.
adds, To whom be glory and Majesty for ever and ever, Amen. The same
expressions of praise he gives to God the Father several times, p. 156. B. p.
144. B. p. 148. C. p. 160. C.D
and what can we conclude, from using such a Doxology indifferently to God the
Father, and to Jesus Christ his Son, But that He understood them to be of one
and the same nature, both Infinitely Glorious, both one proper object of praise
and adoration? And the same venerable Author, speaking of the Patriarchs,
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, adds particularly of the last; that from him
descended all those Priests and Levites who serve at God's altar, (...), etc.
(...), p. 144. A.
of him was Jesus Christ, so far as concerned his flesh, of him were the Kings,
Princes and Leaders of Judah; where it is observable, that nameing our Savior,
He says of him, that, He was of Jacob according to the flesh, by a particular
phrase (...), according to, or so for as concerned in the flesh; but of the
Princes and Levites deduction from that Patriarch, he speaks only in the common
way; now this particular way of expressing himself in relation to Christ, must
have been very impertinent, had it not been designed to show the difference
there was between the manner of Christ's Descent and Theirs; for never was such
a thing said of any mere Man, by any Writer in the world, that He was born of
such and such Parents according to the flesh; as it would look ridiculously to
say, David was the Son of Jesse according to the flesh, the very phrase
intimates some different origination, according to some other nature, Romans 1.3,
4
whatever it be; and the Apostle uses the same expression, in the same
distinguishing sense. So elsewhere S. Clement calls our Lord (...); the same
word used by the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, and by us translated,
Heb. 1.3.
the brightness of God's glory, properly enough, or it might be rendered, a
beam from the body of his glory, from which expressions the Ancients generally
collected, that Christ must be coeternal with his Father; so S. Chrysostom
tells us, the Son is called, the brightness of the glory of his Father, as
always existing in the Father, as brightness always is in Light, for the light
cannot be without brightness, nor brightness without light, so the Son cannot
be without the Father, nor the Father without the Son, for he is begotten of
his Essence before all time, and is always with him: to the same purpose, but
more largely, speak Theodoret, Gregory Nyssen, Theophylact, etc. and S. Clement
to show his meaning to be the same with that of the Author to the Hebrews,
proceeds in a large citation out of that Chapter, from whence we have before
evidently proved the eternal Divinity of the Son of God: Besides, this
unquestionable Epistle of Clement, which we have almost entire, there is a
Fragment of another, written by the same excellent person, to the same
Corinthians, not so generally owned indeed, but of very great antiquity, being
taken notice of by S. Hierome, and before him by Eusebius; Conc. T. 1. p. 181.
the very first words of which give us a full proof of the doctrine we now
assert. Brethren, says the Writer, We ought to think concerning Jesus Christ as
concerning God, as concerning the Judge both of the quick and the dead: If we
must think of Christ as of God, we must think and believe that he is God, for
so we think always of the Supreme Being: But these passages are sufficient from
an Author of so great antiquity. From him we shall proceed to the next Greek
Father,

Blessed Ignatius Bishop of Antioch, One who had seen Christ himself in the
flesh, who is reported by some to have been that Child whom our Savior took in
his arms: Mark 9.36
who conversed frequently with the Apostles, He left several Epistles behind
him, to several Churches, full of excellent advices, and truly savouring of an
Apostolical Spirit and temper. In Him we meet with many evidences of his
belief, that Jesus Christ, the Son of God, was the real, the True God. So in
the very first words of his first Epistle to the Church of Smyrna, He begins,
Epist. ad Smyrn. Edit. Voss.
(...), I glorify Jesus Christ who is God, he is with him, (...), the God,
with an article, the want of which the Socinians so frequently cavil at in
Scripture, that Article is certainly exclusive of all other Gods. The Son he is
the only True God, the Father is the same True God, not two Gods, but two
persons and one God, or one Deity: this is a plain passage and needs no descant
upon it. In the conclusion of his Letter to Polycarp, then Bishop of the Church
of Smyrna, (the same who is called the Angel of the Church of Smyrna by S. John
in the Revelations, who dyed afterward a Martyr for the truth) he gives
Polycarp this salutation, I pray that Grace may be always with thee in Jesus
Christ our God; Ad Polyc.
he neither prefixes nor subjoyns any thing to the words, that might allay the
sense, or make it ambiguous, it is an entire sentence, and as clearly owns,
that He thought Jesus Christ was God, and that he wrote to another, who had the
same Faith, in that respect, with himself; So that the real Deity of the Son of
God, was no strange Doctrine in those days. In the Inscription of his next
Epistle to the Ephesians, He styles that Church predestined from the
beginning, Ad Ephesians.
or before all worlds, to everlasting glory, according to the will of the
Father, and Jesus Christ our God; where he plainly makes the Father and Jesus
Christ one God, to which blessed Jesus he ascribes the same character, of an
absolute Deity, with his Father. So again in the beginning of the Epistle it
self, he tells the Ephesians, they bore an honorable reputation, and justly
gained by their Faith and Love, in Jesus Christ our Savior, being imitators of
God, and reenflamed, or revived by the blood of God: An expression, like that
of S. Paul to the Elders of the same Church, when he tells them, God had made
them overseers of that Church, Act. 20.28
which he had purchased with his own blood; Now we cannot, with any propriety
of speech, call any blood the blood of God, unless it be really his, and it
cannot be his as he is God, therefore he must have assumed some such nature, as
wherein his blood might be shed, which might, and did come to pass, by his
taking our nature; but our Nature being substantially united to that which was
before eternal and Divine, and so God and Man being but one Christ, when
Christ, as Man, shed his most precious blood for our sakes, that blood was,
properly and truly, called the blood of God, or God's own blood. But we meet
with yet plainer evidence in the same Epistle: so I take those words of his to
belong to Christ, Nothing lies hid from the Lord, (that is the common title of
our Savior, in all Apostolical writings,) but even our most secret things are
near to him: Let us then do all things, as if He lived in us, that we may be
his Temples, and He may be God in us, which also he is and will appear before
our faces, for which reasons we justly love him: I the more readily apply this,
which argues Omniscience, to Christ (and is no more than what Scripture openly
ascribes to him, as I have formerly showed) because soon after he earnestly
asks that Question, Wherefore then are not we all wise embracing the knowledge
of God, which God is Jesus Christ? and presently after asking the Apostle's
question, Where is the wise Man? where is the disputer? where is the glorying
of those who were reputed men of Understanding? He subjoyns, For our God, Jesus
the Christ, was conceived of Mary according to divine order of the seed or line
of David by the Holy Ghost: I durst now appeal to all Mankind, whether they
would not conclude, that whosoever should speak of any Being whatsoever at this
rate, would not be thought to account the Person he spoke of in such broad
terms, Real God? and whether a good rational Deist would not conclude, that if
He, so spoken of, were no more than a mere Creature, He who should so speak of
him ought not to pass at least for a Borderer upon Idolatry? For it is
rationally expected that, in such weighty matters, Men's Words should be the
proper interpretation of their Thoughts, and not pestered with dubious or
uncertain, or unintelligible phrases. In the same Epistle he calls our Lord
(...), God appearing humanely, or, in the same manner as men do, clothed with
flesh and blood, and endued with a rational soul; which is but another way of
expressing the Text, God was manifest in the flesh. Would you then have his
pre-existence as God, before he was conceived in the womb of the blessed
Virgin? our Ignatius asserts that too, in his Epistle to the Magnesians, Ad
Magnes. p. 33, 34.
viz. That He was with his Father before all time, and in the end, or in the
fullness of time, at last he appeared, and afterward, There is one God, who
manifested himself by his Son Jesus Christ, who is his (...), his eternal word,
agreeably to S. John in the beginning of his Gospel. Again in his Epistle to
the Trallians; and twice in the Inscription of his Epistle to the Romans, He
gives the title of God to our Savior, nay of our God; and toward the end of
that Epistle He begs of the Romans, that they would not go about to hinder his
Martyrdom then at hand, no: Permit me, says he earnestly; to be an imitator of
the sufferings of Christ my God, and again, Ad Romanos, p. 60.
he calls him My God twice over in the subsequent two or three lines. The
Prophets frequently reflect upon it as Idolatry to say to an Image thou art my
God: and I am not yet convinced by any Socinian argument, that it is not
Idolatry to say the same to any created Being whatsoever: At best, the Apostles
themselves and those eminent Apostolical men, if our Lord be no more by nature
than a mere man, must needs be condemned of extreme imprudence and
uncharitableness; who when they might as well have expressed their minds
otherwise, would yet make choice of such words as were ^nly apt to deceive and
impose upon Men, ^o give them false notions of God and Jesus Christ, and either
make them Idolaters at ^^st; or at least very near borderers upon it; Words
that are figurative, may be easily misunderstood by very good Men, in ordinary
cases, as we see his Companions concluded, S. John should never die, only from
our Savior's words to S. Peter, If I will that He tarry till I come, what is
that to thee? How much more dangerous then must such Words be, especially when
continually used in matters of the greatest weight. It were easy to give more
of the same nature from Ignatius his Epistles, if we'd meddle with those
spurious or interpolated, but we need no such precarious assistances.

The next of the Fathers of the Greek Church, in order of time, is Justine,
commonly styled the Martyr, because he died such, for his obedience to the
Faith of Christ: He lived about one hundred and forty years after the birth of
our Savior: I shall not go about to prove the Divinity of our Savior, out of
the (...), or the Exposition of Faith, printed, as his, among his Works, though
it would afford us a great deal, because the credit of it is doubtful, and
learned men think they have reason to believe our Justine was not the Author of
it. I shall therefore only examine what is of unquestionable authority in him.
In his Apology for the Christians, presented to the Roman Senate, Apolog. 1. p.
44. l. D.
among other things, he tells them, The names of Father, and God, and Creator,
and Lord, and Master, are not the proper names of God, but names derived from
his Works, and those favors he has extended toward Men: but his Son, who
alone is properly called his Son, the Word, who was with him and begotten of
him, before all creatures, because in the beginning God created and adorned all
things by him, was called Christ, he being anointed, and God beautifying every
thing by him: here then we have, what the Evangelist had taught us before,
literally understood and confirmed, That the Word was in the beginning with
God, and that by him all things were made: the holy Martyr thought of no figure
or ambiguity in the discourse. The same Martyr in his second Apology for the
Christians presented to Antoninus Pius the Roman Emperor, in asserting the
Justice and Reason of that Faith in Christ which He and his Christian brethren
professed, lays down a clear proof of Christ's being God, and consequently of the
reasonableness of their service to him, in giving an account of that burning
Bush which Moses saw, and out of which he heard a voice; for at that time when
Moses, as he was feeding his Father-in-law's sheep, was ordered to go into
Egypt, and to bring out from thence the people of Israel, (...), Our Christ
spoke to him out of the bush under the resemblance of fire, and bids him loose
his shoes off his feet, and attend him; and receiving abundance of strength,
and courage from that Christ, with whom he discoursed, He went down and
(glorious and terrible with a thousand miracles) led that people from their
bondage. Apolog. 2. p. ^5. l. B.
The Jews themselves confess, says he, that it was that God whose name was
unknown or unutterable, who then discoursed with Moses, but the Martyr himself
says, it was our Christ, therefore if the Martyr's opinion were true, Our
Christ is the Lord Jehovah, the most high God. The Martyr urges his argument
yet farther, with reflections upon the Jewish incredulity: That Angel which
spoke to Moses out of the burning bush, said to him, I am that God, the God of
Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, the God of thy Fathers, Go
down therefore into Egypt and lead forth my people: A Socinian himself will
own, that that Name was never due to any but to the most high God, (though they
fly to figures there too) We urge this, says the Father, only that we may
prove, that that Jesus Christ, in whom we believe, is the Son and Messenger of
God, who being the Word before, had sometime appeared in the resemblance of
fire, sometimes in the form of Angels, now at last, by the Will of God, was
made Man, for the sake of mankind, and for their sakes suffered whatsoever
Jewish cruelty and malice could inflict upon him; who while they owned it was
God the Creator and maker of all things, who spoke to Moses in the bush, and
yet He, that there spoke, was the Son, the Angel, the Messenger of God indeed,
they laid themselves open to that just reproof of our Lord, that they neither
knew the Father, nor the Son. We argue too from hence, that if it were our
Christ, who appeared to Moses in the Bush, as Justine affirms, and Scripture
sufficiently evidences, if it were our Christ, what name soever he might be
called by, he then was pre-existent, or had a real being before he was
conceived in the womb of the blessed Virgin; therefore he could be no mere Man,
unless the Socinians can find out the way to satisfy the question of Nicodemus
by asserting positively, that a Man, a mere Man, may be born when he is old,
that he may, literally, enter again into his mothers womb and be born anew,
and can prove it when they have asserted it. He could be no Angel, that is
denied in Scripture, the Apostle assures us, Heb. 2.16.
He took not upon him the nature of Angels, a speech very idle, if he had been
an Angel originally: if therefore he neither was a mere Man, nor a created
Angel, he was and must be the supreme God. Again, the same Justine in his
Dialogue with Trypho the Jew, Dial. cum Tryph. Jud. p. 267. l. B. C.
when Trypho urges him with his absurd assertion, That Christ was God before
all ages, and yet had condescended to become Man; Justine answers him, The
truth would not therefore be lost if he should fail in his proofs, that Christ
was the Son of the world's Creator, and that he was God: because, however, it
had been foretold by the Prophets, that he should be so: but if I do not prove
that He had a being before, and then condescended to become Man, and took
flesh, according to his Father's design and determination, p. 275. and dcinceps,
it is only proper to conclude that I am a weak disputant, not that he, who bore
that Character, is not the Christ. When Trypho afterward bids him prove, that
there was or could be another God, besides the maker of the Universe, the
Martyr stumbles not at the proposition, but proceeds to prove the thing by that
instance of the Lord, before whom Abraham stood, when the two Angels went
forwards toward Sodom; and falls again upon the forementioned instance of
Christ speaking to Moses in the Bush, by both which he proves that the Son is
God, as well as the Father is God, and yet he asserts not two Gods, but one
God, because if two or three Beings are partakers of one divine Nature, they
must of consequence be one God, the divine Nature being indivisible and
incapable of degrees or diminution. After a large discourse with the Jew, he
tells him, that in the several arguments he had brought, he had sufficiently
proved, that Christ was Lord and God, and the Son of God, who had appeared both
as a Man, p. 357. D.
and as an Angel, in the burning Bush, and at the destruction of Sodom: And
Trypho all along looks upon him as engaged in that design of proving Christ to
be God, not by a figure, but in reality. He concludes the Scriptures were very
express in their evidence, that that Christ, who had suffered so much at the
Jews hands, was to be worshipped and was God; had he not proved the last well,
that He was God, to have asserted the first, that he ought to be worshipped,
would have sounded very harshly in the ears of a Jew: But even Trypho himself,
who thought it prodigious and incredible that God should be born and should
condescend to become Man, though none of the most tractable persons in the world,
was brought to Agrippa's condition by the zealous Martyr, and almost persuaded
to be a Christian.

About the same time lived S. Irenaeus, Bishop of Lions in France, one who had
been a Hearer of blessed Polycarp, who had been himself an Hearer of the
Apostles; He had certainly the advantage of knowing what was sound and true
Doctrine, with relation to our Savior, and that from very authentic hands;
his writings were originally Greek, as himself was by Birth, though employed to
preach the Gospel in the parts of France, but those Originals are almost all
lost, and we must necessarily content our selves with their Translation: This
excellent Father then tells us first, what the general Faith of the Church is,
That the Church believes in one God, Iren. adv. Haer. l. 1. c. 2.
the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth, etc. and in one Jesus Christ
the Son of God, incarnate for our Salvation, and in the Holy Ghost, who among
other things, has taught us that, according to the good pleasure of the
invisible Father, every knee of things in Heaven, and of things on Earth, and
of things under the Earth, should bow to Jesus Christ our Lord, our God, our
Savior and our King, and that every tongue should confess to him; and this
passage we have in the genuine original, and it seems satisfactory enough as to
the Faith of the French Church in those days; and doubtless was looked upon by
him as the Faith generally embraced by all the true professors of Christianity;
C. 3.
and indeed so he assures us, in the following chapter of the same book; That
the Church spread through the whole world, diligently maintains this Faith, and
observes it as exactly, as if they all inhabited in one house, they believe it,
as if they had all one heart and one soul, and with a wonderful consent, preach
it as it were with one mouth. We then are safe enough, while we believe Jesus
Christ to be God, since holy Martyrs, nay the whole Church of God believed the
same truth so long since; and making it a part of their public Creed, declared
their judgment, that so to believe was necessary to eternal Salvation. Having
afterward told us what the Apostles have preached, and how they have proved
Him true, and that there was no falsehood in him; he proceeds in the next
chapter thus, Therefore neither our Lord himself, nor the Holy Ghost, nor the
Apostles, would have called any one God, absolutely and definitively, unless he
had really been true God, nor would they have called any one Lord, in his own
person, l. 3. c. 6.
but only Him who is Lord of all things, God the Father and his Son; and so he
proceeds to enumerate several Texts, wherein the name of God and Lord, is
indifferently given to both the Father and the Son: and elsewhere he teaches
us, c. 18.
That our Lord is called Immanuel by the Prophet, as cited by S. Matthew, or
God with us, that we might not think he was Man only, but that we might know he
was God too: If then Christ was God as well as Man, his Divine Nature being
mentioned in contradistinction to his humane Nature: Irenaeus cannot mean that
He who was really a Man, was only metaphorically God, but that he was as really
and essentially God as He was Man, which is what we believe.

With Irenaeus agrees Clemens of Alexandria, who thus teaches the Gentiles, in
his Admonition to them; We are the rational Creatures of God the Word ( so he
calls our Savior after the Evangelist S. John,) Admon. ad Gent. p. 5. l. D.
by whom we pretend to Antiquity, because God the Word was in the beginning;
but because the Word was from above, He was and is the divine original of all
things: but since He has now taken upon him the name of Christ, a name suitable
to his power, and which was sanctified of old, I call him a new song; (This
refers to his former Allegorical discourse, wherein he endeavors to describe
every thing, under terms proper to Harmony or Music) This Word then, this
Christ who was at first in God, was both the cause of our original existence,
and of our well-being: But now this Word himself, has made himself manifest to
men, who alone is both God and Man, the cause of all our good; by whom, we,
being taught to live well, are sent from hence to eternal life; for according
to that inspired Apostle of our Lord, the Grace of God has appeared to all
men, teaching them, that denying all ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should
live godly, righteously and soberly in this present world, looking for the
glorious coming of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; This is the new song,
that manifestation of God the Word, who was in the beginning and before all
things, and now shines brightly. out to us; He appeared but lately, who was our
Savior before. He who is, appeared in him who is, because the Word was with
God, and that Word, by which all things were made, makes his appearance as a
Master; that Word, which, as a Creator, gave us life in our first formation,
appearing now as a Master or Teacher, has taught us to live well, that
hereafter, as God, he may bestow upon us eternal life: Thus far that very
learned Father; and his whole discourse does so plainly teach us the
Pre-existence of our Savior, before his Conception in the Womb of the blessed
Virgin, and consequently his Divine Nature, in his eternal being with the
Father, that the most ignorant person in the World, may plainly understand what
the Faith of this Writer was. Thus afterward speaking of John Baptist, the
forerunner of our Savior, he tells them, John taught men to be prepared for
the presence (...), of God the Christ. Afterward, speaking of that care our
Savior took to have the Gospel preached, he adds, The Lord did not effect so
great work in so short a time without a sacred care; He was despised in
appearance, but adored indeed; being a Purifyer, a Savior, and extremely kind:
The Divine Word being really most manifest God, and put into an equal rank with
the Lord of all things, for as much as he was his Son, and the Word was in God,
Ibid. p. 68. l. D.
he was neither disbelieved when he was first preached, nor was he unknown or
unacknowledged, when assuming the presence of a Man, and being made flesh, he
managed the saving design of his assumed Humanity. Again speaking to those who
are blind with sin and folly, under the person of Tiresias, that blind Thebane
Wizzard, and inviting such to believe in Christ, he speaks thus, If thou will,
thou too shall be initiated into these Mysteries, and join in the Choir of
blessed Angels about the unbegotten, the never to be destroyed, the only true
God: God the Word, assisting in the same Hymn with us, He is eternal, the only
Jesus or Savior, the great High Priest of God, who is the Father, p. 70. L D.
he intercedes for Men, and he persuades them to goodness. I shall instance but
in one passage more in his (...), where having cited that of the Psalmist, Who
shall ascend into the Hill of the Lord, or who shall stand in his holy place,
etc. at large, He thus descants upon it: The Prophet, says He, in my opinion,
here briefly describes the true Gnostick, or the man of true knowledge to us,
and by the bye, David shows us, that our Savior is God, for he calls him, the
face of the God of Jacob, who brought us glad tidings, and taught us of, or
concerning the Spirit, therefore the Apostle calls the Son, the Character of
the glory of God, Him who taught the truth concerning God, and who represented
to us that God and the Father was one only and Almighty, whom none could know
but the Son, Stromat. l. 7. p. 733. C.
and He to whom the Son shall reveal him: That God is but one appears by those
who seek the face of the God of Jacob, whom our God and our Savior
characterises, as the only God and father of Good. Here then we have the Father
true and real God, the Son true and real God, and yet but one God, and this is
that Faith which we preach.

To Clemens, I shall only add his Scholar Origin for the Greek Church, a man of
extraordinary eminence in his time, who in his third Book against Celsus, that
great adversary of the Christian Religion, reflecting upon the vanity of
Heathen Gods and their incapacity to help those that depend on them, he tells
Celsus, that upon this very reason, because there is no help in false gods,
it is a sure Rule among Christians, that no man should trust in any being as
God, except only in Jesus Christ; and a little after, whereas Celsus objects
against us so often, that we believe Jesus, consisting of a mortal body, to be
God, and imagine our selves very pious in so thinking, he answers, Let those
who accuse us know, that He whom we know and believe to be God of old, and to
be the Son of God, he is of himself the Word, the Wisdom and the Truth; and
that even that mortal body and reasonable Soul which he assumed by its
Communication, and Unity and Mixture with the Word, or with his divine nature,
arose to so great a height, as to be God, i.e. his humane and his divine nature
make by a substantial or essential union, one God; and that I give no false
interpretation to his words here, will appear by what I shall allege
afterward. It Is all along the humor of Celsus, then when he speaks in the
Person of a Jew, and when he speaks in his own Name and Person, to reproach the
Christians with the irrationality of their Religion on that particular account,
that they owned Christ as God: Contra Celsum, l. 1. p. 30*
so he objects, that Christ was educated in the dark, was hired a servant in
Egypt, that he there tried their magic powers, and returning from thence, in
confidence of his juggling tricks set up for a God. Origin vindicates him from
the malicious imputation of being a Magician, but never pretends to deny that
he was God, or that he assumed that title; nay he is so far from that, that he
takes a great deal of pains to prove that He was God, particularly from those
passages of the 45 Psalm cited by the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews in
his first chapter, which I have cleared before; and he adds, that we must here
consider the Prophet speaking to that God, whose throne is everlasting, l. 1.
p. 43.
and that he asserts that God was anointed by God, who was His God, with the
oil of gladness above his fellows, which is the real sense of the words, and
which, he tells us, he had formerly silenced an obstinate Jew with. In his
second book, Celsus introduces a Jew speaking against Christ, and saying, they
could not own him for God, who did not make good his word, who endeavored
poorly to avoid Death, and was at last betrayed by one of his own followers,
etc. Origin answers, Christians did neither believe the body of Christ nor his
soul to be God, but the (...), the Word, the Son of the God of all things, was
God; that Christians justly condemn the Jews, who acknowledge not him to be
God, whom their own Prophets so often give testimony to, as a powerful Being
and as God, which he is by the witness of the great God and Father of all
things himself: That when God in the beginning of the world said, Let us make
Man in our Image, the (...), the Word, performed all that his Father commanded,
for if according to that of the Psalmist, He said and they were made, l. 2. p.
6^.
he commanded and all things were created, if at God's command, all the
Creatures were framed, who, according to the meaning of the prophetical Spirit,
was able to put in execution such his Father's command, but He who was the
living Word and Truth it self? The Word then in the beginning of all things was
with God, and the Word was God, and without him nothing was made that was made:
It Is the Doctrine of S. John and of Origin too: So far then we may know how the
beginning of S. John's Gospel was understood in his days, and what they thought
might conveniently be proved from thence. When the Jew afterward is brought in
objecting, that Men who are partakers of the same Table, would not lie in wait
for one another, much less would any one have treacherous designs upon God. p.
74.
Origin might easily have answered that cavil by denying that He was God, and
then by giving instances of Men false and treacherous to those who have eaten
with them at the same Table: but He owns his Godhead, and only performs the
latter. Celsus afterward brings in his Jew objecting against the Divinity of
Christ thus, Who ever heard of God coming down from heaven to earth on purpose
to persuade Men, as they say Christ did, and failing in his design, especially
when he was long expected and hoped for? a denial of his Divinity had put a
full stop to this objection too; but Origin, on the contrary, retorts upon
them, That the Jews themselves were instance enough of the possibility of such
a thing, since God had appeared so remarkably to them, in bringing them up out
of the land of Egypt, and in giving them a Law from Sina, and yet they nor
their Fathers could by that means be persuaded to obedience, or prevented from
running presently into Idolatry. p. 106.
After all this, Celsus, in his own person, makes use of this argument to prove
that Christ could not be God; God, says He, is good, and pure, and happy, and
in himself infinitely excellent, and lovely, if He should descend to be among
Men, He must necessarily undergo a change, a change from good to bad, from pure
to impure, from happiness to misery, and from the most excellent to the most
sinful state, this God would never undergo: To this the Father answers, That
it is true, God is in himself Immutable, nor did he suffer any change o^ this
account: But that which descended down to Men was in the form of God; but, out
of his Love to mankind, he debased himself so far, as that he might be born
among them, but He suffered no change from ba^ to good, for that He was without
Sin, he never committed any; He was not changed from pure or clean, to foul or
filthy, for H^ did not so much as know Sin; nor did he fall from happiness to
misery; He humbled himself indeed, but was not a whit the less happy, even when
he stooped the lowest for the good of mankind: nor did he fall from the best to
the most sinful state, because what he did, proceeded from Love and Charity to
us: by being among whom, He, that was the great Physician of Souls, could be no
more altered for the worse, than a Physician for the body is, by conversing
with those that are sick and full of diseases. But, says he, if Celsus think,
that because the immortal God the Word, assumed a mortal body, and an humane
Soul, that therefore He suffered an alteration or a change; Let him know, that
the Word, essentially continuing the Word still, suffers by none of those
things which happen either to the body or the Soul: but that He condescends to
become flesh, and to speak in a Body, l. 4. p. 169, 170.
for the sake of those who are not able to behold the eradiations and
brightness of his Divinity, so long, till He, who receives him, being in a
short time raised to a greater understanding by the Word, may be able to
contemplate his original nature. And finally in his sixth book against the same
Celsus, he speaks ^hus excellently, If then Celsus enquire how we think to know
God, and to be saved with him, We will answer him, That He, who is the word of
God, being in them who seek him, or who wait for his appearance, is sufficient
to make known and to reveal the Father, who was not to be seen before His
appearance; for who else can save the Soul of Man, and guide us in every thing
to God, but only God the Word? who being in the beginning with God, for the
sake of those who are confined to flesh became flesh, that he might be
comprehended by those who were not able to see him as He was the Word, and as
He was with God, and as He was God; l. 6. p. 322.
and appearing in flesh, and speaking in the body, He calls those, who are in
the flesh, to himself, that first he might make them like to the Word, which
was made flesh, and afterward might raise them to see himself indeed, and what
He was before He was made flesh.

The passages are enough and plain enough to show us what Origin thought true
Doctrine concerning the Son of God our Savior. Upon the whole, what a silly
and impertinent adversary was Celsus throughout a large discourse, written only
to expose Christianity to contempt and hatred, to make a continual noise about
the impossibility of our Savior's being God? and what a shallow and ignorant
advocate was Origin for Christianity, to write so many books, principally to
prove the Faith of Christians rational in this point, when in the mean time, if
we may believe our Socinian Adversaries, the Christians, in those early ages,
believed no such thing, nor ever dreamed of Christ's being any more than a mere
Man? Men who intend to do any service to the cause they undertake, or to
procure themselves any reputation by their writings, use to consider what and
who it is they write for or against; but it is mere child's play, for a Man to
set himself up a thing of clouts, that he may throw stones at it to knock it
down, while another takes as much pains to keep it standing. Certainly Celsus
knew better what he opposed, and was sufficiently convinced, that the
Christians did really believe Christ was God. We saw before that the Author of
the Dialogue, called Philopatris, among Lucian's, understood the Christians so;
and Pliny (who lived before either of our Disputants, who had by his office of
Proconsul great opportunities of knowing what tenets the Christians maintained,
who had often examined them with tortures, and punished them with Death it
self, for their supposed obstinacy in their errors.) He, too, understood the
Christians in the same manner, and therefore in that account he gives the
Emperor Trajane of them, among other things, he takes notice of their Coetus
antelucani, their meetings before daybreak (which they were forced to, for the
better securing themselves from the Pagan furies) in which meetings among the
rest of their religious rites, they did Carmen Christo ut Deo canere, They
presented their Prayers or sung Hymns to Christ as God: but this Heathens
themselves would have accounted a bold mocking heaven, had not they believed he
was God indeed whom they so worshipped as God; from which Gerrhard Vossius, in
his Commentary on that Epistle of Pliny, as also Rittershusius, conclude, Via.
ad Calcem Epistolarum Plinianarum Edit. Hackianae
That though the Heathen world looked upon our Lord as a Sophister only, and a
cheat, yet the Christians always acknowledged him to be God: Vossius tells us
the very name of Hymns intimates that they belonged to God, for so he says,
(...) a hymn is (...), a Psalm to God, and never used otherwise, except once or
twice in poetical writings, and refers us to Eusebius, who from a nameless
Author, Historiae Eccles. l. 5. c. 27.
but about the Age wherein Irenaeus lived, takes notice of many Psalms and
Hymns composed from the beginning, by Faithful Brethren, who in those
compositions declared Christ the Word of God to be God: Thus the Writings of
Heathens themselves, and of such who have been the greatest enemies of
Christianity, have been, by Divine Providence, preserved to give unanswerable
evidence to those truths, which some false pretenders to Christianity, have
endeavored to explode, and to satisfy us of our consent with those ancient
Saints and Martyrs in the most weighty particulars of our Holy Religion.

We have now done with the Greek, we come next to the Latin Fathers; And here
we must in the first place take notice of Tertullian, a Man of vast abilities,
and most acute in his reasonings, and whom Schlichtingius esteems almost the
Parent of our Doctrine concerning the Trinity; he is the eldest Writer we have
in the Latin Language, and very plain in the case before us. Tertullian then in
his book de Patientia, Tertul. de Pat. Edit. Par. 1545. p. 3.
for an example of Patience, recommends to us our dear Redeemer, Nasci se Deus
in utero patitur matris, etc. God suffers himself to be born in the womb of his
Mother, and waits for his birth: Being born, He endures gradually to grow up,
being grown up, He Is not ambitious to be taken notice of, but even debases
himself, and is baptized by his own servant, and repels the Tempters assaults
only with his Word: So He, who had resolved to clothe himself with flesh, had
yet nothing of Humane impatience about him. Here we see he calls our Savior
God positively, and makes a great use of that notion of his being so. Thus
again in his book de Carne Christi, written against Marcion, who was so far
from denying Christ to be God, that he fell into a contrary error, and would
believe he was nothing else but God; that the Flesh he assumed was a mere
Phantasme, a Body in appearance, but nothing at all in reality; and so all the
actions he did, all the sufferings he underwent, were only seeming actions, and
seeming sufferings, and no more; and a principal reason he pitched upon for his
opinion, was this, He thought the Birth or nativity of God was an
impossibility, but why should Marcion pitch upon this fancy, if he had not
known, that all the professors of Christianity took Christ to be God? Or why
should any trouble themselves to reconcile God's being clothed with flesh, to a
possibility, when the best method to have confuted Marcion, (as before we
observed in the case of Origin) would have been to have proved, that our
Savior was so far from having only the outward appearance of a Man, that he
was really a mere Man, and nothing else? But says Tertullian to this, Sed Deo
nihil est impossible, nisi quod non vult, De Carne Christi, p. 8.
etc. But nothing is impossible to God, but what is disagreeable to his Will:
Let us consider then if it were his Will to be born, for, if he would, he
certainly could be so; In short, if God would not have been born, neither would
he have appeared as a Man on any account; for who would not have thought him
born into the World, had they seen him in the form of a Man? Therefore if he
would not be a Man, he would not seem so; for it signified nothing to those
that saw him, whether He really was a Man or not, since, by seeing him, they
concluded he was so. But whereas Marcion objected, He denied God could be
converted into Man so as to be born, and to be incorporated with flesh, because
He that is Eternal must also necessarily be Unchangeable, Tertullian makes this
a peculiarity of the Divine nature, which sets it higher than any thing
created, that whereas created Beings, upon a change, lose their former nature,
God does not so, but is God still, though he be clothed with flesh; and argues,
that if Angels of old could assume real bodies, and yet be Angels or Spirits
still, much more must it be believed that God could do the same: Thus still he
prosecutes his Argument, and all his care was to prove, not that Christ was
God, for that was granted on all hands, but that he was Man, which some denied
upon that very ground, because he was God without controversy. Again in his
book of Prescriptions against Heretics, De Praescrip. p. 36.
He lays down somewhat like the form of a Creed, and agreeable to our own:
Where first he says, They believed one God, the World's Creator, who produced
all things out of nothing by his Word; that Word, his Son was called by the
name of God, variously seen by the Patriarchs, always heard in the Prophets, at
last brought, by the power and Spirit of God the Father, into the womb of the
Virgin Mary; He took flesh of Her, and was born of Her, and so became the Man
Jesus Christ, etc. Here we have our Savior's Existence, antecedently to his
birth of the blessed Virgin, not only asserted, but declared as the general
Doctrine and Tradition of the Catholic Church; and that less than two hundred
years after our Savior's Passion; and made use of as a Prescription against an
Heretic: Now Marcion, if he had not been well assured, that Tertullian
asserted no more than what was the current Doctrine of the Catholic Church,
might easily have baffled all Tertullian's pretense to Prescription, by showing
him that all the Christians of the former Age were utterly ignorant of his
pretended Articles of Faith; but we never hear of any such Reply made: Though we
have no reason to doubt, but that the Heretics of those ages were as earnest
to maintain their Errors, as those are who tread in their footsteps in this.
After this, in the same book Tertullian reflects upon other capital Heretics:
So he tells us that Cerinthus maintained, fol. 41.
that Christ was only of the seed of Joseph, a mere Man, without any Divine
Nature: He tells us again, that Theodotus of Byzantium blasphemed Christ, for
He too brought in a Doctrine, qua Christum Hominem tantummodo diceret, Deum
autem illum negaret. Wherein he taught that Christ was a mere Man, and that he
was not God; that He was indeed born of a Virgin, through the Holy Ghost, fol. 42.
otherwise He was only a Man, no better than others, but as his Goodness gave
him a greater authority than others. If Tertullian then took Theodotus to be an
Heretic, on account of this Doctrine, it can scarce be doubted, but he would have
taken Socinus and his Partners for the same, had they lived in those days; and
I find our Socinians doing so much right to this Theodotus, as fairly to reckon
him among the Patrons of their opinions. If we go farther with Tertullian, we
find him assaulting the same Heretic Marcion again, and arguing God's
extraordinary goodness, from that great Humiliation of himself to take humane
nature upon him: He concludes his argument at last with this, Totum denique Dei
mei penes vos dedecus, Adversus Mar. l. 2. f. 68.
sacramentum est Humanae salutis, etc. All that, which, in your opinion, is so
disgraceful to the God I believe in, is the Seal of our Salvation; God converst
with Man, that Man might learn to do those things that are divine: God acted
suitably with Man, that Man might endeavor to act agreeably to God: God was
found in a mean state, that Man might be exalted to the utmost; He that
despises such a God, can hardly be thought to believe in God crucified. In
another book against the same Marcion, he argues, from the ancient apparitions
of Angels, that Christ though God, had a true and real body, We will not yield to
thee, says he, that Angels had only a fantastic body, but those bodies they
assumed had a true, solid, humane substance; this elsewhere he makes good; it
follows, If it were not hard for Christ, to exert the true sense and action of
a Man in imaginary flesh, it was much easier to make true and substantial
flesh, (as he was the Author and maker of it,) to be the subject of true common
sense and action: Thy God was fain to appear in an imaginary body, l. 3. fol.
72.
because he was not able to produce a real one; But my God, who without
pursuing the common course of nature, could make real flesh of Earth, could
have invested Angels with real bodies of any kind whatsoever: For with a word
He made the world of nothing, and shaped it into so many various bodies as we
see: Then he tells us, Angels had flesh truly humane, and connate with the time
they appeared in, because Christ only himself was to be flesh of flesh, that by
his Birth, he might purify ours; that by his Death, he might free us from the
slavery of Death; he rising again in that flesh, in which he was born, only
that he might die: Therefore He appeared in a true body, accompanied with
Angels, to Abraham; but not a body that was born, because it was not that body
which was to die. In consequence of this discourse, which proves our Savior's
Pre-existence to his Birth, fol. 73.
he urges his Adversary with that name of Immanuel, or God with us; from
whence, proving the reality of his divine, he regularly infers the equal
reality of his humane nature. If we proceed, we find the same Father publishing
his Faith, in the beginning of his book against Praxeas: He was an Heretic, so
far yet from believing Christ to be a Creature, or a mere Man, that he asserted
it was God the Father who was born of the Virgin, and crucified and Dead, and
that He was Jesus Christ: In opposition to him the Father declares, As we are
instructed by the Holy Ghost, Adv. Prax. fol. 144.
which leads us into all truth, We believe one God; and that the Word is the
Son of that one God; who was begotten of him; by whom all things were made, and
without whom nothing was made; that he was sent, by the Father, into the
Virgin, and born of Her, Man and God, the Son of Man and the Son of God; and
called Jesus Christ: This was then his Faith, and with him Christ had a being
before he was born into the World, and was, what we assert, the Creator of all
things: Thus afterward he tells us, in the same book, the Father is God, fol.
147.
the Son is God, and the Holy Ghost is God, and dilates upon, and vindicates
that truth: He tells us that the Father is God Almighty and most high, fol. 149.
and that the Son justly claims the same titles, and that the Father and the
Son are one God; and indeed, c. 21.22. fol. 219, 220.
the farther proof of this, is the general design of that book. He confirms the
same Doctrine in his Apology for Christianity against the Gentiles. Besides
these books, he wrote one particularly concerning the Trinity, where, among
other things, quoting the words of the Prophet Hosea, I will not save them by
my bow, nor by horses, Hos. 1.7.
nor by horsemen, but I will save them by the Lord their God: He infers from
thence, If God promises them Salvation in their God, or by him, and yet saves
them only by Christ, why should any Man be afraid to call Christ God, since he
is called so by his Father in Scripture? Nay, if the Father saves none but by
God, no man can be saved by God the Father, who does not confess Christ to be
God; in and by whom God promises to give salvation; whosoever acknowledges him
to be God, shall obtain Salvation in Christ, De Trinit. fol. 236.
who is God; whosoever acknowledges him not to be God, shall not be saved by
him: With a great deal more to the same purpose. In conclusion, he takes notice
of some, who, in those days, argued at the Socinian rate, That if Christ were
God, and Christ suffered Death, then the Deity suffered death, to which he
answers appositely enough, That if Christ had been only God, and had dyed,
their conclusion had been true, but Christ, being man as well as God, his
Humanity suffered indeed, but his Divine Nature was unprejudiced, untouched.
Thus have we largely and impartially examined this Father about this Doctrine
of Christ's being God, and his assertions are so plain, and direct, and the
Heresies he impeached in his writings, of such a nature, that they both concur
exactly in the confirmation of the same; that our Savior was truly and really
God, equal with his Father, and the most high God.

We have another glorious luminary of the same Church S. Cyprian, that holy
Martyr of Jesus Christ, and the laborious Bishop of Carthage; who as he was a
great admirer of the writings of Tertullian, so concurred with him in the same
Doctrine, of the Divinity of Jesus Christ: S. Cyprian then, in his book of the
vanity of Idols, having settled that fundamental truth, That there is only one
God, presently shows, that our Savior is God too: this he would not have done,
had he judged the inference good, that to believe Jesus Christ was God, was, to
make two Gods: He would not so soon contradict himself, nor go about to set up
a new Idol, when he was endeavoring to exterminate the old. Thus then He tells
us, That whereas the Jews, a stubborn and rebellious people had long abused the
Goodness of God, God was resolved to call to himself, from among the Gentiles,
a People that should show forth better effects of his mercy, than they did; the
Manager of this Goodness, Cyprian. de Idolor. vanit. Edit. Ox. p. 15.
Grace and Method was He, who is the Word, and Son of God; who had been
foretold by all the Prophets, the enlightner and teacher of all Mankind: This
Son, is the Power, the Fullness, the Wisdom, the Glory of God: He entered into
the Virgin, assumed flesh, by the cooperation of the Holy Ghost: God united
with Man: He is our God, He is Christ, who put on the nature of those Men, whom
He leads to his Father; Christ would be what Man is, that Man might be what
Christ is. In his second book of Testimonies against the Jews, p. 34, 35.
he spends one whole chapter, in heaping up such Scripture texts, as, before
Socinian Commentaries were thought on, were judged sufficient proofs, that
Christ was God: In particular, he insists on those passages of the 45 Psalm,
which are applied to our Savior so directly by the Author of the Epistle to
the Hebrews. 1 John 5.7.
That famous place, There are three that bear record in heaven, the Father, the
Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one, has been much controverted,
it seems to be a very plain text for the Trinity, and consubstantiality, or
equality or sameness of nature, in the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost: but
Critics observe that this verse is wanting in several Copies of considerable
Antiquity: and Dr. Burnet, in his account of the Library in Swisserland, See
his Let.
takes notice of its being wanting in several Manuscripts, he had purposely
examined: yet, after all, our S. Cyprian, much more ancient than the eldest
Manuscript he or any other Critical Writer^ have yet given us an account of, in
his book of Church-unity, quotes it, as we read it i^ our Bibles. Socinus takes
it for granted, the passage was inserted into the Bible by some zealous
Trinitarian, who made use of an^ fraud to advance their own Error. S. Hi^rome,
who had found it wanting in some Copies in his time, which was about 400 years
after Christ, imputes the want of it more rationally to Arrian transcribers,
who finding themselves pinched with so plain a text, when they could not answer
it, resolved to take it quite away: This he signifies in a short Epistle to
Eustochium, printed formerly frequently in the Latin Bibles, of late omitted,
as is observed by the learned Dr. Fell, late Bishop of Oxford, in his notes on
S. Cyprian. S. Cyprian by quoting the verse as we have it, confirms S. Jerome's
opinion, and renders that of Socinus ridiculous, for he quoted it before the
Arrian Heresy was founded, and that twice in his Works: therefore could he
have no such design as Socinus insinuates: Yet S. Cyprian's opinion is, that
whosoever does not believe this Unity of the Father, and the Son, De Unit. Ec.
p. 10^.
as laid down in that Text, does not believe the Law of God, nor hold the Faith
and Truth of the Father and the Son to his Salvation. The ^ame S. Cyprian,
recommending Patience to Christians, and that in a time when the ^aging
Persecution made it extremely ne^essary, he advances it by the example of
Christ, for says He, Jesus Christ, Deus and Dominus noster, Our God and our
Lord, ^as taught us this virtue, not only in his Words, De bono Patientiae, p.
213.
^ut in his Actions; which he clears, as Tertullian before him, by his Descent
from Heaven to earth, assuming our nature, and ^iffering in it. Again, in his
account of ^he Council of Carthage, held about those ^ho had been baptized by
Heretics, among the suffrages of the Bishops there present. Fortunatus, Bishop
of Thuchabore, declares, Jesus Christus Dominus and Deus noster, p. 233. c. 17
Dei Patris and Creatoris filius, Jesus Christ our Lord and God, the Son of God
the Father and Creator, has founded his Church, not upon Heresies, c. 29.235.
but upon a Rock. The same title is given him by Euchratius Bishop of Then^;
the same by Venantius Bishop of Tinisa, a Confessor: had not this been
agreeable to the common sentiments of the Church in those days; it would
certainly have been the occasion of some contests, and others would have
observed and reflected on the incautiousness of their Colleagues; but we meet
with no differences on this occasion, therefore, we rightly conclude, they
spoke agreeably to the Catholic Doctrine. S. Cyprian himself is mighty
frequent in such passages, so in his Epistle to Rogatianus, he calls out Lord
Jesus Christ, our King, and Judge, and our God: Ep. 3. p. 6. Ep. 11. p. 23.
and what higher characters could be given him? In his Epistle to his
Presbyters and Deacons, he encourages them to assiduity in Prayer, by the
consideration of having Jesus Christ our Lord and God, our Advocate and
Mediator, Plebi Thibaeri p 123, 125. p. 146, 148.
so again, in his fifty first Epistle to Cornelius Bishop of Rome, in his fifty
eighth Epistle twice, in h s sixty second to Januarius and others; Christ is
our Judge, our Lord and our God; so in his sixty third, in his Epistle to
Jubaianus, concerning the invalidity of the Baptism of Heretics: He argues
against that Baptism thus, If any one, says he, can be truly baptized by
Heretics, he may then by that Baptism obtain remission of sins; if He obtain
remission of his sins, he is sanctified, and is made the temple of God: I ask
then of what God? if of the Creator, he cannot be his temple, because he
believed not in him; if you say of Christ, neither can he be his temple, Epist.
73. p. 203.
who denies Christ to be God; if you say he is the temple of the Holy Ghost,
seeing the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost are all One, how can the Holy
Spirit be pleased with him who is an enemy to both the Father and the Son? Here
the force of the Martyrs argument lies only in the Identity of nature, in ^he
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; and the poison of Heresy consists
effectually in denying the Lord Jesus Christ to be God, but he would not have
argued thus, had not the Divinity of Christ been the general and well known
Doctrine of the Church. p. 212.
He uses the same argument again in his 74. Epistle to Pompey, to name no more
Now, ^n conclusion, who can imagine that a holy Martyr, so great an enemy to
Idolatry, so careful to refute the vulgar Error, of a ^lurality of Gods, should
yet so very frequently use such suspicious expressions, as must needs make the
World believe, he ^wned Christ for God, and consequently, multiplied those Gods
himself, which he exposed others so much for, if the whole objection were not
to be removed by that assertion, that the Father was God, and the Son God, yet
they were not two, but one God? an Identity of their nature, necessarily
inferring the Unity of the Godhead.

The same Africa affords us yet another Writer of great antiquity and learning.
Arnobius, in his several books against the Pagan Religion, in his first book,
reflecting upon several of their Gods, he takes notice how much they were
grieved, that Christ should be worshipped by Christians, and received for, and
esteemed as a God. And whereas Pagans derided Christians, Arnobius adver.
gentes. l. 1. p. 21. Edit. Leidensis.
for accounting him a God, whom they owned to have been born a Man, he retorts
upon them, that They were guilty of that crime; but, says He, supposing all you
object in that respect were true, would not Christ, on account merely of those
benefits he confers upon us, deserve to be called and to be thought a God? He
argues from their own principles, who thought every considerable Invention of
any Man was enough to procure his being Deified, as Bacchus for finding out the
use of Wine, Ceres for Bread, Minerva for Oil, etc. But in the mean time
Arnobius openly enough acknowledges, that Christians did receive Christ as God:
He speaks yet more plainly soon after, Christ for his benefits ought to be
called God: Nay, He really is God, without any scruple or ambiguity; and would
you have us deny him Worship, or disown his Government? But will some angry
Pagan cry out, is Christ a God? We answer, he is God, and a God of infinite
Power too, and (which will more exasperate an infidel) he was sent from the
supreme King to us, upon the greatest errand in the World: Perhaps the Pagan,
being more enraged at this, will demand a Proof of what we say; there needs
certainly no greater proof of Christ's Divinity, than an exact examination of
his actions. If it be objected, that He was a Magician, and performed his
mighty works only by unlawful arts, Let them who object this show us any of
their Magicians, who ever did any thing like what was done by Christ: or if
they have done any thing of a prodigious nature, it has still been by invoking
some other Being: but Christ, without any Helps, without any Magic Rites or
Observations, did all he did by the power of his own Name; and what was proper
and agreeable to, and worthy of a True God, nothing he did was hurtful or
mischievous, but helpful, saving, and the kind effects of divine Bounty: And
was he Mortal? was he only one of us, at whose ordinary commands Weaknesses,
Sicknesses, Fevers and all bodily Pains were gone at once? Was he one of us, l.
1. p. 27. etc.
whose very Look the Devils could not endure? Was he a mere Man, whose
slightest touch could cure the bloody Issue, whose hand could make Hydropick
humors vanish, who could make the Lame run, the Withered Hand recover its
motion, the Blind to see, nay those, who were born without eyes, to see the
light? Was He a mere Man at whose word the angry Seas laid down their rage, the
rugged Storms and Tempests sunk, while He, with a dry foot walked upon the
swelling billows, and trod upon the Oceans back, the waves themselves standing
amazed at the prodigious action, and humble nature submitting to her Founder?
And so he proceeds in a florid and pathetick style by an induction of
particulars, and a relating of circumstances, to prove that Christ must be True
God, and that all the Idols of the Heathen were none. Again, a little after, he
tells the Pagans; Christ was the high God, the God from the beginning, a God
sent from unknown kingdoms, God sent by the Prince of all things, to be the
universal Savior; whom neither the Sun nor Stars, if they have any sense, nor
the Governors, nor Princes of this World, nor those mighty Gods, who (assuming
that terrible name) affright poor mortal creatures, were able to find out, or
so much as to guess what He was, or whence He came; at whose very look, then
when he was clothed with flesh, p. 32.
the universal fabric trembled, and fell into a sudden disorder. Again,
Arnobius brings in the Pagans objecting, If Christ was God, why was He seen in
the form of a Man? Why was He put to Death as Men are? to this he answers, Was
there any other way whereby that invisible power, which had no Corporeal
Substance, could suit it self to the World, or be visibly present in the
assemblies of mortal Men, than by assuming a covering of solid matter, which
might be a proper object whereon Men might fix their eyes? What mortal Creature
could have seen or discovered him, if he had come down to earth in his own
original Nature, or such as he is in his Divinity? Therefore he took upon him
the form of a Man, that he might be seen, and looked upon, that he might speak,
and teach, and perform all those things for which he was sent into the World:
And, whereas He dyed as a Man, p. 37.
it is true, his Humane Body was fastened upon the Cross, but his Divine Nature
was incapable of suffering; his Body only suffered, and that for the Salvation
of those very Wretches, by whose cruelty he suffered. The same Author,
reflecting upon the curiosity of the Heathens (because they would not believe
what they did not understand) asks them a great many questions about the
Originals, or natural causes of several things in the World, which puzzled them
in those, and confound us their posterity in these days; He wonders then that
they should deride Christians, because they cannot explain all the Mysteries of
their Religion, and own their inabilities in the case, when They were so much
to seek in those ordinary cases? Our concerns are mysteries indeed, Et ideo
Christus licet nobis invitis Deus, Deus inquam Christus, hoc enim saepe
dicendum est: ut infidelium dissiliat, and dirumpatur auditus, etc. Therefore
Christ who is God, in spite of all your opposition, that Christ I say, who is
God (for that must be repeated often to scourge the ears of Infidels) speaking,
by God's command, in the form of a Man, Adv. gent. l. 2. p. 85.
knowing the blindness of humane understandings, and the weakness of our
apprehensions, forbad us to be curious or inquisitive into matters so far
removed, only ordering us to direct our thoughts and souls to him, who is the
original of all these things: What advice Arnobius gives his Pagans, in
pursuance of this discourse, would be very proper for our Socinians, among whom
a modest opinion of their own Natural strength, and an humble supposition of
God's superior Wisdom, would cure that Incredulity they are at present guilty
of: Arnobius soon after lays down this Truth, That none can save Souls but an
Almighty God, nor is there any who can give them long life or perpetuity but
only He, who is himself immortal, and perpetual and uncircumscribed by any
boundaries of time: Yet this work of saving souls he ascribes to the Son of
God, Adv. Genesis l. 2. p. 87.
therefore according to his sentiments, the Son of God is that immortal, all
powerful and unbounded God: To all these evidences, I shall only add one of

Lactantius, the Scholar of the forecited Arnobius, who endeavoring to
reconcile the worship which the Christians paid to the Father and the Son, to
those adorations which they acknowledged only to belong to one God, writes
thus, Instit. l. 4. c. 29. p. 445. Ed. Hack.
Where we say the Father is God, and the Son is God, we do not say they are
different Gods, nor do we separate them one from another, for neither can the
Father be divided from the Son, nor the Son from the Father; for the Father in
a relative sense, cannot be named without the Son, nor the Son be begotten
without the Father: Since then the Father makes the Son relatively, and the Son
the Father, they have both one Mind, one Spirit, one substance, only the Father
is as an exuberant Spring, the Son as a stream flowing from it: the Father is
as the Sun in the firmament, the Son as the rays beaming from that Sun; who,
because he is dear and faithful to his Father, can no more be separated from
him, than the stream from the Spring, or beams from the body of the Sun; for
the water of the fountain is in the stream, and the light of the Sun in those
rays which issue from it: And this is plain and pertinent enough.

And thus have I gone through the Writings of those first Fathers, who are of the
greatest Name and Reputation, for their learning and piety in the Churches of
God: I have examined on this account, only such Men as lived before the Arrian
controversy was on foot, so that they cannot be suspected of partiality in the
case, and either we must believe these Men knew very well what was the General
Belief of Christians in those earliest ages, or they did not; if they did not
understand what the Catholic Faith really was, we are all strangely in the
dark, and the Socinians are no more capable of giving an account of the Faith
of the primo-primitive Church in contradiction to what we now assert, than we
are in agreeance to it; nay, there lie all the presumptions in the World
against them in the point; for all the Writers, extant afterward, with an
almost Universal consent, are directly against them: So that unless the true
Christian Faith were entirely lost about the time of the great Nicene Council,
the Socinians must of necessity acknowledge, that the Christian Church
generally believed, that Christ was true and real God. Nor can they secure
themselves, even among the several Heretical Clans of those ages; for though
they own Artemon and Paulus Samosatenus and Photinus, and Arrius, and Aetius,
etc. for great and very Orthodox Men, and the sole Pillars of truth in those
times, yet neither did Artemon agree with Paulus, nor Paulus with Photinus, nor
Photinus with Arrius, or he with Aetius: and the same Writers call our
Socinians sometimes by the name of Samosatenians, sometimes of Photinians,
sometimes of Arrians and Semi-Arrians, yet really they agree exactly with none
of them, as might easily be proved by comparing their opinions together. Now if
Artemon, and Paulus, and Photinus, and the rest, were such very great Men in
all respects, and such careful preservers of the true Apostolical Faith, in
those things wherein they agree with the Socinian sentiments, why should not we
believe they used as exact a care, and were as certainly in the right, in those
particulars wherein they differed from them? for doubtless such Good Men would
not admit of any Errors in any points of weighty and important concern. Those
Men certainly must presume very much upon their own infallibility, who, though
they are at odds among themselves, will admit of none to be in the right but
such who, and where they agree with them in the most singular and paradoxical
opinions. But if, on the other side, we admit that these Fathers, I have quoted
on this occasion, had real opportunities of knowing the General Sentiments of
the Christian Church in their days, and that they really did know them, the
result of that acknowledgment will be this, either they were honest and
faithful deliverers of the same Catholic Faith down to us, or they were not;
if they were not honest and faithful in delivering down the true Faith in their
Writings, then holy and zealous Martyrs, and devout Confessors, must have
proved themselves a pack of impudent cheats and notorious villans, in that they
have left us such accounts of that Faith, whereby Salvation must be attained,
as can only serve to cheat and abuse their Readers, and lead them into
unreasonable and damnable Errors: They only laid so many snares in their
unhappy Writings, for the ruining men's Souls, and their wicked designs have had
but too too fatal effects upon the World. Now all this is very hard to believe
of Men, who converst with the inspired Apostles, some of whom had that glorious
power of working Miracles conferred upon them, some laid down their Lives, with
the greatest joys, and triumphs for the sake of their blessed Master, and the
rest were ready to have done so, whenever Providence should have summoned
them to that fiery trial. It Is hard to believe that such Men could be betrayers
or corrupters of the Faith in its most Essential Articles. If these Fathers
were honest and faithful in their Writings, and set down there only what were
their real thoughts, as became honest and good Men, if they defended
Christianity against its subtle and powerful enemies with a just Industry and
Integrity, then, in what I have alleged from them, we have a faithful and
honest account of what the Ancient Church believed concerning the Nature of the
Son of God, and we have reason to satisfy our selves, and to give praise to
God, who has still afforded us so much light, as that we can agree with the
Eldest and most Apostolical Churches in that saving truth, That the Son of God,
who in fullness of time took upon him our flesh, is really God equal with his
Father.

If any should enquire Why I only make use of those Fathers who lived before
the Nicene Council? The reason is, because they are less to be suspected by
those we have to do with, as having no interest in those Controversies, which
were afterward managed by particular Persons, with a great deal of heat and
eagerness. Besides, the Socinians are sometimes apt to boast, that the most
ancient Fathers are on their side, whereas they will freely own the Principal
Writers afterward are against them; not but that several did undertake the
Patronage of the Arrians and their accomplices, after the Council of Nice, but
their Writings are gone, and they ly there at the mercy of their Adversaries.
Not only the Socinians themselves are apt sometimes to Appeal to the
Ante-Nicene Fathers, but several Great Men, such as Erasmus, Grotius, Petavius,
and others, are apt to yield this to them: therefore it was proper in the first
place, to give a true account of the first Writers, whose Doctrines others
afterward did but repeat and illustrate. Our Church principally recommends to
us the Doctrine that is nearest to the fountain head, that agreeing best with
the fountain it self, from which it is derived, that is the Word of God. Now
the Socinians sometimes would fain put in for an Interest with these Ancient
Writers, Vid. Epist. intermutuas Ruari and Zwickeri in Ruari Epist centuria
prima.
and Zwicker particularly in his Irenicum Irenicor. (though he was very far
himself from agreeing with his brethren in all particulars) Yet upon better
consideration, they are loath to depend upon that authority of the Fathers,
knowing too well, that they must be cast by their verdict: Therefore their
great Patriarch Socinus himself in his answer to Vujekus the Polonian Jesuit,
who had written a book on purpose to prove the Divinity of Christ, where
Vujekus presses him with the Authority of the Fathers, answers thus, That the
perpetual and universal consent of the whole World, is of the less weight
against Divine Testimonies, though obscure, when those things which are the
subjects of that consent, evidently oppose reason and common sense. But here we
may say, That truth can never be so entirely lost, that the whole World should
always desert it; but where Scripture-expressions are obscure, the perpetual
consent of the whole World about their sense would be incomparably the best
interpretation of those obscurities; and it is very hard to believe, that the
whole World should perpetually agree, in what is against reason and common
sense. A great number have embraced the Roman Doctrine of Transubstantiation,
but we know, that neither All, nor the greatest part of the World embraced it,
nor was it held perpetually by any; and though we may allow Socinus to have been
a man of great Reason, yet we may allow those who held the contrary Opinion to
His, to have been as Rational as himself, and perhaps, on a strict scrutiny, it
may appear, contradictious to reason and common sense, to assert that our
blessed Savior was no more than a mere Man. But in short, Socinus never
troubles himself to deny those Authorities the Jesuit had ramassed from the
Fathers, nor to answer them, but makes use of one Herculean Argument against
them all, for first he tells us, It cannot be said, the whole doctrine or the
greatest part of the doctrine of the ancient Church was opposite to the
Socinians, or agreeable to the Doctrine of their Adversaries; for there were
many, whose Writings are now wholly lost, whose opinions therefore we cannot
judge of; and many there were, who never wrote any thing at all; and they might
be of a contrary mind to those whose Writings we still have, and they were
infinitely more numerous: That the Arrian Heresy was once spread far and wide,
favored by Princes, confirmed by Councils, and almost generally entertained,
though afterward by degrees it vanished, therefore, says He, our Adversaries
need not boast of that universal and perpetual consent of the Church; whether
it were real or verbal; for which was the true Church, and where it was, was
for several ages disputable. Itaque haec, Authoritatum and testimoniorum ex
Patribus and Conciliis, congeries, nullas vires habet, praesertim vero adversum
nos, qui ab istis Patribus and Conciliis, quae extant, nos dissentire non
dissitemur: Socinus contra Vujekum ad classem argum. 7 c. 9. p. 618.
Therefore this heap of Authorities from Fathers and Councils is of no force,
especially against us, who freely own our dissent from those Fathers and
Councils which are yet extant: Nor can it ever be proved by the Writings of any
of our Party, that they did either assert or believe, that those who wrote
before the Nicene Council, whose works are extant, were of our mind, though they
were as little of the mind of our Adversaries as of ours. This now is plain
dealing, and more ingenuous by far than wresting a few sentences, contrary to
the Writers minds, only to amuse the ignorant with an empty show of Antiquity.
But more plainly yet, Socinus soon after confesses, that the extant Fathers
differed from his Party, in that they assert, That Christ, or the Son of God,
had a Being of the substance of his Father before the worlds creation: that he
had often appeared to the Fathers under the Old Testament; nay, that that one
God his Father, had made the World it self and all other things by him, and
that by him He had made known to Men, whatsoever he desired should be known by
them: Thus we have Socinus his own confirmation of what we had before produced
as the sense of the Ante-Nicene Fathers. After this, he touches slightly upon
some pieces written by those first Fathers which are of suspected credit, but
we have nothing to do with them, having quoted nothing from any of them, but
what among Learned Men at present is of undoubted reputation. As for the
Fathers who writ after the Council of Nice he fairly owns, that the Socinian's
business is to oppose those Errors, which they gave credit to by their
Authority in the Church of God. The Fathers then are on our side, whether those
of the eldest, or those of an inferior date; nor can we desire a greater
advantage to our cause, since we can neither find out any means by which these
Heretics should know God's Will and Meaning in his Word, better than these
Ancient and Heroic Assertors of the Christian Religion: We have no account of
any new Visions or Revelations, any of them have had: Nor have we heard of any
Miracles performed by them in confirmation of their Heterodoxies; therefore
when we believe that Jesus Christ, the Son of God, our Savior, is God equal
with his Father; we follow that truth, which, to our apprehension, is very
plain in Scripture, which holy Saints and Martyrs have from the very beginning
of Christianity embraced, and which really is That Faith which was once
delivered to the Saints, as God willing will yet more plainly appear hereafter.

I observe here by the way what Socinus touches upon, and what others of his
Disciples allege farther, that though the Fathers do thus make Jesus Christ to be
God, yet they always put a great difference between Him and his Father, and
insist particularly on his own Words in the case, where He tells the Jews, That
his Father is greater than He, that, his Father orders, commands, directs and
enables Him to do every thing, etc. It Is true they do sometimes speak
suspitiously in this matter; but what solves the Objection from such Texts of
Scripture, solves those Objections which may be drawn from such expressions in
those ancient Writers, viz. That, where they urge such things, their meaning is
only to assert that difference there is between Christ's Divine and his Humane
Nature; as He is Man we doubt not but he is inferior to his Father, that he
received power from Him, and acted here upon earth in subordinacy to hi^ as He
was God, he was equal with his Father, always united with him, having the same
Will, Power, Knowledge and Wisdom which his Father had; by which means, whereas
mere flesh and blood would have had a strange reluctance against such
sufferings as were necessarily prepared for him, his Divinity, in concurrence
with that of his Father, supported and enabled mere Humanity to effect and make
good the work he had undertaken. Thus we find the same Scriptures asserting of
Christ, Acts 2.32.
that his Father raised him from the dead, and that he rose from the dead of
himself, he asserting to himself only that power of laying down his life, Joh.
10.18.
and of taking it up again, and both true: as He was God as well as Man, none
could have taken his life from him without his own consent, as He was Man as
well as God, none could have brought that flesh and blood to life again, which
was now a carcass by the reparation of the rational Soul, without the
concurrence of Almighty God; but as such He and his Father were one: They both
Willed and both Acted (as they both were able) to effect the same thing. But
besides this (which answers those beforenamed seeming difficulties) it is enough
to say, that whereas the first Fathers of the Christian Church were
irreconcilable enemies to Idolatry, or to worshipping a Multiplicity of Gods,
which is the same thing; whereas in all their Writings they took care to
vindicate the Honor of the one true God, in opposition to all false Gods; when
they assert Jesus Christ to be God, they mean not that He is a false God; for
they prove themselves to be the only true Worshippers, and they make it their
boast that they worship Jesus Christ; therefore they looked upon him as true
and real God, and worshipped him only as such. If then these Fathers did think
Christ to be a God of an inferior or subordinate Nature, or to be a Created
God, as the Socinians would have him be, they directly contradicted their own
Principles, and brought in again that multiplicity, or at least plurality of
Gods, they had before exploded. As for the notion of a made or created God, or
a God, a part post, as Socinus calls him, it is a dream so senceless and full
of contradiction, that it is only to be wondered at, that Men pretending to any
sharpness of Reason should ever stumble upon so absurd a conceit: For Scripture
no where makes a distinction between God self-originated, and God made by
another, and both true: but it lays us down a plain difference between the true
God the Creator and the Creature, or any thing that is created by that true
God, and therefore though there be in Nature such things as Spiritual and
Corporeal Beings, yet the allowance of that difference makes or introduces no
intermediate Beings between the Creator and the Creature, every thing that is
not God, is made by God; every thing that is made by God is not God; and so it
must follow, that, if the Son be made by God, he is not God, but a Creature; if
the Son be in all particulars equal with God, he is not made by God, but is God
himself. Again, The notion of a true and real God is infinity in every respect,
Heathens, Jews, Mahumetans, Christians, all agree in that: if this be a true
notion of a real God, it must be such a notion, as must sufficiently
distinguish him from all other Beings, infinite Attributes being wholly and
only proper to and inseparable from Him: If then these infinite attributes do
agree to our Lord and Savior, He is and must therefore be the true God, in
contradistinction to all created Beings; if they do not agree to him, then He
cannot be the true God, therefore he must be a false God, therefore he must be
an Idol, therefore he must be no God at all, and this is the true and
inevitable consequence of the Socinian notion of a made or a Created God: For
that the Supreme God should make another supreme as himself, and yet at the
same time continue supreme himself, is nonsense and a contradiction; that the
Supreme God should make another God, who yet is no God, because the attributes
belonging to a real God are not applicable to Him, is a contradiction too;
therefore the Socinians and their Adherents, must either declare in plain and
express words, that our Savior is no God at all, either a part ante, with
respect to the time past, or before his Incarnation, or a part post, with
respect to the time to come, or after his Incarnation, but only a mere
glorified Man: or they must agree with us, that He is God eternal equal with
his Father, as true and as real God, as ever he was true and real Man: and this
is what those ancient Fathers did certainly agree with, and in all those
passages I have quoted from them, they must believe so, or be absolutely
inconsistent with themselves; and all those, who were their successors soon
after in the Government of the Church of Christ, must have strangely mistaken
them and their opinions, which yet is not so likely, as it is, that modern
Writers should misunderstand them. Now how their immediate Successors, nay and
their Contemporaries understood them, will appear the better, by a short view
of the dealing of public Councils, and such as were approved by them, with
respect to the Samosatenian and Arrian Heresies; in which it is observable,

That Gregory Bishop of Neo-Caesarea, commonly called Thaumaturgus, among other
things gives us a Confession of Faith, said by Gregory Nyssen to have been
dictated to him in a Vision; leaving that circumstance in suspense, the sum of
his Confession amounts to this, Council. T. 2. p. 841.
There is one God, the Father of the living Word, of essential Wisdom and
Power, and of an eternal Character, the perfect begetter of him that was
perfect, the Father of the only begotten Son: There is one Lord God of God, God
alone, of him who alone is God, the Character and Image of the Deity, the Word
working in us comprehending the contexture of all things, and the power which
made the universal Creation; the true Son of the true Father, invisible of him
who was invisible, incorruptible of him who was incorruptible, immortal of him
who was immortal, and eternal of him that was eternal: This confession of his
Faith was express enough to our purpose, and but necessary, for that time when
Samosatenianisme was springing forth, and making way for more Heretical
Innovators in the Faith. About the same time was a Council called at Antioch,
where Paulus of Samosata was then Bishop, whose Doctrine was, in that,
agreeable with our Socinians; that He held, That Christ was a mere Man, Council.
T. 1. p. 844.
that He had no Being before his Conception in the womb of the Virgin Mary, and
that He acquired the name of the Son of God by his good works and extraordinary
righteousness: In that Council then met at Antioch, these Doctrines of Paulus
were condemned and Anathematized; this was about the year of our Lord, 264.
very early: and by the concurrence of a number of Bishops in the condemnation
of that Doctrine; and that when there were no Roman Emperors, nor other great
secular Men to countenance them, is a sufficient proof, that Socinian Doctrine,
as now it is, Samosatenian Heresy as then it was, was not then approved of in
the Church. In their Synodical Epistle to Paulus, thus they declare, No man
has known the Father but the Son, and He to whom the Son has revealed him,
Ibid.
but we confess and preach, That this Son is begotten, the only begotten Son,
the Image of the invisible God, the firstborn of every Creature, the Wisdom,
and Word, and Power of God, existing before all ages, not in his Fathers
foreknowledge, but real God in his own Essence, the Son of God, so declared
both in the Old and in the New Testament, whosoever then fights against this
truth, and declares the Son of God not to have been God before the foundations
of the World, and who says, that to believe and confess, or to preach that the
Son of God is God, is to introduce two Gods, we look upon such a Man to be
without the pale of the Church, and all Catholic Churches consent with us in
this opinion: Then they proceed to prove what they assert, by several Texts of
Scripture, the greatest part of which we have considered before. About the same
time Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, answered Ten Questions propounded to him
by Paulus, Ibid. p. 857
wherein he maintained the same Doctrine of the Eternity and Consubstantiality
of the Son of God. Certainly these would not have not only declared their own
opinions freely, but appealed to Universal Judgment, if they had thought it
possible that they could have been confuted; but Paulus offers at no such thing
that we can hear of. Paulus condemned by the first Council of Antioch,
renounced his Heretical opinions, but soon returned to his vomit again, and
undertook their vindication, this Apostasy of his made a very great number of
Bishops meet at Antioch a second time, they looked on the Controversy as of so
great importance, that even in the reign of Aurelian a cruel persecuting
Emperor, they thought it necessary to meet to crush so dangerous and
fundamental an Error. In that Council Paulus and his Doctrine are unanimously
condemned again: there Malchion a Presbyter, disputing with Paulus, tells him,
That Jesus Christ, of God the Word, and an humane body which was of the seed of
David, was made one, no longer subsisting in a Divided, but in an United state:
In their Synodical Epistle, not entirely extant, they complain of Paulus, as
denying Christ to have descended down from Heaven, Council. T. 1. p. 899.
Baluzii Nova colloctio Council. p. 19, 20, 21, 22.
and for affirming him to be wholly from earth: In some other fragments of the
same Epistle, omitted by Eusebius, the Synod speaks thus, Neither God who was
clothed in an humane body, was in that body free from humane passions, neither
was his humane body empty of Divine Power, that Power which was in that body,
and by virtue of which, that Humane body wrought those wonderful works. Here
then we have a body of Pious and Learned Men, representing a great part of the
Eastern Church, concurring in the condemnation of those opinions, which the
Scholars of Socinus have lately revived; To these we may add, for the Western
Church, the suffrage of Foelix, the first of that name, Bishop of Rome, in a
small fragment of an Epistle written by him about those controversies, as the
matter evinces, to the Clergy of Alexandria: the fragment is extant in the
Apologetick of S. Cyril of Alexandria against the Eastern Bishops in the first
General Council at Ephesus, and it is to this effect. As for the Incarnation of
the Word, and our Faith in that point, We believe in our Lord Jesus Christ,
Council. T. 1. p. 912.
who was born of the Virgin Mary, that He is the eternal Son of God and the
Word, and not a Man assumed by God, that there might be another beside himself;
for the Son of God did not take humanity upon him for that end, but being
perfect God, he also became perfect Man, being Incarnate of the Virgin. When
the Arrian Controversy was on foot, Alexander Bishop of Alexandria condemned
it in a Synod of almost an hundred Bishops, who all concluded the Doctrine of
Arius a perfect Innovation, not at all consistent with the Faith of the
Universal Church; what Arius asserted we have in Alexander's circular Epistle,
viz. That God was not always a Father, but that there was a time wherein he was
not the Father; that the Word of God was not always, but had its original as
other Creatures out of nothing: for He that is God framed or made him who had
no Being, out of what had no Being: Therefore there was a time when he was not,
etc. Of these Heterodox assertions of Arius, Alexander in that Epistle gives us
a confutation, and that strong and pithy, and such, as being drawn from plain
texts of Scripture, could never have been opposed, had not there lived in elder
ages, some, who were able to study out as perverse glosses for positive texts,
as the Socinians do now adays. But that is not all; what Alexander insists upon
is the disagreement of these positions with the Churches ancient Faith; so he
first styles the Arian Heresy, a forerunner of Antichrist; and properly
enough: After this He says, they were Apostates, such as had fallen off from
the Faith of the Church, and delivered such Doctrines as were no way consonant
to Scriptures. Whoever heard such things before, says He, or who is there, who
hearing them now, Socratis Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 6. Edit. Val.
would not be amazed, and stop his ears, that they might not be defiled with
hearing such abominable stuff? That there had been many Heresies before, but
this the worst of all the rest, and making the nearest approaches to
Anti-Christianism: Thus Alexander in his circular Epistle: But Alexander must
have been equally silly and impudent, to have written in this manner to all the
Bishops of the Church, when his business was to satisfy them of the reasons of
his proceedings against Arius and his Accomplices, and when he was to
countermine the stratagems and interests of Eusebius of Nicomedia, a subtle and
powerful adversary, If the Doctrine of the Son's co-eternity and
co-essentiality with his Father, had not been the received and well known
Doctrine of the Church; for the whole design of his elaborate Epistle had been
blasted, had but his Brethren the Bishops or any part of them, retorted upon
him, that Arius taught no new Doctrine, but what had been held even from our
Savior's time, and generally taught in all Christian Congregations: but we
find nothing of this kind offered at, and Alexander himself going off the stage
of the world at last, with the reputation of a very wise and a very good Man.
Eusebius of Nicomedia then makes a considerable party for his Client Arius, and
supports and encourages him to resolution in his Opinions; this made the
Controversy grow hot, and obliged Constantine the Great, who desired by all
means to preserve the Peace of the Church, to call that famous General Council
at the City of Nice in Bithynia, to determine at once the Arian and the Paschal
Controversy; the Emperor himself in his Letter to Alexander and Arius, by
Hosius of Corduba, seems to be very indifferent in the Controversy: his
indifference was enough to give life and vigor to the Eusebian or Arian party,
yet all would not do, for, notwithstanding the Emperors indifferency, and
Eusebius his industry and activity, upon fairly debating the matter, of 318.
Fathers which made up that Assembly, there were only Five who refused to
subcribe the condemnation of Arius; Eusebius of Caesarea, the Church Historian,
seemed to hesitate a little at first, but, after mature deliberation,
subscribed, and gave an account of his Subscription, and the reasons of it, to
his own Diocese of Caesarea, wherein he gives them a Copy of that Creed himself
had drawn up, wherein he declared, He believed in God the Father Almighty,
Creator of all things visible and invisible, and in one Lord Jesus Christ the
Word of God, God of God, light of light, life of life, the only begotten Son,
the firstborn of every Creature, begotten of God the Father before all ages,
by whom all things were made, who for our Salvation was made flesh, and
conversed among Men: Thus Eusebius, Socratis l. 1. c. 8.
this he declares to have been always his Faith, and therefore he could safely
subscribe to that Form proposed in the Council it self, and so he did, and he
declares, that He willingly subscribed those Anathema's propounded against
Arius, because they particularly forbad the use of such words with which
Scripture was unacquainted, of which several, which he there instances in, were
in the Arian Formulary, or Confession. The Nicene Council it self, in their
Synodical Epistle, declares the opinions and expressions of Arius so uncouth
and blasphemous, c. 9.
that the Council could scarce have patience to hear them, that He had yet
unhappily seduced two Bishops with his impious Heresy, whom they therefore had
excommunicated, with Arius himself. The Emperor Constantine in his Epistle to
the Church of Alexandria, on the conclusion of the Council, tells them, Ibidem.
that Arius and his Companions had blasphemously contradicted Scriptures, and
our Holy Faith, that when three hundred and eighteen Bishops, had settled the
Faith according to God's Word, only Arius, seduced by the Devil, refused to
submit to it; he advises them to embrace that Faith which God himself had
delivered; that all should return to their dear Brethren, from whom that
instrument of the Devil, had separated, them: And thus the whole Controversy
came at last to rest in the determinations of entire Councils. These particular
persons Alexander, Eusebius and Constantine, had called the Arrian opinion
Apostasy, a seduction from the true Faith, a subserviency to the Devil,
disagreeable to God's Word, etc. the Councils gave their positive
Determinations, and Confessions of Faith, suitably opposed to those
encroachments men in those days made upon the true Catholic Faith. Thus the
second Council at Antioch, before mentioned, gives us this Confession of Faith,
with respect to our Savior, We confess our Lord Jesus Christ, begotten of his
Father, according to the Spirit, before the Worlds; born in the last days of
the Virgin, according to the flesh, one Person of the Heavenly Divinity and of
humane flesh united; whole God, even with his body, but not God according to
his body, whole Man, even with his Divinity, but not according to his Divinity,
wholly adorable, even with his body, but not adorable according to his body,
entirely adoring God himself, even with his Divinity, but not adoring him
according to his Divinity; wholly uncreated, even with his body, but not
uncreated according to the body, wholly created even with his Divinity, but not
created according to his Divinity; wholly consubstantial with God even with his
body, but not consubstantial with God in his body, and wholly consubstantial
with Man, even with his Divinity, but not consubstantial with Men in his
Divinity, etc. Where it is observable, those Fathers use the word (...),
Consubstantial, 50. years and more before the Nicene Council; and Eusebius of
Caesarea, in his before-cited Epistle to his Diocese, owns, it was an
expression used by some, (...), Forhesii Inst. Theol; Hist. l. 1. c. 4.
by some ancient Bishops and Writers, a thing either not observed or strangely
forgotten by some modern Authors. This Confession of the Antiochian Council,
was confirmed in the Synodical Epistle of the Council of Constantinople
afterward, and so made theirs. The Council of Nice, gives us this Creed, We
believe in God the Father Almighty, maker of all things visible and invisible;
and in one Lord Jesus Christ the Son of God, begotten of his Father, and the
only begotten, i. e. of the substance of his Father, God of God, light of
light, very God of very God, begotten not made, being of one substance with the
Father, by whom all things were made, both that are in heaven, and those that
are on the earth; who for us Men and for our Salvation came down from Heaven,
and was made flesh, and became Man. After the Council of Constantinople, the
second General Council reduced that of Nice to that Form which we now make use
of in the Communion Service. A Confession of Faith so full and so plain, that
so long as that is retained and faithfully believed, the Socinian Heresy can
never get any considerable advantage against us: (the consideration of which
has occasioned some late struglings of an heretical party, to get that Creed,
as well that called the Athanasian expunged out of our Liturgy) To this agrees
Their Council-book, sent to the Bishop of Rome and other Italian Bishops,
assembled together at Rome: and to the same agreed, before them, Athanasius,
that great standard of the true Faith against the Arians, in his (...), or
exposition of the Faith, extant among his other works; and to the same we may
join that excellent Confession of Faith appointed to be used on particular
days, in our Liturgy, under the name of the Athanasian Creed, sound and
orthodox, but not of so great Antiquity. And thus have we shown at large what
the Doctrine of the Primitive Church was, with respect to our Savior's
divinity, long before the Bishops of Rome pretended to the mighty name of the
Universal Bishop, or could carry on any ambitious design by altering the Faith
every where received in the Church: this Primitive Faith is what the Church of
England, and with her all the Body of the reformed Churches hold, as I showed
before, and which even the Church of Rome it self dares not attack, nor shall
the gates of Hell ever prevail against it, Amen. And thus have we done with our
fourth evidence of the real Divinity of the Son of God, viz. the Faith of the
Primitive Church. We proceed to the

of adoring and presenting our Prayers to him: This adoring and praying to
Christ, is a duty so properly incumbent on all persons who hope for Salvation
through his name, that the Socinians themselves in the Racovian Catechism, in
answer to that question, Quid sentis de iis Hominibus qui Christum nec
invocandum nec adorandum censent? Catech. Racov. l. 6. c. 1. p 92.
What think you of those men who conclude that Christ is neither to be called
upon nor worshipped? they thus reply, Since those are certainly Christians who
acknowledge Jesus to be the Christ, or that heavenly King of an Holy people,
and therefore worship him in a Divine manner, and scruple not to call upon his
name, (on which account we formerly described Christians as such who call upon
the name of the Lord Jesus Christ) it is easy to understand, that those who
will not do so, are not yet Christians, though they may otherwise profess the
name of Christ, and pretend to adhere to his Doctrine. In this we have the
Great Prophets of that Party, declaring how essential praying to Christ is to
Christianity, and this their witness is true; but, in the mean time, we cannot
but sverely reflect upon their Impudence, who will first make us believe that
our blessed Savior is no more than a mere Man, and then would persuade us
either that we ought or may call upon him in our Prayers, or Worship him: but
that we may have the fairer view of their folly and madness in this particular,
we shall lay down this Argument, All that Divine Worship is Idolatry which is
paid to any Being but him who is the true God.

None of that Divine Worship is Idolatry which is paid to Jesus Christ.

Therefore Jesus Christ is the true God.



Where by Divine Worship we mean, that Worship, either inward or outward, which
by the Laws of God or nature, is ascribed and appropriated to the supreme
Being: The true God then is, that supreme or sovereign Being: and by Idolatry I
mean, such an application of that true Divine Worship belonging to the supreme
Being, to any Creatute, or created Being, as is forbidden by the first or
second Commandment in the Decalogue, from whence alone, the true notion of
Idolatry, or regular and properly applied Divine Worship, can be taken. I
assert then,

That all that Divine worship which is paid to any Being besides the true God,
is plain Idolatry: the excellency of nature in any of those things which may be
the Objects of our adorations, make no difference or abatement of guilt in the
case: He Is as much an Idolater who worships a wise Man, or a great public
Benefactor, or a Man Deified, as he who worships a stock or a stone; and he
breaks the holy Commandment as notoriously who pays those adorations to a good
Angel which belong to Almighty God, as he that pays them to the Devil; for the
noblest Created Being in the Universe is no more able to answer the true ends
of all Divine Worship, than the most contemptible Creature we can cast our eyes
on: and God expresses as great a jealousy of his own honor, when it is taken
from him to be given to the purest of his Creatures, as when it is misapplyed in
a grosser manner. When God commands Israel, what the Law of Nature must
necessarily have prescribed before, Not to have any other Gods before his face,
he made no Reservation of any right of appointing another God to himself, but
excluded all other Deities, were they made, or subordinate, or coordinate, or
under what character soever they might be made the objects of our Worship. And
when He required they should not make to themselves any graven Image, nor the
likeness of any thing either in heaven above, or in earth beneath, or in the
waters under the earth, that they should not bow down to them, nor worship
them, he excluded every Creature from a capacity of receiving divine Honors;
whatsoever was capable of being represented by any figure or image, if it was
worshipped, was an Idol, the Creature represented was so, as well as the
representation; and invisibility, as well as any other attribute, is ascribed
to the true God, as a peculiarity whereby we might know him to be the only
proper object of our Worship; by both these precepts, our Savior is perfectly
shut out from being the subject of Divine Honors, as he is supposed by the
Socinians to be a God in subordinacy to his Father; and as he is a Creature,
and capable, as other Creatures be, of being represented by a material Image,
which is wholly inconsistent with a true Divinity. For though the Socinians allow
our Savior to be the Son of God in a peculiar manner, by reason of his being
begotten in the Womb of the Virgin by the Holy Ghost, or as they call it, by
the influence of Almighty God, this does not at all put him out of the rank of
the Creatures; nor does that Glory, and Honor, and Immortality, which they
suppose his Father to have adorned him with, after his resurrection, make him a
God who was before a Man; for all these things are reserved too, in a just
proportion, for all such as die in the true Faith of Christ, by which they too,
in their turns, must necessarily be Gods; though because their proportion of
honor is supposed inferior to that of Christ, they must be Gods of an
inferior rank and quality: but this Collation of dignity effects nothing at
all, and the Socinian distinction between a God made by the supreme God, and a
God made by Men, comes to nothing at all: The Poets Divinity in that point is
better, and more rational than theirs, Qui fingit sacros auro vel marmore
vultus, Non facit ille Deos, Qui rogat ille facit, He who represents a Divine
face in gold or marble makes it not a God, but he who prays to it makes it
such: So, if God render the body of our Lord never so illustrious, that makes
him not a God, but the presenting of Humane supplications to him makes him one,
so that Christ, by that means, comes to be a God made so by Man, as well as any
other Idol whatsoever is; therefore, according to the Socinians own principle,
Christ being a mere Man, if he be prayed to must be an Idol. There can be no
true God, but He who is the Creator of all things, nor does it lie within the
reach of omnipotence it self, to make a Creature a Creator, therefore either
Christ must be the Creator of all things, or else he cannot be true God, He
remains a mere Creature still, and all those adorations presented to him by the
Christian World, are notorious and damnable Idolatry. The common notion of
Idolatry confirms this, so S. Cyprian tells us, according to the notion he had
of it; Idololatria committitur cum Divinus honor alteri datur, Idolatry is then
committed, when that Honor which belongs to God is given to another. Gregory
Nazianzen gives us this definition of it, (...), Idolatry is a transposition of
divine worship from the maker to the thing made, from God the Creator of all
things to the Creature? Therefore so long as our Savior is really but a
Creature, which he must be if he be not the eternal God, so long, all that
Worship paid to him, according to this ancient notion, is Idolatry. Now let a
Socinian, if he please, impeach those of the Roman Communion as Idolaters, we will
agree with him, and we really believe them to be so: but there is no Argument
which can properly be made use of against that Church, to convince them of
Idolatry, by reason of their praying to Angels or departed Saints, (from which
practice they have been sufficiently and undeniably proved to be Idolaters) but
the same will hold good against these: The strength of all Arguments against
Rome lying in that, That they transfer the Honor, only due to the Creator, to
a Creature; which is as true of all those who pay divine Worship to our
Savior, if he be no more than a Creature. The Gods who have not Created all
things, who have not Created Heaven and Earth, shall perish from the earth, and
from under the Heaven, as we alleged from the Prophet before, but, according
to the Socinians, our Lord did not make the Heaven and the Earth; Therefore,
though they say he is True God, (at the same time they say, He is not The true
God) He must be one of those Gods which must so perish: A conclusion which our
Adversaries either must deny, or fairly renounce all their pretenses, which
indeed are but weak at best, to Christianity. Divine Honors cannot be lawfully
offered, or Prayers lawfully presented to any created Being, but upon
supposition of some defect in the Creator; for a positive Command from him to
that purpose, could it be supposed, would not be enough: for a Divine Command
open and plain, cannot make, that which in its own nature is Evil, to be good:
things morally good or evil are eternally so, and that from that consideration,
that their moral goodness or illness flows from their agreement with, or
contradiction to the Divine Nature: Now what was once contradictory to the
divine Nature, God himself cannot make agreeable to it, because He cannot
change his own Nature, which yet must be, if that which being abstractedly
considered, was a sin against him, should now, under the same abstracted
consideration, 1 Timothy 3.16
be no longer so: therefore we are sure God himself cannot command any thing
that is morally evil; but diverting that ^orship, which belongs to the Creator
of all things, from him, to his own Creature, let that Creature be what it
will, is morally evil, it is Idolatry; therefore God cannot command it;
therefore he cannot give or have given Christians any positive or open Command
to Worship our Savior, if he be a mere Creature, because that is translating
that Worship due only to the true God to the Creature. To suppose any defect in
the Creator is blasphemous; if there can be yet any just reason or apparent
necessity, of Men's addressing themselves to any Being, which is but their
fellow Creature, for the attainment of that, for which they were wont to apply
themselves only to the supreme Being or Creator before, it must be asserted:
but where there is all Perfection concluded to reside in that Sovereign Being,
to whom it is granted on all hands, that Divine Worship is due, there is no kind
of necessity that we should apply our selves to any Intermedial Power, or go
round about when we may have a direct access to the throne of grace. While we
own Christ to be the True God, as his Father is, of the same eternal Nature,
whatsoever obliges us in our necessities to call upon the True God, obliges to
call upon him: If He be a mere Man, whatsoever obliges us to Worship the Lord
our God, and to serve him only, excludes Christ from being any such Object of
our adorations; and we cannot reasonably believe, but that, after our Savior
had baffled the Tempter by that assertion, when He came to see our Savior
permit himself, nay, and encourage and command himself to be Worshipped, He
would have reflected upon our Savior as false to his own Principles, and
therefore none of God's Son, or the worlds Savior; and the reflection must
have been good, unless the Devil had been satisfied, beyond dispute, that He
whom he had tempted under the veil of a body assumed, was really and truly God;
As such, the Devil found him, in his humble state, able to confound, able to
command him, and that in his own name upon all occasions: Devils trembled at
the sight of him, as of their original and all-powerful Creator, at whose hands
they had received a glorious and blissful Being, but had foolishly and
ingratefully fallen from it: So the guilty Soul trembles now at the distant
apprehensions of it is terrible Judge, and according to Evangelical assertions,
at his dreadful approach will cry eagerly to the hills to fall upon it, and to
the rocks to cover it, if possible, from the dismal effects of infinite and
insupportable Fury. The Apostle tells us, That the earnest expectation of the
Creature waits for the manifestation of the Sons of God, Romans 8.19, 20, 21,
22.
That the Creature was made subject to vanity, not willingly but by reason of
him who has subjected the same in hope, because the Creature it self also
shall be delivered from the bondage of Corruption, into the glorious liberty of
the children of God. And that we know that the whole Creation groaneth and
travaileth in pain together until now: By the Creature here we understand all
creatures whatsoever, or all created Beings, of a purer or of a grosser Nature;
and the Creature is agreeably interpreted in the last cited verse, by the whole
Creation; and this interpretation is so general, that it seems incontestable:
Hence we infer, that, if our Savior was a mere Creature, he was under the same
necessities and inconveniences as all other parts of the Creation were: He must
have earnestly expected the manifestation of the Sons of God, as they
themselves, being a part of the Creation, do, i. e. to see the time wherein the
Servants of God in spite of all sinister Opinions and Prejudices against them,
shall be gloriously proved to all the World, to be what they are, the real Sons
of God, and infinitely dear to Him: Farther, Christ as a Creature, must have
been subject to vanity as well as the rest, liable to corruption, assertable
into liberty, something that could groan and be in pain till the time of
manifestation; all these things Christ if he were a mere Creature must have
been, and must be liable to at this present, and be always in an obnoxious
state, till the great day of Judgment and the revelation of the righteous
Judge, that is, of Himself: Therefore he cannot now excuse any Man from the Sin
of Idolatry, who shall worship him as God, any more than others can, nor indeed
can he be yet capable of that divine Glory and Honor, which the Socinians
would have us believe were conferred upon him after his Resurrection. This
consequence from these words, the Socinians are so very sensible of, that they
endeavor by all means to prevent it, and to do so, they fly to one of their
conceited interpretations, and the Creature here must be the new Creature; though
the new Creature be no where in Scripture besides, called either the Creature
absolutely, or the whole Creation: Schlichtingius in particular is very
elaborate and prolix in proving, that the Creature, can mean nothing else, but
what is elsewhere known by that Epithet of New; but here their admired friend
Grotius forsakes them, and in effect declares that Interpretation of theirs
mere Nonsense. The Sons of God mentioned in the cited Text are unquestionably
new Creatures, they must be one before they can be the other: Why then the
Creature should signify the same is unaccountable, Vid. Deuteronomy. 32.1.
especially seeing the Apostle in those Verses puts a plain distinction between
them, so that Grotius determines rightly, Jer. 47.6.
The words are a Prosopopoeia, wherein by a Figure, no way unusual in
Scripture, the Universe and all the parts in it are brought in, as some single
Rational Being, expecting, waiting, groaning, subject to vanity, etc. Nor is
the subjection to vanity, nor the expectation of liberty, so uncouth an
application to the Universe, for besides that, Solomon tells us, that all
things under the Sun are only vanity; we cannot wonder at the thing it self:
Man's first sin was prejudicial to the whole frame of Nature, all things
suffered by it, the Earth fell under a curse, the living Creatures embroyled in
a state of War one with one another: Sin and Death having gotten footing in the
World, all things in their proportion felt the dismal effects of it; the
Creatures according to Prophetical Predictions, were to be partakers of very
considerable advantages by the dominion of the Messiah, an Universal Peace was
to overspread the World, The Wolf to lie down with the Lamb, and the Ox with
the Lion, Children to play securely with the most noxious Creatures, and Men to
beat their swords into plough-shares, and their spears into pruning hooks, etc.
And we make no doubt but that when the final determining Judgment shall be
past, and a notorious distinction made between God's Servants and his Enemies:
The New Heavens and the new Earth, (whatever Creatures we may imagine to be
sharers in it) will be the unchangeable habitations of Peace and Righteousness;
and even the most insensible parts of the Creation will receive advantages by
those blessings the eternal Government of the Son of God must introduce; At
least we may be sure there will be an end put to all those Calamities, and that
extreme Servility, the whole Creation lies under at present by reason of Sin:
Now to this servile or vain state, the Creature is subject, not willingly, nor
indeed by it is own fault, but as Subjects suffer, whether they will or not, by
the miscarriages of their Princes, so the several parts of the visible
Creation, by the folly of Man their Prince and Head. It was from that time the
Devil acquired his title of being the Prince of the power of the Air; a Title
and Power troublesome to every thing there: but if that Crime committed by Man,
subjected the whole Creation to vanity, that merciful Promise of a Savior
given to fallen Man, could not but be of excellent advantage to his visible
fellow Creatures, since the performance of that Promise would be so great an
abatement to the Devil's Tyranny, and the absolute Government of the Messiah
would put a full end to it at last: So that the Criticisme of Schlichtingius is
childish, when to a reasonable and usual Prosopopoeia he objects, the
insensibility of several parts of the Creation, and to the general
Interpretation of the Words, a wild assertion, that (...) signifies, not the
Creature absolutely, but this Creature, i. e. the New Creature, of which he had
spoken before, though indeed others can find no such thing; whereas really the
Article signifies, that the word is put absolutely, and not otherwise; and if,
according to Schlicktingius his own suggestion, our Savior's command to his
Disciples that they should go preach the Gospel to every Creature, Mar. 16.15
be to be understood of every Creature that was rational, and so capable of
receiving benefit by it, then by the same Rule here, by the Creature named
absolutely, we are to understand every Creature which is liable to Vanity and
Servitude, i. e. every part of the visible Creation. To what we have said that
of Tertullian agrees very well as cited by Grotius, Death shall then have an
end, when the Devil its manager shall be gone into that fire which God has
prepared for him and his Angels, Grotius is loc.
he being first cast into the bottom of the Abyss, when the manifestation of
the Sons of God shall redeem the Creature every where subjected to vanity by
Sin, then the Creature, being restored to its Innocence and Integrity, the tame
beasts shall play with the wild, and children with Serpents, God laying his
Enemies, the works of Sin, under the feet of his Son. As for the hardness of
the Prosopopoeia: Origin follows it exactly with relation to the Sun and Moon,
generally accounted irrational Creatures, (...), Of them we confess that they
look for the revelation or manifestation of the Sons of God. Nor can we look
upon it as an improper argument for the Apostle to comfort suffering Christians
by, That all their fellow Creatures are at present in a state of servitude or
vanity, therefore they have no reason to expect an exemption; That all their
fellow Creatures yet wait in hope of the discriminating season, when those who
fear God shall be fully distinguished from those who fear him not; This they
hope for, in spite of all that servitude they groan under; therefore those who
fear God, who are his Sons, his Children, have no reason to despond, though they
suffer all the extremities imaginable from Hell, and the worlds malice here,
since they are sure of a complete and dearly purchased Liberty hereafter to be
bestowed upon them. I have gone the farther in clearing this Text from Socinian
sophistry, because from hence a clear and undeniable argument may be drawn
against applying Divine Worship to any Creature: for, if all Created Beings are
really subject to vanity, and wait themselves for liberty with a mighty
expectation; whatsoever addresses are made to them, as they must necessarily be
vain and fruitless, so they must fall under the charge of gross Idolatry; and
if our Savior be no more than a mere Creature, then, as before I alleged, He
being subject to the same vanity, all Worship or adorations offered up to him,
must fall under the same denomination and censure. In a word, nothing can be
the proper object of Divine Worship, but what is Omnipotent, Omniscient, and
Omnipresent, these attributes are only applicable to the Supreme God, therefore
Divine Worship ought only to be presented to Him: if these things concur in our
Savior, He Is the True, the Supreme God, and so all Honor and Glory belongs to
him; if they concur not in him, He Is but a Creature, no more, therefore all
divine Worship offered to him, under what plausible pretenses soever, is vain,
fruitless and Idolatrous.

But this Question about Worshipping our Savior or Presenting our Prayers to
him, has created no small Fraction among the Anti-Trinitarians themselves. You
heard before the declaration of their Catechism, which ought to contain the
Fundamentals of their Persuasion, That they are not Christians who give not
divine Worship to Christ, nor call upon him: This may seem to imply a necessity
of Praying to him, if we would receive any benefit by him; That we may be the
more confirmed in this Opinion, that they think this Worship offered to Christ
necessary, may appear the better if we observe their answers to two Questions.
To that, Cat. Raco. S. 6. c. 1* p. 88.
In what manner ought we to trust in Christ? They answer, In the same manner as
we ought to trust in God, namely, that We should believe him able to do all
things, and that if we seek his favor, he will do us good, and perform all his
Promises to us: To that, In what does that divine Honor due to Christ consist?
They answer, In worshipping and calling upon him, for it is our duty always to
worship Christ, and we may direct our Prayers to him in all necessities as often
as we will, and we have several reasons exciting us to do so. Now, according to
these things, if Adoration or Divine Worship be due to Christ, then there lies
a necessity upon us to pay that Adoration so due. But they seem to fall off
from that resolution in the last words, where they say, We may pray to him, as
if praying to Christ were (...), some very indifferent thing: this last
expression is in compliance with their great Leader Socinus, who in managing
this very Controversy (one indeed of their own starting) with Franciscus
Davidis, rests principally in that assertion, That it is really lawful to pray
to Christ, (which his adversary, upon their common principles, more rationally
denies) but is very loath to assert the necessity of any such invocation;
therefore when George Blandrata, Physician to the then Prince of Transylvania,
and the great Patron of the Anti-Trinitarians, and of Socinus himself, out of a
politic fear, that a denial of the necessity of praying to Christ (a practice
continual among all Christians to that time) might justly render the Party
odious to all the believing World; when, out of such a fear, Soci^ respon. ad
Blandrat. operune T^ p. 716.
he urged Socinus to assert and prove such Praying necessary, yet Socinus was
very cold in the matter, sed constanter asserimus, says he, posse nos, and
quidem jure, quocunque loco and tempore, ad ipsum Christum verba precationum
nostrarum dirigere, etc. We constantly affirm, that we may, by good right,
direct the words of our Prayers to Christ himself, and beg his help and
assistance in all those things which may any ways belong to his Church, or to
any particular person, as a Member of his Church; We may do it. So far he will
freely adventure, and so to leave the matter indifferent, Blandrata thought
sufficient to quiet Franciscus Davidis, but not enough to secure the Public
Reputation of the Party: However Socinus in the same place declares, That
there is no command given in Scripture for our praying to Christ, and their
Catechism asserts, there is no plain command in the whole Old Testament for our
praying to God the Father, though the position be notoriously false: only this
we will join with them in, That we have no command to pray to Christ as he is a
mere Creature, but we are forbidden it in the first and second Commandments;
But we are bound to pray to him, as He and his Father are One, not by agreement
of Will, or by the Son's entire submission to the Father, but by agreement or
Identity of Nature: Otherwise the Will of all deceased Saints, the Will of all
holy Angels, is wholly submissive to, and the same with the Will of God,
therefore they might as lawfully be prayed to as our Savior, if a mere
sameness of Will, and not of Nature, were enough to found Divine Worship, as
offered to any other Being but the Supreme God, upon. But when Socinus comes to
speak of the necessity ^f Praying to Christ, he runs off from the matter in
hand, to that of acknowledging hat Kingdom, and Power, and Government given to
him by his Father, which acknow^edgment, as he concludes, infers a necessity of
Praying to Him: But this is an Argument far fetched, and very impertinent; ^oth
the foundation and superstructure is ^alse. Christ in his Humane Nature is the
head of the Church; in his Humane Nature he has the Government of it in his
hands, in his Humane Nature all power in Heaven and in Earth is his own, but
none of these things are his merely as he is Man, or as he is a Creature, but
that Humane or Created Nature of Christ, is made capable of those things of
which in its own Nature it was absolutely incapable, by its entire Union with,
and subsistenee in the Godhead. Without owning this, our Prayers to Christ, as
those offered by the Church of Rome to Saints or Angels, are mere mock
devotion. For if Christ, before his Ascension into Heaven, had no Existence but
in a Body, in mere flesh and blood, then after his Ascension he likewise had no
existence but in the same Body; if he existed in the same Body, he could be
partaker of no other qualifications but such as are incident to a Body; for if
his natural Body could be partaker of such qualifications as a natural body was
not capable of, it could be no longer the same body he was raised with, but
another, and that no natural body: If he still existed in Heaven in that same
body he rose and ascended with, and it was not changed to or for another, no
attributes wholly or essentially Divine, could be truly or properly ascribed
to him: therefore Christ could not be Almighty, which Infinite Power or
Almightiness yet is absolutely necessary in him who has all Power given to him,
both in heaven and earth, and who is able to do every thing, that can tend to
their good, or to God's glory for them that ask him. Christ in his Natural Body
cannot know all things, without which Universal Knowledge yet it is impossible
he should suit all grants to the necessities of Petitioners, or be assistant to
those who lie under a natural incapacity to address themselves to him
otherwise, than in their thoughts and inward wishes. Christ in his Natural Body
cannot be Omnipresent, he cannot be in more places than one, for natural bodies
are and must be circumscribed by Time and Place, otherwise they lose their
natures, and become God, for only God can exist without those circumscriptions
of Time and Place: which Omnipresence yet is indispensably necessary to every
one, who can receive Petitions offered to him in several quarters of the World
at once. If now the Socinians will deny these things to be inconsistent with a
Natural Body, if they will assert that a Created body may be Almighty, that it may
know all things, that it may be every where present, they must introduce a new
and yet unheard of Philosophic and Theologick Scheme, and to little purpose.
If they will say, these things are needless to our Savior's natural body, for
that he may read all the wants of Petitioners, in all parts of the World, at
one view in the Essential glory of his Father, that is the Roman plea, and every
whit as rational, on behalf of their Saint and Angel-worship: They can see all
the wants of their humble supplicants, in the glass of the Trinity, as they
tell us: They say too, that God reveals to Saints and Angels, to whom Papists
make their Prayers, all those things their Devotoes pray to them for; If the
Socinians join with them, and say, God so reveals every thing to Christ: We
answer them both, that this is to set God upon a needless work, and indeed to
make the Supreme Being, in effect, inferior to his Servants and to his Son: for
those are the greatest Persons to whom the last Appeal is made, those
inferior, who are employed in carrying or presenting Petitions to another; if
then the Supreme God make it his business to present the Supplications of
Petitioners to his own Son, he takes upon him that inferior Office. If he
present them to his Son, that his Son may grant and perform them, it argues a
natural Impotency in himself to answer such Petitioners, and consequently a
superiority in the Son, whereby he is able to grant and to do for his servants
what God the Father could not. If the Socinians will have us believe, in
respect of Omnipotence, that Christ only represents our wants to his Father,
and that it is his Fathers Power alone which answers and acts for us, it will
follow then, that God has not given him all Power in Heaven, and in Earth,
whosoever has that Power, can do all things in and of himself; if Christ cannot
do all things in and of himself, he has not that Power; if He want that Power,
for what reason should we pray to him, and not rather immediately to Almighty
God? especially since this Man Christ Jesus died for us, that, in his own
blood, he might open to us a new and a living way whereby we might have access
with boldness to the throne of Grace. If we may go directly thither, what
should we trouble our selves with applications to a subordinate Power? as for
the Mediatory Office of our Savior, so far as He Is concerned in it, according
to Socinian Principles, he will mediate continually for Us, and all Believers in
general terms, whether we make any supplications to Him or not. The result of
all then is this, either Christ is not Almighty, nor All-knowing, nor Present
every where, and consequently cannot be the proper Object of our Adorations and
Prayers, and therefore all such Adorations offered to Him must be scandalous
and Idolatrous, or else, our Lord must be present every where, Know and be able
to Do all and every thing, and so their Catechism teaches us in the chapter
before quoted, for it says, All Power is given him, as before, that his Power
and Efficacy is great enough to subject all things to himself by it, Mat. 28.18
Phil. 3.21. Joh. 6.40, 54.
that by it he is able to free us from death, and to give us life and
immortality, 1 Cor* 4.14.
than which Power there can be none greater. Again, Christ is by his Father
constituted our Savior, our Priest, our King, and our Head, on purpose that he
might manage the affair of our Salvation, and help us at our need; and lastly,
it is plain, say they, he can understand our Prayers, because He knows all
things; He searches the Hearts and reins; He sees through the hidden things of
darkness, Joh. 16.30. Rev. 11.23. 1 Cor 4.5. Joh. 14.13. In resutatione
thesium, Fra. Davidis, p. 715.
and he has told us that whatsoever we shall ask in his name, he will do it for
us: whence it necessarily follows, that he must know what it is we pray for;
thus far the Catechism, to which Socinus agrees: As for Omnipresence he denies
the necessity of that, since he may be present every where, though not in his
Person, yet in his Power; this they say, but if they say true that He can do
all things without exception, that, He knows all things without exception, we
are sure he must, as God, be Present in all places without exception, for Power
and Knowledge are different Attributes, they cannot be one without another, yet
Power knows not every thing, nor does Knowledge act every thing especially in a
Man; though in God all Attributes act all things, because they are all one God:
If then all these Attributes belong to Christ, he must be God, not Made, nor
Created, but Eternal; for whosoever had not infinite Power, Wisdom, Presence
from eternity, cannot have them conferred upon him in time, such a One being a
subject incapable, and infinity not to be determined by time or place, which
both must be of a finite nature: these things granted, free all worship offered
to Christ from being Idolatrous, a charge which, on the other hand, if these
things be denied, is absolutely inevitable.

He that shall seriously consider the many Encumbrances of Life, and the
greatness of that Duty toward God, which is incumbent upon every Christian,
will easily find, that it is a full emyloyment for the life of any Man, to give
Almighty God those inward and outward Adorations which belong to him: It Is with
relation to these extreme and continual exigencies Humane Nature's liable to,
that the Apostle requires of us, that we should pray continually, or without
any ceasing or intermission; 1 Th^ss. 5*17.
not that we are obliged continually to be in the very action of Prayer; there
are some particulars in the Calling of most Men, which require for some time
the whole Intention of the mind, yet that earnest Intention of theirs, is no
more a Sin than all lawful industry can be accounted so; but the meaning of
that expression is, that We should always keep our souls in such a frame and
temper, as to be able on every emergency to apply our selves to our Maker with
that Calmness, Humility and Sincerity which he requires in those who come to
him as Petitioners. Now this temper of Soul being required in us, and the real
business of our proper Callings requiring so much of diligence and attention,
our time would certainly be very ill employed, if we should propose to our
selves various Objects of Divine worship, when through the frailty of our
Natures, we are necessarily defective in our Adorations paid to One: If we
suppose our Savior to be God of one and the same substance with his Father, we
meet with no difficulties in this point; but if he be no more than a mere
Creature, whenever we present our supplications to him, we deservedly incur
the Prophets reproach, Jer. 2.13.
forsaking the fountain of living Water, and hewing out to our selves broken
Cisterns that can hold none: for let us put a mere Creature into the greatest
circumstances imaginable, either he is Omnipotent or he is not; if he is
Omnipotent, I know no advantage the Supreme God can have over him, the Creature
must be able to do all things, the Creator can be no more: If he be not
Omnipotent, then I may often Pray to him in vain, and if I may do so at any
time, what security can I have that I shall not do so always? especially since
there is no Rule given me in Scripture, whereby I may certainly know what I may
Pray for to a Creature, or what I may not pray for to him: Nay Scripture is so
far from giving any such Rule as might seem to leave the matter in suspense,
that it directly forbids all adorations to any Creature as a Creature: but a
Creature being no more, cannot be considered under any higher notion than of a
Creature, therefore he cannot be adored at all. And besides, If there were no
such Prohibition to be heard of in Scripture, yet the Worship of a Creature,
how excellent soever, would be very silly and irrational, since we are sure
that God can hear us, and effectually answer us in any thing we pray to Him
for, but we are not sure, that any Creature can do any such thing for us.
Again, God having given several Prohibitions in his Word against all
Creature-Worship, and for ought we can find, having left no intimation there,
that ever He himself would find out such a Creature for whose sake he would give us
a full and free dispensation against all such Prohibitions: We have a great
deal of reason to suspect, that whatsoever Worship we may exhibit toward any
Creature, may so far provoke the Jealousy of the Creator, as to render, by
that very means, all those Services we may offer to him useless and
unacceptable; and so while we play the fools with the Dog in the Fable,
grasping at the shadow of extraordinary assistances from more than One, We may
lose the substance of Mercy from One, who is able to bestow it in deed in a
case of extremity. It Is not unusual in the Prophets to find Israel, as a just
judgment for their former Idolatries (when they found themselves pressed by any
extraordinary calamity, and therefore sought to the God of their Fathers for
deliverance) to be remanded to their false Gods, and ordered to try what great
kindnesses those sharers in their Devotions could do for them; so God by Moses,
Deuteronomy. 32.37, 38.
Where are their Gods! the rock in whom they trusted? which did eat the fat of
their sacrifices, and drink the Wine of their drink offerings? let them rise up
and help you and be your protectors; So the Prophet, Jer. 11.11, 12.
Behold I will bring evil upon them, which they shall not be able to escape,
and though they shall cry unto me, I will not hearken unto them, then shall the
Cities of Judah and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, go and cry unto the Gods unto
whom they offer Incense, but they shall not save them at all in the time of
their trouble. Nor can this dealing be looked upon as unreasonable in God,
since it is usual even among Men, when they are slighted by those who owe them
respect, for the sake of those to whom none is oweing, to send them in their
necessities to those Idols of their fancies, for whom the Supplicants had
deserted them before. If then we at any time pay our Adorations, or present our
Prayers to any Created Being, when we have all the encouragement of Command and
Example, to pay that Worship to the Creator of all things: if such Created
Beings have no inherent original power to assist us, and so we are not
assisted, if, (by way of correction to our former Error) we fly in our Prayers
to the most High God, we can justly expect no kinder answer from Him, than such
a remission to that Creature or Created Being, to whom we had foolishly engaged
our selves before. Now if we examine the thoughts of Pagan Idolaters, we find
by their Writings, that they pretended all along to make their One Supreme God,
their Jupiter, the object of their Worship; they terminated nothing upon their
inferior Deities, but made use of them, as they say, as a kind of mediators
between them and their Jupiter: The Papists plead the same with respect to
those Devotions they teach people to present to Saints and Angels, in their
Communion; We know well enough the fallacy of their pretenses, and the
insincerity of those paltry shifts they make use of, to avoid the imputation of
Idolatry to them. But our Socinians teach us so openly, that it is lawful for us
to pray to our Savior, though a mere Creature, nay, and to terminate our
Adorations upon him, as their ultimate Object, that we have not so much as the
Pagan or Roman subterfuges for our practice. They tell us, Cat. Rac. sect. 6.
c. 1. p. 89.
That we may direct our Prayers to Christ in all our necessities, first,
because He both can and will help us, and He understands our Prayers: Then
because we have several exhortations from our Lord himself, and from his
Apostles to that purpose; and lastly, because we have several instances of holy
Men who have so done. If these reasons are good, we need not then have that God
in our minds at all, whom they call the Supreme God, when we Pray in our most
urgent Necessities; for our Savior can answer our Prayers as effectually to
all intents and purposes, as the Supreme God can: but in the mean time, if this
Savior of ours be no more than a mere Creature and if the very reason why the
Worshipping more Gods than one is forbidden, be, because all other Beings,
except that One God, be no more than mere Creatures, (for so worshipping the
Creature, (...), beside the Creator, is reflected on by the Apostle) then we,
Romans 1.25.
in following Socinian opinions, are guilty of most damnable Idolatry; Idolatry
more inexcusable, while we pray to Christ, than either Papists or Pagans have
ever been guilty of before us: for we terminate our Adorations upon a mere
Creature confessed, which They declare they do not, and which Scripture every
where declaims against as Idolatry: By this means too, we incur the guilt of
Horrid Sacrilege, for we rob God of all that worship we pay to any inferior
Being; the reason of all Divine Worship is, that sense we have of our necessary
dependence upon superior Providence; that consideration renders all those
Commands which we have to Worship God Reasonable and Obligatory, and it is a
consideration which reaches holy Angels as well as Men. If God then, the most
High God, command us to call upon him in the time of trouble, as he does, and
to encourage us, promises He will diliver us, and we shall glorify Him, Psalm.
50.15
and we, notwithstanding all this, appeal to a mere Creature in those
circumstances of Necessity: If we call one God, and pray to and worship him as
God, when we our selves own that he was Created originally; and when God justly
asks the Question, Is there a God besides me? Yea there is no God, I know not
any; and has declared again, that He will not give his glory to another: Isa.
44.8. Isa. 48.11.
If we with these circumstances call upon such a One, we rob God of that
Honor, which belongs to God himself, and to none else; and dispose of what is
his due according to our own fancies, and we do all this so, as our Fault
becomes our Punishment, Deus enim est zelotes, qui nulla ratione patitur ut
populus ipsius cultum ipsi debilum ad alios deferat, si^que spirituale
adulterium committat* Quis vero alius est cultus vere divinus qualisque nulli
mortalium defertur vel deferri potest, quam aliquem tanquam coelestem, eamque
sanctam mentem, ab omni mortali concretione separatam and inconspicuam eo
respectu and colere and invocare, quo se a te coli and invocari and velit and
intelligere possit, tibique in iis quae petis, opitulari. Nonne qui aliquem
tanquam talem and hoc respectu colit cum reipsa, ut ut forte verbis id neget,
Deum esse statuit. Plura hujusmodi sed plane (...) profert, Schlichtingius in
notis ad Grotium de Antichristo in 2. cap. 2 Epist. ad These. p. 50.
we rob God of his Honor, and confer it upon a mere Creature, and we rob our
selves of God's assistance, and quit it to those who are wiser and more
rational in their Adorations.

What we spoke somewhat of before, relating to our Savior, we may yet farther
confirm from an enlargement on this consideration: That if it be necessary,
that an ultimate Object of true Divine Worship should be infinite in Power,
Knowledge, Presence, and every other respect, it then being impossible, that
any thing which was not, on these accounts, an Object properly capable of
Divine Worship from eternity, should be made a proper Object of Divine Worship
in time; all such Divine Worship paid to any Creature, on pretense of now
having those qualifications, which before it had not, must be Idolatry. Now,
the Impossibility of any Creature whatsoever attaining to that infinity now,
which before, merely by being a Creature, it could not have, must needs be very
obvious to every considering Man: God cannot translate himself into a Creature,
because He cannot be comprehended in a Creature, but the great general
Distinctiion between Almighty God and the Creature is this, that God is
infinite in every respect, but the Creature is not; allowing now that any
Creature could be made the proper subject of this Universal infinity, the
distinction between God and the Creature is at an end, the nature of the
Creature is quite changed, and though it were created at first, and from thence
had its name of a Creature, it now was no longer created originally, but had
its being of it self, before any thing in nature was created; and if this be
not a contradiction notorious and absurd enough, we cannot easily find what is.
But admitting one absurdity, a thousand will naturally follow from it: so if
the same Being may be infinite in Extension, Wisdom, Power, etc. and yet be
finite or limited in respect of Time, as every one must be, though Infinite now,
if it had no Being from eternity, we have then a limited infinity, or a Being
that is bounded, and yet has no bounds; a contradiction too, which Omnipotence
it self cannot verify: Again, from hence will follow, that the supreme or
sovereign Being can create another, who shall be God, truly and properly so
called, and Almighty, and yet no Almighty God; who shall be All-wise, and God,
and yet not an All-wise God; who shall be every where present and God, and yet
not an Omnipresent God: which things look somewhat more Ridiculous and
Contradictory, than any thing objected by Atheistical scoffers to that commonly
called the Athanasian Creed. Whatsoever is done by Almighty God so, as to be
obvious to us, must certainly savor of that perfect Wisdom essential to the
Deity, and must as certainly tend to his own Honor: but to put all his own
power into the hands of a mere Creature, if it were possible, (considering the
nature of every Creature, that Man, the head of all visible, fell into misery,
though created Innocent; that Angels the immediate Ministers of God's power, and
who had before them the continual vision of Immense Glory, fell from the bliss
of Heaven into the gloomy prisons of eternal darkness:) to put his own infinite
power into such hands, would be so far from augmenting his own Glories, that it
would render Divine Wisdom it self obnoxious to rational Censures: and so far
prejudice the notion of eternal Wisdom, that God would seem to have forgotten
the main end and import of all his own actions: and to act with the same
fondness and dotage, as careless mankind are generally guilty of. The Roman
plea for Saint-Worship then, (they looking upon those Saints as Creatures of an
inferior nature, and only beneficial to us, as they are beloved by God) is
^omparatively tolerable, when they say, they ^minate their worship not upon the
Saints, but upon their God, this may seem ^o tend some (...) to God's Honor,
as the respects shown to the Attendants of a great Prince, are interpreted
generally as an Honor done to the Prince himself: But to Worship, with true
Divine Worship, a Created Being, Vindication of Unitarians against Sherlock, p.
12.
and under the notion of an Vbiquitary Spirit, as a late Arrian Scribler calls
him, or True God, as the Socinians adventure to call him, and at the same time
to own he is but a Creature, while we yet make him the Vltimate Object of our
Adorations, is as far from bringing any Honor to God, as it is, to make a
Prince's servant the last receiver of our Petitions, to ascribe to him the
whole Sovereign Power, to serve him as such with all Humility and respect, and
to expect all those favors from him, as in his own Power, which his Master
once had the sole power of conferring. It looked great enough in the Roman
Emperors to have their Caesar's, nay their partners in Empire, under the name
of Augusti: but, even then, there was an absolute Supremacy remaining in the
Emperor himself, and had his reserved Honors been communicated to his
Partners, that Communication must have detracted from the Supreme, the first
visible fountain of the Partners Honor and Power: Yet such are all of a
Nature, the Emperor himself as much and as frail a Man as his Substitutes; the
danger of diminishing Honor so much the less: but where the distance is so
immensely great as between the Creature and the Creator, there can be no reason
to allow such a participation in Divine Honor to the Creature: Nor can any
thing bring more dishonor to the name of the Sovereign Creator, than to permit
a mere Creature to sit down with him on his eternal Throne, and to receive the
Worlds Adorations equally with himself. Besides all this, to talk of an
Vbiquitary Spirit, that yet is not God; of a Being existing, as such a Spirit
before the Creation of the world, yet afterward being confined to the prison
of a weak and mortal Body; and as a reward for what is done in the Mortal body
toward the reconcilement of a justly angry God to his Creatures, received with
that mortal body into Glory and Honor, but so, that the Vbiquitary Spirit for
all futurity must be confined to that body, however glorified, and so lose its
Vbiquitary nature (unless the Body after glorification can pretend to be a
Spirit, and so no longer a Body, because Vbiquitary too) to talk of these
things, as some Arrians do, is nothing but contradiction and nonsense all over:
For, that the true Supreme God is Vbiquitary, or every where present, is
allowed by all those who have any thing but heavy and carnal notions of the
Divinity; but if the Supreme God uncreated, be every where present, and a
created Spirit be every where present too, then that created Spirit, and that
God must be essentially One, as being commensurate or equally proportioned one
with another; but for a Created being to be one and the same thing with its
Creator, is what Socinians themselves will not allow, therefore no Creature, as
failing of Vbiquity, can be the proper object of true Divine Worship, therefore
Christ, as being a mere Creature and so incapable of Vbiquity, cannot, by us,
who call our selves Christians, be adored as God, without inexcusable Idolatry.
Besides, if our Savior be God, only as Princes and Rulers are Gods, because
they are sanctified by him, to act as his Deputies in the World, then He can
pretend, by such sanctification, to no more Vbiquity, than those Kings and
Rulers can; Now we all know well enough, that our Kings and Princes are so far
from Vbiquity, that they are forced to see with other Men's Eyes, to hear with
other Men's Ears, and consequently, are not to be Worshipped, nor trusted in as
Gods by us; and those who trespass in this kind, are indisputably Idolaters:
therefore all those that Worship our Lord, only as such a made or sanctified
God, must be Idolaters. But,

careful to avoid the guilt or the very opinion of Idolatry, and yet being
withal constant Worshippers of our Savior, as being that rock of ages, on
whom, whosoever fixes his Faith and Hope, cannot be deceived; We assert, That
none of that Divine Worship offered to our Savior is Idolatry: We know, that
Nature and Revelation teach us clearly enough, that there is, and can be only
One True Supreme God, the Maker and Creator of all things, that God in whom we
live and move and have our Beings, and from whom alone every good and perfect
gift descends: We know, by the same rules, that We are to Worship this Lord our
God, and to serve Him only: We know, it is the common practice of all Professors
of Christianity, and allowed by our Adversaries, to worship our Savior, to
adore, and pray to him as God: We think our selves, and the Socinians
acknowledge, that we may do thus, without being guilty of Idolatry; therefore
our Savior must be the Supreme God, the maker of all things, etc. therefore He
and his Father must be One God; and so neither the first, nor second
Commandment at all trespassed upon in those Adorations. We find the worship of
Images, or any false Gods condemned as Idolatry frequently in God's Word: We
find Holy Men refusing to (...) worshipped there, and Angels them forbidding
any signs of Adoration to be offered to them, because they would not trespass
upon a Law so notorious both in Scripture and in Nature, and this we have
spoken off before. A Socinian will own, that our Savior knew his Father's Will
as well as either Holy Men or Angels, that He was as careful to Honor his
Father in performing his Will, as either of them, that He who came to die for
the sins of Men, in what sense soever, would never tempt them to commit Sin:
Yet we find him allowing that Worship offered to himself, expressed by outward
humility and prostration, which yet was that very reverence, which good Men and
good Angels had refused as unlawful before: Either this Worship was Idolatrous,
or it was not; if it was, our Savior was no better than the Jews thought of
him, viz. A Cheat and an Impostor, one who sought their ruin, not their
happiness, therefore, to be sure, far enough from being that Messiah whose
title he pretended to: If it was not Idolatry, then the worshipping of our
Savior was not worshipping more Gods than one, though he were worshipped under
the notion of God; therefore he must be the Supreme God, all Divine Worship
paid to any other Being, being largely proved to be Idolatry before: But we
have no reason to believe, that Men of extraordinary Goodness and Wisdom would
ever have given us examples of Idolatry, or that God would any way have
allowed, much less have commanded it. That It Is fitting to be done, the
Racovian Catechism proves from that, Joh. 5.22, 23.
The Father has given all judgment, or government to the Son, that all should
Honor the Son, as they Honor the Father; and again, from that of the Apostle,
Phil. 2.9, 10, 11.
Therefore God has highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above
every name; that at the name of Jesus every knee should bow, both of things in
Heaven, and thirds on earth, and things that are under the earth, and that
every tongue should confess, that Jesus Christ is the Lord, to the glory of God
the Father: And though they are at a doubt whether there be any direct command to
worship Him in Scripture, yet when we read that of the Apostle, Heb 1.6. Ps.
97.7.
When He brings his firstborn into the World, He says, let all the Angels of
God worship him, or as our more immediate translation from the present Hebrew
Text reads it, Worship him all ye Gods: and when according to the
acknowledgment of Socinus himself, in his dispute with Franciscus Davidis, that
passage, Joel 2.32. Romans 10.13. ^p. 721.
Whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved, is applied justly
to our Savior by the Apostle; these two passages together, appear to be a
command strong, and forcible enough, to oblige every one believing in Christ,
to call upon his name, or to pray to him: These are Commands enjoining us to
worship our Savior, even in his Humane Nature; but if our Lord and his Father
are one God; then all those commands which enjoin the worshipping of one God,
are so many commands equally obliging us to worship Jesus Christ: but,
supposing a Positive Precept wanting in the case before us, though we are not to
look upon every private Action of a good Man as an obliging Precedent to us,
yet, where we have a Cloud of Witnesses concurring in the case, we may
reasonably conclude, that they would not have worshipped our Savior so
continually, merely to lead us into Error; nor would Angels have agreed with
them in the practice; nor would our Savior himself have passed them by without
a reproof. Yet frequently as we find Adorations paid to our Savior when upon
Earth; We never find any dissatisfaction in his words and actions: Joh. 11.33.
He groaned for the stubbornness and obduracy of Jewish Hearts, for their
prodigious resolutions not to own him, though drawing them all with the sacred
cords of love and miraculous goodness; he wept, v. 35.
to observe their inflexible, and, to themselves, fatal temper: He wept over
Jerusalem, Luk 19.41.
on the dismal prospect of those calamities, that wrath to the uttermost, which
was then hastening upon them: Luke 12.14.
He reproved the Man who would needs have made him a temporary Judge, or, a
Divider of Inheritances among them: Luke 22.2^
He reproved his Disciples for their contentions about their future grandeur;
and seems to check the Man, who only called him good Master, Mar. 10.17*
as if the ascribing Goodness to one, whom he took to be a mere Man, was too
near an encroachment upon the sacred character of the Supreme God: And can we
imagine he would be so tender in every such little particular, and yet so very
careless in those important affairs, wherein the eternal interests of his
followers would be concerned, as long as the World endured? This is very hard
to believe; yet that the Concern is so great, the late Scribbling Arrian owns,
when, to the charge of Blasphemy imputed to his Party for denying the eternal
Godhead of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, he retorts that question upon us,
Vindication of Unitarians, p. 3.
If you err, do not you both blaspheme and commit Idolatry, in worshipping the
Son and the Holy Ghost, as coequal with the Father? We must be guilty of both
if they are not, but for the Son, we hope enough has been, or shall be said to
prove we are free from danger on that side. To clear our own practice yet
farther, We Will trace those footsteps our Adversaries themselves have trodden
before us, and make use of those instances they have laid together on this
occaon: So the Apostles pray to their Master, Lord, increase our Faith! Luke
17.5.
a Petition of a strange nature to one that was no more than their fellow
Creature, and so far from any encouraging exaltation in the world, that whereas
the foxes had holes, and the birds of the air had nests, He the Son of Man had
not so much as where to lay his head: How could he give them Faith, who could
not, as it seemed, give himself security from worldly persecution? but our Lord
gives them no check for mislaying their Petition, nor does he bid them seek to
his Father, though it were an inward grace, a strengthening of the Soul, which
they required of him. Again, when the Disciples were with him on shipboard,
and during his quiet sleep, just sinking by the violence of an angry tempest,
they in a fright wake their Master and cry out to him, Lord save us, we perish!
Mat. 8.25.
If our Savior was a mere Man, the Disciples acted with much less sense than
Jonah's Mariners, who every one, in the storm, called upon their Gods for help,
and summoned sleeping Jonas, not to save them, by His Power, but to join with
them in calling upon his God: For was it ever heard before, that when a Ship
was just sinking, or running upon a rock, the ship's Crew ran to some poor
ignorant Passenger to beg their security from him? The Mariners, though convinced
that he was an extraordinary Person, made no such application to Saint Paul in
a parallel danger; it is God alone who can command the Seas and Winds, his
permissive Word makes them ruffle the Universe, and put Nature into a
Consternation; the same Word lays them still as in their first Originals, ere
uncorrupted Nature knew any thing terrible or dangerous: In the case before us,
our Savior answered them not, as that King of Israel did the Woman, If the
Lord help thee not, what can I do? But, He arose and rebuked the Winds, and the
Sea, and there was a great calm: Nature, in its greatest hurry, owned his
Divine Authority, only his Disciples stumbled upon the Question, ver. 27.
What manner of Man is this, that even the Winds and the Sea obey him? They
talked like Men beside themselves with Fear, they called upon him for Help, as
if they had believed him to be God, they reflected upon that Deliverance he had
given them, as if he had been no more than Man; but he takes no notice of any
error they were in, in their first Devotions, but, by his Mercy, encouraged
them to do the same again upon a like occasion. What the Disciples did here in
a storm at Sea, that Saint Stephen, the first Martyr for Christianity, did in a
more violent storm of Persecution on Land, for when he came to his last
Agonies, when, it was the proper season for a good Man to exert the utmost
vigor of his Faith and Charity, then, for himself, and with respect to his own
Soul, he prays, Acts* 7.59.
Lord Jesus receive my Spirit: The frequent expiring Ejaculation of Holy Saints
and Martyrs after him. Compare now this with that assertion of the wise Man
concerning Death; Eccles. 12 7.
Then shall the Dust return to Earth as it was, and the Spirit shall return to
God who gave it; and the consequence will be, either that our Lord Jesus Christ
was the great Author or Creator and Giver of the Rational Soul, or else, that
this Holy Martyr, then when filled in an extraordinary manner with the Holy
Ghost, in his extreme hours, when commonly Men's apprehensions of futurity are
most Clear and Rational, talked in a very Impertinent and sinful manner, to
devote his Soul to him, who could have no right to it, if he were a mere
Creature, and to forget his God: Franciscus Davidis would have us believe here,
that Stephen did not call upon Jesus Christ, but upon God the Father, and that
we should translate the expression, O thou Lord of Jesus receive my Spirit! but
this Socinus has strongly confuted; though, upon their common Principle, of our
Savior's being a mere Creature, Franciscus undertakes the much more rational
part; However, here his subterfuge is nothing worth. It was Jesus the Son of
God, He who bore that proper name of Jesus from his Circumcision, for whose
sake Stephen was now persecuted to Death by the malicious Jews; it was the same
Jesus whom he saw at the right hand of God, when the Heavens opened to give him
such a view of future Glory prepared for Martyrs, as might support and
encourage him under his sufferings; it was to him therefore that Stephen
applied himself, and sitted himself for a glorious and happy Exit, by that
admirable Resignation. But neither did Saint Stephen stop there, but as the
utmost effort of a dying Martyr's Charity, He adds this to his former
ejaculation, ver. 60.
Lord, lay not this sin to their charge; He certainly designed exemplary
Charity in this, and to imitate his dying Savior, who prayed his Father to
forgive his Murderers, for they knew not what they did: But the Martyr's
enemies would have had little reason to have admired his Charity, had he
presented his Prayers for them to one, who had no power to forgive them; and
the Jews would be as ready now to make the Objection, as heretofore, Who can
forgive sins but God only? And if God, to whom vengeance belongs, in whose
sight the Death of his Saints is precious, would certainly avenge the blood of
his Saints and Martyrs upon their Persecutors, to what purpose was it to pray
to him to forgive them, who not being the most high God himself, could have no
Power to forgive those who had sinned against the most high God, so as to give
them any security; but above all, He could never have hoped for any acceptance
at the hand of God in any Petition whatsoever, had he now, in his last
extremity, been guilty of Idolatry. Saint Paul had been made partaker of
extraordinary Revelations, had been snatched up into the third heavens, where
he had seen and heard things not lawful for a Man to utter, 2 Cor. 1^.7, 8, 9.
indeed things unspeakable, lest He should have been exalted above measure
through the abundance of those Revelations, there was given to him a thorn in the
flesh, the messenger of Satan to buffet him: This was a very severe
humiliation, and Saint Paul was sensible of it, and at first, as appears by the
Text, very uneasy under it. Saint Paul knew well enough, that the best remedy
for all calamities was Prayer, that Prayers presented to the true God with a
sincere heart, could not return unfruitful; but Saint Paul presently applies
himself to Christ, For this cause I besought the Lord thrice, that it might
depart from me, says he, and He said unto me, my Grace is sufficient for thee,
for my strength is made perfect in weakness; By the Lord here, the Socinians
themselves understand our Lord Jesus, and therefore allege this Text as a
proof of Pious Men's praying to Christ: Now had Saint Paul prayed to Christ for
Assistance and Relief in such a case, where only the Supreme God could really
help him, if that Christ were a mere Creature, then such a Prayer must be
Idolatrous, and such Service be called Idolatry, wherein the Creature was
rather worshipped than the Creator; and Christ a Creature must, as Lucifer of
old, have endeavored to set himself up for a rival God, and prosecute a
separate Interest of his own, and manage and assist his servants, in a way of
opposition to the most high God, and so he must have Graces of his own, and
Strength of his own, to employ for the use of his own Devotoes, for so Saint
Paul tells us, that Christ referred him, not to the Grace of God, or to the
strength of God, for security from the violence of Satan, but tells him, My
Grace and my Strength are sufficient for thee, therefore there could be no need
of applying himself to any other: Now if Saint Paul were in this case guilty of
Idolatry, all those who follow the pattern of Saint Paul must incur the same
guilt, but he was not guilty, therefore neither were his Imitators guilty of it.

The Socinians in proof of the lawfulness of Praying to Christ, allege farther
Saint Paul's joining him with God the Father, in his own Prayer with respect to
the Thessalonians, to whom he is there writing, ^ Thessalonians. 3.11.
Now God himself and our Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, direct our way unto
You: where he takes for granted, that the Father and the Son are both
Copartners in the same directing power, and therefore he equally Petitions
them both for guidance in his design of visiting the Thessalonians. What the
Apostle himself did, in a Letter sent to Believers for their instruction in
matters concerning their Salvation, we need not doubt but they would be very apt to
follow him in, so that either this Praying to Christ was lawful and reasonable
in it self, or else the Apostle must be concluded to have it in his mind only
to abuse those he wrote to, and to draw them, by his extraordinary influence
upon them, into Sin; for a sin it must be to make any mere Creature the
Vltimate Object of our Prayers and Devotions: That the Apostle in this passage
does so is indisputable, if at least it is owned, that He makes God the Father
such an Object, for he joins them together, puts no mark of Inferiority or
Subordinacy upon Jesus Christ, but what he begs of the Father, the same He begs
of the Son in one continued expression. And the Apostle frequently does the
same thing in those Salutations he sends to the several Churches, where He
wishes them Grace, Mercy, and Peace, equally from God the Father, and from our
Lord Jesus Christ: Grace, Mercy, and Peace are all divine and spiritual Gifts,
as in possession of the Father, so in possession of the Son; else it would be
very impertinent to Petition them equally for it, and of very ill consequence,
for it would easily bring such a notion into Men's heads, as that some created
Being might have a power of giving Gifts of a Spiritual nature, as well as the
Supreme God; and that it might be lawful, in our most serious Devotions, to
join him who alone is God, with one who is no more than a Creature, to set them
in a rank as equal as words would allow, and to conclude a Prayer to the great
Creator of all things insufficient to procure any good from him, unless it were
backed and strengthened by the joined formality of an Address to a dependent
Creature. But we need not so much insist on this particular; since the same
Socinians as a vindication of Prayers addressed to our Savior, take notice of
that piece of Religious Worship, as being made the very Characteristick or
distinguishing note of Christians: So Ananias answers the Command of Going to
visit and baptize the newly converted Saul, Acts 9.14.21.
He has authority from the chief Priests to bind all that call on thy Name:
And when Saul first began to preach Christ at Damascus, all Men asked, with
amazement; if it was not He who had lately destroyed all that called upon the
name of Christ, that is, all who believed in him; So that it seems from hence,
that to believe in Christ and to call upon him were used as reciprocal terms,
every one who believed in Christ would call upon him, or Pray to him, every one
who prayed to him must believe on him, for as the Apostle elsewhere argues, How
shall they call on him, or pray to him, in whom they have not believed? So
again, St. Paul inscribes his first Epistle to the Corinthians, 1 Cor. 1.^.
to those who are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints, with all
that in every place call upon the name of Jesus Christ, i. e. to all
Christians, for whose general use and instruction he wrote that Epistle, as
well as for the Corinthians: And the same Christians are described as such, 2 Timothy 2.22.
who call upon the name of the Lord with a pure Heart: These are the evidences
drawn by the Socinians themselves out of Scripture, to prove the practice of
Christians in the very infancy of the Church, and they are sufficient for that
purpose. Now that Those who accompanied with our Lord himself during his
converse upon Earth, or that those Apostles who were guided by the
extraordinary influences of the Holy Ghost; or that those first Christians who
took the ^oke of Christ upon them, when the Gospel was certainly preached to
them in its original simplicity, that all these should be guilty of abominable
Idolatries, and that when the Apostles themselves were originally Jews, who had
an irreconcilable a^ersion to any thing that looked in the least ^ike
Idolatry; and that our Savior himself should have so little regard for his
Dis^iples, as to let them commit a gross sin, ^f a damning nature, without any
check or ^eproof; that that Holy Spirit which was ^romised to believers on
purpose that He might guide them into all truth, that both these should so very
early, not only permit, but encourage and persuade men to commit Idolatry, and
all this at a time when they pretended to promote the Salvation of Souls, and
when it was notoriously known to all Mankind that Idolatry was a Sin,
irrational in it self, and detestable in the sight of God; that the one part
should commit, and the other promote Idolatry under such circumstances, is
absolutely incredible. They had the Pagan World at that time to reform, The
Apostles were all willing to spend and be spent, to carry on that glorious and
merciful work, at the utmost hazard of their lives; the great and crying sin of
the Gentile world was their Idolatry, that of which St. Paul particularly took
notice with grief and anger among the Athenians; but it had been a strange
method of reforming an Idolatrous World, by advancing the same practice,
without any other correction, but only a variation of the Object, as if Praying
to a Man had not been as great an Error, as Praying to a Genius, or the Sun, or
some other bright Star, or an Ox, or any other Creature. Such things would have
rendered the Gospel foolishness with a witness, among the Gentiles: and none
would have wondered that Christ should have culled out poor ignorant Fishermen,
and other illiterate persons to be the first Preachers, since such a senceless
Method of procedure, was only fit for such dull and unthinking Creatures to
prosecute. But for our comfort, the first Christians are free from any such
folly; and all the several sorts of Heretics, through all ages, have freed
them from any such Imputation: They did nothing but what was agreeable to the
Will of God, They took care not to provoke him, whom they knew to be a
consuming fire, to jealousy, by setting up a mere Creature in competition with
him. The Christians in that time, showed their extreme hatred of Idolatry, in
that all the allurements and terrors in the world, could not possibly draw them
to it in other instances: If they would but have thrown a little Incense into
the Fire burning on an Idols Altar; If they would but have made the smallest
condescension to some admired Heathen Deity, they might have been blessed both
with Impunity and Rewards: And sure it could be imputed to nothing but a
ridiculously perverse humor, to refuse all kinds of submission to
Creature-Gods, merely because they were Creatures, and yet, at the same time
themselves to Worship or Pray to a Creature of their own setting up. We find
not but that the Jews were more tractable, and so more reasonable in the point,
when they had once gotten the gusto of Idolatry in the Golden Calf, and had the
fetters of religious Elders and Governors knocked off their heels, they stood
out at nothing, but were ready to worship any little Idol, any of their
neighbors recommended to them. And other Idolatrous Nations, the Romans, in
particular, thought it but reasonable, that when they had set up some Gods for
themselves according to their own humors, they should compile all the
Divinities they could, and secure themselves, if not by the quality, at least
by the multiplicity of their Gods. But when the Jews were once truly purged
from their Idolatrous humors by severe and terrible Judgments, they would
never more at their utmost peril, admit of the least umbrage of it: And the
converted Gentiles would have dyed a thousand deaths, rather than have brought
such a scandal upon Christianity, as to have retained or advanced any thing
that might have laid them open to the reproaches of the Jews, or have seduced
or perverted their Brethren. We no where find the Apostles or any Apostolic
men, ever vindicating that Worship they offered to our Lord with that pretense,
that they went to him only as ^ Mediator of Intercession, as the Roman
distinction is, or that they might not press too rudely upon God, without
addressing in the first place to some Favorite servant. We never find them
arguing, that they only Pray to Christ, that He might pray for them, though he
always does so, as being the sole Mediator between God and Man; nor do they
ever defend their Practice by that Allegation, that they do not terminate their
adorations upon Christ, but upon his Father, the contrary would easily have
been proved against them from their own Writings: Yet, after all, they were not
Idolaters, they did not give that Honor to a mere Creature which belonged only
to the Creator, therefore that Christ, to whom they made their addresses, was
not a mere Creature: Yet, as he was Man, He could be no more than a mere
Creature, therefore He was more than Man, therefore He was God, the true and
Almighty God the great Creator of all things; and thus have we made good our
Argument, that Jesus Christ was true God, equal with his Father, from that,
otherwise indefensible, practice of Worshipping him, or Praying determinately
to him, as the Giver of all good Gifts equally with his Father. If he be owned
to be the One true God, we can have no scruples, no fears of offending, upon us
in Praying to him, and expressing all the Signs of external religious
adorations toward him. If he be not owned to be the One true God, then there is
no argument which either a Socinian or any Other can bring, to prove the
lawfulness of Praying to him as God, but it will equally serve either Papists
in their praying to Images, Saints or Angels, or Pagans in Praying to their
confessed Idols: and therefore the Socinians themselves fairly confess, with
respect to those Texts before-cited, where Christians are known by that
character of calling on the name of Christ. That those Words do so comprehend
all that divine Worship which is exhibited to Christ by his faithful people,
that they describe it by that one, the most considerable part of it, namely,
beging assistance from him in our Prayers, Cum necesse sit eum, cujus nomen
invoces, pro Deo competente sensu colere, Since it is necessary to Worship him
as God in some fit sense, whose name you call upon in Prayer: but there is no
other fit sense in which we can call upon him as God, but that which makes him
the true, the eternal God: Therefore if he may be called upon as God without
Idolatry, He must be that true, that eternal God.

We have at last, by God's assistance, gone through these several heads of
Discourse from which we propounded at first to prove, That Jesus Christ the Son
of God was God equal with his Father, or the true, the eternal God: We have
proved this from those several accounts of his Appearance, and his Nature laid
down in the Old Testament, namely, that it was He who appeared to and conversed
with Abraham before the fatal destruction of Sodom, and that He there bore the
name Jehovah, the name of God incommunicable to any other: That it was He whose
Throne the Psalmist declared to be for ever and ever: That it was He who laid
the Foundations of the Earth, and that the Heavens were the work of his hands,
after whose decay and perishing, He yet should continue beyond the reach of
time: That Christ our Lord should be that Child, that Son, given us in time, on
whose shoulders the Government should be laid; that He should be the wonderful
Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, and the Prince of Peace:
That He should be the Righteous Branch springing up to David, whose name should
be the Lord our Righteousness: And finally, that He, the blessed Jesus, should
be that Ruler of Israel, who should be born in Bethlehem Ephrata, whose goings
forth have been of old, from everlasting. We have proved the same assertion
from those several Declarations our Savior has made concerning himself, and
his Disciples afterward concerning him in the New Testament, as namely, that
of Saint Matthew, of the Angel's prediction to Joseph, to which the Evangelist
applies the Prophecy, that our Savior Incarnate should be called Immanuel, or
God with us: That of our Lord joining himself in equal rank with his Father in
the Institution of Baptism, ordering it to be performed in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: We have proved that our Savior
was that Word which was in the beginning, which was with God, which was God, by
whom all things were made visible and invisible, in Heaven and upon Earth, that
according to our Savior himself, He and his Father were One; that it was He
whom Saint Thomas, upon a sufficient Conviction, declared to be his Lord and
his God; that, according to Saint Paul, He is God over all blessed for ever;
and that, according to the same Apostle, He being in the Form of God thought it
no Robbery to be equal with God, yet took upon himself the Form of a Servant
for our sakes: These proofs I explained, enlarged upon, and vindicated them
from their Sophistry, who would have them looked upon as proofs insufficient of
the Divinity of the Son of God. We proved the same thing then by those Actions
done by himself, and in his own Name, during his converse upon Earth, and done
by his Apostles in His Name after his Ascension into Heaven: For instance, from
his passing, insensibly, through the multitude, who led him to the brow of an
Hill, designing to cast him headlong down from thence: From his making the
Soldiers, who came with Judas to seize him, to fall down with barely answering
them what they desired, and in the kindest and most satisfactory manner: From
his commanding Lazarous in his own Name to come forth of his Grave, after four
days burying: From his Apprehension of virtue going out of him to heal the
Woman with the bloody Issue, though only touching the Hem of his Garment: From
his calling those that were weary and heavy laden with their sins, to come to
him, and promising them rest for their Souls, upon so doing: From his Forgiving
sins in an authoritative manner, his searching the Heart, trying the Reins,
and, according to Saint Peter, Knowing all things: From his Promising and
sending the Holy Ghost, and giving it first of all with his Breath, opening the
Understanding of the Disciples, and sending them abroad with a Commission
equivalent to that which himself had received from his Father; and in
conclusion, from his Disciples Baptising, Preaching, and doing Miracles, wholly
in his Name, and by Faith in him. From this Head we proceeded to prove our
Doctrine that Christ was God equal with his Father, from the Faith of the
Primitive Church, where we confined our selves in our Disquisition principally
to those Fathers who wrote before the starting of the Arrian Controversy. So,
for the Greek Church, we gave you an account of what Clemens the Roman Bishop
in his Epistles to the Corinthians, of what Saint Ignatius Bishop of Antioch in
his several Epistles, of what Justine Martyr in his two Apologies, and in his
Dialogue with Trypho the Jew, and Irenaeus in his books against Heresies, and
Clemens Alexandrinus in his Admonition to the Gentiles, and in his Stromata,
and what Origin in his books against Celsus furnishes us with, in evidence of
our Savior's Divine Nature. Then for the Latin Church, we gave you the sense
of what Tertullian, St. Cyprian Bishop of Carthage, Arnobius, and Lactantius
have written; from whence we descended to Creeds framed, by Gregory
Thaumaturgus, by Felix the first of that name, Bishop of Rome; by the First and
Second Councils at Antioch, summoned on the account of Paulus Samosatenus, and
the Circular Epistle of the Latter, from the circular Letters of Alexander
Bishop of Alexandria, and so from the Epistle and Creed of the Nicene and
Constantinopolitane general Councils, with the remarkable suffrages of
Constantine the Great, the first Christian Emperor, and Eusebius of Caesarea,
one much suspected of Arrianism himself, but a famous Writer of Church History.
Having done with this, we proved last of all that no true Divine Worship was
due to any mere Creature, or could be paid to any such without Idolatry: That
true Divine Worship yet was paid to our blessed Lord by his Apostles, and first
Followers, without Idolatry; therefore that our Savior in consequence could be
no mere Creature: Thus far we had proceeded, and concluded all our works of
that nature at an end, and our selves at liberty to prosecute our intended
discourse farther.

But Ill Men, taking advantage of that Liberty now indulged them, a Liberty
always fruitful of Errors and Innovations, give us yet more Work, and a
necessary care to prevent that Poison they scatter, from spreading too far
amongst those who profess Christianity in these Nations. And here we have two
mighty Pretenders to Piety and Reason; One of which undertakes the Patronage of
long exploded Arrianism, the Other of the more refined Socinianism, and both
with old Arguments, and it may be, some new Finenesses attack the Divinity of
our Savior. It Is no small happiness that such Men take up such different
Opinions to maintain, for by that means One is somewhat of an Antidote against
the Other, and by these differences between themselves in so weighty a matter,
Wise and Considerate Christians will learn to believe neither of them. As for
what our Socinian pleads, considering what we asserted in the beginning of our
Discourse, viz. That Jesus Christ our Savior is the Son of God, which We, with
all sound Christians understood in a natural sense; and that that very Notice
inferred a co-essentiality of the Son with the Father, as it does among Men,
where the Son is of the same Nature with the Father which begets him, we
thought we had reason; but the Socinians have found us out a way of Filiation
or Sonship, of being the begotten, nay, the Only begotten Son of God, without
any such Essential Relation: thus the Racovian Catechism, speaking concerning
the Original of Christ's being called, or being the Son of God, tells us He is
so; First, Because He was conceived of the Holy Ghost; and being born of a
Virgin without the concurrence of a man, he had no other Father but God: and
this, Wissowatius in his note upon that passage tells us, ought to be observed,
as the first reason mentioned in Scripture, why Christ is the Son of God, in
opposition to those who found that relation upon his eternal Generation of his
Father. Secondly, Christ, says the Catechism, is the Son of God, because, as He
himself teaches us, He was sanctified by the Father, i. e. He was separated
from the rest of mankind in a singular manner, and besides the perfect holiness
of his Life, furnished with Divine Wisdom and Power, Cat. Raco. sect. 4. c. 1.
p. 24.
He was employed by the Father to execute the Office of an Ambassador with a
supreme Authority among Men: Thirdly, Christ was the Son of God because He was
raised from the Dead by God, and so begotten of him again, by this means
becoming like God in Immortality: and Fourthly, Christ is the Son of God,
because He is invested by God with supreme Authority and Command over all
things. Our Country man Lushington, a great Patron of Socinianism, in his
Commentary on the Epistle to the Hebrews, On the Hebrews, c. 1. p. 23.
reckons up the grounds of Christ's being the Son of God to the same number.
He Is the Son of God says He, First, by his Conception, Secondly, by his
Function, Thirdly, by his Institution, being by God appointed the Heir of all
things, Fourthly, by his Resurrection; thus He: but our New Undertaker, to
render these things the more plausible, has given us a new set or Division of
the reasons why Christ is called the Son of God? The title of the Son of God,
says he, is in Scripture founded upon these Five things, Two that are taken
from his twofold birth, the one out of the Womb of the Virgin, by the
Operation of the Holy Ghost; the other out of the Womb of the Earth, by his
Resurrection, which makes him undoubtedly the Natural Son of God, his only
begotten Son, Thoughts on Sherlock's vindication of the Trinity, p. 4, 5.
his own, or his proper Son. Three other which are drawn from his Offices, the
First, Because he is that Prophet, whom his Father has sanctified and sent into
the World with an extraordinary Commission, Secondly, Because he is the great
High Priest immediately called to that Office by God himself; the Third,
Because He is the King, whom God has exalted to a Supreme Power both in Heaven
and in Earth. Now these Reasons thus multiplied, though we should allow them all
True, yet they come not up to the matter in hand. It Is true, Christ really is
the Son of God, by reason of his Conception by the Power of the Holy Ghost in
the Womb of the Virgin: but supposing, with the Socinians, that the Holy Ghost
is not a Person, but only the influence of Almighty God, there is not enough in
that Birth, so miraculous as it is, to give our Savior the title of the Son of
God distinctly and exclusively of all others. Dr. Heylin, though far enough from
denying the eternal Deity of Christ, yet seems very willing to rest in this
Reason, that He is called the only begotten Son of God, purely upon it, or
because He Is the beloved Son, in whom He is well pleased, or his loved Son, or
the Son of his Love: and approves of Maldonat's opinion, that the beloved Son,
and the only begotten Son, are terms Reciprocal; but the mistake is apparent:
for though Isaac be called the only begotten Son of Abraham, it does not argue
that He was the sole engrosser of his love, the contrary is apparent from
Abraham's carriage in the case of Ishmael, when he took the necessity of
turning Him and his Mother out of doors so grievously, Genesis 21.11.
and when, upon God's promising him a Son by Sarah, who should be heir of his
blessings, the tender Father yet begged, that Ishmael might also live in his
sight, Genesis 17.18.
i. e. be partaker of God's Favors and extraordinary Blessings too. Besides,
that Isaac is called Abraham's only begotten Son, in contradistinction to
Ishmael, Isaac was the only begotten Son with respect to God's Promise, and as
being the only Son of the free Woman, and properly enough; yet we see, by
course of Nature, Abraham had more Sons than Isaac, therefore Isaac was not
Abraham's only begotten Son in a sense so eminent, as our Lord is called the
Only begotten of the Father: Heylin on the Creed, p. 168.
the Father having no other Son begotten by himself but Christ. But though
sometimes Men do love an Only Child at an extraordinary rate, yet it is not
^lways, nor necessarily so; for Love, being sometimes guided by Reason, and
Obe^ience being the only rational ground of ^aternal Affection, several
Children may ^e as obedient as One, and therefore several may as rationally be
loved as One in an ex^raordinary manner. But farther, Neither is our Savior's
Conception by the Holy Ghost in the Womb of the Virgin, so very great a
Miracle, as to set our Savior, on that account, so far above every Creature;
for as Doctor Pearson well observes, Pearson on the Creed, p. 107.
Adam the first Man was made immediately by the hand of God, no humane faculty
concurring at all, and Adam is therefore called the Son of God by the
Evangelist; now there cannot be a Power so much greater required, to give a Man
a being in the Womb of a Virgin, than to frame him at first out of a Piece of
Earth, as to make so great a distance necessary, as is between the First and
the Second Adam: for Jesus Christ, our Second Adam, must be the Son of God in
so peculiar a manner, as must make him infinitely Superior to any other
Creature, he being designed to exercise such a Power as no other Creature could
possibly be capable of. We allow then our Lord's Birth and Conception to have
been one ground of his being the Son of God, but not the first, it is no where
called so in Scripture, nor is it sufficient to fix him in that supereminent
station wherein our Faith is fixed upon him. The second reason of his Filiation
is yet much more Deficient, viz. his Resurrection or raising from the Womb of
the Earth, for we find none called the Son of God in Scripture on that Reason;
that our Savior was raised from the dead we know, if we look upon him as
raised from the Dead by his own Power, as indeed He, Joh. 2.19. John 10.17, 18.
and He only was, as himself asserts, that affords us a great difference
between Him and all other Persons; but utterly destroys the Socinian ground of
his being called the Son of God. But for such troublesome passages as these, I
find a remarkable saying of Smalcius, which shows us the whole mystery of their
avoiding the force of plain Scripture, and it is this, speaking of Christ's
being called God, he proceeds, When we find it declared in Scripture, not only
once or twice, but very often, and very plainly, that God was made Man,
considering that this is a Proposition absurd, wholly contrary to right Reason,
and full of Blasphemy against God, we believe it must be a great deal better to
find out some mode of speaking, according to which one may say this concerning
God, than to interpret things simply and according to the Letter: that is to
say, the Socinians have resolved, not to regulate their Opinions by the
Scripture, but to reduce the Scripture to their Opinions: this however is plain
dealing, and a sufficient warning to read their Discourses with the greater
Caution, and Intention of mind. But, if the Socinians make use of this Art by
their own Confessions in matters of the clearest nature, and so often repeated,
we cannot doubt, but they will rather pitch on some unknown Figure to elude those
Texts which imply our Savior's raising himself from the Dead, than own his
Unity with his Father in the same Essence or Nature, whereby both the assertion
that Christ raised himself, and that He was raised by his Father from the dead,
are so easily reconciled: But allowing them their own fancy, if our Savior was
not raised from the Dead by any Power of his Own, but only by that of his
Father, and yet, was called the Son of God on account of his Resurrection, then
all those who shall rise from the Dead before that great day, must be called
the Sons of God in the same sense as our Savior is, and consequently our
Savor cannot, on account of such Resurrection, be so the Son of God, as to be
his only begotten Son, exclusively of all others, though that title be so
exclusive in it is own nature. As for the three Reasons of his being called the
Son of God derived from his Offices; it is true in the first place that God has
sanctified our Savior and sent him into the World, but so he sanctified
Jeremy, and so he sanctified John the Baptist, and the last in particular he
sent into the World with an extraordinary Commission, i. e. to Preach the glad
tidings of Salvation, and to prepare the way of the Lord against his public
appearance, which Employs were both wholly extraordinary: but as for that
descent of the Holy Ghost upon him, whereby, say they, he was anointed to his
Office, without measure, there was no particularity eminently distinguishing
Him in that from his own Apostles, upon whom the Spirit descended in a visible
manner, at the feast of Pentecost, and fitted them so for the same Office of
Preaching, and every way promoting the Salvation of Mankind. Indeed we no where
find the Apostles called the Sons of God; on account of their being baptized
with the Holy Ghost, and with fire, but we see our Savior is declared the Son
of God, in whom he is well pleased, on that occasion; but he was owned by the
same title at his Transfiguration too, when there was no effusion of the Holy
Ghost: therefore, there was some peculiarly eminent reason for giving our Lord
this Title, which could not be applied on any account to any other Person. If
we reflect on the second ground of Christ's being called the Son of God, which
is, because He is our Great High Priest, and so constituted by God himself; our
Author's proof of it is very strange, viz. from that passage of the Psalmist,
Thou art my Son, Heb. 5.5.
this day have I begotten thee, quoted by the Author of the Epistle to the
Hebrews, for though those Words are there repeated, as well as in the first
Chapter of that Epistle, yet it is not in a different Sense, or to a new
purpose; but the Apostle there, speaking of our Savior's Priesthood, and the
greatness and excellency of that Office undertaken by him, tells us, no Man
takes this Honor to himself, but He that is called of God, as was Aaron: Now
the Apostle shows that our Savior had such a Call as well as Aaron, for his
Father who said to him, Thou art my Son this day have I begotten thee, showed
his Propriety in his Son, and his Love to him by those words, so that it could
not be strange that his Father should lay so great an Honor upon him: But then
his title to the Priesthood it self, is founded on that, Thou art a Priest for
ever, ver. 6.
after the order of Melchisedec, so then, the Sonship of Christ is antecedent
to his Priestly Office, and He was made a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedec, because He was the Son of God, and not called the Son of God
because He was our High Priest. As for the last reason why our Savior is
called the Son of God, viz. Because he is exalted to the Supreme Power over all
things, and so is our King, Hab. 1.5.
(which he proves again from the same words as quoted in the same Epistle to
the Hebrews) There yet again the same truth occurs, that Christ was the Son of
God before He entered upon his Kingly Office, for by Him God made the worlds,
and our Savior never had a being, but that at the same time he was the Son of
God; but if God by Him made the Worlds, ver. 2.
as the Apostle says, and he could not be our King before the Worlds were made,
We who are a part of these Worlds, being those Creatures over whom he was to be
King; then he was the Son of God before he was our King, and therefore could
not be his Son on that account. Besides, if we should allow all these things,
the whole grant would be useless, for Christ is called, as before we observed,
the only begotten Son of God in an eminent and distinguishing manner above all
others; but if upon account of his Offices Prophetical, Priestly, or Regal,
Christ be called the Son of God, then all those who exercise the same Functions
in the world may upon the same reason lay claim to the same title: for of some
of them we know the Psalmist says, They are Gods, and they are all the children
of the most high; but if they can all justly lay claim to the same Title, then
there is nothing peculiar to our Savior included in that being the Son, the
only begotten Son of God; which yet the very Title it self imports.

All these Reasons then not being sufficient to give our Savior the Title of
the only begotten Son of God in a manner so super-eminent to all other
Creatures and their Originals, particularly to Angels who are of a Spiritual
Nature, and are called the Sons of God: There must remain some other ground for
our Savior's being so called, and that is his eternal generation of the
Father, which puts him into such a Relation to his Father, as no other creature
can possibly pretend to. We have proved that the whole of his Five Precedent
Reasons do not fill up the Idea, or make good the full meaning of those terms,
wherein Christ is called the only Begotten Son of God, his Beloved Son, or his
own Son: for if I am Born of my Mother, but not Begotten, in his own Image, by
my reputed Father, though my reputed Father were able after Death to raise me to
Life again, though he were able to confer upon me all the Authority in the
Universe, yet all this will be so far from giving Me justly the Title of my
Father's only-begotten Son, though perhaps he never had any other, that by all
these Reasons together I should be a putative Son, but really no more related
to my supposed Father, than our Savior was to Joseph the Husband of the
blessed Virgin, when before her Espousals he was begotten in her by the Power
of the Holy Ghost. Nay, should we admit of the very unphilosophical Hypothesis
of Ruarus, Quid in eo absurdi si spiritum Dei venas in virginis uterum
descendentes emulsisse, atque ex sanguine coagulato Embryonem formasse dicam,
non aliter atque id fit spiritu in masculo semine latente? Ruarus ad Mersennum
Epistola Centur. 1. Number. 56. p. 262.
the most modest of the Socinian tribe, all would be too little to make good
this glorious Idea of the only begotten Son of God. But his eternal Generation
answers all, and makes our Savior as properly the Only Begotten Son of his
Heavenly Father, as I or any other Lawful Son is the only begotten of his
Father, when he has no more; and the Union yet between the eternal Father and
the eternal Son, is of a closer and more levelling kind, than any thing
inferior nature can afford. Our New Author indeed challenges us, Cum
Scriptoribus de generatione animaelium haec comparentur. Nos Dei virtutem in
Virginis uterum aliquam substantiam creatam vel immisisse aut ibi creasse
affirmamus ex qua^, juncto eo quod ex ipsius Virginis substantia accessit,
verus homo generatus fuit. Alias enim homo ille Dei filius a conceptione and
nativitate proprie non fuisset. Sic Smalcius, de vero and naturali Dei filio,
c. 3. Ruarus ab ipso, uterque a veritate quantum distat.
if we believe this eternal Generation, to prove it expressly contained in
Scripture, and then to prove this Eternal Generation the true Basis or
Foundation of his glorious Title of the Only Begotten Son of God: As if clear
Consequences from plain Premises, were not a demonstrative proof of any thing,
to Men who pretend to Reason, and a capacity of discoursing Rationally, which
is indeed nothing but drawing Consequences plain or obscure from agreeable
Premises: Or, for an instance, as if when I find God called a Spirit, and I
know a Spirit is Invisible, I might not conclude God, though a Spirit, to be
invisible, unless I found Invisibility it self, distinctly and separated from
the Notion of a Spirit, attributed to him somewhere in Scripture. Now if all
these Proofs I have laid down before, have proved, that our Savior had a Being
before he was Conceived in the Womb of the Virgin, which we think to be proved
beyond contradiction, and if our Adversaries will but allow that Dictate of
Common sense, that, He who really is my Son, is my Son as soon as he has a
Being, or if He be not my Son then, He never can be my Son otherwise than by
Adoption; and so Christ can never be the only begotten Son of his Father,
because all those who Believe in and Obey God are his Sons by Adoption too, if
they will but allow this, then Christ must have been the Son of his Father, before
such time as he was Conceived in the Virgins Womb, because he had a Being
before that Conception: If Christ had a Being before his Conception, it must
have been as a Spirit, but Spirits do not generate one another, therefore he
must have had a Being from the beginning of the World. If then we fall in with
the Arrians and say, God created his Son the Word first out of nothing, and
then created all other things by Him, we contradict Scripture, which positively
assures us, that in six days the Lord made Heaven and Earth, and all that in
them is, and therefore rested the seventh day, but God could not rest the
Seventh Day, nor do all he had to do in Six Days if he wrought more than Six
Days; but He must have worked before the beginning of the Six Days, if he made
the Word before he made any thing else, and we have the Six Days Work summed up
authentically by Moses, but no account there of the Creation of the Word before
the Creation of Matter: If he were not Created before Matter, then he could not
Create all things as the Arrians pretend: If therefore He had a Being, it must
have been from all eternity, but he was not Created from eternity, for
whatsoever is Created must have a Beginning; but he was begotten of his Father
as the Scriptures assure us, if therefore he were Begotten and not Made, and
Begotten before the beginnings of the World, He could be Begotten of nothing
but of the Substance of his Father, there being no other Substance for him to
be originated from, and therefore must be eternal, because the Substance of his
Father is and cannot be otherwise than eternal. This being true, it would be
mere folly not to fix his Sonship more peculiarly in this eternal Generation:
for He that is Begotten by a Father, must be his Son, and he that is Begotten
from eternity, must be a Son from eternity, Therefore Christ who was Begotten
of his Father from eternity must be the Son of his Father from eternity, which
was the thing to be demonstrated.

If yet a Socinian will stumble at the Union of the Humane with the Divine
Nature, as if it were an impossibility, or against reason, let Him resolve us
fairly, how the Union is made between a rational and immortal Soul, of a
Spiritual, and an heavy and unactive Body of an Earthly Nature: We are all
convinced they are so joined together, but those subtle Springs, whereby an
Immaterial Soul actuates a Material Body, are hitherto indiscernible by the
sharpest Eye of impaired Reason: why then should we conclude it impossible for
the Divine and Humane Nature to be united together, unless it be united in a
way more intelligible than our Souls and Bodies? For though our Souls are of a
Spiritual Nature, they are infinitely inferior to the Nature of Almighty God,
and being that Constitutive part of Humane Nature, by which Man is a Rational
Creature, it might seem an easy task for us to find out, how that Soul we
reason by, should be united to that Body we reason in: But since we are so far
to seek in this matter, may we not reasonably conclude, God has hidden this
from our Eyes, to moderate and humble our unruly Fancies, to keep us from
prying into things that are too high for us, and to convince us, that many
things wherein we are more immediately concerned, not being a whit the less
True though we understand them not, we ought to believe that some things may be
True with respect to God, of which yet we are able to give our selves no
considerable account? And so we may satisfy our selves, that our Savior spoke
plain truth, when he said, I and my Father are One, meaning thereby an
Essential Unity between his Father and Him; because, though he were, at the time
of his speaking so, a true Man invested with real flesh and blood, yet He was
God before he was Man, the Word of God before he was made flesh and dwelt among
us; and was God when He was Man, his Divine Nature not being prejudiced by his
assuming Flesh and Blood; by that Divine Nature he was One essentially with his
Father, and his Humane assumed Nature being in his Divine Nature, as a finite
is contained in an infinite, there could be but One Person at last (...) Christ
God-Man, our Savior and Redeemer. I take the more notice of this particular,
which I had insisted on before, because our new Assertor of Socinianism would
persuade us, that if we duly examined these Words of our Savior on this
occasion spoken to the Jews, (when they charged him with Blasphemy, because in
his former expressions He had made himself God, though indeed he were but a Man)
we should quit all arguments drawn from thence; the words are these, Jesus
answered them, John 10.34, 35, 36.
Is it not written in your Law, I said ye are Gods, if he called them Gods unto
whom the Word of God came, and the Scripture cannot be broken, say ye of him
whom the Father has sanctified and sent into the World, Thou blasphemest,
because I said I am the Son of God? This says our Adversary, Thoughts on Sh. p.
2.
agreeably to those he follows, proves, That our Savior calls himself God, or
the Son of God, upon the same grounds on which others are called Gods, in
Scripture, to wit, because the Father has sanctified him, i. e. Christ is God,
or the Son of God, in the same sense that Magistrates, Good or Bad, are called
so, which certainly is a very great Honor to our Savior. But, if we examine
these Words with that Care we ought, we shall find, that our Savior by
alleging that God had sanctified him, and sent him into the world, does two
things: First he distinguishes himself from those called Gods, by that
Sanctification and Mission which He had, and They had not; for he affirms no
such thing of them, unless our Author will infer it from that, of the Word of
God coming to them; but all those to whom the Word of God comes, are not
sanctified presently by that; nor are all those sanctified to whom God imparts
any thing of his Power for the management of the World, some sufficiently
proving the contrary; Nor will it be easy to prove Sanctification and
Anointing to be one and the same thing, upon that reason. Nay, if we admit of
Heinsius's Criticism, Heinsius in Aristarcho sac. in locum.
the case will be yet worse, for he would have those words, to whom the Word of
the Lord came, be translated, Against whom the Prophetic Burden, or the
threatening Word of God was denounced: and indeed the Original will bear it well
enough; now we may fairly conclude, that Divine Menaces against sinners do not
sanctify them: so that the comparison between our Savior and those Gods
mentioned in the text, does not lie in their being both sanctified. But
secondly, our Savior teaches us, that He was First Sanctified and then Sent
into the World; now He could not be sanctified before he had a being, but he
was sanctified before he was sent into the World, He was sent into the world as
soon as he was Conceived in the Womb of his Mother, (so Every one is sent into
the World as soon as he has a Being in the World, but he has a Being in the
World as soon as he is Conceived) therefore our Savior was Sanctified before
his Conception, and therefore he had a Being before his Conception in the Womb
of the Virgin; this is what the Socinians deny, but the answer to this evidence
is not so easy. After this, though our new Writer would have our Savior to
argue as indeed he does, from the Less to the Greater, that, if They were Gods,
much more He: yet he has not observed, that our Savior gives himself the Title
only of the Son of God, but to be the Son of God, is less than to be God
absolute or without restriction, but our Savior should have given himself yet
some Superior Name, if he intended to prove himself Superior indeed to those
whom the Psalmist calls Gods in the cited place; and so indeed he did, as the
Jews understood him, they knew well enough that those Gods were only called so
by a Figure, and had our Savior plainly told them, that he meant only
Figuratively, when, by calling God his Father, he made himself the Son of God,
and by saying, He and his Father were One, He made not himself God, their anger
against him would have very much abated, since, in that sense very Ill Men
might have pretended to the Title: but they understood, that our Savior made
himself really equal with that One Supreme God whom they worshipped: and
according to their thoughts, his Sanctification and Mission into the World by
God, if He were his Father, set him infinitely above those Figurative Gods, to
whom the Father might have communicated some Authority or Power, but had
neither Sanctified them, nor sent them with any extraordinary pretenses into
the World, and our Savior was so far from going about to elude their anger, by
a shifting or ambiguous answer, as Smalcius a Socinian says he did, when he
told the Jews, before Abraham was I am; that he exasperates them the more, by
alleging the works he did as an evidence that the Father was in Him and He in
Him; Joh. 10.3^
upon which they go about to seize him but in vain. From the whole we conclude
directly contrary to what our Socinian Writer asserts: that since our Lord
declared nothing, concerning Himself and his own nature, to the Jews, but what
was necessary for them to know, and yet did declare to them such things as made
it evident to them, that he ascribed a Nature truly and literally divine to
Himself; Therefore it was necessary the Jews, and with them all the rest of
Mankind, should know, that Christ was really and truly God, not Metaphorically
as Magistrates, nor by participation of God's Holiness, as Good Men are made
Partakers of the divine Nature; but essentially and eternally as his Father.
And thus have we in some measure made good our second Proposition that the
blessed Jesus, appearing in our Nature, was God equal with his Father, or
really and truly God as well as real Man. We proceed to show

to effect our Salvation, God, and particularly God the Son, should assume our
nature to himself? That God the Son did really take our Nature upon him, we
have largely proved: That God, especially in such extraordinary cases, does
nothing but what is necessary, we may conclude: for though God be a Free and
uncontrouled Agent, yet infinite Wisdom can act nothing that is unnecessary, or
indifferent, whether it be done or no: Our business therefore will be to
enquire into the Ends and Designs of our Savior's appearing in the flesh, from
whence we shall be the better able to apprehend the necessity of such his
appearance. Sermon of the Not. p. 247.
Our Church in her Homily upon the Nativity of our Savior teaches us, That the
end of our Savior's coming in the flesh was, to save and deliver his people,
to fulfill the Law for us, to bear witness unto the truth, to teach and preach
the Word of his Father, to give light unto the World, to call sinners to
repentance, to refresh them that labor and be heavy laden, to cast out the
Prince of this World, to reconcile us in the body of his flesh, to dissolve the
works of the Devil, and last of all to become a propitiation for our sins, and
not for ours only, but also for the sins of the whole World* What Is contained
in these, and what other Ends may be assigned for our Savior's Incarnation, I
shall lay down, and prosecute, by God's assistance, under these Heads; Our
Savior was incarnate, or the Son of God was made Flesh, That He might destroy
the works of the Devil, or put an end to his Tyranny over us.

That The World might be convinced, that the Law given by Moses to the nation
of the Jews was so much God's Law, that it could not be disannulled or
antiquated in any particular, but by an authority not inferior to that of God
himself who framed it.

That God's Law, as given to the Jews, might be, exactly and according to the
Letter, fulfilled in our Nature; and so that He who fulfilled it, might be an
example of Holiness and Obedience to us.



God was manifest in the flesh, or, which amounts to the same, our Savior was
Incarnate, 1 John 3 8.
That He might destroy the Works of the Devil, and put an end to his Tyranny
over us: This is the very doctrine of the Apostle, For this purpose the Son of
God was manifested, that He might destroy the works of the Devil, that is, that
He might get the Mastery of Sin and Death, so that neither of them might
prevail upon us to our eternal Destruction. The Devil had got a strange
Ascendant over Men since the Fall, so that he seemed to preside in every humane
action, this Prevalency of his, almost banished all Natural Religion out of the
World, or perverted it to so ill Intents and Purposes that it lost it is name in
gross Superstition and ridiculous Idolatry. The Devil made use of all the
various Dispensations of Providence for the promoting of his own wicked
Designs, so that the bare Permission of him to prevail was thought a sufficient
argument, by which to assert his own Independent Supremacy over the World, and
consequently to engross to himself all that Divine Worship, which Originally
belonged to the Almighty: Nor could it be strange, that He who seemed to manage
all the affairs of the Universe without control, should be generally feared
and sacrificed to, if it were for no other reasons, but that he might do no
outward mischief. Having thus insinuated himself into the Throne of God, though
he might now and then for his own credit, propound some honest Moral Principles
to the World, yet He took far greater advantages to instill all manner of
Impieties into his Adorers; it was his malicious and desperate aim, to revenge
himself on that terrible Justice which had condemned him to eternal burnings;
and this revenge, as he commenced with tempting Men to sin at first, so he
carried it on, by moving deluded Wretches to do all such things as seemed the
most directly to contradict the Will of Heaven; hence arose that horrid
complication of sins, of which the Pagan world were guilty, summed up by the
Apostle. It was Man's unhappiness, Rom 1.28, etc.
that notwithstanding the visible fatal effects of the first sin, they would
yet believe it possible there might some unknown sweets lie hid in the
perpetration of wickedness; Sin always made a gaudy show, like a common Whore
in gay trappings, who carries so much of Witchcraft in her lascivious looks,
that, though many rot away piecemeal in her poisonous embraces, yet other wicked
and adventurous fools are always adding to the tale of her nasty Trophies: This
gay outside of sin could prevail, not only upon the inferior World, but upon
the Sons of God themselves, those separated from the rest of Adam's race by
nobler principles and a diviner knowledge, though the product of that unhappy
softness, was nothing but Brutes and Monsters, the Plagues of Nature, and the
insolent Enemies of Heaven. Sin prevailed afterward, when God had chosen to
himself a particular Nation, and made them the proper Lot of his inheritance,
and where God could discover but 7000. of those who had not bowed the knee to
Baal, who had not defiled themselves by a miserable prostitution of their Souls
to Hell, the Devil had a spreading and destructive Interest among the thousands
of Israel, every day added more to his strength and his ready apprehension of
his mighty Conquerours approach, edged his Industry and raised his Rage to more
than a double heat, because his time was short: It grieved that enemy of Souls
to think of the impendent abridgment of his Insolence: He had been so used to
easy Conquests, that He knew not how to veil to the blessed Jesus, nor could
he speak less to him than as if he had still been the Governor of the
Universe, and could really, by virtue of some inherent authority of his own,
have bestowed all the kingdoms of the world and the glories of them upon
whomsoever he pleased; If we would make more particular remarks of the Devil's
influence on the World, about our Savior's Incarnation, we shall find it
notorious in the exertion of a double Tyranny.

He exercised at that time a prodigious and unaccountable Tyranny over the
Bodies of Men; He could not be content with enslaving Man's nobler part, but as
God himself, so the great enemy of God, would have the whole Man entirely to
himself: not that it could be any way advantageous to himself and his own
destructive purposes, for where he had got the Conquest over the Soul before,
he knew well enough the body must follow; but he cared not what impertinent
mischiefs he engaged himself in, provided he might but the more directly cross
his Maker and his Punisher: Hence he came to take Possession of so many bodies,
and to vent his malice in so many tormenting Distempers, and especially he
invaded those of the Jewish nation, as if knowing, by force of ancient
Prophecies, the World's Savior was to be born among them, He Would take possession
entirely of all he could, as if it were by violence to keep out the Lawful Heir
from that Inheritance which belonged to him. It has seemed strange to Many,
that whereas a Corporeal suffering by the ingress of the Devil into a Man is so
very rare now adays, and was not so very frequent among the Gentiles even in
our Savior's time; yet so many should be possessed among the Jews, as we find
upon record in the Evangelists: This has made diverse believe, that all violent
or convulsive distempers were generally taken to be the effects of the
influence of some malignant Spirits; not as if there had really been any Devil
within them, but, at most, as if he had been permitted then, as he was in Job's
case, to inflict bodily diseases upon some by external causes, and not
otherwise; We know well enough that the Devil, in some sense, may be called the
author of all those Distempers Men's Bodies at this time labor under, for it
was Sin that introduced Death and all the Preliminaries to it, and the Devil
introduced Sin: But to resolve all these Posessions by the Devil, recorded by
the Evangelists, into nothing but some more violent or unusual diseases than
ordinary, can no way be allowed; For we find it not said of those that were
Lepers, that were Lame, or Blind, or that had bloody Issues, or that had
Fevers, etc. That they were possessed, yet those distempers were of very
malignant Natures frequently, and insuperable by all the Art of the Physician,
as the Gospel-History informs us: But among other instances of those possessed
with Devils, we find Two coming out of the tombs, exceeding fierce and
dangerous, so that no Man might pass that way, and it was the voice of a Devil,
not of a miserable Man, who would have been glad of a release from Slavery,
that cried out, What have we to do with thee, Jesus thou Son of God? (...). 8.
art thou come hither to torment us before our time? The notion of Christ's
being the Son of God, had then gotten very small footing among Men, but the
Devil had experienced his divine original, by that extreme baffle He had
received in that Temptation he assaulted him with in the Wilderness: Nor had a
Poor Distempered Man, who knew Jesus Christ was the Son of God, any reason to
fear his being tormented by Him, who expressed nothing but Goodness and
readiness to help the miserable in all the motions of his life; but Devils knew
what they had to fear, because they knew what they had deserved; and though they
expected not their final heaviest Doom so soon, they knew not what terrible
Sentence so Powerful and justly incensed a Judge might immediately pass upon
them: It could not again, have been a Disease that could with an audible voice
have desired leave to enter into the herd of Swine, nor was it a Disease, ver.
31.
predominating only in two Persons, which, upon its removal, could have had
such precipitate effects upon a whole herd of Swine, as to have driven them
headlong into the Sea, there to have perished in the Waters: ver. 32.
and it evidenced the true temper of a Devil, to be ready to do mischief in all
degrees, and to leave no Creature, that might be any way useful to Man,
unassaulted by his active malice.

Again, another time there is one brought to our Savior possessed with a dumb
Devil, Mat. 9.32.
there seem to have been no ordinary natural causes of this distemper, for, as
soon as the Devil was cast out, the dumb spoke, and the people wondered, and
said, It was never so seen in Israel. And that the Person was really possessed
with a Devil, the very Pharisees themselves, who were apt enough to detract
from every action of our Savior, confess plain enough, when upon this truly
miraculous effect of his Divine Power, they object, that he cast out Devils by
Beelzebub the Prince of the Devils: Mat 9.34.
the first was their Confession, that He did really cast out Devils, the second
was but their malicious and senceless supposition, that he cast them out
through Beelzebub the Prince of the Devils; an Objection, upon another like
occasion, sufficiently exposed by our Savior to the shame of the Objectors.
Here it is worth our observation, that where those brought to our Savior were
really possessed with Devils, our Savior cast them out with a Word only, a short
and peremptory Command; where Persons were brought to him affected with the
same kind of Distempers, without any such Possession, He generally used some
kind of Means, though the reasons of them were unintelligible to the Spectators
then, and to our selves at this day: Thus for the Man that was born blind, He
spate on the ground and made clay with the spittle, Joh. 9.6, 7.
and he anointed the eyes of the blind man with clay, and said unto him, Go
wash in the Pool of Siloam, and he went his way and washed, and then he came
away seeing; Another blind man, that begged his pity at Bethsaida, was cured in
a manner somewhat resembling that; Mark 8.23, 24, 25.
He took the blind Man and spate on his eyes, and put his hands upon him, and
asked him if he saw ought, and when he owned but an imperfect sight, he put his
hands upon his Eyes again, and then he looked up, and saw every Man clearly:
And where he was desired to lay his hands upon one that was Deaf and Dumb,
where it arose, not from a possessing Devil, but from natural impediments, He
put his fingers into his Ears, and he spat, Mar. 7.32, 33, 34, 35.
and touched his tongue, and looking up to Heaven he sighed and said unto him
Ephphatha, Be opened, and the consequence was, straitway his Ears were opened,
and the string of his tongue was loosed, and he spoke plain; Now this account
of the cure of several particular bodily distempers, puts a plain and very
remarkable difference between these griefs caused immediately by the Devil, and
those commonly incident to Mankind. Besides, we often, if not always, find the
Person possessed by an evil Spirit, under some distraction of mind, so the Two
possessed with Devils mentioned before, Mark 5.15.
the Man who was called Legion, because of that multitude of Devils which had
entered him, (who therefore when he was dispossessed, is said to have been in his
right mind:) which though it may arise from bodily distempers, and doubtless
often does so, yet it is generally observed, that where the Devil has taken
Possession of Men's or Women's bodies by Divine Permission either so as to speak
oracularly by them for the delusion of mankind, or to act otherwise maliciously
to their destruction, there are and have been frequent, if not continual
alienations of mind, and desperate ravings and distractions; and it is no wonder
that such an inmate should create nothing but ruins and disorders. Farther, we
find the precise number of seven Devils cast out of Mary Magdalene, we could
scarcely say rationally that they were seven diseases, or, as some dream, that
they were the seven deadly sins: Nor would the casting out of those Devils be
so often repeated, if there had been no more in the case than what was the
ordinary effect of our Lord's goodness to persons in distress, so that, upon
the whole, we may certainly conclude, it was, at the time of our Savior's
comeing into the World, an ordinary thing, comparatively to what it was at
other seasons, for the Devil to enter into and possess, and disorder the bodies
of Men; If we ask the reason why, it may seem to have been permitted,

utmost trial of the possessed persons Patience and Faith, and to excite in them
the more earnest longings for the coming of the Messiah: Thus God permitted the
Devil to assault holy Job with extreme malice and violence, not that he
intended to leave Job wholly in his hand, no; he knew the natural frailties
incident to corrupted nature, and would not permit the enemy to press upon him
beyond what he would enable him to bear, therefore, though the Devil improved
that liberty given him to the utmost for the tormenting of his body, and for
the taking from him all those worldly comforts he had enjoyed before, yet he
could not but complain of that hedge which God by his Providence had set about
him; he could not but be sensible of that restraint laid upon him by a
superior hand; at last, after all the expressions of Diabolical malice against
him, Job comes out from the furnace of his Affliction more Pure, more
Illustrious and Happy, and every way infinitely more considerable than he was
before: Affliction taught him more particularly to depend upon the life of his
Redeemer, he saw his mighty Savior at a distance, but with so clear and strong
a Faith, as preserved him in all his bitter sufferings from sinking in Despair,
while he saw the expiring rage of his cruel Adversary, ready to be swallowed up
in Victory, and himself among others, like to be partaker of his Redeemer's
eternal Triumphs; he rose from the Dunghill he sat on in his misery, more
experienced in the uncertain and unsatisfactory nature of all sublunary things,
in the weakness of his own Temper, and the malice of his Enemy, so that he was
admirably fitted on all hands, to be a Teacher to the rest of the World, both
by his pious Lectures, and his more instructive example: What was the Case of
Job so long before, was the Case of those more numerous Wretches, whom Satan
was permitted to possess about the time of our Savior's Incarnation; though they
were miserable enough, in being the unhappy receptacles of Infernal Spirits,
yet there was a providential guard about them still, which checked the
malicious designs of Hell, and made those poor creatures, though so terrible to
others, yet not to sink by themselves into Despair: those strange effects of an
unusual vigor, apparent in the Persons Possessed, showed the World plainly, how
strong the cursed Inmate was, how little Natural strength was able to oppose
him, and how Dreadful the Prince of Darkness must have been to all, had not
strong and weighty chains been laid upon him. Yet we cannot imagine those
Persons, thus possessed, were deprived so wholly of their Understandings, that
they had no lucid intervals at all, the Man, and the Rational heaven-born Soul
acted sometimes, and the poor Wretches were sensible of their own deplorable
condition; this made them long for a Deliverer, and, when they saw him, not to
punish themselves with ordinary Jewish Prejudices against him, but in spite of
Hell it self and all the reluctance of in-dwelling Devils, to fly to his feet,
and to seek a remedy for their calamities at his hands; they lived in Hope
amidst all their former Torments, and now they showed it, their eyes were not
so thick, but that they could see the Son of God through a veil of flesh, and
of an humble and inferior State; nay, those very Devils within them were
instrumental against their design, to confirm their Faith and Hope, by that
unwillingness they would certainly express to quit any Seat, where they had
engrossed a Power, and to appear before an all-knowing and inexorable Judge;
and, by those Confessions which they made, who, in that point, as to our
Savior's being the Son of God, when they confessed it, were more to be credited
than all the Jewish Doctors and prejudiced Hypocrites put together. We may yet
be sure it was none of the Devil's motion, that made the miserable Demoniac,
when he saw Jesus afar off, run and fall down and worship him: Mark 5.6.
they were Devils who drove the unhappy Wretch to take up his habitation among
the tombs, they were Devils that drove him about the mountains day and night,
where he was continually crying and cutting himself with stones, whatsoever
could be mischievous to him that they urged him to, but it was Reason divinely
influenced, and a deep sense of that slavery he then lay under, that brought
him to his Masters feet, where only help and salvation could be found. Certain
misery generally opens the Eye of Reason, and brings it to an exact weighing of
all things, and an impartial examination of their natures: If it befall an
Impenitent guilty Soul, it gives him an irrefragable conviction of the eternity
of those woes he is engaged in, this makes him desperate; If it be the lot of
One, who, though very guilty, yet endeavors to expiate his crimes by a sincere
Repentance, it makes him find unanswerable reasons why he should still hope in
the Mercy of God, and that with some considerable assurance of being a partaker
in it. Those very Demoniacks in the Gospel, were awakened to a sense of
themselves by that heavy judgment they were laid under, their lucid Intervals
taught them to humble themselves under God's afflicting hand, it made them long
to see the strong Man armed cast out by one that was stronger than he, and
their Liberty asserted by one mighty to save; and therefore they saw, what
stubborn fools would take no notice of, and flew to that Savior with an eager
haste, whom the rest of their more unhappily possessed Country men contemned and
persecuted. Now this, being one reason of God's permission that the Prince of
Darkness should Tyrannize upon humane bodies; it is no wonder He should be more
Active than ordinary, when his Power was drawing toward an end, and it is as
little to be wondered at that he should lose his aim, and that his violence
should make all long the more earnestly, that He who was their much expected
Savior should come quickly. Nor is it any wonder that though God permitted the
Devil to afflict their bodies, yet he himself should support their spirits from
sinking under that calamity, since his own Son's appearance was now at hand,
and Hells utmost fury would easily submit to his Almighty power.

permitted this insolence of the Devil, more particularly about the time of our
Lord's Incarnation, that as the malice and power of the Devil was by that means
the more apparent, so the glory of his Son, and the evidence of his yet greater
power, might be the more illustrious: So that, though Men were under a present
affliction, and that far from being unmerited, since they had sinned to deserve
more than temporal punishment, should God have been extreme to mark what was
done amiss, (as appears by Mary Magdalen's case, to whom our Savior observes,
much was forgiven) yet they were much advantaged by that temporary affliction,
and that freedom they obtained taught them the more industriously to celebrate
God's glory, and to admire that goodness showed by him to the children of Men.
For, when they saw what they had suffered, and how extreme a danger they had
incurred before by yielding to Sin, Men, with their Cure recovering their
Reason, would be afraid to sin any more, lest a worse thing might come to them:
Hence we find the Man possessed with a Legion of Devils, when they were cast out,
desiring to be with his Deliverer, which though it were refused him, yet Christ
bad him go home to his Friends, Mark 5.18, 19.20.
and to tell them how great things the Lord had done for him, and had had
compassion upon him: which accordingly he did, and published in Decapolis how
great things Jesus had done for him: and by this means, all those, who were not
wilfully blind, might easily discover that the Lord whom they expected was
come. Our Savior, by these particular actions, got a mighty advantage against
Pharisaick Prejudices, and evidenced his own glory and their shame at the same
instant. As all ages had showed some on whom the Devil had exercised a more
particular Power, so among the Jews there had been several instances of the
same nature, and as they had a certain knowledge of the miserable state of
those who were so troubled, so pious Men, among the Jews, had had particular
recourse to Almighty God, that God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, interceding by
their Prayers for Mercy and relief for those so visited; they, who were brought
up in the methods of True Religion, applied not themselves to Charms or Magic
Arts to get a victory over him who was the Inventor and Promoter of such Arts,
as the Gentile world did; but they applied themselves to their own God, whose
Mercy and Power they were well acquainted with, and of whom they knew all the
Powers of darkness stood in awe; and it please God often to hear the Prayers of
such pious Persons on behalf of those Demoniacs, and to cast those Fiends out
of them; this dealing of that God who had planted true Religion, among them by
Moses, gave a continual evidence to the Divinity of that Religion; those
ejections of Devils being effected not by the loose devotions of an impious
Rabble, but by the humble and incessant applications of such who lived in
punctual obedience to the Law, and justified its holy nature by their lives and
conversations; these our Savior takes notice of when the Pharisees reproached
him with casting out Devils by Beelzebub the Prince of Devils, when in return
to their scandalous Objection, he asks them, Matthew. ^2.27.
If I by Beelzebub cast out Devils, by whom then do your Children cast them
out? And from thence carries on an argument to convince them of the falseness
of their objection. Now if it were true, that pious Men among the Jews did by
devout Prayers to God cast out Devils, and by so doing confirm their Religion,
(because it was certain God would not hear the Prayers of those, who should
have separated from a Religion of his own Institution) if this were so, then
since Christ lived himself in a complete Obedience to the same divine Law, in
an Obedience so absolute, that he could challenge all his quick-sighted
Adversaries to convince him of sin; and while he lived in such Obedience, did
the same things with those whom they supposed Holy and Good Men, then it must
necessarily follow, that Christ acted as religiously as They, cast out Devils
by the same means, and acted by the same divine Power as those holy men among
themselves did. Had he indeed gone about to seduce them from the Service of the
God of Abraham and Isaac and Jacob, they might justly have exclaimed against
him: but he referred all the glory of what he did to the same God, and appealed
to him as his Father; therefore they could not, upon any just reason, condemn
him as acting by any unlawful ways, while they admired their own Children for
those very things, for which they pretended to condemn Him. From this he
proceeds to a farther Argument in his own vindication: The Devil indeed is
strong and powerful, and where he gets possession is very Hardly removed; If he
pretends on foolish Exorcisms, to quit his hold, it is but to delude the
Ignorant and Credulous, and to return at his own pleasure; if he be not for
that illusion, He cannot be stronger than himself, therefore He cannot cast out
Himself; but the Devil is really and frequently cast out, and that so, as not
to be able to return to his former Mansion when he pleases, therefore he must
be cast out by one really stronger than himself; but there is no Being more
Powerful than the Prince of Darkness, 1 Timothy 3.16.
except only that God who created him, therefore it must be by the strength of
that great God that He was cast out. Now that our Savior frequently cast out
Devils, nay that the very Disciples who followed him, and who acted only by a
Power delegated from him, cast out Devils, was plain to the Eyes of all Men,
therefore both the Master and the Disciples cast out Devils by a Power truly
Divine: for, as our Savior urges them, How can one enter into a strong man's
house, Matthew. 12.29.
and spoil his goods, except he first bind the strong man, which He that does
must be stronger than He, and then He will spoil his goods: Thus were those
captious Adversaries of their own happiness baffled, and thus was the Glory of
our blessed Savior increased; for by this means, being in the outward
Communion of the Jewish Church, and asserting the Honor of the same God whom
they worshipped, it must appear plain beyond Contradiction, that He really came
from God, that he was the Anointed of God, That Messiah upon whose comeing both
They and their Fathers had for many ages built their hopes. The frequency then
of the Devils exercising his Tyranny at that time upon men's bodies, gave our
Savior the more frequent opportunities of exerting his own Divinity, and so
the Devil himself, that great Enemy of his appearance, was the great Evidence
of the truth of that appearance, and that by those very means, by which he
hoped principally to obstruct those benefits flowing from his Appearance; so
numerous Rebels starting up in several quarters of the Kingdom, give a
well-arm'd Prince the greater opportunities of becomeing more Absolute than
before, by those very methods whereby they hoped to have shaken off his Yoke,
and to have set up a Government according to their own fancies. To this
Consideration might perhaps be added, that this great prevalency of the
Infernal Powers about the time of our Savior's appearance, was one certain
evidence of that fullness of time in which the Messiah was to be revealed, since
it was a great evidence of the general Deluge of Wickedness, which then had
overflowed the World, so that it was full time for the Son of God to interpose
with his Power, lest God's anger should have consigned a generally infected
World to his Revenge, who waited for it, and began to domineer in it as his
own: but

Image of their great Creator was impressed, there he loved to Tyrannize, and
as far as possible to deface that glorious original Image, and He prevailed but
too effectually. The Devil had seduced a great part of the World entirely from
the Service of the Creator to himself the worst of Creatures; He had set up his
own Altars in every place, and made an unthinking Generation prostrate
themselves to him for good and assistance, when the World contained no other
Enemy to their good but himself; it may seem strange that the World should
have been seized with so gross a Stupidity, as to be liable to the fatal
Mistake, but when ignorance prevails, it is no wonder that a Spirit of such
active subtlety should extend his Conquests very far, where the Soul is once
made like a fair Table without any impression, it is easy for the first that
attempts it to draw the Pourtraict of the Devil upon it; now the Engines by
which the Devil held the Soul in slavery were these

False Interests: Interest is what goes a great way in managing the affairs of
this World; where it is conceived to lie, it often excites in vigorous and
apprehensive Souls a strange industry and eagerness to carry on whatsoever
seems subservient to it; nay, he is justly looked upon as his own Enemy, who
does not observe his own Interests, and prosecute them to extremity; this the
Devil knowing very well, set false Interests before the Eyes of much the
greater part of Mankind, some few sagacious Souls were sensible of his
Subtleties, and stood upon their guard, kept their Eyes so open that his
Lethaean bough was unable to close them, but the rest were lulled by the fatal
music of bewitching Sirens into such Dreams, as nothing but eternal ruins
could awake them from; thus the Devil persuaded Men, That Liberty was their
interest, not that sacred liberty from sin and guilt, which Divine Religion
offers to the Soul, but a wild extravagance, the product of wretched
inconsideracy, which carries men out into all excess of wickedness, a Liberty
which has no bounds but what time and mortality sets before it, and yet, which
is so far from being a true Liberty, that it is the most miserable, and to the
Soul, when it has leisure but to think a little, the most intolerable slavery
in the World. But however Liberty is the word, and it carries charms along with
it, and too too few reflect upon it so far as to distinguish between what is
Real and Fictitious. It is the Interest of Mankind to seek for Pleasure, i. e.
to seek to live always with Him, in whose presence is fullness of joy, and at
whose right hand there are pleasures for evermore: but here Hell plays again
with Ambiguities, and gives not Men leisure to distinguish or judge of
Pleasures, false or true, transient or perpetual: But Pleasure and Liberty are
such Interests, as no Wise Man can cease to prosecute, therefore Men must take
a world of pains to glut themselves with sensual Pleasures, where Sorrows and
Torments have their shares, and they must have Liberty to be damned in spite of
all the whineing Lectures of men pretending to true Religion, and to teach Men
saving Wisdom; there are some petty Moral Virtues which Hell it self would
recommend, lest a general hurry into Vice should give so horrid a Prospect of
things as should startle the most insensate Brute, and make him desire at least
to live in Peace with the World, for his own security; but it is Interest still
for any Man to do wrong to his Neighbors, when he finds himself strong enough
to justify his pretensions by Force: And whether he succeeds or no, the Devil
gains his ends, which is the destruction of Mankind, which he always promotes
so far as he may safely do it, without rendering his Advices suspicious to his
own Vassals; so that, according to the Divinity of Hell, it is Man's Interest
to be extremely Ambitious, extremely Debauched, extremely Wicked; in all these
things corrupt Nature loves to go on without check or restraint. But if it be
not safe for the same Person to take his swing in every respect, any One of
them is enough to damn him eternally, and he may indulge himself in what he
pleases. But whereas the Soul sometimes reflects upon futurity, there are
Elysian fields provided for the Fancy to exercise it self upon, where it may be
Rewards are promised to some Popular Virtues, but neither the Sensualist, nor
the irregularly Ambitious, nor the Pitiful Effeminate Souls shall be excluded
from them. It was always the suggestion of Hell, that the Messengers of Heaven
had no other design but to yoke men under unreasonable severities, to debar
them of all the delights of life, to engage them in morose and sullen courses,
and all with a prospect only of a Chimaerical happiness, such as had no being
but in the talk of those who invented it; now these things must needs sound
very harshly to Flesh and Blood, and arm Men against that Religion which should
pretend to invade such rights and privileges: This argument Hell made use of
principally against the Jewish Religion of old, and endeavored on all
occasions to expose it to the rest of Mankind. When the worth and import of
Jewish Ceremonies was almost at an end, then to the Jews the suggestion was,
That their Holy Religion, that Law given to them in so extraordinary a manner
by the hand of God himself, was like to be trodden under foot, that God's
Temple, the Glory of their Nation, was like to be destroyed, and it must
certainly be their Interests, who had just hopes of Salvation by their Law, to
defend it against all encroachments and alterations whatsoever. Against
Christianity it was easy to persuade the Gentiles, That all those Gods whom
they had so long adored, and by whose kind influences they had so long been
happy, were now like to be set at naught, that they would be tempted to a
persuasion which the Wise and Inquisitive Heads, the subtle Philosophers of
those Ages, who yet were the Wisest Men, and the greatest Examples, would never
admit of, that therefore, if they embraced it, they must certainly incur the
odium of all the World, and prepare themselves to suffer whatsoever the joint
furies of the Universe could inflict upon them, and it was certainly their
Interest to write after the Copy of the Philosophic Tribe, to assert the
Honor of their ancient Deities, and to live in a good correspondence with all
mankind: These suggestions were fair and plausible, and golden Interest every
way glittering in men's faces; these introduced

Violent and unreasonable Prejudices against all those means which should be
made use of by Heaven, to assert Men into a true and substantial liberty from
that Hellish slavery they had been inured to: Now if the case be never so plain
that Men are really in a place of torment, and that they feel it severely, if
their Looks and Cries and Complaints make others take notice of and pity their
Condition, and yet One that goes to persuade them of the uneasiness of their
lives, and offers to disengage them from those pains they feel, and proves,
beyond contradiction, that his Power is sufficient to effect what he pretends
to, cannot be heard, nor his Offers attended to or accepted, it must
necessarily be concluded, that such Persons lie under some very unaccountable
Prejudice against the Person of the Offerer, or that Authority invested in him.
Such was the condition of the world in general at our Lord's appearance in our
Nature, they were all Prisoners to their greatest enemy, to him who desired to
be the eternal tormenter both of their Bodies and their Souls, that Liberty he
pretended to indulge them with was nothing, but extreme Slavery, the most base
and unworthy of a rational Creature that possibly could be contrived, like that
wherein the Poet tells us Circe kept the Companions of Ulysses, where they,
were turned to Wolves and Dogs and Swine, the very tortures of which beastly
state made some more fiery Souls conclude it was better by their own hands to
disengage themselves from those weighty fetters they mourned in, than endure so
base a confinement. To these our Savior appeared, that Sun of Righteousness
came to them with healing in his wings; Compassion to their wretched condition
drew him from the bosom of his Father and made him manifest himself in the
flesh. The end of his descent was, That whosoever believed in him should not
perish but have everlasting life: That all might believe in him, He fully and
clearly stated their own miserable condition before their eyes, he showed them
the Strength and Malice of their Tyrant, their own inability to get free from
those Chains he had laid upon them, his own readyness to be their Deliverer, if
they would but depend upon him for it, and he gave all Men every day new Proofs,
that he was able to make good what he offered, the Devil, who was their
Persecutor, flying before him as a Wolf would before a generous Lion, or a
Child before a Giant. Yet after all this our Savior came even to his own, as
the Evangelist assures us, and his own received him not, Joh. 1.11.
He came among them at that precise time which their Prophets had assigned to
his advent. He came when their Religion was almost vanished into Air, and the
Law of Moses of no more Authority among a company of nice Scribes and
Pharisees, than the whole Book of God was afterward among the Schoolmen. They
looked every day for his coming, and could not avoid being sensible of their
present wants: But for all this, the Devil had filled them with such ridiculous
Jealousies of their Law, and with such Prodigious Prejudices against the Person
of Him, they so long waited for; that necessity it self could make but very few
of them own or believe in him. It Is true, he appeared but in the form of a
servant, in a very mean and despicable state, and the Jews, being enslaved to a
Foreign Power, expected some mighty Monarch who should have broke the Roman
fetters, and have made Jerusalem sensibly superior to all the Cities upon
Earth: Prejudice in the mean time shut their eyes so strongly, that they could
not see, that He who was able to heal all manner of Distempers, to quell the
Ragings of a stormy Sea, to drive whole Legions of Infernal Spirits before him
with a Word, notwithstanding the meanness of his outward garb, might be able,
if he saw it good, to effect all these mighty conquests they expected at his
appearance; as if his saving Power had depended only on the Greatness of his
Retinue, the Gayety of his Habit, or the Grandeur of his Court. The Gentiles
had their Prejudices too; they thought a Contemptible Man far too weak td
baffle all those numerous Deities whose directions they had so long managed
themselves by; they concluded that one Crucified by the prosecution of his own
Country Men, one whose Disciples freely owned his ignominious Death, and seemed
proud of their Master's Cross, whose Apostles pretended to no elaborate
Eloquence, to no niceties of Argument, to no depth of Learning, and yet would
always be Preaching in their Master's name, they concluded it impossible that
such a One should be the World's Savior, that such Messengers should really be
the authentic Ambassadors of Heaven, though they too did numerous miracles in
the name of Him they preached, and without Learning baffled all the wit and
arguments of their nimble Sophisters: As if it were the outward appearance, and
not the inherent power and authority of a person, that must effect the mighty
work; or as if complete Liberty could not be worth a Man's acceptance, unless
it were given by a royal hand; It must certainly be a strange ascendant which
Hell had over mankind, which could infatuate them so far, and persuade such
vast numbers to build their own eternal ruin upon such pitiful Objections.

Prodigious and unaccountable Laziness, such as made them absolutely unready to
contribute to their own happiness. They saw themselves abused by those Gods
they worshipped, their Credulity imposed on, and their good Intentions
perverted, this they publicly declared. They found themselves cheated with an
empty show of knowledge, and caressed by others, like themselves, for their
Philosophic achievements, when indeed they were not able so much as to agree
about the Supreme Good, but fell into more than 300. different opinions about
it, though they accounted the achievement of that good the great end of all
Humane Actions. This they could not but laugh at themselves; They saw that
notwithstanding their continual Declamations against unsociable Vices or
notorious Immoralities, their very Instructors themselves scarce deserved the
names of Men, by reason of their dissolute and irregular lives; They found
themselves irrecoverably addicted to all those very things which themselves
branded as irrational and odious; This they lamented, and they seemed earnestly
to wish for a remedy of all these evils; but they were like the Clown in the
ditch, they would cry to Heaven for help, but never went about to rescue themselves
by Care and Industry from those Calamities they were involved in. The Devil
could well enough bear with all the Remonstrances of those who were sensible of
the World's deplorable state, so long as Sloth had seized their Vitals, and
would permit them to go no further than empty Lamentations. Nothing can render
Men more ridiculous or contemptible, than this Temper, to their cruel
Adversary: the very Heathens could represent their ancient Hero's as Men of
daring Spirits, never giving themselves to ignoble Ease, but traveling
continually through the World, to seek Adventures worthy of their Strength and
Courage; yet they could easily forget their own Examples, and languish in a
miserable slavery to Sin, neither combat with their own Vices, nor with the
Temptations of the Devil; they could not so much as find the way to Him who was
able to assist them, who could renew their languid Souls with a sprightly
Vigor, and make them, by the influences of his sacred Spirit, triumphant over
all their in-born Corruptions; the Blind were desirous to be led to him, the
Lame to be carried to him, only those who were under inward and more mortal
Distempers showed no forwardness to be cured by an Almighty hand. When the
Wiseman describes the Sluggard's Vineyard, and shows us the Fences thereof
broken down, the Surface of it covered with Thorns and nettles, and the
Sluggard himself so far from regarding it that he stretches himself upon his
Bed and cries, Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the
hands to sleep, he characterizes the general disposition of Men under the
Influences of Hell, overgrown with all manner of Impieties, unguarded against
all manner of Temptations, and yet dull and stupefied under all their Miseries.
When we reflect upon this general Captivity of rational Creatures to Vice and
Folly, when we reflect upon that spiritless Weakness they groaned under, when
we see them lazy in their own nearest concerns, prejudiced against all the ways
of their own Deliverance, pursuing Bubbles with a ridiculous Earnestness, and
imagining it their greatest Interest to undo themselves; we cannot well
persuade our selves, that any ordinary means could help the miserable, or
relieve the oppressed, or let the Prisoners go free. The chains and violences
of Hell are not easily broken, and the attempts of Weaklings in the Case would
but increase the sorrow of the Sufferers; but when the blessed Jesus revealed
himself, in the fullness of time; when he began, by mighty works, to exert his
power; when he commissioned his Disciples to go through the Cities of Israel,
and to preach Repentance, and to work Miracles of all sorts; when those
Disciples, returning again to give an account of their Ministry, told their
Master, that even Evil Spirits themselves were subject unto them through his
name, our Savior observes, Luke 10.18.
that he saw Satan, like lightning, fall from Heaven; he had put an end to that
height of power the Devil had pleased himself in before. He had seemed to
himself to be like the most High, invested in an absolute Dominion over the
World; but he was now fallen from his Height, and should no more be able to
deceive the Nations with that success he had formerly had; for the Gospel then
preached, set before Men, in plain terms, the true and only good they were to
aim at; it laid out the means tending directly to that good; it showed Men
their frequent Failures indeed, but an infallible Atonement for them in the
Death of their Savior; and showed the Holy Spirit ready to assist all their
pious Endeavors after Happiness, by which the Works of the Devil were
effectually destroyed.

That the World might be convinced that the Law given by Moses to the Jewish
Nation, was really the Law of God, and that it could not therefore be repealed
by any Power or Authority whatsoever, but his who was God. The last part of
this Reason is a necessary consequence upon the first; for in all Countries the
sanction and repealing of Laws require one and the same Authority at least;
nay, where it is possible, the annulling of a Law requires much the greater
Power; thus among the Romans, the Edictum Praetoris, or the Praetor's Edict,
had the force of a Law, and Obedience was absolutely required to it, only it
might be rescinded by a Rescript of the Emperor, whose Power was indisputable
both over the Praetor and his Law; but the Praetor could not repeal an Imperial
Rescript, nor his own Edict, after an Imperial Confirmation: thus God can
vacate all Humane Laws, when and where he pleases, because he is superior to
all Laws but those flowing from his own Nature; but it is a damning Sin for Man
to go about to vacate God's Laws, because Man, in his highest state has no
other Authority but what he derives from God, who cannot be supposed to give
any Man an Authority contradictory to his own, or that should interfere with
it; but among Men, as in the Roman Empire it required an Imperial Power to
repeal an Imperial Sanction; so among our selves, an Act of Parliament can be
repealed only by an Act of Parliament, the King in Parliament being in all
respects whatsoever, the supreme Power of the Nation. Thus we see the
Parallelism between both the making and disannulling both Divine and Humane
Laws; so that it appears altogether rational, that the Mosaic Law, if
originated from God, should be repealed by God. As for the Law of Moses, that
it was given by God, and only by him, he that reads the Scripture, and owns
that to be the Word of God, must of necessity believe, and the Jews to this day
are so strongly possessed with that Assurance, that all the World knows the
vacating that by One, who appeared but a mean Man, is one great prejudice the
Jews make use of at this day against Christianity; they are certain God gave
their Law and every part of it, they are as certain that the same God only
could change or take it away, they conclude, as our Socinians do, That Jesus
was a mere Man and no God, therefore they look upon him as very wicked for
pretending to put an end to that Law. Now, if we wanted the Scripture to
confirm us in that Knowledge, a bare Reflection upon the behavior of the
Jewish Nation at all times is enough to satisfy us, that God was the Author of
their Law. For if we look upon them as esteemed by their Neighbors, they were
never looked upon as the veriest Fools and Ignorants in the Universe, that
Ptolomey, who procured the Translation of the Old Testament into Greek, thought
the Books of their Law worth procuring at a vast expense, so he and several
adjacent Nations at all times were ready to enter into terms of Confederacy
with them, etc. But were they never so wise or knowing in any thing, they never
found any reason to shake off the Yoke of the Law of Moses; they owned it upon
all occasions, and, as at first, when they fell under any extreme Affliction,
they had immediately recourse to the Law and to the Testimony; from whence they
re-confirm'd their Apprehensions of the true God, the God of their fathers, and
applied themselves to Him; so afterward, they employed themselves earnestly in
vindicating that Law from any Aspersions which their Enemies might lay upon it,
and in endeavoring to procure Proselytes to that Law, from among the
neighboring Nations. But now we must have a very mean opinion of the Jews, if
we can imagine a whole Nation should submit themselves to a body of Laws, for a
course of several ages; that they should believe it their indispensible duty to
obey all the particular Injunctions of a Law that was extremely nice and
difficult to be observed; such a Law as, in its Ceremonial part, was very
troublesome and heavy, yet necessary enough, considering the Temper of the
People it was given to, and the great end and aim of it; that they should own
the obliging force of this Law, notwithstanding those many Rebellions against
it which they were guilty of, and which there stood upon record against them,
to their perpetual Reproach and Shame; that they should be infinitely nice in
preserving the Copies of their Law pure and incorrupt, though it contained so
many Prophecies and Threatenings against them, and the accounts of so many
Terrible Judgments executed against them for their Stubbornness, Disobedience
and Incorrigibility, and that, after all, they should expose their lives to
Tortures and to Death it self for the sake of these very Laws, rather than by
any force be drawn to renounce or to trespass upon an ordinary Ceremony of
them; we must have a very mean opinion of the Jews, if we can believe they
would do and suffer all these things for the sake of such a Law, whose Original
they really were unacquainted with, or they could be persuaded to assert its
coming in an extraordinary manner from the hand of God himself, when there were
so many in all parts of the World, who because they would not admit of it, were
engaged by their proper Interests, and for their own credit, to ruin its
reputation, if they were not able to prove beyond contradiction, that their Law
had its Original from God himself. Now since so little has appeared against the
Divine Original of the Jewish Law, in any age, and that little has been so very
easily baffled, we can the less wonder that the scattered Posterity of the Jews
to this day should be so hardly persuaded to quit that Law. Since they have
unanswerable Reasons to believe that as it did proceed immediately from God, so
it could be abrogated by none but the same God, therefore those who go about to
persuade the World, that Jesus Christ the Messiah was not God, but a mere Man,
and so confirm their old Prejudices taken up against our Savior during his
converse upon earth; such lay a desperate Stumbling Block in the way of the
Conversion of those miserable People; for our great Interest is against them to
prove that Jesus Christ was God, for, that being granted, they will easily yield,
that He was the Messiah, and that he lawfully might abrogate the Law of Moses,
in part or in the whole, as He himself thought good.

When we speak thus of the Abrogation of the Mosaic Law, it is to be observed,
that part of what is comprised in the Books of Moses, is the Law of Nature, so
not His by any peculiar Title, and therefore, though in his Books, not
repealable, some part of his Laws were Political, which, since the Fall of the
Jewish State and their penal Dispersion, are impracticable, and consequently
antiquated of themselves; those Laws therefore which we at this time more
particularly respect, are those called Ceremonial Laws, appropriated wholly to
the Jewish Nation in distinction from all others, and made Authentic by the
Authoritative Sanction of God himself; this was that Law, which as it had a
particular respect unto the Coming of the Messiah, being full of Types and
Shadows, representing what He was to do and suffer, so it could rationally be
no more than Temporal, and expire of course at such time as the Messiah the
Antitype should appear in the World: and since the Messiah, when come, would
be able to effect all those things for Men, which those Types and Shadows did
but point at, the Jews themselves could not but be glad to have that Burden
removed which neither they nor their Fathers were able to bear, when that
promised Messiah was really come; therefore we see that all that Fondness the
Jews at present express toward their Ceremonial Law, arises only from their
mis-perswasion, that the Messiah really is not yet come. But if the Ceremonial
Law were really given to the Jews by God himself, and yet was to be abrogated
at last, there must certainly appear some reasons for that Abrogation, beside
the mere Authority of the Repealer, sufficient to justify the Repeal it self;
and such are,

general Import, just mentioned, they were Types and Shadows only, they could
be no more in their own Natures, nor was it necessary they should be more; they
were Figures for the time then present, Heb. 9.9, 10.
wherein were offered both Gifts and Sacrifices, and wherein was much sollitude
about meats and drinks and diverse washings, and carnal ordinances were then
imposed upon the Jews until the time of reformation, says the Author of the
Epistle to the Hebrews; that those Sacrifices offered under the Law were but
Vanity in their own Nature, the Jews have been sensible themselves; so in their
Midrasch Koheleth, or Gloss on Ecclesiastes, on that passage, Eccles 2.1.
I said in my heart, go to now, I will prove thee with mirth, therefore enjoy
pleasure, and behold this also is vanity, they comment thus, Enjoy pleasure or
good, i. e. the good of the Law, and behold even that is Vanity; sure the
Scripture ought to have said, behold that is pleasure or good; what then is the
Preacher's meaning to say, behold that also is Vanity? Rabbi Hezekiah said, All
that Law which thou learnest in this age is but Vanity, Ragmundi Martini Pugio
fidei pars 3. distinct. 3. c. 11.. 12.
in competition with the Law of the Ages to come; by the Law of the Ages to
come, they mean the Law of the Messiah, for so they explain it in their Comment
on chap. 11. v. 8. where they positively say, All that Law which a Man learns
in this age, or at the present, is Vanity, (...) in comparison with, or in
presence of the Law of the Messiah; and they had reason for their Opinion: for
though the Ceremonial appendages of the Law had respect principally to the
service of God, yet they were all external, such as could not possibly affect
the Soul, yet the Jews themselves conclude the Soul the principal part
concerned in their worship of God, in the Midrash Tehillim on that of the
Psalmist, Ps. 51.17.
The sacrifices of God are a broken spirit, a broken and a contrite heart O God
thou will not despise. Now, if we reflect on the nature of their Sacrifices
offered to God by Fire, they were expiatory; the blood of those Sacrifices was
shed and sprinkled for the atoneing Heaven for the Sins of the Offerers; but as
the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews asserts, The Law can never with those
Sacrifices, Heb. 10.1.4. Numb. 19.
offered year by year continually, make the comers to them perfect: and that
it is not possible that the blood of Bulls or of Goats should take away sin.
The Water of Separation prepared with the Ashes of a Red Heifer was to purify
the Unclean, but it could only purify them outwardly, no inward Pollution
could be removed by a sprinkling with it; therefore David in a state of
extraordinary inward guilt, begs of God, Create in me a clean heart, O God,
Psalm. 51.10.
and renew a right spirit within me; and elsewhere he declares, I will wash my
hands in innocence, and so will I compass thine Altar: Psalm. 26.6.
therefore we find, that during the whole force of the Ceremonial Law, the
outward Purifications might, on an extraordinary Occasion, as that of
Hezekiah's Passover, be dispensed with, but the inward Purification of the
Heart was a duty absolutely indispensible; whence it was, that when several of
Ephraim, and Manasseh, and Issachar, and Zabulun, had not cleansed themselves,
Hezekiah put up that petition for them to God, 2 Chronicles. 30.18, 19, 20.
The good Lord pardon every one that prepares his heart to seek God, the Lord
God of his fathers, though he be not cleansed according to the purification of
the Sanctuary, and the Lord hearkened to Hezekiah, and healed the people: which
additional Passage intimates, that God inflicted some punishment on the People
for participating of the Passover when legally unprepared, so to teach them a
Lesson of punctual Obedience; but he healed them upon account of their inward
and spiritual Preparation, to satisfy them, that he esteemed inward Holiness
beyond all the ceremonial Purifications of the Sanctuary. In the Law there were
a great many Washings appointed, and upon several occasions; the Scribes and
Pharisees, by virtue of some Traditions of their own, added more, Mark 7.3, 4.
they would not eat except they washed their hands, and when they came from
their markets they washed; and there were many other things which they had
received to hold, as the washing of Cups, and Pots, and of brazen Vessels, and
of Tables. Now all these things might contribute to outward Purity, and argued
a great care of Cleanliness; nor were the Jews to have been condemned for these
practices, if they had not laid too great a weight upon them, and for the sake
of such Purifications, banished all thoughts of true inward Purity out of their
minds, and this our Savior reproves them for, not condemning their outward
Neatness, but their making void the Law of God by their Traditions; and he
carries the reproof yet further, Matthew. 23.25.
Woe unto you Scribes, Pharisees, Hypocrites, for you make clean the outside of
the cup, and of the platter, but within they are full of extortion and excess,
etc. But the Purity of the Soul was what God principally regarded, and those
outward Washings originally ordained in the Law, were so many Types designed to
put Men in mind of that clean Hand and that pure Heart which every one was to
endeavor after. If we look into Circumcision it self, that great initiating
Ceremony in the Jewish Church, it was really a preventive of natural
Uncleanness, yet though it were made by God the Seal of that Covenant between
himself and the Seed of Abraham, the Jews had a right notion of what that
Ceremony was to put them in mind of, given them by Moses himself, Deuteronomy. 10.16.
so he bids them to circumcise the foreskin of their hearts, and to be no more
stiff-necked; Stubbornness and Disobedience were the Uncleanness of the Heart,
therefore what care the Jews took to prevent that of Nature, it was reasonable
they should take to remove that accruing from Sin; Moses therefore promises it
as a great Blessing from Heaven on them in case of their sincere Repentance
when under God's afflicting hand, Deuteronomy. 30.6.
the Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart, and the heart of thy seed, to love
the Lord thy God with all thine heart and with all thy soul, that thou may
live; where the stubborn Heart is once mollified, the Love of God is easily
settled in it. Now that this Circumcision could effect nothing, ex opere
operato, or that it could contribute nothing to the Obedience of the Soul, we
see demonstrated by the case of the Jews at present, who are careful enough in
performing the outward Rite of Circumcision, and yet obdurate and unmalleable
by all the Tendries of the Gospel, therefore the Apostle has furnished us with
an easy Distinction between a Jew by Nature, or one descended lineally from
Abraham, and a Jew by Grace, or one allied to Abraham spiritually, as he was
the Father of the Faithful: for, says He, He is not a Jew that is one
outwardly, Romans 2.28, 29.
neither is that Circumcision which is outward in the flesh but he is a Jew
which is one inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the Heart in the spirit,
whose praise is not of men but of God: We see then that these Ceremonies, to
instance in no more, have only a Typical Nature, and can have no more, because
though they may serve to represent to our Memories the solid Duties of sincere
Religion, yet it is impossible they should operate on the inward Man, or, in
themselves, make any one that is punctual in them acceptable in the sight of
God: Nor was there any need they should be more than Memorials or
Representations of more important Good; for those Ceremonial Vsages were from
their first beginning, whether among Adam's universal Race, or the People of
Israel, intended only as comfortable supports to men's Spirits, otherwise ready
to droop under the various pressing calamities of a mortal Life: God had given
Adam the promise of the blessed Seed, whose heel was to be bruised by the
Serpent, which bruise signified Death, unless we can imagine Adam so weak as to
draw any comfort from a literal Interpretation of the words; but that sense
could really afford none more than a promise, that I should break the Head of
some Snake, and that should bite or wound my Heel, could be a matter of
consolation to all Mankind; but Adam's case was this, He saw how his Folly and
Disobedience had made way to Sin and Death to tyrannize over all his own
Posterity, that the Sin committed was irrevocable, the wages of Sin
consequently inevitable, these thoughts were enough to deject the most daring
Spirits, and Adam, without the interposition of immense Goodness, must have
sunk irrecoverably beneath the dreadful weight of his own Misery. What could
prevent his despair, could only be this, an Assurance that the Powers of Sin
and Death should not totally prevail, but there should, by some sufficient
means, be a stop effectually put to their Tyranny. This Assurance God designed
to give him in that memorable Promise, which though spoken to the Serpent, was
only a terrible Threatening to him, but a precious Promise to Adam, I will put
enmity between thee and the Woman, Genesis 3.15.
and between thy seed and her seed, it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall
bruise his heel: The bare settling an Enmity between Him, who had tempted Adam
by the Serpent, and the Seed of the Woman, could have signified little to
Adam's satisfaction; he had suffered too deeply in the first engagement with
Him, and therefore could not wish his Posterity engaged in a perpetual Warfare
with so subtle an Adversary, therefore the following words, the seed of the
Woman shall bruise the Serpent's head, contained the Comfort longed for: To
bruise the Head is to wound a vital part; to crush it, is to put an end to all
the strength and vigor of the Animal so crushed, nothing can be more fatal to
a real Serpent, than a Wound inflicted there, it may live some time afterward,
and when the Head is crushed, may threaten with the Tail, but those Threatenings
are languid and easily to be avoided. If therefore the Seed of the Woman could
crush the Serpent's Head, he must get the Mastery and entire Conquest over all
the Wiles and Stratagems, over all the Strength and Violence of the Devil; so
as He must;, for the future, lose his Interests and Power, and be defeated in
the expected events of his Malice, and in short, have his Tyranny wholly broken
by the Seed of the Woman; this was what alone could comfort Adam after his
fatal Error: But this Victory was not to be so easily gotten, but that the Seed
of the Woman must be partaker of the Inconveniences of the War; the serpent
must bruise his heel, or wound his inferior Part, that which was at the
greatest distance from his Vitals and from the Head, that governing, directing,
advising, instructing Part; so that the Government and Power of the Woman's
Seed was not to be ended, but he was to lose some Blood in that Conflict in
which the Serpent's head was to be crushed; without Bloodshed then there could
be no Victory obtained, nor must the Seed of the Woman be absolutely
invulnerable; for had he been so, there could have been no shedding of Blood,
and consequently no hope for remission to miserable Man. Now those Sacrifices
afterward offered, wherein the blood of living Creatures was shed, were
propitiatory, or designed to atone that God who was justly displeased with Sin
and Sinners, not as if the blood of Bulls, or Goats, or Lambs had any thing
propitiatory in their own Nature; but they were to represent continually to the
Offerers minds, that effectually propitiatory Blood which was to be shed in the
great Combat between the Seed of the Woman and the Serpent, wherein the former
was to suffer in his less noble and inferiourly originated part; and if those
outward a scrifices effected so much, they did as much as possibly they could,
and as much as was necessary for them to do; for while Men had daily before
their Eyes a representation of that bloody Contest, wherein that great and
malicious Enemy of Mankind was to be entirely conquered, Men had reason always
to live in hopes, and to reap inviolable Comforts from those hopes. But now
after all, if those Commemorative or Typical Sacrifices did bring to mind that
Blood afterward to be shed, then, when that Blood so represented was actually
shed, there was no need of any farther prophetical Representation, and if the
several Washings and Purifications, under the Law, related to that inward
Cleanness and Purity, which was afterward, by a more proper medium, to be
effected, then when upon the Conquest gained by the Woman's Seed over that
infernal Serpent, that Sacred Blood was shed, which was able to cleanse Mankind
from all Sin, the inward Purity of the Soul was effectually procured, and
ceremonial Purifications were rendered altogether useless, and therefore that
Law enjoining such Ceremonies might very well be disannulled, since Types or
Shadows were never invented by any with any other design but to be vacated and
abolished at such times as those things appeared, of which they were designed
at first to be the Shadows or Representations.

The Ceremonial Law, though given to the Jews at first by God himself, yet
might very well be abrogated, because in it self it was not essentially
necessary to the being or well-being of a Church; had it been so, it had been
unchangeable, because it had been a part of the Law of Nature, as the Moral Law
was, that received no additions or diminutions by the Ceremonial Law, nor by
the coming, or the inherent Legislative Power of the Messiah. The truth of this
reason, that the Ceremonial Law is not necessary to the being or the wellbeing
of a Church, we find by the existence of the Christian Church among our selves
at this day, and by a due reflection upon the Church of God existent in the
World before the time of Moses's receiving a Law from Mount Sinai. We cannot
deny but that the Roman part of the Christian World is as much, nay infinitely
more, clogged with Ceremonies than that of the Jews ever was, though we take in
the traditional part of Jewish Ceremonies, which had no foundation in what was
delivered by Moses; this our Church takes notice of in that preface concerning
Ceremonies, prefixed to the Liturgy, where giving the reason why many Ceremonies
were taken away, which had been used in times of Popery, She tells us, Preface
of Ceremonies why some abol. some kept.
It is partly because the great excess and multitude of them had so increased
in these latter days, that the burden of them was intolerable, whereof St.
Augustine, in his time, complained, that they were grown to such a multitude,
that the estate of Christian People was in worse case, concerning that matter,
than were the Jews, and therefore he advised the taking away that burden as
there was opportunity: but if he complained then, much more would he have done
so had he seen the number of those in use at the time of the Reformation, to
which the Multitude he had seen was nothing to be compared: which multitude of
Ceremonies was so great, and many of them so dark, that they did more confound
and darken, than declare and set forth Christ's Benefits to us. This Persuasion
was so rationally settled in the minds of our first Reformers, that whatsoever
the Enemies of it may pretend, the established Church of England, as distinct
from that of Rome, was settled with the fewest and the most decent Ceremonies
of any National Church in the Christian World; and upon that reason, among
others, has been accounted the Glory of the Reformation, by all but a few
Ungrateful, and Hypocritical Schismatics, whose viperine Rage has always been
endeavoring to tear out the Bowels of their Mother. Indeed under the Roman
Cloud of numberless Ceremonies, true Christianity has been almost lost, and the
Strength and Purity of that Holy Religion delivered to the World by our Savior
and his Apostles, perverted into gaudy Show and ridiculous Pageantry:
Simplicity, as far as it interferes not with Brutality and Slovenliness, best
becomes the Economy of the Gospel; and to be sure the Everlasting Truth will
shine brightest there, where there is no Artifice made use of to disguise it,
nor more of Weight in matters of Salvation laid upon outward Circumstances than
upon inward and solid Sincerity and Holiness. This was the Ornament of God's
Church before the Mosaic particular Dispensation, for though it were impossible
for Adam, or any of the Antediluvian Patriarchs, or for Abraham and his
Posterity, till the Redemption out of Aegyt, to perform their Sacrifices
without somewhat of Ceremony, yet neither the same nor the same number were
required of them, as were afterward enjoined the Israelites in the Wilderness;
and yet we cannot deny but the Church of God was as inwardly glorious, and
their Services as really acceptable to Almighty God, as the Jewish Service was,
when adorned with all those beautiful Circumstantials which the Law of Moses
had appointed. But now if the Church had a Being in the World, and a Well-being
too, before the Mosaic Service was determined, then it follows plainly, that
those Ceremonies enjoined by Moses, though directed by God himself in every
particular, were not essential to, nor inseparable from the Church of God. Nay
that very great Ceremony of Circumcision, though it began as high as Abraham
himself, that particular Friend of God, was no way essential to the Church, and
therefore not laid on Noah, not used by Melchisedech, nor known by the Saints
of the Antediluvian World. Besides, supposing the Patriarchs had had a whole
set of Ceremonies, and those Typical as those of the Jews afterward were, yet
we may certainly conclude, that they were not the same with those the Jews had,
for then that Exactness required of Moses in every punctilio, and by Moses
required of the Levitical Priests, would have been needless, for that Method of
serving God, which Men are brought up to is easy and strongly enough retained
by them, without any such extraordinary Niceness. But then, if these
Ante-Mosaic Ceremonies were not the same with those from Sinai, and yet could
be abolished to make room for them, then those from Sinai might, with as little
Inconvenience, be laid aside, for the Prescriptions of the Messiah, and those
very few Ceremonial Circumstances, the simplicity and significancy of the
Gospel it self required: Besides, if we consider the whole reason why so many
particular Ceremonies were enjoined the Jews, we shall find that they had a
double respect, i. e. either to the future Advent of the Messiah, or to the
securing the Jews from the pest of Idolatry, with which all their Neighbors,
and indeed all other Nations, at that time, were infected. God designed the
Israelites a peculiar Inheritance to himself; he, by entering into a peculiar
Covenant with them, married them to himself, as to one Husband, and therefore
was Jealous over them, Vid. Hottingeri Historiae Oriental. l. 1. c. 8. p. 162.
Spencerum de legibus Heb. l. 2. p. 237. Witsium de Oeconomia Foederum. l. 4. c.
14. p. 634. Vbi plurima de fictis Zabaeorum ritibus quorum nomen ex Alcorano
primitus depromptum exinde a Maimonide excultum, plurimum negotii nequicquam
doctis d^dit. Cum quod de Zabiis particulariter quasi de peculiari quodam
Idololatrarum genere disputatur, gentibus quibuscunque Idololatricis tribui
debuisset; a quibus omnibus aeque ac a quibusdam Israelitis lege Mosaica cautum
erat. Vid. Seldenum de Jure Not. and Gentium secundum Hebraeos l. 2. c. 7. p.
207. Edit. Argentorat.
lest they should fall into spiritual Adulteries, and so alienate his Love from
themselves, as the Nations round about them had done, by prostituting their
Souls to numberless Idols, and the more immediate service of the Devil in
Magic Arts, etc. God knew how much prejudiced they were for the Idolatry of
the Egyptians, among whom they had long conversed, and with whom doubtless
they had complied very far during the time of their Vassalage to them. He
considered how he had drawn Abraham himself, that great Father of the Faithful,
from the Worship of the Idols of the Chaldaeans, to whom the rest of his
Kindred sold themselves: He considered how tempting the fair Words and Fashions
of their Neighbors might be in time to come, and how fair a prospect of
Advantage, from a Correspondence with them in sacred Matters, might prevail
upon gross and carnal Minds; on all these reasons, God gave the Israelites such
Laws, and prescribed them such particular Rites and Ceremonies in religious
Affairs, as might alienate them wholly from the ill examples of their
Neighbors, and might make their Neighbors think them as strange and singular
a People, and a People the less proper to be tampered with, because of that
high Opinion they had of the Original of their own Laws, and their resolute and
punctual Obedience to them. Yet after all, this foolish and stiff-necked
People, not wise enough to conquer their own Prejudices and carnal Thoughts,
fell frequently into those very Sins God had so well fortified them against;
and the Captivity of Babylon contributed more to the purgation of that People
from their mighty Inclinations to Idolatry, than all the Ceremonial Laws put
together could. But when God, by the severity of that Chastisement, had
corrected them in good earnest, and a more punctual observation of the
appointed Rites had created in them an irreconcilable aversion to that Idolatry
they had so severely smarted for before, then the very reason of those Rites
began to vanish, as their just Prejudices against the Idolatrous Customs of
Pagans grew stronger and stronger, and the coming of the promised Messiah, to
whom so many of those Ceremonies pointed, concurring with this natural
cessation of the reason of them, as tending to the Nation's security against
Pagan Idolatry, the Jews themselves had such reasons to expect the abrogation
of those ritual Laws, as nothing but a wilful and obstinate Blindness could
have hindered them from discerning; for, from what they read in their own
Sacred History, they could not but find them of a changeable Nature; for
Instance, whereas they were ordered by God's immediate Command to eat the first
Passover with their Loins girded, Exodus 12.11.
their shoes on their feet, their staves in their hands, and in a great deal of
haste, this particular mode of eating it was dispensed with when they came to
be settled in the Land of Canaan. Whereas God himself had ordered nothing in
respect to the Solemn Services of that Temple which was afterward to be built
to his Name, they saw David instituting a new Method for the Priests attendance
and services, very different from what had been before prescribed, 1 Chronicles. c.
23.24, 25, 26.
of which we have a large account; yet David's Ordinances in that Matter were
held to be authentic ever after. They had seen, that though God himself, by
Moses, had appointed that the Passover should always be killed and eaten on the
fourteenth day of the first month, and had allowed a Dispensation in no cases
but that of Uncleanness by touching a dead Body, or being in a journey, Numb.
9.5. v. 9, 10. 2 Chronicles. 30.2.
yet Hezekiah upon a different reason, and by common advice had kept the
Passover on the fourteenth day of the second Month: Nay, they had seen but
lately the Law of the Sabbath broken (as they thought) by the Maccabees, by a
solemn Resolution; 1 Macc. 2.41.
therefore the Jews must have owned them changeable, and we must conclude,
though appointed by God himself, they might justly be laid aside by an equally
Divine Authority.

though it were given by God himself, yet God always put a vast difference
between an exactness in that and an exact obedience to the Moral and
perpetually obliging Law; now the Difference between them must lie, as in their
different Relation, the last to the Soul, the former to the Body; so in that,
that One was of its own Nature mutable, the other was not so. It was
indispensibly necessary that all those who hoped to live in God's Holy Hill,
should walk uprightly, Psalm. 15. per totum.
and work righteousness, and speak the Truth in their hearts, that they should
no way injure their neighbors, that they should be faithful, merciful, kind,
etc. but it was not indispensibly necessary that they should be circumcised,
for Adam, Seth, Noah, Enoch were not circumcised, yet Enoch in particular is
observed to have walked with God, and to have been translated by God; and Noah
was the only Man found righteous by God in the whole Antediluvian World. It
was not necessary that they should All eat of the Paschal Lamb, for Abraham,
Isaac, Jacob, Joseph, and the rest of the Jewish Patriarchs were wholly
strangers to that Solemnity; but it was absolutely necessary all Men should
live in exact Obedience to the Law of Uncorrupted Nature, and should be ready
to submit themselves to whatsoever should be revealed by Almighty God as his
will; and it was absolutely necessary that all Men, under a clear sense of
their own Inability to do their own Duties, should have respect to some
Powerful Mediator between themselves and God, and some effectual Satisfaction
to be made the Laws of God, on account of that deficiency of theirs; that
consquently, there should be some Sacrifice offered to Almighty God of a Real
and Intrinsic Worth, which might have power to atone in earnest for Sin, and
this necessity the generality of Mankind might learn, as well from those many
bloody Sacrifices they were wont to offer as propitiatory to Heaven, as the
Jews could from their Paschal Lamb. It was a Duty not to be intermitted, that
Men should be very careful of and very charitable to the Poor, that they should
make a Provision for them, proportionable to their Necessities, the Rich so
proving themselves careful Stewards of that Good which God had bestowed upon
them, and ready to distribute it among their Fellow Creatures; yet all were not
tied just to Jewish Rules, Lev. 19.9.23.22.
to leave the corners of their fields unmown, to leave a considerable gleaning
on their vines, and olives, and fig trees, to leave the forgotten handfuls in
the field, etc. So it was an universal Task to follow Judgment, Mercy and
Faith, which by our Savior are called the weightier things, not of the
Ceremonial Law, but of the Moral Law, though all were not bound to pay their
particular Tyths of Mint, Anise and Cummin, or of every little Plant which grew
upon their ground; though paying the Tenths of Men's general Increase for the
Sustenance of their Priests, has been sufficiently proved by Learned Men to
have been an acknowledged Duty in most, if not in all, Nations, long before the
Mosaic Institution; but it is needless to run out into any more Instances of
this kind. But mere Reason it self will teach us how light and inconsiderable
Ceremonies are, when they stand in competition with the Essentials of Religion,
how convenient or useful soever they may otherwise be; for besides that, as
Religious Services Public and Solemn cannot be performed without some
Ceremonies, let Men aim at what Simplicity they please, so there may be Variety
of them invented and used, yet very proper to express one and the same thing,
as the Turks express their respects to Divine Services among them, by pulling
off their Shoes, where we mean the same Reverence by uncovering our Heads; but
there can be but one Course and Method of true Practical Piety concerning all
Men and at all times, the doing all the good and avoiding all the evil
possible, being that general Course or Method. So it is farther to be
considered, that if Ceremony stood on any equal ground with inward Holiness,
the best bred and the richest Men must needs, if they pleased, be the greatest
Saints, for good ^reeding and Gentile Education will enable a Man to make his
Addresses to Heaven in the most taking and humble ways; a Man so accomplished
knows best how to express an outward Reverence and Humility, how to speak in
the most proper Words, and to accompany those Words with the most decent
Gestures and the most melting Accents; He knows how in common Transactions with
Men, to set off a little Good with a great deal of Gaiety and Luster, and to
manage those Interests with a few soft and obliging, but mere empty Words,
which others, less debonair, know not how to advance with a plain unadorned
Charity and Liberality; at this rate, if Goodness must not be accounted for by
inward Sincerity, the gayest Show must unquestionably make the best Man. Again,
if outward Ceremony and Circumstance were available, the Man of mighty Wealth
would be able to purchase the Friendship of Heaven, since he could load the
Altars with such multitudes of Sacrifices, as Men of meaner Fortunes must never
pretend to: the Gentiles often had their Hecatombs, their Sacrifices of an
hundred Oxen offered to their Gods at once, and it was observed by the more
sagacious Pagans, That the worst of Tyrants and of Men were always the most
profuse in their Offerings to their Gods. Hence Ammianus Marcellinus, though no
Enemy to his Religion, observes of Julian the Apostate, that before his fatal
Expedition against the Persians, Hostiarum sanguine plurimo Aras crebritate
nimia perfundebat, tauros aliquando immolando centenos, and innumeros varii
pecoris greges, avesque candidas, terra quaesitas and mari, He washed the
Altars with the blood of too many Sacrifices, offering sometimes an hundred
Bulls at once, and innumerable Flocks of several sorts of Cattle, and white
Birds, brought from every quarter both by Sea and Land: insomuch that the same
Author, one of his own Soldiers, adds, that his Army was merely debauched by
their constant participation of such numerous Victims, and withal, Quod
augebantur Caeremoniarum ritus immodice, Ammian. Marc. Hist. l. 22. c. 12. p.
327. and 8. Edit. Valesian.
cum impensarum amplitudine adhuc inusitata ac gravi, That the Ceremonial Rites
of their Religion were increased without Measure, with such an extraordinary
Expense as was very burdensome, and to that time unusual. And it is observed
elsewhere by that same Author, That had he returned safe from that Persian
Expedition, and continued his Sacrifices at the same rate, he would scarce have
left oxen enough to have supplied the necessities of the Roman Empire. But we
can scarce allow that wretched Apostate to be the better Man for that
immoderate Profusion. Offering Sacrifices to God was the plea which Saul make
for himself to Samuel, after his transgression of God's Command in his Invasion
made upon the Amalekites; The people took of the spoil sheep and oxen, 1 Samuel
15.21.
the chief of the things which should have been destroyed, to sacrifice unto
the Lord thy God in Gilgal; but Samuel answers him to the purpose, v. 22.
Has the Lord as great delight in burnt offerings and in sacrifices as in
obeying the voice of the Lord? Behold to obey is better than sacrifice, and to
hearken than the fat of rams: All which does not import but that Sacrifices
might be very good; nay, we know that they were commanded, and they were to be
made of the best of every thing; but those external Performances were not at
all to be compared with an absolute submission and resignation of our selves to
the positive Determinations of God, or that entire Obedience which he requires
at our hands. To the same purpose God argues with the people of Israel by the
Psalmist, I will not reprove thee for thy Sacrifices or thy burnt Offerings to
have been continually before me. Psalm. 50.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13.
I will take no Bullock out of thy house, nor Hee-goat out of thy fold, for
every Beast of the forest is mine, and the Cattle upon a thousand hills; I know
all the Fowls upon the mountains, and the wild Beasts of the field are mine. If
I were hungry I would not tell thee, for the world is mine and all the fullness
thereof: Will I eat the flesh of Bulls, or drink the blood of Goats? All along
God speaks as if he set no value at all upon those very Rites and Ceremonies
which himself had appointed, and the Assiduity of which he required upon very
severe Penalties; but it is indeed only the Comparison between these things and
more important Duties, which makes these appear light and of almost an
indifferent Esteem; for God speaks at another rate when he commands, v. 14.
that we should offer unto God Thanksgivings, and pay our Vows unto the most
High: and when he concludes with that, Whosoever offers Praise glorifieth me, i.
e. he glorifieth me more than if he made never so expensive Offerings without
that care, and to him that orders his conversation aright will I show the
salvation of God: v. 23.
this Rectitude of Conversation was that which God always required, and the
want of which he would make no allowance for. God, by the Prophet Isaiah, carries
this Argument yet higher, To what purpose, says he, Isai. 1.11, 12, 13, 14, 15.
is the multitude of your Sacrifices unto me? I am full of the burnt Offerings
of Rams, and the fat of fed Beasts, and I delight not in the blood of Bullocks,
and of Lambs, and of Hee-Goats: when you come to appear before me, who has
required this at your hands to tread my courts? Bring no more vain Oblations,
Incense is an abomination to me, the new Moons and Sabbaths, and the calling of
Assemblies I cannot away with, it is Iniquity even your solemn Meeting. Your
new Moons and your appointed Feasts my Soul hates, they are a trouble unto me,
I am weary to bear them; and when you spread forth your hands I will hide mine
eyes from you, and when you make many Prayers I will not hear. It Is strange
that Sacrifices, New Mons, Sabbaths, Solemn Religious Meetings, nay, their
Prayers themselves should not only be undervalued, but be hated by God himself,
that God who had enjoined them; but they must be understood as that of our
Savior, which requires us to hate our Fathers and Mothers, etc. i. e. not
absolutely, for that is a damning Sin, but comparatively, or when the Love of
them may have any ill influence upon our Love to our Savior; so God hates
these things, not of themselves or positively, but as they exclude true
substantial Holiness; as a dependence upon, or a confidence in such outward
Services, might make men forget that Worship required in Spirit and in Truth;
for would but the Israelites have performed those Moral Duties set down in the
following Verses, would they but have washed and made themselves clean, ceased
to do evil and learned to do good, etc. their Prayers, Solemn Assemblies,
Sabbaths, New Moons and Sacrifices would all of them have been accepted well
enough; from the clear evidence of such passages as these Moses ben Maimon,
himself a Jew, observes, That God, by his Prophets, More N^v^^. p. 3. c. 32.
ofttimes reproves Men for their too much Nicety and Exactness in their
Rituals, inculcating that he did not intend them principally and for any
intrinsic Worth of their own; nor because he had any need of them, but only as
collateral and subservient to more solid Acts of Piety, without which they were
of no value, and with which, every thing ornamental outwardly to Religion,
would be acceptable in his sight. From all this it appears, that the
Mosaic-Ceremonial Law was very much inferior to the Moral, the Moral obliging
perpetually, which the Ceremonial Law did not: If then it did not perpetually
oblige, it was of a mutable nature in it self, and being so changeable, it
might be actually changed, whenever a Power equal to that which gave it its
first Obligatory Authority, should appear and undertake that Matter.

Notwithstanding all the reasons why the Law of Moses, so far as Ceremonial,
was changeable in its own nature; our Savior, when he conversed in the World,
was very careful to give it its due Weight, and to make the World have a right
estimation of it; hence he complied with it in every particular, nay, even in
those which were not of equal Antiquity with the body of ceremonial Laws, as
delivered by Moses. Thus we find him observing the Feast of the Dedication,
Joh. 10.22, 23. 1 Macc. 4.59.
a Feast instituted by Judas Maccabaeus and his Brethren, in remembrance of the
Temple's Purification from the Prophanations of the Gentiles, but without any
pretense to the prophetic Spirit in that Institution. So whereas a kind of
Baptism had been taken up by the Jews, in pursuance of which John, surnamed the
Baptist, began his work of Preaching with baptizing in the Wilderness (no new
Ceremony we may be sure, for the Jews had been lashed into more Wisdom, than to
run so greedily after Novelties) and the captious Pharisees, when they were
sent to examine his Commission for what he did, found no fault with him for
putting in practice an uncouth or newfangled Ceremony, but they ask him what
Authority He in particular had to baptize, seeing he had declared He was
neither that Christ, nor Elias, Joh. 1.25.
nor that Prophet? from whence it may seem, that the Jews had some expectations
of an Improvement of Baptism, about the time of the Messiah's coming; and did
believe, that Elias himself, whom they expected as the Forerunner of the
Messiah, should take up that Employment, therefore they looked upon even their
Baptism, though an adventitious Ceremony, of a very excellent and obliging
nature; and our Savior himself gave it a yet much stronger Confirmation, in
that he came and demanded Baptism of John, and with this particular reason, For
thus it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness. Matthew. 3, 15.
Now, though I doubt not but our Savior had a further respect in his
submitting to John's Baptism, yet I question not but he really meant, that that
Baptism ought to be regarded as a part of the righteousness of the Law, though
it were no where prescribed by the Law; therefore we may be sure He would not
have failed in his Obedience to any thing which really was a part of that Law;
but again, neither would he have been exemplary in his Obedience either to the
one or to the other, had not the Latter had a just and reasonable Foundation in
the Former, and the Former an authentic and truly obligatory Foundation in the
Will of God. He showed himself too resolute an Enemy to the generality of
groundless Traditions, any way to teach others to set a greater value on them
than they deserved. Had he altogether slighted it, as a thing of no value or of
no authority, it had been impossible for all the Miracles in the World to have
conquered those very reasonable Prejudices the Jews must have taken up against
him and his Doctrine; for having an infallible Assurance, that the Law given
from Mount Sinai was really Divine, and having suffered so deeply for their
contempt of it as Divine, they could only have looked upon one who came to
impeach it, though attended with never so many Miracles, as an Impostor,
permitted by Almighty God to tempt them and to make trial of their steady
Obedience to his Law: and they had been wa^n'd of this long before by Moses,
Deuteronomy. 13.1, 2, 3.
If there arise among you a Prophet, or a Dreamer of dreams, and gives thee a
sign or a wonder, and the sign or the wonder come to pass, whereof he spoke
unto thee; saying, Let us go after other Gods which thou have not known, and
let us serve them, Thou shall not hearken unto the words of that Prophet, or
that Dreamer of dreams, for the Lord your God proves you to know, whether you
love the Lord your God with all your heart and with all your soul; Now our
Savior being himself God, and acting in such a manner as could not but
proclaim his own Divinity, and being taken notice of by the Jews as so doing,
they had a great deal of reason to stand upon their guard; and had he shown an
open or a secret Contempt of what they knew was Divine; that Di^honour, by such
an action accrueing to the God of their Fathers, would have made them oppose
him justly, and to have concluded it impossible that such an Innovator could
have been from God, much less that he could have been the Son of God. But our
Savior's business was, by glorifying his Father, to draw Mankind to a sense of
their own Good; and therefore he came not to abolish the Law or to destroy the
Law, but to fulfill it, that is, to show that relation the very slightest
Ceremonies in it had to himself, and that great design upon which he came into
the World, to accomplish every thing it related to, and to do, and to suffer
such things as might make all considering Persons plainly apprehend, that
whatsoever was Typical and Ceremonial in the Law, was really consummated in
himself, at whom only all such Types and Ceremonies pointed; and therefore
that it would be unreasonable to expect any other Person on whom their Import
was to be terminated. While therefore our Lord took this mighty care, the more
he exalted the Obligation of the Mosaic Law, the more exemplary he was in
Obedience to it, the more reason the Jews had to believe that he could have no
ill design upon them, and the more justly could he reproach them with that,
That he honored his Father, Joh. 8.49.
but they dishonored him; there was not an Iota or tittle of the Law, could or
should pass away, till all were fulfilled; and as to his part in the work, he
could justly challenge any of them to convince him of Sin, and they, though
malicious and captious enough, had nothing to answer to the challenge. Indeed
they had some Dreams of their own, empty and troublesome Traditions, which they
taught, and for their sakes slighted the Moral and perpetually obliging Duties
laid upon them, these our Savior cast a just contempt upon, and frequently and
sharply reproved them for; and he did so the rather, to show the world what a
difference they ought to put between the Institutions of God, and the weak and
unreasonable Inventions of Men. Now the Yoke of these Jewish Traditions
extremely galling the Necks of the vulgar Jews, upon whom their Law-Expounders
loved to lay heavy Burdens, such as themselves would not put so much as one of
their fingers to support; we find, upon several occasions, they were ready to
receive the Messiah with open arms, to endeavor to take him by force and to
make him a King, and to welcome him to Jerusalem with their loud Hosannaes, nor
could the Chief-Priests and domineering Pharisees, without a great deal of
malicious Industry, manage th^se who longed for Liberty, to their own turn.
Those who were overaw'd, and therefore durst not murmr aloud, knew well
enough they were under the hands of worse than their old Egyptian
Taskmasters, and therefore it could be no wonder they should be ready to close
with every one whom they thought capable of asserting them into Liberty; and
yet, though their Imperious Taskmasters determined concerning them, that that
People who knew not the Law were accursed, that People were not so ignorant,
but that had they observed our Savior, either breaking the Law himself, or
persuading others that it was lawful for them to do so, they would have taken
Public notice of it, and at least, when they saw Jesus a Prisoner to his
implacable Enemies, and the great loss they were at for Witnesses against him,
they would soon have come in, and laid him open to his Judges, as a Criminal
deserving the severest Usage. Our Savior had taken upon him the Office of an
Expositor of the Law, the People easily found the difference between Him and
their common Instructers, Matthew. 7.29.
for he taught them as one having authority, and not as the Scribes; he cast
away the putid Pharisaic Glosses, and he laid open their true Import and
Meaning. We cannot reasonably question, but that, among Christ's numerous crowd
of Auditors, there were at that time, as we find frequently afterward, some
Scribes and Pharisees; or if there were none, what he delivered was not in a
Corner, and therefore doubtless they had a full account of what he preached;
but we no where find any offer at a refutation of what he delivered in his
Sermon on the Mount; That Exposition of the Law which he there gave, was a
perfect Test, whereby himself was afterward to be tried; He could not
reasonably refuse to stand to that Trial, but neither do we find that his
Enemies ever went about to show the Discrepancy between his Doctrines and his
Practice; and therefore when they thought to cajole him into their snares, by a
most malicious Complement, they gave him indeed no more than a true and proper
Character, Master we know that thou art true, Matthew. 22.16.
and teach the way of God in truth, neither carest thou for any man, for
thou regardest not the persons of men; this Character was really his due,
whatsoever they meant by it, and they, who were unwilling to acknowledge their
own Hypocrisy, could never fairly go off from so remarkable a Testimonial. If
then the Blessed Jesus were so signally innocent, He was above all other the
fittest to assert and vindicate the Authority of his Father's Laws, and this he
carefully did, and made his appeal to all those Laws without exception,
according as occasions offered themselves. After all then, if he would really
put an end to the Ceremonial Law, and yet maintain to the last his Character of
Truth and Justice, He must of necessity be the Son of God and God himself, his
Authority otherwise notwithstanding, the mutable Nature of those Laws, not
being sufficient to bear him out in so great an Alteration.

That the Law of God, as given to the Jews, might in our Nature be fulfilled
exactly, and according to the Letter; and so that he who fulfilled it might be
a complete example of Holiness and Obedience to us: and how great an Undertaker
this required, we shall have hereafter Opportunities enough to understand. Now
when I lay down this reason, by the word Law, I understand, whatsoever was
given to the Jews, whether Moral, as confirming the Law of uncorrupted Nature,
or Political, as relating to their Civil Government, or Ceremonial, as
referring to their various Religious Rites, both the last, so far as they
could, concern the Practice of a private Person: so that indeed the whole Law,
as given to the Jews, contained in it whatsoever could have been expected from
Adam had he retained his original Innocence, or whatsoever humane Nature, in
its utmost perfection, could possibly attain to: Now that such a complete
Obedience should be expected from some One Partaker of humane nature was but
reasonable, when the great work of Man's Redemption was in hand; for, since
Man, created in all that Perfection his Nature was capable of, had yet fallen
from that Obedience which was justly expected from him, he being in a condition
every way capable of performing it; and by that fall of his had necessarily
involved all those who should be derived from him in all those Miseries
attending the guilt of Sin, and since the intent of God's Goodness was, that
from the Obedience of one man, descended of the same flesh and blood, many
should be made righteous, or be blessed with those Rewards attending upon
Righteousness, as the Apostle assures us it came to pass, it was but just and
reasonable that that Man, from whom that righteousness was to descend to
Mankind, that that Man should completely make up that Character of the first
Man, when in Innocence, which, had he persever'd in as he ought, his whole
Posterity had been entirely happy; and yet that task was abundantly greater for
the second Adam, our Lord Jesus Christ, than it was for the first Adam, our
great Parent; for Adam had no Corruption derived down to him from his Original,
from whence it has been not impertinently questioned, Whether before Sin
entered into the World, and Death by Sin, He was liable to the common Rules of
Mortality? But our Savior, when he took Flesh of the Virgin, took it up at
such a time as Humane nature was sunk into its utmost depravation; nor would an
allowance of that Roman Foolery, That the Blessed Virgin was born without any
Original Sin or Guilt upon her, help the matter: For so long as she was
descended from such Parents as had their share in the Corruption of Humane
Nature, her Freedom would not, of consequence, free every one who should be
born of her; but she being no way beyond other Women, but only on account of
her Practical Holiness, our Lord, as descended from her, must be in all things
like his Brethren, liable to all the Inconveniences attending a Body certainly
mortal, for as for his being without Sin, it depended on the Union of a Mortal
to an Immortal Being: the very nature of which superior Being was more
effectual than the Refiner's Fire on Gold or Silver, purifying that otherwise
corrupt Body it was united to, and fortifying it against all that proclivity to
Sin and easy succumbency to Temptation which the rest of Mankind was obnoxious
to. Nor was it any thing, but such a coacting Omnipotence, which could possibly
have produced a clean thing out of an unclean, or a Body without Sin out of
that which was naturally sinful. There is certainly such a state as that of
Eternal Happiness, but it is attainable only as the reward of Merit in a proper
sense, or, as we ordinarily say, it is as Wages, which he who faithfully
performs his work deserves, and may justly lay claim to as his own, and
therefore cannot be denied without Injustice; as for instance, whereas the
condition of eternal Life is, This do and live, whosoever it is that performs
the Condition, and does what is required, he has for so doing, provided there be
no circumstantial failure in the performance of the work, a just and rightful
claim to that eternal Life propounded, and God himself could not be just,
should he deny the proposed reward to such a One as should completely perform
the Condition set before him. Had Man continued in the state of Innocence, he
had had this proper claim of his own to eternal Happiness, he might justly have
claimed it, and could not without extremity of Injustice have been denied it;
but that eternal Happiness which we now expect is of Grace, or it is the free
Gift of God, which we, as Sinners, and such we are all without exception, have
no proper or inherent right to; but it is not the immediate free Gift of God, as
if he, without any performance of incumbent duty on our part, would bestow upon
us an eternally glorious Inheritance, for this would be as inconsistent with
that infinite Justice which makes up the Idaea of the Supreme God, as it would
be to deny Wages or a Reward to him that had truly deserved it; nor is it a
free giving Man such an inward Ability to perform all the punctilio's of the
Divine revealed Will, as by which they might make a full compensation to Divine
Justice for the original pravity of Nature, and do all such things to the
utmost, as could be required from the beginning to the end of Life; for this
were to alter the whole frame of Humane Nature, and to give it in the present
state of things an universal advantage of Adam's primaeval Innocence; but this
eternal Life is the free Gift of God: as he has been pleased to send his Son
into the World, to perform that work of perfect Righteousness which was
incumbent upon us, to suffer that Punishment which our Sins had deserved for us
and in our stead, by this means God's infinite Justice was completely
acquitted, and the impossibility of Sins escaping without Impunity
demonstrated, since rather than it should pass without Punishment, it was
punished even in Him, who of himself knew no Sin. Besides, the infinity of
God's Mercy and Goodness was manifested, because he found out and bestowed upon
Man such a Mediator, as was able to do and suffer so effectually on his
behalf, and this, when sinful Man could find out no way whereby he could
pretend to Pity or Mercy at the hand of God, nor could he ever possibly have
pitched on such a Mean, as by virtue of which any Mercy could have been hoped
for rationally from him; but it is certainly as great an effect of infinite
Goodness, where a Man is naturally blind and has a difficult way to find out,
to give him Eyes whereby he may see his way, and a guide who may direct him in
it, though he must go it himself too; as it is to leave a Man still in his
miserable Blindness, and to carry him so hood-winked to his journey's end;
since by so doing the Man shall be happy indeed, but shall neither know what
Dangers and Difficulties he escaped in his way to Happiness, which yet render
it the more valuable, how kind and knowing a Guide he had to assist him, nor
how great that Happiness is he enjoyed at last, nor how wonderful his Goodness
who gave him Eyes and Guide for his Journey, when of himself he knew no
possibility of attaining either. That Man is made perfectly Blind by Sin, is
unquestionable; and that Blindness without assistance must end in Misery, is so
too; God, of his infinite grace and goodness, when poor Man was not able to
conceive of such a thing, opened a way for him to recover that Happiness, which
by Sin he had utterly lost all pretenses to, and that was the powerful
Interposition of One mighty to save, of One who could do what Man in his dark
condition could not, even Jesus Christ the righteous; by his Word and Will
declared to Man, he gave him Eyes whereby he saw the way so laid open; he gave
him the Mediator himself, whose Mediation was the Way, to be his Guide and to
direct him in all the Mazes, and Turnings, and Difficulties in the way to
Happiness, and he demonstrates to him the glories of that Happiness, which was
attainable only by such wonderful means: and is not this more, than if God had
immediately carried wretched Man, accoutred with all his Sins and Impurities,
into Abraham's Bosom, or the Seats of eternal Bliss, whose Glories yet he,
with all those miserable Encumbrances, could never rightly apprehend; but only,
as a Man corporeally blind, feels some little refreshment of his Spirits when
the Sun gets up on a cheerful day: while he who has Eyes open has an
inexpressible contentment in those various and delightful objects that immense
body of Light exposes to his Sense? A Blind man would scarce believe himself
had the Advantage.

Socinians pretend they mightily advance the Glory of God, and set off his
infinite Mercy with an extraordinary Luster, when they represent God forgiving
the Sins of Men without any meritorious Mediation at all, or without any thing
of Satisfaction required at the hands of Men for those Sins and that Guilt they
are burdened with; which, that they may the better defend, they have set up new
Notions of Goodness and Justice in God, from what the rest of the Christian
World have hitherto entertained; they own indeed, in their account of the
Divine Nature, Cat. Raco.. 3. c. 3. p. 12. Crellii Ethica Arist. par. 2. c. 16.
p. 187.
that God is sum Justus, vel perfect Justus, that he is infinitely or
perfectly Just: Now when Crellius comes, in his Ethics, to give us a
definition of Justice, at first he tells us, that it is Virtus qua praestamus
quae alteri debentur, That it is a Virtue, whereby we make good to others all
those things that are due to them; and afterward giving us a definition of
that which he calls universal Justice, he tells us, It is Virtus omnia ea
praestans, quae legibus a vera prudentia profectis, sunt constituta, A Virtue
performing all those things ordained by the Laws of true Prudence: and a while
after reduces it to the first definition. The same Crellius, in his Book
concerning God and his Attributes, makes no mention of Justice at all, as any
distinct Attribute of God, but reduces it, I know not how, to that of Sanctity
or Holiness; whereas yet, in our discourses concerning the Nature of God, we
are wont to have distinct Notions of every paricular Attribute, however they
all concentre in, and all those Notions together represent to us but One true
God: and the Racovian Catechism, when it comes to teach us what it is to know
God to be infinitely Just, makes it to amount to no more than this, That it is
to know Quod rectitudinem in omnibus actionibus sequatur, ab omni autem
pravitate adeoque ab injuria quavis, sit alienissimus, That God follows what is
right in all his Actions, and is wholly a Stranger to all corrupt and injurious
Dealings; when they come to show how it is necessary to Salvation, that we
should know God is infinitely Just, their Reasons are, First, that we may from
thence be sure that God will perform every thing which He has promised to us;
and then, Secondly, that we should patiently undergo all those Temptations,
Calamities and Crosses we meet with in this World, considering there can be no
Injustice in them, since they are permitted by God. Now we are generally ready
to think, that as nothing terrifies ill Men more either in Church or State, or
lays greater Restraints upon them in their vicious Courses, than an
Apprehension of the Power and Justice of their Governors, so nothing should
deter Men from Sin and Wickedness more than a just sense of the same Attributes
in God, for so our Savior teaches us, That we should not fear them who can
hurt the body, and afterward can proceed no further, Luke 12.5.
but that we should fear him, who after he has killed has power to cast into
Hell; where our Savior joins Justice and Power together, Justice in killing,
so punishing for what is done amiss, Power in casting into Hell, in commanding
eternal Torments, the force of which the Soul it self, that spiritual part, may
be sensible of; and Power and Justice are co-incident: Power enables to punish
temporally and eternally those that are disobedient to the Will of God, and
Justice requires it; so that our Savior's Argument is not designed to exempt
us from all fear of Humane Authority or Justice, but it is a minore ad majus,
from the less to the greater. If we should be afraid of humane Justice, which
can only inflict temporal Punishments, much more should we fear that of Heaven,
which equally extends to body and soul, to temporal and eternal Punishments; so
that when the fear of one comes in competition with the other, we may choose
rather to undergo humane Severities, than to cope with everlasting Burnings.
But if we look upon Justice in its own Nature, it is moral and good from
Eternity, and therefore the obligations laid upon us to follow Justice, are
indispensible. Now, as I formerly observed, the excellence of Moral Virtues
flows from their agreeableness to the nature of Almighty God, who is the great
and inexhausted source of every thing that is good; therefore whatsoever there
is in Man that is really commendable, that Commendation flows from his
endeavors to resemble God, to be holy as He is holy, and perfect as He is
perfect; and every such part of true Goodness is infinite in God: so it is good
for a Man to be Wise, and he may, by endeavors, acquire a considerable Talent
in Wisdom, but God is infinitely Wise, so that, without any assistance or
forecast, he knows and understands every thing at once with all those
Circumstances attending on it; It Is good for a man to cleanse and purify
himself as far as possible from all filthiness and pollution both of Flesh and
Spirit, to avoid the very garment spotted with the Flesh, every appearance of
evil; endeavors of this Nature are always required of all Men, and those who
are pure in heart have Blessedness ascertained to them; but God is infinite in
Purity, nothing polluted can possibly approach him, nor can the least thought
of it be affixt upon him, without denying him: It Is good for a Man to be
Tender, Compassionate, Loving, no Duty's more inculcated upon Men, nothing more
agreeable to the temper of the Gospel, there will yet be some strugglings in
corrupt Nature against it; but God is Love it self, Infinite and Essential,
yet, as Wisdom in a Man consists in knowing some things rightly, but in God
consists in knowing all things; as Purity in Man consists in honest Endeavors
after Innocence and Blamelesness in every respect, but in God exalts him
infinitely above every thing that is corrupt or imperfect; as Love in Man shows
it self in doing Good as we have opportunity within the narrow Sphere of our
Activity, but in God is diffusive to all his Creatures; so if it be Justice
universal in Man to make good, as far as he is capable, every thing that is due
to others, universal Justice in God must be of the same nature, only infinitely
perfect in him, because it is impossible he should be deceived or mistaken in
any particular; and therefore consequently if it be Justice in any Man,
according to that Power he is entrusted with, to punish those who do ill, and to
reward those who do well, and if no Man can be counted universally Just,
howsoever he may manage himself in all other Instances, if he be defective in
this; It Is then as certainly Justice in Almighty God to bestow Rewards and
Punishments upon all Persons according to their Actions; and therefore the
Apostle sets off the consummate Justice of the great Tribunal at last, by this,
that when we appear before it, 2 Cor. 5.10.
we shall all receive according to what we have done in the Flesh, whether it
be good or evil; and therefore if it should be supposed that God should fail in
this particular Distribution, we must, upon this supposition, conclude, God
cannot be infinitely Just; and if he fail of Infinity in any one proper
Attribute, he can really be infinite in none: so not infinitely Wise, or
Merciful, or Holy, if withal he be not infinitely Just. But if we allow that
God is indeed infinitely Just, then though we allow him to be infinitely Good
and Merciful, yet his Justice must as certainly be satisfied in the punishment
of Criminals, who are obstinate in their Crimes, as his Mercy in pardoning
Criminals, who are truly sensible of that Guilt they lie under: Now among the
Sons of Men there are none who are not great Sinners, therefore they are all
properly the objects of God's Justice, and infinite Justice can never be at
rest till those who are Sinners are punished; therefore that must be true, that
that Mercy is as infinite which pardons one Criminal who has deserved
punishment, as that Justice is which condignly punishes all Delinquents, and
this stands good, let the Pardon be granted on what considerations soever: for,
for Justice to punish the guilty is but natural, but for Mercy to pardon them
seems not so naturally necessary, since Mercy shows it self infinite in giving
all things their Being, in providing every thing necessary for them, in giving
them Rules and Laws of all kinds to act by, and all possible Encouragements for
them to manage themselves by those Rules, and all this when there was no Merit
on the side of the Creature to oblige him to it, and that God, being infinitely
happy in himself, had no need either of their Existence or their Services,
therefore the very Being of all things is only the effect of his eternal Will,
as the four and twenty Elders acknowledge in their Eucharistic Hymns to God,
Thou art worthy, say they, Rev. 4.11.
to receive Glory, and Honor, and Power, for thou have created all things, and
for thy pleasure they are and were Created. Now after all this Mercy shown, and
this Mercy abused and despised, Justice might very properly take place in
punishing the Despisers; nor indeed could Mercy, however infinite, have taken
place to the prejudice of Justice or the Obstruction of its free passage, had
there not been a proper Mean found out for the Satisfaction of Justice
otherwise than by immediate or extreme Punishment, that is, by the
Interposition of our Savior, in and by whom Mercy and Pardon make their free
approaches to undeserving Sinners. He that shall go about to make one Attribute
in God inferior to another, goes about to ruin the right Notion of a God, for
in an infinite Being nothing can be but what is infinite, and among Infinites
there can be no inequality; but they go about to degrade Divine Justice
exceedingly, who make all the effects of God's punishing Justice only
Arbitrary, and not natural or necessary, and therefore determine, that he
punishes those who are eternally damned only because it is his pleasure to do
so, whereas he could forgive them all freely, were they never so guilty, and
those who are at all Forgiven he really does forgive so, without any regard to
any Merits of their Own, or to the Merits of any Other on their account; and
all these things the Socinians assert, merely that they may take away all the
Merit of our Savior's Life or Death, and make good their Assertion, That there
was no need of Satisfying God's Justice on the behalf of Sinners, and therefore
that all what our Savior did or suffered was not of a satisfactory Nature, and
from hence too they endeavor to confirm their Heretical Opinion, That our
Savior was not God equal with his Father, for that Truth being thoroughly
cleared, all the Socinian Chain of Heterodoxies is broken and comes to nothing.

But They say, Christians generally think that Christ suffered proportionably
for our Sins, Ca^. Rac.. 6. c. 8. p. 145.
or, that He underwent Punishments equivalent to what we Sinners should have
undergone, and that by the Merit of his Obedience, he made a complete
compensation for our Disobedience; but this Opinion, say they, is fallax and
erronea and admodum perniciosa, it is fallacious and erroneous and of very
dangerous Consequence, and this they assert upon these grounds, Because such an
Opinion is not founded upon clear Scriptures, and then, Because it is repugnant
to the Rules of right Reason; and when they come to discourse of its not being
founded upon Scripture, the great ground they go upon, is, "Because the
Scriptures testify, that God remits the Sins of Men freely: Now, this we
assert as well as they, and are infallibly assured, that it is only by Grace, by
free and unmerited Grace, on our part, that we are saved; and when we remember
that it has been proved, by unanswerable Arguments, that our Savior is the Son
of God, that He is God himself, and that He, when there was no help left for
guilty Mankind, according to the eternal purpose of his Will, came down from
Heaven to Earth, and took our Nature upon him, only that, by what he did in
that Nature, he might procure our eternal happiness: when we consider his
eternal Father as acting in agreement with him, and, for his Son's sake,
forgiving miserable Sinners, and the One willing, and the other doing and
suffering so much on our accounts, when it was impossible we should have any
Motives in our selves that might serve to excite so immense a Goodness: when we
remember all these things, we cannot but say, that as many of us as have our
Sins forgiven, have them freely forgiven; God the Father, God the Son, and God
the Holy Ghost all concurring jointly in the Pardon, and all the Motives
procuring that Pardon, proceeding wholly from the Deity it self. And this Truth
will receive yet more light, by considering the Import of those very Texts,
which the Socinians, in their Catechism, bring to make good their own Opinions;
so they prove the free Pardon of Sin from that of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.19.
That God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their
trespasses to them; we need not here take any notice of another gross Error,
founded by them upon this Text, viz. That by the Death and Obedience of Christ
God was not reconciled to the World, for he never was angry with it, but the
World was reconciled to God, the World having foolishly forsaken him, and being
altogether alienated from him by Sin: not to reflect any further directly on
that Position; we find, by the Text now cited, that God does not impute the
Trespasses of those who believe, to them, but why? only because they are
reconciled to him in Christ, not because he passes by their Trespasses purely
on account of his own Will, or because of his immediate Love to the
Trespassers; but it is for the sake of Jesus Christ: their Trespasses must have
stood imputed to them, had they not been reconciled in him; but if he
particularly procured the Reconciliation of Sinners to his Father, then it is
plain enough, they were incapable of making any such Reconciliation for
themselves, and so could not procure the Remission or the non-Imputation of
their Sins; the reason of which could be no other than their want of Merit, for
had they had any inherent Merits of their own to plead, the same infinite
Justice which was concerned to punish their Sins, was equally concerned to
reward their Merits; but if the want of Merit hindered their procuring their
own Reconciliation, there must have been some Merit in Christ which was able to
effect it, and that Merit must have been exhibited on our account, and that
Merit, supplying the Sinners defect, must have been satisfactory to divine
Justice, which otherwise must have fallen upon Sinners, while they had no
better deserving to plead on their own accounts; but if God reconcile the World
to himself in Christ, and Christ be One eternal God, co-essential with his
Father, what is done by One is done by the Other, and so, though the Son merited
at his Father's hand the Sinner's pardon, yet the Sinner is freely forgiven of
God, the Son freely interposing between him and Divine Justice, and freely
concurring in the same Pardon of his Trespasses. Again, the Socinians prove the
Freedom of God's Grace or Favor to us by that, Romans 3.24, 25.
Being justified freely by his Grace, through the Redemption that is in Jesus
Christ, whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation through faith in his
blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins that are past,
through the forbearance of God; here we own Free Grace, or Pardon, or
Justification, which signify all the same thing, with respect to this passage,
is plainly and clearly set forth; but still this free Pardon or Justification
is the consequence of that Redemption wrought for us by Jesus Christ, that
Redemption is effected by the offering of his Blood; that Blood which is of a
propitiatory or atoning Nature, our Faith in, or our certain belief of the
infinite value of which Blood, is necessary to procure us any good by it; but
neither would that Faith of ours be necessary, nor would that Blood be so
intrinsecally valuable, if it were no way meritorious: nor could Redemption be
wrought for us, if there were no Price paid on that account; for a Prince is
not said to redeem a guilty Prisoner, when he sets him at liberty without any
ransom, but he is said to redeem the Prisoner, who pays down that Price, or
undergoes that Penalty which is set on the Criminal's head; so our Savior paid
that Price which was set on our Heads, without Blood there could be no
Remission, therefore he gave his Blood for us; without Punishment for Sins
there could be no acquittal of Justice, therefore he suffered to the loss of
his Life, beside those unknown Sorrows, as the Ancient Church has styled them,
which his innocent Soul underwent on our account: But after this Redemption
effected, this Propitiation offered, the Remission of Sins followed. Now, the
Punishment of Sins being the effect of Justice, and the Remission of them the
effect of Mercy, this Redemption-Price paid down satisfied Justice and made way
for Mercy, and therefore that Price so paid down was meritorious, and
meritorious for us, who had no Merits of our own; therefore this Remission was
really free with respect to us, howsoever God the Son satisfied his Father's
Justice to procure that Remission for us. The last proof the Socinians allege,
is, that Parable of our Savior's, Matthew. 18.23. etc. The great business of our
Savior in that Parable, is, to urge Men to mutual Charity and Forgiveness of
one another, in case of any Trespasses by one committed against the other, this
he urges from the Greatness of that Remission which is made to us, and the
Smalness of the greatest Trespasses which can be committed against us, in
comparison of those Trespasses we are guilty of against God; so the Argument
amounts to this, If God forgive us our ten thousand Talents, a debt which we
are utterly incapable of ever discharging, we ought to forgive our offending
Brethren those hundred pence, which it is possible they may be engaged in to us,
or those little inconsiderable Injuries, they may have done us, and for which,
on occasion, they may be capable of making us a reasonable Compensation. If it
be urged, that Forgiveness which we partake of is free, we own it, for it
proceeds from one God, without any other Motive but what proceeds from himself;
but the Father, and the Son, and the Holy Ghost, are that one God; therefore
that Remission of our Sins, which is given by the Father, purchased by the Son,
and sealed by the Holy Ghost, is, with respect to us, wholly gratuitous or
free. But to this they presently object, At remissioni gratuitae nihil
adversatur magis quam ejusmodi, qualem Christiani vulgo volunt Satisfactio and
pretii aequalis solutio, That nothing can be more contrary to the free
Remission of Sins, than such a Satisfaction as Christians generally talk of, or
a purchase of such a Remission at a just Price; for, say they, when a Creditor
is satisfied, either by the Debtor himself, or by some other in the Debtor's
name, it cannot be truly said, That such a Creditor, so satisfied, has freely
forgiven his Debtor. This Instance may be true, but nothing to the purpose: for
if a Debtor pay not what he ows me, Justice requires a legal Prosecution of
that Debtor, nor can that Justice, with relation to the public or my own
private Concern, be satisfied, unless the Debtor be so prosecuted; but if I,
considering the extreme necessity of the Debtor, and the certain Ruin which
must fall upon him if prosecuted, do therefore contrive a way to satisfy the
Justice of the Law, that no ill Example be drawn from my remisness, and withal,
to show my Kindness and Compassion to the poor insolvent Person, do, by a
second Hand, but equally concerned, convey so much to the Debtor, as wherewith,
if he apply it as originally designed, he may discharge the Debt, and so
satisfy the eternal and immutable Law of Justice; yet after all, if the Debt
be paid, as, when the Sum is truly and honestly laid down to the Creditor, it
is truly and legally paid, then the Remission of that Debt is truly and
properly called free: Free, because undeserved by the Debtor; Free, because the
Debtor was, in himself, absolutely insolvent; Free, because this Method of
Kindness was freely and without any adventitious or external Motive resolved
on; Free, because the Person so assisted is discharged of the Debt, as if the
Payment had proceeded wholly and only from himself. But in the mean time, we
may safely assert, howsoever some may seem very shy in the matter, what Socinus
himself, and after him Crellius, so strongly oppose, That God, Vid. Crell. in
Grotium, c. 4. p. 99.
with a due and necessary regard to his own Justice, could not pardon the Sins
of Men without some satisfaction offered on their account; nor is this to deny
God's Omnipotence, any more than it is to deny the possibility of
Transubstantiation; but it is to vindicate and make good the true Notion we have
of the Supreme God, in whom Justice and Mercy are co-existent from Eternity,
and consequently, the just distribution of Rewards and Punishments essential to
him, and whatsoever Men or Angels now do or ever have done, whatsoever they
shall or do receive in consideration of their Actions, whatsoever by Guilt they
are liable to and must suffer, and whatsoever Effects infinite Mercy could have
in respect to all or any of them, all these things were present from Eternity,
with all Circumstances attending them, in the Divine Mind; so that no Methods
nor Rules of God's dealing can now be changed, without supposing God himself
changeable, concerning whom yet the Apostle assures us, James 1.7.
That with him there is no variableness nor shadow of turning. Now all these
things being necessarily true to make up the Idaea of an infinite God,
whatsoever Notion we have of Justice or Mercy considered abstractively or
simply in their own Natures, without any Object whatsoever on which they might
be exercised, the same Notions we must have of that infinite Mercy and Justice
which is in God, notwithstanding all the Variety in their Objects daily
observable, and all the most minute Circumstances attending them; because all
these Varieties and Circumstances were before God from Eternity, and so
coexistent with that Justice and Mercy essential to the Divine Nature, and
therefore can offer no reason why God should, now or in time, limit, or dilate,
or change, his eternal Judiciary or Merciful Determinations. So if it be beyond
the reach of Omnipotence for God to contradict himself, then it is beyond the
reach of Omnipotence that the Effects of any Divine Attribute relating to
Mankind should be frustrated, or Sins, being so direct a Contradiction to his
holy Nature, should go unpunished, or Goodness, so agreeable to his Nature, and
his revealed Will, should go unrewarded. The Socinians themselves confess, as I
showed you before, that God cannot be injurious or do any wrong to any, because
he is perfect justus, perfectly or infinitely just; but if God could without
any satisfaction on the part of Man, forgive all those Sins Man was guilty of,
and yet did not, nor does forgive all, but only some particular Persons, (for
some will certainly be damned, and it is as certain that those who are damned
were never pardoned) then while God extends his Mercy to some, and those not
the least, but even the greatest of Sinners, as St. Paul owns himself once was,
and punishes others for the same, or it may be fewer or less aggravated Sins,
God must be very unmerciful and very injurious to those so punished, unless we
suppose arbitrary and irrespective Determinations of all things, to be the most
powerful efforts of Divine Goodness or Justice, which few Persons, of any
tolerable sense, will be persuaded to believe, Besides, could God forgive the
Sins of Men, without any Satisfaction offered on their behalf, and yet not lay
any Imputation on his own perfect Justice, I know not how to prove that he is
not inju^ious to all those from whom He requires Faith, and that vigorous and
persevering, and Obedience uninterrupted and universal, at least it must be
said He Is very unkind; for He who can forgive, and, as Socinus asserts, does
forgive all our Sins without any Satisfaction tendered to his Justice, might as
well forgive us without putting us to the trouble of informing our Minds, or
regulating and restraining our Actions, for we cannot easily give any reason
why he should exact such Duties of us, as Conditions of our Salvation, when, if
it pleased him, he could give us Salvation without any Conditions at all. If it
be objected, that He has declared otherwise in his revealed Will, and it is
Justice in him to be true to his own Declarations; that Plea again reduces all
to perfect Arbitrariness, and he will be irrespectively Merciful, merely
because he will be Merciful, and he will be irrespectively Vindictive, merely
because he will be so; which things seem somewhat to contradict our common
notion of Justice, That it does suum cuique tribuere, give to every one what is
due and proper to him; We believe, more safely, that God lays those Duties,
which yet we are unable to perform in that perfect manner we ought, upon us,
that they might be as continual Remembrancers to us of that Satisfaction which
he really requires at our hands; for could we perform all God's revealed Will,
without any failure either in Time or Circumstance, God's Justice would be
otherwise satisfied, and employed wholly in distributing Rewards among us; but
since, when we take the utmost pains, our Duties are either at one time or
other essentially or circumstantially sinful, therefore we our selves ought to
conclude some such Satisfaction necessary as may make up for our unavoidable
defects; and since we are assured by God's Word, that One has undertaken that
Work who was every way capable of performing it, we are obliged, in gratitude
to so great a Benefactor, to endeavor after all that Holiness and Perfection
(how little soever it is that we are capable of) and we are obliged to do it
for our own sakes, because it is no way reasonable those should be Partakers of
any benefit from Christ's Satisfaction, who do not perform those Conditions
upon which only that Satisfaction can be any ways beneficial to us. To this we
may add yet further, That if God can forgive Sinners without Satisfaction made
for their Sins, without any derogation from his Justice, how merciful soever
God may seem to Mankind, yet he seems wholly to have forgotten all that Mercy
with respect to the fallen Angels; for if no Satisfaction was needful for Sin,
why could not their Maker forgive their Transgressions too without it, as well
as Men's? there might have been a thousand Means doubtless found out to confirm
a Covenant of Grace with them, as well as that of the Death of Christ to
confirm the same Covenant with Men; but it seems God would not so forgive them
though he could, they could offer no Satisfaction for themselves, therefore
they are eternally and immediately damned; these Conclusions are necessary and
inevitable from Socinian Principles, but in themselves are detestable and
damnable.

But, what the Socinians fail to effect by God's Word, they make no doubt of
making good by dint of Reason, in which they look upon themselves as wholly
invincible. Here then they assert, That if Christ have made Satisfaction for
us, and that suitable to our Necessities, then Christ must have suffered the
pains of Eternal Death, because Mankind by Sins were liable to such Eternal
Death; but here we may observe, that they fasten upon that single Instance of
Christ's Sufferings, viz. his Death, in the matter of Satisfaction for Sinners,
only; whereas our Lord was a continual Sufferer on that account, from his
first Condescension to take our Nature upon him, to his Crucifixion; and I make
no question but what he underwent when he bore humane Infirmities, when he was
in that bitter Agony in the Garden, when he cried out upon the Cross, My God,
My God, why have thou forsaken me! I make no question but his Sufferings in
those Instances were much greater than what he underwent in Death it self: and
so the very Story of his Passion represents things in relation to those latter
Scenes of his Life on Earth; for what prodigious Cause must we imagine there
was that he declared to Peter and the Sons of Zebedee, Matthew. 26.38.
My Soul is exceeding sorrowful even unto Death, (...), my Soul is compassed
round about, or even overwhelmed with Sorrow, for so the Original imports: In
his Agony in the Garden, what through a clear Apprehension of that dreadful
Task he was then to set about more immediately, what with the Fervor and
Earnestness of his Prayers to his Father, either that, if it were possible,
that Cup, that bitter Cup, he was then to drink, might pass from him, or that
what he was then suffering might be truly effectual to that great End for which
he suffered, Luke 22.44.
his Sweat was as if it had been great drops of blood falling down to the
ground: the Terror of his instant Sufferings to that Flesh and Blood he had
assumed, as well as the Strength of his Enemies, and the greatness of the
Conflict he was then engaged in, might be the occasion of that stupendous
Sweat; for experience tells us, that Fear opens the Pores of the Body and emits
as grumous Sweats as the most earnest Intention whatsoever of the Body, or the
Mind; and the Angel appearing to Christ, in the Garden, and strengthening him,
seems more necessary with respect to those Terrors ready to seize on Flesh and
Blood engaged in mighty Sorrows and oppressing Woes, than merely to reinforce
that Earnestness in Prayer, which, the greater the Danger is, so long as the
Soul is consistent with it self, will naturally be the more earnest and
importunate for Assistance or Deliverance. His Sufferings yet seem to work more
violently upon him when he comes to that bitter Cry, My God, My God, why have
thou forsaken me! why do thou seem to hide thy Face from me, and to leave me
wholly to the barbarous Cruelties of wicked and malicious Men? the Complaint
was more natural, and carried with it a greater Emphasis when proceeding from
that Son of God, that only, that beloved Son, in whom he was well pleased; so
far his holy Soul seems to be upon the rack, but when he receives his last
bitter Draught, and owns the mighty work, as well as the Types and Predictions,
relating to him, were finished; the Storms that ruffled him before, seem to
sink into a Calm, and he breathed out his Sacred Life with those charming
eruptions of unbounded Love, Father forgive them, Luke 23.34.
for they know not what they do; and those full expressions of absolute
Satisfaction in what he had undergone, Father into thy hands I commend my
Spirit; v. 46.
Our Lord's Sufferings ended there, and there, with his dying Breath, he raised
to himself the first Trophies of his glorious Victories, for though the
bringing the Son of God to Death, who had so terribly overaw'd and baffled him
before, were the utmost reach of Hell's impetuous Malice, yet that very Death
of his, gave the infernal Tyrant that fatal Blow, which he strove by that very
Prosecution to put off; that mighty Wound, which Hell, with all its Stratagems
and Strugglings, can never recover; and this great Event, the vanishing of that
thick Darkness at that very Instant of his Expiration, which before, when
Nature's Lord was in his Agonies, covered the Face of the whole Earth, the
terrible Convulsions of the Earth, the Dissolution of mighty Rocks, the Rending
of the Temples Vail, and long buried Saints starting from their Graves, as if
at that very Instant of their Savior's Death, all the Chains of that King of
Terrors had been broke at once; with that great Event all these mighty Wonders
seemed to sympathize. Now if with these greater, and more inexpressible
Sufferings, we consider all the rest which our Savior's Life was obnoxious to,
from his Cradle to his Tomb, and withal reflect with due reverence upon the
dignity of the Sufferer, the distance may not seem so immoderately great as the
Socinians would have us believe, between the Satisfaction given and the
Necessities of those it was given for. But further, we are to consider, that
the Eternity of that Death Adam's Sin had laid him open to, did not proceed
from the nature of the Sin it self, for no Crime infinite in its own Nature can
proceed from a finite Being; but the Eternity of that Penalty annexed to Sin in
Man arises from the absolute Infinity of that God against whom he sinned, and
whose Anger when irreversible must be eternal, from a respect to that infinite
Goodness and Justice, essential to him, whereby he had conferred such mighty
Benefits upon Man, and laid so very reasonable Duties upon him, which yet Man
had ingratefully slighted and abused: Now if the greatness of the Penalty arise
from the greatness or immensity of the Being offended, then the Greatness and
Value of the Satisfaction tendered in lieu of that Penalty, arises from the
same Consideration, viz. the greatness of that God it is offered to and accepted
by, and as we believe God to be infinitely Wise, and therefore not to be
imposed upon so as, with Glaucus in the Poet, to exchange, (...), things of the
greatest consideration for Trifles, Gold for Brass, so we reasonably conclude,
That God understands the true Value of that Satisfaction offered to Justice in
the Sufferings of his Son, we are assured, that he has accepted of what his Son
has done on our behalf, therefore we are assured too, that what he has so acted
for us, was and is equivalent to those Punishments we ought, as Sinners, to
have undergone for the Satisfaction of eternal Justice. Our Adversaries indeed
would persuade us, That if we insist so much on the Dignity of the Person
suffering, we must suppose that Christ suffered for our Sins, as he was God, or
in his divine Nature, which Supposition would be blasphemous, and the
Conclusion impossible; but by their leave, we neither mean nor pretend to any
such thing: We know, and assert, that Immortality cannot die, and that the
Deity cannot suffer; yet we believe that He who was and is true God, did both
suffer and die, but we know, He that was God took upon him the Nature of Man,
and therefore though he could not, nor did die as God, yet that Humane Nature
which he assumed, both could and did suffer and die, and by that Suffering and
Death, among other Proofs, evidenced the Reality of his being Man, as well as
he demonstrated his Divinity by his continual Words and Actions. But now let us
consider God condescending to take upon him our Nature, that very Condescension
alone is of infinite weight; we look upon it as a very meritorious piece of
Humility, for a Sovereign Prince to take upon him the Habit of a Beggar, only
to procure good for some miserable undeserving Wretches; the Athenians
therefore long celebrated the glorious Memory of their last Monarch Codrus, who
put on the ignoble Arms of a private Sentinel, merely that he might die by the
hands of those Enemies, who had been forewarned by an Oracle not to kill him,
by which private Habit assumed, he procured the safety of his Country; but we
never admire much the Humility or Condescension of that Beggar, who wears Rags,
because he has no richer Habits to put on. Now, had the Son of God taken upon
him a Royal Grandeur, had he been wrapped in purple, adored by all Mankind in his
Cradle, worn the Imperial Crown even in his Infancy, or had he taken any other
Methods we could fancy to our selves, which might have rendered him
considerable to the World, yet this had been an infinitely greater Humiliation;
than for a Cyrus, or an Alexander, or a Trajan, or a Constantine, or a
Tamerlane to have taken upon him the Person of the most contemptible Wretch in
the World, and for the noblest End. It cannot well be questioned, whether it
was possible for God to take into his Own an Humane Nature or not? Humanity it
self being the product of his own Eternal Power, was, as all other parts of the
Creation, wholly at his command; and though God's assuming a Body might be
supposed enough of it self to render that Body immortal, yet we may reasonably
be assured, that he could make it according to his own good Pleasure, liable to
Death, as well as other Humane Bodies were; but the Union between the Divine
and Humane Nature being so close and absolute, the Humane Nature, howsoever
submitted to Mortality, must contract an infinite Honor and Dignity from
thence; but after all, the Condescension is not a whit the less, that he who is
God should assume that mortal Nature, nor is his Love less admirable who should
assume it for our sake, or who should stoop so low purely to make up that
breach that was between his Father and Mankind; but if to this Condescension we
add a due consideration of those many Calamities or extreme Sufferings this
Humane Nature was all along obnoxious to, if we consider the Son of God, as he
was Man, always in a state of Persecution, and that carried on by various
Degrees to the utmost Extremity, and then recollect again that Honor it had
contracted from that close and inseparable Union there was between the Divine
and Humane Nature in Christ; such Sufferings in such a Person, must be
acknowledged infinitely meritorious, and consequently capable of atoning or
satisfying for infinite Guilt, though such Sufferings were not Eternal, as
those of sinful Men are or ought to have been; for it is not necessary that the
Satisfaction given for Humane Sins should be of the same kind, as if Divine
Anger could have been averted by no Method but that of the Lex talionis, or
like for like, but that the Redemption-Price, paid for the guilty Prisoner,
should be of equal value to those Injuries done by that Prisoner to him, to
whom that Redemption-Price is paid down; as if I take up Goods or Silver Coin
of any one, for which I my self am wholly insolvent, and another undertakes for
me to discharge the Debt, the Creditor will scarce take it ill, if he paid to
the full in Gold or Jewels for that Silver or those Goods he had given credit
for, though the Debt be not paid in kind.

Cat. Rac.. 6. c. 8. p. 146.
But, say They, it is ordinary to say, That one D^^p of Christ's Blood was enough
to wash away the Sins of the whole World, therefore God must be very unjust to
exact so extraordinary Sufferings at the hand of his Son, that he should shed
so much of his Blood, and die at last, and so pay a Price for Man's Sin, so
much greater than necessary: We might easily answer this Cavil by saying, that
an Argument drawn against an Article of Faith, merely from an Hyperbolical
Expression, is altogether invalid; nor is the Christian Church, in general,
bound to answer for every passionate Expression which one of her Sons may use.
But we may consider further, that whereas the reason of the Bloody Sacrifices,
offered by Men in former Ages, was to signify to the World, that an Expiation
was to be made for the World's Sins, and to keep up their hopes and
expectations of it; and whereas we are assured in God's Word, that without
Blood there is no Remission, though the shedding one Drop of the Blood of the
intended Sacrifice, be as real Bloodshedding, as the drawing out of all is,
and though one Drop of that Blood of the Sacrifice had as much Virtue and
Efficacy in it, as the whole Mass could be thought to have, yet that was not
all that was aimed at; for the Blood of the Sacrifice was so to be shed, as
that Death might naturally follow on that Action, which was not likely to
follow on the shedding one or only a few Drops; and without this Death the
Beast was not fit for Sacrifice; so much Blood being required as was necessary
to sprinkle on several things, in agreeance with which, the Blood of Christ too
is called (...), Heb. 12.24.
the Blood of sprinkling. The Blood then, shed of old, represented somewhat
Expiatory, but not as it was the Blood of an Animal, but as it was the Blood of
such a Creature sacrificed on the Altar to that God who was to be atoned: so
though the Blood of our Savior, in every Drop of it, as shed for us, was of an
infinite Worth; yet the Worth of that Blood, with respect to us, depended on
his being Sacrificed, or made an Offering for Sin, which he could not have
been, had not his Life been taken away by the pouring out of his Blood before;
for as we easily apprehend, that the fairest Beast designed for Sacrifice by
Men, if yet it died alone, or accidentally, was no Sacrifice; but that to make
it such, it was necessary the Priests should make it bleed to Death: So had our
Savior's Humane Nature submitted only to the common Rules of Mortality, or
fallen by a natural Death, he had been no Offering, no Sacrifice to God; but he
really was a Sacrifice, and is owned as such in Scripture, therefore his Blood
too was to be shed, and that so far as to put an end to his Humane Life, or the
Union between his Rational Soul and his Mortal Body; so that the extraordinary
Sufferings of our Savior take not away from the Worth of his Blood, in it
self, but his Blood could have had no effect upon us, for the washing away of
our Sins, had it not been the Blood of our Sacrifice, our Propitiation, as well
as it was the Blood of the Son of God; and therefore we own, with all Humility
and Thankfulness, the Goodness of our Lord in offering up himself a Sacrifice
for Sin on our account, by permitting those Powers to kill him, which he could
have destroyed with one revenging Word: Nor can we less acknowledge the
Goodness of his and our Father, who was pleased to accept of that Propitiation
for our Sins, his Son's Satisfaction for our Debts, which he was no way obliged
to, but by the Concurrence of the Divine Love and Goodness of the Father and
the Son, from all Eternity. But from this Doctrine of Christ's making
Satisfaction to his Father for our Sins, they draw a very unhappy Consequence,
for they tell us, Quod Hominibus fenestram ad peccandi licentiam aperiat, aut
certe ad socordiam in pietate colenda invitet, etc. That it gives Men an open
Liberty to sin, or at least, gives them great encouragement to Slothfulness in
the Duties of Religion: for if Christ has satisfied for all our Sins, then we
are free from all obligation to any punishment for Sin, and therefore there can
be no Conditions reasonably propounded to us, by virtue of which we should be
free from those Punishments; or it is unreasonable that God should still make
Practical Holiness a Condition of our Salvation, when Christ, by his Death, has
fully satisfied his Fathers Wrath, with respect to all our Sins, past, present,
and to come: This Charge would be very heavy if it were true; but would they
consider those very Texts they endeavor to confirm this Objection by, they
would easily see how they confound themselves, and slander that Holy Doctrine.
The Apostle tells us of Jesus Christ, Tit. 2.14.
That he gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and
purify unto himself a peculiar people zealous of good works: All this we
steadfastly believe. 2 Cor. 5.15.
And that Christ died for all, that they which live, should not henceforth live
unto themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose again: We believe,
that our Lord Jesus Christ gave himself for our Sins, Gal. 1.4.
that he might deliver us from this present evil World; Ephesians. 5.27.
That he might present his Church to himself a glorious Church, not having spot
or wrinkle or any such thing, but that it should be holy and without blemish:
We believe, Heb. 9.14.
that our Lord offered himself without spot to God, that he might purge our
Consciences from dead works to serve the living God; 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.
and that we are redeemed from our vain conversation, not with corruptible
things, but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish and
without spot: and from all these things we conclude, That our Savior's
Sufferings for us, were originally designed to free us both from the Punishment
and Guilt of Sin; and therefore as we look up to our Savior as our Priest and
our Sacrifice, so we acknowledge him to be our Prophet and our King, our
Instructor and our Governor; that he has been our Instructor in all Ages, by
his Messengers Prophetical and Apostolical, and those, to this day, lawfully
entrusted with the Dispensation of his Word and Sacraments; that he is that
great and glorious King, in perpetual Obedience to whose Commands we are
obliged to live, and without Obedience to whose Commands, performed according
to our ability, we certainly merit Eternal Punishment: and this power over us
as a Prophet and a King, we doubt not, took its Original from that Sacrifice he
offered for our Sins in the fullness of time, but on account of the certainty of
which, Rev. 13.8.
he was effectually, that Lamb slain from the beginning of the World. Well
then, our Savior, in his Suffering, paid a sufficient Price to satisfy for
the Sins of all Mankind, to atone God's anger against them as Sinners, and to
prevent their eternal Damnation: but these Advantages accrueing from his
Priesthood and his Sacrifice, can only be participated in by those who submit
to his Instruction and his Government; he purchased that Interest in us at a
dear rate, and the Connection between the one and the other is indissoluble: He
therefore that would reap any Benefit from the Sufferings of our Savior, must
obey his Directions, submit to his Laws, do his Will; he who acts so, must
certainly be very perfect in all Religious Duties; therefore those who are
eternally saved by Christ's Death, must, as far as possible, be perfect in all
Religious Duties; therefore, the true genuine Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction
must infer a necessity of Practical Holiness, not destroy it: thus we see when
God appointed the brazen Serpent to be set up in the Wilderness, for the relief
of those who were bitten by fiery Serpents, that brassy Representation had a
power sufficient annexed to it to heal all that were hurt; but if any bitten
Israelite, out of an obstinate humor, would not have cast his eyes upon the
brazen Serpent, though the Serpent had been just over his head, he would have
died by the Wound, because the Condition on which alone the Cure was to be had
was annexed to the appointment of that Serpent, viz. that the wounded Person
should look up to it. Or let us take our view of the Doctrine of Christ's
Satisfaction from another place, then we shall find Faith as an originally
necessary Condi ion of receiving any Benefit by it, and Faith, to be true, must
as necessarily work by Love; for if I am cast into Prison as a Debtor, and
another out of pity to my deplorable state, go and discharge all my Debts, and
receive an entire acquittance of all such Debts for me and in my name, this is
Love and Kindness, and sufficient in the case, in the Judgment of all Rational
Men; but if, after all this done, and the Acquittance showed me and attested,
I Will not believe one word of all the matter, and to prove I do not believe,
will continue a Prisoner still, though always complaining of the sadness of my
own Condition, my Friend did enough for me, but what am I the better? my
Incredulity makes my state and condition still as sensibly lamentable as
before; so, whereas by Adam's Transgression, all Men are brought into a state
of Guilt, and all stand as Prisoners under the hand of God, justly incensed
against us, and are such Debtors to his Justice, as unless that Debt be
discharged by or for us, we must be eternally miserable. Our blessed Savior,
assured of our Insolvency, has, by himself, satisfied his Father's Anger; he
has discharged that Debt we stand engaged in to Heaven; his whole Gospel is a
sufficient Evidence of what he has done for us, in it we are acquitted by God
the Father from those Punishments we were liable to, for the sake of his Son;
and the truth of that Gospel has through all Ages been sufficiently attested to
the World; but if, after all this, we all turn Socinians, if we will not
believe that our Savior has really extended any such Goodness toward us, and
to prove that we do not believe it, we slight all those Rules of Holy Living
which are given us, and resolve, with the rebellious Citizens in the Gospel,
that we will not have this Man to reign over us, that we will not submit to his
Laws, nor acknowledge his Sovereignty, his Satisfaction is ineffectual to us;
and though we groan under never so deep a sense of our natural Misery, we can
reap no good from that: we must therefore believe in our Savior, we must
believe him able, willing, and really to have satisfied his Father for our
Debt: we must believe that, by virtue of that Satisfaction so made, He Is able
to save to the uttermost all those that come to God in and by him: We must
believe he is really able to Teach us, and that he certainly has a Right to
Command us; and when we sincerely believe all these things, and that as it was
one great end of our Lord's offering himself for us to free us from the
Punishment, so it was another to free us from the Slavery of Sin, so that we
should not obey it in the Lusts thereof, it will be impossible that we should
indulge our selves in Sin; nay we cannot confirm the Truth of our professed
Faith, or make it credible to the World that we really Believe what we pretend
to do, unless we endeavor, as he that has called us is holy, so to be our
selves holy in all manner of conversation.

Let those then who talk so freely of the Doctrine of our Lord's Satisfaction,
who would persuade us that it is so irrational and pernicious to believe any
such thing, find out any Arguments from their own Scheme of Doctrine, which may
serve to enforce Practical Holiness more vigorously than what we have
delivered, if they can: Will They tell us we are obliged to it out of pure
Gratitude to Heaven, bcause God is pleased to forgive us our Sins past freely,
and to confirm that free Pardon to us by the Death of his Son, as if he merely
died a kind of Martyr for that Truth, which they make almost the sole end of
all our Savior's Sufferings? Gratitude, it is true, may operate powerfully upon
a generous Soul, but the most generous of all would be willing to understand
the nature of that Obligation they have to be so grateful, and the reasons of
it. We are then obliged by God's free pardoning of our Sins; how do we know he
has done so? By the Testimony of Scripture, that Word of God, which is
sufficient to instruct us to Eternal Life: Well, we own Scripture does inform
us, That our Sins are freely pardoned by God, and we should build very
confidently on that evidence, did not those we have to do with teach us a great
deal of Diffidence, and show us that such Passages of Scripture are capable of
very different Interpretations, and that when we think we have a very clear
proof of this or another Particular, when we come to scan things accurately by
our own Reason, we find we have none at all; for the same Scripture which tells
us we are freely pardoned, tells us as plainly, and as intelligibly, That the
Lord Jesus Christ is that Lamb of God who takes away the Sins of the World;
that Christ died for us, or for our Sins; that he bore our Sins, and carried
our Transgressions; that he redeemed us with his own most precious Blood; that
he gave his Soul a Redemption-Price for many; that he is our Mediator; that he
has reconciled us to God, and is a Propitiation for our Sins; and that the
Scripture has very distinctly stated the Comparison between Legal expiatory
Sacrifices and the Sacrifice of Christ, the former being only so many Types and
Shadows, the latter the Antitype, or the thing so long and so often represented
by them: And yet, according to Socinian Doctrine, we must not believe one word
of all this, but we must fly to foolish Glosses and impertinent Figures to
elude the force of all these Assertions; and Scripture must be made a Nose of
Wax, that it may the better be subservient to the ridiculous prejudices of
pretended Rationalists. But if we may so slightly pass over these Assertions,
we may as slightly pass the rest, and deny that we ow any Gratitude to God on
account of the forgiveness of our Sins; according to true Catholic Principles
we believe, both that our Savior has satisfied for our Sins, and that our God
has freely forgiven them: and none but a Socinian Reasoner would find any
difficulty to reconcile those Truths to one another, as we have shown before.
But we'll suppose Gratitude to Heaven for Mercies received, especially that of
Salvation by Christ, would oblige us sufficiently to Holiness of Life; it will
follow from thence, that that Doctrine which sets off the Love and Mercy of God
and Christ to the greatest advantage, must needs offer the most considerable
Motives for our Obedience; but here a new Vindicator of Socinianism
acknowledges, Defense of the Hist. of Vnitar. p. 50.
That the Socinian Doctrine makes the Love of God less wonderful than the
Trinitarian; therefore the Socinian Doctrine affords us less effectual Motives
to grateful Obedience than the Trinitarian Doctrine does; and since the Love of
God is of so extraordinary a Nature really that it passes knowledge, Ephesians. 3.19.
as the Apostle assures us; since no words can set it off according to its
Excellence, nor the very Conceptions of Men reach it, (for if they could, Men
might know the utmost dimensions of it) then whatsoever Scheme of Doctrine goes
about to lessen that Love under a pretense of making it more intelligible, that
is really destructive of true Piety, and, as far as possible, takes away all
Obligations to Obedience arising from Gratitude for God's Love to Mankind. So
the Doctrine of our Savior's great Humiliation, in being incarnate for our
Sakes, seems a very powerful reason why we should be meek and lowly in spirit;
will their Opinion, that he was a mere Man, taking his first and sole Original
from the Blessed Virgin, promote Humility more powerfully? that he was very
great on that account, that he did many Miracles, we readily own; but we cannot
but imagine our mighty Man of Reason talks Nonsense, when he tells us, Ib. Def
p. 51.
That Christ by the power bestowed upon him cast out Devils, cured all sorts of
Diseases, raised the dead, commanded the Winds and the Seas, and was then
indeed in the likeness of God, but it was a great Humility in him, that he was
so far from making an Ostentation of his Glory and Greatness, that he became
like a Servant, etc. If indeed he had that power of doing such great Miracles,
and had concealed it, or had never done any thing miraculous but in Corners,
and where the Noise of it could never have crept out into the World, it might
have looked like somewhat of our Author's Humility; but the greatest part of
our Savior's Miracles were done openly, in the Synagogues, on the Sabbath Day,
and elsewhere when Multitudes were gathered together, and this, as we take it,
was to own and publish his Greatness and Power to the World; and it was but
necessary he should do so, for these Miracles of his were the authentic
Evidences of his Messiahship, the Evidences to which he appealed when he
declared, that If he had not done among them the works which never man did,
John 15.24.
they had had no sin, but that now they had no cloak for their sin, because
they themselves had been Eyewitnesses of those great things, which they could
no more prove were done by any Diabolical Power, than our Socinians can that
they were not done by a Power, Inherent, Natural, and Divine in himself; and
the same Evangelist, after having given us the History of Christ's turning
Water into Wine at the Marriage of Cana in Galilee, adds this Remark to it,
2.11.
This beginning of Miracles did Jesus, and manifested forth his Glory, and his
Disciples believed on him: so that, in this particular, we see our Savior not
expressing an unwillingness to be known, or to have it known what and how great
he was; and as for his becoming a Servant, notwithstanding all that Power, it
was no matter either so great or so peculiar to him, as should render him so
extraordinary an Example to us; for his Birth, as to his Condition in this
World, was very mean, and if we believe, as some do, that for many Years he
followed the same Employ which Joseph, his supposed Father, did, and that he
had an illiterate Education, 7.15.
as the Jews object to him, (which particulars are almost unquestionable) his
Condition was servile from the beginning, and therefore not so strange, that he
should willingly be a Servant to others, especially since it has always been
the Policy of those who endeavor to head a Party, to manage themselves with
all the obliging Condescensions in the World; so Menelaus, in Euripides, tells
Agamemnon, he should remember when he sought the Command of the Grecian Army,
Euripid. in Aulide.
(...), How humble he was, taking every Man kindly by the Hand, and having his
doors always open to the meanest Plow-jobber, and courteously speaking to all,
though they seemed to take no notice of him. If this were the Mode of Great
Men, aspiring after more Grandeur, what of wonder was there that He, who had
not so much as where to lay his Head, should be so humble and so much a Servant
to every one? especially since he came to call Men to follow him, and set up
for the Sovereign Head of the greatest Society of Men in the World? As for our
Savior's Sufferings, notwithstanding his Power of doing Miracles, he was far
from standing alone in that particular, for Moses himself, though so great, by
God's own appointment, among his own People, though he were a King in Jesurun,
Exodus 17.4.
though he did many Miracles, was in danger of Stoning by the discontented
Israelites; Elijah, a Man of a very considerable Character, acted as a Servant
when he girt up his Loins and ran before Ahab to the entering in of Jesreel,
Numb. 14.10.
and as a poor persecuted Man when he was forced to fly for his Life from the
fury of Jezebel: the Prophets generally died Martyrs for those Truths they
published; and the Apostles, tho'mighty in those signs and wonders which they
did in the World's View, yet several of them died by ways as cruel and
tormenting as our Savior himself: from whence it will follow, that Moses and
Elijah, that the Prophets and Apostles, were as great Examples of Humility and
Condescension as our Savior himself, and therefore St. Paul, when he set
Christ as an example of Humility before the Philippians, did it only at
random, and might as well have named himself or any of his Fellow-Apostles on
the same account; and doubtless this Doctrine tends very much to the
Advancement of Christian Piety. But now, if we quit Socinian Reason, and
consider the Truth of things; if we look upon our Savior, as pre-existent to
his appearing in the World, as being God of God and Light of Light, and that
from Eternity, and consider him as condescending to assume our Nature, as
appearing without those Terrors of Divinity, and clothed with all the
Sweetnesses of innocent Humanity; if we respect him who had all things
originally at command, and did yet (...) become poor for our sakes, (where we
cannot but take notice of our new Author's pitiful Criticism, who tells us,
that Word signifies not to become poor, but to be poor; yet Suidas tells us,
that (...) signifies, Suidas in Verbo.
(...), one that falls into want from having been sufficiently provided for,
which we think is becoming Poor from being Rich, and not being originally Poor;
and so whereas Poverty in the Poet Aristophanes tells us, Aristoph. in Plut. p.
58. I.B.E.
(...), The Life of a Beggar is to be without any thing of his own, but what he
receives from the Charity of others; which was really our Savior's Case;
Gerard, a better Critic than our Author, defines, according to ancient
Etymologists, Car. Ger. in locum.
(...), a Beggar as one falling or descending from Riches to Penury, from
Sufficiency to extreme Want, so far as to have nothing but what is given by
others) thus our Savior became Poor, nay a Beggar, others administering to his
Maintenance of their Substance; and he descended from that celestial Glory,
with which he was robed from Eternity, to assume Humane Nature, and in that
Nature to be so poor and despised on that account, as the Evangelists represent
him: and we know, as well as he can tell us, that God, as God, cannot be poor;
but we are as sure that that real Flesh and Blood, assumed by our Savior, was
liable to the same inconveniences with the rest that were Partakers of the same
Nature, among which one was Poverty, very incident to those who are born to no
worldly Estates. But how Men come to be Rich and Glorious, by having the power
of doing Miracles conferred upon them, we cannot easily discover; our Savior's
Miracles brought him in no Treasures, and his Apostles, notwithstanding that
Power of doing the like conferred on them by Heaven, were in a very low
Condition in the World; and Paul, among his numerous Converts, was but (...), a
poor Man, fain to get his Living by the Labors of his own hands: Now certainly
the Jews were as much obliged to observe our Savior's Humility as others, and
they saw him low enough, but they, who very well knew the Meanness of his
Birth, that could ask the Question, Is not this the Carpenter's Son? could not
make any extraordinary Remark upon that; but could they have believed him the
Son of God, which those converted among them afterward did (by which they
understood his being equal with God) they would have been very ready to admire
his Humiliation, as his Disciples did, when, owning him their Master, they saw
him stooping to wash their Feet; so that our Savior was no way visibly Rich or
Glorious in the World, unless they will say he was so because contented, which
every Wise and Good Man is, and they who saw neither any Riches nor Glory, that
he had upon Earth, could not have been easily drawn to set him as a pattern of
Humility before themselves, because they saw him in the form of a Servant; if
he were a mere Man, when he was once more than a Servant, when all power was
given to him both in Heaven and Earth, he appeared as a Master on every
occasion, and quickly withdrew himself from the sight of Men: and the humility
or condescension of one that has nothing, is neither admirable nor exemplary.

If we could dwell longer on this Subject, I make no doubt but it would appear,
that, above all other Doctrines, Socinianism should never be embraced as
tending to the advancement of true Piety; and since we have had so many holy
Martyrs living and dying in the belief of Christ's Satisfaction for our Sins,
we may conclude that Doctrine of Christ's Satisfaction is neither so pernicious
nor destructive of Holiness as those Heretics would persuade us; and therefore
we may the better assert this Doctrine, and make good our Foundation of it, i.
e. the notion of infinite Justice in God, which does necessarily infer, that
every Sinner ought to be punished. But they tell us, Cat. Rac,. 6. c. 8, p. 147.
That we make God's Mercy such as cannot but forgive all Sin, and his Justice
such as cannot but punish all Sin, and so we set God's Attributes at
irreconcilable odds one with another; but I do not remember infinite Mercy
defined, by any of Ours, by that particular Character of necessarily forgiving
every Sin: We believe indeed, that the Sins of those who are pardoned, could
not be pardoned, were there not infinite Mercy in God; but we generally
believe, that infinite Mercy exerted it self, when Christ came into the World
to redeem Sinners; and that indefinite Expression of our Savior, that God so
loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes
in him should not perish but have everlasting Life, teaches us as much. Now, if
Faith be so necessary a Condition, that without it the Sins of none can be
pardoned, then infinite Mercy cannot imply a necessity of pardoning every Sin;
and if that Condition of believing be requisite, I know not why another
Condition, such as a Christ offering up himself a Sacrifice to atone his
Father's displeasure for Men's sins, should not be so too: As for infinite
Justice, we believe it necessarily infers a Punishment for every Transgression,
and therefore we believe, that had not our Savior undergone that Punishment
for our sins which was due to us, every Sin of ours must have been inevitably
punished; and therefore whereas we conclude, agreeably to Scripture, that the
greatest part of Mankind are eternally damned, we conclude their Damnation is
the effect of infinite Justice, and that they have no more than they deserve;
and whereas all those who believe in Christ have their Sins pardoned, and are
eternally saved, we believe that the consequence of the same infinite Justice;
for since Christ has really satisfied for our Sins, and his Father has accepted
it for us, and the Will of God the Father and of God the Son, being eternally
the same; so that the Satisfaction and the Acceptance were of eternal
Determination; God could not evidence that Justice to us, but by making good
that Original Contract or Agreement, and so by bestowing Pardon and eternal
Happiness on all those who believe in his Son; and the same Justice is as much
evidenced in the condemnation of the Wicked, because the Satisfaction offered
by Christ being sufficient to atone for all Sins, upon condition that all
Sinners believe in him who has so satisfied, that slight put upon the
Condition, or the Unbelief of the greater part of Mankind, exposes them justly
to Divine Vengeance, as even common Reason teaches us. The Socinians tell us,
as if they were the Privadoes of Heaven, that God's Mercy and Justice are both
moderated by his Wisdom and Goodness, as if they needed somewhat of Limitation
or Restraint: but why should Justice and Mercy be moderated or governed by
Wisdom and Goodness, more than Wisdom or Goodness should be managed by Justice
or Mercy? God's Attributes do not superintend one another, but they are all
infinite, concentred in one infinite Being, therefore all equal, and no more
capable of interfering one with another, than God can be supposed capable of
disagreeing with himself; and whereas we are taught by those Men of Reason,
that that Justice which is exercised in punishing Sinners, is called in
Scripture God's Severity, his Anger, and his Fury; if we allow it, will they
say, that Severity, in God, or Anger, or Fury, are unjust? We know those words
are generally understood in an ill sense; Severity, among Men, can admit of no
more favorable Character than that of Summum Jus, or extremity of Law, which
is thought to be Summa injuria, or extremity of Injustice; and Anger and Fury,
in Men, are generally taken for vicious Excesses, and such, as till a Man can
govern or conquer, he is not looked upon as any extraordinary proficient in
Virtue; but we hope there are no such vicious Excesses in God, therefore such
words are made use of only according to Men's Capacities, to show us how very
angry God is with Sin and Sinners, (and yet no more than Justice, in
consistence with Mercy, will allow) and to strike a just Aw and Terror upon
Men; then they who will avoid breaking such or such a Law, out of Fear of the
Indignation of the Lawgiver, whose superior Power and Authority may render
him formidable, may much more be afraid of breaking the Laws of that God, whose
Anger is irresistible, and whose Justice is inevitable: and though there be
neither Justice nor Mercy in punishing the Innocent, or in acquitting the
Guilty, yet there is no trespass upon either, in pardoning the Guilty, when the
Innocent Freely and Voluntarily takes that Guilt upon himself, especially when
the Quality of that Innocent, so offering himself, is such, that the same
degree of Punishment, or Punishment as heavy falling upon him, cannot possibly
bring eternal Ruins upon Him, as it would upon inferior Offenders; as we
often see among mere Men, some of so strong and vigorous a Constitution, that
the same Pains shall scarce disorder them, which bring present Death to those
of feebler Tempers. And if it were no Injustice for the Jewish Highpriests, by
God's immediate Command, to transfer the Crimes of themselves and the People
upon the Heads of those Beasts they offered in Sacrifice for Sin, which
Translation of their Guilt they signified by laying their Hands upon the Head
of the intended Sacrifice, Exodus 29.10.
(which Beasts were really innocent, yet then died for Men's Sins; not as in
their own nature expiatory, Vid. Oughtram. de Sacrificiis. l. 1. c. 22.
but as referring to the Sacrifice of Christ, which alone was so in it self;)
then neither was it Injustice in God, to lay upon Christ the Iniquity of us
all, and, by so doing, to expiate our Sins in earnest, though the same Blessed
Jesus were Holy, Harmless and Undefiled, as we are sure he was: Nor indeed
could any thing but what was truly innocent be substituted to suffer for the
Guilty, since otherwise, its native Crimes must have needed Expiation; whence
among other Reasons, I conclude, Humane Sacrifices abominable to God, because
all were Sinners, and one Sinner could not reasonably atone for another, which
was no Exception to the Sacrifice of Christ.

But our Adversaries have their artificial Glosses, whereby to put off the
plainest Evidences of Scripture that assert, His Satisfaction for our Sins; for
when we are told, that our Savior Died for us, that He laid down his Life for
Sinners, etc. they allow no more to be signified by it than this, That Christ
was a Sacrifice for us, in the same manner as former Sacrifices were for those
who offered them; so that as those Sacrifices were never looked upon as any
Compensation for the Sins of the Offerers, neither could that of Christ be a
Compensation for theirs for whom he offered himself; only his Offering Himself
so seems like the others, as a certain Condition on which Remission of Sins
should be granted; But if common Sense may be our Guide, the Difference must be
very great between this of Christ and all former Sacrifices offered by the
Jews, as generally the Antitype is accounted of a superior Nature to the Type:
for though Remission of Sins were granted to the Offerer upon his Sacrifice being
offered, yet it was not upon account of that Sacrifice offered, but upon
account of the Sincerity and Obedience of the Offerer, and that respect his
Sacrifice had to the Death of the Messiah yet to come; for, though Beasts were
innocent, there was nothing meritorious in their being sacrificed, their
Sufferings being involuntary, and themselves in a corrupt and insensible state;
because there was nothing in the ancient Holocausts considerable but their
relation to the Messiah, therefore they were offered continually, from their
first Institution to the time of our Savior's Death; but when the Messiah was
once come, and had offered himself, knowingly and voluntarily, for Sin; the
former Sacrifices were all effectually to cease; and our Lord to offer himself
no more than once, therefore there must be something extraordinary in that one
Sacrifice, which was not in others, and once offering of that must be more than
equivalent to all the former; that really and effectually in it self expiating
Sin, which the others did not; and this the Apostle himself urges, when he
tells us, Heb. 9.9^ 11, 12.
That the Jewish Tabernacle was a figure for the time then present, in which
were offered both Gifts and Sacrifices, that could not make him that did the
service perfect, as concerning the Conscience, but Christ being come an
High Priest of good things to come, not by the Blood of Goats and Calves, but
by his own Blood, he entered in once into the Holy Place, having obtained
eternal Redemption for us: that eternal Redemption is an absolute Freedom from
the Punishment of Sin, effected by Christ, but only signified by Jewish
Institutions, the utmost of the virtue of those Symbolical Rites. The same
Author presently subjoins, the Blood of Bulls and of Goats, and the ashes of an
Heifer sprinkling the Unclean, sanctified to the purifying of the Flesh, i. e.
God having, for the use of the Jews, ordained those Rites and Sacrifices, and
promised to receive them as Clean who punctually observed his Institutions,
they were consequently Legally clean who so observed them; but otherwise than
in the Sense of the Law, no cleaner than the rest of Mankind, who never heard
of those Institutions, but the Argument follows, a fortiori, How much more
shall the Blood of Christ, v. 13, 14.
who, through the eternal Spirit, offered himself without spot to God, purge
our Consciences from dead works to serve the Living God. The Difference then
between the Sacrifices, is apparent enough, those could only give a Legal
Purity to Jews, and that only to their Flesh, without which Ceremonial Purity
Men may be saved; but the Sacrifice of Christ reaches the Pollutions of the
Soul, takes away the Defilements of the Mind, and opens a free passage for us
to the throne of Grace, without which means, Remission of Sins, and eternal
Salvation are never to be obtained. Again, the Apostle, speaking of that Blood
which, according to the Levital Law, was to be sprinkled upon several things,
adds, It was necessary that the Patterns of things in the Heavens should be
purified with these; or rather the Patterns of Heavenly things, for so the
following Words explain the Phrase, but that the Heavenly things themselves
should be purified with better Sacrifices than these, for Christ is not entered
into the Holy places made with hands, which are the Figures of the true, but
into Heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of God for us, i. e. as a
Mediator on our behalf; but he entered not there that he might offer himself
often, as the High Priest entered into the Holy place every year with the Blood
of others, for then must he often have suffered since the foundations of the
World, v. 22. ad 27.
but now once (...), in the perfection or completion of Ages, i. e. in the
fullness of time, has he appeared to put away sin, by the Sacrifice of himself.
The same Divine Author urges the matter further in the following Chapter, and
directly confirms what I before asserted, That the Law having a Shadow of good
things to come, and not the very Image of the things, can never, with those
Sacrifices, which they offered year by year continually, make the comers
thereunto perfect, for then they would not have ceased to be offered, because
that the Worshippers once purged should have had no more Conscience of Sins:
and if the Worshippers could have been so purged at once by those Legal
Sacrifices, the successive continuance of them, would, in the same manner, have
purged all those concerned in them; and then another and a better and greater
Sacrifice would have been altogether needless; but alas! in those Legal
Sacrifices, there was every year made a Remembrance of the same Sins, and of
the Guilt of the same Sinners, Heb. 10.1, 2, 3, 4, 10, 11, 12, 14.
for it was not possible that the Blood of Bulls and of Goats should take away
Sin; But now by the will of God, we are sanctified through the offering of the
Body of Jesus Christ once for all; Every Jewish High Priest stood daily
ministering and offering the same Sacrifices which can never take away sin; but
this Man, after he had offered one sacrifice for sin, for ever sat down on the
right hand of God, nor did he need to offer oftener, for by one Offering he has
perfected for ever them that are sanctified. The Difference then between the
Sacrifice of our Savior and those of the Law is notorious; but now, if
Remission of Sins could be granted to the Offerer of a Legal Sacrifice, and yet
a Legal Sacrifice could not take away the Sins of the Offerers; and if the
single Sacrifice of Christ did really take away Sins, both which things are
asserted in the Texts now cited; then a great deal more must be meant, by
Christ's Sacrifice taking away sin, than the bare Remission of Sins amounts to;
It must signify taking away that Guilt of sin, by which Men are rendered
obnoxious to Punishment: which, considering that Justice inherent in Almighty
God, cannot be removed but by substituting somewhat so innocent in the Sinner's
room, that the Sufferings of that Innocent may satisfy for the Impunity of the
Sinner; but it being inconsistent with Justice to punish the Innocent for the
Sinner, if the Innocent be unwilling, or depend upon his Innocence as his
Security from Punishment; therefore our Savior, for the acquittal of Divine
Justice, offered himself voluntarily to die for us, and that when no Power on
Earth could have taken away his Life from him; which Offer of his being the
effect of his eternal Will, and his eternal Will the same with that of his
Father. Eternal Justice required his Sufferings, and accepted those Sufferings
(though to be undergone in time) as really, and in their own intrinsic Nature,
equivalent to those Punishments otherwise due to a sinful World. Upon the
whole, Christ died for, or in the room of Sinners, not to prevent their
temporal but their eternal Death; and by his Humiliation and his Death, who was
so Innocent and so Great, gave eternal Justice as absolute Satisfaction as the
eternal Punishment of all those who are now saved through Him would have done,
and therefore when Socinians seek for a reason, for their denying Christ's
Death to have been in our stead, and fly to that of St. Paul, (...), that
Christ died for our Sins, 1 Cor. 15.3.
and plead from thence, that since it cannot be said that Christ died in the
room of our Sins, no more can it be said, that he died in the room of Sinners,
this is mere Stuff and Cavil; for if Christ died on account of our Sins, which
is the direct English of (...), it is then the more probable, He died in the
room, and stead, of those Sinners, or suffered a vicarious Punishment for them,
for, or on account of whose Sins he resigned himself to the Death upon the
Cross. Or they know it is no uncommon thing in Scripture to put Sin for Sinners,
and they will confess, though not in that sense which we do, that He who died for
Sin died for Sinners, they being inseparable from one another: But the
Socinians tell us otherwise, that Christ's dying for us, signifies his
procuring a great deal of good for us by his Death; this we certainly believe
he did, but cannot imagine it is any detraction from the Worth of that Good he
procured for us, to conclude, that he suffered instead of Sinners; for if he
offered himself to Divine Punishment in the place of those, who were
unquestionably obnoxious to it, and if his Father accepted of that Offer, then
all those Sinners who accept of those Conditions, on which alone his Death is
effectually beneficial to them, are certain of the pardon of their Sins, and of
eternal Happiness, the natural Consquence of that Pardon. But they have yet a
farther Shift, and because St. John tells us, We ought to lay down our Lives
for the Brethren, 1 John 3.16. Col. 1.24.
and St. Paul tells the Colossians, that by his sufferings he filled up what
was behind of the afflictions of Christ in his flesh, for his Body's sake which
was the Church, they conclude, that as those who die for the Brethren cannot be
said to die in their stead, nor St. Paul to satisfy by his sufferings for the
sins of the Church, so neither could Christ, on account of his being said to
die for us, be reasonably thought to satisfy for our sins; but this Allegation
is impertinent; for, though we are obliged to expose our Lives to the utmost
hazards for the Conversion and Edification of others, yet where was it ever
said, We should be wounded for the Transgressions of our Brethren, or be
bruised for their Iniquities? or that they should be healed by our stripes?
that God should lay on us the Iniquities of all our Brethren? that We should
make our Souls an Offering for Sin? that We should be delivered for the
Offenses of our Brethren, and should bear their Sins in our own Bodies on the
Cross? all which things, with more to the same purpose, are spoken of Christ,
and ought to be the Explications of the other. As for that of St. Paul, if we
translate it, as we very well may, all their pretenses from it are lost, I
rejoice in all my sufferings for you all, or in those Troubles and Persecutions
I undergo for Preaching the Gospel to you, and in my turn fulfill in my flesh
the latter parts of Christ's Afflictions for his own Body, that is, the Church;
and so Afflictions or Sufferings for the Church are not applied to St. Paul,
but to Christ, who really laid down his Life for his Flock, and all the
Afflictions of the Servants of Christ, are but the Counterparts of what Christ
has done for them; it being their Duty to mantain what he has delivered to
them, and to be faithful to Death as he died before for them: and the Church,
the Body of Christ, is exceedingly edified and benefitted by the courageous
Sufferings of their Fellow Members, Martyrs and Confessors giving the best
evidences of the Excellent Nature of the Gospel, and confirming and encouraging
others in the same Resolutions, of dying rather than forsaking Truth; but
neither can any of the former passages be applied to St. Paul, therefore his
Words cannot bear the same sense as applied to him, as the same Expressions do,
when they are applied to Christ, Scripture, which is its own best Interpreter,
no where explaining it in the same manner.

But further, our Savior is said to have born our sins, and to have carried
our sorrows; this seems to be a Metaphor taken from a Man carrying that Burden
himself which another ought to carry; and this is commonly looked on as a
considerable evidence of Love and Kindness: 1 Timothy 3.16. c. 2.
the same has carried Men out to a willingness to die for one another, so
Pylades was willing to die for his Friend Orestes, only that he might escape a
Tyrant's Fury; and Nisus, in the Poet, would gladly have redeemed his loved
Euryalus from the Enemy's Sword, by putting himself into their hands in lieu of
him: but the tendry in these Cases was certainly a vicarious Death, and the
Persons so offering themselves, without all doubt, concluded, that whatsoever
could be pretended to by the most severe Justiciaries, would be well satisfied
by an Innocent's offering his own Life for an Offender, and that voluntarily;
by virtue of which Consent or Desire, there could be no wrong done to the
innocent Sufferer; and hence St. Peter tells us of Christ, that he suffered
(...), once for sins, 1 Pet. 3.18.
the Just for the Unjust (where, by the way, we may observe the phrase of dying
for Sins, is authentically explained by dying for Sinners, or for the Unjust)
i. e. He bore that Burden of God's Displeasure in himself, though he were Just
and Righteous, which was due to the Unrighteous; and yet, as among Men, those
generous Offers made by Friends for one another are not wont to be displeasing
to the greatest Princes, nor are they a whit the more angry with the vicarious
Innocent, though, to satisfy the Rules of Justice, they accept the Offer; no
more was God displeased with his Son for taking upon him that Burden due to
Sinners, since it only was the Sin which had trespassed so much on Justice, and
provided that were punished, either in the real or the substituted Offender,
who was only putatively Criminal, infinite Justice would be satisfied, Sin
condemned, and all Mankind be afraid of committing that which they saw was, in
its own Nature, unpardonable. One would think too, that other passage of the
same Apostle were plain enough, 1 Pet. 2.24.
That Christ bore our Sins in his own body upon the Cross, Sins are there put
for the Punishment due to Sins, and the bearing them in his own Body, must
signify his Body's being punished for them, and if for them, then for those
who had committed them; now if Christ did not take our place, or appear in our
room in those Sufferings, there can be no reason, suitable to Divine Wisdom and
Justice, why he, an Innocent, should die at all for our Transgressions; for to
say, That his Father had designed him for it before, and therefore he must die,
would be impertinent; to say, that without dying a vicarious Death for us, he
could procure any good, with respect to our Sins, would be very hard to prove;
for he might Die to make good the Truth of those things he had preached, to set
us an example of Patience, Submission and Humility, which, Socinians tell us,
were the great Ends of his Death, and yet we be as far from obtaining Remission
of Sins, by the means of his Death, as we were at first. So we believe that St.
Stephen was murdered for giving Testimony to Evangelic Truths, the very
Circumstances of his Death prove him an eminent Example of Patience, Fortitude
and Resignation; his Resolution appearing, upon a Socinian view, much beyond
that of our Savior himself, yet St. Stephen is not said to have died for the
sins of the World, nor to have carried Men's sins, or to have born them in his
own Body, at the place of Execution; and it would be absurd and ridiculous to
apply any such passages to him; and yet, as they say, the Sins of Men were the
cause of the death of those Victims offered to Almighty God by the Sinners, and
in the same manner, were the cause of our Savior's Death; so the same Sins may
truly be said to have been the cause of the death of St. Stephen and every
Martyr; yet the former Expressions being inapplicable to them, and they
contributing nothing to the Remission of Men's sins, (Christ only being that
Lamb of God who takes away the Sins of the World) those Scriptural Expressions
concerning the Death of Christ, must signify a great deal more than bare Dying
upon Common Reasons can amount to. But to answer this, they tell us, that
whereas God proclaims himself, Exodus 34.7.
a God keeping Mercy for thousands, forgiving Iniquities, Transgressions and
Sins, according to the Hebrew Original, it ought to be, bearing or carrying
Iniquities, etc. which is the same attributed here unto Christ, and yet we
cannot say, that God, as there named, has satisfied for any sins, therefore
neither can Christ have satisfied for sins, notwithstanding any such passages
concerning him; but this the Ancients easily answered, by asserting our Jesus,
the Son of God, to have been that very Being, so often and emphatically called
God, who all along conversed with the Israelites, during their wanderings in the
Wilderness, as I formerly showed; and that Testimony given to their Opinion by
St. Paul, when dehorting the Corinthians from several Sins, by the example of
those Israelites, 1 Cor. 10.9.
he inserts, Neither let us tempt Christ, as some of them also tempted, i. e.
the same Christ, and were destroyed of Serpents; where Moses tells us they
tempted God when they fell under that Judgment; therefore that God was Christ,
therefore he really did converse with Israel in those days, otherwise he could
not have been tempted, that Testimony, for any thing I have yet seen, may pass
for unanswerable. But, with all respect to their Critical Skill, we must assert
they are mistaken; the Hebrew word (...), from whence (...) in the cited Text,
not signifying to carry in its primary acceptance, but levare to ease, or to
take away, Marin. Brinxia. in verbo.
and so Marinus, in his Arca Noe, translates this very Text by levare or
tollere, and so God, when he pardons or forgives sins, is rightly said to ease
Men of that burden they bear, or to take them away; and consequently our
translating the word by forgiving is true, and agreeable to the general sense
of Interpreters; hence the Authors of the Septuagint Translation, as good
Critics as our Socinians, render it (...), taking away, not carrying, Sins,
and they could scarce be suspected of being Athanasians; no more could the
Chaldee Paraphrast who interprets it by those, (...), leaving or remitting
Iniquity, the word (...), never signifying Carriage, or any thing of that
Nature, but only leaving or remitting, with what else may be genuinely deduced
from that Interpretation; Vid. Castle. Lex. Hept. in verbo.
so (...) in the Syriack Version, signifies, leaving, remitting, pardoning,
sparing, but no where signifies supporting or carrying; the Samaritans use
(...), a word signifying easing and pardoning too; the Arabic (...), taking, or
driving, as a flying Enemy is driven away by a pursuing Army: So that for them,
because in a foreign sense the Hebrew word sometimes signifies to carry, to
interpret it so in this place, contrary to the sense of all the World beside
themselves, is absurd, and only shows what mean Shifts they are put to, to find
some Parallels to their abusive Constructions of Plain Scripture. As for the
Evangelists application of that Text, Isa. 53, 4. He has born our griefs, and
carried our sorrows, to our Savior, Matthew. 8.17.
upon healing all the sick that were brought to him; he only applies that to a
particular there, which really is of a general Import; therefore, what he
applies to the removal of bodily Diseases, St. Peter applies to Sins, the
Diseases of the Soul; our Savior visibly and openly removing the former, as a
sign of his removing the latter; but not doing both in the same manner, he
cured bodily Distempers, by a Word, a Touch, an Application of outward, though
seemingly unpromising, Means; but removing the Distempers of the Soul only by
his Death, and so by his blood cleansing us from all Sin, satisfying his Father
for all our Sins by his shedding of it, purging our Souls from all the
Filthiness and Corruption of Sins by the Application of it, and by Faith in it;
and that Bloodshedding of our Savior, as tending to his Death, proved it is
infinite Price and Value, so often taken notice of in Scripture, by being
equivalent to those Punishments Divine Justice might and must have laid upon
Transgressors; the Socinians indeed say, He takes away our sins, i. e. He
makes a show as if he died, and bore the Punishment due to our Sins, eorum
quasi poenam in se recepit, so putting a sham upon the World, pretending or
seeming to do what he never did, from which, if the World were convinced of the
Truth of what they assert, it would be very hard to persuade them, that he did,
by such seeming Means, eos a vera eorum poena exsolvere, discharge Mankind
really from those certain Punishments attending upon Sin; so for that further
put off, That our Savior may justly be said to procure Salvation for us by his
Death, because, by that Obedience showed to his Father in dying at his Command,
he had all Power conferred upon him both in heaven and earth, and so had power
to forgive our Sins, and to confer eternal Life upon us. It Is against Reason to
believe it, for all Power in Heaven and in Earth is infinite Power, infinite
Power must have an infinite Subject to reside in, Christ, being mere Man, can
be no such infinite Subject, therefore no such Power can be conferred on him, on
account of his Obedience, for he cannot receive an impossible Reward; but that
infinite Power being essential to him, as an infinite and eternal Spirit, his
Humane Nature, as united to that, is made Partaker of that infinite Power, and
consequently Christ, God and Man, can indeed bestow on us those mighty
Blessings.

To fix in our Minds the Notion of Christ's Satisfaction for our sins the more,
we are told by the Apostle, as I formerly cited him, That we are justified
freely by his Grace, Romans 3.24, 25, 26.
through the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus; whom God has set forth to be
a propitiation through faith in his blood, to declare his Righteousness for the
Remission of sins: to declare at this time his Righteousness, that he might be
just, and the Justifier of him which believes in Jesus; the last Verse teaches
us that Care taken to vindicate Divine Justice, in the World's Eye, by the
Death of Christ, which could scarce have been done, had not Christ laid down
his Life for us, and in our room, so satisfying the Justice of his Father; and
so the Justice of accepting as righteous every Believer in Christ, is apparent
too: for, if he have paid an entire Satisfaction, a full Redemption-Price to
his Father for our Sins, on that Condition, that those who believe on him
should be Partakers of the Advantages flowing from thence, God then could not
be just, should he refuse to justify such Believers; so that God's Justice is
as deeply concerned in the Pardon of Believers, as in the Punishment of
Infidels. Again, St. Paul tells the Elders at Miletum, Acts 20.28
that God had made them Overseers of that Church, which he had redeemed with
his own most precious Blood; Now whereas God is said to have redeemed his
People Israel from their Egyptian Bondage, that Redemption being really
effected by Jesus Christ, who was that great and powerful Agent in that mighty
Work, what was done for Israel then, was but the pre-signification of what he
intended in due time for all Mankind; so that he is called their Redeemer,
especially with respect to that future Design; though the rescue of them from
the Power of their Enemies be a Metaphorical Redemption, and applicable, in
such a figurative sense, to all those, who, even by an unjust Violence, set
open the Prison-doors, and make a way for the escape of the most notorious
Criminals. Again, Acts 7.35.
it is true, Moses is styled a Redeemer, (...), and a Leader to Israel, God
making use of him as his Instrument to execute Vengeance upon rebellious
Egypt, and to lead out Israel from thence with a mighty Hand and a stretched
out Arm; but we no where find that the Israelites were redeemed by the Blood of
Moses from their Slavery; We find not that the Sins of the Israelites were
forgiven on account of that deliverance; God indeed sometimes heard the
Intercessions of Moses for those ungrateful Wanderers, and, for his own Name's
sake, was pleased to pass by their Offenses, and to glorify his own Name in
that constant protection he afforded them, among their observing Enemies; but
the deliverance it self was no cause of God's remitting the Punishment due to
their Trespasses; nay their Ingratitude for that Mercy was a frequent reason of
their Sufferings, and amongst the rest of the total Destruction of that
Generation of People who came out of Egypt; it is further observable, that that
God who conversed with Israel in their passage to Canaan, calls them his Son,
his Firstborn, and threatens Pharaoh, that if he would not let them go, He
would destroy his Son, his Firstborn; Exodus 4.22.
besides, He required the Sanctification of the Firstborn of all Israel to
himself; which requiry of his obeyed, together with the exact execution of his
former Menace, was a kind of Redemption-Price, accepted by God, on account of
which he gave them deliverance from their Enemies. Nor was the Blood of the
Paschal Lamb insignificant in the case, that Blood prefiguring the Blood of the
Lamb of God, which did really atone for the Sins of the World. Upon the whole,
howsoever we may allow others, besides our Savior, to be called Redeemers, yet
so long as there is no Parallelism between the Circumstances of those
Redemptions they have wrought, and the Circumstances of Christ's, we must of
necessity conclude, that Scripture means a great deal more by naming Christ a
Redeemer, than by giving Moses or any other eminent Person the same Character;
that Name is figurative as applied to all others, it is proper as applied to
Christ; we may illustrate the Case by such an Instance as this, A Sovereign
Prince, blessed with One only and infinitely beloved Son, having in his power a
Capital Offender against his Laws, in concert with that Son, determines that
such Punishment as is proportionable to his Crimes, ought to be inflicted on
him; yet pitying the Weakness and deplorable Condition of the Criminal, and
designing to make his Clemency toward the Offender evident, He, in concert
with his own Son, orders it to be proclaimed every where, that if any Person,
not obnoxious to the same Punishment by reason of personal Guilt, loves the
Condemned so well, as to offer himself freely to undergo proportionable
Penalties to what the Law would have inflicted upon him, the Criminal,
acknowledging the Kindness offered, and his mighty engagements to his
Deliverer, shall be free; this Condition once proposed, the Prince's Son lays
hold on the Opportunity to express his Love to the Offender, offers himself to
die for him, and, since the Law requires it and must be satisfied, really does
so; the Prince, according to his Proclamation, accepts of his Son's vicarious
Punishment, the Law and Justice have their Course, and the grateful Criminal
obtains his Freedom: thus are Believing Sinners redeemed from that Punishment
they are obnoxious to, with respect to infinite Justice. The Socinians tell us
indeed, That Christ's Obedience to his Father, even to Death, was no more than
was due, on his own account; and that, though it was perfect and blameless, yet
he received Rewards for it, infinitely beyond what he could merit by such
Obedience. This is to put our Savior into the State and Condition of the
common World; for all those Glories, promised to repenting Sinners, are
infinitely greater than they, by any personal merit, can pretend to; but it
seems very unreasonable, that he should take upon him as a Mediator between God
and man, or that his Name should be so powerfully influential for the advantage
of others, who had just cause to be wholly employed in expressions of Gratitude
for his Father's Kindness to himself; or to be wholly ecstasi'd with
Admirations of that unbounded Goodness, which had conferred such mighty
Blessings on him beyond his deserts; this we rationally suppose will be the
Employ of beatified Souls, and ought to be Christ's too, upon the Socinian
Hypothesis; we own Christ's Obedience, as he was Man, to his Father's Will to
have been most perfect and absolute, his Original Divine Nature never knew any
thing of dissent with his Eternal Father; therefore that Humane Nature he
assumed, could not be liable to Disobedience. 2 Cor. 5.21.
It Is observed of him, that He knew no sin, he neither had nor could have so
much as a depraved Inclination; he had no strugglings within himself between
the Law of his Members and the Law of his Mind, which yet he could not have
been without, had he been a mere Man, a Partaker of Flesh and Blood, at the
same rate as the rest of Mankind were; but the Deity assuming Humanity, and so
being naturally incapable of Sin, we are not wont to assign Merit to his Life
and Conversation, any farther than as it laid him open to Sufferings, but only
to his Death and Passion, and the Preliminaries to them: that absolute
Innocence reigning in his Humane Nature, rendering all those Sufferings, to
which Humane Nature alone was liable, the more meritorious; and that
inexpressible Condescension of the Eternal Son of God to take our Nature upon
him, joined with his consequent Sufferings, made one entire sufficient Oblation
and Satisfaction for the Sins of the whole World. But to suppose, as Socinians
do, that one great meaning of the Death of Christ, was, that God, by that
means, might give Men a pledge of that Favor or Pardon he intended for them,
is idle: those who had any thing of a true Notion of a God, would have depended
upon his Word, authentically revealed, without any such extraordinary Pledge;
those who had perverse Notions of him, would take very little notice of such a
Pawn given; for the Argument would be very obvious to a Skeptic; If God be such
as some define him, infinitely Wise, Good, Powerful, True, there is no need of
such extraordinary Methods to confirm Men in an opinion of his Veracity; if he
be of a different or less perfect Nature, a thousand such Strategems can give
us no sufficient reason of Confidence in him. We find indeed the Ancients, upon
Leagues or Compacts between them, offering Sacrifices to their Gods, and with
their Hands laid upon the Victim's Head, calling their Gods to witness their
Sincerity in such Leagues, and making their solemn Protestations one to another
to observe propounded Articles; the design of that Ceremony seems to be only
to intimate the agreeing Persons serious Imprecation, that their own blood
might be shed in the same manner as that of the dying Victims, in case they
falsified that Contract then made; but we can imagine nothing of this nature to
have passed between God and man in the Death of Christ; Men were so far
consenting indeed as to shed the blood of Christ, but far from promising Faith
and Obedience to their God at the same time; no, they acted in plain defiance
to those Revelations God had made of himself, and those very Persons, who
pretended to the most immediate Dependence upon Christ, had very little
Confidence in him, till such time as his Resurrection from the dead reconfirmed
their fading Hopes, and made them believe he was capable of being their Savior
and Redeemer. But if, at last, it were necessary that Almighty God should so
seal the assurance of his Pardon to Mankind, a meaner Victim might have served
than that of his only Son; since nothing could possibly create in guilty Men a
greater Diffidence in God's Mercy, than so severe a procedure on so very slight
and impertinent a Reason, with that Son, concerning whom he professed, that he
was well pleased with him: After all, the Socinians would flamm us off with a
metaphorical Redemption, the Consequence of which, I fear, must have been but a
metaphorical Pardon of our Sins, in spite of which we might still be really and
properly damned; St. Peter, drawing the parallel between ours and a proper
Redemption, teaches us to believe, that our Redemption is proper too, forasmuch
as we were not redeemed with corruptible things, as Silver and Gold, the
ordinary means of redemption for Criminals or Captives, 1 Pet. 1.18, 19.
but with the precious Blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish and
without Spot; which precious Blood, being of infinitely more value than Silver
or Gold, could and did effect as proper a Redemption for them, for whom it was
offered, as the greatest Sums of Treasures, paid down for their Ransom,
possibly could.

To convince us yet further of Christ's Satisfaction for our Sins, the
Scripture represents him to us as a Mediator; but our Adversaries reply to
this, that Moses is called a Mediator too, yet Moses never satisfied for the
Sins of Israel; to prove that Moses is so called, they allege that of the
Apostle, That the Law was ordained by Angels in the hand of a Mediator; Gal.
3.19.
yet it is well known that Ancient Writers and Interpreters generally understand
that Passage of Christ, whom they certainly and truly conclude to have been
that God, more particularly appearing to the Israelites in their passage from
Egypt to Canaan; and so he delivered the Law to them by his own power, or with
his own Hand, as we may well express it, the Decalogue, the great binding part
of the Law, being written with the Finger of God, as Moses informs us, and so
put into the Hands of Moses, and the blessed Angels, as ministering Spirits,
attending their Lord in the Solemnity, and this Interpretation is not easily to
be eluded. But if by (...), a Mediator, we only understand, with Suidas, one
that is (...), a Peacemaker, it then is applicable to Moses, or to any other,
who goes between contending Parties, to make up any quarrel or breach that may
be between them. But in this case we must always consider the Persons between
whom matters are to be rectified, their Natures, and the nature of that Offense
which may have caused a breach between them, and he who undertakes such a Work
had need to have a considerable Interest in both the Parties who are at odds;
for an Undertaker, in such a case, who is liable to any exception on either
side, is like to mediate to very little purpose. Now, it is no very hard Task to
find Persons fit enough to take up quarrels between Men and Men, all Men
agreeing in one and the same Nature, and Offenses between them generally
arising from both sides; but that breach there is between God and man, is not
so easily made up, their Natures are infinitely different, one absolutely pure
and unchangeable, the other miserably corrupt and humourous; man continually
offending, God continually obliging; man proud, haughty, disdainful,
insensible; God kind, condescending, essential Love and Goodness: yet a
Mediator, such as should be able to procure Peace between God and man, must
have a very great Influence on both sides, to which purpose, it is indispensibly
necessary he should be completely Innocent: Moses was incapable of such a
Mediation, though he interceded for the People of Israel, by his Prayers, and
was earnest and importunate with God, to turn from that fierce Anger he had
justly expressed against a stubborn and ungrateful Generation; but Moses
himself, at the very time of his zealous Interposition for Israel, was, as
other Men, obnoxious to God's anger, and felt the effect of it, when, for his
Transgression at the Rock, he was denied entrance into the Land of Canaan; so
that in effect he did no more than what is particularly incumbent on God's
Priests in all Ages, i. e. to offer Prayers and Supplications for the People
they live among, and by such means, to the utmost of their ability, to stand in
the Gap, and to divert threatening Judgments from guilty Heads. Our Savior, as
necessity required, was Holy, Harmless, Undefiled, separate from Sinners, one
that needed not first to pray for Pardon for his own Sins, and afterward for
the Sins of others, and therefore he might be, and is, properly called the one
Mediator between God and Man, exclusively of all others; 1 Timothy 2.5.
as we are told in the same Text, there is One God, exclusively of all other
Deities; which could not be, if Moses had been a Mediator of the same kind and
in the same manner, as Christ was: and it is further added of our Mediator, That
he gave himself a ransom for all, which Moses never did; and though, in the heat
of his charitable Zeal, he was willing to have been blotted out of the Book
which God had written, that God, by that means, might have been reconciled to
his People, that Offer neither was nor could be accepted, because it could be
no Satisfaction to Divine Justice, to punish one Sinner, and, on account of
that punishment, to pardon another; for why should I pretend to satisfy that
Justice, on behalf of another, which, should it proceed severely, would pass
upon me without any such pretense; but he who conscious of his own Innocence,
is secure from any legal Danger, may, with reason, interpose vigorously for
another. In our present Case, our Lord endeavors to put an end to that
difference there is between God and Man, arising from Sin; God is the Supreme
Lawgiver, and has, in his own hand, the uncontrollable Power of punishing
Trespassers upon his Laws; Man is the continual Transgressor, having, by that
means, wholly forfeited all pretenses to Grace and Favor; therefore his Case,
being it self desperate, the Mediation begins on God's part, our Lord not being
styled, the Mediator between man and God, but between God and man, the whole
Mediation arising not from man's hopes, but from God's mercy and goodness,
which found out the means of reconciling us to himself, by his Son. Perhaps a
Socinian would find it difficult to give a satisfactory reason why, seeing the
first Covenant, or that between God and Israel, could be made by the Mediation
of Moses, and confirmed with shedding the Blood only of ordinary Victims, the
Evangelical Covenant managed by the Blessed Jesus, a Person very much superior
to Moses, could not be confirmed with Blood of like Sacrifices as the former?
We'll own freely, the Covenant of the Gospel is a better Covenant, the Promises
in it more plain and numerous, the Hopes raised in Men by it stronger and more
vigorous; but all these things are accounted for in the Dignity of the
Undertaker; and why Christians should not confide in God, upon the same terms,
on which the Jews did, is not easy to determine; I am sure they are generally
represented as the most tractable Persons. Besides this, there appears a vast
Difference between the Mediatorship of our Lord and Moses on these accounts;
our Savior, by virtue of his Mediatorial Power, was able to remit sins, was
able to give eternal Life to Believers; but Moses could do no such thing; he
was only a Suppliant to God for Pardon for Israel; and Socinians will scarce
allow, he gave them so much as a Promise of Eternal Life, throughout the whole
Systeme of his Laws, so that though we allow there ought to be some resemblance
between the Type and the Antitype, yet we must allow a mighty distance between
a Common Man and one on whom the Title of the Son of God, his only begotten
Son, was fixed, and the resemblance must be between Circumstances capable of
being represented, and not between those which are incapable of it. The Death
and Passion of our Savior, as an external Accident, attending his Humanity,
might be represented by the Death of those Creatures offered in Sacrifice
frequently to God; the Intercession of our Savior with his Father for a sinful
World, by the Intercession of Moses for a sinful Nation; but that Satisfaction
by Christ given for Sinners to his Father's Justice, was so great a thing, as
nothing could make any proportionable adumbration of it; the Confession of the
Peoples Sins over the Victim's head, and laying their Iniquiries on the Head of
the Scapegoat, as a devoted Creature, might keep up somewhat of an Idaea of
what the Messiah was afterward to do and suffer, and the manner how; but the
Symbol was so dark, that even the prophecy of Caiaphas pointing at the
Antitype, made very little Impression upon the Jews, and made them expect very
little from Christ, though they saw frequent evidences of his Divine Mission,
and his Death (as a Person devov'd and made Sin, as the Apostle expresses it)
for the safety of the Nation. But there is another Fetch, as subtle as the rest,
that supposing a Mediator ought to partake of the Nature of both the Parties,
between whom he is to make peace, yet this touches not our Savior; for his
Mediatorship was only to be employed in reconciling men to God, for so say
they, we find God reconciling the world to himself in Christ, but there is no
mention of reconciling himself to the World, supposing this assertion true, is
it therefore impossible that God should be angry with a sinful World? If so;
how comes it to pass he sends so many Judgments, particular and general, upon
Men, Cities and Countries? does he lay his Rod on Men's backs at random?
without any displeasure against their Crimes, or without any respect to their
Demerits? did he drown the old World without being angry with them? burn Sodom
and Gomorrha with their neighboring Cities, and yet not displeased with them?
these things are incredible: That he was often angry with the People of Israel,
we find frequently attested in Scripture; that, as an evidence of his Anger, he
punished them severely too, we meet with upon record there: If he could be
angry with the Sins of a particular People, he may certainly be angry with the
Sins of the whole World; for Sin loses not its odious Nature by being more
diffusive: If God be angry with their Sins, he must be angry with the Sinners
too, especially if they be active and obstinate in their Sins; for though Man, as
created at first in the likeness or in the image of God, be good; yet Man,
wherein that sacred Image is defaced by Sin, is odious and detestable, a proper
object of God's Displeasure, and, of himself, incapable of avoiding it; but if
God may be displeased with Sin and Sinners, and if (his Nature being pure, and
his Laws holy, just and good) he must be so, then he must be reconciled to Man,
or Man must be eternally miserable; and though we find God frequently in
Scripture calling upon Men to turn to Him, as if all the Work lay on their
hands, yet he promises withal, that He will turn to them; Mal. 3.7.
and those kind repeated Calls are only evidences, that He, who has a great
deal of reason to be averse to it, will yet be as ready to be reconciled to
them, as they can be to return to their Obedience to him; and he is said to
reconcile the World to himself in his Son; because He, in concert with his Son,
determined on that means of Pardon and Remission, to be granted to Sinners,
which Sinners themselves could never have pitched on, and because Man was
naturally backward to his own good, but God ever seeking it: Yet when we
consider (...), as a word of Ecclesiastical use, and signifying particularly
such a Reconciliation as is of Penitents to the Church, by which, for their
Crimes, they had been before excommunicated. We look upon our Savior, as our
great High Priest, making that Peace for us; and as Penitents are not required
to forgive the Church which they have offended, but the Church kindly forgives
them, though Offenders; so the World, reconciled to God, do not forgive God, or
restore God to their Favor, but God, by the Sacrifice and Intercession of
their High Priest, forgives them and restores them to his Favor; to which end
the Doctrine of Reconciliation, i.e. the Doctrine of Repentance is committed to
God's Ministers, and we, 2 Cor. 5.19, 20.
as Ambassadors from Christ, entreat Men that they would be reconciled to God,
that is, that they would turn every one from the Wickedness of their Ways, and
so be re-instated in his Favor.

It might seem not very easy to pervert the meaning of Scripture, when it
calls our Savior a Propitiation for our sins; so St. John, 1 John 2.1, 2.
If any man sin we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous, (...), and he is the Propitiation, or the propitiatory or atoning
Sacrifice for our Sins; and again, In this is Love, not that we loved God, 4.10.
but that he loved us, and sent his Son a Propitiation for our sins; and so St.
Paul, Romans 3.25,
God has set forth Christ to be a Propitiation through Faith in his Blood,
etc. Now would I fain be satisfied what is the Benefit of our Faith in the
Blood of Christ, a Faith peculiar, extraordinary and indispensibly necessary to
Salvation, if the shedding of that precious Blood had no effect, with relation
to atoning or satisfying God's Displeasure, justly expressed against our Sins?
That Christ's Blood had a real intrinsic Value, it would look somewhat harshly
to deny; yet it was not necessary it should have any such Worth, to render it
capable of confirming the new Covenant; mutual Compacts made, among the
Ancients, with the Solemnity of a Sacrifice, depended not at all on any
inherent worth in the Blood of that Sacrifice, nay, Cataline's Conspiracy,
though confirmed with Humane Blood, was not so confirmed because Humane Blood
was of a greater value in it self than that of other Creatures, but that, by
joining at first in so horrid an Action, they might desperately conclude it to
no purpose to stand out at any Wickedness whatsoever; but our Savior's Blood
is particularly preferred in its Worth to Silver and Gold and any corruptible
Riches whatsoever, therefore must be in it self of infinite or transcendent
Worth, and that infinite Worth, could not but effect some mighty good for us,
on account of which we were to depend on that Blood; nor could the Blood of our
Redeemer, or his Sufferings be less Satisfactory, because God is said to have
given him; for so he might, though our Lord's Humiliation was voluntary: the
perfect agreement of the Divine Will in the Father and the Son, neither
detracting from the Father's Bounty, nor the Son's Willingness or Freedom; so
Isaac, who was a Type of our Savior, must have been able to have resisted his
aged Father, when he was preparing to sacrifice him, but he did not, imitating
the Antitype, in that very particular, of being led as a Lamb to the slaughter;
yet Isaac's Willingness did not hinder, but that, had the Solemnity gone on as
begun, he would have been his Father Abraham's Sacrifice, or his Gift to
Almighty God, as would Jephtha's Daughter too, notwithstanding her ready
compliance with the Import of her Father's Vow. But it is objected, That the
Covering of God's Ark, appointed to be made by Moses according to the Pattern
in the Mount, is called the Propitiatory, Exodus 23.22.
which we translate the Mercy-seat, the Septuagint (...), the same Title by St.
Paul affixt to our Blessed Savior, the (...) was certainly in its original
Signification no more than what answered to its position about the Ark, that
is, a Covering, or that which closed it up on the Top, translated by the Word
which signifies a Propitiatory, on account of that immediate Residence which
God promised to keep there; from the Cherubims placed on which Covering he gave
Answers to the Petitions of his Supplicants, thence called emphatically, That
God who dwelt between the Cherubims; from whence it may appear, that when the
Apostle applies that Word to our Lord, of whom that Propitiatory or Mercy-seat
was always accounted a Type, he means, that the Man Christ Jesus was the
peculiar Residence of the Deity, or, as he expresses himself, that Person in
whom dwelt the fullness of the Godhead bodily: from which Body of his, God
himself gave his answers of Mercy and Compassion to Mankind; and this must
necessarily have been, if he informed his Disciples rightly when he told them,
He and his Father were One, and that whosoever had seen Him had seen his Father
also. The Socinians seem very willing to own that our Savior's Passion served
to expiate our Sins, Cat. Rac.. 6. c. 8. p. 153.
Cum Joannes eum Propitiationem pro Peccatis nostris appellat, significat per
eum Peccata nostra expiari, when St. John calls him the Propitiation for our
Sins, he means, that our Sins are expiated by him; but nothing can expiate
Sins, but what is satisfactory for Sins, or what bears that Punishment for
Sinners, which Sinners themselves should have born; hence Expiation is often
explained by Satisfying; so the Beasts offered in Sacrifice were put to death,
to intimate the Demerits of the Offerers, who ought to have died for their own
Transgressions; hence those Offerings made for the Sins of Men were styled
Expiatory or Purging: not as if the Beasts, offered by Men to Almighty God, had
any thing expiatory in themselves, but they were called so, on account of that
relation they had to the great Sacrifice of our Savior, which really did what
they only shadowed out, i. e. made a sufficient Satisfaction for the Sins of
the World, otherwise why should the Apostle tell us, that it is impossible the
Blood of Bulls and of Goats should put away Sin, since they were appointed by
God himself to be sacrificed as expiatory for Sin, but that their whole Effect
depended on their relative Nature, and their Praesignification of that glorious
Offering to be made for Men at last? it had been only to put a Sham upon
miserable Wretches, to tell of expiating their Sins by those Means by which it
was impossible they should be expiated; and to put them to extraordinary
Troubles and Expense for those things, by which, in themselves, they could reap
no good, and which further had no respect to any thing that could advantage
them: the Jewish Rabbis therefore always understood by such Expiations the
Transferring of that Punishment due to One upon some Other to whom it was not
due; whence that Wish, Vid. Buxtorfii Lex. Talmud in voce (...).
May those Chastisements which I undergo be expiatory or satisfy for Rabbi
such a one, and his Children; and again, Let thy Expiation be upon us, and let
us suffer in thy room, whatsoever thou ought to suffer; and Rabbi Moses ben
Maimon, commenting on that Phrase used by one, May I be an Expiation for them,
tells us, it is as much as to wish, that He might be a Redemption, Oughtr. de
Sacrif. l. 2, c. 6. p. 336,
or the Redemption-Price, or the Ransom for them: and it is a mode of Speaking,
whereby is expressed an extraordinary Love; to this the Apostle St. Paul
alludes, when he wishes he might be Anathema, Romans 9.3. Gal. 3.13.
for or in the room of his Countrymen, and our Lord really was made a Curse
for us, or in our stead, and so became indeed an Expiation, or a Propitiation
for our Sins. We allow it may be true, that He who is once reconciled may remit
what he pleases of his Right; but he must be reconciled first, now that
infinite Justice, essential to Almighty God, could not be reconciled to Man,
without a complete Satisfaction, and yet he may be said justly to abate of the
Rigor of his Right, who will accept of a Satisfaction offered, which he is not
bound to do; as among Men it is wholly at the determination of the Supreme
Power, whether they will execute the Malefactor himself, or accept of the
Punishment of some other, who voluntarily offers himself to die for the
Malefactor; Justice may if it please insist on the One, and it is no Injustice
to accept the Other.

What the Socinians at last endeavor to avoid, is, that Agreement between the
Legal expiatory Sacrifices, and that of our Redeemer; where they would fain
impose on us a new Fancy of their own, i. e. That our Savior's Sacrifice was
not completed, till he ascended into Heaven to present himself there before
his Father; and this they conclude from the custom of the High-priest's entering
into the Holy of Holies, with the Blood of the yearly Sacrifice, offered for
the Sins of the People: We must certainly own, that the High Priest did enter
that Sacred place with Blood; but we are to consider, that there were other
expiatory Sacrifices beside that which was offered once a Year, and which
prefigured the Suffering of our Lord, in which no such Ceremony was used: as
all those Sacrifices offered by particular Offenders for those Sins they were
personally guilty of, they endeavoring, by such means, to make an Atonement
for their Sins, and these particular Sacrifices were complete in themselves,
and procured Remission of Sins for the Offerer, and were certain Types of that
great Sacrifice, afterward to be offered; and the Paschal Lamb it self, of all
others the most lively representation of that Lamb of God who, in fullness of
time, was to die for the Sins of the World, was killed and eaten without any
such Circumstances, as carrying the Blood of it into the most Holy place, and
the Annual Sacrifice was really offered, when it was killed, and afterward
burnt without the Camp: Levit. 16.16.
the End and Design of sprinkling the Blood of the Goat and of the Bullock upon
and before the Mercy-seat, was, to make an atonement for the Holy place it
self, because of the Uncleanness of the Children of Israel, and because of
their Transgressions in all their sins, as the Text teaches us, i. e. though
the Holy of Holies were the place of the more special Presence of God, which
rendered it venerable and glorious, yet, it being among Men who were very
disobedient and rebellious, it contracted somewhat of Uncleanness and Pollution
from them, a Pollution so infectious, Psalm. 78.60.
that it made God forsake his Tabernacle in Shilo, even the Tent which he had
pitched among Men; it was on account of such Pollutions, that God threatened
Israel afterward, to destroy that House which was called by his Name; and
commands them, Go ye now unto my place which was in Shiloh, Jer. 7.12, 14.
where I set my Name at the first, and see what I did to it for the Wickedness
of my People Israel; therefore will I do unto this place which is called by my
Name, wherein ye trust, as I did to Shiloh, i. e. I will make it a desolation,
for such was Shiloh made on the same reason: This was then the case of the Holy
of Holies, and it stood in need of a formal Sanctification, in the ceremonial
way, for the Wickedness of those who were concerned about it; now this
Expiation of the Holy place, had no relation to the Remission of Men's Sins, as
the devoting, and killing, and burning the Sacrifice had; but the great
Sacrifice there offered by the High Priest was that of Prayer and Supplication,
shadowed out in that, Levit. 16.12, 13.
That he was to take with him into the most Holy place a Censer full of burning
Coals of fire from off the Altar of the Lord, and his hands full of sweet
Incense beaten small, and to put the Incense upon the fire before the Lord,
that the cloud of Incense might cover the Mercy-seat, that was upon the
Testimony, that he might not die: by all this, signifying that Sinners,
appearing even before the Seat of Mercy, without offering an Atonement to
Heaven in the most humble and solemn Devotions, can expect nothing but Ruins
and Destruction; and as we rationally conclude, that the Priests were not wont
to offer Sacrifices without Prayers in general, so we conclude, that even this
Symbolical Ceremony was not performed without some Prayers and Ejaculations at
least, God's Priests being appointed, under the Mosaic Law too, not only to
offer Sacrifices of several kinds, but to offer up Prayers and Praises to God,
in the name of that People over whom they presided in Religious matters. But
now, though we commonly look upon the Holy of Holies, whether in the Tabernacle
or in the Temple, as an Emblem of Heaven, being guided by the Apostle in the
Epistle to the Hebrews, yet we know that Heaven can be the Receptacle of
nothing defiled or impure, therefore it can contract no Impurity from any thing
in it or about it; therefore our Savior's Sacrifice was complete in dying on
the Cross for our Sins; Heb. 9.12.
but by his own Blood he entered into the most Holy, that is, into Heaven, in
his humane Nature, or that Body in which he had suffered on Earth; his free
offering himself, and freely sacrificing himself, he being our Priest and
Sacrifice both at the same time, opened him that entrance into Heaven; but
there, as our great and never-dying High Priest, he makes Intercession for us
to his Father, he presents to his Father's view those mighty Sufferings he had
undergone on our Account, which serving as a Memorial of that eternal
Determination of the Deity for Man's Redemption, has the same and greater
Efficacy on our behalf, than a Plea from divine Truth and Justice it self; he
being invested with that Almighty Power of bestowing those Blessings he has
purchased for us, and the Demonstrations of his Merits, his Will, and his
Goodness being all one Act. It Is true, the Author of the Epistle to the Hebrews
tells us, Heb. 9.7.
that the High Priest went not into the Holy place without Blood, which he
offered for himself and for the Errors of the people; but how that was we have
explained before, since that Blood was made use of for purifying even the
Holiest Place, rendered impure by the Sins of the High Priest himself, and by
the Errors of the People. Perhaps it would not be amiss, to take some notice of
those different Expiations of Sins in the Old and in the New Testament, which
the Socinians, in their discourses concerning Christ's Priesthood, tell us of,
i. e. That Legal Sacrifices were only appointed for such Crimes as were
committed by Imprudence or Infirmity, greater Offenders not being directed to
make use of any, but were doomed to die for their Crimes; whereas, as they say,
the greatest of Sins, provided Men persevere not in them, but are truly
penitent, are expiated by the Sacrifice of Christ; and this they prove from
that of St. Paul, Be it known unto you, Act. 13.38, 39.
that through Christ is preached unto you the forgiveness of Sins, and by him
all that believe are justified from all things, from which ye could not be
justified by the Law of Moses: But here we are to consider, that the Political
as well as the Religious Laws of the Israelites, being given at one time by
Almighty God, they are so blended together, and made Dependents on one another,
that where an ordinary Sacrifice could not, there the Death of the Offender
himself might satisfy for the Crime committed: A Sacrifice offered, though by
its Institution it were expiatory, yet if the Sinner, however ignorant or weak,
persisted in his Sin, or approached the Altar of God without true Humility and
Repentance for the Sin committed, his Sin could not be pardoned on account of
the Sacrifice offered, but if such a Sinner did truly repent and amend his
Errors, his Offering was then accepted, and not only temporary but eternal
Judgments diverted from him; for such Sacrifices typified the Sacrifice of
Christ, which was powerful to save us from both Worldly Punishments and the
Damnation of Hell; and as we have before observed, the Virtue of those
Sacrifices consisted wholly in that relation the Types had to their Antitype.
Now, where the Jewish political Laws reached the Life of the Delinquent, and
took his Blood, there it would have been an Impertinence to offer the Blood of
other Creatures for him; but it follows not, but that the same Conditions of
hearty Repentance, and true Resolutions of amendment, might procure the
Offender's pardon from God, though he suffered under the Rigor of the
Sanguinary Laws; and the daily Sacrifices were of some import, with respect to
such Criminals; and the Blood of Christ, though to be shed afterward, was
available to the Salvation of such; so a Terror was struck upon Others by the
Delinquent's outward Sufferings, and Encouragement was given to the greatest
Sinners to repent by the reasonable Hopes of their being pardoned by Heaven,
who yet were to suffer upon Earth. And so we find among Christians in Christian
Governments, the Laws take notice of and animadvert upon notorious Sins, some
are punished by lighter Penalties, some by Death it self; yet the Prayers and
Intercessions of the Church offered to God, in the name of Christ, may be, and
frequently are effectual to the Eternal Salvation of such Persons, so justly
suffering for their Crimes; but for the Text alleged, the Import of it is
this, That by the Sacrifice of Jesus Christ we are really and effectually freed
from all Sins, whereas the Ceremonies of the Law had no such intrinsic purging
Power of themselves, all their Validity depending wholly and only on their
Relation to this All sufficient Sacrifice of the Son of God.

But we are taught by these Innovators, that this Sacrifice was not complete
till our Savior entered Heaven, Cat. Raco.. 7. p. 173.
nor he possessed of his High Priesthood till that time; yet at the same time
they own, Christ was a Priest when hanging on the Cross; if he were a Priest he
must be our High Priest, for we meet with no Gradations in that Office of his
in Scripture, nor that by executing the Office of an inferior Priest very
well, he purchased a title to an higher Dignity: If he were an High Priest, he
was completely so, else he was and he was not the High Priest at the same time;
but the Socinian Error, in this matter, lies in not distinguishing rightly of
the Priests Offices: the Apostle teaches us, Heb. 5.1, 2.
That an High Priest, taken from among men, is ordained for men in things
pertaining to God: Now, things pertaining to God are not only external Gifts
and Sacrifices, but those that are internal and Spritual too, such as are
Prayers and Supplications, with respect to which, it is necessary an High Priest
should have compassion on the Ignorant, and on them who are out of the way, for
that he himself also is compassed with Infirmities; a Sense of his own Wants is
apt, in any Man, to raise a sympathizing Tenderness for others; so that when he
begs of God Pardon for his own Sins, he may at the same time implore Divine
Mercy for the Sins of others: now, the High Priest is completely such in doing
both or either of these; so upon the Cross, our Savior was our High Priest,
and his external expiatory Sacrifice was completely offered; in Heaven,
interceding for us with his Father, he there presents that Sacrifice, shadowed
to us by what we commonly understand to be the meaning of Prayers and
Supplications, i. e. Christ, in Heaven, intercedes as powerfully and
effectually for us, as if he really did pray and supplicate as present on our
behalf; but that he should literally do so is unnecessary, and not to be
understood by his Intercession for us; for he is an Intercessor, not only who
prays and supplicates immediately for another, or on his behalf, but He Is one
who, by some extraordinary Action, pleasing to him with whom he intercedes,
purchases a Power of doing that thing, or showing that Kindness to his Friends
at all times by himself, which, without that purchase, he must make continual
and repeated Entreaties for; such a Power has our Lord purchased for himself,
by offering himself a Satisfaction for the World's Sins, in his Sufferings,
completed by those particular Sufferings upon the Cross; for his Father
accepting that Price so paid down, Christ, as Man, Heb. 7.25.
acquired that Power, as to be able to save, to the utmost, all those that come
to God by him, and therefore his humane Nature is immortal, that he may always
be capable of exerting such a Power. But the Socinians would prove their
position by that, Heb. 8.4.
That if Christ were on Earth he should not be a Priest, seeing that there are
Priests which offer Gifts according to the Law; but here they are vastly wide
from the Apostle's meaning; for the Apostle, writing there to Jews, and arguing
the matter with them concerning the Messiahship of Christ, shows them, that
though he asserted Christ's High Priesthood, yet he pretended not that he was
any Successor of Aaron or the Legal Highpriests; for, says he, 7. 13. 14.
it is evident that our Lord sprang out of Judah, of which Moses spoke nothing
concerning the Priesthood, therefore our Savior was a Priest, according to
Prophecy, after the order of Melchisedech, and not only after that Order, but
for ever so, a High Priest never to die, never to be succeeded in that sacred
Office by any other: now, being after that Order, and under a necessity of
having somewhat to offer as a Priest; for so we are taught (and, 8.3.
as a Priest, having no right to offer any Jewish Sacrifices or Gifts, the
Order of Melchisedech not having any relation to them) Christ offered himself,
the greatest, the noblest Offering in the World: having made that glorious
Offering, he soon left Earth, having there no further immediate concern, for
could he have made his Title to Priesthood never so plain, and offered himself
never so freely among the Jews, to execute the Priestly Office, it had been to
no purpose, they having Priests of their own, of the Aaronical Line, of whom by
Divine prescription they were to make use in things pertaining to God, those
Priests properly officiating so long as Sacrifices were legally necessary, and
when they were rendered unnecessary by the perfection of our Savior's
Sacrifice, there being no need of any Priests at all to offer such external
Sacrifices or Gifts, the Apostles of Christ, and their Followers, succeeding
their Master only in the Instructing, Governing and Interceding Parts of his
Sacerdotal Function. As for some part of their Argument, to prove that Christ
was not a complete High Priest till his Entrance into Heaven, it is more dark
and unintelligible to me than all those Mysteries in Religion which they
pretend to explode: for, say they, since the Apostle asserts, that he ought in
all things to be like his Brethren, that he might be a compassionate and
faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God, and for expiating the Sins of
the People, it is plain that, so long as he was not like to his Brethren in all
things, i. e. in Afflictions and in Death, so long he was not a complete
High Priest: well, is the Consequence from all this, therefore he was not a
complete High Priest till he appeared in Heaven before his Father? nothing
less: It will only follow, on their own Principles, that, upon his Death,
without that Consequence, the expiatory Sacrifice was completed; for there was
no need of sanctifying the highest Heavens with his own Blood; nor does this at
all abate the necessity of Christ's Resurrection or Ascension into Heaven,
since, without these, that Faith fixed in one who had been false to his own
Promises concerning himself, who could neither have raised himself nor others,
who could neither have possessed those eternal Mansions in his own Person, nor
have prepared them for his Followers, who could neither have protected nor
assisted them to the end of the World, could have been no way justifiable; but
Christ's assimilation to his Brethren, could proceed no further than to the end
of his Sufferings, which ended with his Death upon the Cross; since none of his
Brethren had been so glorified, or had so risen as he did, or so ascended into
the presence of God to make Intercession for Sinners; but indeed Death it self
was not so essential to that Resemblance as they imagine; for whosoever is
liable to common Infirmities, and obnoxious to Sufferings, must of necessity be
obnoxious to Death on the same reason, though he should actually be translated
with Enoch, or carried up into Heaven with Elijah; for though those holy Men,
after such a Translation, were no more in a mortal state, yet all that was no
greater Privilege than all are Partakers of, who after their final Resurrection
die no more; or than those who shall be found alive at the day of judgment; for
though such shall only be subjected to a change, and not really die as others,
yet that hinders not but that, in their own Natures, they shall be mortal, and
as liable to Distempers, so to Death, as well as others. To say truth, our
Savior, during the whose course of his Life, and in all its particulars, lived
as Men do, and being a Partaker of real, and not fantastical Flesh and Blood,
it was not probable he should live otherwise, only in his exemption from Sin,
he was beyond that general Rule, the Deity not being capable of an Union with
any thing imperfect or impure: But having lived as real Man, and suffered as
such, and having by himself thoroughly purged our Sins, Heb. 1.3.
he sat down at the right hand of the Majesty on high; the Socinians indeed
seem to point at somewhat of an Interstice between his Ascension and his
Session at the right hand of God that is not at all grounded upon Scripture: for
though we know he conversed some time with his Disciples before he left them,
that was not the time of presenting himself before his Father, and for any
thing of a formal presenting himself before his Father, as a Suppliant, with
his own Blood, it is an irrational Dream, neither becoming Men pretending to
Scriptural nor to Philosophical Reason; for since we must, to please their
Fancies, make an exact Parallelism between the Annual Sacrifice and that of
Christ, we must consider, that the High Priest, entering into the Holy of
Holies, had really with him the Blood of the Victim already dead, and in that
state of Death to continue, till consumed by fire without the Camp, and so
never capable of a Resurrection: but our Savior rose again from the dead, and
though those of Rome would persuade us, some of his Blood was gathered from
under the Cross, and preserved as a venerable Relick by some very Pious and
Devout Persons, and may be seen at this day by those who have Faith enough; yet
we doubt not but that Blood so shed was reunited to his Body, being easily
gathered, by Almighty Power, from that Diffusion it had suffered at his
Crucifixion: so that though our Lord had died, yet his Blood, after his
Resurrection, existed only as in a living Body, therefore it could be presented
before God only as in such a Body; therefore it could not be presented so as
the Blood of the Annual Sacrifice was by the Jewish High Priest; nor could the
Blood of Christ be so sprinkled, as that was, toward Heaven, or toward the
Mercy seat; but our Lord's Ascension into Heaven, and sitting at the righ-hand
of God, were one continued, uninterrupted Act, and that Blood, which had been
once offered upon the Cross, needed not to be offered again; he was made a
perfect Messiah, a real Savior through Sufferings, a Savior every way
sufficient for those who should believe on him: and having, through his own
Blood, made way to the Exaltation of his Humane Nature, he had no more to do,
but to satisfy his Followers in the truth of his Resurrection, and to give
them proper Instructions, with respect to their future Employs, and so
immediately to ascend to, and to sit on the right hand of the Majesty on high,
i. e. to exercise that absolute Dominion and Sovereignty over Believers, as
Man, which, as Man, he had purchased at the dearest rate; and, as such, we find
him appearing in Apocalyptical Visions, though at the same time bearing that
Title, King of kings, and Lord of lords; and thus have we cleared those Proofs,
justly alleged for our Savior's Satisfaction for Humane Sins, from Socinian
Glosses, and irrational Interpretations.

I shall now add only some short positive Evidence of the same Truth, from
particular Circumstances attending his Death, and so conclude this particular.
It must therefore be remembered, That one End of our Savior's exact fulfilling
the Law, was, that he might be an example of Holiness and Obedience to us; but
if our Savior's Sufferings were of such a nature, as to import a great deal
more than barely such an Example, then it was really to be considered further,
and the Reasons of that Import to be enquired into. Holiness includes all sorts
of Virtue, amongst the rest, Patience, Fortitude, Courage, and the like;
supposing our Savior to have satisfied our Heavenly Father for our Sins, to
have atoned that Anger justly excited against a Rebellious World, these Virtues
were prodigiously eminent in him: the weight of God's Wrath against Sin and
Sinners was enough, had it been permitted to take its course, to have crushed a
world of miserable Wretches; therefore it had been impossible for a mere Man to
have struggled with, and to have averted that terrible Indignation from us; but
if we take away this particular Consideration of his treading the wine press of
his Father's Indignation alone, nothing seems more mean, among the various
accounts of the Sufferers for Truth, than the Carriage of our Blessed Savior;
that Man, whom yet Socinians themselves acknowledge to have moved in a Sphere
superior to the rest of Adam's Race. If we look upon that Death our Savior
died, it must be owned, it was grievous and painful, yet when we consider it
duly, the Shame and Ignominy in it, was the heaviest Circumstance attending it:
otherwise, when we come to compare his Death, as to its outward Circumstances,
with the Sufferings of Prophets and Martyrs of old, they were merely Trifles
and inconsiderable: The Apostle tells us, among Faith's ancient Heroes, of
those who were sawn asunder, so we are told, in particular, that great Prophet
Isaiah was sawn with a wooden Saw, the more dull, the more lingering, the more
tormenting; so the three Children were cast into the burning fiery Furnace by
Nebuchadnezzar, and Daniel into the Lions Den, to have been torn in pieces
under the cruel Paws of ravening Beasts; where we are not to look upon the
Miraculous Deliverance those illustrious Sufferers met with, but upon the
barbarous Cruelties intended against them: but if, from them, we come to view
the cruel Subtilties of Heathen Persecutors, there we find all the variety of
Tortures exquisite Malice could invent, executed upon poor Christians; the
terrible Racks stretching their disabled Limbs, and leaving no sound Joint in
their Bodies, a Torment terrible indeed to the strongest natural Constitutions,
they out-living their Pains, and recovering Strength only to enable them for
renewing Miseries; some broken upon the Wheel, dying piece by piece, and
Nature, in the mean time, sustained by Puddle-Water and Excrement; some burnt
alive in scorching Flames; some broiled or roasted before lingering Fires; some
worried to Death by enraged Wild Beasts; others clothed with Pitchy Vestments,
and so set on fire, to fry away in inexpressible Pains, merely to make sport,
or to serve for Flambeaus to midnight Wanderers: What, should we descend lower
to the poor persecuted Protestants in Merindo! and Chabrieres, or the unhappy
Piedmonteses of late Years? to see Men's Mouths and Women's Privities stufft with
Gunpowder by barbarous Villains, and so their Bodies or their Heads blown in
pieces by that murdering Artifice, to name no more of those inhumane Cruelties,
managed so, that Holy Men, admirable Christians, have been Days, and Months,
and Years a dying; and beside all this, it was oft-times the Aggravation of
their Sorrows, to see their Friends and nearest Relations murdered first before
their Eyes, to have all the unjust and scandalous Reproaches in the World fixed
upon them; for Women to see their sucking Infants thrust through with Swords,
their own Blood, and their Mothers Milk flowing from their bleeding Wounds
together; to see them tossed and carried triumphant upon their Spears, torn from
their dying Mothers ripped up Wombs, and thrown immediately into consuming
Flames; these Sights, such as might rack the most resolute Soul, and almost
squeeze sympathizing Tears from brute Beasts or insensate Rocks; the very
reading those dismal Tragedies are enough to make Men shiver with Horror, and
survey the Bloody Scene with Amazement and Consternation; yet, after all, we
find those glorious Martyrs so far from Fear or Apprehensions of their
approaching Fate, that never Happy Pair went, with more cheerful Looks, to the
Bridal Bed, than they went with to Racks and Wheels, to Flames and Gibbets, or
whatever else their angry and malicious Enemies could inflict upon them; nay,
they were so far from being daunted with the cruel Executions of their Fellow
Saints, that ambitious Princes were not more active to grasp at Crowns and
Sceptres, than they at the more splendid bloody Crown of Martyrdom; nay, so
desirous were they of that Honor, that whole Multitudes, made up of Men, Women
and Children, readily, without being sought for or accused, offered their
Throats voluntarily to Pagan Governors, to the Amazement and Confusion of
their most violent Persecutors: If we observe the Behavior of those admirable
Persons under their Sufferings, their Management is all of a piece, though they
were all the day long as Sheep appointed to be slain, though they found their
Portion in this World never so severe or uncomfortable, yet in all these things
they were more than Conquerours, through Christ who loved them; they feared not
the Cruelty of their Enemies, but the Kindness of their Friends, lest, out of
Compassion to them, they should find out any means to rob them of that Crown
they longed for, Death, though in its most dreadful shape, was never half so
terrible to them as such a Disappointment: in the midst of all their Pains, not
Victors in the famed Olympic Games, not young Generals after mighty and
unexpected Victories, were possessed with a more exulting Joy, than those
triumphant Saints on their Natalitial days, for such they accounted those times
of their Sufferings; then happy Visions pleased their parting Souls, and an
expiring Stephen could see the Heavens opened, and the Son of Man, his glorious
Redeemer, sitting at the right hand of God; Flames were to them so many Beds of
Roses; Racks and Wheels like yielding Down, or soft as Fanning Briezes on a
Summer's Evening; no Mournings, no Complaints were heard, no Tears were seen
among them, but Songs of Joy, and Praise, and Triumph were the Exercise of
their suffering Hours, and their aspiring Souls mounted on them, as on Seraphic
Wings, to Abraham's Bosom; and what was the original Ground and Reason of all
these Joys, but only the certain Goodness of their Cause, the extraordinary
Assistances of their King and Savior, and an infallible Assurance of God's
Love to them, and consequently of their future and eternal Happiness; Romans 8.18.
They reckoned that the Sufferings of the present time were not worthy to be
compared to the Glory which should be revealed in them; and therefore, Heb.
11.35.
though they were tortured, yet they accepted not of Deliverance, that they
might obtain a better Resurrection; and all this was agreeable to the Doctrine
of the Cross, as laid down by the Apostles in Scripture; here then was the
Faith and Patience, the Courage and Resolution of the Saints; these were indeed
to be imitated, the Spirit and Power they acted with was wholly Divine and
irresistible; but if, after all this gallant Prospect of the noble Army of
Martyrs, we turn our Looks upon the dying Jesus, or his behavior of himself
under his Sufferings, things will look very differently; we find in him all the
evidences of Fear, and Sorrow, and cruel Apprehensions of that Death he was to
undergo; His Soul was exceeding sorrowful even to death, he begged of his
Father, if it were possible, that that bitter Cup might pass from him, and
though he concluded his Prayer with that resigning Expression, nevertheless not
my will but thy will be done, yet he repeated his deprecatory Prayer three
times, to show how earnest and real he was in his Requests, his Fear and
Earnestness produced that Bloody Sweat, and brought down the Angel from Heaven
to strengthen him, all these were Prefaces to his Sufferings of a very
disagreeable Nature to the sacred Ambition of his own martyred Followers; when
he was in the Agonies of Death, he was so far from any Triumphant Expression on
the occasion, that he vented his sorrowful Spirits in that despondent Cry, My
God, my God, why have thou forsaken me! we cannot pretend the Blessed Jesus, at
this time was under any alienation of Mind, under any distraction of Spirit, by
reason of the extremity of his Pains; we have shown before, that many suffered
much greater Cruelties for his sake, than the pains of the Cross amounted to;
consider it only as the Roman Method of putting Slaves to death, and even Pagan
Philosophers have suffered much more to the World's eye, voluntarily and
involuntarily, without any such inward distemper, as Anaxarchus and Calanus the
Indian, the former being beaten to pieces in a Mortar by Nicocreon the Cyprian
Tyrant, the latter walking gravely into the Fire, prepared for that purpose
before Alexander the Great, and there Philosophizing seriously and rationally,
till his Breath was stopped by Smoke and Flames; and our Savior showed as great
a Mastery of his own Thoughts, and as undisturbed Apprehensions of things, when
upon the Cross, as at other times; as in refusing Gall and Vinegar, in
discoursing with the penitent Thief, in taking care for his blessed mourning
Mother, etc. we cannot pretend it was the Delicacy of our Savior's Body, who
being conceived in an extraordinary Manner, was accompanied with a
preternatural Tenderness, for we know its the Soul that sees in the Eyes, feels
in the several Members, hears in the Ears, suffers in every bleeding Wound, the
Body, without its Activity being only a stupid and insensible Lump of Earth,
and the Soul of our Savior being, according to the Confession of all, of a
Nature far exalted above the common Standard of Mankind, having no Guilt to
clog it, no Sin to render it uneasy, and therefore could not be but far above
any grovelling Earthy Thoughts, infinitely sensible of the Advantages of Death,
to those that died in God's Favor, and therefore would more perfectly despise
all the Effects of humane Rage or Malice: we cannot say our Savior was the
first that suffered under the Inhumanity of Persecutors, so many of the
Prophets had been brought to violent Deaths before, not to mention that
Persecution the faithful Jews underwent from the Tyranny of Antiochus
Epiphanes; it cannot be alleged that Sufferings were the more heavy and
insupportable to our Savior, because he was conscious of his own Purity and
Innocence, such a Conscience of inward Integrity must needs be the most
comfortable Circumstance in the World for a dying Man, such an Innocent being
infallibly certain of eternal Rest and Happiness in a future World; and it was,
among other things, a clear Sense of their peace being made with God, (which
those who are holy and harmless can never want) that made those eminent
Servants of God so eager to be Martyrs, knowing it was better for them to be
dissolved and to be with God, than to linger upon Earth, though compassed about
with all the Grandeur and Felicity a state of Infirmity can be susceptible of:
nor can it be supposed that the Ingratitude and Baseness of the Jews, among
whom he had preached, and for whose Conviction he had done so many mighty
Miracles, could work upon him so much as to press him with such exceeding
Sorrows; it is true indeed, Ingratitude to Benefactors is a Crime, it is a very
pungent Thought to Men in Adversity, to see those, on whom they have laid the
greatest Obligations, stand among their Enemies and promote their Ruin; and
it is further true, that never were any Generation of Men more unworthy, or more
insensible of the most powerful Obligations, than the Jews contemporary with
our Savior; but, after all this granted, why should our Lord at that time more
particularly pray to his Father, that the bitter Cup might pass from him, when
he had all along, through the whole course of his Life, found the Jews as ill
inclined to him as then, but only wanting proper Opportunities to show it? or
why should the Blessed Jesus cry out, My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me! only because the Jews had repaid his Goodness with Ingratitude and
Cruelty? besides, this was the Case of our Lord's Disciples and Followers, as
well as of himself; they preached among both Jews and Gentiles the glad Tidings
of Salvation, they, assisted by the Influences of the Holy Spirit, did a great
many Miracles among them both; yet, where they were most venerable for their
Miracles, where most zealous to spend and to be spent for the propagation of
the Gospel, they met with very unkind Returns, and commonly sealed those saving
Truths delivered, with their own Blood; so that when we have turned our selves
which way soever we can, we must of necessity conclude, either that the Martyrs
were abundantly more exemplary in their Deaths, than Christ himself, their Lord
and Master, which is either Blasphemy or very like it; or else we must
conclude, there was somewhat distinct from any thing yet mentioned in the Death
of that Lamb of God, which made it more terrible and heavy than all those
exquisite Tortures expiring Martyrs underwent; for, is it possible, that,
without any such Circumstances, He, who was emphatically styled the Son of God,
the Son of his Love, that Son in whom he was well pleased, He, who was One with
his eternal Father, should be afraid of Death, of Humane Cruelties, or complain
of Dereliction? is it possible he should be able, at any time, to send such
Assistances to those who believed on him, as should make them despise all the
Terrors and Furies of a malicious World, and yet himself be weak and timid,
start at the sting of that Death, which dying Martyrs smiled at? is it possible
that He who knew no sin, nor had any guile found in his Mouth, should tremble
before that King of Terrors, over whom his own Followers, and only by Faith in
him, so gloriously triumphed? these things are incredible. But let us again
consider our Dearest Lord as appearing as our Pledge and Surety before his
Father, as paying in his Death a satisfactory Price to his incensed Father, for
the Transgressions of Mankind; let us consider him as dying for our Sins, as
being made a Curse for us, therefore apprehensive of Divine Displeasure, on our
behalf; as being made Sin for us, as being made by God Justification and
Redemption for us, as having redeemed us by his most precious Blood, as having
reconciled us to God by his Death; let us remember that he is a Propitiation
for us, through Faith in his Blood, that He bore our Sins in his Body upon the
Cross, that he was sacrificed for us to take away our Sins, for all which
Considerations we have the undeniable Warrants of Scripture; in short, let us
consider our Savior as undergoing those bitter Pains, in his last Sufferings;
which, for the Quality of him the Sufferer, and for the Immensity of the
Sufferings themselves, being internal as well as external, were equivalent to
those eternal Punishments prepared for Impenitent Sinners; let us but seriously
weigh these things, and that the Humane Nature of him who was the Son of God
himself, should startle and recoil, can never be incredible; if we looked upon
him as engaged in this dismal work, how prodigious was his Patience, how
inexpressible, inconceivable his Charity! for him that was originally undefiled
to be made Sin, him that was the well-beloved Son to be made a Curse, him, whom
an ungrateful World rejected, to become an expiatory Sacrifice for that World;
for him, who had never done any Sin, nor deserved any Punishment, to undergo
the severest Agonies, and Death it self, for the sake of obdurate and
unconsidering Sinners; these are the stupendous Effects of inscrutably
mysterious Love; such as, the more a pious Man meditates on, the more he is
rapt into Amazement, and the more closely he reflects on Humane Demerits, his
Astonishment grows the more profound; that Man, so miserable, should be
considered, that the Son of Man should be so mercifully visited, these things
observed, the sufferings of Martyrs, were not worth the naming on the same day
with the Sufferings of the Son of God; their Agonies were sports compared with
his, and he dearly purchased, by taking off that bitter Cup, all those
Comforts, and Joys, and Triumphs, which they afterward pretended to; He, in
his own Person, conquered first those gigantic Monsters, Sin and Death and Hell
in open field, he triumphed over them upon the Cross, He led Captivity captive,
and how easy was it then for the Sons of Faith to follow the Captain of their
Salvation, and to wear those Crowns of Righteousness which he had purchased for
them, with his own most precious Blood? when they knew God's Anger was atoned,
that they had One able to save, continually sitting on the Right Hand of God,
as an Intercessor for them, when they were infallibly assured, those Persons
were blessed who were persecuted for Righteousness sake, for that theirs was
the Kingdom of Heaven; it was no wonder that they rejoiced and were exceeding
glad; nor was it strange, that those who suffered for the sake of Truth, before
the Incarnation of our Savior, should express the same Courage, they being
Partakers of the same Faith, and depending as unmoveably upon God's Promises
made to them, as if they lived upon Earth to see their utmost accomplishment;
so that they too had the same Mediator, the same Redeemer, the same Savior,
the same glorious Hopes and Expectations.

Having thus largely insisted upon some reasons why it was necessary that God,
and particularly God the Son, should be incarnate, and consequently suffer for
the Salvation of Mankind; we are now to consider the Force and Import of those
Arguments, as laid together. That a Messiah was to be sent, and on such a
saving Errand, is a Truth questioned by none, but that in a mere Man such
things should be made good, as were foretold concerning him, was impossible:
for in a mere Man all the Families of the earth could never have been blessed,
though they were all ruined in one that was no more; for the Repairer of
Breaches, the Restorer of Ruins, the Raiser to Life, ought to be greater and
more powerful than the ordinary Instruments of procuring one, or taking away
the other; for we see how every little Creature can do mischief, where it
requires a greater Care and extraordinary Industry to repair that Mischief when
once done; it was no mere Man who should reign for ever, and of whose Kingdom
there should be no end: for such a Kingdom requires Eternity in the
Administration; the story of Scripture tells us, that, when Solomon had
finished and dedicated his Temple, and the Ark was carried into the Holy of
holies, upon the Priests coming out from thence, 1 King. 8.10, 11.
the Cloud filled the House of the Lord, so that the Priests could not stand to
minister because of the Cloud, for the Glory of the Lord had filled the House
of the Lord: We meet with no account of any such Glory filling the Second
Temple, built after the return from Babylon; yet the Comfort given by the
Prophets to the mournful Elders of Israel, when they were dejected on account
of the Meanness of that Second Building, was, that the Glory of the Second
House should be greater than of the First; which yet could not be true, if God
did not afford his more immediate Presence to the Latter than to the Former;
but we read in the Gospel of no such Presence, unless in the Presence of
Christ, which he frequently afforded to that Temple, during his Converse upon
Earth, and the Text it self was always applied by the ancient Jews to the
coming of the Messiah into that Temple, nor did they pretend to a contrary
Opinion till after their destruction by Titus, as even Grotius himself asserts
on that Prophecy; Grotius in Hagg. 2. 8.
therefore the Jews themselves could not but acknowledge God more especially
present in the Messiah, than in that Glory which appeared in Solomon's Temple,
which could not have been, had not the Fullness of the Godhead lived bodily in
him, according to the Apostle's Phrase; or been essential to him, which it was
not to that Cloud appearing in the Temple: nor could our Savior have been God
with us, if he had not been God at all while he was with us, nor God at all,
truly or properly so called, if he had not been so from Eternity: nor could he
have done Miracles in his own Name, nor have forgiven Sins in his own Name,
etc. had he not been God: or have been the proper Subject of those glorious
Titles given him by the Prophets, had he not been literally and properly
Partaker of the Divine Nature. Again, the World's Savior was to destroy the
works of the Devil; to dispossess the strong Man armed he must be stronger than
he, it is our Savior's own Argument: now God, we know, is stronger than the
Devil; Man, we know, is weaker when in his best Condition, the strength of good
Angels we only guess at; but we are sure our Savior appeared as a Man, and
really and truly was such, we are sure that he was no Angel, we are sure that
he did destroy the works of the Devil, for he did not lose the end of his
Coming, therefore we are sure he was God, as well and as really as he was Man;
and though we find, among Prophetic Miracles, some going so far as to heal
Bodily Distempers, nay, as to restore Life to the dead by their Prayers; yet we
meet with no pretenses among them to cast the Enemy out of their Souls, or to
work upon their Inclinations so as to change their Natures by a word's
speaking, or knowing and understanding the Thoughts and Hearts of Men: Further
yet, the Law of Moses being to be repealed, so far as it was his, and not
natural or of eternal Obligation, it was necessary the Repealing Power should
be as great as that which gave its first Sanction: now this, if we look upon
our Savior as a mere Man, he was no way qualified for; Moses was a King in
Jeshurun, authorized, in a manner miraculous and extraordinary, to be the
Leader of God's own People, taking him for his inward Qualification, he was the
meekest Man upon Earth, a Person of wonderful Love, Condescension, Charity, one
of a peculiar Intimacy with God, so that God declares of himself, that he would
not speak to him by Dreams, or Visions, Numb. 12.6, 7, 8.
or Revelations, as he did to other Prophets, but he would speak with him face
to face, as a Man speaks to his Friend: besides, he delivered the Law to the
Jews with a great deal of Majesty and Terror, after long Converse with God, so
plain and evident as was undeniable; and he had evidence of that Familiarity
with Heaven in his glorious Countenance, so bright and terrible that the People
were afraid to look upon it, till he put a Veil upon his Face, and, while he
was in this mighty employ, none could so much as murmur against him or repine
at his Authority, though it were Miriam his Sister, and herself a Prophetess,
but immediate Vengeance from Heaven vindicated him; all these Circumstances
were enough to confirm the sacred Nature of that Law he delivered, and the
Danger that might arise from trespassing upon it. But if we come to our
Savior's state and condition in the World, it was such as could procure him no
Veneration, nor pretend to get him any Authority in the World; nothing, to
outward view, could be meaner or more contemptible than He, and though his Life
were, beyond that of Moses, absolutely blameless, and indeed impeccable, yet
the Obscurity of his Birth, and manner of Living were such as could conciliate
no Reputation to him among the Jews; and yet, even in that lower Sphere wherein
he moved, they could pick quarrels with him, and charge him as if he had been
some very obstinate and daring Sinner: He never pretended to any exterior
Dignity among the Jews, but declined it, and, though he were ill used by a
malignant World on every hand, there was no sudden Vengeance executed on his
Abusers; but he submitted with that Patience and Unconcernedness to all Wrongs
offered him, that it seemed to the Jews like somewhat of a Conscience of his
own Guilt that made him so silent: we have no account in Scripture-Story of any
particular Familiarity he had with Heaven, by ascending Mount Sinai, by
receiving his Gospel with Thunders and Lightnings, and all those Terrors that
strike an aw upon mean Souls, nor was he, at any time, withdrawn from ordinary
Converse, but only when he was tempted in the Wilderness by the Devil, or when,
sometimes for a few Hours, he went apart by himself to pray; for as for the
Socinian Dream, of his bodily Ascent into Heaven, as a School where to learn
his Lesson, we have exploded that before; and his several withdrawings from
Company were so very private, that the World could take no notice of him on
that account; nor do we hear of any Radiancy in his Face, any awful Glory in
his Aspect, unless when he was transfigured on Mount Tabor, of which there were
but three Witnesses, and they forbidden to divulge it, and even then he held
Communion but with Moses and Elias, not face to face with God himself, as Moses
had done; now, compare these two Lawgivers together as mere Men, and Moses has
in every respect the advantage of our Savior, he carries more of Luster and
Authority with him in his Person and his Actions, and therefore that Law given
by Moses must be more authoritative and obliging than any thing delivered by
Christ could be, therefore nothing given by Moses could be disannulled by
Christ, as being every way an Inferior Person; and therefore the Jews could
not have been reasonably condemned for adhering to Moses in all particulars
against Christ: nor could Almighty God have been looked upon as so equitable and
merciful to that unhappy People as he really was, had he sent one who was a
mere Man, and so ill accoutred externally as our Lord was, on so weighty and
surprising an Errand, as abolishing the Mosaic Law. But after all, state the
matter rightly, acknowledge our Savior to be God as well as Man, all the
difficulty vanishes at once, his Person was more august, his Power and
Authority greater, his Will uncontrollable, his Holiness and Dignity
incomparable. Moses was but the Servant, he the Lord, and therefore, without
any Impeachment to the Fidelity and Honor of Moses, he might reverse every
Institution of his as he pleased, since he, as God, was able of himself,
without any circumstantial Delay, to give the World a more complete and perfect
Rule, whereby humane Happiness and God's Glory, the great ends of all divine
Institutions, might be more directly promoted; the great work he undertook was
proper to the Deity it self, but superior to any humbler Being: this requiring
so much, the Satisfaction of God's Anger, raised against a stupid sinful World,
cannot be supposed more easily brought about; for the weight of God's Anger
against Sin being insupportable to mere Flesh and Blood, Help must of necessity
be laid upon One mighty to save, or else Mankind, who had so long subsisted
upon the lively Hope of a glorious Deliverance, must have perished without
Remedy at last; and finally, the Justification of our Faith, Pardoning of our
Sins, and the bestowing upon us Everlasting Life, are things compatible only
with God, yet really and properly ascribed to our Savior, therefore He must be
God, therefore He that was incarnate or made Flesh for our Salvation must be
God. But now, if we observe the Nature of this great Work for which God was
manifested in the Flesh, we shall find it was wholly the effect of Immense Love
and Pity to Mankind; and of extraordinary Interest and Power with the great
Father of all things, therefore an Undertaking more peculiarly proper to God
the Son, than to any other Person in the Trinity.

Man's Redemption was an Effect of the Father's Love, the Deity it self is
Love, the Design of saving such Sinners as should make use of Means to be
offered, in due time, to that purpose, was an Effect of Love; the Father, the
Son and the Holy Ghost, were all consenting in the Design; from the Father, as
the beginning of Order, must the first motions of Eternal Love, and Goodness,
and Will take its Original: not as if there were any Interstice of time between
the Actions of Eternal Minds, (for Time can have no place or consideration in
Eternity;) but we must speak of such things suitably to Humane Apprehensions,
by which kind of Expressions, though our Idea's of God's Acts, cannot be adequate
or proportionable, yet they may be true and safe; so we speak of God the Father
as propounding, of God the Son as declaring his readiness to execute what is
propounded, of God the Holy Ghost as consenting so to influence the Objects of
Love and Mercy, that neither the Proposal nor its Prosecution should be
frustrated; all these, though the distinct Acts of Three distinct Substances,
are yet all one uninterrupted Act, and Determination of one Infinite and
Eternal God; for where Infinity, or Eternity, or any other Attributes peculiar
only to God, are given to Three distinct Substances, yet those Substances,
which are infinite, howsoever really distinct, must of necessity be
inseparable, therefore they must of necessity be One; for be the Substances
never so much distinct, and never so perfect in themselves, yet Unity must
follow upon Inseparability: But, according to our common way of speaking, God
the Father, designing the greatest Goodness to Men, could show that Love and
Pity to them by no other effectual Means, than by giving them his only Son,
the very relative Term of Father and Son implies the greatest Nearness and Love
in the World; and the kinder and more loving a Father is to his Son, the
greater, of necessity, must that Favor and Love be, which can be content to
part with a Relation so dear, for the Advantage or Satisfaction of another;
hence God accepted it as an Effort of complete Love and Obedience in Abraham,
that he had not withheld his Son his only Son from him, but was ready,
without any murmuring, to sacrifice him at his Creator's Command; and if our
blessed Redeemer was the Son of God, the Son of his Love, the Son in whom he
was well pleased, the Apostle urges it home and excellently, He that spared not
his own Son but delivered him up for us all, Romans 8.32.
how shall he not with him give us all things? the Gift of his Son was the
greatest Effort of Tenderness that was possible, therefore when Men had
received that Gift from the Father's hand, there could be no reason of doubting
whether they should receive any thing else that was fit for God to bestow, or
for Man to receive. Indeed, when the Father had determined to express the
greatest Love and Pity to his Creatures, there did remain nothing else to be
done, but to send his Son into the World upon that Occasion; for he was still
to move so as not to impeach his Justice, Justice could not be free and
universal without Satisfaction in every respect; Man was, so soon as fallen, a
continual Criminal, therefore Man was the Object of that irresistible Justice;
the acquitting him from the stroke of Justice, was the effect of the greatest
Love, yet Justice, not being perverted, must be, and was satisfied on that
particular account, therefore it must be, and was satisfied by the grant of God
the Son, to put himself into a passible state, and to suffer a Punishment
equivalent to that due to Sinners, and this could be effectually performed by
none other but the only Son of God; for,

The Redemption of trespassing Mankind from the stroke of Justice, according to
the Father's Intention, required the most absolute Obedience, the greatest
Interest, and the most extraordinary Compassion and Tenderness toward Mankind:
Now, these things were all most naturally to be expected from the Son; for
Identity or Sameness of Will in God the Father is Command and Determination, in
God the Son is Submission and Obedience, in God the Holy Ghost is Concurrence
and Assistance. Now, if we consider the Severity of the Condition, on which Man
was to be redeemed from sinking under Wrath to the utmost, and without which it
was impossible Man should be redeemed at all; if we reflect upon the weight of
God's Displeasure due to Sin, the infinite Power of the Being displeased; the
extreme Provocations whereby it is continually exasperated; these Considerations
must convince us, that it required the greatest Obedience possible in the
Undertaker, such an Obedience as could be startled by no Difficulty, diverted
by no Temptation, nor conquered by any Extremity it could engage with. Of such
an Obedience Isaac was a considerable Type, who, though so dear to his Father,
so vigorous and strong, as he might have been able enough to have secured
himself from the violent Zeal of his Aged Father, though Nature must have had
some Reluctance against Death, against Death by the hand of his own Father, by
his hand from whom he had deserved all Kindness and Love by his habitual
Obedience, yet he stopped upon none of these Considerations, but was, for ought
we can find by the Sacred Story, as ready to be offered as his Parent was to
offer him; now, such a kind of Obedience cannot reasonably be expected from any
but a Son, nor from any but the best of Sons, such was Isaac; but as the Burden
the Son of God undertook was infinitely greater than what Isaac was concerned
in; the Eternal Determination of Heaven in respect of Man, infinitely harder to
comply with, so it required a Son more Powerful, more Obedient, more united
with his Father than any Earthly Son could be with the most obliging Earthly
Parent; therefore, there being that Eternal Unity of Will between God the
Father and God the Son, it was impossible there should be the least Reluctance
in the Son, against what was resolved on for the rescue of Sinners from the
Wrath to come; and therefore that declining the terrible Hour which appears in
his Prayer before his being seized on by the Jews, was purely the Effect of
Humane Nature, necessarily infirm, but clearly understanding the Terror of the
approaching Conflict, and therefore showing the result of the purest Flesh and
Blood, yet without Sin. Again, when we reflect on the Relation between a Father
and a Son, as it is very close, so their mutual Loves and Affections must needs
be very extraordinary and tender; this is observed and expected among earthly
Parents and Children, and it is what Nature commands, and Religion, so far as
true, obliges to: this then must be much more eminent between God the Father
and the Son, and so our Lord himself teaches us, The Father loves the Son,
and, as the greatest evidence of that intense Love, John. 3.35.
he has given him all things into his hand; he asserts the same again, The
Father loves the Son, and shows him all things that he does, 5.20.
which is an Expression of the greatest Intimacy and Unity; the same Jesus
declares, that his Father hears him always; 11.42.
and the Palmist, in the Person of the Father speaking to the Son, says, Psalm.
2.8.
Ask of me and I will give thee the Heathen for thine Inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the Earth for thy Possession; and on assurance of this,
Christ, when he reproves St. Peter for using his Sword against those who came
to take him, tells him, he could pray to his Father, and he should presently
send him more than twelve Legions of Angels; from all which Circumstances we
may be assured, that the Interests of an infinitely Obedient Son with an
infinitely Loving Father, must be infinite; therefore, whereas Men's Sins were
infinitely odious, and that Vengeance infinite, which was by consequence to
fall upon Men for those Sins, there was nothing but an infinite Interest that
could possibly, by any means whatsoever, divert that Vengeance, and this
infinite Interest was proper to God the Son, that is, to such a Son as was at
Unity, nay, was One with his Father; from whence it is that we are taught by
the Rules of Christianity, and a Socinian himself will scarce contradict it, to
present all our Prayers to God in the Name of his Son Jesus Christ; so, whereas
our Lord teaches his Disciples, Whatsoever ye shall ask in my Name, John 14.13,
14.
that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in the Son; if ye shall ask
any thing in my Name, I will do it; 16.23, 26.
he afterward varies thus, In that day ye shall ask me nothing; Verily, verily
I I say unto you, whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name he will give it
you; Hitherto ye have asked nothing in my Name, ask and ye shall receive, that
your Joy may be full; which two Texts compared together, show the absolute
Prevalency of the Name of the Son of God with our Heavenly Father, and the
absolute and indissoluble Union of the Father and the Son; so that it may
properly, and without any thing like a Contradiction, be asserted, that what
One does the Other does, and what the Father grants for the Son's sake, that
the Son grants; nor can any thing of an Heavenly Nature be granted to Mankind
but by the Deity so united in it self; by which Consideration all inferior
Intercessors between God and Man are excluded from being in themselves the
Objects of our Religious Adorations, because there can be no such adequate
Unions of Persons between them, nor any such absolute Power, or immediate
Interest in such inferior Beings, as there can be no reasonable Competition of
Interests between a Son adopted out of Commiseration, and an only begotten,
and universally loving and obedient Heir; as then the Interest of a Son with
the Father was necessary for Humane Redemption, so it was necessary, that God
the Son, particularly, should assume our Nature, to do and suffer for us, in
such a measure as we might be redeemed, upon acceptance of the proper
Conditions, from Eternal Destruction: Finally, the Tenderness of the Son
oft-times shows it self, when the Gravity and just Severity of a Father seems
inexorable to an Offender; yet even then when the Father seems of himself, and
otherwise would be, inflexible to the Criminal, he is pleased to see the
Tenderness of his Son, and will frequently encourage and accept of his
Intercession; so, if we may compare small things with great, our Heavenly
Father deals with us, in respect of the Intercession of his Son; and though
Justice cried out for Vengeance against Sinners, he was particularly well
pleased when he saw Him clothed with Flesh, for accomplishing that great Work
of Mercy and Goodness; he was pleased at his Interposition between the
Criminals and impendent Punishment; and since the Divine Nature was wholly
incapable of flexible Affections, nothing but unbounded Love, Mercy, Justice,
etc. concentring in it, the Apostle teaches us, that our incarnate Lord, our
great High Priest was such an One as could be affected with our Infirmities,
Heb. 5.7, 8, 9.
could have compassion on the Ignorant, and of them that are out of the way;
who, in the days of his flesh, when he offered up Prayers and Supplications,
with strong crying and tears, unto him that was able to save him from death,
and was heard in that he feared; Though he were a Son, yet he learned Obedience
by the things which he suffered, and, being made perfect, he became the Author
of eternal Salvation to all them that believe; the Assumption of our Nature
created in him a sympathetic Tenderness of Humane Infirmities, as appeared by
his Tears over Jerusalem, and at the Grave of Lazarus, yet he was free from all
Sin in those condescending Tears of his; now, he that had such extraordinary
Compassion for miserable Sinners, could not but exert the utmost of his sacred
Interests on their behalf, and make a free access for them to the Throne of
Grace; where such Obedience, Interest and Compassion being indispensibly
necessary for our Good, and those Qualifications being naturally most incident
to the Person who stands in the Relation of a Son, therefore it was necessary
that the Son of God should take upon him our Nature, and pity us, and plead for
us, that how deplorable soever our Condition might be in it self, we might be
in a Capacity of Eternal Salvation.

It was proper, that He, who first gave a Being to all things by his Power,
should, when the Work of his hands was decayed, if he designed Mercy for them,
rectify their Disorders, and resettle them in such a state, as might, in some
measure, answer the original Design of the Creation; that our Savior, the
Eternal Word of God, was the Maker of all things, we have formerly proved at
large from the beginning of St. John's Gospel, and several other Scripture
Passages: and it is a Truth, which even Arians themselves acknowledge. In that
first Creation, as the wise Man observes, Man was made upright, Eccles. 7.29.
but he has now sought out to himself many Inventions; were he but left a
little to himself he would need no other Vengeance to be poured upon him but
what he would soon draw down on his own Head: but God, in pity to him, was pleased
to determine otherwise; but, as we observed before, though an inferior
Creature was able to bring one, in a happy state before, into a ruinous
Condition, as any little mischievous Agent may, yet those Ruins, so easily
procured, could not be so easily repaired again. We are taught, in the History
of the Creation, that Man was created at first in the Image of God, that was
his Glory and Excellence beyond the other Members of the visible Creation; but
that Image of his Maker was miserably defaced in him by Sin: the Blessed Jesus,
the Eradiation of God's Glory, Heb. 1.3.
and the express Image of his Person, therefore the most proper to renew, in
Obedient Man, the blotted Image he had at first created him in, (...), says
Athanasius, whom we may justly allege now, in a matter little controverted,
Athan. de Incar. T. 1. p. 72.
It was not in the power of any other but him who was the Image of the Father,
to create again or resettle that Image in Men. It Is true, the Socinians would
persuade us, the original Image of God consisted in nothing but Dominion over
his Fellow Creatures; but that Dominion over the Creatures, could not answer
that Perfection the Wise Man adverts to in Man's first Creation, no more than
we can prove Kings and Princes the more Perfect because of that Dominion God
entrusts them with, or that, among Princes, those who command the largest
Empires should be the best and most complete Men; but the original Image of God
in Man, consisted in that Purity and Holiness which Man was adorned with in his
first Creation; and in that vast Wisdom and capacious Understanding, whereby he
knew every thing that was necessary to his own Happiness; this Purity and
Wisdom was ruined by his Fall, and this our Savior came effectually to
restore, by making such as believe in him new Creatures, by which they are
again renewed in Knowledge, and in Righteousness, Col. 3.10. Ephesians. 4.24,
and true Holiness, after the Image of that God who created them; now, when we
speak of an (...), or a Renewal of any thing, we refer to somewhat that was
before, for that cannot be renewed now, that never was formerly; but if the
Knowledge, and Righteousness, and Holiness in the new Man be the Image of God,
at present, and there was such Knowledge, and Righteousness, and Holiness in
Man before his Fall, (without which it could not be renewed by him who came to
repair the ruins of that Fall) then that Knowledge, and Righteousness, and
Holiness was originally the Image of God, in which Man was created; and we need
not fly to Dominion, as the sole Instance of God's Image in Man, especially,
since his Dominion was no more an Image of God's Sovereignty, than the
Government of all Princes since has been an Image of that, for God was Lord of
all things, Man was not, and yet Princes, as well as others, have had their
shares in the Mischiefs arising from Man's Fall, though their Governments be as
absolute as ever. To this we may add, that Regenerate Persons being ordained to
that Title of the Sons of God, it was most proper, that he who was the Son of
God by Nature, should be their great Guide and Conducter to that Honor; this
we learn from St. Paul, who, laying down that mysterious Doctrine of God's
Prescience and Predetermination as to the future state of Men, Rom 8.29.
tells us, that whom God did foreknow he did also determine beforehand that
they should be conformed to the Image of his Son, that he might be the
Firstborn of many Brethren; where, by the way, we may observe, that those
Persons who, by this very Apostle, are elsewhere said to be renewed according
to the Image of God, are here said to be conformed to the Image of his Son,
therefore the Image of God the Father and of God the Son are the same thing;
and those whose Image is the same must be One, not metaphorically but really
One; our Lord became our Brother, by assuming our Nature, by submitting to all
the Infirmities of Humanity, Sin only excepted, and he was the kindest and the
tenderest Brother, who laid down his own sacred Life to restore a crew of
wretched Prodigals to the embraces of their Father, he envied not that, where
there were many Mansions, repenting Sinners should be admitted to them; but
after his Death and Resurrection, he ascended to his Father and our Father, to
his God and our God, that he might prepare those very Mansions for those who
believe in him; Behold what manner of Love the Father has bestowed on us, that
we, through the Mediation of his only begotten Son, should be called the Sons
of God; that I insert that on good reason will appear to any one who considers
with the Apostle, That, Gal. 4.4, 5.
when the fullness of time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a Woman,
made under the Law, to redeem them that were in Bondage in general, and that
they might receive the Adoption of Sons; this then was the reason of the
incarnation of God the Son, and the reason of his Sufferings we have from an
equally authentic hand, the Blessed Jesus, by the grace of God, Heb. 2.9. -- 18.
tasted death for every Man; He was the Captain of our Salvation, being made
perfect through Sufferings, is not ashamed to call us Brethren; Forasmuch then as
the Children are Partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself took part of the
same, that through death he might destroy him that had the power of death, that
is the Devil; And deliver them, who, through fear of death, were all their life
subject to Bondage; wherefore, in all things, it behoved him to be made like
unto his Brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest, in
things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the Sins of the People, or
to atone for them, i. e. to reconcile God to People that had sinned, for in
that he himself has suffered, being tempted, he is able to succor them that
are tempted.

There remains nothing more on this Subject to be done, but to draw a practical
Inference or two, from our Apostolical doctrine, that God was manifest in the
flesh, or that He who really and eternally was God, took upon him humane Nature
for the Salvation of Mankind.

just Admiration of that transcendent Love and infinite Compassion extended to
us by God the Father, in sending, by God the Son in being sent to, and
condescending to come among us. Words are too weak to express the mighty debt
of Gratitude we are engaged in to Heaven, on that account, only Actions may, in
some measure, express our Acknowledgments; let us not conceit our selves exempt
from the Condition of the rest of Mankind: We lost our original Innocence, we
were precluded from Paradise, from tasting the Tree of Life, by Cherubims and a
flaming Sword, when could we then hope for? We were created happy, we forfeited
it too too easily, what could we afterward pretend to? But God, however
provoked, by the eternal Intercession of his Son, had reserved Mercy for us,
therefore he allowed Mankind a time and space of Repentance; Repentance was the
sole possible Condition of Eternal Happiness; Repentance, invalid yet and
unfruitful in it self, had it not been rendered acceptable by the Blood of the
Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World; the Truth of what I do assert in
this particular appears, from the Song of the four Beasts and the twenty four
Elders, when they adored this Lamb of God, and praised him in the name of the
Saints, Thou wast slain, Rev. 5.9.
and have redeemed us to God by thy Blood, out of every kindred, and tongue,
and people, and nation; those so redeemed from all parts, include all Persons,
dying in the true Faith of God, from the beginning of the World, some of whom
we find mentioned and praised for our Example in the Eleventh to the Hebrews,
and therefore, when St. John afterward gives us an account of those who
received the Seal of God on their Foreheads, he first reckons up 144000 of the
Tribes of Israel, a certain for an uncertain Number, but after them, he tells
us, he saw a great multitude, 7.9, 14.
which no man could number, of all nations, and kindred, and people, and
tongues, who stood before the throne and before the Lamb, clothed with white
Robes, and with Palms in their hands; of whom, and what they were, when the
Apostle enquired of one of the Elders, he received this Answer, these are they
which came out of great Tribulation, and have washed their Robes, and have made
them white in the Blood of the Lamb; now this numberless Number of happy Souls,
marked by Heaven for its own, represents all those walking and dying in the
Fear of God through all Ages; for Tribulation was the Characteristic of a pious
Man, before God was manifest in the Flesh, as well as afterward; but they had
all their Robes washed in the Blood of the same Lamb, therefore that Blood was
effectual for Man's Salvation and rendered all their Religious Performances, of
which Repentance was a chief, acceptable in the sight of God, before such time
as it was actually and openly shed upon the Cross. That Mankind might be
apprehensive of their Duties, and be as certain in their Repentance as they had
been in their Miscarriages, God, who had given them all the Providential
Encouragements possible to serve him faithfully and willingly, was pleased to
send his Messengers from time to time to call them to Repentance; so Enoch, by
the transcendent Holiness of his Life, which doubtless was accompanied with as
edifying Instructions, preached Repentance to a World, even so early grown old
in Sin; so Noah, for an Hundred Years together, preached Repentance to a
perishing Generation; after the Renewal of the World again, from that Stock
purposely preserved in the Ark, Prophets and Holy Men were frequently inspired
by Heaven, and sent through the World on the Reforming, that too rarely
successful, Errand; nor were they so wholly confined to Israel, the Lot of
God's own Inheritance, but that they sometimes delivered Messages to the
adjacent Gentiles; so Obadiah to Edom, Jonah and Nahum to Nineveh, etc. this
was certainly an Effect of wonderful Compassion, that a God, so justly offended
at Humane Crimes, should have any respect to them, or use so many Methods of
bringing them to a Sense of their own Errors, and that Misery attending them;
but what measure did those Messengers meet with? the same with those Servants
in the Parable, whom their Lord sent to the Husbandmen to receive of the fruits
of his Vineyard, some were beaten, some wounded, some murdered, all slighted
and disregarded. Yet, to evidence his Love further, God, when he observed how
unsuccessful his Ambassadors had been, He sent his Son, the Conclusion was
rational, they will reverence my Son, but the Event was contrary, even that
Son, by foolish Husbandmen, was cast out of his own Vineyard, and cruelly
murdered: And was not that senseless Barbarism too much? was it not too much to
affront Mercy so notoriously? would we thus requite the Lord, O foolish People,
and unwise that we are! ill would it become those now, who call themselves
Christians, to trample under foot the blood of the Gospel Covenant, to crucify
to themselves afresh the Lord of Life, and to put him once more to an open
shame: Did he come down from Heaven to Earth, from Glory to Misery to save us,
and shall we be so much Fools, as, having a Prize put into our Hands, not to
have Hearts to make use of it? shall we refuse to be saved by him? nay, shall
we not Love him? shall we not Admire him? shall we not Adore him? shall we not
obey him in all things? shall we not be ready to suffer all that Hell and
wicked Men can invent to our prejudice, rather than forsake his Truth or
dishonor his Gospel? Reason would teach us these things; for they who have
received the greatest Favors, ought to repay them with the greatest Gratitude;
but alas, we generally discourse to senseless Walls, or try our Charms on deaf
Adders, for who has believed our Report, and to whom is the Arm of the Lord
revealed? The Leopard may sooner change his Spots, or the Negro his Skin, than
those who are inured to Wickedness be persuaded to relinquish it by the most
cogent Arguments in the world; but how base and ridiculous does it look, that
Holy Men of old could live upon God's Promises of redeeming them, that in
confidence of his Veracity, in a full and strong Faith in his Goodness, they
could account themselves but Pilgrims and Strangers here on Earth, and, by
religious Lives and Actions, prove to the World they were in quest of a better
Country; and yet, We, who have seen the Performance of those Promises they
depended on, their Obscurities all cleared, their Certainty vindicated, We, who
are beset with such a Cloud of Witnesses, cannot cast aside every Sin, and the
Weight that does so easily oppress us, and run, with Joy, the Race that is set
before us? Were we Bondslaves to Hell, and has the Son of God struck off our
Chains and Fetters, and do we love them still? is Light come into the World,
and can we love Darkness rather than Light? were we all liable to eternal
Vengeance, and has our Lord redeemed us with his own most precious Blood from
the dismal strokes of that Vengeance, and shall we not believe in him that has
alone trod the Wine Press of his Father's Wrath for us? We were Sinners; we
were Enemies; we were foolish and obstinate Enemies; yet the Son of God, that
great Shepherd of the Sheep, came to seek and to save that which was lost; and
can we be his Enemies still, who was so much our Friend? I Am sure, whatever
corrupt Nature may tempt us to, it would be wretched Policy in us, to reject
what he has done for us; the wicked Husbandmen killed their Lord's Son indeed,
but it was to their own Confusion; the rebellious Citizens refused to have
their rightful King reign over them, but it was to their Destruction; the First
or Primary End of our Savior's Coming, was, that Men might be saved; but if
Men foolishly neglect that End, there is a Secondary Design in it, that those
who still continue in Sin may be without Excuse, that they may have nothing to
plead for themselves at the great Day; but that the Justice of his Wrath
against Sin and Sinners may appear to Men and Angels. Where an Ambassador of
Peace is sent and slighted, the Dignity of the Ambassador aggravates the
Contempt; the Apostle therefore, having, in the first Chapter of the Epistle to
the Hebrews, demonstrated the Dignity of Christ, and proved his pre-eminence to
Men and Angels, (who yet, after the several Methods God had formerly taken to
reveal himself, had in those latter days spoken himself to the World.) makes
this rational Deduction from all, Therefore we ought to give the more earnest
heed to the things which we hear in the name of Christ, Heb. 2.1, 2, 3.
for if the word spoken by Angels was steadfast, and every Transgression and
Disobedience received a just Recompense of reward, how shall we escape if we
neglect so great Salvation, which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord,
and was confirmed to us by them that heard him? If we repent not at his Call,
if we submit not to his Admonitions, nor lay hold on his Grace, we must not
please our selves with empty Dreams of entering into his Rest, there remains now
no more Sacrifice for Sins; His indeed is sufficient to those who believe in
and obey him; but for those who obey not the Truth, there remains nothing but
Indignation and Wrath, Tribulation and Anguish to every Soul that does Evil,
let his State and Condition be what it will: this Woe, I hope, all those who
profess Christianity will endeavor to avoid, and that all those who name the
Name of Christ, that glorious saving Name, will depart from Iniquity.

be the Son of God, if he be God himself, infinite and eternal, and yet humbled
himself, and took upon him the Form of a Servant for our Redemption; if it were
absolutely necessary, that he, who undertook so great a Work, should be real
God as well as real Man, or else must have sunk in that prodigious Attempt; it
behooves all those who expect Salvation by his Name, to adhere to this Doctrine,
to believe in Christ as he is set forth to us in Sacred Writ, that is, as God
coequal and co-essential with his Father; I would to God the Caution were
needless! There were some Heretics in the Ancient Church, who would needs
maintain our Lord was not true Man, had only a fantastical Body, but not real
Flesh and Blood as we have; others, as it were to balance them, would assert
our Savior was a mere Man, and no more, that he was not real God, nor his Love
to us, nor his Undertakings for us, so great as we are ready to conclude; God's
Blessing upon the Labors of the Governors of the Church in those days crushed
the growing Heresies, and they bequeathed to us a Faith undeprav'd, unchanged;
nor had the Trent-Conventicle an Opportunity to propound their additional
Articles of Faith, till besides the Eastern Churches, God was pleased to raise
up Men in these Western parts of the World, of extraordinary Piety, and
Learning, and Industry, who had rescued the genuine Christian Faith from Fraud
and Obscurity, to give it us, so as the Ancient Christians had left it, without
Additions or Alterations: by which Cares they prevented the malignant Designs
of the Roman Church; but, as the Devil will always be sowing his Tares of
Heresies and Falsehoods among the good Wheat of Divine Truths; so, with the
Reformation of Religion, besides the bloody Severities of Romish Bigots,
several of the ancient Heresies were revived, and particularly that which
denied the Eternal Divinity of the Son of God; which, as it walked about
formerly under several Names, so it has of late, though, as the Presbyterians
and Independents, the other day, in spite of former Feuds, are pleased to give
themselves the painted Title of United Brethren, so those wretched Heretics,
however at odds among themselves, agreed in the gay Name of Unitarians, under
which Name Turks and Jews come as well and properly as they, if they could be
true to their own Principles. They unite indeed all in that one impious Error,
in denying the Divinity of our Savior; a Heresy detestable to every sober and
intelligent Christian; a Heresy proper only to introduce Deism and Sadducism,
and to thrust true Evangelical Christianity out of doors: This, all those who
love their Religion ought to oppose and declare against, with as much Zeal and
Care, and more than they would against the foulest Errors of the Roman See:
for, though there are so many Falsities and Absurdities propounded to us in
that Communion, yet there is nothing flies so directly in the face of Almighty
God as this; it is Folly enough to believe the Bishop of Rome Christ's universal
Vicar upon Earth, but it is a greater Stupidity to believe that Christ himself
is no more truly and originally God, than that pretended Vicar; it is Idolatry
to pray to Saints or Angels, and to make them the ultimate Object of our
Adorations; it is greater yet, to make a mere Man the Object of the same
Devotions, and to suppose him a made God, and capable of doing every thing for
us we beg at his hands, though he were no more but a Creature, as others, at
his first existence; it is Madness to believe that Saints or pious Men may have
a Surplusage of Merits, such as may not only serve themselves and their own
Necessities, but accommodate others who were defective in themselves; but it is
yet a greater Madness to believe that the Son of God had no Merits, and was
able to purchase no Pardon for our sins by his Sufferings, or that by dying for
our Sins he was unable to satisfy his Father's Displeasure against Sinners;
the Mischief and Falsehood of such Opinions, I have proved at large in the
former parts of this Discourse; yet God, in his Wisdom, and for the Trial of
those who can adhere steadfastly to the Truth as it is in Christ Jesus, is
pleased to permit these Errors to be divulged, and defended, and propagated
with a mischievous Diligence, by Men of mighty Names and Interests, who,
presuming upon the present Indulgence, assume boldly to vent and spread those
Poisons they were forced to conceal within their own Breasts before. Time was,
when, by the just Judgment of God upon the Laodicean Temper of the generality
of Christians, Arianism got strength, and clouded all the native Glories of the
Church of God, it was then when, as St. Hierome says, the World stood in amaze
to see it self grown Arian at once; God grant the Plague of Socinianism be not
permitted to infect the Church of England with as fatal a Success; that those
Damnable Heresies, wherein the Lord who bought us is denied, gain not among us
too many Proselytes and Patrons too! they have indeed their oily Words, their
plausible Arguments, their extraordinary pretenses to Morality, and extremity
of Confidence, yet could they never hope to prevail, did they not observe the
extreme Debauchery and Looseness of the Age; they consider the Principles of
solid Religion as generally slighted, the lazy Humors of Men as little careful
to enquire into the Nature of Doctrines propounded, but ready either to sink
into downright Atheism, or to take up with the first Scheme of Religion that
may come to hand; Men aim more at eminence in what they abusively call Wit,
than at serious Piety; and therefore subtle watchful Heretics pretend only to
reduce Religion to the Rules of Reason, i. e. of their own Reason, who have
started so many Impieties, though the Reason of all Mankind beside themselves
appear in contradiction to them; as if a company of Opinators, who neither
value their own nor others Souls, were to fix their particular Sentiments, as
the only Standards of Sense and Truth, when indeed they have only the Fucus of
Sophistry to make a show of, easily observed by those who stand upon their
watch, and are willing to be certainly convinced of the Truth of things before
they entertain them. There are others, besides Papists, who are only Wolves in
Sheeps clothing, and by how much the more venerable Name they assume to
themselves, by so much the more dangerous they are: Every Man is ready to stand
upon his guard, if he fears being attacqu'd by a Roman Priest, or by a
pragmatick Jesuit; but who would suspect, that any of those who pretend to
Tenderness of Conscience, and a superfineness in Religious matters, should
blaspheme God the Son, or God the Holy Ghost? who would imagine, that those who
dare call themselves Sons of the Church of England, nay, Attendants at her
Altars, Hers, who particularly declares against these very Heresies, in those
Articles they are obliged to subscribe and to defend, should so affront their
Sacred Mother, and go about to seduce her Children from her sound and wholesome
Doctrines? But, if Apostolic times could be pestered with such False Teachers,
we may expect worse Measure, upon whom the Ends of the World are come; but,
above all, what can be more astonishing, than that those who pretend so great
Good Will to our Sion, should charge the Practice of our Church, in praying
equally to God the Father, Son and Holy Ghost, and proposing the Creeds of
Constantinople, and that called by the Name of St. Athanasius, as guilty of
Popery, and those things as Relics of that Idolatrous Religion? Popery is a
hated name, and those, who would have any thing hated, need to fix nothing more
odious upon it; but if it be Popery, to believe, that our Savior is the Son of
God, that he is God, that, by his Sufferings, he has satisfied for our Sins,
and now sits at the right hand of his Father, making Intercession for our Sins,
God grant we may live and die in that Faith: since our Case is such, take heed
how you hear, or what you read; let none deceive you with vain Words; you have
heard and read the Truth; and if now, or hereafter, We, or an Angel from Heaven
preach any other Gospel unto you, than what we have preached, in this
particular, Let him be accursed! and again, Let him be accursed! Amen.

FINIS.
A TABLE OF THE Principal Heads IN THIS DISCOURSE.
THE Design of the present Discourse. Page 1 Socinian Endeavors to change the
Text answered. Page 4 A Mystery, what. Page 12 Doctrines may be Mysterious though
revealed. Page 13 Humane Reason enquired into, as used in Religious Matters. 1.
Its original Excellence. Page 19 2. It Is very much impaired by Man's Fall. Page
21 3. It Is yet sufficient to convince us of a general Necessity of Religion.
Page 25 4. Well employed it meets with Divine Assistance. Page 32 5. By
Exercise it grows more knowing and comprehensive. Page 38 6. Yet it is not
complete till the Future Life's attained. Page 44
Deductions from thence, 1. God's Goodness to be admired because it continues
us a discursive Faculty, useful toward Salvation. Page 47 2. We should use our
Reason, in Matters of Religion, with all Humility and Sobriety. Page 55
The Necessity of Enquiring into our Lord's Divinity, no breach upon that
Humility or Sobriety. Page 63 The Text further explained, and, The Mystery of
Godliness proved not applicable to the Gospel, or God's revealed Will. Page 66
Not applicable to God the Father. Page 68
The true Meaning of the Text with the subsequent Instances laid down, and
applied to our Savior. Page 73 And Paraphrased. Page 79 I. The First Position
then laid down, That the Foundation of Christianity is indisputably Great and
Mysterious, and that proved necessary, 1. By the World's universal Agreement,
that Mysteries, both fundamental as to Faith, and externally essential as to
Rites, are necessary in Religion. Page 83
Rites, among the Jews, mystical by God's Appointment. Page 94 Those of the
Gentiles the same naturally. Page 96 The first Design and Mystery of Sacrifices
Page 98 The Devil imitating God, and why. Page 107 Sacrifices yet not believed
sufficient to appease Heaven, by any Intrinsic, but only by a Relative Virtue.
Page 108 Our Savior intended not the Abolition of every thing Mysterious in
Religion. Page 113 Men's Sentiments about the true Ends of Religion, before our
Lord's Incarnation, inquired into. Page 114 Those of the Jews. Ibid. Those of
the Gentiles. Page 119
The Ends of Religion, how depraved By the Jews. Page 127 Sadducees what, and
their Opinions Page 129 Essenes, what. Page 131 Pharisees what, and how
charactered by Jews. Page 133
By the Gentiles. Page 140 Their Philosophers, what. Ibid.

Things essential to Religion unchangeable. Page 145 Therefore the Law of
Regular Nature neither changed by Moses nor our Savior, nor any thing as
essential added to them. Page 148 And therefore Mysteries not taken away,
either in Faith's Foundation or Symbolical Rites. Ibid.
Advantages of Religion founded on Mysteries. 1. From them Men learn the
Imperfection of their own Reason. Page 160 2. Fundamental Mysterious Truths the
distinguishing Characters between several Religions. Page 168 3. Mysteries in
Religion create a due Reverence for it. Page 177
The Conclusion from all, That Mysteries are essential to Christianity as well
as to any other Religion. Page 190 It Is then Essential to Salvation to know
Christ is God. Page 193 Scripture conclusive of it. Page 201
II. Jesus Christ was truly and properly the Son of God. Page 209 This proved,
1. By the Promises and Predictions concerning his Birth, etc. Page 219 Several
instanced, in Page 221 etc. Christ expected by the Gentiles. Page 234
2. By the Manner and Circumstances of his Birth. Page 237 3. By the Doctrines
of himself and his Minister. Page 259 The gentle and peaceful, yet prevailing,
Nature of his Doctrine. Page 267

Scripture proved the Word of God to Deists. Page 283 God necessarily perfect
in all his Attributes. Page 287 His Love in particular. Page 289 Which obliges
him to reveal his Will to those intelligent Creatures, from whom he expects
Obedience to it. Page 294 Scripture such a Revelation of his Will, and has all
requisites in it. Page 299
III. Jesus Christ the Son of God was God equal with his Father. Page 309
Proved, 1. By the Old Testament. Page 311 The first Chapter to the Hebrews
occasionally cleared. Page 315
2. By the New Testament. Page 324 3. By Actions done by himself in Person, or
in his Name. Page 381 By himself while on Earth Ibid. By his Apostles in his
Name. Page 400
4. By the Faith of the Ancient Ante- Nicene Church. Page 409 Fathers alleged,
Greek, Clemens Romanus. Page 411 Ignatius Antiochenus. Page 415 Justine Martyr.
Page 420 Irenaeus Lugdunensis. Page 425 Clemens Alexandrinus. Page 427 Origin.
Page 430
Latin, Tertullian. Page 439 St. Cyprian. Page 447 Arnobius. Page 452
Lactantius. Page 457
Zwicker alleges, Socinus rejects the Ante- Nicene Fathers. Page 462 Why the
Fathers suppose a Difference between God the Father and God the Son. Page 466
The Confessions of the Ante- Nicene Councils. Page 470 The Judgments of
Eusebius and Constantine the Great. Page 477 5. By the generally allowed
Practice of Praying to our Savior, he is proved true God. Page 481
Under this Head is proved, 1. That all Worship terminating on any but the One
True God, is Idolatry. Page 483 The Ancient Notion of Idolatry. Page 486
Unitarians divided about Worshipping our Lord. Page 496 Their Vindication
reflected on. Page 515
2. That Christians, worshipping our Lord, are no Idolaters. Page 518 Therefore
our Lord is True God. Page 536 The Summary of the precedent Discourse. Ibid.

The Filiation of the Son of God enquired into. Page 541 The Racovian,
Lushington's Account, and that of Thoughts on Sherlock, etc. proved
insufficient. Page 542 Therefore a Necessity of Eternal Generation. Page 550
IV. It was necessary that God the Son should be Incarnate. Page 562 1. That he
might destroy the Works of the Devil. Page 563 He was Tyrannical over Mankind.
1. With respect to their Bodies. Page 566 Possessions by the Devil not bodily
Diseases. Page 567 The Devil permitted to possess Bodies, 1. For Trial of Faith
and Patience, and to excite the greater Longings for a Messiah. Page 573 2. For
the Glory of the Incarnate Son. Page 577

2. He was Tyrannical over Men's Souls, corrupting them, 1. With false
Interests. Page 583 2. Violent and unreasonable Prejudices. Page 588 3.
Prodigious and unaccountable Laziness. Page 592

A Second Reason why the Son of God was Incarnate, 2. That he might repeal the
Mosaic Law by a just Authority. Page 595 The Law of Moses, though Divine yet
repealable, proved, 1. By its general Import, it being wholly Typical, and
referring to somewhat Future. Page 601 2. The Ceremonial Law was not essential
to the Being or Well-being of a Church. Page 610 3. God always put a great
Difference between the Ceremonial and the Moral Law. Page 617 Hence necessary
that the Repealer should be equal with the first Maker of that Law. Page 625
3. The Son of God was Incarnate, that in our Nature He might fulfill the whole
Law for us, and give us a complete Example of Holiness and Obedience Page 632

God's Mercy not diminished by what Christ merited or suffered on our behalf.
Page 639 Crellius his Notion of Infinite Justice considered. Ibid. Justice in
God no hindrance to his Mercy, and vice versa. Page 645 Christ's Sufferings
Proportionable or Equivalent to our Demerits necessary. Page 646 Satisfaction
consistent with free Remission. Page 652 Christ not necessarily to suffer Death
Eternal, his Temporary Sufferings sufficient and equivalent to what was our
Due. Page 658 Why so much of Christ's Blood shed as to procure his Death. Page
666 Our Lord's Satisfaction no Encouragement to Sinners. Page 668 But a greater
Encouragement and Obligation to Holiness than the Socinian Hypothesis. Page 674
Confessed by the Defender of the Unitarians. Page 676 Christ a Real and Effectual
Sacrifice for us. Page 688 Christ's Obedience in his Exinanition not necessary
but on our account. Page 707 His Sacrifice Expiatory. Page 722 Completed
before his Ascension. Page 724 His Dying for our Sins proved positively Page
731 From the Circumstances of that Death. Page 738
Otherwise His inferior to the Sufferings of Martyrs. Page 739 God the Son
therefore necessarily the World's Redeemer, because that Redemption was 1. An
Effect of the greatest and Divinest Love. Page 758 2. It required the greatest
Interest in God the Father, and the greatest Tenderness toward Mankind. Page
761 3. He who made all things was fittest to restore them. Page 767
The Image of God not founded in Dominion of Man over his Fellow. Creatures.
Page 768 The Conclusion of all, in two Practical Inferences, 1. We learn, from
the whole, to admire God's wonderful Love and Compassion in condescending so
far to us as to be Incarnate and to die for us. Page 772 2. We ought to adhere
constantly to that Faith by which we believe Jesus Christ our Lord to be the
Eternal Son of God, true God himself, and the Propitiation for our Sins. Page
778

Places of Scripture more particularly Explained and Vindicated.
GEnesis 3.1, 2, 3, 4. Cain and Abel's Sacrifice. Page 98 3.15. I will put
Enmity between thee and the Woman. Page 607 18.2. Abraham stood still before
the Lord. Page 311 32.28. Jacob wrestling with the Angel, called Israel. Page
313 49.10. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah. Page 241 Exodus 4.16. Moses
a God to Pharaoh, and Aaron his Prophet. Page 343 7.1. Moses a God to Pharaoh,
and Aaron his Prophet. Page 343 14.21. They believed in the Lord, and in his
Servant Moses. Page 329 25.22. The Propitiatory or Mercy-seat. Page 721 34.7.
Forgiving Iniquity, Transgression and Sin. Page 699
Levit. 16.12, 13. Censer of Burning Coals in the Holiest Place. Page 726 v.
16. To make an Atonement for the most Holy Place. Page 725
2 Kings 3.26, 27. King of Moab offering his Son. Page 105 2 Chronicles. 30.18, 19,
20. Hezekiah's Prayer for the Unprepared. Page 603 Psalm 40.6, 7, 8. Sacrifice
and Burnt-Offerings not desired. Page 225 45.2. Thy Throne, O God, is for ever
and ever. Page 314 82.6, 7. I have said, Ye are Gods. Page 342
Isaiah 9.6. Unto us a Child is born, a Son is given. Page 320 Jeremiah 23.5,
6. I will raise unto David a Righteous Branch. Page 321 Micah 5.2 Thou
Bethlehem Ephrata, etc. Page 323 Haggai 2.8. The Glory of the Second House
greater, etc. Page 753 Matthew. 1.23. Thou shall call his Name Emanuel. Page 325
18.23. The Parable of the Debtors to their Lord. Page 651 28.18. All Power is
given to me in Heaven and Earth. Page 407 v. 19. In the Name of the Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost. Page 328
Luke 4.29, 30. They led him to the Brow of the Hill. Page 382 24.45. He opened
their Understandings. Page 395
John 1.1. In the beginning was the Word. Page 332 3.13. No man has ascended
up into Heaven, etc. Page 337 5.23. The Father has committed all Judgment,
etc. Page 202 10.30. I and my Father are One. Page 354 10.34, 35, 36. Is it not
written in your Law? Page 558 17 21. That they all may be One, as Thou, etc.
Page 358 20.28. My Lord and my God. Page 360
Acts 7.59. Lord Jesus receive my Spirit. Page 524 Romans 2.6. God will render to
every Man, etc. Page 124 3.24, 25, 26. Justified freely by his Grace, etc. Page
649 703 8.19, 20, 21, 22. The earnest Expectation of the Creature. Page 490
9.5. Of whom as concerning the Flesh Christ came. Page 370 10.13. Whosoever
shall call upon the Name of the Lord, etc. Page 203
1 Cor. 1.14, 15. Lest any should say, I had baptized in my own, etc. Page 402
10.2. All were baptized into Moses, etc. Page 329 15.3. Christ died for our
Sins. Page 693
2 Cor. 5.19, 20. Reconciling the World, etc. Page 648, 719 12.7, 8, 9. For
this cause I besought the Lord thrice. Page 527
Gal. 3.19. In the hand of a Mediator. Page 711 Philip. 2.5, -- 11. Being in
the Form of God, etc. Page 374 Col. 1.24. What was behind of the Afflictions of
Christ. Page 694 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. Pray without ceasing. Page 505 Heb. 1.8, 9, 10.
etc. When he brings his First-Begotten, etc. Page 314 5.5 Thou art my Son,
this day have I begotten thee. Page 549 6.1, 2. Leaving the Principles, etc.
Page 184 8.4. If on Earth he should not be a Priest, etc. Page 733 c. 9. etc.
10. Page 689, 727, 728. 11.1. Faith is the substance of things hoped for, etc.
Page 87
1 Pet. 2.24. Bore our Sins in his own Body on the Cross. Page 698. 3.18. He
suffered for our Sins, the just for the unjust. Page 697
1 John 2.1, 2. He is the Propitiation for our Sins. Page 719 5.7. There are
Three that bear Record in Heaven. Page 458 v. 20. This is the True God, and
Eternal Life. Page 205

ERRATA.
PAge 3. l. 5. after Salvation dele. p. 5. l. 20. put a Period after Text. l.
30. after Attentatam d. ^ p. 6. l. 3. r. Wissowatius. p. 130. in the Margent r.
Serrarii. p. 142. l. 19. r. seemed. p. 148. l. 31. r. Posterity. p. 200. l. 14
r. One. p. 209. l. 26. r. really and indeed. p. 221. l. 7. r. Paradisiacum. p.
239. r. this. p. 139. l. 21. r. (...) p. 149. l. 21. d. And. p. 289. l. 29. r.
those p. 312. l. 3. r. (...) In the Margent r. Sandii Hist. Eccles. Enucl. p.
318. l. 6. r. for. p. 332. l. 16. r. those. p. 336. l. 25. r. Stranger. p. 364.
l. 29. r. at. p. 413. l. 21. r. far. p. 448. l. 20. r. Libraries. p. 467. l.
22. r. Separation. p. 492. l. 26. d. One. p. 511. l. 10. r. deliver. p. 539. l.
3. r. Lazarus. p. 552. l. 31. in Marg. r. Epistolarum. p. 602. l. 12. r. (...).
p. 609. l. 13. r. Sacrifices. p. 666. l. 1. he be. p. 690. l. 29. r. Levitical.
p. 700. in Marg. r. Brixian. l. 3. r. curing. p. 704. l. 31. r. (...). p. 720.
l. 11. r. Catiline. p. 752. l. 10. r. Administrator. Several smaller Mistakes,
especially in the Pointing, the Reader will easily observe and pass by, or
correct as fitting.

Books Printed for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
TEN Sermons, with Two Discourses of Conscience. By the Lord Archbishop of
York, 4to -- 's Sermon before the House of Lords, Nov. 5. 1691. -- 's Sermon
before the King and Queen on Christmass-Day, 1691. -- 's Sermon before the
Queen on Easter Day, 1692. Henrici Mori, D. D. Opera omnia. Bishop Overal's
Convocation-Book, 1606. concerning the Government of God's Catholic Church,
and the Kingdoms of the whole World, 4to Dr Falkner's Libertas Ecclesiastica,
8vo -- 's Vindication of Liturgies, Ibid. -- 's Christian Loyalty, Ibid. Mr.
Lamb's Fresh Suit against Independency, Ibid. Mr. W. Allen's Tracts, Ibid.
Bishop Fowler's Libertas Evangelica, Ib. Jovian, or an Answer to Julian the
Apostate, Ibid. Animadversions on Mr. Johnson's Answer to Jovian. In Three
Letters to a Country Friend, Ibid. Turner de Angelorum and Hominum Lapsu, 4to
Mr. Raymond's Pattern of Pure and Undefiled Religion, 8vo -- 's Exposition on
the Church-Catechism, Ibid. Mr. Lamb's Dialogues between a Minister and his
Parishioner, about the Lord's Supper, Ibid. -- 's Sermon before the King at
Windsor. -- 's Sermon before the Lord Mayor. -- 's Liberty of Humane Nature,
stated, discussed and limited. -- 's Sermon before the King and Queen, Jan. 19.
1689. -- 's Sermon before the Queen, Jan. 24. 1690. Dr Hickman's
Thanksgiving-Sermon before the Honorable House of Commons, Oct. 19. 1690. --
's Sermon before the Queen at Whitehall, Oct. 26. 1690. Dr Burnet's Theory of
the Earth, 2 Vol. Folio. -- 's Answer to Mr. Warren's Exceptions against the
Theory of the Earth. -- 's Consideration of Mr. Warren's Defense. -- 's
Telluris Theoria Sacra, 2 Vol. 4to Bishop of Bath and Wells Reflections on a
French Testament, Printed at Bourdeaux. -- 's Christian Sufferer supported, 8vo
Dr Grove (now Lord Bishop of Chichester) his Sermon before the King and Queen,
June 1. 1690. Dr Hooper's Sermon before the Queen, Jan. 24. 1690/1. Dr
Pelling's Sermon before the King and Queen, Dec. 8. 1689. -- 's Vindication of
those that have taken the Oaths, 4to Dr Worthington of Resignation, 8vo -- 's
Christian Love, Ibid. Religion the Perfection of Man, By Mr. Jeffery, Ibid.
Faith and Practice of a Church of England Man, 12o The Fourth Edition. Kelsey
Concio de Aeterno Christi Sacerdot. -- 's Sermon of Christ Crucified, Aug. 23.
1691. Mr. Milbourn's Sermon, Jan. 30. 1682. -- 's Sermon, Sept. 9. 1683. An
Answer to an Heretical Book, called the Naked Gospel, which was condemned and
ordered to be publicly Burnt by the Convocation of the University of Oxford,
Aug. 19. 1690. With some Reflections on Dr Bury's new Edition of that Book; to
which is added a Short History of Socinianism, by W. Nichols, M. A. etc. Two
Letters of Advice, I. For the Susception of Holy Orders. II. For Studies
Theological, especially such as are Rational. At the end of the former is
inserted a Catalogue of the Christian Writers and Genuine Works that are Extant
of the First Three Centuries, By Henry Dodwell, M. A. etc.

