A VINDICATION OF His Majesty's GOVERNMENT, and IUDICATURES, IN SCOTLAND; From
some Aspersions thrown on them by scandalous Pamphlets, and News-books: and
especially, with Relation to the late Earl of Argiles Process.



EDINBURGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno DOM. 1683.

A Vindication of His Majesty's Government, and Judicatures, in SCOTLAND, etc.
ALL wise and sober Men in Scotland, do with a just mixture of pity, and
contempt, Read those infamous Pamphlets, wherein this Kingdom is so maliciously
traduced by some in our Neighbour-Nation; and when they consider that the
Licentiousness of the Press, does so much weaken all Government, corrupt all
Intelligence, and blast so unavoidably the Reputation of the best, and most
Innocent: They conclude justly, that to deny their King the necessary
privilege and prerogative of restraining the Press, were to refuse to the
Master of a Ship, the power to prevent its Leaking: To deny the Magistrate the
power of punishing these, who corrupt the Springs and Fountains of a City: And
to refuse to the Master of a Family, the Power of Chastising his Servants when
they rail at one another. I am very desirous also to be informed, how the King
can by the Privilege and Prerogative of His Crown, have the absolute power of
making Peace and War? Calling and Dissolving of Parliaments, and a Negative
Voice in them? and yet should be denied the far less privilege of restraining
the Press: Especially after so many proofs of its having been so dangerous, and
Seditious. How the Magistrates of the meanest Hanse-Town should enjoy this
privilege, and yet that it should be denied to the King of Great Britain. Or
how he should have the power to punish Lybels, and yet should want the power of
stopping them, it being both much safer, and easier, to prevent, then to
punish. Nor can I dissemble, that our Nation has found the happy Effects of
discharging all Printing without License by an express Statute, whereby we find
the public Government, and every private Man's Reputation most happily secured:
Whilst on the other hand, It is very observable, that that Peer, who told it
was not yet time to restrain the Press in England, has lived to see a famous
Library of Libels and Pasquills against himself, for the Conviction of this
Age, and the Information of those who shall succeed us.

We glory also in the justice of our Law, that has by a special Statute,
Ordained all such to be severely punished, who by Word, or Writ, Devise, Utter,
or publish any false, slanderous, or reproachful Speeches, or Writs against the
State, People or Country of England, or to the Dishonor of any Privy
Counselor thereof: and therefore, we hope, that so wise and just a Nation as
England, which punishes those who injure a private Peer, will not suffer them to
go unpunished, who rail at a Nation, that is obliged to hazard their Lives and
Fortuns for their preservation.

Unhappy Liberty which consists in the privilege of doing ill, and which
serves for nothing, but to make the Authors be contemned for want of Breeding,
and despised for want of Sense: Nor does this Crime want a sufficient
punishment, since it has convinced us, that the Enemies of the Monarchy are
such liars, and so malicious, that they deserve neither to be believed, nor
followed; and how can any amongst us believe these in Matters of Right? who
every day lie so scandalously in Matters of Fact.

Upon this Ground, I confidently believe, that no honest man, will think we in
Scotland have owned his Royal Highness, because England had an aversion for
him, as a late Pamphlet has maliciously asserted; for as their worthy Peers did
wisely reject the Bill of Exclusion; so our Predecessors were obliged to this
by so many Oaths, and through a Series of so many Ages, and GOD had so severely
punished us in the last Age, for having joined with our Rebellious Neighbors
against our Native Prince, that we had been the greatest Fools and Rogues upon
Earth, to have Relapsed so soon into the fame Errors; and especially in
following the Example and Advice of those very Rebels, or their impenitent
Heirs, who had in ten years Exercised that Arbitrary Government over us,
against which themselves had Exclaimed, and to a hight, that we had never
known, and as it is very well known, that every honest Man in Scotland
rejoices, when they hear of the prosperity of the Royal Family in England, and
esteem highly* and love passionatly all such as have, or do contribute to it
(an Union in Principles, being stronger then that of the Kingdoms) So Scotland
being the less powerful Nation, what can they gain in the contest? Or why
should they envy that which is their greatest Security, as well as Honor.

The delivering of the best of Kings at Newcastle was no more a National Act in
us, than the Murdering him after a Mock-Tryal, was a National Act in the
Kingdom of England Rebels in both committed those Crimes, whilst honest Men
suffered, with him, and for him; and it is undeniable, that the honest Party of
Scotland, were at that time fighting under the Great Montrose, against that
pretended Parliament, which Voted his Delivery, and that even our Rebellious
Contrymen delivered him only up to such of our Neighbor Nation, as did
Swear upon Oath, that they should preserve Him and His Crowns, and when they
found that these Sectarians, neither regarded their Oath nor their King: they
raised an Army immediately, to Expiat their Crime; Nor wanted ever our Nation an
Army, even under the Usurpers, to appear for the Monarchy, and from us, and
Encouraged by us, went that Army that Restored our present King: Let then no
honest Man remember those National Errors, except either in his Prayers, when
he Interceeds with GOD, For diverting the Curse which those Crimes deserve; Or
in Judicatures, when such are to be punished, as would lead us back into those
Confusions. But why the Authors of these Pamphlets should condemn the very
Actions, which they so very faithfully Copy, seems very wonderful, as it does
how our Fanatic Contrymen, should wish success to those who Rail at their
Nation and their Principles.

Open then your Eyes, my dear Contrymen, and let not your own Fanaticism,
nor their Cheats persuade you, that such as endeavor to lessen and asperse the
Monarchy in our Neighbor. Nation, will be ever Faithful to you, who are sworn,
even in your Covenant, to maintain it in this, to you who opposed them in the
last War, in their grand Designs for a Commonwealth, and the Extirpation of
the Scottish Race, to you who think that Presbytery jure divino, which they
laugh at, and never use it as an useful Government in the Church, though they
do some times as an useful Tool to Rebellion in the State, and to you whom they
cheated so far, and oppressed so dreadfully in the late Rebellion, that they know
you cannot trust them. Was it the Church of England, or Sectarians that Sold
you to be Slaves in their Plantations, that filled your Pulpits with
Buff-Coats, and your Churches with Horses; and did not they turn all your own
Arguments against you, that you had used against Episcopacy; for as you said
the Bishops should not have Revenues, so they said your Ministers should not
have Stipends, as you contended, that Lawn Sleeves were Popish; they contended,
that Gowns were so too; they in Enimity to Ceremony, would cover their heads at
Prayer, as you did in Churches; and by the same Rule that you taught that
Subjects might Reform Kings, they concluded against you, that they might
Execute them.

I shall likewise refer to your consideration, that it is the Duty of every
good Subject, to obey the Laws of that Nation wherein he lives, since they must
either obey the Magistrate, or overturn him; and a Schism does breed so much
Un-christian Heat, and so many Civil Wars, that no pious or reasonable Man
should Engage in it, except he be necessarly Obliged to separate from the the
Church, as absolutely Antichristian: But so it is, that the Differences
betwixt our Episcopacy and Presbytery, which have occasioned all these
dangerous Disorders, are founded upon no express Text of Scripture, else
Foreign Churches would not acknowledge ours to be a True Church, as they
universally do; nor had the Fathers of the Primitive Church owned a Government,
which stood in direct opposition to the Word of God. And it seems strange, that
God Almighty should have designed to express a thing in Scripture, as necessary
for Salvation; and yet we who are obliged to obey the same, should not be able
to find it out. It is also very fit to be considered by you, that the Reason
why Monarchy has always preferred Episcopacy to Presbyterian Government,
proceeds not only from an aversion to Presbytery, as neither Established by
Scripture, used in the Primitive Church, nor recommended by the Holy Fathers;
but because it has been observed, that your Government being founded on
Equality amongst Presbyters, resembles more a Commonwealth; and that you have
always in this Isle, Reformed without the Monarchs approbation, if not against
it, and so have Interwoven with your Religion, Principles opposite to
Monarchical Government, resolving to balance Established Authority, with
pretenses of Religion, from which necessity has at last forced many of you to
oppose all Government. And it is still observable, that whatever opposes the
Government of the Country where we live, must at last end in Anarchy and
Confusion.

Those great Idolizers of Parliaments, in speaking so much against our last,
show that they care no more for Parliaments, then they do for Kings, and think
them only Infallible when they are such as themselves. For where was there ever
a Parliament so unanimous as ourswas in the matter of the Succession, not one
Man having proponed any one Argument against it. And what a Villainous thing is
it to assert, that the Test is a Popish Contrivance, when in it we Swear
expressly to own the Protestant Religion, and breed up our Children in it. And
that without all mental Reservations, or Equivocations. And to show how well
contrived that Oath is, in opposition to Popery: Not one Papist in all our
Kingdom has taken the Test. What more could his Majesty's Commissioner have
done, to show his willingness to have honest and loyal Protestants enjoy their
own Religion. And who after this should believe these lying Authors? Who would
Impose upon the World, that, as a mark of Popery, which is the strongest
Bulwark imaginable against it. And though we make not the Protestant Religion,
the Instrument of Cruelty, the Stirrup of preferment, a Cloak for all manner
Knavery, and a Trumpet of Rebellion: nor admire avowed Atheists, nor pay
Salaries to such as deny the Divinity of Jesus Christ, if they be useful to
other Hypocritical designs, as some do; yet our Nation has reason to suspect
such as will have them pass for Popishly inclined, (as if all Duty, when it
pleases not them were Popery,) for in our Chief City, and it is Suburbs, we have
not 14 Popish Families, in the whole Diocese of S. Andrews, the far largest of
Scotland, we have not three, and there are not 60. upon a sworn Report, to be
found in the Diocese of Aberdeen, which is the most suspected of all others.

These wise Statesmen, who think insolently, that they though private men may
reform our Laws, as well as their own Religion; we appeal still to that
Parliamentary Insallibility, which they here deny: And therefore we justly
contemn these Pamphlets, which inveigh against the 25 Act of the third Session
of His Majesty's first Parliament, whereby the Estates of this Kingdom oblidge
themselves, to send 22000 Men, into any part of His Majesty's Dominions,
wherever His Authority, Honor, or Greatness may be concerned, which was
certainly their duty; for if they defend it only at home, their defense may
prove useless, both to themselves and Him, and since he is our King every
where, we should assist Him every where: And that the King may call his
Subjects, even without his own Territory, is clear by all Lawyers, and amongst
whom; I shall only cite, Castallio de Imperatore quest. 159. Where the question
is expressly treated, and this decided from the Law of Nations: Nor need any
honest Subject fear our assisting their King, and Traitors should be terrified.
But in all this, we were much Loyaler then that Peer of England, who, when our
Rebellion rose, in 1679, affirmed, that His Majesty could not send down Forces
into Scotland, without consent of Parliament; because, by the Treaty of Rippon,
it was declared, that the Subjects of one Kingdom, should not in vade the
other, without the consent of the Parliaments of both Kingdoms, which Treaty is
Rescinded with us, and we believe England will not think that a mutual Treaty
can stand, when one side is free: nor consider we Parliaments, as the Arbiters
of Peace and War, that being the Kings incommunicable Prerogative, but this
shows why our Acts are railed at, and what Loyal Men they are who do it.

As also, since all lawful Parliaments have ever since the Reformation, both
Here, and in England, made very severe Laws against non Communicants, or
Schismatics; either no respect is to be had to those Parliaments, or these
Laws are Just, and fit: ard why the Laws should have been so severe to them in
Queen Elizabeth's Reign, before they had rebelled, and should now remit their
severity, when by frequent rebellions, and extravagant Sermons, Books, and
Assemblies, they have incorporated so many dreadful principles, inconsistant
with all Government, into the body of their Divinity: I see not, and shall be
glad to be informed, and if it be pretended, that their numbers having
infinitely increased since that time, should prevail with a wise Magistrate to
lessen his severity, we conclude just the contrary, especially, since we find,
that an exact and firm, though moderat execution of the Law, is abler to lessen
their fury, then an indulgence, there being now very few, who go not to Church,
and almost all repenting, that they went not sooner, and I desire to know from
these Authors, if their Party in England thinks: that the true way of using
Papists or if the Presbyterians allowed that way of arguing, when they
prevailed, and was it not that lenity, which drew on the last Rebellion, and
our Slavery.

A short view of our Laws, made on that Subject, with the occasion of them,
will best clear this point.

In the last Rebellion, defensive Arms, and that the people had power to
Depose, or Suspend Kings, were the great foundation, and in defense whereof,
several Books have been lately written, and therefore these were declared
Treason, and it is admired, how any can be called good Subjects, who maintain
them.

The Parliament did see; that the not going to Church, occasioned much Atheism
and Ignorance: and that the hearing such as were not Authorized, was a certain
inlet to all Sedition and Herisie: since every man might preach what he
pleased, and therefore they discharged House Conventicles, and declared, that
meetings in the Fields were formal Rebellion; since Rebellion is only a rising
in Arms, without, and contrary to the Command of Authority, and that sometimes
there would be gathered together several thousands of people in Arms, who
might join when they pleased; and from a Conjunction, merely of those,
proceeded the Rebellions 1666. and 1679. and they punished these with moderat
Fynes, far below the guilt. And how dare men be so dissingenuous, as to own
themselves the only Protestants, and yet to inveigh against Statutes made to
hinder Jesuits, Socinians, and others to pervert the people; as we certainly
know, they did for many years together, at those meetings, and how could this
be prevented, since the poor commens know not what is Orthodox. And since they
were persuaded not to ask who was to Preach, least they should be oblidged to
Witness against him, and as the dangers on the onehand were great, so on the
other, they were desired to go to that Church, which the greatest and soberest
of their own Ministers did, and do still frequent.

Some Ministers fearing, that their hearers might be led as Witnesses against
them, infused in them, a dangerous and ridiculous principle, that no man was
oblidged to depone, when he was called to be a Witness, and that no man was
obliged to Depone, when the being at such illegal Meetings, was referred to his
Oath: and this was called the accusing of ones self; whereas all Laws under
Heaven, oblige a man to be a Witness, else no Crime could be proved. And if
this were allowed, we might have as many Masses as we pleased; and when any
thing is referred to a man's Oath, he does not accuse himself, for the Fiskal
accuses him; and do not all Nations prove Injuries and Misdemeanors by the
Oaths of the Committers, if these are not to be capitally punished. And
therefore the Parliament was forced to make a Statute, obliging them to Depone
as VVitnesses.

I need not tell the dreadful Equivocations lately invented to secure Rebels,
as when a Witness Depones he saw a Hilt, and a Scabbart, but yet knows not if
there was a Sword. The Pia fraus of Ignoramus Iuries, and a hundredth other
Cheats, rather to be lamented, then related. And which tended to unhing all
Property, as well as Religion, if God and zealous Magistrates had not prevented
it. And yet the opposing these, which is a Duty, must be represented as a
Crime, for deluding ignorant people.

The Parliament then having for the necessary Defense of the Kingdom, by
reiterated Laws, commanded those things to be put to Execution. Laws which did
not only at first seem to be just, but were thereafter upon experience, found
to be so. Are not they promoters of Arbitrary Government, who think, that the
Judges and Magistrates of the Nation, should dispense with such Laws? And
whoever thinks he may dispense with the Law, must certainly think, that he is
tied by no Law; and that is to be truly Arbitrary. And it is most observable,
that these who are Enemies to His Majesty's Government, and His Servants: are
of all men alive, most guilty of that Arbiltariness, which they would fix upon
others. It cannot be imagined, that the King will contemn the Laws, since they
are his own Creatures, as well as His Support, whereas such as oppose Him, or
Rebel against Him, must first trample under foot, the Laws by which the King
is Secured, and by which they are to be punished, and it is not the Masters,
but Robbers who break the Fences.

2ly, Are not these honest and good Contrymen, who think it cruelty to
punish such as did take up Arms twice in an open Rebellion? and who own all the
Cruelties that were committed in the late Civil Wars, who burn publicly the
Acts of Parliament, and who join with Murderers.

3ly. Albeit those Crimes be very attrocious, horrid in themselves, and
dreadful in the preparative, inconsistent with humane Society, and a Scandal to
Religion. Yet have not His Majesty's Judicatures offered Remissions to all such
as have been accused, providing they would disown those Rebellious Principles;
so that such as die, are the Martyrs of their own Crimes, and justify their
Judges, even whilst they are Exclaiming against them. And as no Government
under Heaven, did ever show so many Instances of Clemency, offering Indemnities
when there was no necessity for them, Renewing and Pressing those Indemnities,
when they were twice or thrice slighted; and Remissions, when all those gentle
Offers were contemned: so, has any man died amongst us, by malicious Juries, or
false Witnesses.

4ly, Has not the Privy Council in their Fyning such as were guilty, proceeded
with such moderation, that albeit for many years, the Laws were absolutely
contemned, after many Reiterations by the Parliament, and Proclamations from
the Council, pressing Obedience to them: Yet they have Ordered Execution to be
Suspended, as for bypast times, to all such as would Obey for the Future. And I
must beg leave to Observe, that it has been upon an exact Review, found, that
the Rebellious Parliament, 1647. did Impose more by way of Fine in one day,
than the Privy Council has done since His Majesty's happy Restoration: Such as
differed from their Government, Entreated for those Pardons, which are now
refused. And it would have been then thought very ridiculous, to offer a man
his Life; who had been in Arms for the King, upon his offering to live
peaceably.

5ly. If the Differences amongst us, upon which all those Rebellions were
founded, were Matterial and did proceed from Conscience; somewhat might be said
to lessen, though not to justify the Guilt, for Conscience should neither be a
Crime, nor a defense for Crimes. Yet what can now be said? When all men
willingly go to Church, which certainly they would not do, if their Conscience
did not allow them. And it being now clear, that the former contempt of the
Law, proceeded from Humor, and not from Conscience: who can blame Magistrates
for preferring the Law of the Kingdom, to the Humor of particular Persons.
Somewhat might be likewise said for those Differences, if we did not find, that
they necessarly, and naturally produced Principles of Rebellion, Assassination,
contempt of Magistracy, and of Masters, with a thousand other Impieties, and
Immoralities: Whilst it is very remarkable, that Episcopacy never bred a Rebel,
nor inspired a Murderer; but gentle, like the Christian Religion which it
professes, it Preaches Obedience under the pain of eternal Damnation, and
practices mercy to that height, that it is now become the Temper of the Men, as
well as the Doctrine of the Church.

6ly, In Matters of Government, We must Balance the Safety of the whole, with
the Punishment of a few. And in our Case, We must consider that a Civil War
would be much more severe, then a few Executions, or Fynes can be. And we need
only remember the vast Subsidies, the extraordinary Cruelties, and boundless
Arbitrariness of the last Age to be convinced, that it is not Severity; but
kindness in the present Government, which forces them, as a Physician, rather
to draw a little Blood, than to suffer their Patient to run into a Frenzy;
especially when they know the Patient has been lately inclined to it: and when
they see the usual Symptoms that foretell the approaching fit, to grow very
remarkably every hour.

This may be further cleared, by comparing a little the condition, wherein His
Royal Highness found this Kingdom; with that State to which it is now brought,
under his happy Influence.

It cannot be denied, but that before His Royal Highness came to Scotland, the
Fields were every Sabbath covered with Arm'd-men, upon the pretext of hearing
Sermons: Which Sermons were so far from being a legal Defense against
Rebellion, that they were most Efficacious Incentives to it. His Majesty's most
undeniable Prerogatives, were upon all Occasions contraverted. Masters were
contemned by their Servants, and Heretors by their Tennents. And it was very
just, and consequential, that these Masters should have been contemned by their
Servants, who did themselves learn them this Lesson, by contemning the King
their Superior, and Master.

The Ministers of the Gospel were Invaded, Wounded, and Assassinated. Churches
were either left Waste, or insolently Perturb'd, when they were frequented.
Principles of Assassination were Preached and Practiced. All such as owned, or
Served the Government were affronted, and menaced. Pasquils and Defamatory
Libels, were publicly vented and praised. Dreams, Visions and Prophesies,
portending the Ruin and Overthrow of the Government were spread abroad to
amuse the People, and fill the Heads of the weaker sort with Fears and
Jealousies. Lying was become all our Wit, and Hectoring of the Government all
our Courage:

Whereas now, People are gathered in from the Fields to Churches. God Almighty
is served with Reverence; and the King as his Vicegerent with Respect. The
Royal Prerogative is neither streatch'd, nor basi'd. The Privy Council have
learned by his Royal Highnesses sitting so long amongst them, to show as much
Clemency, as may consist with firmness: and to sustain their Justice by their
Courage. All Animosities and Differences among our Nobility are Composed and
forgot: and Thefts and Robberies in the Highlands, which were formerly so
great a Reproach to the Government, and a Ruin to the People; are now not
only Secured against, by present Punishments, but prevented by suitable and
proportional Remedies, such as Commissions of Justiciary, Security taken from
the Heretors and Chiftains of Clans; settling of Garrisons in convenient places,
and giving Money for Intelligence to Spy's. Ministers are so much Protected and
Encouraged, that one can hardly think, if he had not known their former
condition, that ever the People had had any unkindness for them: Men do not
now lust after Nevvs, nor Conventicles: But Employ those Thoughts, and that
Time upon their private Affairs, which they formerly misspent, in follovving
Expensive Field Preachers: Securing themselves and their Estates, by a pleasant
peaceableness, from the Fears, as well as the Damnage, of Fines and
Punishments. We have no Pasquils, nor hear of no Visions. Men honor the Laws
by which they are Protected, and those Magistrates, by whose Ministry they
enjoy this Peace and Quiet: Whilst their Magistrates on the other hand, remember
that His Majesty and His Royal Highness, hate the insolence of their Servants,
though they may for some time suffer it: And that the preparatives they make to
the prejudice of the People, will be lasting Snares and Burdens on their
Posterity. Magistrates should pity the frailties to which themselves are
subject, and the misfortuns which themselves cannot shun, and should cover
rather than punish Escapes, which have more of mistake in them than of Guilt.

By which parallel, our Contrymen and Neighbors, may judge, whether His
Royal Highness be so undesirable a Governor, that the Law of God, of Nature,
and Nations should be brok, to Exclude him from his Right of Succession.
Whether we Enjoy greater, and truer Liberty, under his Protection: than we did
under our usurping Parliaments. And whether those Expressions of our
Thankfulness, proceed from flattery, or from gratitude.

REFLECTIONS ON The Earl of ARGIL'S Process.
NExt to our Laws, our Judges are arraigned, and though all Nations presume,
that Judges understand, and that we should presume them Just, being ordinarily
men of Integrity, who are ingadg'd upon Oath, and have both Soul and Reputation
at Stake; And who know their Children are to be Judged by the preparatives they
make. Yet our Phamphleters, who neither understand matter of Law, nor matter of
Fact, stick not most soveraignly to decyde, that our Sentences, even in
Criminals (in which men cannot Err wilfully, without murdering deliberatly) are
absurd, ridiculous and inhumane* And yet these same men (the great Patrons of
Justice) are the Secretaries of that Party, who after they had murdered
Strafford, made an Act that none should die by that preparative; in imitation of
which horrid Injustice, our Rebellous Zealots did Execute Sir John Gordon of
Haddo, upon a Statute made by them, after they had Condemned him as a Traitor,
for bearing Arms against the three Estates, tho he had a special Commission
from the King their Sovereign. And hanged the great Marquis of Montrose, with
his Declaration, Emited by His Majesty's Authority about his Neck, though they
had Treated and concluded with the King that gave it, by whom so many Noblemen
and Gentlemen fell for doing their Duty: and so many innocent Cavaleers were
Massacr'd after they got Quarters.

Then it was, That an Oath was taken by our Statesmen, not to spare the lives
of either kin, Friend nor Ally. That three hundred were exposed on a Rock to be
starved, and as many murdered in cold Blood after Quarter. And a Scaffold being
Erected at the Cross of Edinburgh, on which in six Weeks time, multitudes of
generous Gentlemen having died, a Zealous Minister Thanked GOD for that Altar,
on which so sweet smelling a Sacrifice was offered. Whereas our Merciful King,
having had his Father Martyred, and being himself Banished; Pardoned even His
Fathers Murderers. And granted not only Pardons, but Indulgences after two
inexcusable Rebellions. And it was very wonderful, to see His Royal Brother
(this formidable Tyrant in our Pamphlets) pleading for Pardon even to such as
owned a hatred against all the Royal Family. Nor can it be denied, but there is
a gentleness in the old Cavalier Party, which demonstrats that they are in the
Right. And which is infinitely preferable to that sour Cruelty, and morose
bitterness, which make the insolent Republicans, and bigot Fanatics, humourous
and dangerous. And as a Monarch the true father of his Subjects, thinks it
generous to Pardon, so Republicans must be Cruel, to show a Zeal for the Rabble
which they Serve. Nor do I ever hear that any of those public Spirited
Authors, do turn the Edge of their Zeal against Ignoramus juries, false
Witnesses, lying Scriblers against the Government, assassinats, etc.

I am now come to take notice of a late Pamphlet, called The Scots-mist,
wherein, because the late Earl of Argyl's Process is founded upon Points in
jure, and consequently not so obvious to the consideration of every Unlearned
Man, the Author takes pains to make it appear an unanswerable Instance of the
Arbitrariness of our Judges.

But before I answer his weak Reflections in Law, I must take notice of some
few Particulars in Fact:

As first, His Judges were not Judges in a Packt Commission; but the learned
and Ordinary Judges of the Nation.

2ly, What Temptation could the King, or any who Served Him have to streatch
Law in that case* for that, as to his Life there was no design, is clear from
the express Order His Royal Highness gave, not to keep him strictly after he
was found guilty. Though great presumptions were offered to that generous
Prince of a designed Escape. And himself ordour'd in Council, that the most
Learned Advocats in Scotland, should be pressed to appear for him. Nor was ever a
Prisoner used, either by Judges, or by the Kings Advocat, with so much
discretion and respect.

3ly, His Jurisdictions, nor Estate could be no Temptation, for the late
Advocat had Represented such Reasons against his Right to these Jurisdictions
and Superiorities, as no man under Heaven could answer with any shadow of
Reason: And the King got not one farthing of his Estate, for His Royal Highness
by his generous Interposition, procured more of it for his Children, then
belonged to the Family, Debts being paid. And the remainder was gifted by our
gracious and inimitable King amongst the Creditors. And the Tithes possessed by
that Earl, returned to the Church.

Happy Kingdom, wherein the greatest Instance of Arbitrary Government, is a
Person, who having nothing to lose, save what the King gave, had a fair Trial
by sworn Judges and Jurors: and lost upon the Event, neither Life nor Fortune.
And whose Family after three capital Sentences, two by Parliaments, and one by
a Solemn Justice Court, is left without envy in a better condition, then almost
any who Served the King in His great Extremities.

4ly, All these Narratives and Apologies are founded on great mistakes, as if
the Earl had been desired to take the Test; for we desire no man, but men in
Office desire it, because they cannot enjoy their Offices till they take it:
And that the Council was once pleased with the Explanation he gave, as if he
had given in an Explanation: and the Council being pleased with it, allowed him
to take it in these Terms: Whereas the true cas was, that the Earl had assured
both His Royal Highness, and many others, that he would not take the Test.
Notwithstanding whereof, coming in abruptly to the Council, he spoke something
with so slow a Voice, that none say they heard him, and then clapping down-on
his Knees, took the Test; but some Copies being dispersed of what he said, all
Loyal Men murmured at the preparative, as tending to destroy, not only the
Parliaments design in the Test, but to unhing all Government. And the greatest
Fanatics in Scotland, owned they would take it in that Sense; without
prejudice to their Principles: and so they might, being allowed not to bind up
themselves from endeavoring any alteration they should think fit for the
advantage of Church and State: Which made the Oath no Oath, and the Test no
Test. And therefore the next day, when he offered to take the Test, as a
Commissioner of the Thesaury, he was desired first to give in his Explanation,
which when he gave it in, it was inquired, if any man had heard that
Explanation made in Council: and no man did remember he heard or understood it
so. And thereafter it was Voted not satisfactory. And albeit His Majesty's
Advocat allowed the Earl to prove that the Council heard and approved it; yet
his Lordship failed in the Probation: and it is absurd to think the Council
would have allowed an Explanation, which would have Evacuated the whole Act,
and the design of the Parliament in it: as shall fully hereafter be proved.
Whereas if the Earl had only designed to Exoner his Conscience, he might either
have abstained, for no man is obliged to take the Test; or if he had resolved
to know if his meaning would have been acceptable, he might have given his
Sense, and petitioned to know if that was acceptable, which had been a fair and
sure way, both for Takers and Rulers. Whereas, first to take, and then give in
his Explanation, is a certain way to secure ones own Employments, and a
preparative to let in any, let their Principles be what they please, if they
have the Wit to Salve their Principles by apposit Explications: and the
dispersing Copies of that Paper, before it was presented in Council, cannot be
said to have been done for Exonering his own Conscience, but is the ordinary
way that men take, when they resolve to Defame the Government. Nor is our
Government so unreasonable, as not to desire to satisfy such as scruple,
without ill Designs. And this they show in satisfying some of the Orthodox
Clergy, who offered modestly some Scruples against the inconsistency of the
Confession of Faith, with Episcopacy: And which Scruples being easily cleared,
they all obeyed save nineteen or twenty, in the whole Kingdom at most, some
whereof had also inclinations however to the good old Cause. Nor can I pass by
here a strange abuse put upon the World in that Pamphlet, as if those scruples
there set down, were only the Scruples of the conform Clergy, whereas many
Papers bearing that Title, were drawn by the Presbyterians, and found amongst
their Papers; and the Paper ascryb'd to them in that Book, wants the chief
Objection they stuck at, viz. That the Compylers of that Confession of Faith
were Enemies to Episcopacy; and in place thereof, it asperses our present
Episcopacy, the Kings Supremacy, and the Act of the Succession, which the
conform Clergy never did.

For clearing this Process, modestly and merely in defense of our Judges, I
shall first set down the Earls Explanation, which runs thus,

I have considered the Test, and am very desirous to give Obedience as far as I
can --

I am confident the Parliament never intended to Impose contradictory Oaths,
and therefore I think no body can Explain it but for himself, and Reconcile it,
as it is Genuine, and agrees in his own Sense.

I take it as far as it is Consistent with it Self, and the Protestant
Religion. And I do Declare, I mean not to bind up my self in my Station, and in
a lawful way to wish, and endeavor any Alteration, I think to the advantage of
Church, and State. Not Repugnant to the Protestant Religion, and my Loyalty,
and this I understand as a part of my Oath.

The first Crime Charged upon the Earl from this Paper, is, that albeit by the
107. Act of Parliament 7. I. 1. It be Statute, that no man Interpret the Kings
Statutes, otherwise then the Statutes bears, and to the Intent and Effect they
were made for. And as the Maker understood, and whosoever does the contrary,
shall be punished at the Kings will. Yet the King and Parliament having
appointed an Oath to be taken for Securing the Protestant Religion, and the
Kings Prerogatives. And having to evite the old Fanatic Juglings; and Evasions
of the Covenanters on the one hand; and the Equivocations and Mental
Reservations of the Papists on the other.

The Oath does expressly bear, these Words: And finally I affirm and swear, That
this my solemn Oath is given in the plain and Genuine Sense and meaning of the
words, without any Equivocation, Mental Reservation, or any manner of Evasion
whatsoever. The said Earl did, notwithstanding of that Statute, and the
foresaid Clause in the Oath it self, take the said Oath in such a Sense, as did
not only Evacuat his own taking of it, but did teach others how to swear to it,
without being thereby obliged; and path a Way to Posterity, for Evacuating all
the Acts that ever can be made for Security of Religion, King and Government,
in so far as he declares, that he did take the Oath with these Qualifications
only.

First, I will give Obedience as far as I ean.

2ly. I think no body can Explain it but for himself, and reconcile it as it is
genuine, and agrees in his own Sense.

3ly, I mean not to bind up my himself in my Station, from making any
alteration, I think to the advantage of Church or State, etc. Which is not to
take it in the Imposers Sense, but his own, which will the more easily appear
from these Reasons.

First, That the Design of all Laws, but especially the making of Oaths, is
that the Subjects should be bound thereby, according to the Sense of the
Legislator. Which is very clear from the express words of the former Statute,
and by the Reason whereon it is founded, which is, that the Legislator may be
sure of Obedience, and may know what to expect from those who are to obey. And
who have taken the Oaths prescribed. And in which, Divines agree with Lawyers,
for they tell us, that verba ju* ramenti intelliguntur secundum mentem and
intentionem ejus cul sic juramentum, Sand: page: 173. But this sense in which
the Earl takes the Oath, does Evacuat all the designs of the Oath: For, first,
Whereas the Oath designed that this Act of Parliament should be simply obeyed,
as a sure Foundation for the Security of Church and State; the Earl promises
only to obey it as far as he can, without telling in what he will obey.

2ly, Whereas the Oath is to be taken in the plain genuine Sense of the Words;
the Earl declares, that no body can Explain it but for himself. And reconcile
it as it is genuine, and as it agrees in his own Sense. Which implys, that it
had no plain genuine Sense, in which it could have been taken. 3ly, Whereas the
Parliament designed it as a Security for the Protestant Religion; he declares
he takes it only in as far as it is consistent with the Protestant Religion.
Which implys, that in some things it is not consistent with the Protestant
Religion. 4ly, It cannot be pretended, that the Parliament designed to make an
Act that had contradictions in it; and yet the Earl says, he takes the Oath in
so far as it is consistent with it self, which imports necessarly, that in some
things it is not consistent with it self. 5ly, The design of this Oath was, to
preclude all the Takers from reserving a Liberty to rise in Arms upon any
pretext whatsoever* but by this Explication, the Earl reserves to himself a
power to make any alterations that he shall think, for the advantage of Church
and State. By all which, I conclude, that the Earl has interpret this Oath
otherwise than it bears, and to the Intent, and Effect it was made for. And
otherwise than the Maker understood. And therefore this Explication does
clearly fall under the foresaid Satute.

2ly. If this were allowable, no Member of Parliament needs hereafter propose
any doubts in Parliament, but let the Parliament make what Oath they please,
the Taker will Reform, and alter it as he pleases. When he takes the Oath. And
I desire to know from any man of Sense, if the Earl would have obtained from
the Parliament at the passing of it, that every man should have been allowed to
take it as far as it was consistent with it self, and the Protestant Religion.
Or if they would have suffered the other Qualifications in that Paper to have
been adjected, as a part of the Act. Which does demonstrat* that he did not
only not take it in the Legislators Sense, as the former Statute Commands. But
that he did not at all take the Oath that they made, but made a new Oath of his
own.

3ly, If a man should oblige himself simply upon Oath, to make me a Right to
such Lands, could this Sense be consistent with it, (...) make it as far as I
can. Or would the making such a Right, with that quality, satisfy the
Obligation. Or could he who receives the Obligation, be sure of a good Right,
if the Person Obliged were bound to no further than he could perform.

4ly, All Oaths must be so taken, as that the Taker may be pursued for Perjury;
but so it is, that when it is not known what the Taker is tied to, it cannot be
known wherein he has failed. And consequently in how far he is Perjured.

5ly, I would willingly know, if the Covenanters would have allowed any to have
taken the Covenant with a Qualification that he should observe it as far as it
was consistent with his Loyalty. And do not generally the greatest Enemies to
the Kings Supremacy declare, that they are content to take the said Oath, in as
far as it is consistent with the Word of God, and the Protestant Religion.

6ly, If this were allowed, every man should take the Oath in a particular
Sense, and upon his own Terms, nay and upon contrary Terms, according to men's
contrary Interests. So that it would not be the Parliaments Test, but every
man's own Test. And there should be as many different Oaths, as there are
different Takers.

7ly, Former Statutes having discharged the Leidges to Convocat, or Assemble,
or to enter into Bonds and Leagues without the Kings consent, the Covenanters
did protest, that their taking the Covenant was not against these Acts; because
these Acts could not be mean'd against any Leagues, or Meetings holden for
Preservation of the King, Religion, and Laws. And yet the 4: Act Par: 1: Ch: 2:
does positively declare, that all such Glosses are false and disloyal, and
contrair to the true and genuine meaning of these Acts. And therefore this
Gloss must be so too, because this Gloss is the very same, both in Words, and
Design with those Glosses.

But though this Point be very clear, and undeniable. Yet Mr. Mist (for so I
must call the Author for distinctions sake) makes those three answers:

First, That if the Authority which is to administer the Oath, does accept the
Takers Sense, the Taker is only bound in the Sense he gives, and no other. But
so it is the Council accepted his Sense. And if they had refused, the Earl had
not taken the Oath, nor had his refusal been a Crime.

To which it is replied, That first, If it be a Crime to Interpret the Kings
Laws otherwise than they bear, and to the Effect for which they were designed:
Then certainly it may be debated with very good Reason, that though the Council
had connived at the Earls misinterpreting the Law, neither their negligence,
nor their mistake could have prejudged the King; nor have been in place of a
Remission. For though the Council be a more eminent Judicature than others, yet
they cannot pardon Crimes, when committed. And consequently their allowance,
cannot make that to be no Crime which is a Crime. And we have a particular
Statute in Scotland, That the negligence of the Kings Officers shall not
prejudge Him. Nor is that Statute so Reasonable in any Case as in this. For
since this, and all other Oaths are often times administered by very ignorant
Persons, we should have them a thousand times cheated, and imposed upon, by the
adjecting of such Qualifications as these; if the adjecting of such
Qualifications as these were not punishable. Because he who did Administrat the
Oath, did once allow them. And I put the Case, that if a man who had many
Friends in Council, should have given in an Explication that was
uncontravertedly Treasonable, by saying that he was content to take the Oath,
but that he designed not by it to preclude himself from rising in Arms, when he
thought fit, for the Defense of the Protestant Religion. Would it have been a
sufficient Defense, that the Council did not challenge it in the mean time. And
therefore it this was a Crime in it self, the Councils allowing the
Explication, did not at all in strict Law take off the Crime. But the Judges
(resolved to do him all possible favor) were more merciful then to straiten
the Earl upon this Point. For if the Earl had given in an Explication to the
Council, and told that he subjected that Paper to their Consideration, and that
he would take the Oath upon these Terms, and no otherwise, the Judges would
have Interposed for the Kings Favor, if he had been so ensnared by the
Councils connivance, or mistake. Nor would the King have pursued it. But the
true matter of Fact is, that the said Paper was not given in, till the next day
after the Earl had sworn the Test. And though the Judges allowed him to prove
that he had adjected these Words at his first Swearing of the said Test, and
that they were allowed, yet he failed in the Probation, and so the Judicature
is no way to be blamed.

The second Defense is, that all that can be inferred from the above cited Law
is, that no man should put a Sense upon any Law that should bind another, or be
the public Sense of that Law to all the Subjects, which is most false, for the
Words of the Law are general. That no man shall Interpret the Kings Laws, but
to the Intent and Effect for which they were made. And consequently this must
be Extended to all Cases, where the Law is abused, and the Legislator
disappointed by a misinterpretation. Et ubi lex non distinguit, nec nos. And
there is as great Reason to Punish such as take Oaths under such wrested
Senses, contrair to the Design of the Legislator, as there is for punishing any
Crime. And much more then for punishing such as misinterpret the Law to others
in other Cases. Since if this be allowed every man may by misinterpreting the
Oath as to himself, evacuat all Oaths, and make them ridiculous: And so not
only enjoy Employments contrair to the Legislators Design. But likewise cut
down the greatest Fence of Government, such as Oaths are now esteemed to be by
all Christians.

The third answer made to this Point is, that the Legislator is surest of those
who give Explications of their Oaths; for they deal honestly: And it is
impossible that any man can take an Oath, but he must take it in his own Sense.
But neither is this of any moment; for if this Answer prove any thing, it will
prove that no man can be challenged for adjecting any Quality. And consequently
the Act of Parliament could take effect in no case. And so not only were this
Act useless, but we would want an excellent Remedy for curbing such as resolve
to abuse the Government, in rendering all Oaths that are invented for its
Security, altogether ineffectual. And it is strange to see what absurd things
men will run to, when they are put to Defend an Absurdity. And though every man
must have a Sense when he takes an Oath, it does not therefore at all follow,
that men must be allowed to adject Senses that are inconsistent with the Oath,
or render the Oath useless. And since this is not an Oath, that all the
Subjects must take, it having no other Penalty adjected to the not taking, but
the loss of the Employment, they possess by the Kings mere Favor. Every good
Christian ought either to be satisfied of the design of the Legislator, in the
Oath, or else to abstain from it. And though the Mind of the Legislator might
secure the Taker, yet that can only be when the Sense is previously offered to,
and accepted by him, which cannot at all be said in this Case. And whatever
favor may be pretended, where the Taker of the Oath condescends upon what he
will oblige himself to; yet that cannot be pretended in this Case, where the
Earl does not condescend how far he can obey. And does not specify how far he
thinks it consistent with the Protestant Religion, or with it Self. But only
that he will obey it as far as he can; and as far as it is consistent with it
self and the Protestant Religion. So that the Legislator is still unsecure, and
the Earl himself still the only Judge. And I am desirous to know in what part
of Europe such qualities were ever allowed.

It is also very absurd to contend, that the adjecting of these qualities can
put the Taker in no worse case, then if he had refused the Test. And since that
cannot amount to a Crime, so neither can this. For it is contended, that these
qualities do infer a misinterpreting of the Kings Laws, and a Defaming of the
Parliament. And it is most absurd to think, that such things as these should be
suffered, because they are thrown in into Explications: For else under the
pretense of Explaining Oaths, we should have virulent Libels daily against King
and Palliament. Nor can I see why Equivocations and Mental Reservations should
be condemned if this be allowed, for such as take the Test or any other Oath,
may at the taking of them, Evacuat the Obligation of the Oath, by adjecting
such qualities. And it is all one to the Legislator, whether he be openly or
secretly abas'd. Only this I must observe, that the open Abuse is the greater,
because it adds public Contempt to the designed Cheat: And whereas it is
pretended, that the Magistrate may choose whether he will admit of the quality
or not, which he cannot do in mental Equivacations.

To this it is answered, that that could only hold if the qualities adjected to
the Oath, were first offered by way of Petition to the Magistrate, that it might
be known whether he would allow of them, which was not done in this Case,
wherein without ever applying to the King or Council: The Earl did by his own
Authority Swear in his own Terms.

Though the Council and the Reverend Bishops took pains to satisfy some
scrupulous Ministers (whose Scruples were in Favors of the Government) and got
them the Kings Sense, and told them their own. And which indeed was the genuine
Sense of the Parliament. Yet that did not at all allow the Earl, or any private
man to take it, in a Sense Inconsistent with the Oath. And that too without
previously offering his doubt to the King and Council: And geting their
Approbation as said is. Nor were they allowed to take it in such general Terms,
as did ^^^ecure the Legislator, and admit the Takers to be Judges.

The second Crime fixt'd upon the Earl from this Paper, is, That albeit by the
10: Act Par: 10: Ia: 6: It is Satute, That none of His Majesty's Subjects,
presume nor take upon hand, publicly to Declaim, or privately to Speak, or
Write any purpose of Reproach, or slander of His Majesty's Person, Estate, or
Government; or to Deprave His Laws, and Acts of Parliament; or misconstruct His
Proceedings, whereby any misliking may be moved betwixt his Highness and his
Nobility, and loving Subjects, in time coming, under the pain of death.
Certifying them that do in the contrair, they shall be repute as seditious and
wicked Instruments, enemies to his Highness, and the common well of the Realm;
and the pain of death shall be Execute against them with all rigor, in example
of others. Yet true it is, that the said Earl did endeavor all that in him
lay, to Defame the King, and Parliament, and Test, in so far as he did declare,
That he would give Obedience to it as far as he could; Which imported that the
Parliament had made an Oath which could not be absolutely obeyed. And though
the Parliament never intended to impose contradictory Oaths, yet no body can
Explain it but for himself. Which did clearly import, that though the
Parliament designed not to make an Oath that was contradictory: yet they had
made one that was indeed contradictory. And could not be made Sense without
private Reconciliations, and Explications. And by saying that he took this Oath
only as far as it was consistent with it self and the Protestant Religion; he
did clearly declare to all the world that he thought it in some things
inconsistent with it self, and the Protestant Religion. And since there is
nothing concerns Governors more than to have themselves esteemed by the
people, without which, or numerous Armies, Government cannot subsist. And
therefore our Parliaments, have in place of Armies, consented in the former
excellent Statute, that whosoever shall endeavor to deprave the Laws, or
misconstruct the proceedings of King and Parliament, shall be punished to the
death. And what can be a greater reflection upon King and Parliament, in the
age wherein we live, than to have made Laws which cannot be obeyed, and which
are inconsistent with the Protestant Religion. And there was no man that ever
heard that Paper, except this Author, but did conclude, that upon the matter,
the people would from it entertain those scruples. Nor are these the inferences
of people that live far from the Sun, as the undiscreet Author does object
against this Nation. But men must be as disingenuous, as he, not to confess
that these are most just and natural Inferences. And the Inferences are so much
the stronger, that both this Author, and all such as were enemies to the Test,
did take pains to make the People believe, that the Contrivers of the Test,
were in so far, friends to Popery, and consequently, there was nothing drawn
from this Paper by Inferences, but that which was too publicly owned by all,
who were in the same Circumstances with him who gave it in.

Mr. Mist in answer to this part of the Accusation, does first cry out, that
Crimes must not be inferred by Inferences, and Insinuations, seeing these may be
unjustly drawn against the design of the Party accused. And no man could be
secure, if men could be made Criminal upon Insinuations, and Inferences. And
this Paper having been given only for the Exoneration of his Conscience, it is
not capable of any such Misconstruction, nor ought any such Construction be
made, except where a malicious Design can be proved, in the Person accused.

To which it is answered, That the Parliament having been very jealous of the
honor of the Government, which ought to be Sacred. They discharged in general,
all such Words, and Papers, whereby any mislyking might be moved betwixt the
King and his Subjects. And therefore since the effect was the thing they looked
to, and that it is all one to the Government, what the Authors design was, if
the effect was wrought, and the dislike moved. They therefore ordained the
effect to be punished, without adding, as they do in other cases, that
whosoever shall maliciously, or upon design, Write, or Speak, and it is very
well known, that there are no Papers so dangerous, nor no Satyr so bitter as
these, which are colored with specious pretexts of Conscience, Respect and
Kindness. And upon this account it was, that by the 9: Act Par: 20: Ia: 6: All
Papers that tend to renew the remembrance of the former feeds betwixt the two
Nations, shall be punishable. And what can be more justly called Insinuations,
and Inferences, then Tendencies are. And if the people be abused, and inflamed,
what advantage is it to the Government, that the Author designed it not. And
therefore it is much safer for the Government, as it is sufficiently safe for
every Subject, that men rather secure their own innocence, by not meddling in
public Matters of State, then that they should be encouraged to meddle, upon
hopes, that they could not be reached: since their design could not be proved.
And which design and malice being latent Acts of the mind, can never be
otherwise proved, than by the nature of the Action it self: And therefore, the
dolus malus, or design, needs not in this case be otherwiseprov'd, than from
the Nature, and whole strain of the Paper it self. Which was so fit to Inflame
the people, and abuse the Parliament; that dole and premeditat malice, could
not have done more prejudice. But if it were necessary to clear the Earls
Design, further then from the Paper it self. These Circumstances might be
conjoined with what results from the Paper.

First, That the Earls Father and Family, had owned eminently the Principles
against which this Oath was taken, viz. The Rising in Arms, for Reforming
without the Kings Authority, and did still own the Covenant.

Secondly, The Earl himself had taken the Covenant.

Thirdly, The, Earl had all along opposed the Test in Parliament.

Fourthly, The Earl had positively told his Royal Highness, he would not take
the Test.

Fifthly, Neither the Ministers, nor any other within his Country, upon whom
he could have Influence, had taken the Test.

Sixthly, I am afraid that the kindness showed to the Earl by the Fanatics
during his Trial, and the noise they have made for him since that time: may
clear too convincingly, that he designed in that Paper to own that Interest,
for they never manifest any concern, save for those of their own persuasion.
And where have we ever heard them resent the injustice done to any Cavaleer, or
show more resentment than in this Earls Case? So that this Author does himself
prove that design, which he desiderats, and add to the guilt, which he designs
to lessen.

All which Demonstrat, that he had an aversion for the Test, and so what he did
against it, was done dolo malo; and whoever writes for him, writes against the
Test.

2ly, What juster measures could this Judicature take, then by considering what
the Supreme Judicature of the Nation, formerly did upon the like occasion. But
so it is that the Lord Balmerino being accused for having misinterpreted the
Kings actions, in a Petition given in to himself; in which, against this
Statute, he endeavored to raise jealousies in the Peoples mind, of designs to
bring in Popery, and that by far remoter Inferences than these now insisted on.
He was found guilty, though his Lawyers Pleaded for many days together, that
there could be no Crime, but where there was a Design. And there could be no
design of Defaming the King, in a Paper that was merely a humble Petition
presented to himself, and accepted, and Read once by him, without any show of
displeasure; and wherein nothing could be challenged, but by way of Inserence,
and Implication. As also, this same Earl of Argyle being accused before the
Parliament, in anno 1662: for Leasing making, betwixt King and People, upon the
Acts mentioned in the Earls Indictment. He was found guilty upon that
Expression, viz. That that storm would blow over, and then the King would see
their Tricks. Which Words, he pretended did relate to private Persons formerly
mentioned in the Letter, and not to the Parliament. And that every man should
be allowed to Interpret his own Words, Which Interpretations being refused
then, ought much less to be allowed now, nam semel malus semper praesumitur
malus, in eodem genere malitiae.

In the next place, Mr. Mist endeavors to justify the particular Expressions,
against the Consequences drawn from them, by the Lybel: And as to the first, He
tells us, that in that Expression, I will give Obedience as far as I can. He
did not at all imply, that the Law was unjust, but only that he could notgiv
Obedience to it: which cannot be Treason, since the refusing it absolutely
would not be Treason.

To which it is answered, that the Authors mistake is very gross, for it was
never designed that Treason should be inferred from these Words: but that which
was inferred from it was, that it was a gross Evacuating of an Oath, and a
making it ineffectual, to say that a man should swear by way of quality, that
he will obey as far as he can, and that he declares, this is a part of his
Oath. For there is no man, but will take any Oath with that quality: and
whatever he takes with that quality, is no Oath, nor Obligation at all, that
can bind him in the Legislators Sense: and though we look upon it as no fault,
nor Crime, not to Take the Test; yet to Take the Test so, as not to remain
bound by it; and so as to Teach others how to Evacuat it, and so as to defame
it, as this Expression does, is certainly an abusing, Evacuating, and Swearing
to an Oath in express contradiction to the Act of Parliament, and to the Oath
it self.

And though it be no Reproach, not to Take the Oath at all, for then a man
expresses no Opinion concerning it; yet certainly, that with the subsequent
Expressions being Dispersed among the People, could not but raise in them
Jealousies, and a Contempt of the Government. For having made Oaths which men
could not Take, though they were desirous; and for which afterward he
Insinuats this Reason, viz. That though the Parliament designed not to make
contradictory Oaths, yet he thinks, That no man can Take that Oath, lut in his
own Sense.

And whereas Mr. Mist pretends, that these Words are no Reflection upon the
Parliament, since he does not formally say, that the Parliament has made an
Oath that has contradictions in it; but on the contrair, That the Parliament
did not Design to make Contradictory Oaths.

To this it is answered, That the Words are a very plain Reflection upon the
Parliament; for no man can hear one refuse to take an Oath simply, because,
though the Legislator Designed not to Impose contradictory Oaths; yet de facto,
the Oath is such, as that no man can Take it but in his own Sense, and without
a particular Reconciliation of his own. But the Hearer will certainly conclude,
that the Parliament has been so Weak, Malicious, or Inadvertent, as to have
contrived an Oath, which has in it self Contradictions. For else to what
purpose was it said, That he believed the Parliament designed not to Impose
Contradictory Oaths. And it is an extraordinary affront to a Parliament, to
have made contradictory Oaths, though they did not design it; and to have made
made such an Oath especially; That no man could Take it but in his own Sense:
Whereby the whole Security of the Government is Evacuted. For the Security of
the Government, as well as the Nature of Oaths, requires that an Oath should be
Taken in the Legislators Sense. And can there be a greater moving of the People
to Sedition, than to tell them that no man that Takes that Oath is bound by it
farther, then he pleases, and further then his own Sense leads him. And that
the Legislator is Ridiculous in having made Contradictory Oaths, which without
Debating whether it be true or false, is a Reflection upon the State; and is
unlawful for any private Subject. And if any such thing were suffered upon
pretense that it were possible, or true. It should be lawful for every private
man to accuse the Government.

As to these Words, I Take it in so far as it is Consistent with it Self, and
the protestant Religion. Does so far openly import; That in some things it is
Inconsistent with it Self, and the Protestant Religion; that whosoever would
persuade us to the contrary, must think us Fools and Idiots. And I almost
charge my Self with Folly, for taking pains to clear this. Since, why should
the Earl have Scrupled, to Take this Oath simply, and have thought it necessary
to adject, that, He Took it only in so far as it was Consistent with it Self,
and the Protestant Religion. If he had not thought it Inconsistent: and either
he must say, he thought it Consistent, or not. If he thought it Consistent, why
did he not Take it simply: and if he thought it not Consistent, then he owns
that He thought the Parliament made an Oath which was Inconsistent with it
Self, and the Protestant Religion. And this was to Inflame the People, who are
so reasonably jealous of any thing that is Inconsistent with the Protestant
Religion. Beside that it is a great Reflection upon their Prudence, and
Conduct. And so every Expression in this Paper, does clear up one another: and
does clear unanswerably, to all the World, that this Paper is a Defaming of the
Parliament, and a depraving of its Laws, and a moving of the People to a
Dislike of it. Which are the Words of the above cited Statute. And what can be
a greater Depraving of a Law, then to make it pravam legem, a pernicious Law.
And what can be more pernicious, then that Law which is Inconsistent with the
Protestant Religion? and which Ties men to Swear things which are
Contradictory? and having affirmed all this upon Oath, and having dispersed
these his Explications amongst the People, he did thereby show a firm, and
passionat Design, to make the People believe all these ill things of the
Parliament. For no man uses to Swear any thing to another, without a great
Design to have him believe it. Nor does any man disperse Papers amongst the
People, for the Exoneration of his private Conscience. Nor could he have any
Design in that, save to Poison them with those Jealousies against the Test, to
which he himself had shown such an aversion in the whole Tract of the affair.

I cannot but smyle at Mr. Mists Critical Learning, when he contends that the
'Earles Paper does only bear, that the Earl did Take the Oath in so far as it
was Consistent with it Self, and the Protestant Religion. But did not adject
the Word Only, as the Libel does. For he who Takes it in so far as it is
Consistent, does Take it only in so far. And certainly the Author must confess,
that either he Designed to Take it further then it was Consistent with the
Protestant Religion: or, as far only as it was Consistent with the Protestant
Religion, there being no midst betwixt these two: and so our Critic may choose
any of the two he pleases.

The third Crime, is, Treason, which is Inferred from these Words; I do declare
I mean not to b^^d up my self in my station, and in a lawful way, to wish, and
endeavor any alteration, I think to the advantage of Church, and State. No^
Repugnant to the Proestant Religion, and my (...) this I understand as a part
of my Oath. Which Treason may be founded upon many Reasons; yet to convince any
Reader, in a plain, familiar, and unanswerable way; I lay down for a Position
which I hope no man will deny; that all Nations have made it Treason, for any
private man to assume, or reserve to himself, the power of Reforming Church and
State. For that is the highest Point of Government. Which how soon any private
man arrogats to himself, he becomes presently Governor of that Kingdom, and
Superior both in Church and State, therein. And therefore by the 1: Act 2:
Sess: Par: 1: Chapter 2: and 1: Act 2: Par: Ch: 2: The power of Reforming is
declared His Majesty's sole Prerogative: and all the Civilians agree with us in
this. Inter caeteras sollicitudines (verba sunt Theodosi) and Valentiniani in
Novel: de Iudaeis sam: haer: and page:) quas amor publicus pervigili cogitatione
nobis indixit, praecipuam Majestatis curam esse perspicimus, veram religionis
indaginem. Cujus si cultum tenere potuerimus, iter prosperitatis humanis
aperiemos inceptis. vid. Ziegler: de jur: Majest. cap: 13: number: 1: Arnis: de
jur: Majest: cap: 6: number: 15: And which is most reasonable, for whoever
pretends to have power of Reforming, must be greater then he who is Reformed.
And we have found by woeful Experience, that such as have endeavored to Reform,
have withdrawn themselves from the subjection of the Supreme Power, under which
they lived. And except they resolve to force the Supreme Power as to this
Point, there is no necessity of reserving a Power to themselves.

From all which, I form this Argument; First, It is Treason to any man to
reserve to himself the power of Reforming Church or State, that being the
Privilege and Prerogative of the Prince, both by the Common Law, and the
above cited Statute: But so it is the Earl does reserve to himself, in this
Explication, a power of Reforming. And therefore he commits Treason.

The first Proposition is founded upon the Nature of the Monarchy, and the
Reasons and Citations abovementioned.

The second Proposition is likewise very clear, because he who reserves to
himself a Power to make any alteration, reserves a Power to make all
Alterations in Church and State. And consequently reserves a Power to Reform,
in Matters of the greatest Importance. For in all Languages, Any, comprehends
All. As for Instance, Does not he who says he will do any thing for the King, say
as much, as if he said, I will do all things for him. Or does not he, who
confesses he believes any thing that is in the Scripture, Imply that he
believes all things that are in the Scripture. And consequently, that
Proposition of the Earls, viz. I intend not to bind up my self from
endeavoring any alteration, I think to the Advantage of Church and State.
Resolves in, and is equivalent to this Proposition. I intend not to bind my
self up from making all alterations, that I shall think to the advantage of
Church or State. And if that be not Treason, nothing can be Treason.

The second Argument is, That all Lawyers are clear, that it is Treason to
attempt against the Security of the Government, l 2. ff. ad l. Iul. Majest. But
so it is, that he who reserves to himself a Power to Reform; attempts against
the Security of the State. Which is clear by all the Civilians, Amongst whom I
shall only cite Arniseus, ad securitatem Majestatis and Reipublicae quietem
nihil excogitari potest efficacius quam si summa religionis inspectio Majestati
reservetur.

My third Argument in Fortification of the Statutes, formerly insisted on at
the Debate. And for farther clearing the extent of that Alleadgance, that is
required by the common Law, is founded upon Act 2. Ses. 2. Par. 1. Chapter 1. The
very words whereof are, Therefore the Kings Majesty and Estates of Parliament,
Declare that these Positions, That it is lawful to Subjects, upon pretense of
Reformation, or other pretense whatsoever, to enter into Leagues or Covenants,
or to take up Arms against the King, or that it is lawful to Subjects,
pretending his Majesty's Authority, to take up Arms against his Person, or
these Commissiona'ed by him: Or to suspend him from the Exercise of His Royal
Government: Or to put limitations on their due Obedience, and Alleadgance, are
Rebellions and Treasonable.

In which Words it is observable, that it is not the doing of these Deeds, but
the very asserting of these Positions, that it is Treason.

2ly, That no pretense or caution adjected to these Positions, can defend them
from being Treasonable.

3ly, That the Parliament thought it not sufficient to acquiesce in the special
Enumeration; But so Jealous were they of such Tricks, that they subjoyn this
general Clause, That it shall be Treason to put Limitations, on their due
obedience, and alleadgance.

From which Words, I infer most clearly, that for a Subject, to declare he is
not Tied up, To wish or endeavor any alteration, is Treason, whatever pretense
it be done upon. For any alteration, comprehends all alterations: and what man
of common Sense, or Ingenuity can deny, but this is a putting Limitations upon
his Obedience, and Alleadgance, which is here declared Treason. For what is a
greater Limitation, than to reserve to himself to be Judge how far he is Tied?
And what Expression or Limitation can be Treason by this general Clause, if
this be not? Or of what use can this general Clause be, if it secure not
against such Limitations as this? Nor do I think this Limitation, wherein the
Earl still reserves to himself to be Judge, a greater Security to the King, or
Kingdom, than if a man should tell me, that he would lock my Money in a secure
place, but would keep the Key of it himself, In which case. I am sure, he, and
not I, were Master of that ney. 2ly, It being then Treason for any man to
reserve to himself the Power of making such alterations as he shall think for
the advantage of Church and State, viz. not repugnant to my Loyalty, and the
Protestant Religion. The adjecting these Cautions cannot hinder this Paper to
be Criminal; else,

1. The Covenant had not been Criminal, for the very Words of this Caution are
in Covenant; The very Words of the Covenant being, Art. 1. That we shall
endeavor in our several Places and Callings, the Preservation of the reformed
Religion. And, Art. 3. We shall with the same sincerity, reality, and
constancy, endeavor to preserve and Defend the Kings Majesty's Person; and
Authority: In the Preservation, and Defense of the true Protestant Religion.
That the world may bear witness with our Consciences, of our Loyalty, and that
we have no Thoughts, nor Intentions to diminish His Majesty's just Power, or
greatness. Here are the very same Expressions, accompanied with many more, in
favors of the King.

2ly, That cannot be a sufficient Caution against Treason, which never hindered
any man to commit Treason; but so it is, that notwithstanding of these Words,
all the Covenanters owned that they might lawfully rise in Arms, hold
Parliaments, impose Taxes, and Oaths, enter into Leagues with foreign Princes,
Hang and Head for Serving the King, etc. Ergo, These Words are not a sufficient
Caution, when subjoined as a Caution to the power of Reforming. Which is
uncontraverted Treason in its self. And did the great Protestations of Loyalty
annexed to the Lord Balmerino's Petition, defend it from being condemned.

3ly, Do we not see daily, that these who Rebelled in anno 1666: and 1679: did
openly own, That they loved the King as well as their Accusers did. But when he
was in opposition to Religion, it was lawful to rise in Arms against Him. So
little Security has the King in flowrishing Professions, when the Prosessors are
to be Judges.

4ly, The adjecting of this Protestation, is called by Lawyers, protestatio
contraria facto. Which kind of Protestation, all Lawyers under Heaven reject,
as inconsistent with the thing, to which they are adjected. And thus the League
of France, was Treason, though they did assert under the deepest Protestations,
the sincerest Loyalty.

5ly, By the foresaid 4. Act Par. 1. Chapter 2d. All Glosses put upon the Laws of
this Nation, in the late Rebellious Parliaments, to the prejudice of their
Alleadgance, are declared to be false, and disloyal; and contrary to the true,
and genuine meaning of these Acts. And particularly that Gloss, or Explanation,
that what they did, was for the Preservation of Religion. Which is the very
Explanation put by the Earl upon this Oath. And from which it clearly follows
by a demonstrative consequence, that Explanations and Glosses put upon Oaths,
and Acts of Parliament, contrary to the meaning of the Acts themselves, are not
to be respected. And being in Law holden and repute, as unlawful, they are so
far from defending the Contraveeners, that they are themselves looked upon as
new Crimes.

From all which, it clearly follows, that the Earl having reserved to himself
in this Explanation, a power to endeavor what he should think to the advantage
of Church and State. He did thereby commit Treason, and that this Treason is
not taken off by the Cautions adjected, viz. The not Repugnancy to the
Protestant Religion, and his own Loyalty.

Whereas it is pretended; First, That Treason requires a special Law from,
which it ought to be inferred, I deny this Position, for our Lybels are oftimes
found Relevant on the common Law, and the Laws and Customs of Nations, and the
nature of the Monarchy.

There was Treason before there was Law, for how soon Kings were Elected, it
was Treason to rise in Arms against them, or to Murder or Betray them; and many
of our Laws being but lately made, declare often times what has been Treason, not
for necessity, but for the better Information of the Leidges. And though we
have Laws declaring it Treason, to seek Benefices at Rome; yet we have none
declaring it Treason to assume the Title, or Power of the King in general, that
being inherent in the nature of the Monarchy it self, Treason is the Fense of
the Government, as Murder is of private men's Lives; and to rise in Arms was
Treason before the Statute, King Ia. 1. Nor have we yet any clear Statute
against Murder: and if special Statutes were requisite in every case of Treason,
the greatest Treason should often escape unpunished. For Law thought it
unnecessary to provide against these, and every age produces new kinds of
Treasonable Extravagancies; and Traitors would easily elude and cheat the
express Words of a Statue, if that were all that were necessary. But who can
deny that the Justices condemned a man justly for Treason, for saying, when he
was asked if the King was a Tyrant: let his Coronation Oath, and his Actions,
and particularly his usurping over the Church of Christ be compared: and that
will be soon known. And yet here was no explicit assertion; but yet what all
men easily understood, and which reproacht, and misrepresented the King as
much, as any open Expression: and there was no Statute condemning that
Expression, expressly. nor can there be a Law for every Expression: But yet the
Earls Treason is founded upon the express Statute abovementioned.

And whereas it is pretended, 2ly, That the Earl might have as a Privy
Counselor, proposed any thing to the King: and so a Reservation was necessar
upon that account.

To this it may be easily answered, that no Oath does hinder a man from doing
what is Lawful; and so there needed be no Reservation nor Exception upon that,
or the like Consideration. For an Exception must be of some thing that could
oppose the Rule. But so it is the Oath which is the Rule in that Case, did not
exclude any lawful Endeavors, at the desire, or command of the Prince: and so
there needed no Exception as to these. But the former argument still Recurs,
viz. He that will not bind himself up, as to any thing, reserves a power as to
all things, or at least it must be Interpret of unlawful things: For lawful
things need no exception. And if this were sufficient, then the Parliament did
unjustly, in declaring that it is Treason, to put limitations on our
alleadgance: and that notwithstanding of any pretense whatsoever. Nor could any
man commit Treason, if that were allowed; for he himself would be still Judge.

And whereas it is pretended, 3ly, That he disclaims the Covenant, and rising
in Arms expressly in this Oath; and so he could not reserve any thing, as to
these.

It is answered, that this were undeniable, if he took the Oath simply; but
having taken the Oath only, In so far as it is consistent with it Self, and the
Protestant Religion. This Oath does not tie him, if he think the Protestant
Religion shall require rising in Arms. And having taken the Covenant, if he
still thinks the Covenant binds him, he renunces it not by his Oath: For this
Oath ties him only as far as he can; that is to say as far as he is free: and
no man is free who thinks himself bound. And taking it only, as far as it is
consistent with it self, God only, and the Earl knows how far that is; for he
has not told us, how far it is consistent with it self; and very probably, such
as have taken the Covenant, think not that Oath consistent with the Protestant
Religion, in so far as it binds us not to take up Arms, if the Protestant
Religion be in danger: and the Antitesters Papers, Printed by Mr. Mist, tell us
plainly, that it is not consistent with it self, in so far as we swear to own
the Successor, though differing in Religion from us. And yet we swear to the
preservation of the Laws, of which the Coronation Oath is one. But whatever
might have been said in defense of such Limitations, before we saw what
dreadful effects they had produced, both in the last age, and this. And that
Parliaments had so severely condemned them as Treason. It is the duty of Judges
to be severe to such as use them, and they have only themselves to blame, who
split on a Rock, when they see a Beacon set up to them. And it is much safer
for the Commonwealth, that such Papers be punished, then that it should be in
danger by such Reservations, as leave every man Judge how far he is obliged to
Obey. And as there is great danger to the State on the one hand, if it pass
unpunished. So there is none on the other, seeing men may be secure in
abstaining from such Expressions, and Papers. And there was never any so
unnecessary as this was. And might not Strangers, and our own Posterity, think
all the miseries that should fall on us by Rebellions, and Civil Wars, very
just punishments of our senseless Security, if after we had not only seen, but
felt the mischief of such Glosses. We stood still unconcernedly, as men seeing
their own House set on fire, by the same hands which had helped to burn it
formerly.

If any by Ignorance, or Error, stumble into a Legal; tho undesign'd Crime. The
Law allows not Judges, by an insolent pity to justify the Guilt, but suffers
the King by a Judicious Clemency, to mitigat, or remit the Punishment. In which
the Subjects under Monarchy, are much happier than these of a Commonwealth,
where, in many cases the Law must be cruel, or Judges must be Arbitrary. This
is that sure City of Refuge, into which, no man who flees, perishes. And if
the Earl of Argile, had come in Will during the Debate, as use is. I am sure he
had been Securer there, than by his Defenses.

But why should I admire, that this Author, and those of his Principles, do not
see that this Paper is Treason. Since I dare say, they will not acknowledge
that it is Treason to oppose the Succession, and to say that it can be altered
by a Parliament: and yet our Parliament unanimously thought that to be Treason.
And in the last age, they thought it not Treason, but duty to rise in Arms
against the King, and to Call Parliaments without him. Though all the World
abhorred us for it. So that the fault is not in our Parliaments, and Judges;
but in the depraved Sense, and debauched Intellectuals of such, as have (by a
long Custom of hating Authority) bred in themselves also, a hatred of every
Person, and thing that can maintain it.

Since then GOD Almighty amongst the other Miracles which he has wrought for
his Darling, as well as Representative CHARLES THE MERCIFUL, begins to open the
Eyes of the Blind, and to make some who were Crooked Walk Straight: Let us who
Serve this gracious Monarch, Reason whilst His Enemies Rail; and be Just,
whilst they are Extravagant: but withal, let us be ashamed, that they dare do
more for Humor and Errors, than we for Duty and Law; and we may expect amongst
other Rewards, which the Rabble has not to bestow; that we will get also that
Applause which is alwise the Slave of Victory; and which of late seemed to Fan
them so pleasantly, merely because they were like to prevail. And for which,
too many of late sacrificed their Honor, and Loyalty. Without remembering that
tho just Applause, is an Elogie Written by the Hand of Virtue, and a Monument
Built of solid Merit. Yet that Applause which is unjust, is only a sweet
Poison, a plausible Cheat, and the Dream of one who is Drunk.

FINIS.

