A COMPLETE HISTORY Of the LATE REVOLUTION, FROM The first Rise of it to this
present Time.

In Three Parts.

SHOWING
I. The Growth of Popery in England, under the Reign of the late King CHARLES;
By his Connivence, French Intrigues, etc. II. Our Imminent Ruin in his Popish
Successor King JAMES his Reign; By his Invading of our Laws, Religion, and
Liberties. With a Particular and Impartial Narrative of the fictitious Great
Belly. III. Our Wonderful and Happy Deliverance, by the PRINCE of ORANGE, Our
present King's famous Expedition over into England. With an Account of the late
King James's Desertion and Abdication, of Their Majesty's happy Succession to
the Throne of Great Britain, and of Their prosperous Reign hitherto, by
Defeating the Jacobites dark Plots in England, by Suppressing their open
Rebellion in Scotland, and by the Total Reduction of Ireland.
To Which is Added A Postscript, by way of Seasonable Advice to the Jacobite
Party.

LONDON, Printed for Samuel Clement at the Lute in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1691.

THE HISTORY Of the LATE REVOLUTION.
PART I. Showing the Growth of Popery in England, under the Reign of the late
King Charles.
TO demonstrate the Growth of Popery in this Kingdom, as the first Occasion of
all our late Distractions, I shall begin at the Head, and come up to the
Original Cause.

All the World knows, that the Ruin of the Protestants, and the Inslaving all
Europe, have been the two grand Designs of the Reign of Lewis XIV; the first
influenced by an infused blind Zeal, and the last being the product of his own
insatiable and boundless Ambition. To the first he was prompted by those
Spiritual Engineers, the Jesuits, who ever made it their business to set the
World in a Combustion. And the last he attempted, to please his own Humor, and
gratify his excessive Pride.

The Holy Cabal had resolved upon the Extirpation of the Protestant Heresy.
And such has been the effect of their Enchanting Eloquence, and reputed Skill
in Politics, that they are in a manner become Companions for Princes and
Crowned Heads of the Roman Communion.

In point of Conscience they are their usual Directors, and their Decisions are
to them as Laws and Oracles. It Is therefore no wonder that the French King,
being inspirited by these Men, should follow their Directions. Whose Confessors
being of that Order always indulged him in his Criminal Courses, with
Assurances of Salvation, if he did but apply himself with Zeal and Fervency to
so meritorious a Work as the Extinguishing the Protestant Heresy. This
forsooth would make him the Favorite of Heaven, and an Immortal Prince on
Earth.

Infatuated with these Delusions he struck in with the Society, subscribed to
their Dictates, and resolved upon their Project. In short, he disposed all
things to purchase Heaven with a Hellish Zeal, and to improve his Fame upon
Earth with the infamous Character of a Tyrant and Persecutor. His Protestant
Subjects, to whom he owed his Elevation on the Throne, he undermined during
several years, and by degrees weakened their Party, till he thought fit at last
to pull off the Mask, and to fall foul upon them.

Abroad he had his Agents to inspire other Princes with the same Unchristian
Zeal, and put them upon the same Methods of Cruelty, for promoting of a
Religion whose Principles chiefly tend to make the Clergy Great and the Laity
Slaves. Hungary, Bohemia, Poland, and Piemont not long since, have felt the
fury of this Spirit of Persecution. And England by his means was like, but few
years ago, to feel the same Calamity; so near it was to fall a Sacrifice to the
ambitious Designs of Popery, and with its fall to carry the Ruin of all the
Protestant Interest in Europe.

That the Design was laid in the Reign of King Charles is apparent by the
Growth of Popery here, whilst he swayed the Scepter. And for this we may thank
our unhappy Civil Wars in the Reign of King Charles I. when that good King
being put to death by a prevailing Party, and the Royal Family dispersed
thereupon into Popish Countries, the Princes of the Royal Blood were easily
poisoned with Popish Insinuations, that the only Way for their Restoration,
and to Reign Arbitrarily, was to embrace, or at least to favor the Roman
Religion.

Though I am not fully satisfied, that King Charles II. was ever actually*
Reconciled to the Roman Church, (whatever has been reported to the contrary)
but rather that he was too clear-sighted to think well of her Principles; yet
it is plain, by the whole Series of his Reign, that he made his Government as
easy and favorable to the Roman Party as his Circumstances would allow, and
that he gave 'em all possible Encouragement. But, as he was a Prince naturally
inclined to Clemency, and abhorrent from Cruelty; so this Proceeding of his was
rather looked upon as an Effect of his good Nature, than of any Design upon the
Protestant Interest of these Kingdoms. If we reflect upon the Course of his
Life during his Reign, it seems his Aim was to please all Parties, that he
might enjoy himself, and Reign in Quietness. But still he kept to an outward
Profession of the Reformed Religion, as by Law established, and from time to
time soothed up his Parliaments with solemn Protestations of his faithfulness
to their Religion and Liberties.

Such was the Posture of Affairs in his Reign, that though he would not himself
bring in Popery downright, yet he made the way smooth for it. For, whilst he
minded his Amors more than the Government, the Thieves stole in, and grew upon
us. Who being countenanced by his Brother the Duke of York, a Prince more
daring and gone over to the Roman Church, began now to build all their Hopes
upon him.

The King having no Issue by the Queen, and in process of time no hopes of any
by her, the Duke remained the Heir apparent, and was consequently looked upon as
the Rising Sun. On whom His Majesty, too much given to Ease and Pleasure,
disburdened himself of the active and troublesome part of the Government, which
he left in a great measure to his Care. Thus his R. H. had a fair Opportunity
to gratify the Roman Party, and improve their Interest here, whilst the King
connived at i^. And, though ^e did not openly profess himself a Papist, his
forsaking at last the Church of England wherein he was bred and born, and
espousing so much as he did the Popish Interest, sufficiently evidenced his
being of that Communion.

The King being a Prince bigoted to no Religion, but linked to the French
Interest, gave him a great Latitude. And this was so far improved by the French
King, that in the Interview which happened at Dover Anno 1670 between our King,
his Brother, and their Sister the Duchess of Orleans, a Treaty was there
managed by the Duchess between both Kings, whereby the French King did promise
King Charles to Subject his Parliament to him, and to Establish the Roman
Religion in his Kingdom. In order to which the Hollanders must first be brought
down, and both Kings join in Arms to make them incapable of being any longer a
Support or Refuge for Protestants. Delenda est Carthago.

In short, Anno 72, the Storm broke out upon Holland, that Nest of Heretics.
And in two Campaigns we saw that Potent State, at that time our only Rival upon
the Ocean, brought by the French King's Land Forces to the last Extremity;
whilst we harassed them at Sea, and fought them, but without any great
Advantage on our side. We had indeed a Frenchy Squadron in conjunction with our
Fleet, but their business (it seems) was not to fight. All their Care was to be
Spectators of our Fights at a convenient distance, and to see if the English
did their Duty well. In the mean time they learnt the Art of our Sea Fights,
and had the satisfaction to see these two Protestant Nations thus weaken one
another, which was the French King's chief Aim.

This Conduct of the French at Sea, with the amazing Progress of their Arms by
Land, happened to open our Eyes. For till then we were possessed of the Justice
of the War on our side, considering the many Provocations of the States, as
they were mustered in the King's Declaration. We could not imagine, that King
Charles had any other Design than to curb their Pride, and lessen their Power
at Sea, for the benefit of our Trade and Navigation; in order to which a little
help, though from France, was not thought amiss. The Dover-Treaty lay then under
the Rose, and we knew not what Snake lay in the Grass.

The King, wanting Money to prosecute the War, convened his Parliament. The
Danger we were in by the apparent Ruin of a Neighboring State of the same
Religion with us, and now become (with our help) a Prey to the French, came
soon under Debate. The Parliament voted a Peace with the States. And the King,
finding no Money was to be had without it, yielded to their Desire, and made a
separate Peace. This startled King Lewis; who from this very time concluded,
that King Charles was not to be relied on for the execution of that grand
Religious Design he had been so long big withal. And, to be even with him for
his Desertion in this War, he caused not long after the Dover Treaty to be
published with his Privilege, by the Abbot Primi, in his History of the War
with Holland; whereby he chiefly designed to make the King odious to his People.

The Duke of York upon this was looked upon as the fitter Person for the
Project in hand, who wanting neither Zeal nor Ambition, was a Vessel altogether
prepared and molded for his purpose. Whereas King Charles was like the Church
of Laodicea, neither Cold nor Hot, and therefore to be spued out.

The Duchess of Orleans, or rather the French King by her means, had sent to
King Charles a French Curtain Solicitor, but a true Member of the Holy Church,
as a Pledge (or Memorandum) of the Dover Treaty. Who, for her close and
faithful Commerce with the King, was made D. of P.

The same Care he took of his R. H. to keep him in a right Cue, and steady to
his Principles; but by way of Marriage. So that he was both Procurer, and
Match-maker. The Match was Mary the late Duke of Modena's Daughter, an Italian
Princess of no great Fortune, but of an Ancient Family, and (which was most to
the purpose) a Princess entirely devoted to the present Interest.

The Duke had been three Years and a half a Widower. And, as the Case stood,
there was a Necessity for his R. H. to venture on a second Match, that the
Succession to the Crown might be Intailed either by Nature or Art to an Heir
Male. The Lady Mary and the Lady Ann, his two Daughters by Ann his first Wife,
were bred and born Protestants, and such were not for the present Turn.

King Charles, who was sensible how unacceptable this Match was to his People,
and fearing some ill Consequences of it upon himself, resolved however to
dispose of his Royal Nieces, and to Marry them to Protestant Princes, to allay
the Jealousies and Fears from this New Match. Which indeed were something the
less, for the then common Opinion, That His Royal Highness was too much
Frenchifi'd to get any durable I^ue. To the Lady Mary was given in Marriage to
the Prince of Orange, Anno 1677; and the Lady Ann to Prince George of Denmark,
in the Year 1683.

But, few days after the Lady MARY was married to the Prince of ORANGE, the
Duchess of YORK was brought to bed of a Son, created Duke of Cambridge; who
dying in four or five days, the Popish Faction had but a short Joy of it.

In the mean time his R. H. being the next Heir to the Crown, and the Papists
resolved not to lose this Opportunity, turned every Stone to make their Party
good, by Plotting and Conspiring even with Authority against the Government.
The KING was healthful, and of a strong constitution, but wanted zeal or
boldness to secure their Interest. The DUKE was zealous and bold, but wanted a
sound Body. In short, according to all humane probability, the KING by the
strength of Nature was the most likely to live.

These Considerations were like enough to give Birth to that famous Conspiracy,
which upon its breaking out made so great a Noise in the World, I mean the
Popish Plot. And, tho I cannot believe it in all its Branches, as made out by
Dr. Oats, yet in the main it is more than probable, that there was a Plot on
foot against the Government.

Mr. Coleman, the Dukes Secretary's, intercepted Letters, are a sufficient
Proof of this; who kept, as appears by those Letters, a close Correspondence
with Father La Chaise (the French King's Confessor) for the Extirpating the
Protestant Religion in these Kingdoms, under the name of the Northern Heresy.
That to Extirpate imports a violent Act, is a thing undeniable. So that the
Roman Religion was not to come in by fair means, or by way of persuasion, but
by force and violence. And it is like a great deal more of that wicked Design
had appeared, if amongst Coleman's latest Letters for two years and a half that
were brought to White Hall, many had not been there suppressed, and kept from the
sight of the Parliament. Yet, upon his Trial, he openly avowed the Design of
Subverting the Protestant Religion, wherein he owned himself a subordinate
Minister.

This Plot kept for a while the Papists under Hatches, and forced the Duke
himself (upon the King's Command) to withdraw for some time out of the Kingdom;
so that he went first to Flanders, and afterward to Scotland. Mean while the
House of Commons, who looked upon him as the great Abettor and Supporter of the
Popish Interest, went so far as to attempt his Exclusion from the Crown* But,
as vigorously as it was carried on in the House of Commons, it was quashed in
the House of Lords by the Church of England Party, which stood stiffly for the
Succession.

The Tide now began to turn, and the Popish Party to have a fair Prospect. The
Duke was called home; and His Majesty disbanded Parliament after Parliament, in
hopes to get a healing one. But, failing thereof, he published a plausible
Declaration touching the Causes that moved him to Dissolve the two last
Parliaments. Which, being read in all Churches and Chapels, did very much
strengthen the Court Party, and turned the Hearts of many People against the
late Proceedings of the House of Commons, as having over-short the Mark.

Which House, consisting most of Dissenters, gave a Jealousy to the House of
Lords, and indeed to all the Church-Party, that under color of rooting out
Popery, they designed nothing less than the Ruin of the Church, and so to kill
two Birds with one Stone. The Dissenters on the other side, seeing the Church
Party so stiff for the Dukes Right to the Succession, tho upon the Grounds of
Justice and Equity, failed not to clamor against them as Abettors of Popery,
and Papists in Mascarade. In short, the Fewd grew so great between both
Parties, row distinguished by the Nicknames of TORIES and WHIGS, that, had not
his Majesty (who now bestirred himself in these difficult Times) prevented it
by his great Care and Wisdem, it had certainly broke out into a Flame.

In the mean time these unhappy Differences gave fair play to the Papists, who
know best how to fish in troubled Waters. The Popish Plot grew now out of date,
and lost much of its Credit. Then up starts another, called the Presbyterian
Plot, which proved fatal to several Persons of Quality, and others of a lower
Rank. The King, now exasperated in the highest degree against the Dissenting
Party, ordered the Penal Laws to be put in execution, which made the Breach so
much the wider betwixt Them and the Church Party. And, whilst the poor
Dissenters lay under the lash, an officious sort of Church of England Ministers
made it their business to preach the stupid Doctrine of Non-Resistance, with as
much Zeal and Fervency as if there had been no Salvation without it. Which some
were hired for with a Promise of Church-Preferment, whilst others did it merely
to show their Parts; but all wonderfully to the purpose of the Roman Catholic
Party, and to help forward the Designs of the next Reign. The City of London,
which had strongly appeared against the Dukes Interest, was now called to an
Account, and a Writ of Quo Warranto (a dreadful piece of Latin, before which no
Reason could stand) issued out against them, to take away their Charter; which
was accordingly done. Then other Corporations were prevailed upon fairly to
surrender their Charters, in expectation of new ones, whereby all their
Magistrates and Officers were dependant upon the King's Will. And, by the
Duke's Interest, many false Protestants were got into Places of Trust, who upon
the push would be ready to join with the Papists, and lend them their helping
hands.

Thus all Things were finely prepared against his Majesty's Exit, to make room
for his Brother. And, which is observable, at the very time when the King was
resolved to sift out some Miscarriages, and much inclined to call a new
Parliament, an odd kind of Fit seized upon him, which in four days time
bereaved him of his Life and Crown.

Thus died King Charles, a Prince who was neither a sound Papist, nor a zealous
Protestant. Admired for his great Sagacity, beloved for his Clemency, and the
fittest Prince in the World to Reign, had not his over-Indulgence to Ease and
Pleasures made him averse from Business. In which unhappy Temper he was too
much followed by his Subjects of both Sexes.

THE HISTORY Of the LATE REVOLUTION.
PART II. Showing Our Imminent Ruin in the Reign of the late King James; With
an Account of the supposed Great Belly.
KING Charles being dead (the Lord knows how) some wept upon his Tomb for Joy,
but most for Sorrow. The Popish Party were the most concerned in the first, and
the Protestants (whatever he was) in the last. We were but threatened before
with the Danger of a Popish Succession, now we had it. The Papists had a
blessed (but doubtful) prospect of it, and now they were in possession.

To Secure which, the Blood of the deceased King was hardly chilled in his
Veins, when his next Successor James Duke of York was Proclaimed King at
White Hall and in the City, in great haste, that no Man might pretend
Ignorance. So that King Charles was scarce gone off the Stage, when his
Brother, to play the last Act, enters, and ascends the Throne.

No Prince more courteous, more obliging, or more promising at first, than he
was to his new Subjects, but particularly to the Church of England Party. He
came in like a Lamb, but reigned like a Lion, and followed in all things the
Steps of King Lewis. Not but that he had innate Virtues of his own, but none
that could stand proof against the precipitate Suggestions of the Roman Clergy,
and the irresistible Influence of those hot-brained Statesmen the Jesuits.

So great was the Opinion of his Justice and Valor, when Duke of York, that
many Protestants durst rely upon his Justice, and most promised themselves
great Matters from his Valor. Especially when, upon his Accession to the
Crown, he declared to his Council, that he would protect and favor the Church
of England, for her unshaken Loyalty; and to his Parliament, that he would
carry the Glory of England beyond all his Predecessors.

Upon these Assurances he allayed for some time the Fears of his Protestant
Subjects, but especially the Church of England; which thereupon Addressed him
from all Parts of the Kingdom, as their Tutelar Angel. In short, so great on a
sudden were the Hopes of this King, that Edward III, and Henry V. the most
glorious Monarchs of England, were like upon his Account to be hissed out of
our English Chronicles.

But it was not long before he pulled off the Mask. And first to gratify the
Roman Catholic Party, he declared himself of their Communion, and made open
Profession of it. Which some Protestants looked upon as a good Omen, and the
product of a generous Soul above Dissimulation; whilst others more
clear-sighted looked upon it as an effect of a wilful Nature, that thought it
needless to Dissemble, now the Power was in his own hands.

To Establish his Religion here was, I confess, a difficult Task, considering
how small the Popish Party was, the Protestants then (by the best Computation)
being reckoned 200 to one. But the Advantage of a Crown is a great Bait, and
has a mighty Influence. The Hopes of worldly Preferment, and the Dread of
Majesty, would in all probability draw in a great Party. Besides what was
expected, by way of Persuasion, from the Industry and Activity of Popish
Emissaries. Nor do I doubt, but the King promised himself great Matters from
the Church of England Party, which having ventured so much to secure his
Succession, would not (as he thought) recoil, and leave him now in the lurch,
who so lately had made unto them new Protestations of his particular Favor and
Protection. The Dissenters were then under the lash of the Law, and not without
some apprehension of the French. Thus, with this prospect of Things, the King
fell presently to work, by feeling first underhand the Pulse of Men in Credit
and Authority amongst his Protestant Subjects.

But, whilst he was taken up with these gentle Motions, a Storm was raised all
of a sudden in Scotland, by the late Earl of Argile; and at the same time
another in the West of England, by the late Duke of Monmouth. Who both appeared
in Arms with their Parties in their several Stations; but so unsuccessfully,
that, after the loss of many Men's Lives in the Field, they lost their own upon
the Scaffold. These two Rebellions, which startled so much the Popish Party,
till they saw the Issue of it, gave them a great Advantage, and raised their
Expectations of Success to an Infallibility. The King had now a great Army on
foot. And tho the Work was done for which the same was raised, yet he would
not part with it; but kept it still on foot, contrary to Law, for his further
Designs, and to keep the Nation in aw.

For the Preservation of our Laws, Religion, and Liberties, it was provided by
the Wisdom of our Parliaments, upon the Growth of Popery in the late King's
Reign, That all Persons appointed to bear any Office in Church or State should
declare themselves to be not Papists, but Protestants, by taking the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy, and the Test, and receive thereupon the Sacrament
according to the Church of England. But, upon the Raising of the foresaid Army,
the King was pleased to protect against those Laws many Popish Officers that
served in the Army, without taking the Oaths. And in his Speech to both Houses
of Parliament, on the 9th of November. 1685, he told the Parliament in plain
words, That, though the said Officers were not Qualified according to the late
Tests for their Employments, yet he would neither expose them to Disgrace, nor
himself to the Want of them. And, tho the Parliament did highly except against
it, as an open Violation of those Laws which were our main Bulwark against
Popery, yet his Majesty would by no means recede from his Word. A Debate was
held to dispense those Unqualified Officers then act^ally in Service with the
Fenalty of the Law, provided no more were admitted. But this would not serve
the King's turn. Who, to prevent any further Heats about it, prorogued the
Parliament t^ll Feb. 10 following; and so put it off by further Pror^gations,
till it was at last Dissolved.

Mean while, he made it his business to New-model his dearly beloved Army, now
consecrated to more pious I ses, and kept on foot to accomplish the great Work
of resturing Popery Both Officers and Soul^iers were Reformed, and such of both
sorts put in as would encourage and promote the Design.

^o lose no Time, whole Sholes of Priests and Jesuits, with Multitudes of
Lay-Papists, came over daily from France, and other Parts, as often as the Wind
would permit; some to Convert us, and others to Cut our Throats. The first,
like the Pharisees, came over by Sea and Land to make Proselytes; and liked
England so well, that they stuck to it like Burr. Whilst poor Lapland, and
other wretched Countries, are left to their Temporal and Spiritual Darkness,
seldom visited by those Lights of the Roman Church. And first, to take off from
our Minds the frightful Notions we had of Popery, they laid aside the old way
of Controversies from Scripture, Tradition, and Reason; and so new-vamped their
Roman Tenets, after the Bishop of Meaux late invented Dress, that it was hard
to discern at first view the Popish from the Protestant Religion; Such was
their Resemblance, that it was Alter Ego. But the Cheat was quickly found out,
and hissed at here, by all Men of Reason and Understanding. Then was held a
Disputation at White hall in the King's Presence, wherein his Party came off so
shamefully, that his Majesty was fain to excuse their Weakness, by saying, That
a good Cause might be baffled.

Yet, notwithstanding these Repulses, the Popish Emissaries having now
(contrary to Law) the liberty of the Press, plied it hard to get Proselytes,
but still with little Success. Providence had so ordered it, that the Church of
England was never stocked with so many Sound, Pious, and Learned Divines as we
had in this Juncture. So that this Spiritual War, begun by Priests and Jesuits,
ended to their Confusion. The Church of England bore the brunt of it all, and
the Dissenters would not meddle, for fear of giving Offense; nor was there any
need of it.

The King found by this time how little was to be expected from Roman
Emissaries, and that Compulsion at last must do the Work. France showed him the
Way, where the holy Design was now ripe for Execution, without any fear of a
Check from England. For now King Lewis fairly pulled off the Mask, and by his
Edicts Anno 1^85. told the World in plain terms, that his Design of Reconciling
his Protestant Subjects to the Holy Church was from his Coming to the Crown,
that all his former Edicts in their behalf, his Acknowledging and Registring in
Parliament their great Services to the Crown, and his Advancement of many of
them to the highest Dignities Civil and Military, were but so many Blinds to
cover his Design (for which he calls God to witness) to abolish their Religion
by degrees. And, to show what Opinion he had of Protestants, he declared them
Incapable to claim the benefit of Treaties, Promises, or Oaths, made to them by
the Papists.

According to these his Unchristian Principles, he broke the sacred Ties of
Religious Oaths, by Revoking his Protestant Subjects grand Charter of
Privileges, the famous Edict of Nantes, which from its very Foundation was
counted Irrevocable; and by forcing his Religion upon them, through the
miraculous Virtue of his Apostolic Dragoons. Who ('it is true) had no Commission
to take away their Lives, but all the Comforts thereof, by Want and barbarous
Usage, Spoiling and Plundering, dark Prisons and loathsome Dung^o^s, by parting
the Husband and Wife, and robbing Parents of their dearest Children.

But, lest the World should think, that the French King's Zeal was confined
within the Bounds of his Dominions, he lost no Opportunity to make it known,
that his Design was against the whole Body of Protestants, and first against
the English, whose Conversion would much facilitate that of other Protestant
Nations. This appears by that noted Speech made to him at Versailles in the
Year 1685. by a French Bishop, in the Name of the whole Clergy of France.
Wherein the Bishop, having magnified the King for his Zeal in Suppressing the
Protestant Religion in his Kingdom, tells him, that England offered to his
Majesty one of the most glorious Occasions that he could wish for, and that his
British Majesty wanted nothing but his Protection and the Support of his Arms
to settle the Catholic Religion in his Dominions. This Speech was published by
the French King's Authority, and the Translation of it suffered to come over
freely into England. Which looked something odd, and beneath a King of England,
to be thus exposed to the World as a Prince to come under the Protection of a
King of France; over whose Kings, and Kingdom, his Ancestors had so often
Triumphed. But nothing (it seems) was to be thought Inglorious, that might
serve the Popish Design of Rooting out the Protestant Religion.

Such was King James his Zeal for Mother Church, that (according to Father
Peter's Relation) his Majesty told him in his Chamber, That he had rather Reign
but one Year to an end, tho in Troubles, and die with the Conversion of
England, Scotland, and Ireland, than to Reign prosperously 30 years, and leave
them in Heresy, as he sound them at his Accession to the Crown. A Zeal in some
sense like that of Moses; who, to save the People under his Government, was
willing to be blotted out of the Book of Life.

By this Saying, and his Proceedings, with the French King's Assistance, we may
gu^ss what he intended for us. To convert us, he went about to subvert the
Laws; and, to make us good Christians after his own Way, he made his Will the
measure of his Government, without any regard to his Oaths and Promises, to
Justice or Equity.

However, to color what he did with some show of Justice, he set up a new
Claim, a Thing called the Dispensing Power, unknown to former Ages, and now
suddenly started up as a Branch forsooth of the King's Prerogative. By which
means he threw aside those two great Stumbling Blocks, the Penal Laws and the
Tests, being all our legal Securities for the Preservation of our Religion and
Liberties; and so shook the very Foundation thereof, that we had no Security
lest against his Will and Pleasure.

It Is not denied, that, in the Cases of Treason and Felony, the King of England
may, by virtue of his Prerogative, Pardon the Punishment that a Transgressor
has incurred. But it cannot be with any color of Reason inferred from thence,
that the King can intirely-suspend the Execution of those Laws relating to
Treason or Felony; unless it is pretended, that he is Clothed with a Despotick
and Arbitrary Power. And, as no Laws can be made but by the joint Concurrence
of King and Parliament; so likewise Laws so Enacted, which secure the public
Peace and safety of the Nation, and the Lives and Liberties of every Subject in
it, cannot be Repealed or Suspended but by the same Authority.

It Is true, the Judges declared this Dispensing Power to be a Right belonging
to the Crown. But, before that pernicious Judgment could be obtained, first the
Opinion of the Judges was privately examined. Such of them as could not in
Conscience concur in so pernicious a Sentence were turned out, and others
substituted, till by the Changes which were made in the Courts of Judicature
that Judgment was at last obtained, to give some Credit to the Cause. And,
amongst those that were raised to these Trusts, some were professed Papists,
and consequently Incapable of all such Employments. However it does not appear,
how it is in the Power of the Twelve Judges to offer up the Laws, Rights, and
Liberties of the whole Nation to the King, to be disposed of by Him at his Will
and Pleasure.

'Twas by virtue of this Imaginary Power, which made the King break loose upon
the Laws and govern by his Will, that He imposed upon his Subjects such
Magistrates as he thought fittest for his turn, some true Papists, and others
false Protestants, such as would go a great way (if not through-stitch) to
serve his Popish-Designs. And, though they were admitted without taking the Oaths
in that Case provided, and consequently no lawful Magistrates; yet all were
threatened, vexed, and prosecuted, who durst but say, that they had no lawful
Authority.

By Virtue of the same Power, the Kingdoms Military Defense was put into such
Hands as by many express Laws were Incapable of them. Which justly gave the
Protestants sad Apprehensions of imminent Danger, seeing themselves put into
the Power of Men that publicly professed to be in Union and Communion with the
Church of Rome, declaring themselves to be mortal Enemies to Protestants, and
bound upon their Salvation to seek their Ruin and Destruction, if they
persisted in their Religion. Thus an Army of Papists and Mercenaries was
maintained and dispersed through the Kingdom in full Peace, to the great
disquiet and terror of the Protestants. Who, contrary to the Ancient Laws of
the Kingdom, and the express Words of the late Statutes, were constrained to
receive those Soldiers into their Houses; whereby they were deprived of their
Peace and Security at home, of a free Converse abroad, and of the Advantages
they might make otherwise in their Ways of living.

The Church of England was by this time grown out of Favor with the King, for
her Stea^iness to the Laws, and strong Zeal against Popery. And who should now
grow into favor with his Majesty, at least in outward appearance, but the
Dissenting Party, the Object of his Resentment and Indignation, when he came to
the Crown? The King knew how to turn the stream of his Kindness, and to shift
from one Side to another, that losing one Party he might make sure of another.
It Is true, some Leaders amongst the Dissenters made an advantage of this Turn,
for their private Interest; but the thinking Part of them, who knew where the
Snake lay, did not build much upon it. Not could the King expect much from
them, considering how lame and falsify'd were most of the Addresses His Majesty
received from that Party.

The King, to aw the Church, erected a Court of Commissioners for
Ecclesiastical Affairs, whose Commission was to proceed with a Non^bstante,
that is, without and against the Rules of our Laws. And, to please the
Dissenters, He put out a Declaration for Liberty of Conscience to all sorts of
Persuasions; with a secret Intent, that none should have it at last but the
Papists.

The First was by Commission, so far from any Color of Law, that it was
against most express Laws to the Contrary; and the extent of the Commission
was, to take Cognizance and Direction of all Ecclesiastical Matters. The
Illegality and Incompetency whereof was so notoriously known, and the Design of
it against our Religion so plain, that the late Archbishop of Canterbury
(being one in the Commission) refused to fit or concur in it. For the chief
Design of this Court was to Raise none to any Church Dignities but such as had
no Zeal for the Protestant Religion, who cloaked their Unconcernedness for it
with the specious Pretense of Moderation; and to oppress such of the Clergy as
were of eminent Learning, Virtue, and Piety. In this Commission was a Noble
Peer who made public Profession of the Popish Religion, and who at the time of
his first professing it declared, that for a great while before he had believed
that to be the only true Religion.

'Twas by virtue of this Illegal Commission, that the Lord Bishop of London was
Suspended, only because he refused to obey an Order sent him to suspend Dr.
Sharp, then Rector of S. Giles, without so much as Citing him before him to
make his own Defense, or observing the common Forms of Process. By the same
Court was Dr. Hough, President of Magdalen College in Oxford, turned out, though
duly chosen by the Fellows of the said College; and afterward all the Fellows
of the said College, only for refusing to choose for their President a Person
recommended to them by the Kings Evil Counselors Iustigation. Though the Right
of a Free Election belonged u^ oubtedly to the said Fellows; and that it is
expressly provided in Magna Charta, that no Man shall lose L^fe or Goods, but by
the Law of the Land. More than that the said College was wholly put into the
hands of Papists; who by the Law of the Land, and the Statutes of the College,
are altogether Incapable of such Employments.

By the King's Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, His Majesty Commanded the
same to be Read in all Churches and Chapels; whereby he would have the Clergy
to be his Cryers, to proclaim his pretended Power to Suspend at once the Force
and Use of our Penal Laws, made for the Security of our Religion and Property.
And, when the late Archbishop of Canterbury, and six other Bishops, offered
His Majesty an humble Petition in Terms full of Respect, containing in short
the Reas^ns why they could not Obey the Order sent them to appoint the Clergy
to read the Declaration in their Churches, the said Bishops were Committed to
the Tower, and afterward brought to a Trial, whose Crime was only a due Regard
to the Laws. They were Acquitted, and for that piece of Justice Judge Holloway
and Judge Powel were Displaced. And, because their Acquittal had caused an
universal Joy, some were brought into Trouble for their innocent Expressions of
it.

Then came out an Order from the Lords Commissioners, requiring all the
Chancellors and Archdeacons of England to return the Names of all such as had
read the King's Declaration for Liberty of Conscience, and of those that had
not read it, whether they were enjoined or not enjoined to do it by their
respective Bishops. And it is observable, that in the Bishopric of Durham (the
Bishop whereof was one of the Commissioners) near 200 Ministers were Suspended
for not Reading the Declaration.

Hitherto the Court had carried on their Interest barefaced, at least since
the Ill-timed Rebellion of Monmouth and Argile; and Dissimulation (unless it
were to Dissenters) had no share in their Transactions. But, whilst the Church
of England was under Persecution, it was thought convenient to Protect such of
the French Refugees as ventured to fly hither from the now raging Persecution
in France. Insomuch that, notwithstanding King James's strict Friendship and
Correspondence with the French King, His Majesty Protected them with his
Favor, and Relieved them with his Royal Briefs. But the Reason of the Thing is
plain. The Court of France were got over the Dissembling Part, and all Things
there were ripe for Action. Whereas in England the Persecution of some was
thought fit for a while to be Palliated by the Toleration of Others, though all
equally designed for Destruction.

The same however of this Indulgence to the French Protestants invited
Multitudes of them hither, to feel the benefit of it in their distressed
Condition. The Sight whereof stirred the Compassion of most People, even of
Sober Papists; whilst the Plurality of them made it their business all over the
Kingdom to stem our Charity, by crying down the Persecution. Which, as famed as
it was all over Europe for the unparalleled Cruelty of it, these Men had the
Face to deny, representing the Poor Refugees as so many Cutthroats and
Vagabonds, whom we must be forsooth aware of. A base Inhumane Thing it was,
thus to insult over the Oppressed, and to add so cruelly Persecution to
Persecution. But this is true Roman Zeal.

Two Things did prompt them to it. First their just Apprehension, that this
Spectacle would be a Caution for us to look to our selves, and stand upon our
Guard. Secondly, That such an Addition of incensed Protestants to so great a
Party as that they must struggle with, was not at all agreeable to their
Interest. The Truth is, we ought to admire the singular Providence of God in
our behalf, that this French Persecution should be so timed as to give us a
seasonable Alarm to prevent the same here; that our Persecutors Precipitation
and Folly should be so great as to open their wicked Designs so early, and to
send us over so many Thousands of Witnesses, as it were to awaken us, and to
let us see what we ought to look for, whenever their Bloody Religion should
come to prevail among us. Whereas it is probable otherwise, that the good Nature
of some, and the Weakness and Corruption of others, had put us, (to use Dr.
Burnet's Words) to a more melancholy and troublesome After-game.

In the mean time Nothing was omitted to Encourage Popery upon all Accounts,
though never so much against Law. New Popish Chapels and Mass. Houses were set
up, New Popish Schools and Monasteries Erected, four Popish Provincial Bishops
established, Priests and Jesuits so Encouraged, that England swarmed with them
as Egypt did of old with Frogs, Lice, and Locusts, the Privy Council made up of
Popish Lords, and some Protestants not much better, the Jesuit Father Petre a
Member thereof, and the chief Director of the Cabal Council, a Nuncio admitted,
and a solemn Embassy sent to Rome in the person of the Earl of Castlemain. All
this in open Defiance to the Laws.

Such was besides the Corruption and Depravation of Justice in the Courts of
Judicature, that the Judges must either be biassed by the King's Will, or
expect a Quietus est, as in the Case aforesaid of Holloway and Powel. The
Juries commonly returned by secret Contrivances and illegal Nominations, being
neither (as the Law Requires) of the most sufficient nor most indifferent of
the nearest Neighbors to the Facts in question, nor by sworn Sheriffs; So that
any Man's Life or Estate not well affected to the then Government was in great
Jeopardy, if called into Question. Besides that, by putting the Administration
of Justice into the hands of Papists, all Matters of Civil Justice were brought
to great Uncertainties. Who being under an Incapacity by Law, there lay no
obligation upon any. Man to acknowledge or obey their Judgments, and all
Sentences by them given were null and void of themselves

Thus, in few years, the Popish Party being become Masters of the Affairs of
the Church, of the Government of the Nation, and of the Course of Justice,
subjected them all to a Despotick and Arbitrary Power; that by the Assistance
of the Army they might be able to maintain and execute their wicked Designs, by
establishing Popery and Slavery.

But, if our Case was desperate here, it was rather worse in Ireland. Where the
whole Government was put into the hands of Papists, and all the Protestants
there under a perpetual sear of a new Massacre, such as they fell under Anno
1641. Which made great Numbers of them leave that Kingdom, and abandon their
Estate, in it. As for Scotland, the King declared himself to be clothed with
Absolute Power; and all his Subjects there bound to obey Him without reserve;
and accordingly assumed an Arbitrary Power, both over the Religion and Laws of
that Kingdom. Whereby it plainly appeared what we must look for in England, as
soon as Matters were duly prepared here.

But, during these Transactions, the Popish Party grew Sensible, that the
Dispensing Power, being raised but upon a weak Foundation, would quickly sink;
and that they could not be safe, unless the Penal Laws and the Tests were
abrogated by the Authority of a Parliament, or Something like it. The King
therefore made it his business to get such a Parliament as would bring this to
pass.

It Is well known, that about four parts in five of the Members of the House of
Commons are to be chosen by Cities and Boroughs. To destroy therefore their
Customs, Privileges, Charters, and Governments, and to substitute therein such
Magistrates as would either ignorantly or corruptly serve the Kings Designs,
Writs of Quo Warranto fell like Thunder upon those Corporations. Which were
seconded by Instruments appointed to terrify the Magistrates thereof with the
King's severe Displeasure, if they dared to insist upon their legal Right, and
contest with the King at Law. He had Agents appointed to fright them with the
vast Charge they must be at, in case they would be so bold as to stand it out;
to possess them, that it was to no purpose, since he was resolved to have their
Charters at his Command; to tempt them with a Promise of New ones, if they
would but Resign their Old into his hands; and to threaten them, that the Names
of all that refused it must be returned to the Attorney General. Besides, that
Judges were prepared to damn the Pleas of all such Cities and Towns as would
stand upon their Right. Witness the Cities of Oxford and Winchester, and the
Borough of T^tness, which were declared to be Dissolved at the King's Pleasure;
whereby their respective Citizens and Burgess s were Disfranchised, and
divested of all their ancient Customs, Freedoms, and Privileges.

This terrified most Cities and Boroughs into voluntary surrenders of their
Charters; which brought them to that condi ion as to have no Magistrates or
Officers but at the Kings Will, and during his Pleasure. But this Proceeding of
the King seemed the less strange, it being but a Copy of what had been already
done in the Reign of King Charles.

And, whereas the Election of Members of Parliament ought to be Free and
Indifferent, without Pre-ingagement of the Electors, by Bribes, Promises, or
Threats, infinite were the Tricks and Artifices used to get such a Parliament
as would serve the King's turn. Yet none more busy than the King himself, in
continual Attempts upon the personal Freedom and Indifferency of all the
Electors for Parliaments throughout the Kingdom. Such were his Personal
Solicitations in secret, to accept of such for their Deputies in Parliament as
were fit for his Designs, that his Closetting of Electors was become a Byword
amongst the People. Nor was it possible for Persons that held Offices and
Imyloyments of Profit and Trust to continue in the same, but by their
Concurrence therein with his Majesty's Pleasure, Witness his second Declaration
for Liberty of Conscience, under the Date of Apr. 7. 1688. wherein he declared
his Mind, that none ought to be Employed under him in the Kingdom, but such as
would contribute to choose such Members of Parliament as might do their part to
finish what he had begun; That, in pursuance thereof, he had turned out by his
Absolute Will many Civil and Military Officers; And that he looked upon all
Refusers as neither good Christians, nor Lovers of their Countries Good.

To further this Design, the Lord Lieutenants were ordered by the King to
Summon in his Name the Chief Officers and Gentlemen in their respective
Counties, and to lay the Case before them, so as to flatter or terrify them out
of the Use of their Freedom in Electing for Parliament. And Marks of the King's
Displeasure were put upon those that resolved to keep their Freedom and
Indifferency to Elect worthy and fit Deputies, according to their Judgments and
Consciences.

Another sort of Men were Commissionated to the same purpose, Known by the Name
of Regulators. Amongst which several Anabaptist Preachers were employed, with
good Weekly Allowances; who were sent all over England, to delude People by
Caresses or Threats into a fatal Compliance with the King.

By which Illeg^l Practices it appears how eager the Court was to introduce the
Rom^n Religion and Laws, by endeavoring to free the Papists and Popish
Emissaries from the Punishments of our Penal Laws against such manifest
A^tempts upon the Freedom. Properties, and Rights of the Realm. Which tended to
nothing less than, First, to subject the Laws of the Realm, and consequently
the very Rights of the Crown to the Canons of the Church of Rome, which Rights
our ancient English Papists before the Reformation always endeavored to
maintain against the Inchroachments of the Papal See. Secondly, To declare all
the Power of Magistracy in Protestants hands to be unlawful, and all Right and
Title to their Estates forfeited (by their being Protestants) to the Papists.
Thirdly, To own and justify all Dispensations from Rome, with our Obedience to
all such Laws of the Realm as should be thought derogatory to the Popes
Interest or Authority. And, Fourthly, to hold Communion with the Church of
Rome, the French, and all Foreign Papists, tho professed Enemies to the
Religion and Power of the Protestants, so as to contrive with them the
Suppressing or Extirpating of them out of the Realm.

Thus the Ax was laid to the Root, and the Train laid to blow up our Laws,
Religion, and Liberties. Which was Provocation enough for a Free People, that
have a share in the Legislative Power, to stand up for their Rights and
Privileges thus invaded, and to oppose the Exorbit^nce and Abuses of an
Executive Power, which shaked the very Foundation of this ancient Monarchy. Yet
all was hushed, and these Things born with extraordinary Patience, in hopes of a
Redress upon the next Succession, whilst the Princess of Orange (now our
gracious Queen) was the Heiress apparent.

But, to cut off at once these only remaining Hopes, who should be now with
Child but the Queen, after she had been Childless several Years, and very much
decayed and weakened with Sickness? Which unexpected Pregnancy some Papists
attributed to the Kings Progress to St. Winifred's Wells, others to the Bath,
but most to the Lady of Loretto, who for the sake of a fine Present made
forsooth made to her by the Queens Mother (the Duchess of M^dena) helped her
to conceive a Son. A Son it must be by all means, for nothing would serve their
turn but a Prince of Wales. And, tho it proved but a Daughter, yet most Priests
were of Opinion, that it would set aside the Princess of Orange's Right to the
Succession; for which they had no better Argument, than that a Daughter born
after the King came to the Crown ought to succeed before a Daughter born before
he came to it. Which argued their Ignorance.

I grant, without reflecting in the least upon the King, That this pretended
Conception, to be real, must be done by a Miracle. The Queen as is before
hinted, had labored a long time under great Infirmities; and was so far from
giving Life to another, that with much a do she kept her self alive. Nothing
therefore but a Miracle could do that which her weak Condition made her
incapable of.

But, upon a strict Inquiry into those various Circumstances that attend a
Woman with Child, and the Want of them in the Queen, it is more than probable it
was a mere Fiction, and a Design on Foot to cut off the Princess of Orange from
her Right to the Succession. And it is observable, that, some time before the
Report of this unexpected and miraculous Pregnancy of the Queen, the Prince and
Princess of Orange had been very much pressed in the King's Name, to declare
themselves for the Abolishing the Penal Laws and the Tests. Which his Majesty
not being able to gain upon them, he was heard to say with much anger, that He
would trouble himself no more with them, but they should Repent it.

Soon after this, the Rumor of the Queen's Conception was spread abroad with
great Industry; but believed by none but Papists, or Persons Popishly affected.
For amongst others it became a Matter of Laughter and Derision, and a Subjest
for Poets Lampoons; which grew so common, that White Hall it self was full of
them

But the Papists, who looked upon it as a certain Way to procure their
Settlement here, triumphed nevertheless. And the fruth is, this was the best
Way they could find to lessen the growing Reputation and Power of Their
Highnesses, to weaken their Interest and that of the whole Body of Protestants,
to encourage the ^^en^ King in the Prosecution of his cruel Designs against
them, to strengthen the English Papist, and make our Corrupt and Time-serving
Protestants fall in with their Party, and lastly to possess many weak
Dissenters that their Liberty of Conscience must of necessity be fixed in a
Popish Succession. The King therefore, to give the greater Credit to this
pretended Conception, ordered a Day of Thanksgiving for it, with solemn Prayers
to be offered unto God, for the Preservation of the Queen and Infant. Though he
knew well enough that sew People besides his own Party gave any credit to it.

To come now to the usual Circumstances that attend a Conception, the first
natural Sign is the Stopping the Monthly Courses. By the King's Speech in
Council, it seems Their Majesty's had both thought fit to publish her
Conception to have been at the Time of the Present made to the Ladies Image at
Loretto, upon his Return to the Queen at Bath. Now it is very well known, that
it was with Her afterward as formerly after the manner of Women; and all the
Industry used to conceal it proved Ineffectual, because it came to the
Knowledge of more than were made privy to the Plot.

And, whereas in four Months time the Breasts of a Woman with Child begin to
swell and yield Milk, the Queens Breasts never swelled all the time of her
pretended Childbearing, nor produced any Milk, whatever one Court Lady
affirmed to the contrary. If the Queen had any Milk in her Breasts, it was so
much for her Interest and the Credit of her Cause to convince the World of her
real being with Child, by giving that signal Demonstration of it, that I had
rather think her Majesty wanted Milk, than so much common Prudence as to make
it appear, in case she had any. And we are very well assured, that none of the
Ladies proper to be VVitnesses could ever obtain the satisfaction to see a drop
of Milk from her Breasts.

The same Reason we have to disbelieve the Quickening of the Child in her
Womb, however industriously it was spread abroad. For the feeling of its
Motion was never vouchsafed to any competent VVitnesses of it which would have
been a main Proof of her Pregnancy, had there been any such Thing. And
therefore 'twas expected, to give the suspicious Kingdom a Ground to believe
the Queen to be really with Child, that her Majesty would have made some of the
Protestant Ladies of her Bedchamber sensible of so great a Proof of her being
in the Codition she pretended.

Another manifest Sign of the true natural Progress of a Great Belly, is the
Distension of all the Parts of the Body that incompass the Womb. The Queen
indeed had her Belly exceedingly copped up, and high. But, as it was observed
by skilful Matrons, all the outward Parts of her Body that incircle the Womb
were of the same proportion that they were at other times. And, when they
minded her Majesty walking, and looked upon her behind and on each side, they
could see no appearance in her of a Great Bellied Woman. Her Bodies were made
without alteration. And, during all the last four Months, when she was to
change her Linen, She always withdrew from her Chamber with two or three
Italian Women, and retired into her Closet, or some other private Room,
contrary to her former usual Course; and would not suffer any of the Protestant
Ladies of the Bedchamber to see her shift her self, as they had constantly
done.

All these are strong Presumptions, that the Queen's Great Belly was but a
false Appearance to delude the Nation. But there are other Circumstances, that
create as great a Prejudice against it.

In the Preparation for Her Majesty's supposed Delivery it was expected, that
early Notice should be given to the Princess of the Blood of her expected
Travel, and of the Place of her Residence at such time; that proper Noble
Matrons, and others, might prepare themselves, and attend there in their
behalf, who, by their Testimonies might have for ever suppressed and silenced
all Suspicions of Fraud or Imposture. It was hoped at least, that the Princess
of Denmark would have been present, to see what was brought forth. But Care was
taken to advise her, when she wanted astringent Medicines, to go to the
loosening Waters of the Bath; and to keep her 80 miles distant, till the
supposed Prince should be born.

To conceal the Time and intended Place for this fictitious Travel, such
Artifices were used, that no body could tell when nor where this Play was to be
acted. Sometimes the Queen was to lie at Richmond, sometimes at Windsor,
another time at Hampton Court, tho St. James's was the Place appointed. And,
when her Majesty declared she would lie at St. James's on the Saturday at
night, which was the Night before her preten^ed Travel and Delivery, the
Warning was so very short, that with much ado her Lodgings could be got ready
time enough.

That very night the Queen was late at Cards, without any Sign of fore-running
Pains of a Woman whose Travel approaches, nor is any pretended to have been in
the Night* And it does not so much as appear, that the usual Instruments of
Midwives, whereupon they commonly place all Women of Quality in their Time of
Travel, were got in readiness. So that every Thing was carried on and managed
by her Majesty, as if she chose rather to confirm the general Opinion of the
People, that this was but a pious Cheat, than to be at the trouble of acting
all the parts of a Woman with Child.

The Time of the Day fixed upon for this Travel, and the Room it self wherein it
was to be acted, are two other unlucky Circumstances that mainly fortify the
National Prejudice against this pretended Prince. The Travel was contrived to
be at Churchtime on the Sunday, between the hours of nine and ten in the
morning, that the Business might be over before the Protestant Ladies were come
from Church, and that the Assistant Matrons might be free to act their Parts as
they did.

In the Room there was a private Door within the Ruel of the Bed, leading into
an Inner Room, from whence a Child might be secretly brought, and put unseen
into the Bed. And by that Privy Door all the Transactions were managed. It Is
true, some Lords and Ladies were brought into the Bedchamber, but only to be
seen in the Room, and that their Names might be published as VVitnesses of the
Queen's being Delivered, tho they saw nothing that was done.

For the Queen lay in Bed with all the Curtains round close drawn, whilst the
Midwife and her Confederates seemed very busy about Her Majesty in the dark,
none seeing what they did. Nor does it appear, that Her Majesty had any of
those natural Signs which usually attend a Travel, and such as cannot be
hidden. Her Labor was short and easy, far beyond what could be expected from
her State of Body, debilitated with long lingering Infirmities. Which might be
so contrived, lest the Child that was got in the Bed should be stifled by the
Closeness of it.

The Jobb being thus finely over, something close covered was by the Midwife
delivered to one of the Confederate Matrons, and both hastened with it through
the Privy Door into the next Room, without declaring what it was, a Prince or a
Princess. Which looks something odd of the Midwife, to quit her Attending and
Assulting the Queen, when her Attendance and Skill were both so necessary to
preserve her Majesty's Life, if she had really brought forth either a Son or a
Daughter.

Nor was the Child heard to Cry, which is the common and most constant natural
Sign of the Birth of a living Child. Which might be, because the Child that was
brought in was prepared to sleep, to prevent its Crying before it was conveyed
into the Bed, and slept on till it was gradually awaked.

The King, after some time, leaving the Lords of the Council in the Bedchamber
(who had waited all this while to no more purpose, than if they had been ten
miles off) withdrew into the inner Room, where the supposed Prince was. And
soon after the News was brought them, that a Prince was born. VVhereupon some
went away, and others staid yet a while, to have a sight of this Newborn
Prince. Who being shown unto them, the King said, That he had now a Son, a
strong, and lively Prince. Which gave occasion for a Joke, even amongst the
meanest sort of Childbearing Women, That such a Child of about Eight Months
was as great a Miracle as the Queens Conception. For, by their Majesty's
Reckoning, this supposed Prince was but the Product of eight Months and four
Days; and to see such an untimely Birth so strong and lively, especially from
so weak a Mother, is rare, and almost past Belief.

Nor was the Matter much mended by saying, That it was frequent amongst
Childbearing Women to Misre^kon; or by persuading the Queen to declare,
contrary to her first Reckoning (which she kept to several Weeks after her
pretended Delivery) That she had miscounted the Time of her Conception, and
that she knew her self to be with Child before her Use of the Bath. Strange!
that Her Majesty should be then with Child, and yet have her Monthly Courses,
as she had in her Journey to the Bath, and four Days after the Kings going from
thence. That, knowing her self with Child at that time, she should not acquaint
her Physicians with it; the meanest of whom might have told Her Majesty, That
her Bathing would probably destroy the Embryo. And that Her Majesty should not
consider, this would spoil the Story of the Miracle of Loretto, said to be
performed at the King's Return to Bath.

These are Things so Inconsistent, and altogether so Irreconcilable, that they
would be hissed at in any Judicious and Impartial Court of Judicature. But any
Thing will go down with a sort of Men that can digest Contradictions, and whose
Zeal to their Religion can make them believe at random what they see not, and
not to believe what they see.

If the Queen's pretended Conception was Miraculous, the Progress of her Great
Belly, and her Delivery, were as Preternatural. Nay, the very Consequents of
her Delivery were no less wonderful, so that it was all but one continued
Miracle. To see a Queen, at the best but tender and weak, yet free from any
Danger of her Life after an Untimely Birth, without Fever, or so much as the
usual Redundancy of Milk, these are such Blessings from Heaven as may pass for
Miracles. But, as the Miracle of the Conception was spoiled by shifting the
Reckoning, so it is to be feared that the rest was all of a piece.

From what is said, upon very sure Evidence, I leave the World to judge what
Ground there is to believe the supposed Prince of Wales to be born of the
Queen. I confess it is something hard to think, That a Father should be so
Unjust and Unnatural, as to put by his own Lawful Children from their
Succession to the Crown, to make Room for an Interloper, a supposititious
Child. Besides the Affront put, 1. Upon the two Princes, joined in Wedlock to
his Daughters, and having thereby a Matrimonial Right to the Crown. 2. Upon
three Kingdoms, by Imposing a strange (tho innocent) Child upon them to be the
next Successor, and consequently to receive in time Homage and Allegiance of
all the Subjects thereof, the Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty, with all
dutiful Submission to his Commands. 3. Upon all Foreign States, Dominions,
Powers, and Principalities, by setting up a Sham-Prince, who being upon the
Throne must be looked upon and respected as a great King and a lawful Prince, in
all their Treaties and Negotiations with him.

But what is not a blind Zeal capable of? To Settle a Popish Successor in these
Kingdoms was such a piece of meritorious Service to the Church of Rome, that
nothing could indear the King more to her, than the doing of it. What Issue he
had then alive were too much dipped in Heresy; and nothing could bring them off
from it, no not so much as to consent to the Repealing of those two Bug-bears,
the Penal Laws and the Tests.

But, suppose this Prince were really born of the Queen, against which there
are so many strong Presumptions, it is a Thing unaccountable why the Queen
should be so shy all the time of her Childbearing to give that public
Satisfaction about it which was reasonably expected from her Majesty. The
Nation was possessed, it was all but a Trick. It had been therefore but common
Prudence in the Queen to Undeceive us as far as it lay in her power, even for
the Child's sake in her Womb. If her Majesty had Milk in her Breasts, what
diminution to her Glory had it been to let her Protestant Ladies see but some
Drops of it? If, when the Child stirred in the Womb, but two or three
true-hearted Protestant Ladies had been admitted to feel those Motions, it had
gone a great way to silence all Gainsayers, and to quicken the very Nation into
another Belief. When Her Majesty was near the time of her Travel, to what
purpose was the Place appointed for her Lying In so concealed, that no
Protestant could tell where to find Her? And why must a Room at last be chosen
at S. James's, with a private Door within the Ruel of the Bed, leading into
another Room, which alone was enough to create a Suspicion? To which add a
total Neglect, and absolute slighting of all the necessary Rules of Law and
Justice about needful Witnesses of the Birth of a Prince and Heir to the Crown.
So that, supposing this pretended Prince to be really born of the Queen, it
must be granted, that Things were so managed from the beginning to the end, as
if the Court intended to make the Thing still more doubtful, and the Suspicion
the stronger. And, if that was their Aim, they have hit the Nail on the Head.

Thus, the Birth of this supposed Prince not being lawfully Witnessed, Her
Royal Highness the Princess of Orange had no Reason to depart from her Claim of
Heiress apparent to the Crown, or to Resign it to him; But rather to complain
to the World of the Wrong done her, by suffering a supposed Child to steal upon
her Right, and ass^^me the Name of Prince and Heir apparent to the Crown.

Nor was it her part to prove him a Counterfeit, it being a Rule by the Laws
and Customs of all Civil Governments for any one that claims to be the lawful
Son of a family, to being in legal Proofs for it. Her Royal Highness had been
hitherto acknowledged to be the Heiress apparent of the Crown; and nothing
could legally debar her from that Claun but a true born Prince, with such Legal
Witnesses as would satisfy the Nation that it was so. The Want of which in
this Case l^ft the Princess of Orange in her full, Claim to the next Succession.

To vindicate which Claim, and to Secure withal the Protestant Interest in
these Kingdoms, His Highness the Prince of Orange, upon the earnest and humble
Application of several of the Lords both Spiritual and Temporal, came over from
Holland with a competent Force. Which leads me to my Third Part.

THE HISTORY Of the LATE REVOLUTION
PART III. Showing Our Wonderful Deliverance by our present King William, and
our Great Happiness therein.
THings were now brought to an Extremity, and nothing but a miraculous
Providence could Rescue us from our Enemies. To which end it pleased God to
raise His Highness, the Prince of Orange. A Magnanimous, Wise, and Religious
Prince; whose Illustrious Family seems to have been appointed by Providence,
ever since the Reformation, for the Preservation of God's Church, and a Check
to Tyranny.

This Prince being penetrated with the dismal Account he ^i^y, Zea^ed of the
French Persecution, and possessed with a and King (...) S^inst the Known
Combination of King James the Reformation, for the Inslaving all Europe, and
Rooting out to oppose their Amb^^^d, with God's help in so just a Cause, that
had been hitherto the (...). Idolatrous* Designs. England, King's Greatness,
was the most likely, Instrument of the French (...) reduced to its proper and
natural Course, to influence and procure his Fall. The Provocations were great
on King James's side, by his Arbitrary Methods of Government contrary to Law
and the Subjects Liberty, by his Attempts upon their Religion, and by Imposing
upon them a Successor justly suspected of being a Stranger to the Royal Blood.

For the Redressing which Abuses, by a Free and Full Parliament, His Royal
Highness undertook the late famous Expedition; which God was pleased to Crown
with Glory and Success, to the Amazement of all Europe, the Joy of all rational
Men, and the Terror of Tyranny. In order to which suitable Preparations had
been made in Holland, both by Sea and Land, to defend his Highness from the
Violence of all such as should oppose Him. Which were carried on with that
wonderful Secrecy, though the Secret was dispersed amongst many, that the
Sagacious Count D' Avaux, the French Ambassador at the Hague, could not sift
out the Meaning of it, till all Things were in great forwardness, and the
Prince almost ready to take Shipping. Whose Forces consisted of about 13000
Men, Horse, Foot, and Dragoons; and (which is remarkable) a good part of them
Papists. For the Transporting whereof, with all Things necessary, there were
300 Fly-boats, Pinks, and other Vessels, under the Convoy of 50 Capital Men of
War, 26 Smaller, and 25 Fireships.

But, before his Setting out, He published a Declaration, to satisfy the World
with the Justice of his Undertaking. Wherein, having fairly shown the manifest
and undeniable Invasion of the Laws and Liberties of England, Scotland, and
Ireland, by the Kings. The Sum of the Prince of Orange's Declaration.
Evil Counselors, He Declares, That, Upon the most earnest Solicitations of a
great many Lords both Spiritual and Temporal, and of many Gentlemen and other
Subjects of all Ranks, for the Relief of these Three Kingdoms, He thought sit
to (...) over into England, with a Force sufficient (by the Bla^^ intended to
defend him from Violence. That his Exped^^wful Parliament for no other End, but
to have a Free Secure to the whole Na-Assembled, as soon as possible, in Laws,
Rights, and Liberties, ^^^tion the free Enjoyment of ^^vernment, to preserve
the Protestant under a Just and (...) such as would live peaceably under the
Government, Religion, (...) (as becomes good Subjects) from all Persecution
upon the account of their Religion, even Papists themselves not excepted; so
that there might be no more Danger of the Nations falling at any time hereafter
under Arbitrary Government. He further Declares, That to this Parliament he
would Refer the Inquiry into the Birth of the pretended Prince of Wales, and of
all Things relating to it, or to the Right of Succession. And, for the
Executing of this his just Design, He Invites and Requires all Persons
whatsoever, all the Peers of the Realm both Spiritual and Temporal, all Lords
Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, and all Gentlemen, Citizens, and other Commons
of all Ranks, to Come and Assist Him against all such as should endeavor to
Oppose Him. Whereby all those Miseries might be prevented, which must needs
follow upon the Nations being kept under Arbitrary Government and Slavery; and
all the Violences and Disorders which had Overturned the whole Constitution of
the English Government, might be fully Redressed in a Free and Legal
Parliament. Then He concludes to this purpose. That he would take Care, as soon
as the Nations were brought to a State of Quiet, that a Parliament should be
called in Scotland, for Restoring the ancient Constitution of that Kingdom, and
for bringing the Matters of Religion to such a Settlement, that the People
might live easy and happy, and for putting an end to all the Unjust Violences
that had been committed there in a course of so many Years. And, as for
Ireland, That he would study to bring that Kingdom to such a State, that the
Settlement there might be religiously observed, and that the Protestant and
British Interest there might be secured. Finally, That He would Endeavor, by
all possible Means, to procure such an Establishment i^ all the Three Kingdoms,
that they might all live in a happy Union and Correspondency together; and that
the Protestant Religion, the Peace, Honor, and Happiness of these Nations
might be established upon lasting Foundations. This Declaration being Given
under His Highnesses Hand and Seal at his Court in the Hague, Oct. 10.
(New-style) 1688. was accordingly thus signed, William Henry Prince of Orange,
and by by His Highnesses Command, C. Huygens.

The King, having had Notice of the Prince's Design but a Month before his
Highness set out from Holland, hurried away from Windsor (where the Court then
was) to White Hall, and from thence to Chatham, to get as much of his Fleet in
readiness as could be done in so short a Warning. He came to White Hall Sept.
18. and the next Day he went down the River to Chatham; the Queen and the
Prince of Wales, with the whole Count, returning in a great hurry the Day after.

His Majesty had, sometime before, signified his Pleasure to Call a Parliament
to meet in November next, and Writs of Summons were issued out accordingly.
Upon this Intelligence He did put out a plausible Declaration, dated Sept.
21st. wherein He declared His Royal Purpose to Endeavor at the next Sessions a
Legal Establishment of an Universal Liberty of Conscience for all his Subjects,
together with his Resolution Inviolably to Preserve the Church of England as by
Law Established, excepting the Penal Clauses. And, to remove all Fears and
Apprehensions that the Legistative Power would be Engrossed by the Roman
Catholics, and turned against Protestants, He declared his Willingness that
they should remain Incapable to be Members of the House of Commons. As for the
Election of Members of Parliament, His Majesty by this His Declaration gave
strict Orders, that all Things relating thereto should be done according to Law.

Immediately after the publishing of the said Declaration, the King was pleased
to Authorize and Empower the Lords Lieutenants of the several Counties to Grant
Deputations to such Gentlemen as had been lately Removed from being
Deputy Lieutenants. And His Majesty gave also Directions to the Lord Chancellor
to put into the Commission of the Peace such Gentlement as had been laid aside,
and should be recommended by the said Lords Lieutenants.

And, upon the Attendance of several of the Bishops on the King, His Majesty
was pleased, amongst other Gracious Expressions, to let them know, That he
would signify his Pleasure for taking off the Suspension of the Lord Bishop of
London. Which was done accordingly.

Then came out his Proclamation, under the Date of Sept. 28th. Wherein He first
informs his People of a great and sudden Invasion from Holland, to be speedily
made in a Hostile Manner upon this his Kingdom; And then solemnly Conjures all
his Subjects heartily to Unite together in the Defense of Him, and their Native
Country, as the only Way (under God) to defeat and frustrate the Principal Hope
and Design of his and their Enemies. But, whereas he did intend to have met his
Parliament in November next, He found it necessary, in regard of this strange
and unreasonable Attempt from our Neighboring Country, without any manner of
Provocation, to recall the Writs issued forth, with Orders to surcease all
further Proceedings thereon. Then He proceeds to give the necessary Charge to
all Lords Lieutenants and Deputy Lieutenants, to use their best and utmost
Endeavors, to Resist, Rebel, and Suppress his Enemies, who came with such
Confidence and great Preparations to Invade and Conquer these his Kingdoms. And
lastly, does most expressly and strictly Injoin and Prohibit all his Subjects
from giving any manner of Aid, Assistance, Countenance, or Succor, or from
holding any Correspondence with these his Enemies, or any of their Accomplices,
upon Pain of High Treason, and being proceeded against with the utmost Severity.

Within four Days after came out His Majesty's most Gracious and General
Pardon; but with such Intricate Clauses as resolved the Pardon into little or
nothing.

The King upon this, having received several Complaints of great Abuses and
Irregularities committed in the late Regula^ion of the Corporations, Authorized
and Required the Lords Lieutenants of the several Counties to Inform themselves
of all such Abuses and Irregularities within their Lieutenancies, and to make
forthwith Report thereof to His Majesty, together with what they conceived fit
to be done for Redressing the same. Whereupon His Majesty would give such
farther Orders as should be requisite.

The next Thing was His Majesty's Appointing the Lord Bishop of Winchester as
Visior of St. Mary Magdalen in Oxford, to Settle that Society Regularly and
Statutably.

Then a Proclamation, for Restoring Corporations to their Ancient Charters,
Liberties, Rights and Franchises. Followed by an Order from the King and
Council, under His Majesty's Signet and Sign-Manual, to Remove, Displace, and
Discharge all manner of Officers and Magistrates of Cities, Boroughs, and Towns
Corporate, which had or claimed such Offices or Places by Charter, Patent, or
Grant from the late King, or from Him, since the Year 1679. Except such Cities
and Towns whose Deeds of Surrender were Enrolled, or against whom Judgments in
Quo Warranto were entered.

And Oct. 2d. the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Sheriffs, with several other
Eminent Citizens of London, attending the King, His Majesty was pleased to tell
them, That out of his Concern for the Peace and VVelfare of the City, and as a
Mark of the great Confidence. He had in them at this time that the Kingdom was
threatened with an Invasion, He had resolved to restore to them their Ancient
Charter and Privileges, and to put them into the same Condition they were at
the time of the Judgment pronounced against them upon the, Quo Warranto, that
so they might be better enabled to serve him with that Duty and Loyalty which
they had given the King his Brother and Himself so many Testimonies of, and
upon which His Majesty did depend. VVhereupon the King was pleased to give
express Commands to the Lord Chancellor of England, and the Attorney General,
to prepare such Grant or Instrument of Restoration and Confirmation as should
be requisite, and that the same should be forthwith Dispatched.

Thus having been Exercised to the Right and to the Left, Backward and Forward,
We found our selves at last much As we were at first. And, had there been any
rational Hopes of Continuing thus, without any further Breach, these gentle
Methods (tho upon a forced Put) would have gone perhaps a great way to turn the
Stream, and to quiet the People. But, what Assurance could be had of having
these our Rights continued to us any longer than what would serve our Enemies
Turn?

The Prince therefore, hearing of these Retractations, which proceeded more
from Fear than any Principle of Justice, published an Additional Declaration,
Given under his Hand and Seal at his Court at the Hague the 24th. (being our
14th.) of October, The Prince of Orange's Additional Declatation.
in these following Words.

After We had prepared and printed Our Declaration, We have understood, That
the Subverters of the Religion and Laws of those Kingdoms, hearing of Our
Preparations to assist the People against them, have begun to Retract some of
the Arbitrary and Despotick Powers that they had assumed, and to Vacate some of
their unjust Judgments and Decrees. The Sense of their Guilt, and the Distrust
of their Force, have induced them to Offer to the City of London some seeming
Relief from their great Oppressions, hoping thereby to quiet the People, and to
divert them from demanding a secure Re-establishment of their Religion and
Laws, under the shelter of our Arms. They do also give out, that we intend to
Conquer and I^slave the Nation. Therefore We have thought fit to add a few
Words to our Declaration.

We are confident, that no Persons can have such hard Thoughts of Us, as to
imagine, that We have any other Design in this Undertaking, than to procure a
Settlement of the Religion and of the Liberties and Properties of the Subjects
upon so sure a Foundation, that there may be no danger of the Nation^ Relapsing
into the like Miseries at any time hereafter. And, as the Forces We have
brought along with Us are utterly dispropertioned to that wicked Design of
Conquering the Nation, if We were capable of intending it; So the great Numbers
of the Principal Nobility and Gentry, that are Men of Eminent Quality and
Estates, and Persons of known Integrity and Zeal both for the Religion and
Government of England, many of them being also distinguished by their constant
Fidelity to the Crown, who do both accompany Us in this Expedition, and have
earnestly solicited Us to it, will cover us from all such malicious
Insinuations. For it is not to be imagined that either those who have Invited
Us, or those that are already come to assist Us, can join in a wicked Attempt
of Conquest, to make void their own lawful Titles to their Honors, Estates,
and Interests. We are also confident, that all Men see how little weight there
is to be laid on all Promises and Engagements that can be now made, since there
has been so little Regard had in time past to the most solemn Promises. And, as
that imperfect Redress that is now offered is a plain Confession of those
Violations of the Government that We have set forth, so the Defectiveness of it
is no less apparent. For they lay down nothing which they may not take up at
pleasure, reserving entire, and not so much as mentioned their Claims, and
Pretenses to an Arbitrary and Despotick Power; which has been the Root of all
their Oppression, and of the Total Subversion of the Government. And it is
plain, that there can be no Redress nor Remedy offered but in Parliament, by a
Declaration of the Rights of the Subjects that have been invaded, and not by
any pretended Acts of Grace, to which the extremity of their Affairs has driven
them. Therefore it is that we have thought fit to Declare, that we will refer
all to a Free Assembly of the Nation in a Lawful Parliament.

King James, having notice of these Declarations, which touched him to the
quick, and made him very uneasy, His Majesty forthwith put out a Proclamation,
dated Nov. 2d. to forewarn all his Subjects not to publish, disperse, repeat,
or hand about the said Treasonable Papers and Declarations, or any of them,
(...) any other Paper or Papers, of such like nature; Nor presume to Read,
Receive, Conceal, or keep them, or any of them, without Discovering or
Revealing the same with all speed to some of the Privy Council, or to some of
the Judges, Justices of the Peace, or other public Magistrates, upon Peril of
being Prosecuted according to the utmost Severity of the Law.

A Fortnight before this a Proclamation was come out, strictly charging all the
Lords Lieutenants and Deputy Lieutenants of the Counties adjoining to the Sea,
and all other Officers Civil and Military within the said Counties, to cause
the Coasts to be carefully watched, and upon the first approach of the Enemy to
cause all manner of Cattle sit for Burden and Draught, and not actually
employed in His or the Countrey's Service, to be Driven and Removed by the
space at least of twenty Miles from the Place where the Enemy should attempt to
Land, and to secure the same in such effectual Manner, that they might not fall
into the Hands or Power of any of His Enemies.

Another Proclamation was set forth, under the Date of October. 26. to Restrain
the Spreading of false News, in this time of public Danger, by Charging all
Officers and Magistrates whatsoever to take effectual Care for the speedy
Apprehension, Prosecution, and severe Punishment of all Offenders herein.

Lastly, there came out a Declaration, dated Nov. 6. wherein His Majesty, after
some grievous Reflections on this pretended Unchristian and Unnatural Attempt
of the Prince of Orange to Invade his Kingdoms, and the many Mischiefs and
Calamities which an Army of Foreigners and Robels must unavoidably bring upon
His People, Charges His Highness with Assuming the Regal Style in his
Declaration, by Requiring therein the Peers of the Realm, etc. to Obey, and
Assist him in the Execution of his Designs, whereas the words are, to Come and
Assist him, which alters the Case very much, and makes the Exception void. Then
He exclaims upon the Prince's Calling in question the Legitimacy of the Prince
of Wales, his Son and Heir apparent, notwithstanding there were at his Birth so
many Witnesses of Unquestionable Credit. And, whereas the Prince of Orange had
Declared, that he would submit all to the Determination of a Free Parliament,
His Majesty by this his Declaration endeavors to possess his People, that a
Parliament could not be free, so long as there was an Army of Foreigners in
the Heart of his Kingdom, and declared his Resolution to ca^l one as soon as
his Kingdoms should be delivered from this Invasion, with Assurances of
Receiving and Redressing all the Just Complaints and Grievances of His good
Subjects, and of Maintaining them in their Religion, Liberties, and Properties.
Upon which Considerations, and the Obligations of their Duty, and natural
Allegiance, He promises Himself, that they will readily and heartily Concur and
Join with him in the entire Suppression and Repelling of those his Enemies and
Rebellious Subjects, coming to Disturb the Peace of these his Kingdoms.

The King had hitherto turned every Stone, to bring off his People from Joining
with the Prince, with daily Retractations, Promises and Threats, Proclamations,
and Declarations. Nay some few Addresses were procured, full of horror and
amazement at this intended Invasion, as they called it, and of the Subscribers
Impatience to show their Zeal for the King's Service, by Sacrificing their
Lives and Fortunes for the support of his Crown and Dignity. Such was the
humble Address of the Justices of the Peace for the County of Cumberland,
subscribed unto by several other Gentlemen of the said County. Another from the
Mayor, Aldermen, and Common Council of Exeter. A third from the Mayor,
Aldermen, Bailifs, and Citizens of the City of Carlisle. And, by Sir Thomas
Haggerstons Report, then Governor of Berwick, the People of that Place were so
transported with Loyalty to the King, and possessed with such a Detestation and
abhorrence of this Invasion, that they not only Resolved to venture their Lives
and Fortunes in the Defense of the King's Person and Government; but desired
withal, that His Majesty would be graciously pleased to send down Commissions
for the Raising a Regiment of Inhabitants, to be assisting to the King's
standing Forces there, as Occasion should offer.

All this the Gazets took great care to acquaint us with; as also to let us
know those Noble Peers and others who, upon the News of this miscalled
Invasion, humbly offered their Services to His Majesty. Amongst which was his
Grace the late Duke of Newcastle, to whom the King gave a Commission to raise a
Regiment of Foot.

The King had a gallant Army, but most of them were Protestants, and not a few
true English Men, readier to draw the Sword for the Defense of the Protestant
Religion and the Liberty of England, than for the Maintenance of those two
Inseparable Monsters, Popery and Slavery. The People generally waited for the
Princes Coming with great Impatience, and could not conceal the Joy which the
Expectation of him had diffused over and the Kingdom. So that, if this were an
Invasion, one could every where read Treason in their Faces, and a Man could
scarce turn about but he met with a Traitor.

They that knew not the North from the South, or the East from the West, fell
learning of the Compass, to find out how the Wind fat, whilst they longed for
that Wind which must bring over the Prince. So mindful were the People of the
late Attempts upon their Religion, Laws, and Liberties, that they looked upon
Him as their Savior, whom the Court Party called Invader.

Such was the state of Things here, when the Prince of Orange, having long
waited for a favorable Wind, did at last set out from Holland with His great
Fleet, which lay in the Flats near the Brill. This was October 19. (old Style)
1688, when his Highness, attended by Marshall de Schomberg as General, with
many other great Officers, and Persons of Quality of several Nations, set Sail
about four a Clock in the Afternoon. Nothing could be more glorious than his
Setting out, but nothing more dismal than what followed soon after. So furious
a Tempest did arise in the Night as wholly dispersed that prodigious Fleet, and
gave great Apprehensions of its Loss. When Holland, that had seen but the day
before the whole Fleet sail together in the greatest Splendor, saw now but
seattered Ships return into its Harbor, not without some Damage. Which proved
for some time a great Mortification to the Protestant Party, whilst the Roman
Catholics looked upon it as an Indication of God's Anger, an ill Omen to the
Prince, and a terrible Warning to His Highness not to Attempt any Thing against
the Church Interest. In short, they presently concluded his Highness must let
fall his Design. And it is observable, that, upon the News of it here, there was
a Demurr put upon the Business of Magdalen College; which showed still what
they would be at, if the Prince had any way failed in his Design.

But the whole Fleet came at last to several Ports of Holland, without so much
as one Ship cast away. Only one Man, and 4 or 500 Horses were lost, which were
thrown Overboard. So that his Highness, admiring God's Providential Goodness
in so great a Trial, resolved to pursue his Heroic Design with the first
Opportunity. And, whatever Application might be made unto him to dissuade him
from any further Attempt, he declared, That his Word was too far engaged, and
his Honor lay too much at Stake, for any Danger to deter him from the
Performance of the first, or from Saving the last as far as it lay in his
power. That, as He was satisfied with the Justice of his Undertaking, so He was
fully convinced of God's merciful Goodness in Saving the whole Fleet from so
apparent a Danger, which he took as a good Omen. Accordingly He ordered all
Things to be got in rea^iness, and a speedy Recruit of Horses to be made.

About October. 30. the Wind turning Easterly, and blowing fresh, Orders were
given to Set out with all Speed. And two Days after, Nov. 1. about Three in the
Afternoon, the whole Fleet, now increased to a greater Number did set Sail.
Which, being commanded by Admiral Herbert, was divided into three Squadrons,
the Red, White, and Blue, according to the Color of their respective Flags.
The Prince was in the Brill, a new Ship of about 3^ Guns; Whose Flag was
English Colors, with this Motto impaled thereon, The Protestant Religion and
Liberties of England; and underneath, I Will Maintain It.

To the Red Squadron belonged the English and Scotch Forces, consisting of six
Foot Regiments, commanded by Major General Mackay. To the VVhi^e, the Prince's
Gards and the Brandenburghers, under the Command of Count Solms. And the Blue
Squadron contained the Dutch and French Forces, commanded by Count Nassaw.
Every Ship had a distinctive Mark, whereby it was Known unto what Squadron she
belonged. And, when Night came upon them, all the Ships set out their Lights,
which made a most glorious Show upon the Sea; the Princes Ship having three
Lanthorns, the other Men of War two each, and each other Ship one. All which at
a distance appeared like so many Stars, moving upon the Water.

The Wind and VVeather continuing Fair, on Saturday Nov. 3. about Noon the
Fleet got into the Channel, sailing VVestward with all their Colors set out,
and stretched in a Line betwixt Calais and Dover, so that it reached within a
League of each Place. His Highness led the Van, attended by three Men of War;
one at a distance before his Ship, and one on each side. The Tenders, as Pinks,
Flyboats, and other Vessels of this Kind, sailed next, with their Decks
thronged with Officers and Soldiers; the Flanks and Rear being guarded by the
Men of War, but especially the Rear, as being most in danger to be followed by
the English Fleet. In this great Splendor and Order the whole Fleet sailed
with a Kind of Bravado betwixt England and France, Drums beating, Colors
flying, the Trumpets sounding, and the Hoboys playing, for the space of three
hours. Great was the Concourse of Spectators on both Shores, at 20 miles
distance from each other, to see this glorious Sight, worthy of the greatest
Monarch to behold. The Men of War that sailed nearest to Dover gave the Town
and Castle some Guns, and those that went on the other side did the same by
Calais.

The English Fleet, consisting of about 34 Sail under the Command of the Lord
Dartmouth, lay then in the Buoy of the Nore; but did not think fit to stir,
with a Number so much inferior, and a parcel of Seamen who were Known to be
Well wishers to the Prince.

The next Day, Nov. 4. being the Lord's Day, and the Day of the Prince's happy
Birth and Marriage, the Fleet (being now come as far as the Isle of VVight)
observed the Duty of the Day; and did not Sail, but all were driven of the
Waves, till about four in the Afternoon. When, the VVind being still
favorable, and blowing very fresh, every Ship made all the Sail she could bear.

Torbay in Devonshire was the Place intended for Landing. But the next Morning,
Monday Nov. 5, proving very Hazy and Foggy, and full of Rain, the Fleet happened
to Sail beyond it. About Nine of the Clock it cleared up; and, as Providence
was pleased to order it, the VVind then choped about, and turned West South
West, a moderate Gale. Which brought them back to Torbay, and having executed
it is Commission, was immediately in another Corner.

Then, by the Princes Order, the Standard was put up; the White Flag uppermost,
signifying his Offer of Peace to all that would live Peaceably; and under that
the Red (or Bloody) Flag, denouncing War to all such as should offer to oppose
his just Designs.

Of all this great Fleet, three Tenders only were intercepted by our Men of
War. One of them a Fly-boat, having on Board four Companies of Foot of Colonel
Babington's Regiment, commanded by Major Collambine. This was taken by Captain
Aylmer, Commander of the Swallow Frigate. The other two, being a small Pink and
a Fishing Boat with 24 Horse, separated from the Fleet, were taken below Hole
Haven by Captain Hastings, Commander of the Woolwich.

Thus the Fleet landed at Torbay on the fifth of November. A memorable Day for
the Gunpowder Treason, which seems to have been marked out by Providence, that
Englands Deliverance in the Reign of James II. might begin the same Day that it
was designed for Ruin and Destruction in the Reign of King James I. The Year
also is memorable; this Deliverance falling out in 88. just a hundred Years
after England was delivered from the Spanish Invasion in Queen Elizabeth's
Reign, when it pleased God to confound and disperse that formidable Armada,
which for its Greatness was in vain called Invincible.

The Prince of Orange being come into the Bay, with the major part of the
Floet, Boats were ordered to carry his Highness to Shore with his Gards, and
the Noblemen that were about his Person. Who, being Landed, marched up the
Hill, some before the Prince, and some after. Then the Guns fired from the
Fleet, with the Beat of the Drums, the Sound of Trumpets, the Music of Hoboys,
and the joyful Huzza's of the Fleet and Army; the Ships with all their Colors
out, and the Colors of the Landforces that went out with the Prince, flying
and flourishing before his Highness. And, whilst he was viewing the Ground on
the Top of the Hill in order to In^amp^h^s Army, all hands in the Fleet were at
work to carry the Men and Horses, with their Necessaries, to Shore. So that the
whole Army was Landed the next Day, being Tuesday, by three a Clock in the
Afternoon; the Horse being Landed first, and then the Foot. But their Cannon
and Carriages, etc. were sent about for Topsham, and from thence brought up by
Water to Exeter.

At the upper end of the Bay was a Fair House belonging to one Mr. Carey a
Papist, who entertained a Priest in his House. This Priest having discovered
the Fleet from the Leads of the House, with the White Flags on some of the Men
of War, concluded it to be the French Fleet come to Assist King James against
the Prince of Orange. Transported with Joy at the Conceit of it, he without any
more ado ordered all the Family to the Chapel, to sing Te Deum for the Arrival
of the French. But he was soon undeceived, and thererupon laughed at for his
Religious Mistake.

This House the Prince of Orange, upon his Landing, commanded to be Searched
for Arms and Horses. Some Horses and a few Arms were found, and brought from
thence; but without giving any further Disturbance to the House, where both the
Searchers and the Searched entertained one another with mutual Civility.

Near the Seaside were some Thatched Houses belonging to Fishermen, one of
whom had the honor to Entertain the Prince at his House, till the Wednesday
following. Which Day the Prince rode from this Place to Sir William Courtney's,
within a mile of Newton-Abbot, the first Market Town; the first Line of the
Army being about Newton, and the last upon their March thither. Here a Divine,
going before the Army, went to the Cross (or Town Hall) on the Market Day;
where he read aloud to the People the Prince's Declaration. Which ended with
their joyful Acclamations, and kind Wishes to the Prince; followed soon after
by Ringing of Bells, and Drinking of the Prince's Health. And, as his Highness
was most kindly received and entertained at Sir William Courtney's, so were
the Soldiers generally well treated by the Vulgar. Here began the Provi^ions
to abound, which hitherto had been very scarce; and, as they were honestly paid
for, so the Army was quickly supplied with what the Co^ntry could afford.

On Thursday Nov. 8th. the Lord Mordant (now Earl of Monmouth) came to Exeter
with three or four Troops of Horse, and Dr. Burnet with him. But, when they
came to one of the Gates, it was shut against them. Upon which the Lord Mordant
commanded the Porter, on pain of Death, to open the Gate. Which being open, his
Lordship commanded him on the same Pain, not to shut it again. My Lord and the
Doctor went to the Mayor, to Know if he would meet the Prince at the Gate, and
govern the City under Him. Which he excused, telling him he was under the
Obligation of an Oath to His Majesty, and therefore desired the Prince would
lay no Commands on him contrary to his Conscience. Thus, after some Debate of
the Matter, they parted; whilst the Forces kept coming to Town.

The next Day, being Friday Nov. 9th. the Prince came into Exeter, attended
(besides his Gards) with a brave Train of Nobles, Knights, and Gentlemen. Upon
the Road he met with Multitudes of People, who welcomed His Highness with their
Shouts and Huzza's. The same was done at Exeter, where the Streets were
thronged on each side, the Windows beautified, and full of joyful Spectators.
Being come to the Dean's House, where He kept his Court, He took some
Refreshment; and then was pleased to go and render Thanks to God in the
Cathedral Church, for his ^^se Arrival. Where being sat in the Bishops Seat,
then Absent, the Quire began, and Sung Te Deum; and, after the Collects were
ended, Dr. Burnet Read the Prince's Declaration. Dr. Lamplugh, then Bishop of
this Diocese, was fled to London upon the Prince's Landing at Torbay. Where
having waited upon the King at White Hall, His Majesty was pleased to reward
this piece of his Loyalty by Translating him to the Archbishopric of York,
which had been a long time Vacant.

The main Body of the Army marched in the mean time, the Horse to the
Neighboring Parishes, and the Foot to Clist-Heath, where they Encamped. Both
Horse and Foot looked very much Disabled and Weather beaten, what with the Sea,
and what with their March hither through bad Ways, and in Rainy Weather, Their
H^r^^s were for the most part to Weak, that they could scarce st^^d upon their
Legs. So that, if the K ng's Forces had been read at han^, it might have gone
very hard, in case o a Fight, with he Prince's Army. But it pleased God so to
order it, that, while the King expected the Prince in the North, the Prince
gave him the Go^by, and took his Course a great way to the West; that, being
upon his Landing at a good distance from His Majesty's Forces, He might have
time to Refresh His own, before they could come to Action.

The Prince therefore thought fit to stay a while at Exeter, but this was not
the only Reason. Not a Person of Quality and Interest in those Parts, (besides
Sir William Courtney,) had joined Him hitherto, which His Highness did much
wonder at. Only on the Monday, Nov. 12, one Captain Burrington came, and
offered him his Service; who was accordingly very kindly received by His
Highness. But, two Days after, several noted Gentlemen of Dorset-Shire and
Somersetshire came in to Join the Prince, and waited on His Highness Thursday
Nov. 15 To whom He spoke after this manner.

Gentlemen,
The Princes Speech to the Gentry that came to Join him at Exeter.
Though We know not all your Persons yet We have a Catalogue of your Names, and
remember the Character of your Worth and Interest in your Country. You see We
are come, according to your Invitation and our Promise. Our Duty to God obliges
Us to Protect the Protestant Religion; and Our Love to Mankind, your Liberties
and Properties. We expected you that dwell so near the Place of our Landing
would have Joined us sooner. Not that it is now too late, nor that we want your
Military Assistance, so much as your Countenance and Presence, to justify our
declared Pretensions, in order to accomplish our good and gracious Design. Though
We have brought both a good Fleet and a good Army, to render these Kingdoms
happy, by Rescuing all Protestants from Popery, Slavery, and Arbitrary Power,
by Restoring them to their Rights and Properties established by Law, and by
Promoting of Peace and Trade, which is the Soul of Government and the Life of
the Nation; yet we rely more on the goodness of God, and the Justice of our
Cause, than on any humane Force and Power whatever. But, since God is pleased
that we should make use of humane Means, and not expect Miracles, for our
Preservation and Happiness, let us not neglect making use of this gracious
Opportunity, but with Prudence and Courage put in execution our so honorable
Purposes. Therefore Gentlement, Friends, and Fellow Protestants, We bid you and
all your Followers most Heartily Welcome to our Court and Camp. Let the whole
World now Judge, if our Pretensions are not Just, Generous, Sincere, and above
Price, since We might have even a Bridge of Gold to Return back. But it is our
Principle and Resolution rather to die in a good Cause, than live in a bad one;
Virtue and true Honor being its own Reward, and the Happiness of Mankind our
great and only Design.

Both the Clergy and Gentry of this County were uneasy, for fear that King
James should prevail, and therefore backward to declare for the Prince. But the
People were forward enough. For, when the Drums beat for Volunteers, they came
in apace from all Parts of the County, insomuch that many Captains picked and
chose their Soldiers. Thousands did list themselves to whom Arms were Given;
and many more would have done the same, who were dismissed, upon Marshall
Schombergs Advice, that there was no need of them. Thus the Citizens Fears of
King James's Forces lessening every day, they began to talk now more freely,
and to be more and more inclined toward the Prince. The Mayor himself and
Aldermen, much taken up with their Consultations upon the present Juncture,
came at last to visit his Highness.

The Lord Lovelace coming through Cirencester in Glocestershire to join the
Prince at Exeter with near 70 Horse very well appointed, had the Misfortune to
be stopped at that Town, and seized with thirteen of his Party, by the Officers
of the Militia. Who met however with so sharp a Resistance, that several of
them were killed, and others wounded. Amongst the first were Lorege Major of
the Regiment and his Son, Captain Lee a Deputy Lieutenant of the County, and
Williams a Lieutenant.

About the same time, viz. on Monday Nov. 12, the Lord Cornbury, Colonel of the
Royal Regiment of Dragoons, marched from Salisbury, in order to bring over that
Regiment, and two more of Horse, to the Prince of Orange. Which two Regiments
of Horse were the Royal Regiment, and the Duke of S. Alban's, then Commanded by
Lieutenant Colonel Langston. They marched together, first to Dorcester, where
they refreshed themselves; and then went on to Bridport, and Axmister. Upon
which several Officers, mistrusting his Lordship, asked him whither they were
going? Who answered, he had the King's Orders to beat up the Enemies Quarters
at Honiton. But finding the Royal Regiment of Horse, and several Officers of
the Dragoons, did more and more suspect him, his Lordship marched with the
Officers and Dragoons that would follow him toward Honiton, Lieutenant Colonel
Langston marching before with the Regiment of S. Albans. As for the Royal
Regiment of Horse, and the rest of the Dragoons, they marched back toward
Bridport, being very much wearied by their long Marches, and put into some
Disorder by so great a Surprise.

Salisbury Plain was the Place of Rendez-vous for the Kings Army, consisting of
above 30000 Men, with a Great Train of Artillery, under the Command of the Earl
of Feversham; and all the Forces drew that Way, in order to a Battle.

Mean while, to bring Things to an Accommodation, and prevent Effusion of
Blood, a Petition for the Calling of a Free Parliament, Subscribed by Nineteen
Lord, both Spiritual and Temporal, was presented to the King by the Lords
Spiritual; viz. the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Archbishop of York Elect,
the Bishop of Ely, and the Bishop of Rochester, in these Words.

May it please your Majesty,
The Lords Petition for a Parliament.
We your Majesty's most Loyal Subjects, in a deep Sense of the Miseries of a
War now breaking forth in the Bowels of this your Kingdom, and of the Danger to
which Your Majesty's Sacred Person is thereby like to be exposed, and also of
the Distractions of your People by reason of their present Grievances, Do think
our selves bound in Conscience, of the 'Duty we ow to God, and our Holy
Religion, to your Majesty, and our Country, most humbly to offer to your
Majesty, That in our Opinion the only visible Way to preserve your Majesty, and
this your Kingdom, would be the Calling of a Parliament, Regular and Free in
all its Circumstances.

We therefore do most earnestly beseech Your Majesty, That You would be
Graciously Pleased, with all Speed, to call such a Parliament; Wherein we
shall be most ready to promote such Counsels and Resolutions of Peace and
Settlement in Church and State, as may conduce to Your Majesty's Honor and
Safety, and to the Quieting of the Minds of Your People.

We do likewise humbly beseech Your Majesty, in the mean time, to use such
Means for the preventing the Effusion of Christian Blood as to Your Majesty
shall seem most meet.

And Your Petitioners shall ever Pray, etc.
The King's Answer.
To which the King gave this Answer. My Lords, What you ask of Me I most
passionately desire; And I promise you, upon the Faith of a King, That I will
have a Parliament, and such an One as You ask for, as soon as ever the Prince
of Orange has quitted this Realm. For how is it possible a Parliament should be
Free in all its Circumstances, as you Petition for, whilst an Enemy is in the
Kingdom, and can make a Return of near an hundred Voices?

This was the King's Pretense for shunning a Parliament. Which, being Regularly
chosen, would in all probability call his evil Counselors to an account, whom
He thought himself bound in Honor to Protect; and strictly Inquire into the
Birth of the pretended Prince of Wales, the Questioning of which was a Stab at
his Heart. A Parliament that would probably bind up the Prerogative, pull down
the Dispensing Power, and damn that Beast with Seven Heads, the Ecclesiastical
Court. A Parliament that would prove fatal to his dearly beloved Priests and
Jesuits, and that would have pulled down all their Schools and Chapels, had
they not been prevented by the unaccountable Zeal of the Mobile. Lastly, The
King foresaw, that the Prince would have demanded some Forts to be put into his
Hands and the Parliaments, for their Security. So that He expected, in case of
a Free Parliament, to be but a Nominal King, and an unhappy Instrument of the
Ruin of his Child, Friends, and Religion. And, rather than do that, He chose to
Perish.

On the other side, He might flatter himself with hopes, 1. That we should
never be able to Agree, after he had made it impossible for us to have a Legal
Parliament. 2. That, when the Fear and Disorder were over, the Church of
England Principles would form a great Party for him in the Nation. 3. That the
French King would Assist him with Forces and Money; and, if he should prevail by
Force, then by a Popish Army he would for ever Insure the Slavery of England.

The only Advantage we could pretend to have by the Coming over of the Prince
of Orange with an Army was, to force the King to what he would never have
yielded without that Force. And, had the Prince gone back Re infecta, it is not
likely the King would have then granted us what he would not do now. Suppose he
had called a Parliament, what Assurance could we have of their Sitting, as long
as he should have no Occasion to Fear? Then, to be sure, he would have
disbanded the Protestants of his Army, and supplied their rooms with Irish
Papists, to have at last a Parliament (if a Parliament must be had) of their
making.

This being at that time the Posture of our Affairs, that the Prince referred
all to a Parliament, and the King would have none before he had quitted the
Kingdom, all Things seemed disposed to the Decision of a Bettel. In order to
which his Majesty, accompanied by his Highness Prince George of Denmark, parted
upon Saturday Nov. 17. from White Hall for Windsor, where he lay that Night;
and the next Day continued his Journey to Salisbury, whither he came the 19th.

About this time appeared a Letter from the Prince to the King's Army, in these
words.

Gentlemen and Friends,
The Prince's Letter to the English Army.
We have in Our Declaration given you so full and so true an Account of Our
Intentions in this Expedition, that We cannot doubt but that all true
Englishmen will come and concur with Us in our Destre to Secura these Nations
from Popery and Slavery. We are come to Preserve your Religion, and to Restore
and Establish your Liberties and Properties. It Is plain, that you are only made
use of as Instruments to Inslave the Nation, and Ruin the Protestant Religion.
And, when that is done, you may judge what your selves ought to expect, both
from the Cashiering of all the Protestant Officers and Soldiers in Ireland,
and by the Irish Soldiers being brought over to be put in your places. You
know how many of your Fellow Officers have been used for their standing firm to
the Protestant Religion and to the Laws of England; and you cannot flatter your
selves so far as to expect to be better used, if those who have broke their
Word so often should by your means be brought out of those Straits to which
they are now reduced. We hope likewise, that you will not suffer your selves
to be abused by a false Notion of Honor; but that you will in the first place
consider what you owe to Almighty God and your Religion, to your Country, to
your Selves, and to your Posterity, which You, as Men of Honor, ought to
prefer to all private Considerations and Engagements whatsoever. We do
therefore expect, that you will consider the Honor that is now set before you,
of being the Instruments of Serving your Country, and Securing your Religion.
And We will ever Remember the Service you shall do Us upon this Occasion, by
placing such particular Marks of our Favor on every one of You as your
Behavior at this time shall deserve of Us, in which We will make a great
Distinction of those that shall come seasonably to join their Arms with Ours.
In short, you shall find Us to be

Your Well-wishing and Assured Friend, William Henry Prince of Orange.


The Prince's Army began now to be in good heart, and one Man was as good as
two when they came first to Exeter. Every day his Highness went out to view the
Country with the Marshall de Schomberg, and went once as far as Autry, 12
miles from Exeter. In the mean time Mr. Seymour was made Governor, and one
Major Gibson Deputy Governor. For the managing the Revenue here, the Lord
Wiltshire, Mr. Herbord, and Mr. Row were appointed Commissioners.

The Prince's Court began also to swell. For, besides those great Persons which
had attended his Highness from Holland hither, viz. Marshall Schomberg, Count
Nassaw, Count Solms, the Lords Zulestein, Bentick, and Overkirk; of the English
Nation the Earls or Shrewebury and Macclesfield, Viscount Mordant, Lord
Wiltshire, end Colonel Sidney, and of the Scotch the Earl of Argile, with
several other Persons of Quality; here came to his Highness the Lord Cornbury,
the Earl of Abington, and the Lord Colchester, besides a great Number of
Gentry. Who all entered together into an Association to Assist the Prince of
Orange in the Defense of the Protestant Religion, Laws, and Liberties of the
People of England, Scotland, and Ireland, in these Words.

An Engagement of the Nobility at Exeter to stand by the Prince of Orange.
We do Engage to Almighty God, and to his Highness the Prince of Orange, and
with one another, to stick firm to this Cause, and to one another in the
Defense of it, and never to depart from it, until our Religion, Laws, and
Liberties, are so far Secured to us in a Free Parliament, that We shall be no
more in Danger of falling under Popery and Slavery. And, whereas we are engaged
in the Common Cause under the Protection of the Prince of Orange, by which
means his Person may be exposed to Danger, and to the desperate and cursed
Designs of Rapists, and other bloody Men, We do therefore solemnly Engage to
God, and to one another, That, if any such Attempts be made upon Him, We will
pursue not only those that made them, but all their Adherents, and all We find
in Arms against Us, with the utmost Severity of just Revenge in their Ruin and
Destruction; and that the Executing any such Attempt (which God of his infinite
Mercy forbid) shall not deprive Us from pursuing the Cause which We do now
undertake, but that it shall Encourage us to carry it on with all the Vigor
that so barbarbous an Approach shall do serve.

By this strict Association, the Prince saw how well these Noble Lords and
Gentlemen were disposed toward his Highness, and for the promoting the Good of
the Common Cause.

In the mean time he received Intelligence of the first Skirmish that happened
between the two Armies at Wincanton. To which Place a small Party of Major
General Mackay's Regiment being advanced, to provide Carriage, Colonel
Sarsfield having Notice of it marched thither with a Detachment of 70 Horse,
and 50 Dragoons and Granadiers, in order to cut them off. Who, hearing of
Sarsfield's Approach, resolved upon a stout Defense, notwithstanding their
small Number, being but 25. In order to which, Cambel their Lieutenant, posted
them in a small Enclosure at the East end of the Town, where there was a good
Hedge between them and the Road. Here they made a vigorous Defense, and several
were killed and wounded on both sides; when of a sudden, upon a false Alarm of
a strong Party of the Prince's Horse coming, Sarsfield and his Men retreated
with all speed, and in some disorder. And, tho he had little Cause to boast of
this Action, yet our Gazette did so magnify it, that by it is Account of it 30
of the Prince's Men were killed out of 25, besides 6 taken, and 15 that made
their escape.

One would think, the King by this time had done with Proclamations. His
Majesty was two to one at least as to the Number of Forces; and yet, to Ingross
all to himself, he put out a Proclamation at Salisbury, Nov. 22. to Entice away
all the Prince's Army, and so leave him by himself. By this Proclamation,
first, He Offers and Grants his Pardon to all his Subjects that had taken up
Arms with Foreigners and Strangers against Him and their Native Country; And
next, to all such Foreigners as should come over to Him, promising either to
Entertain them in his Service, or Grant them (if they should desire it) freedom
of Passage, and liberty to Return to the Respective Countries from whence they
came.

But this Stratagem would not do. And his Highness, having now received an
Account of the Motions and Proceedings in the North for the Support of the
Common Cause, prepared all Things for his March toward the King's Army. The
Lords concerned in the North were the Earls of Devonshire, Stamford, and Damby,
the Lord Delamere, and others; who, being met at Nottingham with great Numbers
of the Gentry, and a competent Force of Horsemen well appointed, to repel all
Opposers, unanimously subscribed to this Declaration, Nov. 23. the same Day
that the King put out his Proclamation.

The Declaration of the Nobility, and Gentry, etc. at the Rendezvous at
Nottingham.
We the Nobility, Gentry, and Commonalty of these Northern Counties assembled
together at Nottingham, for the Defense of our Laws, Religion, and Liberties,
according to those Freeborn Liberties and Privileges descended to Us from our
Ancestors, as the Undoubted Birthright of the Subjects of this Kingdom of
England (not doubting but the Infringers and Invaders of our Rights will
Represent us to the rest of the Nation in the most malicious Dress they can put
upon us) do here Unanimously think it our Duty to Declare to the rest of our
Protestant Fellow Subjects the Grounds of our present Undertaking.

We are by innumerable Grievances made sensible, that the very Fundamentals of
our Religion, Liberties, and Properties, are about to be Rooted out by our late
Jesuitical Privy Council, as has been of late too apparent. 1. By the King's
Dispensing at his Pleasure with all the Established Laws. 2. By Displacing all
Officers out of all Offices of Trust and Advantage, and Placing others in their
Room that are Known Papists, deservedly made Incapable by the Estabished Laws
of our Land. 3. By Destroying the Charters of most Corporations in the Land. 4.
By Discouraging all Persons that are not Papists, preferring such as turn to
Popery. 5. By Displacing all honest and conscientious Judges, unless they
would, contrary to their Consciences, declare that to be Law which was merely
Arbitrary. 6. By Branding all Men with the Name of Rebels, that but offered to
justify the Laws in a Legal Course against the Arbitrary Proceedings of the
King, or any of his corrupt Ministers. 7. By Burdening the Nation with an Army,
to maintain the Violation of the Rights of the Subjects. 8. By Discountenancing
the Established Reformed Religion. 9. By Forbidding the Subjects the Benefit of
Petitioning, and construing them Libeliers; so rendering the Laws a Nose of
Wax, to serve their Arbitrary Ends. And many more such like, too long here to
enumerate.

We being thus made sadly sensible of the Arbitrary and Tyrannical Government
that is by the Influence of Jesuitical Counsels coming upon us, do Unanimously
Declare, That not being willing to deliver our Posterity over to such a
Condition of Popery and Slavery, as the aforesaid Oppressions inevitably
threaten, We will to the utmost of our Power Oppose the same, by Joining with
the Prince of Orange, whom we hope God Almighty has sent to Rescue us from the
Oppressions aforesaid, and will use our utmost Endeavors for the Recovery of
our almost ruined Laws, Liberties, and Religion. Wherein we hope all good
Protestant Subj cts will with their Lives and Fortunes be Assistant to us, and
not be Bug-beared with the Opprobrious Term of Rebels, by which they would
fright us to become perfect Slaves to their Tyrannical Insolences and
Usurpations. For We assure our selves, that no rational and unbiassed Person
will judge it Rebellion to Defend our Laws and Religion, which all our Princes
have Sworn at their Coronation. Which Oath how well it has been observed of
late We desire a Free Parliament may have the Consideration of.

We own it Rebellion to Resist a King that Governs by Law. But he was always
accounted a Tyrant that made his Will the Law, and to Resist such a one we
justly esteem no Rebellion, but a necessary Defense. And in this Corsideration
We doubt not of all honest Mons Assistance, humbly hoping for and imploring the
great God's Protection, that turns the Hearts of the People as pleases him
best. For it has been observed, that People can never be of one Mind without
his Inspiration; which has confirmed the Saying, Vox Populi Vox Dei.

The present Restoring of Charters, and Reversing the oppressing and unjust
Judgment given of Magdalen College Fellows, is plain, are but to still the
People, like Plums to Children, by deceiving them for a while. But, if they
shall by this Stratagem be fooled, t^ll the present Storm that threatens the
Papists be past, as soon as they shall be Re-settled, the former Oppression
will be put on with greater Vigor. But we hope in vain is the Net spread in
the sight of the Birds. The Old Rule of Papists is so well known, that Faith is
not to be kept with Heretics, as they term Protestants, tho the Popish
Religion is the greatest Heresy. It Is well known how ill Q. Mary observed her
Promises to the Suffolk Men that helped her to the Throne. And how the Pope
Dispenses with the Breach of Oaths, Treatises, or Promises, at his Pleasure,
when it makes for the Service of the Holy Church, as they term it. These are
such convincing Reasons to hinder Us from giving Credit to the aforesaid
Mock-shews of Redress, that We think our selves bound in Conscience to rest on
no Security that shall not be approved by a Freely Elected Parliament; to whom,
under God, we Refer our Cause.

To this Declaration the Northern Commonalty, sensible of the Justice of it,
and Influenced besides by the Interest and Example of so many Lords and
Gentlemen, did readily Subscribe; and the Militia was Raised upon it, who gave
a great Stroke toward the Revolution. For the News of it coming to the Kings
Ears at Salisbury struck such a Damp upon his Spirits, that he began now to
think his Case desperate.

To the same Effect was a Paper delivered from the Nobility and Gentry of the
North by the Earl of Devonshire to the Mayor of Darby, where his Lordship
Quartered the 21* of November; that is, for the Meeting and Sitting of a
Parliament freely and duly Chosen. With a declared Resolution therein, That, in
case any Interruption should be given to the Proceeding of a Parliament, they,
the Nobility and Gentry of the Northern Parts of England, would to their utmost
Defend the Protestant Religion, the Laws of the Kingdom, and the Rights and
Liberties of the Subject.

In the County of Norfolk, the Duke who bears that Title, found the Gentry and
Common People in the same Disposition. Being come to Lyn, attended by many of
the Principal Men in the County, he received an Address in the Marketplace,
presented in these Words to his Grace by the Mayor, attended by the Body, and
many hundreds of the Inhabitants.

My Lord,
Address of Lyn to the Duke of Norfolk.
The Daily Alarms we receive, as well from Foreign as Domestic Enemies, give
us just Apprehensions of the approaching Danger we conceive to be in; and make
us apply our selves with all earnestness to your Grace, as our great Patron,
that we may be put into such posture by your Directions and Conduct, as may
make us appear as Zealous as any in the Defense of the Protestant Religion, the
Laws, and Ancient Government of this Kingdom. Which is the Desire of many
Hundreds, who most humbly challenge a Right of your Graces Protection.

To which his Grace was pleased to Answer thus.

Mr. Mayor,
The Duke of Norfolk's Answer.
I am very much obliged to You, and the rest of your Body, and all here
present, for your good Opinion of me, and the Confidence you have that I will
do what in me lies to support and defend the Laws, Liberties, and Protestant
Religion, in which I will never deceive you. And, since the Coming of the
Prince of Orange has given us an Opportunity to Declare for the Defense of
them, I can only assure you, that no Man will venture his Life and Fortune more
freely for the same than I will do, especially with all these Gentlemen here
present, and many more of the same Principles. In order to which, you shall see
all possible Care shall be taken to answer your Expectation.

Whereupon the Militia was ordered to be raised throughout the County. Which
being thus put into a posture of Defense, his Grace was pleased to deliver
himself in these Words to the said Corporation.

The Duke of Norfolk's second Speech.
I have endeavored, as you see, to put you into the Posture you desired, by
sending both for Horse and Foot of the Militia, and am very glad to see such an
Appearance of this Town in so good a Condition. I do again renew my former
Assurances to you, that I will ever stand by you to defend the Laws, Liberties,
and the Protestant Religion; and to procure a Settlement in Church and State,
in concurrence with the Lords and Gentlemen in the North, and pursuant to the
Declaration of the Prince of Orange. And so God Save the King.

In short, the Genius of the whole Nation (if you except the Papists, and some
false Protestants) did run that Way, and there was no stopping of so strong a
Current. Which his Highness the Prince of Orange was no sooner satisfied in,
but he marched from Exeter forward with his Army; the Fort of Plymouth being
already Surrendered to his Highness by the Earl of Bath. At Exeter he only left
a new raised Regiment to keep the City, under the Command of Sir John Guyes,
then made Governor thereof.

The Army marching in three Lines, and the Prince in the second Line, his
Highness marched out from Exoter Nov. 22. and came to Crook-horn on Saturday
24. Then the Gentlemen of the West came in apace, and joined him almost at
every Stage. From Crook horn, where he staid the 25th. he came the next Day to
Sherborn, and lodged at the Castle; where the Duke of Grafton and the Lord
Churchill, amongst others, joined him from the King's Army. Whereupon the Lord
Churchill, who lay under particular Obligations to the King, wrote a Letter to
his Majesty in these following Terms.

SIR,
The Lord Churchills Letter to the King.
Since Men are seldom suspected of Sincerity, when they act contrary to their
Interests; and, though my dutiful Behavior to Your Majesty in the worst of
Times (for which I acknowledge my poor Services much Over-paid) may not be
sufficient to Incline You to a charitable Interpretation of my Actions; Yet I
hope, the great Advantage I enjoy under Your Majesty, which I can never expect
in any other Change of Government, may reasonably convince your Majesty and the
World, that I am acted by a higher Principle, when I offer that Violence to my
Inclination and Interest, as to desert Your Majesty at a time when Your Affairs
seem to challenge the strictest Obedience from all your Subjects, much more
from One who lies under the greatest personal Obligations imaginable to Your
Majesty. This, SIR, could proceed from nothing but the Inviolable Dictates of
my Conscience, and a necessary Concern for my Religion, which no good Man can
oppose, and with which I am instructed nothing ought to come in Competition.
Heaven knows with what partiality my dutiful Opinion of Your Majesty has
hitherto represented those Unhappy Designs, which inconsiderate and
self-interested Men have framed against your Majesty's true Interest and the
Protestant Religion. But, as I can no longer Join with such to give a pretense
by Conquest to bring them to effect, so will I always with the hazard of my
Life and Fortune (so much your Majesty's Due) endeavor to preserve Your Royal
Person and Lawful Rights, with all the tender concern and dutiful Respect that
becomes,

SIR, Your Majesty's most Dutiful and most Obliged Subject and Servant,
CHURCHILL.


By this Desertion the King grew more and more sensible how little he was to
depend upon an Army, which daily mouldred away; Not for want of natural
Affection to his Majesty, but only to bring him off from his evil Counselors,
and into a necessity of Complying with the general Desire of the Nation to have
all Things Rectified by a Free and Legal Parliament

Before the King left Salisbury, there happened such a sudden Gust of Wind as
hurried down the Crown which had stood many Years upon the top of a Spire of
the Cathedral. This was looked upon as an ill Omen to the King. And so was his
Majesty's violent Bleeding at the Nose, that could not be stopped for a long time
any manner of way.

The Vangards of both Armies being now near each other, a Party of the Prince's
appeared not far from Salisbury. Upon which King James and his Army, thinking
the Prince's whole Force were coming upon them, took the Alarm; so that his
Majesty in the midst of his Bleeding ordered his Coach forthwith to be made
ready, and drive away to Windsor. Upon whose Departure, his Forces in great
haste and disorder marched, some one way, some another.

The King being come to Andover, which was his first Stage homeward, his Royal
Highness Prince George of Denmark, accompanied by his Grace the Duke of Ormond,
and the Lord Drumlangrig, withdrew from his Majesty in the Night, in order to
join the Prince of Orange at Sherborn; which they did the 29th. From whence
Prince George sent a most tender Letter to the King, in these following Terms.

SIR,
Prince George his Letter to the King.
With a Heart full of Grief I am forced to write what Prudence would not permit
me to say to your Face. And way I ever find Credit with your Majesty, and
Protection from Heaven, as what I now do it free from Passion, Vanity, or
Design. I am not ignorant of the frequent Mischiefs wrought in the World by
factious Pretenses of Religion; but, were not Religion the most Justifiable
Cause, it would not be made the most specious Pretense. And Your Majesty has
always shows too Vninterested a Sense of Religion to doubt the just Effects of
it in One whose Practices have (I hope) never given the World cause to censure
his real Conviction of it, or his Backwardness to perform what his Honor and
Conscience prompt him to. I can therefore no longer disguise my just Concern
for that Religion in which I have been so happily Educated, which my Judgment
thoroughly convinces me to be best, and for the Support of which I am so highly
interested both in my Native Country and in this your Kingdom. Whilst the
restless Spirits of the Enemies of the Reformed Religion, backed by the cruel
Zeal and the prevailing Power of France, justly alarm and unite all the
Protestant Princes of Christendom, and engage them in so vast an Expense for
the Support of it, can I act so degenerous and mean a part, as to deny my
Concurrence to such worthy Endeavors to disabuse Your Majesty, by the
Reinforcement of those Laws, and Establishing of that Government, on which
alone depends the Well-being of your Majesty, and of the Protestant Religion in
Europe. This, SIR, is that irresistible and only Cause that could come in
Competition with my Duty and Obligations to your Majesty, and be able to tear
me from You, whilst the same affectionate Desire of Serving you continues in
me. Could I secure your Person by the hazard of my Life, I should think it
could not be better employed. And would to God these your distracted Kingdoms
might yet receive that satisfactory Compliance from your Majesty in all their
Justifiable Pretensions, as might upon the only sure Foundation, that of the
Love and Interest of your Subjects, establish your Government, and at strongly
Unite the Hearts of all your Subjects to You as is that of

SIR, Your Majesty's most Humble and most Obedient Son and Servant.


This was a strange Time for Flight. For, whilst the King fled from Salisbury,
and the Prince of Denmark from the King, the Princess also took her Flight from
the Cockpit. Her Royal Highness, then big of the Duke of Gloucester, not being
able to bear the King's Displeasure upon the Princes account or her own,
withdrew her self Nov. 26. early in the Morning, and went with the Ladies
Churchill and Berkley, and the Lord Bishop of London, to the North, where the
Forces were in Arms for the Prince of Orange. Upon which her Royal Highness
left a Letter for the Queen, in these following Words.

MADAM,
The Princess of Denmark her Letter to the Queen.
I beg Your Pardon that I am so deeply affected with the surprising News of the
Prince's being gone, as not to be able to see Your Majesty. However I leave
this Paper to express my humble Duty to the King and Your self, and to let You
know that I am gone to Absent my self to avoid the King's Displeasure (which I
am not able to bear) either against the Prince or my Self; intending to stay at
so great a Distance, as not to Return, before I hear the happy News of a
Reconcilen ent. And, as I am confident the Prince did not leave the King with
any other Design, than to use all possible Means for his Majesty's
Preservation; so I hope You will do me the Justice to believe, that I am
incapable of following him for any other End. Never was any one in such an
unhappy Condition, so divided between Duty to a Father and Affection to a
Husband, that I know not what to do, but to follow One to preserve the Other. I
see the general Falling off of the Nobility and Gentry, who avow to have no
other End than to prevail with the King to secure their Religion, which they
saw so much in danger by the violent Counsels of the Priests; who, to promote
their own Religion, cared not to what Dangers they exposed his Majesty. I am
fully persuaded, that the Prince of Orange designs the King's Safety and
Preservation, and hop all Things may be composed without more Bloodshed, by
the Calling a Parliament. God grant a happy End to these Troubles, that the
King's Reign may be prospero^s, and that I may shortly meet You in perfect
Peace and Safety. Till when, let me beg of You the Continuance of that
favorable Opinion you have hitherto had of.

Your Majesty's most obedient Daughter and Servant ANNE.


The same Day the Princess went, the King returned to Whitehall from Salisbury.
Who, seeing how Things went, first turned Sir Edward Hales out of his
Government of the Tower, who being a Papist had threatened to Bomb the City; and
made Colonel Bevile Skeleton Lieutenant of the Tower, who had been a Prisoner
there but a few Days before. Then his Majesty gave Order to the Lord
Chancellor to Issue out Writs for summoning a Parliament to meet at
Westminster the 15th. day of January next. Which was a great Step toward a
Reconcilement, if so be the King had really intended it. But it proved a mere
Amusement. For his Heart did beat for Versailles; and the Pretense of a
Parliament was only to posses the People with an Opinion, that he was resolved
to be Reconciled with them at any Rate, and in the mean time to Prepare himself
under hand for a Retreat.

Nov. 30. He signed the Proclamation for the speedy Calling of a Parliament,
and ordered it with all speed to be Published. Never was false Coin better
plated, than this Proclamation was worded to amuse the People. These are the
Words.

JAMES R.

We have thought fit, as the best and most proper Means to Establish a lasting
Peace to this Our Kingdom, to Call a Parliament; The King's Proclamation for
the speedy Calling of a Parliament.
and have therefore Ordered our Chancellor to cause Writs to be Issued forth
for Summoning a Parliament, to Meet at Westminster upon the 15th. day of
January next ensuing the Date of this Our Royal Proclamation. And, that nothing
may be wanting on Our part toward the Freedom of Elections, as We have already
Restored all Cities, Towns Corporate, and Boroughs throughout Our Kingdom, to
their ancient Charters, Rights, and Privileges; so we Require and Command all
Persons whatsoever, that they presume not by Menace, or any other undue Means,
to Influence Elections, or Procure the Vote of any Flector. And We do also
strictly Require and Command all Sheriffs, Mavors, Bailiffs, and other
Officers, to whom the Execution or Return of any Writ, Summons, Warrant, or
Precept, for Members to the ensuing Parliament shall belong, that they cause
such Writ, Summons, Warrant, and Precept, to be duly Published and Executed,
and Returns thereupon to be fairly made, according to the true Merits of such
Elections.

And, for the Security of all Persons both in their Election and Service in
Parliament, We do hereby Publish and Declare, That all Our Subjects shall have
free Liberty to Elect, and all Our Peers, and such as shall be Elected Members
of Our House of Commons, shall have full Liberty and Freedom to Serve in
Parliament, Notwithstanding they have taken up Arms, or committed any Act of
Hostility, or been any way Aiding or Assisting therein. And, for the better
Assurance hereof, We have Graciously directed a General Pardon to all Our
Subjects, to be forthwith prepared to pass Our Great Seal.

And, for the Reconciling all Public Breaches, and Obliterating the very
Memory of all past Miscarriages, We do hereby Exhort and Kindly Admonish all
Our Subjects to dispose themselves to Elect such Persons for their
Representatives in Parliament as may not be Biassed by Prejudice or Passion,
but Qualified with Parts, Experience, and Prudence, proper for this
Conjuncture, and agreeable to the Ends and Purposes of this Our Gracious
Proclamation.


His Highness the Prince of Orange, having staid some Days at Sherborn, moved
toward Salisbury, by the Way of Mere. At his Entrance into Salisbury, which
was in great State, he was met by the Mayor and Aldermen in all their
Formalities, the Bells ringing, the People shouting, and the whole City in a
Transport of Joy at the sight of their Deliverer. His Highness rode into the
City, with the Prince of Denmark at his right hand, and the Duke of Ormond on
his left; and took up his Quarters at the Bishop's Palace. Here his Highness
made a Halt for some Days. Which the Princess of Denmark having notice of, she
came to Oxford, attended by a select Troop of Country Gentlemen well Armed;
where Prince George went to meet her Royal Highness.

All the way the Army marched, Care was taken to disperse the Prince's
Declaration; and where they happened to Quarter upon Sundays, there it was read
in the Churches. By this time the King's Army was much broken, most of the
Protestant Officers and Soldiers come away, and Joined his Highnesses Forces.
So that there was no Prospect of a Field-Battel.

After some Stay here the Prince came away, and marched to Amsbury, from thence
to Collingburn, and so to Littlecot, where he came on Saturday December. 8.

In the mean time the Lords Commissioners, viz. the Marquess of Hallifax, the
Earl of Nottingham, and the Lord Godolphin, appointed by the King to treat with
the Prince of Orange, were come to Hungerford, being the Place agreed on for
that purpose by the Prince. To whom a VVriting, subscribed by their Lordships,
was delivered in these following Words.

SIR,
The King has commanded us to acquaint you, That he observes all the
Differences and Causes of Complaint alleged by your Highness seem to be
Referred to a Free Parliament. His Majesty, as he has already declared, was
resolved before to Call one, but thought that in the present State of Affairs
it was Advisable to Defer it, till Things were more composed. Yet, seeing that
his People still continued to desire it, he has put forth his Proclamation in
order to it, and has issued forth his Writ, for Calling of it. And, to prevent
any Cause of Interruption in it, he will consent to every Thing that can be
reasonably required for the Security of all those that shall come to it. His
Majesty has therefore sent us to attend your Highness, for the Adjusting of all
Matters that shall be agreed to, necessary for the Freedom of Elections, and
the Security of Sitting; and is ready immediately to enter into a Treaty, in
order to it. His Majesty proposes, that in the mean time the respective Armies
may be Restrained within such Limits, and at such Distance from London, as may
prevent the Apprehensions that the Parliament may in any Kind be Disturbed;
being desirous, that the Meeting of it may be no longer Delayed than it must be
by the usual and necessary Forms.


In Answer to which, these following Proposals were made by the Prince, with
the Advice of the Lords and Gentlemen Assembled with his Highness.

1. That all Papists, and such Persons as were not Qualified by Law, should be
Disarmed, Disbanded, and Removed from all Employments, Civil and Military. 2.
That all Proclamations which Reflected upon his Highness, or any that was come
over to him, or had declared for him, should be Recalled; and, if any Persons,
for so doing, had been Committed, they should be forthwith set at Liberty. 3.
That, for the Security and Safety of the City of London, the Custody and
Government of the Tower be immediately put into the hands of the said City. 4.
That, if his Majesty shall think to be at London during the Sitting of the
Parliament, his Highness might be there also, with equal Number of Gards. Or,
if his Majesty should rather choose to be in any Place from London, his Highness
might be at a Place of the same Distance. 5. That the Respective Armies should
Remove 30 Miles from London, and no more Foreign Forces should be brought into
the Kingdom. 6. That, for the Security of the City of London, and their Trade,
Tilbury-Fort be put into the hands of the said City. 7. That to prevent the
Landing of French, or other Foreign Troops, Portsmouth be put into such hands
as by the King and Prince should be agreed upon. 8. That some sufficient Part
of the Public Revenue be assigned his Highness, for the Maintaining of his
Forces till the Meeting of the Parliament.

The King, upon the View of these Proposals, Resolved upon a speedy Retreat
into France. The Prince of Wales so called was sent for beforehand to go
thither along with the Queen, who accordingly set out December 10. And the next
Day, early in the Morning, the King, attended by Sir Edward Hales, went away
from White-kall Incognito.

Before his Departure he sent Notice of it to the Earl of Feversham, by a
Letter framed in these Words.

MY LORD,
Things being come to that Extremity, that I have been forced to send away the
Queen and my Son the Prince of Wales, that they might not fall into my Enemies
hands (which they must have done, if they had staid.) I am obliged to do the
same Thing and to endeavor to Secure my self the best I can, in hopes it will
please God out of his infinite Mercy to this unhappy Nation, to touch their
hearts again with true Loyalty and Honor. If I could have relied on all my
Troops, I might not have been put to the Extremity I am in, and would at least
have had one Blow for it. But, tho I know there are many loyal and brave Men
amongst you both Officers and Soldiers, yet you know that both your Self and
several of the General Officers, and others of the Army, told me, it was no
ways advisable for me to venture my self at their Head, or think to fight the
Prince of Orange with them. What remains is only for me to Thank you, and all
those both Officers and Soldiers who have stuck to Me, and been truly Loyal;
not doubting in the least but that you will still retain the same Fidelity to
Me. And, tho I do not expect you should expose your selves by Resisting a
Foreign Army, and a Poisoned Nation; yet I hope your former Principles are so
inrooted in You, that you will keep your selves free from Associations, and
such pernicious Things. Time presses so that I can say no more.

J. R.


The Earl of Feversham, upon the Receipt of the Letter, immediately dispatched
a Messenger to the Prince, to let him know, That, having received a, Letter
from the King with the Unfortunate News of his Going out of England, and his
Majestics Order (as he expresses it) to make no Opposition against any body, he
thought himself obliged to acquaint his Highness with it as soon as it was
possible, to prevent Effusion of Blood; To which purpose he had given the last
Order to all the Troops that were under his Command.

Before the King's Departure, several Papists foreseeing the Revolution, had
withdrawn themselves beyond Sea. Now the Priests and Jesuits, who expected no
Quarter, began to shift for themselves, and run some one Way, some another.
Those among the Protestants who were the most Obnoxious, and had so basely
complied with the Times, were also put to their Shifts. Some of both sorts were
Apprehended; but most made their Escape, or lay Undiscovered. The Lord
Chancellor Jeffreys, a Mezzo-tinto Protestant, as forward as any Papist to
Comply with King James's Designs, was taken in a Disguise at Wapping Dec. 12.
and committed to the Tower; where he pined away, and died some time after. The
Earl of Peterborough being secured in Kent, as he was making his Escape, was
also sent to the Tower.

In the mean time the Disbanded Army dispersed it self up and down the City and
Country in an unusual and unwarrantable manner, to the great Disturbance of the
Public Peace and Quiet. The Mobile on the other side, taking an Advantage of
this State of Anarchy, fell to work, by burning, pulling down, and otherwise
defacing several Houses and public Buildings of the Roman Catholics, rifling
and plundering the same. And, without any Regard to the Character of
Ambassadors, they pulled down and plundered the Spanish Ambassadors House;
whose Damages were afterward abundantly made up by the Government. Thus King
James lest his Party to the Mercy of the Rabble, whose unaccountable Outrages
and Violences could not be prevented in that critical Time. Yet their Rage fell
much short of what the Papists expected, considering their former Provocations;
for I could not hear of any Hurt they did to their Persons. Whereas the major
Part of them expected nothing less than Death and Destruction; as it had been
our Fate, had our Case been their own. Which piece of Moderation from a loose,
provoked, and mighty Rabble, without the Restraint of any Government, is not to
be paralleled in History.

As for the false Alarm which happened upon it of the desperate Irish Forces
Burning and Plundering, and putting to the Sword all they met in their Way, as
Improbable as the Thing was in it self, yet it got such Credit all over the
Kingdom, that the whole Nation was in a ferment upon it, and all the Militia in
Arms to oppose the pretended Fury of a sort of Men, which the Sound of a Horn
had newly put to Flight at Reading, and that of an old Barrel at Maidenhead.
But, however the Alarm was given, it was not without some Design; and, whatever
was in the Top, one might easily guess, that Policy was in the Bottom. For, to
imagine that four or five thousand Irish should all of a sudden be grown so
Desperate as to think to Post away this Nation with Fire and Sword, when the
very sight of a less Number of resolute Men might have made them show their
Heels, was a Thing fitter to laugh at than to be concerned for.

One Thing is Observable in the King's Desertion, viz. the Great Seals being
cast into the Thames, as it was found out afterward. Which looked like a wilful
Desertion of the Government, and an entire Abdication thereof. At least he
seemed thereby to imply, that, in case he should Return, he was resolved not to
Rule by Law, of which the Great Seal seems always to carry some Prints.

King James being thus gone, not able to bear the brunt of a Parliament, and
the Writs prepared for it being stopped, made his Way by Water for France with
all speed; till he happened to be stopped at Feversham in Kent, as we shall see
afterward.

Upon the News of his being Gone, there was a Meeting that very Day at
Guild Hall of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in and about the Cities of
London and Westminster, to the Number of nine and twenty; who agreed upon, and
signed a Declaration. In which, having first expressed their Zealous Concern
for the Nation in this dangerous Conjuncture, upon the King's having Withdrawn
himself in order to his Departure out of this Kingdom, they Unanimously
Declared their Resolution to apply themselves to His Highness the Prince of
Orange, and to Assist him with their utmost Endeavors in the speedy Obtaining
of a Parliament, whereby our Laws, Liberties, and Properties might be Secured;
the Church of England in particular, with a due Liberty to Protestant
Dissenters, and in general the Protestant Religion and Interest over the whole
World might be Supported and Encouraged. They further Declared, That in the
mean time they would Endeavor to Preserve, to the utmost of their Power, the
Peace and Security of London and Westminster, and the Parts adjacent; And, if
any Thing more could be performed by Them, for promoting His Highnesses
generous Intentions for the Public Good, that they would be ready to do it, as
Occasion should require. With which Declaration four of their Body, Viz. the
Earl of Pembroke, the Lord Viscount Weymouth, the Bishop of Ely, and the Lord
Culpeper, were desired to attend His Highness. Which they did accordingly.

The same day two Addresses were Agreed upon, one from the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and the Commons of the City of London in the Common Council
Assembled, and another from the Lieutenancy of London; which were both
presented to his Highness at Henly in Oxfordshire, Dec. 13. with the Lords
Declaration. Which Addresses, in short, contained Their humble Acknowledgment
of His Highnesses fervent Zeal for the Protestant Religion, and of his
Vnparalled Generosity in Exposing his Person to so many Dangers both by Sea and
Land, to Rescue these Nations from Slavery and Popery; With a Declaration, that
they presumed to make his Highness their Refuge, and therefore begged his
Protection. And at last humbly beseeching his Highness to Repair with all
convenient Speed to the Capital City, for the perfecting the great Work He had
so happily begun.

The Prince, having now a certain Account of the King's being gone away, did
put out a Declaration, Requiring all colonels and Commanders in Chief of the
Regiments, Troops, and Companies of the Royal Army that had Dispersed
themselves, to call together by Beat of Drum, or otherwise, the several
Officers and Soldiers belonging to their respective Regiments, Troops, and
Companies, in such Places as they should find most convenient for their
Rendez-vous, and there to keep them in good Order and Discipline; And all such
Officers and Soldiers forthwith to Repair to such Places as should be
appointed for that purpose by their respective Colonels and Commanders in
Chief; whereof His Highness required speedy Notice to be given unto Him, for
his further Orders.

The King in the mean time, who was supposed to be near the Coast of France.
was unluckily stopped in a Smack nigh Feversham by some sturdy Fellows then
Jesuite-hunting; and was Secured for One, till he came to be Known. Then he was
prevailed upon to Return to White Hall, which he did on the 16th. Where being
Informed of diverse Outrages and Disorders that had been committed in his
Absence, He was pleased that very Night in Council to give Orders for the
preventing all such Outrages and Disorders for the future. Which proved the
last Public Act of his Regal Power.

His Highness the Prince of Orange was now come to Windsor, where he arived on
Friday Dec. 14. From whence he had sent the Sieur de Zulestein to the King, who
likewise sent the Earl of Feversham to his Highness to Invite him to S.
James's. But his Lordship was secured in the Castle, by the Prince's Order, for
his late Irregular Disbanding of the King's Forces.

December. 17. In the Night the King's Gards were changed by the Prince's, then
arrived at S. James's Park. Which Proceeding the Jacobites do exclaim against
as a great piece of Iniquity, and look upon as unaccountable. But, as the Case
stood, the Thing was unavoidable; and, as I am apt to think the King's
Invitation was none of the more Cordial, so I presume this Proceeding of the
Prince was not free from Reluctance. Upon the King's Going off, the Lords
Assembled at Guild hall, and the City, had put themselves under the Prince's
Protection, as being left in a State of Anarchy; and his Highness had now the
Command of the King's Forces, so that it was in his power to order them as he
thought most suitable to the present Juncture. Therefore it did not any way
consist with his Honor to suffer this part of the said Forces to act
independently from him in so critical a^ Time, which might have occasioned a
general Disturbance and Breach of the Peace, the Keeping whereof was the
principal Care of his Highness. Who clapped his Gards upon the King, not out of
any Design upon his Person, but rather to Secure him from any Attempts of a
rude and incensed Rabble I would fain know what Harm befell him from this
Change. It appears on the contrary by what follows, that, notwithstanding these
Dutch Gards, the King might dispose of himself as he pleased. It Is for this the
Lord without Doors clamoured and kept a heavy Splutter in his Speech to the
House of Lords. Wherein, under pretense that the King was not gone out of his
Territories, and that he might be where he would in his own Kingdom, he
concludes there was no Desertion in the Case. But this is perfect Shuffling.
It Is well known, that, if he had staid, a Parliament must be had, and that he
dreaded nothing more than a Parliament that would rake up old Sores, and find
out who made them. It Is well known, that his Heart panted after the Queen, and
that he had no Business at Feversham. The Time and Manner of his Setting out
are a plain Demonstration, that he was quitting a Kingdom, which was now grown
Uneasy to him; and his Casting the Great Seal into the Thames, adds much to the
Argument. Had he but weathered the Point, and got clear off out of the River,
it is ten to one that he had not been put to the trouble of a second Flight.

In order to which, seeing now his Case desperate, and the Prince at his Heels,
he went about Noon from White Hall Dec. 18. to Sir Richard Head's nigh
Rochester, still steering his Course toward France.

That very Day his Highness parted from Windsor, dined at Sion-House, and came
in the Evening to S. James's. Where he received the Compliments of all the
Nobility, and other Persons of the chiefest Quality in Town; And at Night the
Streets were filled with Bonesires, with Ringing of Bells, and other Public
Demonstrations of Joy.

The next Day, December. 19. Their Royal Highnesses Prince George and the
Princess Ann of Denmark returned from Oxford to the Cockpit; where They were
presently after Visited by his Highness the Prince of Orange. Who that
Afternoon went also to Visit the Queen Dowager at Somerset House.

December. 20. The Lord Mayor (Sir John Chapman) being indisposed, the Aldermen
and their Deputies, with some of the Common Council of each Ward, by Order of
the Common Council, Waited on the Prince of Orange, to Congratulate his
Highness on his happy Arrival at S. James's. Which was performed by Sir George
Treby the Recorder in an Eloquent Speech, and very favorably received by his
Highness. The Speech was thus.

May it please Your Highness,
Sir George Treby his Speech from the City to the Prince of Orange.
The Lord Mayor being Disabled by Sickness, Your Highness is attended by the
Aldermen and Commons of the Capital City of this Kingdom, deputed to
congratulate Your Highness upon this great and glorious Occasion. In which We
cannot but come short in Expression. Reviewing our late Danger, we remember our
Church and State overrun by Popery and Arbitrary Power, and even brought to
the Point of Destruction, by the Conduct of some Men (our true Invaders) who
brake the Sacred Fences of our Laws, and (which was worst) the very
Constitution of our Legislature. So that there was no Remedy left but the last.
The only Person, under Heaven, that could apply this Remedy, was Your Highness.
You are of a Nation, whose Alliance in all Times has been agreeable and
prosperous to us. You are of a Family most Illustrious, Benefactors to Mankind.
To have the Title of Sovereign Prince, and Stadtholder, and to have worn the
Imperial Crown, are among their lesser Dignities. They have long enjoyed a
Dignity singular and transcendent, viz. To be Champions of Almighty God, sent
forth in several Ages, to Vindicate his Cause against the greatest Opressions.
To this Divine Commission our Nobles, our Gentry, and among them our brave
English Soldiers, rendered themselves and their Arms upon your Appearing.

GREAT SIR, when we look back to the last Month, and contemplate the Swiftness
and Fullness of our present Deliverance, astonished, we think it Miraculous.
Your Highness, led by the Hand of Heaven, and called by the Voice of the
People, has preserved our greatest Interests. The Protestant Religion, which is
Primitive Christianity restored. Our Laws, which are our ancient Title to our
Lives, Liberties, and Estates, and without which this World were a Wild^rness.
But what Re^ribution can we make to Your Highness? Our Thoughts are full
charged with Gratitude. Your Highness has a lasting Monument in the Hearts, in
the Prayers, in the Praises of all good Men amongst us. And late Posterity will
celebrate your ever glorious Name, till Time shall be no more.


December. 1. The Prince of Orange published an Order for Returning into the
Public Store the Arms of diverse Soldiers that were lost or imbezelled, since
the Disbanding of the Royal Army. At the same time he appointed Quarters for
the English, Scotch, and Irish Forces, to which all Officers and Soldiers
belonging thereto were ordered forthwith to Repair.

December. 23. Was the Day when the King, notwithstanding his Dutch Gards about
him, made shift to give them the slip. So that he got safe into France, where
the Queen was arrived before with the supposed Prince of Wales. Thus he left us
again in an unsettled Condition; But Care was taken to secure the Peace.

In this Condition, had the Prince of Orange had any Design to take the
Government upon him, this was the Time. He was now come to the Capital City of
the Kingdom, through a perpetual Crowd of Applauses and Benedictions, and had
the Hearts of all true English Protestants. Being a Prince of the Royal Blood
that stood so near to the Immediate Succession, and having besides a good Army
with him, he had nothing to do but what he might easily have done; that is, to
make a Party to support his Interest, and withstand all Opposition. The Law it
self could have afforded him a Claim, it being an undoubted Maxim among
Lawyers, That the Success of a Just War gives a Lawful Title to that which is
acquired in the Progress of it And (as the Learned Bishop of Salisbury says in
his Pastoral Letter) if at Common Law an Heir in Remainder has just Cause to
Sue him that is in Possession, if he makes Wastes on the Inheritance which is
his in Reversion, much more ought the Heir of the Crown to Interpose, when he
sees him that is in Possession hurried on blindfold to subject an Independent
Kingdom to a Foreign Jurisdiction, and thereby to Rob it of it is Glory and
Security. Especially when it is plain, this must occasion the greatest Ruin and
Miseries possible to that Kingdom; and when a pretended Heir was set up in such
a manner, that the whole Kingdom believed it Spurious. In such a Case it cannot
be denied, even according to the highest Principles of Passive Obedience, that
another Sovereign Prince might make War on a King so abusing his Power; and
that this was the Case in Fact, will not be called in question by any
Protestant, Therefore King James, having so far sunk in the War, that he both
abandoned his People and deserted the Government, all his Right and Title did
accrue to the Prince in the Right of a conquest over him. So that, if he had
then assumed the Crown, the Opinion of all Lawyers must have been on his side.
And which Way soever King James's Deserting the Government be turned, this
Argument has much Weight. For, if he was forced to it, then here was a
Conquest; and, if it was voluntary, it was a wilful D^sertion.

But, whatever Prospect His Highness might have of a Crown, either by the
Sword, or the Law, or both Ways together, He chose rather to leave the Matter
to the Determination of the Peers and People of England, chosen and Assembled
together with all possible Freedom.

Mean while, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal Assembled December 25. in the
House of Lords at Westminster, and at the same time the Members of the
Parliaments that had served during the Reign of King Charles 2d. met in the
House of Commons, together with the Court of Aldermen and Common Council of
London. Who unanimously Agreed upon a general Convention of the Lords and
Commons to Meet on the 22. of Jan. next; and prayed his Highness in the mean
time to take upon him the Administration of Public Affairs, both Civil and
Military, and the disposal of the Public Revenues, till the Meeting of the
said Convention. In Order to which Meeting, He sent at their Request, and
according to their Directions, His Letters throughout the Kingdom.

Then came out two D^clarations from His Highness, One for Authorizing
Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, and other Officers and Ministers (not Papists)
that were in Office upon the first day of December, to Act in their respective
Places. Another, for the better Collecting the Public Revenue. Besides an
Order, for carrying on the Elections for the intended Convention with greater
Freedom, and without any Color of Force or Restraint. His Highness also took a
convenient Care to Restrain the Licentiousness of the Press within the bounds
of the Law. Then He put forth a Declaration, for the better Quartering of the
Forces. Another to Encourage the Seamen of the Fleet, then laboring under
Discontents, and absenting themselves, upon several untrue and groundless
Reports Maliciously spread among them, and to warn them at their Peril to
return to their Duty. A third, to the same purpose, for the Land Forces.

Jaruary 22. being the day appointed for the Convention to meet at
Was;tminster, there they met accordingly. Where the two Speakers being chosen,
viz. the Lord Marquis of Halliface for the House of Lords, and Henry Powle Esquire
for the Commons, a Letter from the Prince of Orange was read in both Houses, to
this effect; That he had endeavored to perform what was desired from Him for
the Public Peace and safety during his Administration; and that it now lay on
them to lay a Foundation of a firm Security for their Religion, Laws, and
Liberties; That he did not doubt but by such a full and Fret Representative of
the Nation, the Ends of his Declaration would be attained. He recommended to
them the dangerous Condition of Ireland, and also the States of Holland, both
which required large and spee^ly Succors; And to^d them that, since it had
pleased God hitherto to bless his good Lite^tions with so great Success, be
tr^sled in him, that he would complete his own Work, by sending a Spirit of
Peace and Union to infl^ence their Course^s, that so no I^terruption might be
given to a happy and lasting Settlement.

Whereupon the Lords and Commons unanimously resolved upon an Address to be
presented to his Highness of ^hanks for what he had done, and humbl^ to desire
him to continue the Administration of Public Affairs, till farther Application
were made by them to his Highness. A Day of Public Thanksgiving to Almighty
God was likewise appointed by both Houses, for having made his Highness the
Prince of Orange a Glorious Instrument of the great Deliverance of this Kingdom
from Popery and Arbitrary Power. And then the Lords and Commons went in a Body
to St. James's, to present the forementioned Address to his Highness.

The State we were in required a speedy Settling of the Government on sure and
lafting Foundations; and consequently, that such Person or Persons should be
immediately placed in the Throne, in whom the Nation had most reason to repose
an entire Confidence. It therefore now lay upon the Convention to Make so
Judicious a Choice, as in all probability might render us a happy People, and
give our Posterity cause to Rejoice, when they shall read the Proceedings of
this Wise and Grand Convention.

It Is observed that, before the Theocracy of the Jews ceased, even in the time
of extraordinary Revelations, the manner of the Divine Designation of their
Judges was by God's giving the People some Deliverance by the Hand of the
Person, to whose Government they were appointed to submit. Thus Othniel,
Gideon, Jephthab, Samson, and others, were invested by Heaven with the supreme
Authority. And, though Josh^a had an immediate Command from God to succeed Moses,
and an Anointing for that purpose by the laying on of Moses hands; yet the
Foundation of the Peoples Submission to him was laid in Jora^n. Now what
History can give an Instance, since that Theocracy ceased, of a Designation of
any Person to any Government more visibly Divine than this was? To see a Nation
of so various Opinions, Interests, and Factions fall suddenly from a turbulent
and fluctuating State into a serene Calm, and their Minds so strangely united
on a sudden, it shows from whence the Nation was Influenced. And whoever
considers how the Posture of Foreign Affairs, which no humane Wisdom or Power
could have brought about, made way for this Expedition; how the Prince's
Counsels were all along directed, and crowned with Success, amongst so many
Dangers and Difficulties, and that in so little time, and with so little
Effusion of Blood, must needs see plainly the Finger of God in all this,
pointing out to us what choice we were to make.

Yet various were the Projects amongst the Members of the Convention. Some were
for Sending to the King, and Treating with him to Return, but under such
Restraints as they thought should disable him from Invading our Laws, Religion,
and Liberties. But what restraint could be put upon a King who was under a Vow
of Restoring Popery? The Kingly Power (one would think) was sufficiently
limited by the Law, so as to preserve the Religion and Liberties of the People,
under the Glory and Greatness of a King. But the Experince of King James his
Reign showed us sufficiently, how easy it was for a King to break through the
^ence of the Laws, and that they were but Cobwebs to a Prince whose Zeal or
Ambition could not endure any Bounds. What Ways could be found out, so to ^ye
up his Hands as to Secure his Subjects, but such as must make him a mere
Titular King; which had been a greater Affront put upon Majesty, than downright
Deposing of him? He therefore chose rather to quit the Crown, than be turned
from the sweet Exercise of an Absolute Power to the State of a Baby King, to be
turned and wound by his Subjects as they pleased, to observe their Dictates,
and submit to their Motions.

Some were for making the Princess of Orange Regent; Others, the Prince. Some
again were for declaring the Crown forfeited or demised, and proclaiming only
the Princess of Orange Queen; Others, for making the Prince of Orange only King.

But the Plurality carried it, first for having the Government Dissolved, then
making the Prince and Princess of Orange jointly King and Queen of England,
etc. The public Acts to run in the Name of Both; but the Executive Power to be
solely in the King.

Thus King James II. for having endeavored to Subvert the Constitution of the
Kingdom by breaking the Original Contract between King and People, and by
Advice of Jesuits and other wicked Persons Violated the Fundamental Laws, and
having at last Withdrawn himself out of this Kingdom, was Voted by the House of
Commons, to have Abdicated the Government, and the Throne to be Vatant. And,
after several Days Debates about it, the House of Lords at last fully Agreed
all Things in Dispute. So that King James, having forfeited by his
Maladministration of the Regal Trust of the Executive Power, both in himself
and his Heirs Lineal and Collateral, the same devolved back to the People; Who
might lawfully dispose thereof by their Representatives, according to their
good Will and Pleasure, for their future Government and Peace, Benefit and
Security.

Which was a clear Assertion of the Peoples Right, a firm Evidence of a
Contract broken, and a sure Precedent to all Ages; when, after a most solemn
Debate, the Estates of England declare, That the King having Abdicated the
Government, and the Throne thereby Vacant, They think fit to fill it again with
One who is not Immediate in the Line. Fesides that it will be a Caution to
succeeding Kings, of what satal Consequence a general Derogation from the Laws
may be, when they find by this Instance the Exercise of the Kingly Office in
danger, not only with Reference to Themselves, but precarious to their Family.

And now, to fill up the Throne, what better Choice could the Convention make,
than of that very Prince, who with so great Expense, Hazard, conduct, Courage,
and Generosity, had so wonderfully Rescued us both from Spiritual and Temporal
Slavery, and Restored us to our ancient Laws, Religion, and Properties? In
Prudence, Honor, and Gratitude, they could do no less than Pray him to Accept
the Crown. Which was done accordingly.

But the Nation's Gratitude and Generosity went further, by making the Prince
and Princess of Orange King and Queen jointly; it being a Demonstration of the
Inestimable Value the People had for Her Highness, notwithstanding the
Maladministration of her Unhappy Father.

Thus the Prince and Princess were made equal in Dignity, but not in Authority.
For the Executive Power was solely lodged in the Prince. First, because two
Persons equal in Authority might differ in Opinion, and consequently in
Command; and it is evident, no Man can serve two Masters. Secondly, because a
Man, by Nature, Education, and Experience, is generally rendered more capable to
Govern than a Woman. And, as the present State of Europe in general, so that of
these Kingdoms in particular, required a vigorous and masculine Administration.
To recover what was lost, to rescue what was in danger, and rectify what was
amiss, could not be effected but by a Prince consummate in the Art both of
Peace and War. A Prince of known Honor, profound Wisdom, undaunted Courage,
and incomparable Merit; naturally inclined to be Just, Merciful, and Peaceable,
and to do all public Acts of Generosity for the good of Societies. Therefore,
as the Convention thought fit out of Generosity to declare the Prince and
Princess King and Queen jointly, that they might both equally share the Glory
of a Crown, and we the Happiness of their Auspicious Reign; so out of Prudence
they lodged the Executive Power in the Prince only, as the fittest Person under
Heaven to Govern in this difficult Juncture.

During these Transactions the Princess of Orange arrived from Holland, and
Landed at White Hall on the 12th. of February; the welcome News whereof was
received with all manner of Public Demonstrations of Joy.

The next Day the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons Assembled at
Westminister, presented to the Prince and Princess their Declaration, by the
Marquess of Hallifax Speaker to the House of Lords. Which Declaration contained
a Sum of the late King James's Trespasses upon the Laws of the Kingdom and the
Liberties of the People, the Vindication of the Ancient Rights and Liberties of
the People by declaring his assumed Power Illegal, their Offer of the Crown to
Their Highnesies, and the new Oaths to be taken, according to the late Resolves
of the Grand Convention.

The Offer of the Crown, with the Settlement thereof, was thus expresied; That
William and Mary Prince and Princess of Orange, be, and be declared King and
Queen of England, France, and Ireland, and the Dominions thereunto belonging;
To hold the Crown and Royal Dig^ity of the said Kingdoms and Dominions to them
the said Prince and Princess, during their Lives, and the Life of the Surviver
of them; And that the sole and full Exercise of the Regal Power be only in, and
executed by the said Prince of Orange, in the Names of the said Prince and
Princess, during their joint Lives; and after their Deceases, the said Crown
and Royal Dignity of the said Kingdoms and Dominions to be to the Heirs of the
Body of the said Princess; and, for default of such Issue, to the Princess An^
of Denmark, and the Heirs of her Body; and, for default of such Issue, to the
Heirs of the Body of the said Prince of Orange.

To which his Highness gave this Gracious Answer.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
This is certainly the greatest Proof of the Trust you have in Us that can be
given, which is the Thing that makes us Value it the more; and we thankfully
Accept what you have Offered. And, as I had no other Intention in coming
hither, than to preserve your Religion, Laws, and Liberties; so you may be
sure, that I shall endeavor to support them, and shall be willing to concur in
any Thing that shall be for the Good of the Kingdom, and to do all that is in
my power to advance the Welfare of the Glory of the Nation.


Whereupon the Prince and Princess of Orange were that very Day (being the
13th. of February, 1688/9.) Proclaimed at White Hall and in the City, King and
Queen of England, France, and Ireland, by the Name of WILLIAM and MARY; each
Proclamation being Ecchoed with Universal Acclamations of Joy by the Multitudes
of People which crowded the Streets, Windows, and Balconies; and the Streets
lined all the Way from Temple Bar to the Royal Exchange with four Regiments of
the City Militia. The Night was concluded with Bonfires, Ringing of Bells, and
all other Expressions of Duty and Affection to Their Majesty's KING WILLIAM and
QVEEN MARY, with hearty Wishes for Their long and happy Reign.

April 11th. Being appointed for their Coronation, Their Majesty's were
accordingly Crowned that Day at Westminster, with great Pomp and Solemnity, by
the Lord Bishop of London; and the Day kept with great Ceremony in most of the
chief Towns of England. The Coronation Oath was tendered by the Bishop to the
King and Queen, in these several Articles, Their Majesty's giving a distinct
Answer to each of them.

Bishop. Will you solemnly Premise and Swear to Govern the People of this
Kingdom of England, and the Dominions thereto belonging, according to the
Statutes agreed on in Parliament, and the Laws and Customs of the same? King
and Queen. I solemnly promise so to do.

Bishop. Will you to your power cause Law and Justice in Mercy to be executed
in all Your Judgments? King and Queen. I will.

Bishop. Will You to the utmost of your power Maintain the Laws of God, the
true Profession of the Gospel, and the Protestant Reformed Religion established
by Law? And will you Preserve unto the Bishops and Clergy of this Realm, and to
the Churches committed to their Charge, all such Rights and Privileges as by
Law do or shall appertain unto them, or any of them? King and Queen. All this I
promise to do.

After this the King and Queen laying his and her Hand upon the Holy Gospels,
said, The Things which I have here before Promised, I will Perform and Keep. So
help me God. Then the King and Queen kissed the Book.

In Scotland the same Course was taken for Settling the Government there, by a
Convention which met at Edenburg upon the 14th. of March, according to the
Direction of the Prince of Orange (now King) and the Advice of several Lords
and Gentlemen of Stotland then at London. Which Convention voted also King
James by his Misgovernment to have forfeited the Right to the Crown, and the
Throne to be Vacant. For the filling up whereof, they conferred the Crown upon
WILLIAM and MARY, King and Queen of England, etc. and fetled the Succession in
the same manner as our Convention had done; with a new Oath of Allegiance to
Their Majesty's. Accordingly, on the 11th. of April 1689. being their
Coronation-day at Westminster, Their Majesty's were proclaimed at Edenburg King
and Queen of Scotland.

The 1^th. of May next ensuing, being the Day appointed for the public
Reception of the Commissioners sent up by the Estates of Scotland, ( viz. the
Earl of Argyle, Sir James Montgomery, and Sir John Dalrymple) to Offer the
Crown of that Kingdom to their Majesty's, and tender unto Them the Scottish
Coronation Oath; they accordingly met at the Council Chamber at Three a Clock
in the Afternoon, and were from thence conducted by Sir Charles Cotterel Master
of the Ceremonies, to the Banqueting House, being attended by most of the
Nobility and Gentry of that Kingdom then residing here. The King and Queen went
thither attended by many Persons of Quality, the Sword being carried before
them by the Lord Cardrosse. And, Their Majesty's being placed on the Throne
under a rich Canopy, the Commissioners first presented a Letter from the
Estates to the King, then the Instrument of Government, after that a Paper
containing the Grievances to be Redressed, and lastly an Address to his
Majesty, for turning the Meeting of the said Estates into a Parliament. All
which being Signed by his Grace the Duke of Hamilton, as President of the
Meeting, and Read to Their Majesty's, the King returned to the Commissioners
the following Answer.

When I Engaged in this Undertaking, I had particular Regard and Consideration
for Scotland; and therefore I did omit a Declaration in relation to That as
well as to This Kingdom, which I intend to make good and effectual to them. I
take it very kindly, that Scotland has expressed so much Confidence in and
Affection to Me. They shall find Me willing to assist Them in every Thing that
concerns the Weal and Interest of that Kingdom, by making what Laws shall be
necessary for the Security of their Religion, Property, and Liberty, and to
ease them of what may be justly Grievous to them.

This done, the Coronation Oath was tendered to Their Majesty's; which the Earl
of Argile spoke word by word distinctly, and the King and Queen repeated it
after him, holding their right Hands up, after the manner of taking Oaths in
Scotland. The Oath was thus. We William and Mary, King and Queen of Scotland,
faithfully Promise and Swear by this our solemn Oath, in presence of the
Eternal God, That during the whole Course of our Life, we will serve the same
Eternal God to the uttermost of our Power, according as he has requited in his
most Holy Word revealed and contained in the New and Old Testament; and
according to the same Word shall Maintain the true Religion of Christ Jesus,
the Preaching of his Holy Word, and the due and right Ministration of the
Sacraments now Received and Preached within the Realm of Scotland, and shall
Abolish and Gainstand all false Religion contrary to the same; and shall Rule
the People committed to our Charge according to the Will und Command of God,
revealed in his aforesaid Word, and according to the laudable Laws and
Constitutions received in this Realm, no ways rep^gnant to the said Word of the
Eternal God; and shall procure to the utmost of our Power to the Kirk of God
and whole Christian People true and perfect Peace in all time coming. That we
shall preserve and keep inviolated the Rights and Rents, with all ^^^st
Privileges of the Crown of Scotland; neither shall We Transfer, nor Alienate
the same. That We shall forbid and repress in all Estates and Degrees Reis
Oppression, and al^ kind of i^^rong; and We shall command and procure that
Justice and Equity in all Judgments be kept to all Persons without exception,
as the Lord and Father of Mercies shall be merciful to us. That We shall be
careful to Root out all Heretics and Enemies to the true Worship of God, that
shall be Convilled by the true Kirk of God of the aforesaid Crimes, out of Our
Lands and Empire of Scotland. And We saithfully Affirm the Things above-written
by Our Solemn Oath.

But, at the Repeating that Clause in the Oath which relates to the Rooting out
of Heretics, the King Daclared, That he did not mean by these Words, that he
was under any Obligation to become a Persecutor. To which the Commissioners,
Authorized thereto by the Estates of Scotland, made Answer, That neither the
Meaning of the Oath, nor the Law of Scotland, did imp^^^ it. Then the King
replied, That he took the Oath in that sense, and called for Witnesses the
Commssioners and others present. And then both Their Majesty's signed the said
Co^onation Oath. After which the Commissioners, and several of the Scottish
Nobility, kissed Their Majesty's Hands.

Thus WILLIAM and MARY, Prince and Princess of Orange, were by the Grace and
Providence of God, for the good of these Kingdoms, made King and Queen of Great
Britain, in Opposition to all Malcontents. A Race of Men content in no
Condition, who in a State of Slavery are eager for Liberty, and when set at
Liberty are again for Slavery. These are the Tools hitherto made use of by King
Lewis, to distract these Kingdoms (under the specious Pretense of Restoring the
late King James to the Throne) by their dark Plotting here against the
Government, and their open Rebellion in Scotland. Where the Duke of Gourdon,
Governor of Edenburg Castle, held it out for King James till the 13th. of
June; and the Lord of Dundee, at the Head of an Army of Rebels, was killed in a
Field-fight on the 1st. of August. From which time the Rebels there never
thrived, but were glad at last to embrace Their Majesty's most Gracious Pardon.

The greatest Difficulty was to Reduce Ireland, then in the hands of Papists,
fortifyed with a great Army, assisted by the French King, and influenced by the
late King James. Who looked upon ireland as a Backdoor for him to return into
England, with a Crucifix in one hand, and a Sword in the other. Ireland. that
had been so often Conquered by the English, was now to Conquer England; and the
Irish did not by their Shouls consider, whether it was for King James or King
Lewis. They were pleased with the Notion of an Infallible Conquest; and, before
they had drawn the Sword, they fell forsooth dividing the Spoil amongst
themselves. Encouraged by King James's Presence, now come from France to Dublin
about the beginning of the Year 89, nothing was to stand before them,
Londonderry, in the North of Ireland, was the only place of Note that stood
out for Their Majesty's. The French and Irish being resolved to reduce it by
Fire, Sword, and Famine, sat before it; and brought it to that extremity, that
good part of the Town was by French Bombs reduced into Ashes, and above 5000 of
the Inhabitants died for want of Provisions. Yet, under these dismal
Circumstances, the Town held out, under the Conduct of that Martial Clergyman
the Reverend Dr. Walker, till it was Relieved by Major General Kirk July 31.
1689. What happened since all the World knows. The famous Battle at the River
Boyne, fought the next Year after, is an eternal Monument of King William's
incomparable Valor and Conduct, and of God's wonderful Providence over his
Royal Person. By this Battle, wherein he was blessed with a glorious Victory,
he drove King James with full speed out of Ireland, he got possession of the
Capital City of Dublin, besides Drogheda, Wexford, Waterford, and other places
of less note; so that two parts in three of Ireland were in a manner Reduced in
one Campaign. Afterward Cork and Kingsale were happily Recovered by the Earl
of Marlborough. And this Years Expedition under the Chief Conduct of that
Valiant, Fortunate, Wise, and Skilful General, the Baron de G^^okle, will be
eternally famous for Completing so Successfully the Reduction of that Kingdom,
by the Surrender of Ballymore, the Taking of Athlone by Storm, the great
Victory at Agh^im, the surrender of Galloway and Sl^g^, and at last that of
Limerick, a Place looked upon as alm^st Impregnable. So that we see now a
Kingdom, which (besides its own Strength) has been power-fully Assisted by the
French, and Countenanced by the late King James, entirely Reduced to their
Majesty's Obedience, at the end of two Campaigns. Which I hope may convince the
most Obstinate, especially after a long Chain of unaccountable and unlookt for
Providence, that this great Revolution is not only by the Will or Permission
of Almighty God, but that it is his own Work; who is free to dispose of Crowns
and Kingdoms, to show Mercy and Judgment upon whom he pleases. And, if it be
so, I cannot imagine how Intailed Kings (good or bad) can be more de J^^e
Divino than our Great King William.

Thus we see King James II. an Unfortunate Prince, who might have been a most
glorious Monarch, fallen (with the Loss of three Crowns) a Sacrifice to Priests
and Jesuits; and fain to creep under the Shelter of a King, who is not like to
hold out long himself, if he must give an Account to God and Men of the
abominable Transactions of his Reign. Thus is the Curse of King James I. come
upon King James II, which he solemnly pronounced upon any of his Posterity that
should forsake the Church of England to embrace that of Rome. And yet, had it
been possible for him to keep within some reasonable Bounds, and his Religion
to himself, without trampling (as he did) upon the Laws, he might have hitherto
sat upon the Throne; and it is like the Nation, upon his account, would have
been very Indulgent to the Roman Catholic Party. But he would never be advised
to Moderation, and no Counselors were welcome to him but such as prompted him
to Violence. The Issue whereof proved accordingly; All Covet, all Lose. And
it is observable, that, as great as King James was with King Lewis, yet the
Court of France was allowed openly to declare his Errors to the World, and
passed this Verdict upon him, That his whole Conduct had been very little
Judicious. The Emperor on the other side could not forbear in his Letter to him
dated April 9. 1689. amongst his tender condoling Expressions, to remind him of
some of his false Politics. I am heartily sorry for his Fate; but it is better
so than to see three Kingdoms perish. I remember one of his Expressions at his
first coming to the Crown, that he would carry the Glory of England beyond all
his Predecessors, which he has made good in some sense. For, by his I^legal and
Arbitrary Methods, he has given us an Opportunity, after some Years of tiresom
Passive Obedience, of sh^wing to the World how loath we are to part with our
Laws, Religion, and Liberties, and impatient of that uneasy double Yoke, which
other Nations groan under. Therefore, far from deserving the Censure of
Mankind, we are applauded for it all the World over, by all disinterested,
sensible, and rational Men. And, after two weak, esseminate, and inglorious
Reigns, which had sunk the Re^^tation and Honor of this Nation, and made us
all over Europe an Object of Scorn and Contempt, we have by this way of
Reprisal recovered our Credit, and are now able by the Grace of God to lift up
our Heads beyond their expectation.

But, if you inquire into the Causes of this sudden Change, a Nameless Author
will bring you in a parcel of Jesuits, a sort of hair-brained Statesmen, and
yet bred up in a Cloister; who being unacquainted both with the English Temper
and Constitution, hoped to have carried two such things as Popery and Arbitrary
Power, both at once, upon so Jealous a Nation as the English is, which hates
them above any other People in the World. And yet these are the Men that bore
the greatest sway in King James's Counsels. I confess, says he, a Nation of
less Sense might have been Imposed upon; of less bravery and Valor, might have
been Frighted; of a more servile Temper, might have neglected its Liberties,
till it had been too late to have recovered them.

These Jesuits Manage with the Dissenters of one side, and the Church of
England Party on the other, shows how shallow-brain'd they were. One would
think the cruel Slaughter they had caused to be made by the Course of Justice
of the poor Wretches that were taken after the Defeat of Monmouth's Army near
Bridgewater, should have made them for ever despair of gaining any Credit with
the Dissenters, who rarely forgive, but never forget any ill Treatment. But on
the contrary they had so little sense as to build all their hopes on them, for
having procured unto them a Liberty of Conscience, Arbitrarily and Illegally
granted, and consequently Revocable at the Will of the Granter. Thus these
little Politico's relied upon the Dissenters Gratitude and pretended
Insensibility, as if for an uncertain Liberty of Conscience they would have
sold themselves to everlasting Slavery. On the other side, if we look upon
their Carriage toward the Church of England Party, it will appear how little
they were to be trusted by the whole Protestant Party. First they pursued both
Clergy and Laity with the utmost obloquy, hatred, oppression and contempt. But
when they sound the Dutch Storm coming upon them, who but the Church of England
Men? Then the Bishops were presently sent for, and all Places, Presses, and
flying Papers filled with the Encomiums of the Church of England's Loyalty; who
but few days before were represented as Malcontents, if not Rebels and
Traitors, for Opposing the King's Dispensing Power and the Eccles^astical
Commission.

To Complete their Folly and Madness, they persuaded King James to Throw up the
Government, and Retire into France. For they pretended we should never be able
to agree amongst our selves, but would in a short time be forced to recall him,
and fairly yield to his Will and Pleasure, or be compelled to it by the
Succors he might gain in France. Had France been now in Peace, there might
have been (says my Author) some Color for this. But, when all Europe was under
a Necessity to Unite against him for its own Preservation, then to persuade
King James to desert his Throne, and fly to France for Succor, this was so
silly a Project, that there seems to have been something of a Divine
Infatuation in it. The Prince of Orange might have taught them cunctari, who
would not stir from Holland, till he saw France and Germany irrevocably Engaged
in War, as it happened by the Siege of Philipsburg.

Thus, all Things considered, either King James should have staid here, and
made as good Terms as he could with the Prince of Orange and his own Subjects.
Or, if he would Abandon his Kingdoms, he ought to have despaired of any
Restitution, and betaken himself to a private Life, as Queen Christina did.

THE POSTSCRIPT, By Way of Advice to the Jacobite Party.
NOw Ireland is Reduced, and the Scotch Rebellions Suppressed, it is high Time
for you, Gentlemen, to Capitulate. Providence has declared it self against you;
your Idol the French King's Oracles are ceased, and he has now at last most
basely left you in the lurch. In short, there is no hopes or prospect of
Relief. You have done enough in Conscience, and more than enough, for King
James. You have outdone not only your Ancestors, but Primitive Christianity it
self, in your fond Scruple of Conscience about the Oaths; and have evidenced to
the World, how Impossible it is to serve two Masters. Only some of you went too
far, and made shift for King James's Service to swear themselves true Subjects
to King William, and Queen Mary too. To bring back King James with Popery.
Triumphant, you have stuck at nothing; and have over come even Nature it self,
by putting your selves under a King's Protection, who ever was an Enemy to this
Crown and Nation I mean the great King Lewis, whose Quarrel you espoused, whose
Greatness you admired, whose Successes you applauded too. A Most Christian
King, in League with Turks and Tartars (now become your Confederates) against
the Prefessors of the Name of Christ. A Prince who has a great Account to give
to God and Men of his infinite Extortions, Rapines, Violences, Breach of Faith,
Bloodshed, and Persecutions. With this great Tyrant, Usurper, and Persecutor,
you have endeavored to Overthrow the present Government, by dark Plots and
Conspiracies, by bold Speeches and virulent Libels, by filling the Nation with
Fears and Jealousies. But that which I chiefly admire you for, is your
Withstanding all Temptations of Plenty, Ease, and Liberty, to become miserable
Slaves, even for Conscience sake. Your being proof against the strongest
Arguments of the best Pens of the Nation, which could never make the least
Impression upon you. To which add your fervent (but ineffectual) Prayers and
Supplications to God, for a Blessing upon your ^^^^al Endeavors; and, if they
have not prospered, it is not your Fault. In a Word, so transcendent and
meritorious has been your Loyalty to the late King James, that no Age can
parallel it. So great, that, like Solomon's Wisdom, never was the like before
it, nor I hope will ever be after. So desperate, that it made you willing to
Sacrifice your Lives and Fortunes, your Liberty, Nation, Posterity, and some of
you their Religion, only to have the Satisfaction to sing Allelujah at the
Return of King James.

All this was well enough, according to your Principles, as long as Limerick
held out. But now the Case is altered, and it is time to Desist. King James his
Backdoor is shut; and the Great King having now withdrawn his powerful Arm,
it is in vain for you to hold out. I advise you therefore to Surrender, while it
is time, to Their Majesty's Mercy; and to become Their true and faithful
Subjects, under whose easy Scepter you may live happily.

Thus you will be no more looked upon as you have been hitherto, with Pity,
Scorn, and Indignation. With Pity, as being Misguided by an erroneous
Principle. With Score, for the greatest Infatuation that Men were ever guilty
of, to stand for Slavery when you are Free, as you wished for Deliverance when
you were in Captivity. With Indignation, as being the Bane of the Government,
under whose Protection you live.

When all is done, you cannot but grant, that the King is none of those
frightful Princes that you took him to be, from the Lords Speech without Doors,
and others of his Kidney. Nor have we felt in the space of almost three Years
any of those direful Influences of his Reign, which those unlucky
Fortune Tellers did once threaten us with. He is a merciful King; You have
experienced it. A Wise and Warlike Prince; France it self does own it. So great
is his Fame and Interest abroad, that He is in a manner the Oracle of most
Christian Princes, and the most likely King we have had since Henry Unto make
this Nation both Glorious and Happy. As he is a Pattern for Princes in point of
Government, so in the Course of a Christian Life, he is a Pattern for Subjects;
being both Good and Great, and therefore the fittest Monarch to make this
Nation so. After so many esseminate and inglorious Reigns, what greater
Blessing could Heavens bestow upon us than a Prince so well qualified to Reign
in these Kingdoms? This is not all. It has pleased God to redouble our
Happiness, by setting over us, in Conjunction with his Majesty, a Queen who is
the Glory of her Sex, and a Princess alone worthy of so great a Prince. Let us
therefore be Unanimous, and say with one Voice,

God Save and Prosper King William and Queen Mary.
An Advertisement of some Books sold by Samuel Clement at the Lute in
Paul's-Church-Yard.
1. GOd's Revenge against Murder and Adultery, expressed in Thirty several
Tragical Histories. The Third Edition. By Thomas Wright, M. A. of St. Peter's
College in Cambr^dge.

2. The English Grammar, setting sorth the Grounds of the English Tongue. By
Guy Miege. Gent. The Second Edition.

3. The Delightful History of Don Quixot, the most Renowned Baron of Mancha.
With the Comical Humors of Sancho Panca. The Second Edition.


