A MILD, but SEARCHING EXPOSTULATORY LETTER From the Poor and Plain-dealing
Farmers of the Neighboring Villages, To the MEN of BVCKINGHAM.
To the Right Worshipful the Bailiff, the Worshipful the Burgesses of the
Ancient, and sometimes Famous Corporation of BVCKINGHAM.
Right Worshipful, and Worshipful Gentlemen!
IF your late Folly and Madness had only a Malignant Influence upon your
Unworthy selves, we could contentedly have left you Fools and Madmen at your
own Costs and Charges; Had you betrayed your own Liberties, whilst ours had
been secure, or sold your Selves and Posterities for Slaves, whilst We and Ours
had remained free, We love you so well, you might have been eternally such,
without any the least Let, Molestation, or Disturbance from Us your poor
Neighbors. Nay, had you put Fire to your own Houses, whilst ours had been out
of the reach of your Flames, or purchased some dreadful Plague, whose
Chain-shot might have ^^own you down by Wholesale, whilst we were out of the
compass of its Contagion, we could be silently unconcerned, nor have grudged
you that Vassallage and Desolation, which we confess you have highly merited,
and you must confess you had drawn with your own Hands upon your own Heads.

But seeing the Frame and Constitution of our Parliaments is such, that the
Knights of one County, the Citizens of one City, the Burgesses of one Borough,
must Debate, Vote, Resolve and Enact what all the Counties, all the Cities, all
the Boroughs of the Kingdom are concerned in, and obliged by, that we must pay
the reckoning, which your Folly has inflamed; that we must be sick of your
Drunkenness, that your Prodigals must be prodigal out of our Purses, and what
was your particular, and Personal Miscarriage, must (if other Electors had no
more Wit and Honesty than your selves) become a General and National Misery;
give us leave, (or else we must take it) to correct you gently, and represent
to you plainly and impartially, your abominable Treachery to our Common
Interest, in your late shameful Election of Members to serve in the ensuing
Parliament.

It is not We, your despised Neighbors, it is not this County, but all the
Counties, Cities, and Boroughts of the Land (except a few of the same sordid
and base Spirits with your selves) in whose Name, and at whose Suit we have
drawn up this Legal Indictment against your illegal and riotous Election; That
you the Mercenary and Debauched Bailiff, with the corrupt Majority of your
Brethren, the Burgesses of the Borough of Buckingham, not having the Fear of
God before your Eyes, but being led by the infligation of the Devil, the Duty
and Allegiance which to your Native Country you owe, forgetting, and not in
any wise regarding, have Wickedly, Devillishly, and of your own Malice,
forethought, betrayed your Trust, and as much as in you ^^e^h, endeavored to
destroy those Natural and inherent Rights, those Fundamental Liberties and
Privileges, which all freeborn Englishmen have, and of Right ought to enjoy;
and in order to, and in pursuance of this your Traiterous, Accursed, and
Hellish Design, have elected such Persons to Represent you, and serve for you
in the House of Commons, as are notoriously known to have formerly betrayed the
Trust reposed in them, and have thereby exposed the whole Kingdom to the
apparent Danger and visible Hazard of Beggary, Slavery, and Popery.

Now suffer us to expostulate the Case with you in all Meekness, and
Gentleness. Were you in your Wits? were you sober? or rather had you not put
off common Sense? Were you not forsaken of your Reasons, and Understandings,
that your Wisdoms could find no better a Stick of Wood to make a Prop for a
tottering State, on a Crutch for a halting Church, than Sir Timber? A Piece so
crooked, so rotten and warped in Principle, Conscience and Interest, that
whatever Use others may make of him, we poor Farmers cannot judge him fit to
make an Hovel-post! The Devil was formerly so modest as to be Content with his
Chapel, where God had his Church, but seeing he has now aspired to, and taken
Possession of the Temple, into what Chapel of Ease will you crowd the Almighty?

There are few Sinners so disperate, but will seek or find some Excuses which
they may ^itch together to palliate their Guilt, and hide their Nakedness. But
You are certainly forsaken of all Pretenses which may mitigate your Crimes, and
alleviate your Punishment. Can you plead Ignorance, or pretend Surprise when
your Sir Timber was the Original Sinner in the Muster-roll of the Club of
Unanimous Voters? Has he not there stood like Judas in the Forefront of the
Infernal Regiment of Pensioners? Has not Common Fame pinned a Paper to his
B^east, wherein is signified to the World how he has sold his Country to the
Court; Liberty, to Prerogative; and Property, to Will and Pleasure? Is he not
now notoriously known to the English World, by the Name of Sir Timber? and if
you ask him, who gave him that Name? must he not answer, That either your
selves, or Legion, was his Godfather? For, did he not once make you a bribeing
Present of Timber to rebuild your Townhouse; which vanished all away by the
Magic Art of the same Devil that brought it? was he so great a Knave to cheat
you once, and are not you greater Fools to be cheated twice?

But we your plain and honest Neighbors do yet hope and pray that you and we
may find the Representative Body of England of so sound and healthful a
Constitution, as by the Strength of Nature to purge off those evil Humors
which by your Faule they have contracted; and as our late renewed Parliament
once before cast him into the Draught, so they will never again lick up their
Excrements. And as he was once cut off from their Body as a rotten Member, so
they will never accept from you a wooden Leg made of such putrified Timber.

Yet, had you selected out of all those worthy Gentlemen, wherewith your
Neighborhood has plentifully furnished you, some one whose Virtues might have
corrected the Malignity of his Vices, whose Fidelity might have seasoned his
Treachery, and whose true English Spirit might have balanced his degenerated
Spirit; we had showed our Impartiality in commending what was Good, as well as
condemning what was Evil and Unworthy in you, and that we durst no more conceal
your Merits than your Guiltiness. But you took special Care, it seems, that we
should find nothing in you Praiseworthy, and have therefore coupled with him a
Colleague only meet for you and him. Vile Miscreants! could you find none to be
Judge of a traiterous Father, but a treacherous Son? Could you think him meet
to sit within the Walls of the Houses of Commons, whose great Interest and
Merits lie within the Walls of the Tower? Will not he in his own Defense
obstruct Justice, when Justice would obstruct his Possession of a vast Estate
amassed by betraying us to Arbitrary Power, selling us to the French, enslaving
us with a standing Army, which no Parliamentary Votes, and Acts can disband;
and assisting the Papists in carrying on their late Plot, and damnable Treasons?

Had you seriously reflected upon your Treacherous Actions, had you testified
your Repentance, or given us any Hopes that you had slept out your Debauch, we
had looked on you with some Commiseration; or had your Priests called you to
the Stool of Repentance, where you had given Satisfaction to the World by
Confession of, and Contrition for your Villainies, we had encouraged in our
selves any feeble Hopes, and in you, any weak Appearances of Amendment: but
when you, and your Tribe of Levi, Brethren in Iniquity, maintain a cursed
Combination to advance absolute Power to the Destruction of our Properties, and
to tear from us our Secular, and Civil, as you have already done our Religious
Birthrights, and yet no Sign of your returning to a better Mind appears; what
could we do less than in this innocent and gentle Way chastise you, till our
noble Representatives shall convene, in some Measure to render unto you
proportionable to your Works?

We do therefore hereby declare our Detestation of your Perfidiousness; we
protest against your Election; we proclaim you Infamous to all after Ages; we
renounce all Commerce and Converse with you as men; we excommunicate you from
the Society of all true hearted Englishmen; as Christians we will neither Eat
nor Drink, Buy nor Sell, Deal nor Trade with you in your Fairs, or Markets. We
will set the Red-cross upon your Doors; and do by these Presents warn the
whole Kingdom in general, and this Scandalized County in Particular, that they
fly, as from a Common Pestilence, the mortal Contagion of your Persons, and
Habitations.

We shall further humbly Petition his Grace, whose noble Family has borrowed a
Flower from your now Apostatized Corporation, to adorn his Coronet; that he
would be pleased to procure, and sue out an Alteration of his Patent, that
there may be no noble Family to stain it is Coat with such an accursed
Denomination: And shall further humbly petition his Sacred Majesty, that you
may be disfranchised; a perpetual Brand of Infancy set upon you; and never more
entrussed with that Privilege which you have so wretchedly abused: that so the
highest Officer in your degraded Town may be the Hog-heard, since you have sold
your Country (like the Gadarens) for your swinish Lusts, and would have sold
your Savior at the same Rate, if any had cheapned him; and your Religion too,
such as it is, had any Chapman thought it worth the Buying.

And now ye Renegadoes from the Interest of your Native Country! can you
flatter your selves that we will ever Reverence your Fox-furre? adore your
Threadbare Gowns? tremble at the Idle Ceremony of your Mass, or worship your
titular Gravities; who have prostituted Authority, debauched Power, and now
stand convicted of a most abominable Conspiracy against the Lives, Liberties,
Religion, and Being of England?

If you should chance to Repent (it must be against your Wills if ever you do;)
do not imitate the hypocritical Repentance of Ludgersall, whose dry Drunkenness
has proved more Pernicious to the Public Safety, than their Liquid: and have
made a worse Choice, Sober, than perhaps they had ever done when stark Mad; and
are now the only Borough who being Reformed, have contributed to a Nations
Ruin.

Good Mr. Bailiff! Let not your Worships thick skin be too sensible that we
thus Tan your Hide; and you the Burgesses, be patient whilst we tell you your
own, in our Homespun, russer Language; We do but speak what the whole Nation
thinks, and it is but short, yet sweet: you are a pack of Villains, for whom the
Gallows has long groaned; and that fatal Tree at your Towns-end must be for
ever barren, till you become its fruit; your Rottenness has made you ripe for
Hanging; and how would it complete and crown the Plenty of this Year, could we
see you, and all our Pensioners hang like ropes of Onyons upon such fruitful
Trees. We shall confess you have made a Choice to some Purpose, when you have
hewed out a substantial pair of Gallows out of your own Timber, and you and
your Brethren shall be pleased to take a Swing or two under its Shades.

You will say, perhaps, that we do but rail; and we do ingenuously confess,
there was no help for it: the worst Language we could of the sudden invent, was
too good for you: we have not the Art to embalm a stinking Carrion; we cannot
perfume a Dunghill; only we do heartily repent, that at the beginning of our
Address, we Style you Right Worshipful, and Worshipful; forgive us this one
time of treating you unsuitable to your Merits; and we do religiously promise
that for the future we will Blazon you in your proper Colors, and describe you
by your particular Titles; which you must be content should be none of the
best, since you have taken such care to deserve no better.

In the mean time, we had left you to be chastis'd by the Stings and Lashes of
your own Consciences; but they being long since mortified and past feeling, we
must resign you to the Divine Vengeance, to be made in due time by some signal
Judgments a Public Example to the World, and a fair Warning to all that shall
hereafter dare to betray their God, their King, and their Country.

Most Hang-worthy Gentlemen! Go recreate your selves upon a Gallows made of
your own TIMBER TEMPLE. So pray most devoutly your daily Orators, The honest
poor Farmers of the Neighboring Villages, S. T: R. W. etc.
POSTSCRIPT.
Mr. Bailiff!
WE have sent you enclosed the New Buckingham Ballad, which you may do well to
cause to be read in your Town Hall. Sir Timber Temple presents his humble
Service to your Lady; (she knows the meaning of it) and so would We to the
Ni^ty Barber your Brother, but that we owe him none, and have little enough to
pay where it is due.



THE OFFICE OF THE Overseers of the Poor.
CHAP. I. Of the Antiquity of these Officers, of their Qualifications, and how,
and when to be chosen.
THose to be chosen to this Office, ought to be substantial Persons, Men of
Wisdom and a good Conscience; they mull be Householders, for this Name and
Office may beseem the Best, and not the meanest Men, (it being an Office of
great Antiquity and Excellency;) For as God himself has a special Respect to
the Miseries of the Poor, so they be like God that provide for the Necessitles
of the Poor, Dalt. J. P. 143.

The Overseers of the Poor are to be chosen yearly, and joined with the
Churchwardens of the Parish in the oversight and ordering of the Poor of the
Parish. They are to be chosen by two or more Justices of the Peace, sone
whereof to be of the Quorum) who are yearly under their Hands and Seals at
Easter, or within one Month after, to appoint four, three, or two substantial
Householders, according to the greatness of the Parish, to be joined with the
Churchwardens to look to the Poor of the Parish, Stat. 43 Eliz. c. 2. 21 Jac.
c. 28.

The major part of these Officers, without the rest of them, may do any thing
belonging to their Office. But they are to have the allowance and consent
either in particular, or in general, of two Justices of the Peace (Quor. unus)
to every thing they do about their Office. And these Officers, or such of them
as shall not be let by just excuse (to be allowed by two Justices) are to meet
monthly in the Church on Sunday after Evening Prayer, and there are to consider
of some meet directions about their Office, and they are to use all possible
diligence in their Office on pain to forfeit for every such Default twenty
shillings, 43. El. c. 3. Wingates Stat. Tit. Poor People.

And if it happen that Overseers be not appointed according to the 43 El. then
every Justice of Peace or Head Officer of that Division or Corporation shall
forfeit 5. l. to be levied by a Sessions Warrant, and employed to the use of
the Poor of the Parishes where such default is made, ^^3 El. c. 2. Wingates
Stat. Tit. Poor People.

CHAP. II. Of the several sorts of Poor People, and what Poor the Overseers are
to provide for, and relieve, or to set to work.
THere are three sorts or degrees of Poor, as first, the Poor by Impotency and
Defect, as the Aged and Decrepit that are past their Labor; the Infant,
Fatherless and Motherless, and not able to work; the Person naturally disabled
either in Wit or Member, as an Idiot, Lunatic, Blind, Lame, etc. not being
able to work; and the Person visited with grievous Sickness or Disease, though
casually, yet thereby for the time being impotent. All these the Overseers are
to provide for, that they have necessary Relief, and Allowances proportionable,
and according to the continuance and measure of their Maladies and Needs, and
of these it may be said, Si non pavisti, occidisti, Dalt. J. P. c. 73. ^. 169.

Then secondly, The Poor by Casualty, as a Person casually disabled or maimed
in his Body, as the Soldier or Labourer, etc. maimed in their lawful Callings
the Householder decayed by casualty of Fire, Water, Robbery, Suretiship, etc.
and the poor Man over charged with Children: All these (and such like others)
having Ability, and strength of Body, but not sufficient Means to maintain
themselves, are to be set to work by the Overseers, and being not able to live
by their Work, they are in Charity to be relieved in some reasonable
proportion, according to their several Wants and Necessities, Da^^ J. P. c. 73.
f. ibid.

Then lastly, The thriftless Poor, as the r^otous and prodigal Person, that
consumes all w^^ Play or Drinking, etc. the dissolute Person, as t^^ Strumpet,
Pilferer, etc. the slothful Person the refuses to work, etc. and the Vagabond
the will abide in no place or service; and for all the^^ the House of
Correction is the place where the^ are to be sent to, and being of able Bodies,
then they are to be held to hard Labor, and to maintain themselves by their
Labor and Work, w^^^ out charging the Town or County for any Allowance, 7 Jac.
c. 4 Dalt. J. P. c. 73. sol. 170.

But it seems, that if any of these last ^ort^ Poor happen to prove impotent,
and also ^^ cases of manifest extremity, then they are to b^ relieved by the
Town, Dalt. J. P. c. 73. f. ibid*

If the Parents be able to work and may har^ Work, they are to find their
Children by thee labor, and not the Parish; but if they be overcharged with
Children, they may help, by having some of their Children put out Apprenticeth
by the Overseers, Dalt. J. P. c. 73. f. 157.

The Father, Grandfather, Mother, Grandmother, and the Children and
Grandchildren of every poor impotent Person not able ^^ work, being of
sufficient Ability, shall relieve suc^ poor Persons in such manner, as the
Justices ^^ Peace of that County (where such sufficient Person dwells) at
their General Quarter Session shall Assess; and if such Person refuse to ab^^^
the Order, they forfeit 20 s. for every mond to the Poor of the Parish, which
forfeiture 1. to he levied by the Church wardens or Overseen or one of them, by
Warrant from any two justices of the Peace (Quor. unus) within their Limits, by
distress and sale of the Offenders Goods, and want of distress, any two such
Justices may commit the Offender to prison, there to remain without Bail till
the said Forfeiture be paid, 43 El. 2. Resol. Judges 16, 17. Dalt. J. P. c. 73.
f. 156.

But if a Man marry a Grandmother that has no Estate, the Grandfather in Law
is not chargeable: But if she has an Estate caused without such Marriage, or
that comes after Marriage by descent, or otherwise to her, here he may be
charged: But where they have raised themselves an Estate by their own Industry,
there it is doubtful. But in no case shall he be charged longer than his Wife
lives; and it seems also Bastard Children are not within this Law, neither can
the Justices do any thing therein against a Man that lives out of their County.
See Boulst. Rep. 2 part, f. 245, 246, 247.

No Poor may beg but in their own Parish, and there by License of the Overseers
of the Poor; and they may not license them to beg in the Highways there, and
without the License of the Overseers they may not beg at all, Res. Judges 15.
Dalt. J. P. ^. 73. f. 157. 39 El. 3.

No Inhabitants may serve any Poor at their Door, but those of their own
Parish, that have license from the Overseers of the Poor to beg there, under
pain of 10. s for every time they do so, 1 Jac. 7. Dalt. J. P. c. 83. f. ^20.

These Officers are to make provision for a poor Man that wants an House (but
not for a common Herdsman or Sheperd) with consent of the Lord of the Manor
first had in writing under his Hand and Seal, either by themselves, or with a
Sessions Order, may erect a Cottage upon any part of the Waste of a Manor, and
lodge Inmates therein, notwithstanding the Stat. 31 El. 7. But such Cottage may
not be afterward employed otherwise than to lodge impotent Persons there, for
if it be, then it falls within the penalty of the 31 El. aforesaid, 43 El. c. 2
Wingates. Stat. Tit. Poor People.

All such Persons married or unmarried, having no Means to maintain them, using
no ordinary and daily Trade of Life to get their Living by, and such Persons
also as can get no Work, are to be set on Work by the Overseers; and any one
Justice of Peace may send to the House of Correction, or Common Goal, such as
shall not employ themselves to work being appointed thereto by the
Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor of the Parish, 43 El. c. 2. Dalt. J. P.
c. 73. f. 143.

And to this purpose the Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor may, by, and
with the consent of two or more Justices of the Peace (Quor. unus) etc. Set up
use, and occupy any Trade, Mystery or Occupation, only for the setting on Work,
and better Relief of the Poor of the Parish, Town or Place where they are
Overseers, etc. 3 Car. 1. c. 4. Dalt. J* P. c. 73. f. 148. Wingates Stat. Tit.
Poor People.

CHAP. III. The Duty of the Overseers about putting forth, and binding of
Apprentices, with the Form of the Indenture for that purpose.
IN the putting out of Children Apprentices, there ought to be regard had to
the Master, ^he Child, and the Parents; First, to the Master, that he be of
Ability and Honesty, otherwise by some device or hard entreaty they may provoke
their Apprentices to depart or run away; and regard is also to be had to his
Trade or Faculty, lest the Apprentice consume his time without learning any
thing: Secondly, Regard is to be had to the Apprentices to put them out timely,
and while they are young and tractable (so that they be above the Age of seven
years) otherwise by reason of their idle and base Educations, they will hardly
keep their Service, or employ themselves to work: Then lastly, Regard is to be
had to the Parents, to take away such from them as are brought up to live ^dly
and loosly, or else such as are a burden and charge to their Parents, Dalt. J.
P. c. 73. f. 150, 151.

The choice of these Apprentices, are to be out of the poorest sort of
Children, whose Parents are the least able to relieve them, and they are to be
above 7, and under 15 years of Age, when they are first bound, 7 Jac. c. 3.
Wingates Stat. Tit. Poor People.

And these Officers are to have the consent of two Justices of the Peace in the
placing out of such Apprentices; and they may bind the Man-child till 24 years
of Age, and the Woman chi^^ till 21 years of Age, or till she be married, wh^^
shall first happen: And these Apprentices m^^ be bound to Weavers, Masons,
Dyers, Fullen, ^^ any other Trade, as well as to Husbandry ^^ Housewifery, See
43 El. c. 2. Dalt. J. P. c. 73. f. 14^ Wingates Stat. Tit. Poor People.

Now this placing of Apprentices may be ^ any Man, whom the Officers and
Justices think^ to receive them, within the same Parish, or els^where in other
Parishes within the same H^^dred, either with, or without Money; therefo^^ it is
fit in this case to consider, if the Child ^^ young, and the Party to whom they
place it i^ not very able, then they may give Money, if the^ please, as the
Party and they shall agree, ^^ Judges 1633. Quest. 1.

All Men that-have; or may have use for Servants, as Knights, Clergymen,
Gentlemen, a^^ Yeomen, as well as Tradesmen, are bound to ta^^ Apprentices;
yea, though wealthy Men Tab^^ themselves, or live so privately, that they
haven^ use for a Servant, yet they may be compelled ^^ take them, or else to
pay a Sum of Money for putting them Apprentices elsewhere; and if they refuse to
pay the Sum imposed upon them, tw^ Justices of the Peace may make their Warra^^
to levy the same by distress and sale of the Offenders Goods, Res. Judges 1633.
Quest. 4. Po^^^ 24. Dalt. J. P. c. 73. f. 151.

Or the Refusers to take Apprentices, may be presented and indicted for the
same, upon the Stat. 43 El. c. 2. at the Assizes or Sessions of the Peace,
Dalt. J. P. c. 73. f. ibid. Res. Judges 1633 Quest. 7.

An Apprentice put to a Man in respect of his ^arm, when his Lease expireth,
the Apprentice shall go still with the Farm, if the first Master be so pleased;
otherwise it is where an Apprentice is put to a Man in regard of his Ability,
or for other Respects. And where any differences are between the Officers and
the Man that is to receive an Apprentice, about Money, and what Money shall be
given or otherwise, ^here the Justices thereabouts, or in their Defaults, the
Sessions must end it, Res. Judges 1633. Quest. 2. Dalt. J. P. c. 73. f. 151.

If the Parents of poor Children shall refuse to let their Children be put
forth Apprentices (without good cause showed) such Parents may be bound over,
by the Justices, to answer their said Default, and if the Children shall
refuse, the Justices may send them to the House of Correction, there to remain
till they be content to be bound and serve, Dalt. J. P. c. 73. and 58. f. 153.
and 119.

Note, That this binding must be by Indenture, and may not well be done by a
verbal Agreement; and the Indenture must be either between the Justices,
Churchwardens and Overseers, or them and the Apprentice on the one part, and
him that takes the Apprentice of the other part, as appears by the Form of the
Indenture in the end of this Chapter; and he must be named by the Name of
Apprentice expressly, or else he is no Apprentice, though he be bound, Cromp.
184. Dalt. J. P. c. 5. f. 120.

And this binding is as effectual to all purposes, as if the Children were of
full Age, and did bind themselves by Indentures and Covenants; and all such as
are bound by the Overseers, as abovesaid, may safely be received and kept ^
Apprentices by their Masters, 1 Jac. c. 25. ^^ Jac. c. 28. Dalt. J. P. c. 58.
fol. 120. 3 Car. 1. c. ^ 5 El. c. 4. Cromp. 184. b.

Such Money as is given to put out poor C^^^dren Apprentices, is to be employed
in Corporate Towns, by the Corporations, and in other plac^s by the Parson or
Vicar, together with the Constables Churchwardens, and Overseers of the Poor,
or the most part of them; who shall ^^^ forbear to refuse to employ the same
accordingly, on pain to forfeit five marks, each o^ them so making default, to
be divided betwi^^ the Poor of the Parish and the Prosecutor, 7 Jac. c. 3.
Wingates Stat. Tit. Poor People.

The Party taking any Money with such Apprentice, shall give good Security by
Obligation to repay it at the end of seven years next ensuing the date of the
said Obligation, or within the three months after the end of the said seve^
years; and if such Apprentice shall die within seven years, then within one
year after his or her death; and if the Master, Mistress or Dame happen to die
within the seven years, then within one year after their death; so as the Money
may be employed in placing the Apprentice with some other of the same Trade, to
serve out his time, at the discretion of the Parties trusted as aforesaid, 7
Jac. c. 3.

And the Money so given shall be employed within three months after the Receipt
thereof, and if there shall not be apt Persons found in the places where it is
given to the Apprentices, it shall then be employed in the Parishes next
adjoining, by the Parties that are trusted with it, in the place where it was
so given, and there also Bond shall be taken, as before is decla^ed, 7 Jac. c. 3.

If the Master shall put his Apprentice into Apparel, it is a Gift in Law, and
he cannot ^fterwards take it away, though he should part ^ith his Apprentice,
Br. Transgr. 93.

An Apprentice cannot be discharged from his Apprenticeship but by four
Justices of the Peace ^t the least, and in open Sessions, or else by ^he
Agreement of the Master and Apprentice, and under his Masters Hand in Writing,
Dalt. J. P. c. 58. f. 121.

The Form of these Indentures, mentioned before, is as follows, viz.
THIS Indenture made the 29th day of September, in the 20th Year of the Reign
of Our most Gracious Sovereign Lord Charles the Se^^nd, by the Grace of God of
England, Scotland, France and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, etc.
Annoque Dom. 1668. witnesses, that J. W. and G. R. Overseers of the Poor in
the Town of Kirk-Leaventon, and J. R. Churchwardens of the ^^me Town, by and
with the consent of Sir J. P. Knight and Baronet, and T. M. Esquire two of his
Majesty's Justices of Peace for the North Riding ^f the County of York, have by
these Presents ^laced and bound J. T. (being a poor fatherless child) as an
Apprentice with E. H. of Kirk-Leaventon aforesaid, Widow; and as an Apprentice
with her the said E. H. to dwell from the day of the ^ate of these Presents,
until she the said J. T. shall ^ome to the Age of 21 years, or be married,
which shall first happen, according to the Statute in that ^ase made and
provided, by and during all which time and term the said J. T. shall the said
E. H. her Dame well and faithfully serve in all (...) lawful Business as the
said E. H. shall put ^^ the said J. T. unto, according to her Power, ^^ and
Ability, and honestly and obediently in ^^ things shall behave her self toward
her said (...) and Children, and all the rest of the Family ^ the said E. H.
And the said E. H. for her ^^^ promises, covenanteth, and agrees that she t^^
said E. H. the aforesaid J. T. in the Art and Sk^^ of Housewifry, the best
manner that she can, ^^ may, shall teach and inform, or cause to be taug^^ and
informed, as much as thereunto belongs, a^^ she the said E. H. knows; and
also during ^^ the said Term, to find unto her said Apprentice, Meat, Drink,
Linen, Woollen, Hose, Shoes, W^^ing, and all other things needful or meet for
^^ Apprentice. In Witness whereof, etc.

Note, If it be a Boy that is to be bound Apprentice to Husbandry, or any other
Trade, th^^ he may be bound till 24 years of Age, as ^^ showed before in this
Chapter.

CHAP. IV. Several Cases about Settlements, and also touching Bastards, etc.
TOuching settling of poor People, the Justices are to meddle with none but
those who are impotent, and such as are like to be chargeable to the place
where they are Boulst. Rep. 1 part, 347.

By 13 and 14 Car. 2. cap. 12. It is Enacted, that upon complaint by the
Churchwardens, ^^d Overseers of the Poor, to any Justice of ^eace within forty
days after any poor Person ^ometh to settle in a Tenement under 10 l. ^^r
annum, two Justices of Peace, whereof one ^o be of the Quorum, may by Warrant
remove ^^ch Person to the Parish where they were last ^^gally settled for forty
days, unless they give ^^curity to be allowed by the said Justices for
^ischarge of the Parish: Persons aggrieved may ^ppeal to the Quarter Sessions.

But Persons having a Certificate from the ^inister of the Parish, and one
Churchwarden, and one Overseer of the Poor, declaring them ^^habitants there,
may go into any Parish to ^ork, and the not returning of such Persons, ^hen
their Work is finished, or falling Sick ^hilst they are at Work, shall not be
accounted Settlement: If any return to the Parish from ^hence they are removed,
a Justice of Peace ^ay send them to the House of Correction, to ^e punished as
Vagabonds, or to a public ^ork house to be employed in Labor: and if ^he
Churchwardens and Overseers of any Pa^^sh to which any are removed, refuse to
re^eive them, and provide them Work, etc. a justice of Peace may bind over such
Officers to ^he Assizes or Sessions.

Churchwardens and Overseers for the Poor ^here any Bastard-Child shall be
born, may (...) so much of the Goods and Profits of the ^ands of the Putative
Father and Lewd Mother, ^^ two Justices of Peace shall order toward ^ischarge
of the Parish, to be confirmed at the ^essions: who may make an Order for the
Churchwardens, etc. to dispose of the Goo^ by sale or otherwise as they shall
think (...) and receive the Profits of so much of the^^ Lands, as shall be
ordered by the Sessions.

The Poor in every Town-ship or Village ^^ Lancashire, Cheshire, Darbyshire,
Yorkshire, N^thumberland, Bishopric of Durham, Cumberla^^ and Westmoreland
shall be provided for in t^^ Township and Village where they inhabit, ^^ were
last legally settled: And two or more Overseers shall be chosen in every
Township etc. who shall execute all powers for the ^elief of the Poor under the
Penalties mentioned in 43 Eliz. c. 2.

This Act of 13 and 14 Car. 2. c. 12. was ^^ continue no longer than to the end
of the first Session of the next Parliament, but revived by 1 Jac. 2. c. 17. to
continue for seven years, and to the end of the first Session of the next
Parliament.

And whereas poor Persons at their fir^^ coming to a Parish, do commonly
conceal themselves, the forty days intended by the said Act to make Settlement,
shall be accounted from the time of their deliveries of notice in writing of
their House of Abode, and the number of their Family, if they have any, to one
of the Churchwardens or Overseers of the Poor of the said Parish, 1 Jac. 2. c.
17.

No Man but a Vagraut Beggar, ought to b^ sent out of any Parish to the place
of his Birth or last Habitation; for if any refuse to work in the Parish where
he is settled, or to work for the Wages assessed, then he is by the Justices to
be sent to the House of Correction, Co. 2 part Inst. fol. 730. 7 Jac. c. 4.
Resol. Judges 9. Dalt. ^. P. c. 73. f. 157. 39 El. c. 4. 1 Jac. c. 7.

If a Scholar in the University, or in a Gram^ar School begin to be suspect, he
may be, or ^ he does become impotent, and is like to ^e a Charge to the Parish
where he is, he must ^e sent to his Parents if he have any, other^ise to the
place where he was last legally ^^ttled before he came to School, Res. Judges
633. sect. 32.

If one be Born, and live 20 years in A. and ^hen go to B. and there live in a
House and pay ^is Rent, and after he come to C. and there ^orks 20 Weeks as a
Labourer in a Quarry of ^ones, where he breaks his Back, and becomes ^^potent,
and there is taken vagrant and beg^^ng, in this case he must be sent to A. the
^lace of his Birth, and there must be provided ^^r, Res. Judges, 14 Car. 1.

If a Man that has a Wife and Children, take ^^ House in one Parish for a
Year, and during ^is time he is illegally forced out of his Posses^^on; then he
takes an House as Inmate in another Parish, out of which he is put within two
^^ three days, and then not having any place ^^ be in, he gets into a Barn in
the third place, ^^d there his Wife is delivered of another ^hild: In this case
they are all to be sent to the ^arish out of which they were first illegally
^^rced, Resol. Judges 1633. sect. 24.

One Born in D. left that place for the space ^^ 20 years, then lived in S.
took an House and ^^id Rent, and left that place also six or seven ^ears, and
then came to L. in another County, and there was twenty Weeks, did Work, and
there became impotent, and did wander, a^^ beg in the same place, and was taken
as a Vagrant, and it was ordered he should be passe^ and settled at D. where he
was Born, by t^^ Judges at Worcester Assizes, 14 Car. 1. Boulst. R^^ 1 part, f.
375.

No Child under the Age of seven years sh^^ be adjudged a Rogue within the
Stat. 39 El. c. ^ But it seems such Children vagrant and begging must be sent
and placed with the Father ^^ Husband of the Wife; and if he be dead, the with
the Mother (where she was born, or (...) dwelt by the space of one year) and
such Chi^dren, once thus settled or placed, must the^e remain, and not be sent
from thence to the^^ place of Birth, though after their Parents die* or run
away, or that the said Children gr^^ above the Age of seven years, yea, though
the said Children after beg, and prove vagrant ^^ the Town, for there they must
be set to labo^^ by the Overseers of the Poor, Dalt. J. P. c. 8^. f. 209.

But Children above seven years of Age, going about vagrant, or begging in the
Country, shall be punished as Rogues, and sent ^^ their place of Birth, Dalt.
J. P. chapter 83. (...) 209.

The Wife being a Vagrant Rogue, must ^^ sent to her Husband, though he be but
a Servant in another Town; and where the Husband and Wife have an House,
(though as an I^mate) and either of them Rogue about, i^ this case they are to
be sent to the place where the House is, Dalt. J. P. c. 83. fol. 209.

The Rogue, whose place of birth or last dwelling cannot be known, having Wife
and Children under seven years of Age, they must ^o with the Husband to the
place where they ^vere last wilfully suffered to pass through without
punishment, where the Children must be ^elleved by the Work of their Parents,
though ^he Parents be committed to the House of Cor^ection; and if the Rogue
have Children above ^even years of Age, that Rogue about with him, ^hen they
are to be sent to the House of Correction also with the Parents, and when they
come out again, then to their several places of births, Dalt. J. P. c. 83. f.
206. and Shephards Guide for J. P. page 252. Res. etc. b.

If I live in a House in A. there with my Children, but I work in B. where I am
hired by the year, in this case my Children shall be in A. but ^f I have an
House in B. they shall be placed there, Dalt. J. P. c. 73. f. 158.

A. being a Wanderer with three Children born in three Parishes, comes to Dale
with them to her Sister, and there dies shortly after, here the Children must
be settled in the several Parishes where they were born, and not in the Parish
where the Mother died, Boulst. Rep. 2 part, 351.

No Man is to be put out of the Town where he dwells, and is lawfully
settled, nor to be sent to his place of Bith, or last Habitation, but a Vagrant
Rogue, not to be found by the Town, except the Party be imporent, but they
ought to set themselves to labor, if they be able and can get Work; and if
they cannot get Work, then the Overseers are to set them to work; and if in
such case such Persons wander abroad begging out of the Parish, then they may
be sent as Vagabonds (from the place where they shall be taken wandering or
begging) to the place of their Birth, Dalt. J. P. c. 83. f. 209.

If a Maid Servant be gotten with Child at ^^ by her Fellow Servants (or by
another Man ^^ the same Town) and after both their Service ended, they Marry,
and then the young M^^ is retained at B. and afterward the Woman is delivered
of her Child, in this case she wi^^ her Child are to be sent to the Father at
B. a^^ there must be settled, Dalt. J. P. c. 73 f. 159.

If any disturbance be made to any Settlement lawfully ordered by the Justices,
either by the Constables refusing to receive and convey a Rogue where they
ought to do it, or by the Churchwardens and overseers of the Poor in refusing
such an one as is duly sent to be settle^ there, in such case they forfeit 5 l.
by the 39 El. c. 4.

If a Woman unmarried be hired Weekly, Monthly, half Year, or Yearly, in one
Parish, and there be gotten with Child, and then goes it to another Parish,
and there is settled in Service, or otherwise for two or three Months, and then
she is discovered to be with Child, ^^ this case she and her Child shall be
settled i^ the Parish where she then is, and must not be sent to the Parish
whence she came, Resol. Judg^^ 1633. sect. 12.

If a Woman be delivered of a Bastard Chil^ in one Parish, and then go into
another Pari^^ with her Child, in this case the Child after it is nursed, is to
be sent to, and settled in the place where it was born, and not to remain with
the Mother, Resol. Judges 1633. sect. 23.

If A. have a Bastard Child by B. born in Dale, and the reputed Father marries
another Woman, and they breed the Child 10 years in the Parish of Salt, and the
Mother of the Child is in Service all this while, and a single Woman, the
reputed Father dies; in this case the Child is to be sent to the Mother first,
to be maintained by her, if she be able, and if not, it must be kept by the
Parish of Salt, where it was settled with the Father 10 years, Boulst. Rep. 2
part, fol. 350.

If a Woman have a Bastard Child, and is like to be chargeable to the Parish,
and she is sent to the House of Correction for it (as she may be by Law) in
this case it has been questioned whether the Child must go with her, or remain
in the Town where it was born, (or settled with the Mother) and there to be
relieved by the Work of the Mother, or by Relief from the Reputed Father, upon
the 18 El. and it seems most reasonable to be so; and yet the common opinion
and practice is otherwise, (to wit) to send the Child with the Mother to the
House of Correction: And this may also seem reasonable where the Child sucketh
on the Mother, Dalt. J. P. c. 11. f. 41.

If a Woman with Child be sent to the House of Correction, and there be
delivered; the Child must be sent back to the Parish where the Woman came from,
there to be relieved. Also if a Woman be traveling, and have her Child with
her, and is apprehended and sent to the Goal, and there hanged for Felony, in
this case the Child shall not be chargeable to the place where the Goal is, but
to the place where it was born (if it can be known) otherwise to the place
where the Mother was apprehended* and so was the opinion of Sir Nicholas Hi^^ 3
Car. 1.

The two next Justices (Quor. unus) in ^^ next to the Limits where the Parish
Church ^^ may take order as well for the punishment o^ the Mother, and reputed
Father of a Bastar^ Child, as also for the Relief of the Parish whe^^ it is
born, by charging the Mother and Father with the payment of Money weekly toward
the keeping of it, or otherwise: And if the Mother or Father perform not the
Justices order therein, they are to suffer Imprisonme^^ without Bail, except he
or she give Security ^^ perform, or else to appear at the next Sessions, and
abide the order of the Justices there, if any be made there; and if none be
made, then ^^ stand to the first order, Dalt. J. P. c. 11. f. ^* 18 El. c. 3.

Note, That this Order may be made by any two Justices of the County (Quor.
unus) as it ^^ held by some, but most properly by the t^^ next Justices, and
the question must be abo^^ such a Bastard Child as is like to be a charge to
the Parish; and the Security must be give^ to the Parish where the Child is
born, to secure the Parish from the charge of the Child, or to keep the Child:
it must be a Parish with in the County where the two Justices have power, and
the Order must be certain how long the reputed Father must keep the Child,
secure the Parish, etc. and it must be made against the Person that is
suspected to have gotten the Bastard Child, and not against another Person to
contribute toward it, because it was gotten in his House, etc. and the Order
mus^ express the Child by the Name of a Bastard Child, and not the reputed
Child of such an ^^e; and the Justices for the better discovery of ^he Matter,
may upon Oath examine the Mo^her her self concerning the reputed Father, ^he
time, etc. Dalt. J. P. c. 11. fol. 40. 18 Eliz. c. 3. 7 Jac. c. 4. See Steels
Rep. fol. 154, 245, 246, 247, 388. and see Pridgeons Case, Hill. 9 Car. 1. B.
R. and Slaters Case, Pasch. 13 Car. 1. B. R. Cro. Rep. 1 part.

CHAP. V. The Overseers Office in making of Rates, and passing Accounts.
THE Churchwardens and Overseers of the Poor, or the greater part of them (for
^he doing and performing of the things they have in charge) may raise weekly,
or otherwise by Taxation of every Parson, Vicar, and other Occupier of Land,
House or Tithes, Colemines, or saleable Underwoods, within the Pa^ish, Town,
etc. such a Sum as they shall ^hink fit; and this Rate they must have allowed
and confirmed under the Hands of two Justices (Quor. unus) and then by Warrant
from them, or any other two Justices (Quor. unus) ^hey may levy by distress and
sale of the Goods of the Party refusing to pay the said Tax, rendering the
overplus to the Owners, and ^n default of Distress, two such Justices may
commit the Party to prison, there to remain without Bail till he be discharged
by him, 43 El. chapter 2. Dalt. J. P. c. 73. f. 148. Wingates Stat. Tit* Poor
People.

Now these Rates ought to be well and tr^l^ made, according to Men's visible
Estates, real ^^ personal, within the place only, and not so any Estate
elsewhere; at Lincoln Assizes, 9 Can. by Justice Hutton and Crook.

Note, That a Parish in Reputation, shall be ^ Parish within this Law: so that
if A. be an ^^cient Parish that has Officers in it, and the^^ be a Town within
this Parish, which for a lo^^ time has been used, and reputed as a Par^^^ and
has all Parochial Rights, as Churchwardens, etc. here this place may be rated
as ^ Parish toward the Poor, Huttons Rep. fol. 93. ^ M. 3 Car. B. R. Hilton
and Paul's Case, Cro. 3 p^^ Rep.

This Tax must be set upon the Tenants and Occupiers of Lands; and nor upon the
Land lords Living within or without the Parish; f^^ the Tenant only is
chargeable for the Land, B^^strods 1 part, Rep. fol. 354.

The Parson having a full tenth Part of the Profits of the Place, may be rated
to a tenth Part, Resol. Judges 1633. sect. 33.

He that does occupy Lands in his own Hands lying in several Parishes, he must
be charged in every Parish for his Land lying therein, only according to the
proportion thereof, and ^^ more; but for his personal Estate it seems
reasonable he should be charged for it in the place where his Person is: All
Lands Ancient Demesne, Guildable and Copyhold, are to be charged with these
Rates, which ought to be according to the value, or by the pound, and not
according to the quantity, Sed consuetud^ tollit Legem.

The Rate for Stock or Goods is thought reasonable to be set after the
proportion of Lands, (viz.) an 100 pound in Stock to be rated after 5 or 6
pound a year in Land.

Note, That in some special Cases a Man may be rated beyond his Ability; as
where one brings a Charge upon a Parish; or under any pretense brings in a Man
that may be chargeable in a Parish, he may, if there be cause for this, be
raised in his Rate to the full value of his Estate; and so was the Opinion of
Sir Nicholas Hide, Dalt. J. P. c. 73. f. 167.

Where the Inhabitants of any Parish are not able to relieve their Poor, any
two Justices (Quor. unus) may tax other Parishes and Places within the Hundred,
yea, the whole Hundred, if need require; and where that is not sufficient, the
Justices in their Sessions may tax the County in part, or wholly at their
discretion, 43 El. c. 2. Wingates Abr. Stat. Tit. Poor People, 14 Car. 2. c. 12.

If any Persons find themselves aggrieved in any Tax, or other Act done by the
Overseers, or by the Justices of Peace, they are to be relieved at the Quarter
Sessions, Dalt. J. P. c. 73. f. 160. Wingates Abr. Stat. Tit. Poor People.

The Father, Grandfather, Mother, Grandmother and Children of every poor
Person, shall be assessed toward their Relief, as the Justices of the Peace in
their Sessions of the Peace in the County where such Father, etc. dwells, shall
limit and appoint, on pain to forfeit 20 s. a month, to the use of the Poor, to
be levied by distress and sale as aforesaid, and for want of distress to be
committed to Prison till the Forfeiture be paid, 43 El. c. 2. Wingates A^^
Stat. Tit. Poor People, Dalt. J. P. c. 73. f. 1^6.

Head Officers in Cities and Corporate Town and Aldermen of London, have in
their sever^^ Precincts like Authority that Justices of Peace have in their
Countles, and no other Justices of Peace are to enter and intermeddle there
Wingates Abr. Stat. Tit. Poor People, 43 El. c. 2.

If any Parish shall extend into two Countles or part thereof to lie in any
City or Corporate Town where they have Justices: Then the Justices of every
County, etc. are to intermeddle only within their own Limits; and every of them
respectively within their Limits are in execute this Law concerning the
nomination of Overseers, binding of Apprentices, grant^^^ Warrants to levy
Taxations, taking Accoun^^ of Overseers, and committing such as refuse to
account, or to pay their Arrearages; and yet the Overseers shall without
dividing themselves, execute their Office in all places within the said Parish,
but shall give up Accounts to the Justices, or Head Officers of both Places,
Wingates Abr. Stat. Tit. Poor People, 43. El. c. 2. Dalt J. P. c. 73. f. 156.

These Officers within four days after the en^ of their Year (and that other
Officers are nominated) are to yield up a true Account to two Justices (Quor.
unus) of these things following, 1. What Sums of Money they have received, or
rated and not received? 2. What stock of Ware or Stuff is in their Hands, or it
the Hands of any of the Poor? 3. What Apprentices they have put out, and bound
according to the Statute? 4. What Poor they have set to work or relieved? 5.
What Poor they have suffered to wander and beg out of their Town, or in the
Highways, or in their Town without their directions? 6. Whether they meet
monthly to consider of the things belonging to their Office? 7. Whether they
made their Rates indifferent upon all Men, according to their Ability? 8.
Whether they have endeavored to gather and levy such Assessments? 9. Whether
they have neglected the Justices Warrants to them, or any of them directed for
the levying of any Forfeiture according to the Stat. 43 El. c. 2. Dalt. J. P.
c. 73. s. 153.

By the Statute of 30 Car. 2. for Burying in Woollen, the Justices are not to
allow the Accounts of the Overseers of the Poor, until they have given them an
Account of the Burials and Certificates, and of their levying the Penalties in
pursuance of that Act, 30 Car. 2. c. 3.

Now if the Churchwardens, or Overseers, or any of them, shall refuse to make
and yield a true and perfect Account to the said Justices, of all such Money,
and of all such Stock as aforesaid, any two Justices (Quor. unus) may commit
them to the common Gaol, there to remain without Bail, till they have made a
true Account, and satisfied, and paid to the new Overseers so much of the said
Sum or Stock, as upon the said Account shall be remaining in his or their
Hands, etc. And if they make a false Account, they may be bound over to the
Assizes or Sessions, and there an Indictment may be preferred against them,
Dalt. J. P. c. 73. f. 154.

Also if any of the Churchwardens or Overseers shall refuse, or deny to pay, or
deliver over to the new Overseers the Arrearages (Sums of Money or Stock) which
shall be in their Hands, and due, and behind upon their Account to be made as
aforesaid, any two such Justices of Peace may make their Warrant to the present
and subsequent Churchwardens and Overseers, or any of them, to levy the same by
distress and sale of the Offenders Goods, rendering to the Parties the overplus,
and in default of such distress, any two Justices of the Peace may commit him
or them to the common Goal, there to remain without Ball, until-payment or
delivery of the said Sum, Arrearages and Stock be made, 42 El. c. 2. Dalt. J.
P. c. 73. f. 154.

If any such Stock shall be in the Hands of any of the Poor to work, and such
Poor shall refuse to deliver the same, two such Justices may make the like
Warrant, to levy the same by distress, and for lack thereof, may commit such
Offenders to the Goal, as aforesaid, Dalt. J. P. c. 73. ibid.

And for these aforesaid, and all other Negligencies of the Churchwardens and
Overseers, in the Execution of their Office, about the Poor, etc. every of
them, for every Default, he makes, forfeits 20 s. which Default must be proved
either by the Offenders own Confession, or by Examination of Witnesses, and it
is to be levied by the new Churchwardens and Overseers, or one of them, by
Warrant from two Justices, as aforesaid, by distress and sale of the Offenders
Goods; and for want of Distress, two such Justices may commit Offenders to the
Goal, there to remain without Bail, till the said Forfeitures shall be paid;
which said Forfeitures are to be employed to the use of the Poor of the said
Parish, Dalt. J. P. c. 73. f. 155. 43 El. c. 2.

CHAP. VI. The Overseers Duty about Weights and Measures, and Burying in
Woollen.
THere shall be one Weight, one Measure, and one Yard, according to the
Standard of the Exchequer, throughout all the Realm, as well in places
Privileged, as without, and every Measure of Corn shall be striked without
Heap: And whosoever shall keep any other Weight, Measure, or Yard, whereby any
Corn, Grain, or other thing is bought or sold, shall forfeit for every Offense
five shillings, being thereof convicted, by the Oath of one sufficient Witness,
before any Justice of Peace, or Head-Officer of the City, Town, or Place where
the Offense is done, to be levied by the Churchwardens or Overseers of the Poor
of the Parish, to the use of the Poor of the said Parish, by Distress and Sale
of the Offenders Goods, and for want of Distress, to be ^mprisoned without Bail
until payment. And all Persons, upon Suit against him or them, for any thing
done upon this Act, to plead the General Issue, and give the Act in Evidence,
and to have treble Costs, if unjustly vexed, Dalt. J. P. c. 112. f. 246. 17
Car. 2. 6. 19.

No Corpse shall be buried in any thing other than what is made of Sheeps Wool
only, or be put into any Coffin lined or faced with any thing made of any
material but Sheeps Wool, on pain of the Forfeiture of five pounds, 30 Car. 2.
c. 3.

An Affidavit under the Hands and Seals of two Witnesses (or under the Hand of
the Magistrate or Officer before whom it was sworn, for which nothing shall be
paid) must be brought to the Minister within eight days after the Party is
interred, that he was not buried contrary to this Act, which shall be taken
before some Justice of Peace, Master of Chancery, Ordinary or Extraordinary,
Mayor, Bailiff, or other chief Officer of the City, County, Borough, etc. where
the Party was buried: And if no such Affidavit be brought, the Minister shall
give notice thereof under his Hand to the Churchwardens or Overseers of the
Poor, who within eight days after shall repair to the Chief Magistrate in any
Town, etc. if buried there, else to a Justice of Peace, who upon Certificate
thereof from the Minister, etc. shall grant a Warrant for levying the
Forfeiture by distress and sale of the Goods of the Party deceased, or in
default thereof, of the Persons Goods in whose House the Party died, or the
Goods of any that had a Hand in putting such Party into any Shroud, Coffin,
etc. contrary to this Act, or that ordered the same: And if such Person were a
Servant, and died in the Masters Family, the Masters Goods to be liable: And if
such Person died in his Parents Family, the Parents Goods to be liable: One
Moiety of which Forfeiture shall be to the Poor of the Parish where the Party
is buried, the other to him that shall sue for the same, 30 Car. 2. c. 3.

Ministers, Churchwardens, and Overseers, Justices of Peace, or Chief
Magistrates, neglecting their Duty aforesaid, shall forfeit five pounds for
every Offense, to be recovered by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint, etc. wherein
the Prosecutor shall recover his full Costs, so as the Suit be commenced,
within six months after the Offense committed; one fourth part of the
Forfeitures to the King; two fourth parts to the Poor of the Parish where the
Offender dwells; and one fourth part to the Informer, 30 Car. 2. c. 3.

Every Minister shall keep a Register of all Burials and Affidavits: And where
no Affidavit is brought as aforesaid, shall enter a Memorial thereof against
the Name of the Party interred, and of the time when he notified the same to
the Churchwardens or Overseers of the Poor. And the Overseers when they give up
their Accounts at the Sessions, or to any two Justices at their monthly
Meetings, shall give an account of the Name and Quality of every Person
interred since their former Account; and of such Certificates, and of their
levying the Penalties, and of their disposal thereof, on pain of five pounds to
be levied by distress and sale of Goods, by Warrant from the said Justices, or
two of them: and their Accounts shall not be allowed till they have accounted
for their Burials, 30 Car. 2. c. 3.

No Penalty shall be incurred where the Party died of the Plague: If any Person
be prosecuted, for what he shall do in pursuance to this Act, he may plead the
General Issue, and give this Act in Evidence: And upon a Nonsuit,
Discontinuance or Verdict for him, or Judgment upon a Demurrer, he shall have
treble Costs, 30 Car. 2. c. 3.

And now by the Statute of 32 Car. 2. (where no Justice of Peace shall reside,
or be to be found in any Parish where any Party shall be interred) such Oaths
or Affidavits may be adminstred, not only by such Magistrates as aforesaid, but
by any Parson, Vicar, or Curate in the same County, other than of the Parish or
Chapel of Ease where the Party is interred; and they are to attest the same
under their Hands gratis, 32 Car. 2. c. 1.

The Overseers Duty about Irish Cattle, See Duty of Constables, chapter 8.

Their Duty in suppressing Conventicles, See Duty of Constables, chapter 9.

Note, That the Overseers of the Poor, are to receive for the use of the Poor
of the Parish where the Offense is committed, of such who kill, or take in the
nightime any Conies upon the Borders of Warrens, or other Grounds lawfully
used for keeping of Conies, except Owners, etc. or Persons by them employed,
and of such who use Snares, Harepipes, or other like Engines, or who take any
Fish by any Net, Angle, or other Device whatsoever, in any Water or River, or
shall be assisting thereunto, without consent of the Lord, or Owner of the said
Water, what Sum the Justice of Peace before whom such Offender shall be
convicted, shall think meet, not exceeding ten shillings (which he is to pay
over and above recompense to the Owner:) And in default of payment thereof, he
that takes or kills such Conies, or uses Snares, etc. shall be committed to
the House of Correction for any time not exceeding one month: And the Goods of
him that takes such Fish shall be liable to distress; and for want of a
Distress, he shall be committed to the House of Correction, for any time not
exceeding one month, unless he enter into Bond with one or more Sureties to the
Party injured, not exceeding ten pounds never to offend in like manner, 22 and
23 Car. 2. c. 24.

A GUIDE FOR SURVEYORS OF Highways and Bridges.
CHAP. I. How many Sorts of ways there are; of the Choice of these Officers,
with some few General Cases concerning Highways.
THere are three kind of Ways; First, A Foot-way, called Iter, quod est jus
eundi, ^^vel ambulandi hominis. Secondly, a Foot-way and an Horse-way, called
actus, ab agendo, and this vulgarly is called a Pack or Drift-way, and ^s both
a Foot-way and Horse-way. Thirdly, A Cart-way, etc. called Via or Aditus, (and
contains the other two, and a Cart-way also) for this is jus eundi, vehendi,
and vehiculum and jumentum ducendi; and this is twofold, viz* Via Regia, The
Kings High way for all Men, and communis Strata, belonging to a City or Town,
or between Neighbors.

It is called the Kings Highway, for that the King at all times has therein
Passage for Himself and his People, and may punish all Nusances therein, though
otherwise the Interest be in the Lord to bring his Action for digging therein,
or other like Trespass there done, Dalt. J. P. c. 50. f. 101. and see Rolls
Cases, 1 part f. 392. 2 E. 4. 9. 8 E. 4. 9. 17 E. 3. f. 43. Bro Chemi^e, 10,
11. and Leet 3. 27 H. 6 f. 9. 8 H. 7. f. 5.

The Highway is not only the Common Tract, where Carts, Carriages, and People
have gone; but if the Way be Foundrous, thi^ People cannot pass in the Common
Tract, and there be Out-lets out of it, into the Soll of another adjoining, the
People may in such extremity use those Out-lets upon another Soil, although it
be sown with Corn: And that is, in such case, the Kings Highway as well as
the other; for the Kings Subjects must have a convenient Passage, as was
resolved in a Try^^ at Bar against Sir Henry Du^comb, Tr. 10 Car. Rolls 1 part
of Abridgment, fol. 390. Therefore where a Way goes through a Man's Land, and
the Owner of the Land Fence it on both sides* he, by so doing, has made
himself liable to repair the Highway, and keep it passable; and it is not
sufficient for him to keep it in ^^ good repair, as it was at the time of the
Enclosure; for by so doing he has straightened the Highway, Dalt. J. P. c. 50.
f. 98.

The Constables and Churchwardens of every Parish shall yearly, upon Tuesday or
Wednesday ^n Easter Week, call together a number of the Parishioners, and then
make choice of two of the Parish to be Surveyors of the Highways the Year
following, who shall forthwith take that Office upon them, on pain to forfeit
twenty shillings a piece, 2 and 3. Ph. and Mar. c. 8.

The Constables and Churchwardens are then also to appoint six days betwixt
that and the ^our and twentieth day of June, for the amendnent of the High
ways, and to give public notice thereof in the Church the next Sunday after, 2
and 3 P. and M. c. 8. and 5 El. c. 13.

Highways must be sufficiently amended at the charge of the whole Town: And it
is not enough for the Inhabitants to do their full six days work yearly; except
their Ways be all well and sufficiently repaired thereby: For if all their said
Ways be not sufficiently amended, the whole Town may be indicted therefore, and
if six days work in the year will not serve to amend them, the Surveyors may,
yea, must appoint more days, Dalt. P. J. c. 50. f. 101.

The Owner of Lands, if he be not the Occupier thereof, ought not to be charged
toward the repair of the com^on High ways; but the Tenant who occupies the
Lands is to be charged ^ill. 1^ Car. 1. Br. in one Fosters Case, per Curiam,
^^lls Cases, 1 part, f. 390.

All Fines and Forfeitures assessed in the Sessons, upon the Statute 5 El.
about Highways, must be Estreated by the Clerk of the Peace, and must be
levled, accounted, and employed as is appointed by the 2 and 3 Ph. and Mar. c.
8. 5 El. c. 13.

The Surveyors upon Warrant from two Justices of Peace, are to levy by distress
and sale of Goods, the Forfeitures of all such Persons as offend against the 18
El. 10. in not Scowring their Ditches, etc. and if they neglect by the space of
a year after the Offense committed, to levy the Forfeiture; Then the Justices
may send to the Constable and Churchwardens to levy the same, 18 El. c. 10.

By the Stat. 22 Car. 2. c. 12. All Constables and Surveyors of the Highways
shall put in execution the Statutes for repairing and enlarging Highways, and
levy the Penalties thereby imposed. And every Constable or Surveyor of the
Highways neglecting so to do, or wilfully suffering any Wagons or Carts to
pass through his Limits, with any more Horses or Cattle, or in any other manner
than this Act allows, upon Conviction thereof by one Oath before one Justice,
or the Justices own view, shall pay such Fine (not exceeding 40 s.) as such
Justice shall Assess.

All Actions brought against any Person for acting by this Law, shall be laid
in the proper County, and Defendants may plead the General Issue, and recover
treble Costs.

No traveling Wagon, Cart, etc. in which any Burdens shall be carried,
(except Carts used about Husbandry, and carrying Hay, Straw, Co^^ unthrashed,
Coal, Chalk, Timber for Shippi^^ or Building, Stones of all sorts, Ammunition
o^ Artillery for the King) shall be drawn, or go i^ any Road or public High
way, with above five Horse-beasts at length, and if any draw with more Horses
or Oxen, he shall draw all two a^ breast, except one Horse.

Every Owner of any Wagon, Cart, etc. Horse ^r Beasts, shall forfeit for every
Offense 40 s. one ^hird part to the Surveyors to amend the Ways; ^ne third part
to the Overseers for the Poor; ^he last third part to him who shall discover
^he Offender.

The Surveyor, where any neglect to come ^^d labor, shall complain thereof to
the next ^astices, who upon Oath of one Witness, shall ^^^y for every days
labor neglected 18 d. and ^or every Man and Horse 3 s. and for every Cart ^ith
two Men 10 s. for each day neglecting, ^^ Car. 2. c. 12.

CHAP. II. ^^e Duty of the Surveyors about Setting and Calling the Parishioners
to the common days works for the Highways, and about taking and diging for
Gravel, Chalk, Sand, etc.
THese Officers are to see that the Parishioners do their Work on the days
appoint^d, and that according to these Rules following, ^iz. Every Person
having in his own Occupa^^on a Plough Land in Tillage, or in Pasture in ^^e
same Parish, or keeping there a Plough or ^raught, shall find and send on every
day to ^^e place appointed by the Surveyors, one ^ain or Cart provided, after
the Fashion of ^he Country, with Oxen, etc. fit for the Carri^ge, and with
necessary Tools fit for the Work, and with two able Men, who are there to do
^^ch Work with their Wains, etc. as they shall ^e appointed (by the Surveyors)
by the space of eight hours every of the said six days, on pain of 10 s. every
day default is made, 2, 4 P. M. c. 8. Rastall. 199. Lamb. 459. Wingates Abr.
Stat. Tit. Highways, Dalt. J. P. c. 50. f. 102.

And every other Householder, Cottager, and Labourer of the Parish, Town, etc.
(able to labor, and being no hired Servant by the year) must by himself, or
some other able Man, be then and there ready to work every of the said six
days, by the space of eight hours, as aforesaid, where they shall be appointed
by the Surveyors, under pain to forfeit 12 d. for every day they make default,
2, 3 P. M. c. 8.

Note, That all Persons being chargeable but as Cottagers, by the 2 and 3 P. M
yet if they be in Subsidy 5 l. in Goods, or 40 s. in Lands, or above, they must
find two able Men to work every of the said six days, 18 El. c. 10. Wingates
Abr. Stat Tit. Highways.

If any of the Carriages shall not be thought needful by the said Surveyors
upon any of the said days, they may appoint instead of a Team, two able Men to
work as aforesaid, who shall not fail on pain that the Party that should send
them, shall forfeit 12 pence for every day that either of them make default,
Wingates Abr. Stat. Tit. Highways, 2, 3 P. M. c. 8. Dalt. J. P. c. 50. f. 100.

He that shall occupy a Plow land in Tillage or Pasture, lying in several
Parishes, shall be chargeable only in the Parish where he dwells; and he that
occupies several Plow-lands in several Parishes, shall be charged in each Town
or Parish where such Land lies (to wit) to find in each Town or Parish one
Cart furnished as aforesaid, though he be no Inhabitant there, 10 El. c. 18.
Dalt. J. P. c. 50. f 99.

Now for the further opening of these things, note, That it is said, that a
Plow land is not of any certain Contents, but ordinarily it is so much as one
Plough may Plough in one day, which in some Countries is more, and in some
less, according to the heaviness of the Soil, Co. 9 Rep. f. 124. Co. on ^it. f.
69. and vide Lamb. ver. Hide 35 H 6. f 29.

And note, That a Plow land, or Carve of Land may cont^in House, Meadow,
Pasture and Wood: And if one have so much of this as will keep a Plough, and
yield Tillage for it, if part of it were eared, in this case it seems he is to
send his Plough, Vide Co. 4 Rep f. (...). and 9 Rep. f. 122.

He that has a Plough ^^nd, and no Plough, but does suffer his ^and to lie
fresh, yet he is to f^nd a Plough for this Work; and so it has been agreed by
the Judges, Mich. 21 Jac. Dalt. J. P. c. 50. f. 105.

He that keeps a Plough, or Draught for Carriage, although he occupies
little or no Land, but carries or plougheth for other Men, yet it seems he is
to send his Cart to the High ways; ^^d if a Man keep only two Horses and a Cart
for his own Business, in this case it seems he is to come with his Cart and two
Horses, with a Man ^o manage them, Vide D^lt J. P. c. 50. ibid.

It is held by some, that so many Ploughs or Draughts Men have, and use
frequently about their own Business in Summer, so many they are ^o bring with
them to the Highways; so that ^f a Man have one Plough and five or six Horses,
and shall Plough seven or eight score Acres of and, and shall usually go in the
Summer time with two Carts or Draughts; in this case it seems he is to come
with two Carts or Draughts to this Service: And he that occupies 40 or 50
Acres of Land, and keeps only three Horses, and one Draught or Cart, he is to
come with one Draught or Cart, Dalt. J. P. c. 50. f. 105.

These Officers may, if they see cause, for the amendment of the Highways,
take and carry away so much of the Rubbish, and smallest broken Stones already
dug, of any Man's Quarry lying within the same Parish, without leave of the
Owner, as they shall think needful, or gather the loose Stones lying dispersed
in any Man's Grounds; but they may not without License dig in any Man's Quarry
for new Stones, nor take the great Stones already dug; and if there be no
such Rubbish to be found in any Man's Quarry within the said Parish, then may
they enter into any Man's several Ground within the Parish, lying near the place
where the Ways are decayed, and there (if they see any hopes of finding
Materials fit for the Reparation thereof) without leave of the Owner, they may
dig for Sand, Stones, Gravel, etc. so that it be not i^ the Houses, Gardens,
Orchards, or Meadows of any Man; for they are not to come there with out
License of the Owner; and in such place where they may dig without leave, they
are no^ to make a Pit above ten yards in breadth ^^ length, and they are to
take care that the place be filled up again at the charge of the Parish within
one month after, upon pain to forfel five Marks to the Owner of the Ground, to
be recovered by Action of Debt; and this by the ^ El. c. 13.

CHAP. III. The Surveyors Duty about cutting down Bushes, Trees, and scouring
of Ditches in the Highways; and also touching Presentiments and Inquiries about
Defaults, passing of Accounts, Traveling of Wagons, Wains, etc.
IF the Owners of the Grounds, next adjoining to the Highways, do not keep
their Hedges low, and cut down their Trees and Bushes growing in the same ways,
they so feit ten shillings, Wingates Abr. Stat. Tit. Highways, 5 El. c. 13. 18
El. c. 10.

And he that scours not his Ditches in the Ground next adjoining to the Ground
that is next the Highways, to the end the Water may have the better passage
out of the Highways, shall forfeit 12 pence for every Rod so left unscoured,
18 E. c 10. Wingate, ut supra.

If any scour his Ditch by the High way side, and throw the scouring thereof
into the Highway, and suffer it to lie there six months, he forfeits for every
Load thereof 12 pence; and the Surveyors are to make Sluices where such Banks
have been heretosore made, for carrying away the Water out of the Highway, 18
El. c. 10.

Every Surveyor may cause any Watercourse, or Spring of Water in the Highway,
(within their Parish) to be turned into another Man's several Ditch or Ground
next adjoining to the said Way, in such manner as by the discretion of the said
Surveyor shall be thought meet, Dalt. J. P. c. 50. f. 103.

Note, That the Forfei^ures of the Act of the 18 El. c. 10. must be levied by
the Surveyors for the time being, (by Warrant from the ^ustice^ before whom the
Party shall be convict) by Distress and Sale of Goods; which Forfeitures a^^ to
be employed toward the amendment of the Highways; and if the Surveyors
neglect to do it within one year after the Offense committed then the
Constables and Churchwardens by like Warrant may do it, 18 El. c. 10. Wingates
Abr. Stat. Tit. Highways.

The Surveyors, or one of them, are to present to the next Justice of Peace
every Defaul^ upon the 2 and 3 P. and M. c. 8. and 5 El. c. 14. with in one
month after it shall be made, on pain o^ 40 s. and the Justice is on pain of 5
l to certify the same at the next Quarter Sessions, where the Justices have
power to inquire of the Default, and shall set such Fine upon the Delinquents,
as they, or two of them (Quor. unus) shall think fit, 5 El. c. 13.

That the Presentment of a Justice of Pea^^ in Sessions, upon his own Knowledge
shall be ^ good Conviction, whereupon the Justices in Se^sions, or any two of
them (Quor. unus) may asse^^ a Fine, as well as upon a Verdict of twelve Me^
but in this case the Delinquent shall be admitted to his Traverse, as in other
Cases, 5 El. c. 1^ vide Rastal. 199.

The Defaul^s and Offenses upon these Statute 2 and 3 P. and M. 5 El. and 18
El. are inquirable b^ the Justices of Peace in their Sessions, or b^ Stewards
in Leets, either of which have power to set Fines upon Offenders at their
discret^ons; of which Fines, indented Estreats (^^ the Sessions under the Hand
and Seal of t^^ Clerk of the Peace, in the Leet, under the Hand and Seal of the
Steward) shall be delivered within six weeks after Michaelmas, one part of the
Estreat to the Bailiff or High Constable of the Liberty, and the other part to
the Constables and Churchwardens of the Parish where the Offe^ders live, 2 and
3 P. and M. c. 8. 5 El. c. 13. 18 El. c. 10. Wingates Abr. Stat. Tit. Highways.

And these Estreats shall be a sufficient Warrant for the Bailiff, or Chief
Constable of the liberty of levy the said Offenses by way of Distress; and if
no Distress can be found, or the Party do not pay the Fine within 20 days after
^awful demand thereof, he or they shall forfeit double so much; all which Fines
and Forfei^ures are to be employed, and bestowed toward the amendment of the
Highways in the Parish where the Offenses are committed, Wingates Abr. Stat.
Tit. Highways, 2 and 3 P. and M. c. 8.

The Balliff, or High Constable, shall yearly be^wixt the first of March, and
last of April, render ^o Account unto the Constables and Churchwardens, who
have the other parts of the ^streats of the Fines, of what Money they have
^eceived, on pain of 40 s. and the said Consta^les and Churchwardens have power
to call the ^ailiff or High Constable before two or more ^^stices of the Peace
(Quor. unus) to pass his Ac^ount, who have power to commit him, until he ^ave
satisfied all the Arrearages by him re^eived, save 8 d. in the pound for his
own Fee, ^od 12 d. in the pound for the Clerk of the ^eace, or Steward of the
Leet, and in this case the (^^cceeding Constables and Churchwardens have ^he
same power as their Predecessors had, 2 and 3 ^^. and M. c. 8.

Two Justices of the Peace by the Stat. 18 El. may take Accounts of the
Surveyors of the Ways, and the Petty Constables and Churchwardens, for such
Forfeitures (within that Statute) as they have levied, 18 El. c. 10 Dalt. J. P.
c. 50. f. 103.

Note, There are several Statutes which concern particular Highways, in which
these Surveyors are little concerned; I shall therefore only name the Statutes,
and they who desire to be further informed therein, may look the Statutes at
large.

Stat. 39 El. c. 10. for repairing the Highways in the Wild of Sussex, Surry
and Kent, used for Iron Works. Stat. 37 H 8. c. 3. For Huntington Lane near to
Chester. Stat. 14 H 8. c. 6. and 26 H. 8. c. 7. For laying out new Highways in
the Wild of Kent or Sussex. Stat. 1 P. and M. 2. c. 5. for the Causway between
Dorchester and Sherborn. Stat. 18 El. c. 10. about the Kings Ferry in Kent.

CHAP. IV. Some Heads of the Stat. 22 and 23 Car. 2. c. 17. concerning the
Ways, Sewers, Pavements, etc. in London, and the Scavengers Office.
BY the Stat. of 22 and 23 Car. 2. A Clause ^o a late Act of Parliament,
Entitled, A^ Act for Rebuilding the City of London; wherein was Enacted, That
the Numbers and Places for Common Sewers, Drains and Vaults, and the manner of
Paving and Pitching Streets and Lanes in the said City and Liberties, should be
set ou^ by Persons appointed by the Mayor, Aldermen and Common Council, or
seven or more of them, together with the Surveyors, or one of them within the
Precincts respectively, which Persons, or seven, or more of them were empowered
to impose Taxes upon Houses in proportion to the benefit they receive thereby,
and to levy the same by Distress and Sale of Goods, is made perpetual, together
with the Powers thereby given and appointed to be executed: And the sole Powers
of ordering and regulating the keeping clear, pitching and paving the Streets,
Lanes and Passages, with the manner thereof, and of making and cleansing Drains
and Sewers in London, is to remain in the Mayor, Commonalty, and Citizens, to
be executed by such as the Mayor, Aldermen and Commons in Common Council shall
appoint, or seven or more of them being all Members of the said Court. And
Persons employed in any of the said Works, are enjoined to observe the
Directions of the Persons in that behalf authorized, 22 and 23 Car. 2. c. 17.

Offenders may be proceeded against by Indictment at the next Sessions of the
Peace, in the said City and Liberties, unless they submitted to the Censure of
the Persons so authorized, or any seven or more of them, and pay the Mulct by
them imposed to the Chamber of London, to be employed toward the Works in this
Act mentioned, 22 and 23 Car. 2. c. 17.

The Persons so authorized may impose Taxes on the several Wards and Precincts,
and direct Precepts to the respective Deputies and Common Council Men to assess
the same, and like Precepts to Scavengers to collect the same: And where any
Church or Churchyard shall front or adjoyn to any of the said Streets, Lanes or
Passages, they may assess a reasonable proportion upon the Parish to be paid by
the Churchwardens, of which Assessments the Deputies and Common Council Men
shall return Duplicates with the Scavengers Names, within twenty days after
receipt of the Precepts. And in default of the said Deputies, and Common
Council Men the said Persons to be authorized may rate the said Assessments.
And in default of payment within six days after demand, the Scavengers may levy
the same by distress and sale of Goods, rendering the overplus, besides the
reasonable Charge of distraining: And the Money so collected shall be paid into
the Chamber of London, not to be issued thence, but by order of the said
Persons so to be appointed, or seven or more of them, 22 and 23 Car. 2. c. 17.

Inhabitants aggrieved through defect or decay of Pavements, or want of
cleansing the Streets, etc. shall upon proof that such grievance is unreformed,
receive directions from the Persons so to be authorized, or seven or m^re of
them, for redressing the same, and a Warrant under their Hands and Seals to the
Chamberlain of London to issue Moneys for defraying the Charge thereof,
together with any Sum not exceeding ten shillings for encouragement of his or
their Diligence, who upon receipt of such Warrant shall pay the same
accordingly: And Persons aggrieved by any Charge imposed by virtue of this Act,
within five days after demand thereof, may appeal to the Mayor and Court of
Aldermen, whose Order therein shall be final, 22 and 23 Car. 2. c. 17.

The Mayor, Aldermen and Commons in Common Council may set out and purchase
Ground for Laystals, and places for public Stores, for receipt of Dirt and
Rubbish carried out of the City, and for other Materials and Commodities. The
Money for the same to be paid out of the Moneys arising by the Imposition upon
Coals appointed for public Uses of the City, other than the Money appointed for
Building Churches, 22 and 23 Car. 2. c. 17.

No Persons by this Act made liable to be rated toward the altering, mending,
or cleansing the said Vaults, Sewers, etc. or cleansing, etc. Streets, Lanes,
etc. shall be otherwise charged or liable thereunto, 22 and 23 Car. 2. c. 17.

CHAP. V. Some Heads of the 2 of W. and M. for Paving and Cleansing the Streets
in the Cities of London and Westminster, Suburbs and Liberties thereof, the
Out-Parishes in the County of Middlesex, the Borough of Southwark, and other
Places within the Weekly Bills of Mortality, in the County of Surrey.
EVery Inhabitant inhabiting in the said Parishes, and in the Town of
Kensington, shall twice every Week sweep before their Houses and Buildings, and
take up the Dirt ready for the Scavenger, or other Officer, or else for every
Offense or Neglect, forfeit 3 s. 4 d.

If any throw, or permit to be thrown, Ashes, Filth, or Annoyance before his
House, Building or Wall, shall forfeit 5 s. If before any Church, Church yard,
or public Buildings, or into any Sink, or Way, public or private; but shall
keep it in their Houses and Yards, until, the Officers come to carry it away,
or else forfeit 20 s.

Churchwardens, Housekeepers of White Hall, or other the Kings Houses, or of
Noblemens Houses, shall be subject to like Penalty; so shall Ushers of Courts,
and Porters, and Keepers of other public Buildings.

Scavengers and Officers shall come every day (except Sundays and Holidays) and
give notice that the Parties concerned may bring out their Dust, etc. or
forfeit 40 s. for every neglect.

Every Householder shall pave, and keep repaired the Streets before their Houses
and Ground unto the Chann^l, or else forfeit for every Rod 20 s. and 20 s.
every Week until it shall be sufficiently repaired.

Where new Streets and Ways are made, which the Justices of Peace in their
General Quarter Sessions shall think fi^ and convenient to be paved with Stone
or Gravel, and shall order the same to be done before every dwelling House or
Building in such Street or Way; Every Person neglecting, shall forfeit forty
shillings for every such Offense, for every Perch, and after that rate, for a
greater or lesser quantity, and the like Sum for every Week till the same be
paved and amended.

Where Streets, Lanes or Allies have been by Custom otherwise repaired, it
shall be done by such Persons as are by Custom to do it, under the Penalties
aforesaid.

Upon Monday or Tuesday in Easter Week, The Constables, Churchwardens,
Overseers and Surveyors giving notice, and calling such Inhabitants that have
served that Office, shall choose two Tradesmen to be Scavengers; who being
allowed under the Hand of any two Justices, shall within seven days take the
Office, or pay 10 l. and within seven days after such refusal, they shall in
like manner choose another, who shall accept, or pay 10 l. which Penalties to be
levied by Distress and Sale, and for want of Distress or Payment within six
days after notice at his House, to be sent to the Goal until payment. Within
twenty days after such Election, the Constables, etc. shall call such
Inhabitants as have born the like Office, and make a Tax by a Pound Rate, which
being confirmed by two Justices, shall be quarterly paid upon demand made by
the Scavengers, or other Officers appointed to gather the same, and being
refused, shall by Warrant of two Justices be levied by Distress and Sale, and
for want of Distress, by Imprisonment of the Offender until payment. The
Scavengers are to account for the Money by them Collected, to two Justices of
the Peace, within twenty eight days after new Scavengers are Elected, and to
pay what Money remains in their Hands to the new Scavengers.

The Scavengers and Rakers for any of the said Parishes shall have liberty, by
the Order of the Justices in the Petty-Sessions, or any two of them, to lodge
their Soil in such vacant places near the Streets or Highways, a^ shall be
thought convenient by the said Justices, for the accommodation of the Country
Carts returning empty from the said Parishes, they giving satisfaction to the
Owners of such vacant places, and in case of unreasonable Demands, the Justices
in their Petty-Sessions may hear and moderate the same. If any Persons find
themselves aggrieved with the states made by virtue of this Act, or any ways
prejudiced by the determination of the Justices in their Petty-Sessions, they
may have recourse to the Justices at their General Quarter Sessions of the
Peace.

And whereas there are many Common Highways within the said Parishes, which
cannot be sufficiently repaired by means of the Laws now in force, an
Assessment may be made upon all the Inhabitants, Owners and Occupiers of Lands
and Houses, or personal Estate usually ratable to the Poor within any of the
said Parishes, to be collected by such Persons as the Justices shall appoint at
their General Quarter Sessions, the Money so collected, to be employed as the
Justices shall direct toward repairing the said Highways.

No such Rate shall exceed four pence in the Pound, in any one year, in the
yearly value of Lands, Houses or Tenements, nor of eight pence for every twenty
pounds in personal Estate.

No Person or Persons whatsoever, shall suffer his Wagon, Cart or Car to stand
in the Haymarket near Pickadilly in the Parish of St. Martin in the Fields, St.
James within the Liberty of Westminster, Borough of Southwark, or any other
place in the Parishes within the Weekly Bills of Mortality, laden with Hay or
Straw, to sell the same from Michaelmas to Lady Day, after two of the Clock in
the Afternoon, and from Lady Day to Michaelmas, after one in the Afternoon, on
pain to forfeit five shillings for every Offense and Neglect.

The Owners and Proprietors of any Cart, Car or Dray, the Wheels whereof shall
not be made six Inches in the breadth, or shall be shod with Iron, or be drawn
with above two Horses, shall forfeit forty shillings for every time such Cart,
Car or Dray shall be used, for the uses; and to be levied as aforesaid: This
shall not extend to any Country Cart or Wagon that shall bring any Goods to
the Cities or Places aforesaid, or shall carry any Goods half a Mile beyond the
paved Streets of the said Cities and Places.

One Justice of Peace upon View or Confession, or Oath of one Witness, may
convict any of the Offenses aforesaid, if Conviction be upon proof, one Moiety
to the Overseers of the Poor, for the Relief of the Poor of the Place where the
Offense was committed, the other Moiety to him that shall discover and
prosecute the same. But if the Conviction shall be by the View, then one half
to the Poor, the other toward repairing and cleansing the Streets, to be paid
to the Scavengers of the Place, to be levied by the Justices Warrant under Hand
and Seal, to the Constable, by Distress and Sale, or for want of Distress or
Payment within six days after notice at the House, to be sent to Goal without
Bail, (...) payment.

No Person (within the Cities of London and Westminster, and Liberties of the
same, Borough of Southwark, and Parishes aforesaid) shall breed, feed or keep
any Swine in any Houses or Backsides of the paved Streets where the Houses are
contiguous, on pain to forfeit the same to the Churchwardens and Overseers of
the Poor of the Parish where such Swine shall be kept, to the use of the Poor.

The Churchwardens, Chappel-wardens, Overseers of the Poor, Constables,
Beadles, Head-boroughs or Tythingmen of any the Parishes in the said Cities and
Places respectively, in the daytime, with a Warrant under the Hand and Seal of
the Lord Mayor, or any other of their Majesty's Justices of the Peace, may
search for such Swine, and if any be found, they may seize and carry them away,
and sell them for the best price that can be had, and distribute the Money to
the Poor of the Parish where they were seized.

CHAP. VI. Several Cases about the Repairs of Bridges, with the Names of the
Statutes which concern particular Bridges.
WHere a Common Bridge in the Kings Highway is in decay, and that it cannot be
proved or known, who, nor what Lands are chargeable to the repairing thereof;
in this case four Justices of the Peace (whereof one to be of the Quorum)
within the Shire or Riding wherein such decayed Bridges be; and if they be in a
City, or Town Corporate, then ^o^^ such Justices of Peace there, may within the
Limits of their several Commissions, call before them the Constables, or two of
the most honest Inhabitants of every Town and Parish within the Shire, Riding,
City or Town Corporate, wherein such Bridge, or any parcel thereof shall happen
to be; and the Justices (upon the appearance of the Constables, or other
Inhabitants, and with their Assents) may Tax every Inhabitant in any such City,
Town or Parish within their Limits, to such reasonable Sum of Money as by their
Discretions they shall think convenient, as well for the repairing of such
Bridge, and also for the making and repairing of the Highways by the space of
300 Foot next adjoining to the Ends of any such Bridges, 22 H. 8. c. 5. Dalt.
J. P. c. 16. f. 44. Co. 2 part, Inst. f. 701, 702.

But Note, Where the Franchise, City or Borough is a County of it self, and
has not four or more Justices of the Peace, whereof one or more are of the
Quorum, in this case no other Justices of the Peace, of any Shire or County,
have any power to meddle there by this Act, but such decay must be reformed by
the Common Law, by such Remedy as they were before the making of the Statute of
22 H. 8. Co. 2 part, Inst. f. 702.

And note, That this Taxation ought not to be made by the Justices, without the
Consent of ^he Constables or Inhabitants, nor by them without the Justices; and
this Tax ought to be upon every Inhabitant in particular, and not to be set
upon the Hundred, Parish, Town, etc. for then one or two might be distrained
upon for the whole, Co. 2 part, Inst. f. 704.

After such Taxation made, as aforesaid, the said Justices of Peace shall cause
the Names and Sums of every particular Person so by them taxed, to be written
in a Roll indented in Parchment for every Hundred, and sealed with their Seals,
Co. 2 part, Inst. fol. 704. Dalt. J. P. c. 16. ibid.

And the said Justices may make two Collectors of every Hundred, for the
Collecting of all such Sums of Money by the said Justices set and taxed, which
Collectors receiving the one part of the Roll indented, have power thereby to
collect all the Sums of Money therein contained, and if refusal be made upon
demand, then to distrain, and sell such Distress, rendering the overplus to the
Owner, if any be, Dalt. J. P. c. 16. f. ibid. 22 H. 8. c. 5. Co. 2 part, Inst
f. 705.

The said Justices also are to appoint two Surveyors, who shall see such
decayed Bridges and Ways repaired and amended from time to time as often as
need shall require, to whose Hands the Collectors must pay the Moneys by them
received, Dalt. J. P. c. 16. ibid. 22 H. 8. c. 5.

And the said Collectors and Surveyors, and their Executors and Administrators,
and every of them shall from time to time make a true Account to the said
Justices of Peace, of the Receipts, Payments and Expenses of the said Sums of
Money, and if any of them refuse so to do, then the Justices of Peace from time
to time, by their Discretions, may make out Process against the said Collectors
and Surveyors, their Executors and Administrators by Attachment, Precept or
Warrant under their Hands and Seals returnable at their General S^ssions of the
Peace, and the said Justices may allow such reasonable Costs and Charge to the
Surveyors and Collectors upon their Accounts, as to them shall seem convenient,
22. H. 8. c. 5. Dalt. I. P. c. 16. ibid.

If any such Bridge be wholly in a City, or other Corporate Town, the
Inhabitants of the said City or Corporate Town must repair it; and where such
Bridges lie out of such City or Corporate Town, the same must be made by the
Inhabitants of the Shire or Riding within which the same Bridge shall be, and
if part of the Bridge be in one Shire or Riding, City or Corporate Town, and
part in another, then every of them shall be charged to make and repair such
part as shall lie, and be within their own Limits, 22 H. 8. c. 5. Co. 2 part,
Inst. fol. 207. Dalt. I. P. c. 16. fol. 45.

But otherwise no Village or Freeman shall be compelled to make any Bridge; but
such as of old time, and by right they were wont to make, Magna Charta, c. 15.

By the Common Law, some Persons were ^ound to repair Bridges, Ratione tenurae
su^ Ter^^am, etc. and this was binding, into whose Hinds soever the Estate did
come; but they which have Lands on the one side, or on the ^ther, or on both,
are not bound in Common ^ight to repair the same, 44 El. 3. 31. 21 E. 4. 6. 5
H. 7. 3. Crompt. 186. 8 H. 7. 5. b. Co. 2 part, (...). f. 700.

If a Man which holds 100 Acres of Land, ^^ght to repair a Bridge by tenure
of the same, ^o allen 20 Acres thereof to one Man, and 10 ^cres to another Man,
in such case every Owner ^^ Occupier of such Lands must be charged
^^oportionably for their said Lands, Regist. 268. ^. ^. N. B. 235. b. Co. 2
part, Inst. f. 700.

Again, Some by the Common Law were bound ^y prescription to repair a Bridge;
but herein here is a diversity between Bodies Politic or Corporate, Spiritual
or Temporal, and Natural Persons: For Bodies Politic, etc. may be bound by
usage and prescription only, because they are local, and have a perpetual
Succession, and never die; but a Natural Person cannot be bound by the Act of
his Ancestor, without Assets, or some Profit to be taken therefore, 21 E. 4.
fol. 38. b. 27 Ass. 8. Crompt. 187. Co. 2 part, f. 700. Dalt. I. P. c. 16. f 45.

By Common Right, Bridges are to be amended by the whole County, if it be not
known who ought to do the same otherwise, Pasch. 19 E. 3. 28, 29. Co. 2 part,
Inst. f. 701. Crompt. 186. b. Tr. 10 Car. 1. the Case of Longford Bridge, Rolls
Cases 1 part, f. 368. and Cro. Rep. 3 part, the same Case.

If a Man erect a Mill for his own particular Profit, and cut a new Course for
the Water to come to it, and makes a new Bridge over the same, and the Kings
Subjects use to ride over the same as over a common Bridge; such Bridge ought
to be repaired by him who has the Mill, and not by the County, because he
erected it for his own Benefit, 8 E. 2. B. R. adjudged for Bow Bridge and
Channel Bridge against the Prior of Stratford, Rolls Cases, 1 part, f. 368.

Such as are chargeable to repair a Bridge, may enter upon any other Man's Land
or Soil adjoining, and lay their Stone, Lime, Timber or other Things necessary
there, for the repairing and amending thereof, and the Owner of the Lands shall
have no Action therefore; for it is for the common Profit; and the Party that
is chargeable to repair a Bridge, must also maintain the Way at each end
thereof (thoug^ the Soil be to another) and if the ends be broken by the
Watercourse, he must follow the Watercourse, and repair the Way, etc. Crompt.
186. b. 43 Ass. Dalt. J. P. c. 16. f. 46.

The Names of some Statutes for particular Bridges follow, 8 H. 6. c. 28. For
the making of Burford and Culhamford Bridge. 18 E. 1. c. 7. and 27 E. c. 25.
For the maintenance of Rochester Bridge. 18 El. c. 20. For repair of the
Bridges within a Mile of Oxford. 23 El. c. 11. For the maintenance of the
Bridges over Toss in Wales. 39 El. c. 23. For making and repairing of Newport
and Carlion Bridges over the River Usk. 39 El. c. 24. For building and
maintenance of a Bridge at Wilton upon Wy, near Ross, in Herefordshire. 43 El.
c. 16. For erecting and repairing Edon and Presberk Bridges in Cumberland. 3
Jac. c. 23. For making and repairing Chepstow Bridge.

By the Stat. 22 Car. 2. c. 12. It is Enacted, That the Surveyors and Orderers
of the Work, of amendment of the Highways, shall be yearly chosen in Christmas
Week, according to the Stat. 2 and 3 P. and M. c. 8. Which Persons so chosen,
shall take upon them that Office, and shall appoint six days for providing
Stones, Gravel, and other Materials, and for working in the Highways, having
respect to the Season of the Year and Weather, and giving notice publicly some
convenient time before the several days. At which day all Persons liable to the
said Work, shall attend and work: And the said Surveyors and Orderers shall
make return of the Defaulters, and every of them within one Month, to some
neighboring Justice of the Peace of the same County.

DIRECTIONS for the Keepers of Fairs and Markets.
FAirs are accounted things of Franchise and Privilege, as well as of Profit;
and whether they be held and claimed by Charter of the King, or by
Prescription, which supposes a former Charter, they ought to be holden for no
longer time, than such Grant or Use will warrant: And after such time, what is
done there, is not warranted or justifiable, nor amounts to more than a private
Transaction; and the Sheriff ought to make Proclamation, That those that have
Fairs keep them no longer then they ought to do; and every Lord of a Fair,
shall at the beginning thereof, make Proclamation how long the same is to
continue, upon pain to be grievously amerced to the King; And if they hold them
longer than they ought, they shall be seized into the Kings Hands, until they
make Fine for the Offense; and if a Merchant sell Ware after the time the Fair
ought to end, he shall forfeit to the King double the value of what is sold,
and the Prosecutor shall have the fourth part, Dalt. J. P. c. 62. f. 138.

The Owner, or Chief Keeper of every Fair and Market-over^, are to appoint and
limit out a certain and open place within the Town, Place, Field or Circuit
where Horses, Mares, Geldings and Colts must be sold, and they must appoint one
sufficient Person, or more, to take Toll, and keep the same place from ten of
the Clock before Noon, until Sunset of every day of the foresaid Fair or
Market, upon pain to lose for every Default 40 shillings, 2 and 3 P. and M. c.
7. Co. 2 part, Inst. f. 715.

The Toll gatherer, his Deputy or Deputies are to take their due and lawful
Tolls for every Horse, Mare, etc. at the place and times aforesaid; and they
are to have before them at the taking of the said Toll, the Parties, to the
Bargain, Exchange, Gift, Contract, or putting away of every such Horse, Mare,
etc. and also the same Horse, Mare, etc. so sold, exchanged, or put away, and
then the Toll gatherer must write in his Book the Names, Sirnames, and dwelling
Places of all the said Parties, and the Color, with one special Mark at the
least of the said Horse, Mare, etc. on pain to forfeit for every Default 40
shillings, 2 and 3 P. and M. c. 7. Co. 2 part, Inst. f. 7^5.

And the said Toll gatherer is within one day after the Fair, etc. to bring his
Book to the Owner, Governor or Ruler, etc. of the Fair or Market, who is then
to cause a Note to be made out of the same; of the true number of all the
Horses, Mares, etc. sold at the said Fair or Market, to which Note he must set
his Hand or Mark, on pain of 40 shillings: And if the Toll-gatherer neglect to
bring the Book, as afore^aid, he also forfeits 40 shillings, 2 and 3 P. and M.
c. 7. Co. 2 part, Inst. f. 715.

Where no Toll is due, the Book-keepers Fee for entering every Contract, is one
penny and no more, 2 and 3 P. and M. c. 7. Co. 2 part, Inst. f. 716.

Now since the making of this Stat 2 and 3 P. and M. It is further provided by
the 31 Eliz. That every Seller or Exchanger of any Horse, Mare, etc. in a Fair
or Market, which is unknown to the Toll-taker or Book-keeper must procure one
credible Person that is well known to the Toll-keeper, or Book-keeper, who is
to vouch and testify his Knowledge of the Seller, and the Toll-taker, or Book
keeper, is to enter both the Names and Sirnames, Mysteries, and Places of
Dwelling of the Seller and Voucher into his Book, with the Color, Mark and
Price of the Horse, Mare, etc. so sold or exchanged; and he is to give the
Buyer, if he require it, a Note in writing out of his Book, concerning the
Contract subscribed with his Hand, for which he is to have two pence, 31 El. c.
12. Co. 2 part, Inst. f. 717, 718.

Every Toll-taker or Book-keeper that suffers a Sale to pass without a Voucher,
unless he know the Party of his own Knowledge, as aforesaid, and every Person
making false Testimony or Avouchment in the behalf aforesaid, and every Seller
unknown to the Toll-taker, not bringing a Voucher, and causing the same to be
entered as aforesaid, forfeits five pounds, one Moiety thereof to the King, and
the other to the Prosecutor; and also the sale of such Horse, Mare, etc. to be
void, 31 El. c. 12. Co. 2 part, Inst. f. 718.

And note, That though an Horse, Mare, etc. be at the sale used in all the
Points aforesaid, with Voucher, etc. yet the right Owner, his Executors or
Administrators, may redeem a stolen Horse, if they claim him within six months
after the stealing, at the Parish or Corporation, where they shall find him and
make proof within 40 days after, by two sufficient Witnesses, before the next
Justice of Peace of the County, or before the Head Officer in a Corporation,
that the Horse was theirs, and repay to the Buyer such price for the Horse, as
the same Buyer shall upon his own Oath before such Justice or Officer, testify
he paid for him, 31 El. c. 12. wingates Stat. Tit. Fairs and Markets, Co. 2
part, Inst. f. 718.

If a stolen Horse be not sold in Fair or Market, according to the Rules
aforesaid, then such Sale does not alter the Property of the right Owner, but
he may seize or replevy him wheresoever he finds him, 31 El. c. Wingate ubi
supra, Co. 2 part, Inst. f. 718.

No Person shall buy any Oxen, Ronts, Steers, Kine, Heifers, Calves, Sheep,
Lambs, Goats or Kids alive, and sell the same again, unless he keep the same
five Weeks in his own Grounds; or where he has Herbage by Grant or
Prescription, upon pain to lose double the value of the Cattle; one Moiety to
the King, the other to the Informer, 5 Ed. 6. c. 14.

By the Stat. 22 Car. 2. c. 8. There shall be no Bushel but the Winchester
Bushel, containing eight Gallons, and none shall sell by other Measure, on pain
of 40 shillings.

If the Clerk of the Market of the Kings House, or others authorized to mark or
seal Measures, ^eing required, shall neglect or refuse to seal or mark any
Bushel, Half Bushel, or Peck duly gauged, he forfeirs 5 l. for the first
Offense, and for every other Offense 10 l. or if the Kings Clerk of the Market
of his House take more than his Fees, or if any other take above one penny for
sealing a Bushel, one half penny for the Half Bushel or Peck, or more than one
farthing for any lesser Measure, he incurs the Penalties in the Stat. 17 Car. 1.

That at the charge of such Persons who have the Toll, or profit of the Market
where no Toll is taken, there shall be before 29 Sept. 1670. one Measure of
Brass provided and chained in the Marketplace, upon pain to forfeit 5 l. 22
Car. 2. c. 8.

By the Stat. of 22 and 23 Car 2. It is further provided, That whosoever shall
sell or buy any Corn or Salt by the Bag, or without measuring, being thereunto
required, or in any other manner than as by the Stat. 22 Car. 2. c. 8. is
directed, and without shaking the Measure by the Buyer, shall forfeit besides
the Penalty in the former Act, all the Corn or Salt, or the value therefore to
the Person or Persons complaining, 22 and 23 Car. 2. c. 12.

Upon complaint to one or more Justices of Peace, the Proof shall lie upon the
Defendant, to make appear by Oath of one or more Witnesses, that he or they did
sell or buy according to this and the said former Act; wherein if he fail, he
shall forfeit as by this Act is directed, to be levied by distress and sale of
Goods, by Warrant under the Hand and Seal of one or more Justices before whom
such Conviction shall be. The Penalties to be distributed, one half to the Poor
of the Parish where the Offense shall be committed, the other to the Informer,
22 and 23 Car. 2. c. 12.

DIRECTIONS to Treasurers, for the Relief of Poor Maimed Soldiers and Mariners.
THE Justices of Peace are yearly at the Quarter Sessions, about Easter, to
choose or appoint one or two Persons (according to their Discretions) of the
County, for the taking and distributing of the Moneys collected for the Re^ief
of poor maimed Soldiers and Mariners: And these Treasurers, by the Words of the
^^ture, ought to be Subsidy Men of 10 pounds ^^ Lands, or 15 pounds in Goods,
and these officers are to continue in their Office one Year, and new ones then
to be chosen in their ^ooms, 43 El c. 3. Wingates Stat. Tit. Captains.

Now for the raising of Money for these Treasurers, the greater part of the
Justices in their Quarter Sessions, have power to charge every Parish within
their Limits, toward a Weekly ^elief of maimed Soldiers and Mariners, so that
no Parish pay Weekly above 10 pence, no^ under 2 pence; nor any County, which
consists ^f above 50 Parishes, pay above 6 pence, one ^arish with another, 43
El. c. 3.

When the Tax is levied, the Constables and Churchwardens are to deliver it
quarterly (ten days before every Quarter Sessions) to the High Constables of
their Division, who must deliver to ^^e Treasurers of the County, at the same
Quar^er Sessions all the same Money; and if the Constables or Churchwardens,
their Executors, etc. fail in the payment, to the High Constable, within the
time aforesaid, then they are to forfeit 20 s. and if the High Constable fall
to pay the Treasurers every Sessions, then he forfeits 40 s. which Forfeitures,
as it seems, the Treasurers may levy by Distress and Sale of the Offenders
Goods, without any Warrant, rendering the overplus to the Owner: And these
Forfeitures are to go in Augmentation of the Treasurers Stock, 43 El. c. 3.

The maimed Soldier or Mariner which was Pressed, shall repair (if he be able to
Travel) to the Treasurers of the County where he was Pressed; if he were not
Pressed, then to the Treasurers of the County where he was Born, or were he last
dwelt by the space of three years, at his Election; but if he be not able to
Travel, then to the Treasurers of the County where he Lands; and he is to bring
with him a Certificate under the Hand and Seal of the Chief Commander, or of
the Captain under whom he served, containing the particular of his Hurts and
Service, which Certificate shall also be allowed by the Muster-Master, or the
Receiver-General of the Rolls for the Muster, under one of their Hands, 33 El.
c. 3.

Then upon such a Certificate, the Treasurer aforesaid may allow the Party
Relief to maintain him till the next Quarter Sessions; and then the major-part
of the Justices may allo^ him a Pension, which the Treasurers mu^^ pay him
quarterly, until it shall be revoked o^ altered by the said Justices; and this
Allowanc^ is not to exceed 10 l. per annum to a Common Soldier, nor 15 l. to an
Officer under a Lieutenant, nor 20 l. to a Lieutenant, 43 El. c. ^ Wingates
Stat. Tit. Captains and Soldiers.

Where Soldiers and Mariners arrive far from the place where they are to
receive Relief, the Treasurers there shall give them Relief, and a Testimonial
whereby they may pass from Treasurer to Treasurer, until they shall come to the
place required; and this shall be done upon the bare Certificate of the
Commander and Captain, although they have not as yet obtained any Allowance
from the Muster-Master, or Receiver-General of the Muster-Rolls, Wingates Stat.
Tit. Captains and Soldiers, 43 El. c. 3.

If any Soldier or Mariner beg, or counterfeit ^ Certificate, he shall be
punished as a Common Rogue, and shall lose his Pension, if he have any 43 El.
c. 3. Wingate, ut supra.

When out of the County where the Party was Pressed, a fit Pension cannot be
satisfied, it shall then be supplied by the County where he was born, or else
where he last dwelt by the space of three years, Wingate, ubi supra, 43 El. c.
3.

The Treasurers are to Register all their Receipts and Disbursements, and must
enter the Names of the Parties relieved into their Book, and also the
Certificate, by virtue whereof the Disbursements are made; and where they
disallow of a Certificate, they are to set down ^he Reasons of their Refusal
under the Certificate, or on the back thereof, 43 El. c. 3. Wingate Stat. Tit.
Captains and Soldiers.

If any Treasurer wilfully refuse to give Relief in the Cases aforesaid, the
Justices of the Peace, in their Sessions, may set a Fine upon him, which may be
levied by Distress and Sale of his Goods, Wingate, ubi supra.

These Officers at the end of their Year, within 10 days after Easter Sessions,
are to give u^ a just Account to the succeeding Treasurers o^ all their
Receipts and Disbursements within the time of their Office; and then if they
have any Money in their Hands, they are to deliver it to their Successors; and
if any such Officer* his Executors or Administrators shall not giv^ up such
Account within the time aforesaid, o^ shall be otherwise negligent in the
Execution of his Office; The Justice^ at the Sessions man assess what Fine they
please upon him; so tha^ it be not under five pounds, but what the^ please
above five pounds upon him, his Executors or Administrators, Wingate, ubi supra
43 El. c. 3.

In Corporations, the Justices there are t^ put this Act in Execution, and not
the Justices of the County: This Act is not to pr^hibit the City of London to
make a Tax if ne^ require, differing from that above limited i^ this Act, so
that no Parish pay above thre^ shillings Weekly, nor under twelve pen^ Weekly,
one Parish with another, 43 El. c. 3.

FINIS.

