A NARRATIVE OF THE Causes and Events OF CIVIL-WAR BETWEEN Princes and People.

TOGETHER WITH* The manner how the People of Rome, and of the Netherlands*
Rejected and Abjured their King and Kingly Government; with the form of their
Oaths of ABJURATION, Extracted out of the Roman and Netherlands History.

AS LIKEWISE, Some Objections now in Contest concerning the taking of the like
Oath in this Commonwealth, examined and Answered, if not for Satisfaction, at
least for Information of such as are concerned.

By F. M.

LONDON: Printed for the Author, 1659.

A NARRATIVE OF THE CAUSES and EVENTS OF Civil-Warre BETWEEN PRINCES and PEOPLE.
IN the Alterations that happen sometimes in a State betwixt the Prince and a
People that is Free and Privileged; there are ordinarily two Points which make
them to aim at two several ends: The One is, when as the Prince seeks to have a
full subjection and Obedience of the People: And the Other, that the People
contrariwise require that the Prince should maintain them in their freedoms and
liberties which he has promised and Sworn solemnly unto them before his
Reception unto the Government; thereupon Quarrels grow, the Prince will hold a
hard hand, and will by force endeavor to be Obeyed according to Will and
Pleasure; and the People rising against the Prince oftentimes (upon success) do
reject his Authority, and seek to embrace and maintain their full liberties.

In these first Motions there happens sometimes Conferences at the instance of
Neighbors or others in the Nation, who may have interest therein to quench
this fire of Division betwixt the Prince and his Subjects; and then if any one
of the parties grows obstinate and will not yield, although he seem to be
most in fault, it follows of necessity that they must come to more violent
Remedies, that is to say, to Arms: The power of the Prince is great when he is
supported by other Princes which join with him for the consequence of the
Example, else its but small:. But that of the People, which is the Body,
whereof the Prince is the Head, stirred up by Conscience, especially if the
Question of Religion be touched; the Members ordained for their Function doing
jointly their Duties* is far greater; thereupon they Wound, they Kill, they
Burn, they Ruin, and grow desparate of each side; but what is the Event, God
who is an Enemy to all Tyranny and Disobedience judged of their Quarrels,
weighs them in his Balance of Justice, helping the rightful Cause, and
either causes the Prince for his Rigor, Oppression, and Tyranny to be
punished and chased away, and deprived of his Estate and Principality; or the
People for their Attempt to be punished and brought to Reason, which causes
the alteration to cease, and procures a Peace; whereof there are many
Examples, both Ancient and Modern, besides this ensuing Narrative of the People
of Rome and the Netherlands.

Tarquinus Superbus being the 7th and last King of Rome, after he had Reigned
twenty five years was banished from thence, together with the whole Kingly
Government, which had then lasted 244 years before the People could shake off
that Oppressive yoke of their Kings, which they effected in the manner, and for
the Causes following.

Sextus Tarquinus, Vide the first Book of Titus Livius, page 41, 42.
Son to King Tarquin the Tyrant, being full of Lust and Cruelty, came to
Lucretia's House at Colatia, a place not far distant from Rome, where he had
been before kindly entertained by her Husband Colatinus, who at that time was
absent; and being after Supper brought into the Guest-Chamber, and when he
thought all sure, and that every body was fast asleep, he steppeth with naked
Sword in hand to Lucretia as she lay in a profound sleep; who starting out of
her sleep, heard Tarquinus speak in this manner; I am Sextus Tarquinus, I have
my drawn Sword in hand, if thou once speak thou shall surely die; and if thou will not yield to me, I will kill thee; and for thy perpetual shame and
dishonor, will cut the throat of thy Servant, and lay him naked by thee, that
so it may be rumoured abroad that thou have been killed in Adultery: Whereupon
by violence and force he had her Company; The next morning Lucretia did send
for her Father and Husband, who brought along with them Valerius and Brutus, to
whom (when they came) she told that Sextus Tarquinus was the man, who that
night past entertained as a Friend, but indeed a very Foe in the highest
degree, had by force and violence taken from hence his pleasure; a deadly
pleasure I may say to me, and to himself no less, if you be men of Courage.

All of them gave their* assured word and comforted her, whereupon she said,
Well, what is his due to have, see you to that; as for me, I quit and assoil my
self from sin, yet I will not be freed from punishment, and after other words
uttered, with a knife hid under her clothes, stabbed her self; out cried her
Husband and Father thereat, and while they two were in their plaints and moans,
Brutus drew forth the knife out of the wound of Lucretia, holding it out all
embrewed and dropping with blood; said, Now I swear by this blood, by this most
chaste and pure blood, before the villanny wrought by the Kings Son, and here
before the Gods I protest whom I call to witness, that I will by Fire and
Sword, and with all my might and main, persecute (...)ree the Country of
Tarquinus, the proud and his imperious Wife and the whole brood of his
Children, and suffer neither him no^^ny else for his sake to reig^^^ King at
Rome; Then gave he the knife to ^^^^^tinus Lucretius, and Valerius who took the
same Oath, and leaving their lamentations followed Brutus as their Captain and
Leader, to put down and overthrow the Government of Kings, and utterly to root
out the Race; The dead Corpse of Lucretia was brought in the Marketplace, and
there showed to the people, who with wondering at such a sight, and so foul and
unworthy a fact, they raised much People together, every man for his part was
ready to complain of the wickedness and violence done by the Kings Blood;
Brutus who rebuked all vain weeping and foolish moaning, moved and persuaded
all that were present, that like men of valor, like true-hearted Romans, they
would take Arms against those that demeaned themselves no better, nay worse
then ordinary Enemies.

Thereupon all the People Armed themselves, and toward Rome they went, where
in the Market place he related to the people then assembled the villainy
committed upon Lucretia; And moreover he laid abroad the pride of the King
himself, the miseries, the infinite toil and pain of the Commons buried as it
were under ground, with cleansing and casting of Ditches, voiding and farming
of the Sinks; saying that the men of Rome who were the Conquerors of all
Nations about them, were now of Warriors become Quarriors, hewers of Stone, and
day-labourers; thus rehearsing these and other matters, much more grievous and
horrible, he so mightily inflamed the multitude, that he caused the King to be
deposed and degraded of his Royal State and dignity, yea and to decree and
enact, that King Tarquinus and his Wife and Children should be banished for
ever, which accordingly was effected; and after all the Armies and people had
forsaken him, Brutus being then appointed Consul, and for fear least the
Magistrates and people might at any time after be won by entreaty, or moved by
gifts on the Kings part, he caused them to swear, that they would never suffer
any to be King at Rome, after which the Senate was filled with such as took the
same Oath, Vide* The second Book of Titus Livius, p. 44, 45.
in lieu of those that were murdered by the Kings command, to the full number
of three hundred* so jealous were the people afterward of their Liberties,
that one of their Consuls name being Tarquinus, without they could have any
other thing to say against him but his Name, who they said was dangerous to a
Free State, thereupon was persuaded to retire from the City, and Brutus by an
act and decree of the Senate, proposed to the people, That all the Race and
Lineage of the Tarquin's should be exiled and banished, which was accordingly
effected.

No man doubted then, but that the Tarquins were about to take Arms, but seeing
that no man feared, the Romans had like by Fraud and Treason at home, to have
lost and foregon their freedoms again, and that the Reader may know that the
very same thing endeavored at Rome to restore the Tarquins, is that which has
several times been, and at present is endeavored in England; The story is
briefly thus;

There were certain Youths of the flower of Rome, descended of no low Degree
nor Parentage, who in the Kings days had lived like young Princes, more
loosely and at pleasure as Companions and play-fellows with the young Tarquins
the Kings sons, Vide The same Book, page 45, 46, 47.
who seeking to enjoy the same licentious life still in this Equality of state,
wherein all others then lived, made moan and Complained one to another, that
the liberty of others turned to their servitude. The King say they, Is a man at
whose hand one might obtain somewhat as need requires, were the cause right or
were it wrong, where a man might find favor and friendship, as who could be
displeased and angry, and also forgive and remit a fault, and knew well how to
make difference between a friend and a foe; As for Laws they are deaf and
inexorable, more wholesome and commodious to the poor then to the rich and
mighty, affording no release or pardon, if one chance to trespass and
transgress, and a ticklish Point it is and perilous for a man amongst so many
errors, whereto our frailty is subject, to bear himself only upon his innocent
life; being thus of their own accord already discontent (as it may boldly be
averred the young Nobility and others of the loose people of England are at
this time upon the like account) suddenly unlookt for came Ambassadors to Rome
from King Tarquinus, who without mention at all of return, demanded only their
goods again, and while the business was in debate in the Senate, these
Ambassadors privately sounded the minds of these young Gentlemen, whom they
found ready to conspire with them for the return of the King. The Ambassadors
having obtained the restoration of the Kings goods, and ready to depart, had
private meetings with those young Gentlemen, who for assurance of their
fidelity to the King, signed a Letter which they delivered to the said
Ambassadors, all which was detected by a bond-slave, who had overheard them
when they delivered the Letter, presently giving notice thereof to the Consul,
who apprehended the said Ambassadors, and found the said letter, and thereupon
all the Conspirators were apprehended; And to see how much Pagans made esteem
of their Oaths and Protestations, Brutus then Consul, having two of his Sons,
to wit, Titus and Tiberius, who were in the Conspiracy, himself saw them
executed, and being bound at a Stake, the people pitied them not so much for
being punished, as for deserving by their fact to be punished, that they could
find in their hearts, and once let enter into their thoughts, to betray into
the hands of Tarquinus (a proud Prince, and then a cruel enemy and banished
Rebel) their Native Country, lately, and in that very year set free from
Captivity, and their Natural Father who set it free. Now for the Kings goods
which were ordered to be restored, were flatly afterward denied by the Senate,
who would not confiscate and bring them to the Public Treasury, but were given
away amongst the Commons, to the end they having once touched or seized on the
Kings goods, as a booty, might for ever after be past all hope of any peace or
favor with them.

Not long afterward Tarquin obliged King Perceua with a cruel Army to march
against Rome, and to endeavor the restoring of him to the Kingdom, and to show
how much it conduces to the safety of a Commonwealth that the People thereof
should engage against the banished Kings, and absolutely to abjure and renounce
them and their line for ever, and how far such an Oath does engage a People to
keep them out, take this short story of King Porcena, being with his Army at
the very walls of Rome, and in great hope to take it and restore Tarquin* one
Cajus Mucius afterward surnamed Scaevola, together with others of the Romans,
to the number of 300. engaged one with another to venture their lives in going
to the Camp of Porcena, and to kill him, rather then suffer their Country to be
again enslaved. Vide, The second Book of Titus Livius page 49, to 54.
It fell to the lot of this Scaevola to go first, and coming into the Camp with
a scain hid under his garment, he presses in the thickest throng to stand near
the Kings Tribunal; it happened, that then and their the Soldiers were
receiving their pay, and the Chancellor or King Porcenas principal Secretary
sat together with the King in like array; Scaevola fearing to enquire whether
of them two were Porcena, least he should discover himself, in lieu of Porcena
he killed the Chancellor, and afterward with his bloody weapon making his way
through the fearful multitude, was laid hold on and brought before King Porcena
sitting then upon his Throne, to whom he said, I am a Citizen of Rome, and
Cajus Mucius is my name, a professed Enemy I confess, and an Enemy would I
have slain, as ready and willing am I to die my self as I was to kill another,
for both to do and suffer valiantly is the part of a Noble Roman, and its not I
alone that carry this resolution, against thee O King, there is a long train
behind of them that seek to win the same praise and honor, make thee ready
therefore and arm thy self if thou think good against this danger, and reckon
every hour to be in hazard of thy life, and to have always at the very Court
gates thy Enemies sword; This kind of War we youths of Rome denounce openly to
thee, no battle, no fight else shall thou need to fear, with thee alone will we
all one by one have to do, and with no other. Hereat King Porcena incensed with
wrath, and for the danger he stood in affrighted withal, commanded in menacing
wise, that he should be fried at a stake, unless he would presently unfold in
plain terms what secret and dangerous practices he meant, and threatened under
covert circuit of words and intricate circumstances; Lo, said he again, how
little they set by this carcass that aspires to great glory and aim at honor,
and with that thrust his right hand into the hearth of fire that was made for
the sacrifice, and when he endured the roasting thereof, as if he had been
senceless and felt no pain, the King well nigh astonished at this wonderful and
miraculous sight, started up from his Royal Seat and Chair of State, commanding
the young man to be had from the Altar; Go thy ways (said he) in peace, thou
have done thy self more mischief then thou have attempted against my person, I
would say God bless thee, and worthy have thou been of honor for thy pro^ess,
if it were in my service and in the behalf and defense of my own Country, and
now by the Law of War I discharge thee freely and give thee leave to depart
without any hurt or abuse offered unto thee. Then Scaevola as it were to
requite his courtesy and desert, said, Forasmuch as thou set so great
esteem in valor, and honor virtue so highly, to the end it may be seen,
that thou shall get at my hands by courtesy that which by cruel threats thou
couldct not, these are therefore to let thee understand, that there are 300. of
us Noble youths, even the very flower and Knighthood of Rome, that have
conspired and swore thy death, and in this manner to assail thee; my lot it was
to be the first, the rest as is shall fall out will be here very shortly and
wait every man his turn and time until they hit right upon thee; Scaevola was
no sooner gone back to Rome, but suddenly followed after him Ambassadors from
Porceua, offering the Romans conditions of Peace, which was agreed, and
Porceuae withdrew his Army from Rome. But sometimes after sent other
Ambassadors again to Rome to treat about restoring the Tarquins to the Realm,
to whom the Romans answered, that the Senate would send Ambassadors to King
Porceus himself, who accordingly were dispatched, and delivered the speech
following, that the chief of their Nobles were sent rather then any dispatch
given by word of mouth to his Ambassadors at Rome, not for that they could
have shapen them this short answer, they will no Kings have, but to this end
that for ever after there should be no suite rend^ed of that matter; nor in so
great mutual benefits and favors passed between them, some coffeehouse
arise on either side while he might be thought to request that which is
repugnant and prejudicial to the liberty of Rome, and the Romans again (unless
they would be executors of their own wrongs, and seek their own destruction) to
make denial unto him, whom by their good wills they would not seem to deny any
thing of the world. But as to the substance of the matter this was the point,
namely that the people of Rome were not under the Government of Kings, but were
a free State, and fully settled in this purpose, to set open their gates sooner
unto Enemies then to Kings, and were generally of this mind and resolution,
that when the Freedom of that City had an end, then should the City come to an
end also, to conclude therefore they were to entreat him that if he tendered the
Weal and safety of Rome, he would permit them to be free still at their own
Liberty; King Porceus overcome with very modesty and much abased himself,
answered thus again, Since you are so fully minded and stiffly bent (said he)
neither will I importune you, nor dull your ears with harping still upon this
unpleasing string, and do no good, nor bear the Tarquins any longer in hand,
and deceive them of that hope of aid, which nothing at all is in my power to
perform, let them henceforth seek any other place of Exile either for peace or
War as they shall think most expedient, that there may be nothing to let and
hinder the free course of amity and alliance between me and you. Thus Tarquinus
seeing all hopes of return cut off, removed to Tuscalum, and afterward died at
Cumes.

Thus Reader thou have a short Narrative of the Cause and Manner of the
Banishment of the Kings of Rome, and what course the Romans took to keep them
out from ever returning. Now follows that of the Netherlands, in freeing
themselves from the yoke of Philip the King of Spain, as it is extracted out of
the Edict or Declaration of the General Estates of the Netherlands, dated at
the Hague the 26th of July, 1581.
TO all those that these Presents shall see, read or hear, Greeting; As it is
well known unto all men, Vide, The General History of the Netherlands, written
by Grimeston and Cross, and Printed in the year 1627.
that a Prince and Lord of a Country is ordained by God to be Sovereign and
Head over his Subjects, and to preserve and defend them from all injuries,
force and violence, even as a Shepherd for the defense of his sheep, and that
the Subjects are not created by God for the Prince to obey him in all he shall
Command, be it with God or against him, reasonable or unreasonable, nor to
serve him as Slaves and Bond men; but rather the Prince is ordained for his
Subjects (without which he cannot be a Prince) to Govern them according to Law,
Equity and Reason, to take care for them and to love them, Vide, The 12 Book,
page 659. to page 666.
even as a Father does his Children, or a Shepherd his Sheep, who puts both
his body and life in danger, to defend and preserve them; If the Prince
therefore fails herein, and instead of preserving his Subjects, does outrage
and oppress them, depriveth them of their privileges and ancient Customs,
commands them and would be served of them as of slaves, they are no longer
bound to respect him as their Sovereign Prince and Lord, but to esteem of him
as of a Tyrant; Neither are the Subjects (according unto Law and Reason) bound
to acknowledge him as their Prince, so as without any offense being done with
Deliberation and Authority of the States of the Country, they may freely
abandon him, especially, when as the Subjects by humble Suite, Entreaty and
Admonitions could never mollify their Princes heart, nor divert him from his
Enterprise and Tyrannous designs, so as they have no other means left them to
preserve their ancient Liberties, their Wives, Children and Posterity, for the
which (according to the Law of Nature) they are bound to expose both Life and
Goods, as for the like occasion we have seen it to fall out often in diverse
Countries, whereof the examples are yet fresh in memory, which ought especially
to be of force in these Countries, who have always been and ought to be
Governed according to the Oath taken by their Princes, when they receive them,
conformable to their Privilege and ancient Custom, having no power to
infringe them; besides, that most part of the said Provinces have always
received and admitted their Princes and Lords upon certain Conditions and sworn
Contracts, which if the Prince shall violate, he is by Right fallen from the
Rule and Superiority of the Country, etc.

And after they have made a Recital of his Cruelties, Oppressions and
Tyrannies, they further proceed.

THat having duly considered all these things, and being pressed by extreme
necessity, We have by a General Resolution and Consent, Declared, and do
Declare by these Presents, the King of Spain (ipso jure) to be fallen from the
Seignory, Principality, Jurisdiction and Inheritance of these Countries; and
that we are Resolved never to acknowledge him any more in any matter concerning
the Prince, Jurisdictions or Demean of these Netherlands, nor to use hereafter,
neither yet to suffer any other to use his Name as Sovereign Lord thereof,
according to which we Declare all Officers, private Noble men, Vassals and
other Inhabitants of these Countries, of what Condition or Quality soever, to
be from henceforth discharged of the Oath which they have made in any manner
whatsoever unto the King of Spain, as Lord of these Countries, or of that
whereby they may be bound unto him, etc. Enjoining and Commanding all Judges,
Officers and all others to whom it shall appertain, That hereafter they forbear
to use any more the Name, Titles, great Seal or Signet of the King of Spain,
and have Injoynned and Commanded, and do Enjoin and Command, that all the King
of Spain* Seals which are at this present within these United Provinces, shall
be delivered into the Sates hands, and that from henceforth the Name and Arms
of the King of Spain, shall not be put nor stamped in any Coyns of these United
Provinces, but that there shall be such a figure set upon them as shall be
appointed, etc. In like sort we Enjoin and Command the Presidents and Lords of
the Council and all other Chancellours, Presidents, Provincial Counsuls, and
all Presidents and chief Masters of Accounts and others of all Chambers of
Accounts, being respectively in these Countries, and also all other Judges and
Officers, as holding them discharged of the Oath which they have made to the
King of Spain, according to the Tenure of the Commissions, that they shall take
a New Oath in the hands of the States of the Provinces where they are, or to
their Deputies, whereby they shall Swear to be faithful to us against the King
of Spain and his Adherents, according to the Form set down by us; which Oath
accordingly was taken by the Public Officers and Magistrates of every Town and
Province, and is as follows:

I Swear, that hereafter I shall not serve nor yield obedience to Philip King
of Spain, nor acknowledge him for my Prince and Lord, whom I do Renounce by
these Presents, and do hold my self Free from all Oaths and Bands by the which
I might be formerly tied unto him. Whereof finding my self presently Freed, I
Swear anew, and bind my self to the United Provinces, and namely, to them of
Brabandt, Guelder, Hollandt, Zealandt, and their Allies, and to the Sovereign
Magistrates that are appointed, to be Faithful and Loyal unto them, to yield
them all Obedience, aid and Comfort with all my Power and means, against the
King of Spain and his. Adherents, and against all the Enemies of the Country,
promising as a good Subject of the Country to carry my self Faithfully and
Loyally, with show of all Obedience to my Superiors; So, help me the Almighty
God.

Many notwithstanding made great difficulty to Abjure the King and to take the
New Oath, among others a Counselor of Frieslandt, a man of great Judgment
and Experience, called Raa^da, hearing the Abjuration propounded in open
Council at Leuwarden, and the renewing of the Oath (whether it were through a
sudden amazement, or for the affection which he bare to the King of Spain) was
so troubled, as he fell in a Convulsion and died presently.

Now impartial Reader, that you have seen a short and true Narrative extracted
out of ancient and modern History, whereby you may receive satisfaction of the
causes wherefore the Romans and our Neighbors of the Netherlands Rejected and
Renounced their Kings and kingly Office, and how they provided against their
ever returning to Rule over them; upon the whole matter it may be queried,
whether the Parliament and good People of England, after God had so signally
and miraculously owned their Cause against the late King and Family, have not
had an equivalent or far greater Cause to Free these three Nations of the yoke
of Monarchs and Monarchy, then the Romans or the States of the Netherlands had,
which any one may easily be convinced of, if he will but take the pains and
time to read the History of the Reign of the Kings of England, Scotland, etc.
but especially from the coming of that Bastard brood to the late Tyrant; What
murders, rapines, oppressions, wars, devastations, cruelties, ravishments and
what not have been acted in the three Nations, during that time? I shall only
hint to some few, as first of King John, of whom the History relates, that when
he had endeavored by force of Arms and by other barbarous cruelties to impose
his yoke of bondage and slavery over his People, whom he forced to take up
Arms for his own defense, and that after they had obtained several victories
against him, whereby he was reduced to great extremes, yet would not grant them
Peace, till he had made Trial of all manner of cruel ways to subdue them by
force, one whereof was, that rather then grant to the People their Liberties
and Freedoms, he sent to the King of the Moors, and made him an offer that if
he would send an Army in England, he would deliver up his right and title to
him.

But to come nearer our time, what cruel Murderer and Tyrant was Richard the
third and Henry the 8th* his own Queens and many of his Nobles could not escape
his fury, and that for no other crime but to satisfy his cruelty, lust and
pleasure; so notorious was he, that to this day the Proverb remains resent of
him, That he neither spared man in his fury, nor woman in his lust. Queen Mary
another fury, how many precious Souls she caused to be brought to the stake and
burned. King James, so little he esteemed the lives of the People (although no
man of War) yet (if by accident) any one hindered his sport in Hunting, or not
opened a Gate as soon as he commanded, he would curse and swear, and give
express command that such a one should be hanged; And for his Son, what wars,
desolations and miseries has he been author of in the 3 Nations, how many
thousands killed and ruined, how many millions of Treasure exhausted, what
Plots contrived by him and his Queen to subvert Law and Religion in these
Nations, his inviting of the German Horse in time of Peace, and in time of War
pawn the Jewels of the Crown, to bring over whole Regiments of Papists, to
kill, destroy, plunder, ravish and barbarously use the Protestant People of
this Nation; And moreover of my certain knowledge their sending Sir Kelom
Digbys to the Pope for Assistance, etc.

The realty of these unparalled actings being seriously corsidered, and all
by-ends and self-interest laid aside, and only that of the Public eyed upon,
then it must needs be acknowledged, that besides those enormities, that many
Lucretias have been ravished by those Kings and their Interest, and that their
wars, devastations and cruelties have far exceeded either those of the
Tarquin's, or Kings of Spain at Rome or in the Netherlands; in Rome the
ravishing of one Lucretia (by the Kings son) was the principal occasion of the
Peoples banishing and abjuring the whole brood of their Kings; and in the
Netherlands the oppression and cruelty of the King of Spain occasioned the
States of that Country to do the like; Weigh but the one and the other
together in the Balance of Justice and Reason, against the cruelties and
licentious wills of our Kings, and you will be sure to find them light and
inconsiderable; as to what has been exercised here since the Normans subdued
England under their heavy and oppressive yoke; that in reason it must be
acknowledged and granted that for the safety of the People, the Parliament of
England have (after their so many signal Victories, and their ownings of God
for the same) far more and justifiable reasons, to renounce and cause to be
renounced, the whole Line of the Kings and kingship, or other single Persons
pretending any right or title of Chief Magistrates over these Nations, then
either the Romans or State of the Netherlands had in renouncing and abjuring
their King and kingship; against which Oath it may be Objected,

First, That the Oath of Abjuration taken by the Romans and Netherlands could
not be advantageous to them as for the keeping out their Kings from returning,
and that (say some) because any wicked man to bring his designs to pass, will
make no Difficulty nor Conscience to swallow any manner of Oaths.

To which it may be Answered, that this short Narrative extracted out of the
History, is sufficient to remove that Objection; for first, It is not to be
doubled, had it not been for the Oath taken by the Romans against the return of
their Kings, undoubtedly they had never been kept out.

And secondly for the States of the Netherlands, It was not only useful to
weed out of their Armies and Garrisons all the friends of the King of Spain,
and likewise out of the Courts of Justice and other places of eminent trust;
and certainly, if the hearing of it read and proposed could have so much power
as to kill that Great and Wise Counselor, how much more dreadful was it to all
others of the King of Spains faction and party, who several of them upon
refusal of the said Oath were displaced out of their several employments; and
besides it is very remarkable, that after it was imposed upon all Military
Officers, there was neither Garrisons nor Forces betrayed to the King of Spain,
as formerly before it was daily observed there was; whereupon the King of Spain
was forced to make Peace with them.

And thirdly, It is impossible for the rarest Artists of the world to erect any
lasting Fabric upon an old Foundation, unless first the rubish and old ruin
thereof be absolutely removed and cast out, so likewise and comparatively it is
impossible of a Monarchical Government to introduce and establish upon a sure
basis a Democratical Government, without first casting off and renouncing that
old ruinous and rubish Government of King and kingship, which if it had been
effected in the year 1648 when these Nations were declared a Free State, by
imposing an Oath of that nature upon those Persons then eminently entrusted in
Civil and Military places, there is sufficient ground to believe that Cromwell
nor his Adherents would never have attempted to subvert and usurp the
Government as they did, which has in a manner almost ruined both the Cause and
Nation; and for want of taking such an Oath, we see what hopes the Family of
the Stuarts and other single Persons have had and have still to return, which
will never be removed, until (in imitation of our Neighbors the Netherlands)
those back-doors be dammed up by taking such an Oath; and moreover does not at
present the Royal Party dare with boldness assert and maintain, laying Wagers
to one that the Chief in Parliament and Army will refuse the same, and upon
that do openly declare their great hopes, which would be soon over if those
Worthies would be but sensible thereof, and put no further delays in a
business of so great concernment to the settlement of the Nation and
Commonwealth.

The second Objection which is found in the mouths of many which are no better
then kinglings, but would put it off upon a case of Conscience (viz.) That in
case God who is the Omnipotent over all Governments of the world, should in his
Providence seem good to bring back some of the Line of the late King to be
Ruler over these Nations, then say they, if we should take such an Oath of
Abjuration or Renunciation, we should be found to have resisted the Will of God.

For Answer, God is Just and Righteous in all his Dispensations and
Providence, and for any Person that has seen and several times returned
thanks unto him for his wonderful and miraculous Providence in owning a Cause
so much contended for, by giving so many signal and mavelous Victories and
Deliverances to this Parliament and their Forces, against the late King and
Family in several conflicts, and that at such a time when he was very
formidable, and his party and Armies consisted of most of the Nobility and
Gentry of the three Nations, and yet God by making use of a company of men of
low Estate and condition, and not brought up in the Military Art, did in such
wonderful manner own and prosper them in that War against the King and his Son,
that at length the Father was by his Divine Providence brought to the block,
and the Sons endeavors all blasted and brought to naught, I say when men have
been eye witnesses of such extraordinary Providence, in not only blasting and
disowning Kingship in that Family, but likewise in the late family of the
Apostate Cromwells who attempted the same, and that by a Parliamentary way; And
besides for such as have made War against Kingship and against that Family, and
Voted the Kingly office useless, dangerous and chargeable, making it Treason
to promote Charles Stuart or any other to be chief Magistrate of England,
selling all the support of Kingship and all other Estate belonging to it; And
seeing also the Parliament after several interruptions (during which time
several endeavors were used to bring kingship again) to be miraculously
restored, and to live to see God take vengeance of all those who had been chief
Actors in endeavoring to inthrall us under the yoke of the Cromwells, etc. for
such I say again after all this not to be convinced of the lawfulness of
renouncing or declaiming that whole line and others pretenders to it, is
certainly to doubt of Gods constancy and Justice, there being as much
conscience or reason to plead the same providence against abjuring, renouncing
or declaiming the Popes Supreamacie over these Nations, who for during far
longer time had Dominion and Jurisdiction over them, so that upon the whole
matter, it cannot be imagined that if the pleasure of God was such as to suffer
any of that Family or other, to Rule over these Nations, that it can be to any
other end then as a scourge and Plague to the Nations and to those persons in
particular who are so incredulous and timorous, who with many other in the
Nation may be compared to those of the Israelites, who (after their wonderful
deliverances from under the yoke of King Pharaoh) did murmr while they were
in the wilderness, desiring to return to their former State and condition of
slavery and bondage, by reason they could not enjoy the Garlic and Onions of
Egypt, not minding the Land of Caanan and of plenty, toward which they were
going, which is the condition of many murmurers in these Nations who cannot or
rather will not see nor dive into the Freedom and plenty to be had and enjoyed
under a Democratical or Free State Government, which is the thing now aimed and
labored hard for, and which without doubt had long since been obtained and
enjoyed, but for the endeavors and desires of so many in the Nation to return
to their Egyptian bondage and slavery.

Lastly, An expedient is by some learned men, proposed and offered in lieu of
taking the Oath of Abjuration, Renuntiation or Declamation of the Race of the
Kings, etc. say such a Law may be made whereby it shall be declared to be high
Treason for any person to propose, help or endeavor the bringing any of that
family or others to be chief Magistrates of England, etc.

To which it is answered, that such a Law (without first imposing such an oath)
cannot oblige any person against the return of any of that line, or the
introduction of any other single Person, and that for these reasons*

First, Such a Law does not bind the Consciences and persons of any as an Oath
does, which is voluntary and personally obliging.

Secondly, Because of late there has been a sufficient experiment of the same
in Cromwell and others, assuming to themselves the Government of these Nations,
although it was here declared high Treason by a known Law so to do.

Thirdly, Because such a Law (although never so strict) may be repealed, which
such an Oath can never be.

Fourthly, Because if any one of that family or other should attempt by force
to overthrow the Government of these Nations, such a law obliges no man to
oppose them, which an Oath does in ^erminis.

Lastly, Because such a Law cannot discover who that is in the Commonwealth
service, that may be an Enemy to it, which an Oath will soon discover, and out
all such Kinglings both out of the Courts of Justice, as likewise out of the
Army and Garrisons.

FINIS.

