A NEW COSMOGRAPHY, OR SURVEY Of the Whole WORLD;

In Six Ingenious and Comprehensive Discourses.

With a Previous Discourse, being a New Project for bringing up Young Men to
Learning.

Humbly Dedicated to the Honorable HENRY LYTTELTON, Esquire

By GVY MIEGE, Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Basset, at the George in Fleet Street, near St.
Dunstans Church, 1682.

ADVERTISEMENT.
MR. Miege, the Author of this Book, Teaches Geography both at Home and Abroad,
with the Use of Globes and Maps.

This is that Noble Science, which gives an Account of the World wherein we
live, of its several Countries, Mountains, Capes, Seas, Lakes, Rivers, Towns and
Citys, Provinces, States, and Kingdoms. A Science without which one cannot he a
good Historian, or a complete Statesman, and which is no small Ornament to any
thing of a Gentleman. Therefore it is so Taking beyond Sea, but in France
especially, that there are few Men of any Note or Fortune but are brought up to
it. And we find by Experience, that, of all Study's Young Gentlemen are put
upon, None is so Acceptable and Welcome to 'em, and indeed None so fit for
Them, as the Study of Geography. For, as it is not only Genteel and Useful, but
also very Delightful; so a short Time, with a little Application and Help, will
serve to conquer it. Which makes me Confident, 'twill be well Relished Here,
especially if it be Seasoned with apposite History.

The Author lives at his House, next to the Nags head, in James-street, Covent
Garden. Where he is now preparing for the Press a large English Dictionary of
Geography, both Ancient and Modern, Enriched with History. A Work that will be
of great Use to all Gentlemen, Scholars, Merchants, Travelers, and generally
all Lovers either of Geography or History.

The TABLE.
The First Discourse; Being an Introductory Discourse, or a new Project for
bringing up Young Men to Learning. Page 1. The Second Discourse; Of the
Heavens, and the Stars thereof, with a particular Account of the Sun and Moon.
p. 14. The Third Discourse; Of the Air, and Meteors. p. 35. The Fourth
Discourse; Of the Terr-Aqueous Globe in General, and the Earth in Particular.
p. 53. The Fifth Discourse; Of the Waters. p. 76. The Sixth Discourse; Of the
National Parts of the Earth. p. 104. The Seventh Discourse; Of the Use of
Globes and Maps, with their several Circles. p. 129.
A NEW COSMOGRAPHY, OR SURVEY Of the whole World.
The First Discourse;
Being an Introductory Discourse, or a New Project for bringing up Young Men to
Learning.

PHilalethes. What think you, Sophronius, of the Way used now adays to bring up
Youth? Sophronius. It Is doubtless an odd kind of way; and, if Men be out in any
Thing, it is in this. For it is undeniably true, that Children are brought up
like Slaves till they come to the age of fourteen or fifteen years, or
thereabouts. And what for? to make them learn, against the grain, perhaps a
mouth-full of Latin. For of a hundred Scholars that spend the prime of their
Age in this Torture, I dare affirm there is not the tenth part that after seven
years Apprenticeship can justly boast to have conquered that Language.


Phil. It Is true enough, and I found it so by my own experience. They pester
Youth with a pack of hard Words and Rules that confound their Memory, and stun
their little Intellectuals, and all this under the Standart of the Rod. For my
part, I am quite besotted with it, and with much ado shall I come to my self
again.


Sophr. Thus they make of a fine Language, the Terror and the Plague of Youth;
Who, being incapable of apprehending the beauty thereof, look upon it as a mere
Scarecrow. The Reason is, because they are put upon it before their Memory be
strong enough to retain so many strange words, and their Judgment ripe enough
to apprehend the abstruse meaning of the Rules. For it is not with the Latin
Tongue as with Vulgar Languages, which are learnt with much less difficulty,
because usually spoken; Whereas the Latin Tongue (as it is used now adays in
England especially) is in a manner but a Language for Books.


Phil. What course then, my dear Sophronius, would you have one to takes?


Sophr. This in my judgment would be the most proper way. After that a young
Lad has learnt to Read and Write, and that he is pretty well instructed in the
fundamental points of the Religion wherein he was born, I would have him put
upon some easy, pleasant, and useful Science, until his Judgment were ripe for
the Latin Tongue.


Phil. What is that you would have him learn?


Sophr. The State and History of the World, and particularly of his own native
Country. A thing so easy to learn, that it is not at all inconsistent with his
tender Years. So pleasant, and so full of charming Variety, that he cannot but
be taken with it. And withal so useful, that he would lay this up as a
Treasure to be used in his riper Years. Thus I would have him to apply himself
to two Things, Geography and History. Geography, that would show him the Extent
of the habitable World, it is Continents, Islands, States, and Provinces, Towns
and Cities, its famous Mountains, Seas, Lakes, Rivers, and other Curiosities.
By History he should see the different manner of living amongst Men, their
several Languages, Religions, and Governments, together with the various
Changes and Revolutions of States.


Phil. Oh! had I but taken this course. I should not have been laughed at, as I
was not long since in a Company, for confounding (by mere Ignorance) Swethland,
with Switzerland. I should not be puzzled, as I am, reading, the Gazette, to
know whether such a Place lies North or South, and whither it is in Spain or
Moscovy. This is not all. I am so little acquainted with the public Concerns
of the World, that I am quickly mumped, when there arises any Discourse of that
kind in Company.


Sophr. Thus it is to be ill brought up in his Youth. For my part, I cannot
conceive how any man that pretends to good Education, can be so narrow-Soul'd
as to live in this World as if it were all shut up in his Neighborhood; nor
how he can be satisfied, if he read either History or Foreign News, without
some Knowledge of those Places which happen to be there mentioned.


Phil. The Truth is, without it one is but half an Historian; and to live in
the World without a competent knowledge of the same, is properly to see no
further than his Nose, and not to know whereabouts one is. This is, I confess,
my Case; and truly I blush at it. But, if ever I have a Son to bring up, I am
resolved it shall not be so with him


Sophr. Thus where a Young Man has made a considerable Progress both in
Geography and History (wherein young people take delight) I would have him
disposed of for the Latin Tongue, especially if his Fancy should lead him to it.


Phil. But can no Expedient be found out to learn it in less time, and with
less trouble, than now they do in Schools?


Sophr. Do you doubt it? I Will tell you of one which I think is very likely.
Instead of so many Latin Schools which swarm every where, and where so much
precious Time is lost by reason of their tedious and lingering Methods,
(beneficial indeed to Schoolmasters) there should be in every Province some
Colleges erected, where nothing but Latin should be commonly spoken. For, when
all is done, the quickest and best way to learn a Language is not so much by
the eye as by the ear. And what makes us conquer vulgar Languages so much
sooner than the Latin Tongue, but that those are spoken, and this is not, in
England especially?


Phil. It Is true. But to what purpose shall one learn to speak a Language so
little in use here, except to understand Books?


Sophr. I confess the speaking Part is so much out of date here, even amongst
the greatest Scholars in the Land, that Strangers are in a maze to see Men of
such a profound Learning as we have here in England, speak Latin with so much
hesitancy. Latin that should be by right the general and standing Language for
Scholars of any Nation to converse in together. But it is no wonder, if we
consider how this Language is taught in Latin-Schools, where the very Masters
speak as little Latin, and deliver themselves as much in English as they can.
Whereas, if they did use their Scholars as well to the Speaking as the Reading
Part, it would not only forward their Learning, but also make them fit to
converse in that Language. And, though the speaking Latin is not altogether; so
much abroad since the French Tongue came up, as it has been formerly; yet it
may fall out that a Traveller shall stand in need of Latin, where French is not
so much in request.


Phil. In short, I perceive you would have one learn Latin, by using himself to
speak it; because you conceive it is the readiest Way.


Sophr. Right. And to that purpose the foresaid Colleges should be provided of
able and skilful Masters, such as should have absolutely the command of die
Latin Tongue.


Phil. But you will grant, Sophronius, that the greatest benefit of that
Language does lie in the Reading Part.


Sophr. I grant it.


Phil. Now the Question is, whether speaking nothing but Latin in the Schools
would advance the Reading Part so considerably as you imagine. For you know the
style of most Latin Writers is very different from any thing of a speaking
style.


Sophr. It Is true. But still the speaking part, I hope, would be no hindrance.
And, when all is done, the Speaker has this advantage, that he practices his
Language two ways, that is by Reading and Speaking; but the Reader, only by
Reading.


Phil. There you are in the right. Now let us see how you would order your
Colleges.


Sophr. In the first place I would have them all to be Boarders that should
come to any of them.


Phil. But then poor Parents should be deprived of the Advantage of bringing up
their Children to Scholar ship.


Sophr. So much the better. For many of them undo themselves utterly that way;
and, when all comes to all, their Children are often forced to leave off, for
want of Help. And then what signifies their long struggling, toiling, and
moiling after a thing they could not compass, but only to make their Lives the
more uncomfortable? Whereas, had they learnt a good Trade, they might live
comfortably, and perhaps get enough besides to give their Children a good
Education. And so they should not have occasion to repine at their loss of Time
and Money, and to be justly grieved for having took so much pains about a thing
which now is to be forgotten.

Learning is Chargeable, and the Harvest does not always answer to the Seeding.
It Is I confess, a great Ornament and Advantage to Persons of Honor and
Estates, who are best able to make a good Use of it, and to keep up its
Reputation. But amongst Men whose whole Dependence is Learning, and who are
fain to drive a Trade of it, it loses its Credit, and grows a very Drug. I
appeal to these Times, now we see whole Sholes of poor distressed Scholars
treading upon one another heels, and who going along may well use Bias his
saying, Omnia mecum porto, I carry with me all I have. What makes them so
cheap, despicable, and ridiculous, apt every foot to be trampled upon by
Brutish and Insulting Ignorance, but naked and hungry Poverty? And what makes
their Poverty but their excessive Number?

Poverty, the General Scarecrow of Mankind, the fear of which keeps Men in a
perpetual Motion, and makes them run headlong into the greatest Dangers,

Per Mare Pauperiem fugiunt, per Saxa, per Ignes. Poverty, a lingering kind of
Death, that having once seized upon a Man's Spirits dejects and stupifies him,
takes away the edge of his Senses, weakens his Memory, discomposes his Mind,
and makes, him almost incapable of any Thing. Poverty, in a Word, that makes
men Ridiculous; and so Juvenal has it,

-- Nil hahet Paupertas durius in se
Quam quod Ridiculos homines facit --
Here Is the greatest Mischief of Poverty, It turns Men into ridicule.


Phil. I do acknowledge what you say to be true. But, if the Sovereign, or any
Rich Person well-disposed, had a mind to Found a College or more for the
Education of a certain number of poor Peoples Children, would not you approve
of it?


Sophr. I should not at all dislike it, provided that (according to the Jesuits
way) none should be admitted therein but ingenious, witty, and hopeful Lads.


Phil. Put the case then, Sophronius, that your Proposals were approved of by
the Public, how would you order your Scholars For those that come in must
speak some Language or other. Now it is supposed they cannot speak Latin, for
they come hither to learn it; and, if they speak another Tongue, it is contrary
to your own Proposition.


Sophr. To answer your Objection, I confess that, to compass our Design, it
were convenient that such as should be first admitted into a College should
have already some smattering of the, Latin Tongue. Which the Masters might
easily and in a short time improve to some degree of Perfection, by conversing
with them in Latin, and using them to speak nothing else. And, after the first
Comers, none should be admitted in, that did not understand some Latin Words,
such as may be got by a good Vocabulary; and some familiar Dialogues, like
those of Corderius. Thus their Tongues being untied by these previous Helps,
one word would help out another; and conversing with none but such as speak
Latin, Necessity would breed Attention, as Attention does Learning. And so I am
confident, that in a years time they would be as forward as those that have
lingered four or five years at School.


Phil. Thus far I am satisfied. But Would not you have them to make use of the
Grammar?


Sophr. By all means. For, though by Rote one may learn a Language with ease,
yet a Grammar is of great use to to confirm that Learning. By that one learns
it easily, and by this exactly.


Phil. You put me in mind, Sophronius, of a Young man that I was told of
'tother day; who had been several years in France, where he had learnt the
French Tongue in its Purity, but only by Rote. He came back to England, where
he was very much admired for his French. But he had not been here above three
Months, when he began to confound the Tenses of Verbs, the Gender of Nouns, and
to make strange Anglicisms.


Sophr. All this happened for want of Grammar-help. And therefore there should
be for our Colleges a compendious Grammar, such as might be run over in a short
time. Bur, because the main difficulty of the Latin Tongue in the Reading of
Authors does consist in the Construction, the Learners should be used
frequently to that, is also to make Paraphrases. By this means I am confident
that a Boy should know Latin enough at a years end to learn the Greek Tongue,
and that in three years at farthest he might be fitted for the University.


Phil. That indeed were a fine Business. But there should be very strict Orders
kept in those Colleges, and the Collegers should have but little Correspondence
with the rest of the World.


Sophr. Very right. And truly there is nothing so mischievous and fatal to young
Gentlemen as the want of that Coercion for some time. For, whilst they are
allowed to appear in public with a Splendour suitable to their Birth, they meet
with that Respect and those Caresses from their Inferiors that fills their
minds presently with Pride and Vanity. Their eyes are ever admiring of fine
Garbs, their Ears bewitched with the charming noise of the great Estates and
Honors they are Heirs to, their Fancy's tickled with the flattering
expressions of Servants and others that are apt to adore a rising Sun. Thus my
young Gentleman hardly feels himself for joy, and his soft heart swells daily
like Puff-past. Till at last he grows too stiff to be curbed; and, instead of a
pliant Willow, he proves a stubborn Oak. He becomes Impatiens Jugi; and, though
perhaps he never learned to Obey, yet he thinks it long till he Rules. His Lust
is the only thing he is resolved to inslave himself to, he runs wherever that
hurries him, and never thinks it far enough. But one step into Learning puts
his Body and Soul out of Joint Learning, pedantick Learning, why should he
trouble himself with it? He is Learned enough that is Rich, and that knows how
to improve sensual and brutish Pleasures. And so there is my Midas, with his
Asses Ears.


Phil. You have hit the Nail on the head. And without doubt it were the best
way to keep such young men in the dark as much as possible, till they have
discretion and learning enough to appear in public, and so take advantage of
such Companies as be fittest for them to improve themselves by. But still it
will be objected, that a young Man in this Condition will go near to forget his
Mother Tongue; and that, being kept from People of good fashion, he will grow
thereby so bashful that he will hardly dare to peep into the World.


Sophr. No such thing. For first, as to his forgetting of his Mother Tongue, he
will never so forget it but that he will quickly be able to recover it. But
however, to prevent chat Inconveniency, I would allow my young Gentlemen the
receiving of Visits from their Friends and Relations in the Holy Days. And
besides, there might be an Academy set up for every College, to learn in
English at set hours, these Exercises so fit for a Gentleman; viz. Fencing,
Riding the great Horse, Dancing, etc. Now, to answer the other part of your
Objection, a short time will make a bashful Young Man forward enough to appear
in Company. If one has but wherewithal to appear in a good Garb, there is in
Man an infallible principle of Vanity that will help to put him forward.

In fine, I would have the Masters of every College to be themselves well bred
and polite, of a sweet and genteel Conversation, and as little pedantick as
might be. For it is most certain, that Pedantry, as well as Poverty, has
brought a great disrepute upon Learning.


Phil. You say right. But I have one Objection more to make you.


Sophr. What is that, Philalethes?


Phil. The newness of the Thing, that will scarce be acceptable to so many
Admirers of old Methods; who would think their Children undone, if they went
never so little out of the old Road. And this their Prejudice (you must think)
will be backed by those Persons whose Interest it is to keep up the Modern way
of Schooling.


Sophr. I have only delivered my Opinion, and given Reasons for it. Which I
shall back with Monsieur Montagne's Exemple, who bad the fortune to learn the
Latin Tongue much after this manner. If what, I have said be relished, I am
satisfied: If not, I must be contented.


Phil. For my part, I like it extremely well. And, to conclude our present
Discourse, let me beg a favor of you.


Sophr. Pray, what is that?


Phil. I am so taken with the Thoughts of Geography, that I am absolutely
resolved to learn it; and I must beg your Assistance in it.


Sophr. You shall have it, Philalethes, for I think nothing too much for your
Service. And I am much mistaken, if you do not find it as pleasant and useful a
piece of Learning as any yon can fix upon.


Phil. I do not doubt it in the least, dear Sophronius. And I am resolved so to
give my mind to it, that I hope in a short time to be too hard for those who
jeered me lately for want of skill in it.


The Second Discourse.
Of the Heavens, and the Stars thereof, with a particular Account of the Sun
and Moon.

SOphronius, What do you think of it now, Philalethes? are you still of the
same mind as to Geography?


Phil. You cannot Imagine how eager I am for it, and methinks the whole World
it self is not able to satisfy me. In short, I look upon my self as a Citizen
of the World, and I will know of what Latitude my Right is.


Sophr. Softly, Philalethes, softly* You will find the World big enough, I
warrant you.


Phil. Let us leave, I pray, this Prologue, and enter upon the Matter. Come on,
I long to Travel the world about. Show me the way, and I mall follow you.


Sophr. But what do you mean by the World?


Phil. I mean the Land of the Living, or the habitable World.


Sophr. Why do not you count the Heavens and the Air part of the World?


Phil. Yes sure, when I mean the whole Fabric of the World.


Sophr. Now you must know the Description of the whole World together is called
Cosmography. Whereas the proper Object of Geography is only the Terrestrial
Globe, which consists of the Earth and Waters.


Phil. Pray tell me then, Sophronius, in the first place, whether you think the
World had a beginning or no, or that (according to some Philosophers) it is
from all Eternity.


Sophr. I believe rather, according to the Holy Writ, that it was Created (or
made of nothing) some thousand years ago by that Supreme and Spiritual Being we
Worship, an Immortal, Immutable, Incomprehensible, All-Wise, and All-mighty God.


Phil. How many thousand years do you reckon it since the Creation?


Sophr. We reckon it commonly 3949, years from the Creation to our Savior's
Coming upon Earth. To which if you add 1681. years since Christ's Coming, the
whole amounts to 5630 years. Thus much for the Origin of the World, now let us
explain (if you will) the Parts thereof.


Phil. That I wait for with great Impatiency.


Sophr. Well. But the Question is, whether you mean to be a Cosmographer, or
simply a Geographer?


Phil. That I leave to you, Sophronius.


Sophr. Come on then, Philalethes. We are going to begin a great Voyage, and
vie must take off our Minds from the Earth to raise them as far as Heaven.


Phil. For my own particular, I shall sore up as high as I can.


Sophr. To say nothing of the Empyreal Heaven (the highest, largest, and most;
Glorious Heaven, supposed to be reserved for the happy Mansion of the Blessed)
the Astronomers reckon ten several Spheres or Orbs, all contained one within
another. The highest of which is called Primum Mobile, or the first Moveable,
which carry's all the lesser Orbs contained within and under it about from East
to West, and so to the East again, in the space of twenty four hours, or one
whole day. Next to this Orb is the Chrystalline Heaven, thought by some to be
that which appears so pure blew unto our sight. Below this Orb is that which
contains all the fixed Stars in it, and is called the Firmament. To which
succeed the seven several Orbs of the Planets; the highest of which is Saturn,
then Jupiter, Mars, Sol, or the Sun, Venus, Mercury, Luna, or the Moon Which
that it may the better occur to your Memory, do but mind this Latin Verse,

Post SIM SUM sequitur, ultima Luna subest. For the three Letters of SIM serve
to denote severally Saturn, Jupiter, Mars; and the three Letters of SUM, Sol;
Venus, Mercury.


Phil. But which are those you call the fixed Stars?


Sophr. A Numberless Number of Stars, contained in the eighth Orb; and called
fixed Stars, not that they be immovable, but because their natural Motion is
but flow, and that they keep always the same distance. Which the Planets do not.

But there is besides a visible Difference betwixt the fixed Stars and the
Planets. For it is proper for the fixed Stars to sparkle, or shine with a
trembling light, but chiefly in a Serene weather. Whereas the Planets, as the
Moon among others, send forth steady beams, and void of all vibration. Except
Mars, Venus, and Mercury, which are observed sometimes to sparkle; but neither
so much, nor so constantly, as the fixed Stars.

But how long do you think, Philalethes, that the fixed Stars are finishing
their natural Course?


Phil. A long time, sure enough, if their Motion be so slow, as you said before.


Sophr. According to Tycho Brahe, the Wonder of our Age in point of Astronomy,
they are no less than 25412. years before they come to their first station. And
yet in his Calculation he falls very much short of Plato, who reckoned it
49000. years, which therefore was called the Platonic Year. And, according to
the Opinion of those Times, that Year being expired, the World is to begin anew
in the same Manner, and under the very same Circumstances as formerly.


Phil. What? Then at that rate I must about 49000. years hence return into my
Mothers Womb, be newborn, suck, go to School, and there be soundly lashed
again. Then you and I, after that vast distance of time, shall meet here, and
hold the same Discourses we do now. A pretty Conceit indeed! But, if a Man has
got an imperious Scold, or a Wanton Flurt, to his Wife, is he to have her again?


Sophr. The very same, according to that great Philosopher Plato.


Phil. So Socrates must have his Xantippe again, and Octavius his Messalina.
It Is a hard fate, and for my part (if I were to choose) I had rather lay for
ever in the Dust. In the mean time I know not what to think of it. There is no
new Occurrence whatsoever, but what I fancy to have been so a long time since.


Sophr. A little matter, I see, would inveigle you into that Opinion;
especially if one should prove it by Scripture, as by these. Words of the Wise,
that there is no new Thing under the Sun. But I would not have you,
Philalethes, to be too much affected with it. And let us now proceed to a
Survey of those fixed Stars which the Ancients took special notice of.


Phil. Which are those, I pray, dear Sophronius.


Sophr. They reckoned 1022. of them in the Northern and Southern Hemisphere,
the least of which is eighteen times bigger than the Earth. And, that they
might be conveniently discerned from one another, they reduced them to forty
eight Signs or Constellations, and gave them severally the Names of Living
Creatures and other Things to which they fancied them most like. Twelve of
these, being the chiefest, are found in the Zodiac; 21. in the Northern
Hemisphere; and fifteen in the Southern. To which last Frederick Houtman has
added since thirteen more, discovered by him while he was in Sumatra.

The Twelve chief Constellations, otherwise called the Signs of the Zodiac, or
the Twelve Houses of the Sun, are as follows, with their several Figures, so
much used by Astrologers.

Viz. Aries,. Taurus,. Gemini,. Cancer;. Leo,. Virgo,. Libra,. Scorpio,.
Sagittarius,. Capricornus,. Aquarius,. Pisces,.


I shall pass by the other Constellations, both for brevity sake, and because
they are of less use.


Phil. But what is the meaning of that large, whitish, and bright Tract of the
Sky so observable in a clear Night?


Sophr. I suppose you mean that which the Greeks called (...), the Latins Via
lactea, and We from thence the Milky Way. It Is nothing else but a great
Multitude of little Stars gathered together in this part of the Sky, which give
but a confused Light, and are not discernable to the eye but with a
prospective-glass.


Phil. But how comes it, Sophronius, that in a clear. Winter-night we see in
and about the Constellations an infinite number of lesser Stars, which are
hardly seen at all in Summer time?


Sophr. Because in Winter time the Nights are darker, and so any thing of light
is the more conspicuous and obvious to the eye.

Now you must know, Philalethes, that the Astronomers divide the biggest and
brightest of the fixed Stars into six several Degrees of Magnitude. And they
reckon fifteen of the first Rank, forty five of the second, two hundred and
five of the third, four hundred and seventy seven of the fourth, two hundred
and seventeen of the fifth, and forty nine of the sixth. To which if you add
besides five Cloudy, and nine Dark, you will find the complete Number aforesaid
of one thousand twenty two.

Those of the first Magnitude are reckoned to be each of them an hundred and
seven times bigger than the Earth; those of the second Magnitude, ninety times;
of the third, seventy two times; of the fourth, fifty six; of the fifth, twenty
six; and of the sixth, eighteen.

Thus much for the fixed Stars. Now let us come to the seven Planets, whose
Names follow here according to their respective height, with their several
Figures as they are used by Astrologers.

Viz. Saturn,. Jupiter,. Mars,. Sol,. Venus,. Mercury,. Luna,.



Phil. How come they to be called Planets?


Sophr. They are called Planets, that is, wandering Stars, not that they be
subject to any uncertain or irregular Motion; but because they have, either in
respect to themselves or the fixed Stars, a different Motion, and that they are
not always at an equal distance from each other.

But the Copernicans deny the Sun to be a Planet, and will have it to be a
fixed Star. And, whereas we say the Sun turns about the Earth; they hold quite
contrary, that the Earth turns about the Sun. I suppose you have heard of this
Opinion by the by, and (for ought I know) it may be true enough. But we will
not insist upon it.

Shall I now tell you the several (but prodigious) Distances of the Planets
from us? You will be amazed at it. But thus we have it from approved
Astronomers. Saturn is fourteen Millions of Leagues distant from us; Jupiter,
eight Millions of Leagues; Mars, twelve hundred thousand; Sol, or the Sun,
eleven hundred thousand; Venus, a hundred and sixty seven thousand; Mercury,
sixty four thousand; and Luna, or the Moon, betwixt thirty and forty thousand
Leagues. And yet the Planets are nearer than any of the fixed Stars.


Phil. This is past any man's Belief but an Astronomers. But, if it be so, sure
these Celestial Bodies must be of a vast Magnitude to be seen at such a
distance.


Sophr. The Sun, which is counted by much the largest of all the Planets, is by
some reported to be two hundred times at least bigger than the Earth; and by
the most moderate, a hundred and sixty six times. Then they make Jupiter ninety
five times at least bigger than the Earth; and Saturn, ninety times* Mars they
reckon to be one third part bigger than the Earth; Venus lesser by thirty seven
times; the Moon, by thirty nine times; but they make Mercury much lesser.


Phil. Pray, what Planet is that you call Venus?


Sophr. The same which is more commonly known by the name of Morning Star in
the Morning, and of Evening-Star in the Evening.


Phil. But how comes it, Sophronius, that whilst the Sun appears above our
Horizon, none of the other Planets, and indeed no Star, is seen?


Sophr. The Reason is plain. For a greater Light drowns a lesser; and the Sun,
being as it were the source of Light, must needs have a greater proportion of
it than any of the Stars.


Phil. Are you then of Opinion, that the Stars have no Light of their own?


Sophr. I do not say so. But it is credibly thought, they borrow the greatest
part of their Light from the Sun. And therefore it seems that God has placed
the Sun in the midst of the Planets, that those above and beneath it might
equally partake of its Splendour.


Phil. So much for that, Sophronius; I desire now to understand their Motion.


Sophr. To clear this Point, you must know that those Philosophers who hold the
Sun moves about the Earth (which is the vulgar Opinion) suppose two several
Motions of the Stars in general. The one Natural or Proper, from West to East;
and the other Violent from East to West. And they attribute the Cause of this
last Motion, as I have already hinted, to the great Orb called Primum Mobile,
which turns from East to West round the World with an equal rapidity within the
space of twenty four hours, and with it hurries away all the lesser Orbs. Which
is observable in the Sun particularly.

Whereas, according to the Natural Motion of the Stars from West to East, it is
to be observed amongst the Planets, That cold Saturn does not finish its Course
but within the Compass of almost thirty years; bright Jupiter finishes his in
about twelve years; fiery Mars, within little less than two years; the Sun in
one year; fair Venus, in one year and a half; Mercury, in something less than
half a year; the Moon, in twenty seven days and about eight hours.


Phil. I do not understand these contrary Motions. It is apparent, as you say,
that the Sun moves daily from East to West, and so goes round about the World.
But how can it at the same time move by a proper motion of its own a quite
contrary way, that is, from West to East? How can any thing go backward and
forward at the same time? This is past my Understanding.


Sophr. Do but suppose a small Fly upon a Globe to run through the Ecliptic
Line, which shows the proper Motion of the Sun.


Phil. What then, Sophronius?


Sophr. Then turn the Globe never so much about from East to West, still you
will find that the Fly in the mean time gets forward in her course from West to
East. And, if you do so turn the Globe about, that, as often as it turns quite
round, the fly may advance one Degree in her Course Westward; you will find
that by turning the Globe three hundred sixty five times, the fly shall be gone
as many Degrees in a quite contrary way. Such is the Yearly Course of the Sun
from West to East, according to which it goes about one Degree every day, and
in a years time runs over the twelve Signs or Constellations called the Houses
of the Sun.


Phil. You have explained it to me with as much clearness as may be.


Sophr. Now from this Course of the Sun is come the Distinction and
Distribution of Time, which is the measure of Motion. And, to proceed a minori
ad majus, there is first a Minute, next an Hour, then Days, Weeks, Months,
Seasons, Years. Threescore Minutes go to an Hour, twenty four Hours to a
natural Day, seven Days to one Week, four Weeks to a Month according to the
Moon, and some odd days more to a Month of the Sun. Now twelve of these Months
make the four Seasons of the Year, viz. three Months to each Season. And so the
Year does consist of twelve Months, fifty two Weeks, or of three hundred sixty
five Days and about six hours. Except it be a Leap-year, and then there is
three hundred sixty six Days.


Phil. Pray, what is the Occasion of this additional Day?


Sophr. You must know that (according to the old Julian Account) the Year
consists of three hundred sixty five Days and six hours. Now these fix hours,
at four years end, come to twenty four hours, that makes up a Day, which is
added to the Month of February. And then that Year is called Leap-year, which
by the Romans was named Bissextilis.

As to the Months of the Sun, as we reckon them, some have thirty Days, some
thirty one, and February alone has but twenty eight, except every Leap or
fourth year, when it has twenty nine Days. Which that you may find out readily
at any time, do but mind these following Verses;

Thirty Days has November,
April, June, and September;
Of eight and twenty there is one,
And the rest are of thirty one.

Phil. But did the Ancients hold the same Year as we do.


Sophr. Before the time of Julius Caesar they held several forts of Yeas But
that Emperor, forty years before Christ's Birth, ordained the Year to consist
of three hundred sixty five days, and fix hours.


Phil. Pray, tell me the Difference of the Old and New style, and what is the
Ground of it?


Soph. The Old Style, which the Greek Church and most Protestants keep still,
is the old Julian Account, which for many Ages seemed to have no sensible
Error. But in process of time it was discovered to be not altogether agreeable
with the natural Motion of the Sun, the Julian Year exceeding the rue Solar
Year ten Minutes, and forty eight Seconds; which caused the Equinoxes;and
Solstices yearly to change their Places, and fly back so many minutes and
seconds. Whereupon Pope; Gregory the XIII, by the advice and direction of
Antonius Lilius and other excellent Mathematicians, corrected the Calender,
making the Year to consist of three hundred sixty five days five hours, forty
nine minutes, twelve seconds. And, to the end that the vernal Equinox (which
then was on to the eleventh of March) might be reduced to, the one and
twentieth of March, as it was at the time of the first Nicene Council; he
commanded ten day in October to be left out, so as the fourth day of October
was accounted for the fourteenth day. This happened in the Year fifteen hundred
eighty two, from which time this Account was called the Gregorian Account; and
so came the Distinction of Old and New Style, the Old according to the Julian,
and the New according. to the Gregorian Account


Phil. Thus the Nations that hold the New Style do reckon ten days before us;
and, when it is with us for exemple the first day of May, it is the eleventh
with them.


Sophr. Right. But, as we differ in the Style, so we do from some Nations as to
the beginning of' Years and of Days.


Phil. How so, my Sophronius?


Sophr. You know;that in most Parts of Europe they begin the Year, as the
Romans did, on the first of January. And so we do here in England in some
respect, therefore we call it New-Years-Day But upon a Civil Account, and for
our Date, of Buying or. Selling, etc. We begin the Year (and so do the
Spaniards) eight weeks after, viz. upon Lady Day, the twenty fifth of March. So
the Jews, after they got our of Egypt, began their Year much about the same
time in March, to which answered in part their Month Nisan; Whereas before they
were wont to begin it in their Month called Tisri or Ethanim, which
comprehended part of our September and October.

Now the Venetians begin theirs the first of March. And so did Romulus the
Founder of Rome; for it is observed that before Julius Caesar, the Month of July
was called Quintilis, or the fifth Month from March. The Moscovites, who follow
the Greek Church, begin their Year the first of September, upon this ground For
they believe the World began in Autumn; and, whereas we reckon our Years from
the Coming of Christ into the World, they reckon theirs from the time of the
Creation.

As for Days, you must know there is a Natural and Artificial Day; that
containing Day and Night, and consisting of twenty four hours; this beginning
at Sunrising, and ending at Sunset. The Natural Day is reckoned in most parts
of Europe from one midnight to another, reckoning twice twelve hours; that is
from Midnight to Noon twelve hours, and from Noon to the Midnight following
twelve hours more, beginning with one, two, three, etc. But in Italy (as
formerly in Athens) they reckon twenty four, hours all along without coming
back to one, as we do; and that from Sunset to Sunset. At Nuremberg, and some
other Places of Germany, they reckon their Days (as the Ancient Jews and
Chaldeans) from one Sunrising to another; beginning with one a Clock, and so
on to the twenty fourth hour. It Is true the Jews had (besides their Civil Day)
a Sacred Day, destined for Holy Exercises, which began at Sunset, and
continued till the next Sunset. In Moscovy they reckon their day from the
Sunrising till Sunset; and, when the Sun is gone down, then they reckon the
first hour of the night, and so on, till the Sun appearing again over their
Horizon finishes the time of their Night and begins with them a new Day.


Phil. I have heard very often of Equinoxes and Solstices, but could never
understand clearly what they are. Be pleased to give me as clear an Account of
them as you can.


Sophr. In Order to that you must know there are yearly two Equinoxes and two
Solstices; a Vernal and an Autumnal Equinox, a Summer and a Winter Solstice,
which begin the four several Seasons of the Year. For the Vernal Equinox begins
the Spring; the Summer Solstice the Summer; the Autumnal Equinox, the Autumn;
and the. Winter-Solstice, the Winter. And, as in the Equinoxes the Days and
Nights are of an equal length; so in the Summer-Solstice, we have our longest
Days, and in the Winter-Solstice our shortest. Now the Equiquinoxes are so
called from the Latin Aequinoctium, because then the Days and Nights are of an
equal length. And the Solstices have their Name from the Latin Word Solstitium,
which signifies a stop of the Sun. Not that the Suns Motion be stopped, except
from coming nearer us than the Tropic of Cancer, and from going, further from
us than the Tropic of Capricorn. But of this you shall hear more hereafter.


Phil. What shall we then proceed upon?


Sophr. Next to the Glorious Brightness of the Sun, the Vastness of its Body,
the prodigious Distance thereof from us, and its continual Motion to or from
us, let us now consider the Influence of it by its Heat, which in a manner is
the Life of Plants and Animals. For, as without the Light of the Sun the whole
Frame of Nature should be buried in Darkness; so, without the Heat that arises
from it, no living Creature could live. Neither is this Heat inherent in the
Body of the Sun, but it is wonderfully produced (as Philosophers teach us) by
the Reflection of its Beams. Wherewith the Air being warmed foments and keeps
alive all Vegetables.


Phil. But what is an Eclipse of the Sun?


Sophr. It Is a privation of its beams in some part of the Earth, caused by the
Interposition of the Moon betwixt the Sun and that part of the Earth. Which
happens when the Moon being in the same Sign and Degree the Sun is in, it falls
out that these three Body's, the Sun, the Moon, and the Earth are diametrally
opposite.


Phil. And how is the Eclipse of the Moon?


Sophr. This you shall know, when I have first made a short Description of it.
The Moon, (as I have already observed to you) is the lowest of all the Planets,
and consequently that which is nearest to us. Therefore her Influence must
needs be the stronger over all Sublunary Things.

It Is a Planet much subject to Change, and seen in diverse Shapes; that
sometimes shines, and sometimes does not. And, when it does, it is more or
less, according to the proportion of Light it receives from the Sun. We call it
new Moon, when it is in conjunction with the Sun; and then it gives us no
light, because the dark part of it is to us ward. But four days after it makes
its first appearance in the shape of two bright horns, the rest of her Body
being dark; and then is the first Quarter. Being a Week old, half of it appears
bright, and the other half dark; and then it is called a Crescent, or
Half Moon. Thus it increases for a week more, till it comes to. be full; and
then, being diametrally opposite to the Sun, this strikes its Beams upon that
the more fully. Four days after full Moon, it begins to Decrease and lose its
light (which is called the Wane of the Moon;) and three days after this it
appears again in the form of a Crescent. So, it loses its Light gradually, till
it is New Mood again.


Phil. So I perceive that the nearer the Moon is to the Sun, the less light she
receives from it; and on the contrary, the further off, the more luminous she
is. But, pray, tell me what Course does this Planer take?


Sophr. The very same as the Sun's. Only it is to be observed that, whereas the
Sun is a whole Year finishing its Course, the Moon performs hers in a Month.

Shall I tell you now, Philalethes, some Influences of the Moon? It Is the Moon
that brings the Fruits of the Earth to Maturity and their ultimate Perfection.
It Is the Moon that influences very much upon Generations, upon great Belly's,
and Labors. It Is this Planet that contributes greatly to the nourishment and
growth of living Creatures. Insomuch that it is observed, the very Oisters
increase and decrease with to the Moon.

But, as the Sun, so the Moon is subject to Eclipses Now an Eclipse of the Moon
is nothing else but its privation of the Light of the Sun, occasioned by the
Interposition of the Earth betwixt the Sun and Moon. Which does not commonly
happen but upon the full of the Moon, when this Planet is diametrally opposite
to the Sun.

Thus much for the Sun and Moon, whose Influences (of all the Planets) are most
taken notice of.


Phil. But what do you think; Sophronius, of the World in the Moon?


Sophr. Ay Marry, Now you Started a pretty Question indeed; but it is not for
me to satisfy you whether or no there be such a Thing in Nature. Lucian, a man
of eminent parts, (but as base an Apostate from the Christian Faith in which he
was bred) was the first that writ of this new World in the Moon; but then he
proposed it as a mere Fancy of his own, and so he affords us in one of his
Dialogues a conceited Character of it. But of late times, that Fancy of his is
become a Matter of more serious debate. Insomuch that some have labored with
great pains to make it probable, that there is another World in the Moon,
Inhabited (as This is) by People of diverse Languages, Customs, Policy's, and
Religions. And, more than so, some Means and Ways have been proposed to
Consideration for maintaining an Intercourse and Commerce betwixt That and
This. The like Endeavors there are to prove that the Earth is a Planet. And,
long before Lucians time, Aristophanes (a famous Man amongst the old Greek
Poets) speaks in one of his Comedy's of a City of Cuckoos in the Clouds, which
he calls Nephelococcygia.


Phil. I must confess these are pretty Conceits.


Sophr. However it is observable, that great Truths have been started upon
slight Presumptions. And truly it goes hard with some to believe, that such an
infinite Number of great and glorious Stars as there are in the Heavens should
be appointed only to wait upon this little and dirty Spot of Earth. I say no
more, because it is time to conclude.


Phil. I forgot my self, and should have considered how precious your Time is.
But I am so ravished with this kind of Learning, that what Knowledge you have
already infused into my Mind does but inflame my Desire of knowing more.


Sophr. I am very glad to see you relish these Things. And, as for my Time, you
may assure your self that I think no Time lost but what I do not spend at your
Service. At our next Meeting, if you will, we shall discourse of the Air and
Meteors.


Phil. When it shall stand with your Convenience.


The Third Discourse.
Of the Air, and the Meteors.

PHilalethes, I come again to you, Sophronius, with a greedy mind to learn how
the World stands.


Sophr. Well Philalethes, I shall endeavor to satiate your Greediness; and,
were you a Camelion, you should not want for Air, I assure you. For it is the
Air (as I remember) which is the Subject fixed upon for our present Dicourse.
And I can afford you three Services of it, all of a different Nature.


Phil. I perceive you intend to Air me to some tune.


Sophr. Ay, but take heed of an After-clap. For I shall come upon you at last
with Thunder and Lightning.


Phil. I feat it not, provided it be such as may inlighten my Understanding.


Sophr. To make then no further Preamble, you must know the Air is a thin,
transparent, lukewarm, and moist Element, that surrounds the Globe of the
Earth. It Is the Air that penetrates the substance of mixed Body's, and which
makes way for Generation. It Is the Air that serves for our Respiration, for
Vocal and Instrumental Music, etc. and wherein the Birds of the Air move with
great Swiftness. In fine, it is the Scene where Nature acts those Wonders we
call Meteors.

The same is by Pilosophers divided into three Regions, viz. the Upper, Middle,
and Lower Region.


Phil. These are, I suppose, the three Services you intend to treat me with; a
very Airy Diet.


Sophr. You found it out. But to be serious, the Upper Region begins from the
Sphere of the Moon, and reaches to that part of the Air where the Vapors
condensate. The Middle Region, which follows next, is bounded by the reflected
Beams of the Sun. And the Lower reaches from thence to the Surface of the
Earth. But, because the Sunbeams reach higher in Summertime than they do in
Winter, therefore it is to be concluded, that in Summer the Middle Region is
lesser, and the Lower greater, than in Winter.

Now it is the General Opinion of Philosophers, that the Supreme (or Upper)
Region is accidentally warm, either by reason of the fiery and Sulphurous
Exhalations which ascend thither, or because of the violent Motion of the
Spheres from East to West, or lastly (according to Aristotle) because it is
next to the Elementary Fire which he places in the Concave of the Moon. The
Middle Region is cold. And the Lower is sometimes warm and sometimes cold,
according as the Sun affects it with its Beams by its nearness or remoteness.


Phil. But what is that we call Wind?


Sophr. It Is nothing else but an Agitation, or a strong Motion of the Air;
occasioned chiefly by the Sun, and by Vapors and Exhalations. For the Sun by
its natural brightness does rarifie the Air, and this being rarified requires
more room, and so struggles hard for it. On the other side, the Exhalations from
the Earth and Vapors from the Water being raised in great quantity and with
some Violence up to the middle Region of the Air, do often occasion a Wind by
their Conflict with the cold Air they meet in that Region. But there are other
Causes assigned for the Wind. As the Clouds, when they rarifie, or when by
their descent, they press the Air. To which add the Snow and Ice, (especially
in Mountainous places) that often turn into Wind. Which is the Reason why the
Straight of Magellan, having on both sides of it high Mountains always covered
with Snow, is subject to those Counter-Winds, which beat with equal Fury on all
parts thereof; Insomuch that, which way soever a man Steer his Course, he shall
be sure to have the Wind against him.

Now the Winds move cross ways, that is, neither upwards nor downwards. The
Reason is, because when the Air is pressed down still there arise more Vapors
which beat it back.


Phil. But how many sorts of Winds do you reckon?


Sophr. A great many. And they are chiefly divided into Cardinal, and
Collateral. We call Cardinal Winds those that blow exactly from the four
Quarters of the World, North, South, East, and West; from whence we call them
generally North, South, East, and West Winds.


Phil. But how shall I know the one from the other?


Sophr. If you do but know the North, you know all. For it is but turning your
face straight to the North, and then you have the East on your right hand, the
West on the left, and the South just behind you opposite to the North.

But then by the East you must understand the East Equinoctial, that is where
the Sun rises in an Equinox; and accordingly by the West you must understand
the West Equinoctial, where the Sun Sets in an Equinox.

Otherwise you know, that when the Sun has past the Equinoctial, it Rises and
Sets gradually higher or lower in our Horizon. From compass rose whence is come
the distinstion of Summer-East and Winter-East, Summer-West and Winter-West.
For in Summer time the Sun rises betwixt the North and the East Equinoctial;
and in Winter time, betwixt the East Equinoctial and the South. And accordingly
it sets in Summer betwixt the West Equinoctial and the North; and in Winter,
betwixt the West Equinoctial and the South.


Phil. Now what do you mean, Sophronius, by Collateral Winds?


Sophr. You must know there are no less than 28. of these, that is, seven
betwixt two Cardinal ones; as betwixt North and East, East and South, South and
West, West and North. Amongst which, those that are just in the middle betwixt
two Cardinal Winds are counted the chiefest. So, reckoning the four Cardinal
Winds, there are in all 32. Winds, the Names of which you have in their Order
in the following Scheme.

See the Figure of the Winds. And now, Philalethes, I must observe to you, 1.
That in Spring and Autumn Winds are commonly more brief and more violent than
either in a hot Summer or a frosty Winter. 2. That Winds are more frequent from
the East then from the West, especially in the Torrid Zone. In England the
East Wind is most common in the Spring, and is counted an unwholsom Wind, both
to Plants and Living Creatures, according to the Proverb that says, Wind from
the East is neither good for Man nor Beast. But in Summertime the South-West
Wind does most times predominate. 3. That East and North Winds are commonly
both colder and stronger than either West or South Winds, especially in our
Zone. 4. That Winds are convenient for two things principally, that is for
Navigation, and (except the East Wind) to purify the Air.


Phil. There are those who pretend to foresee what Wind will blow. What do you
think of it, Sophronius?


Sophr. I confess one may give sometimes a shrewd guess, and the Mariners
(those Amphibious Creatures that live most upon Wind and Water) have a pecular
Gift that way. The Ancients guessed at it by the sight of some Birds, of a
Dolphin, or of some Meteor or other. Now our Seamen, when they see a small
Cloud of a pale or blackish color, they conclude a Wind from thence. So when
the Sun does not rise clear, but seems to be spotted, or when it is overcast
with a pale or a black Cloud, it presages either Wind or Rain. The sames is
observed of the Sun, if it look pale when it sets. And then, if clouded with
black Clouds, it is a sign of a North Wind. The Moon, when it looks red, is
looked upon as a certain sign of windy weather, according to the Verse,

Pallida Luna pluit, Rubicunda flat, Alba serenat. And so is the Circle about
the Moon. There are other Signs of Winds, as when the Sea makes a grumbling
Noise inwardly. Lastly, a great deal of Rain is usually followed with a strong
Wind.


Phil. What kind of Wind is that which is called a Trade-Wind?


Sophr. It Is a Wind which blows constantly at a set time of the Year, and
continues for a long time together. Such were the Etesiae amongst the ancient
Greeks, for so they called the North-winds that blew constantly every Year for
40. days together in the Dog Days.


Phil. What do you mean by an Hurricane?


Sophr. A Tempestuous Gust of Wind, such as destroys most Ships at Sea that are
in its way, pulls down Houses, and pulls up Trees by the root. The word is come
from the West Indies, and particularly from the Caribby-Islands, where they
have once in two or three years (in July, or thereabouts) most dreadful
Hurricanes, thus described by Seamen. First, the Sun exhales a great quantity
of Water from the Sea into a Cloud, and then it gushes down with great
violence; followed with a terrible Tempest of Wind, which lasts about two or
three hours, and sometimes longer. By which means the Sea rages so furiously
that no Ship almost can hold out, and few Houses at Land in its way escape
being destroyed.

In July, 1666. The Lord Willoughby of Parham, sailing betwixt Barbados and St.
Christophers, had the ill fortune to be lost in an Hurricane, with diverse
English Ships. In short, an Hurricane can be compared to nothing so well as to
a violent Earthquake.


Phil. Now you put me in mind of Earthquakes, pray, what is the occasion of
them?


Sophr. Nothing but Subterranean Winds that force their passage out of the
Earth with great violence, whereby sometimes whole Cities are swallowed up.
Witness so many fine Places in the East, that have been destroyed by
Earthquakes, the Falling Sickness of most great City's in those Parts.


Phil. My Blood chills in my Veins with the dreadful Thoughts of Earthquakes
and Hurricanes. Pray, let us leave this Subject.


Sophr. The next Thing that offers it self to our Consideration is the Meteors,
those Phenomenon which are formed in the Air, and made either of Exhalations or
Vapors raised up thither by the heat of the Sun and virtue of the Stars.


Phil. What difference do you put betwixt the Exhalations and Vapors?


Sophr. The Exhalations come out of the Earth, and are warm and dry; the
Vapors from the Water, being both warm and moist. Those are proper for Fiery,
and these for Watery Meteors.


Phil. Which of the three Regions of the Air is proper to Meteors?


Sophr. Some Meteors are formed in the Upper Region, some in the Middle, and
others in the Lower. Which that you may the better apprehend, you must know in
the first place, that some Meteors are Real, and others but Apparent.

The Real Meteors are either Fiery, or Watery. The first are Simple, or Mixed.
Those we call Simple, that consist only of Exhalations; and Mixed, such as are
of a courser and more viscous nature, consisting both of Vapors and
Exhalations.

Simple, as, In the Upper Region, Fax, or Candela accensa, a burning Taper.
Trabs, or Ignis Perpendicularis, a Fiery Beam. Bolis, or Jaculum, a Dart. Caprae
Saltantes, the Skipping Goats. Scintillae Volantes, the flying Sparks.


In the Middle Region, Stella Discurrens, a shooting Star. Stella Cadens, a
falling Star. Lancea Ardens, the Fiery Lance.


In the Lower Region, Draco Volans, the flying Dragon. Ignis Fatuus, Jack in a
Lanthorn. Ignis Lambens, the Lambent Fire.


Mixed, as In the Upper Region, Cometa a Comet, or Blazing-Star.


And in the Middle, Fulgur, a Lightning. Fulmen, a Thunderbolt.


Fax, or Candela accensa, is a thin fiery Meteor; so called because of its
resemblance to a burning Taper. Trabs, or Ignis Perpendicularis, is another
sort of fiery Meteor shaped something like a Beam or a Pyramid, and burning all
together. Bolis, or Jaculum, is a Meteor, that having catched Fire fly's
upward, and looks like a Fiery Dart. Caprae Saltantes is an odd kind of Meteor,
the matter whereof extends more in length than in breadth, and which having
took Fire looks like so many skipping Goats. Scintillae Volantes, or flying
Sparks, are nothing but Exhalations which spread themselves into many small
parts, and by their motion take fire.

Stella Discurrens, a shooting Star, is a fiery Meteor of the Middle Region, of
a Globous Figure, which conceiving Fire by the coldness of the Air runs with an
oblique motion. Whereas Stella Cadens, or a falling Star, comes down, and so
appears like a Star falling from the Sky. Lancea Ardens, a fiery Lance, is a
long and well compacted Meteor, which having took fire falls down like a
firebrand.

Draco Volans, or a flying Dragon, is a courser sort of Meteor seen in the
Lower Region; which being raised up on high, and clashing with a cold Cloud
catches fire, and bends it self into some form of a Dragon. Ignis fatuus, well
known in English by the Nicknames of Jack in a Lanthorn, or Will, with a Wisp,
is also a Phenomenon of the Lower Region, but of a courser nature. Which
conceiving fire by the coolness of the night, and being tossed to and fro by
the Wind, is apt to run into steep Places and Precipices; and so proves
sometimes fatal to Travelers, that suffer themselves to be misguided by such a
false Light. This Meteor is seen chiefly in Summer time, and most of all in hot
Country's, as in Aethiopia, where they are very brief. When it appeared single,
the Ancients called it Helena; and, when it appeared in two parts, they named
them Castor and Pollux. Lastly, Ignis Lambens is a light and thin Meteor,
without any heat; that sticks sometimes to men's clothes or hair, and does no
hurt at all.

Cometa a Comet, or Blazing Star, is a Meteor consisting of great abundance of
dry and viscous Exhalations, with some mixture of Vapors, both raised up to
the Upper Region; where being well compacted together they take fire by their
own motion, and appear to us in the shape of a great Star. Now there are three
sorts of Comets, viz. Crinitus hairy, Barbatus bearded, and Caudatus with a
tail. The first happens, when the Pabulum is thick in the middle, and thin in
the outward parts; which makes the Comet look with a kind of dispersed light
round about like ones hair about the head. The Bearded Comet is so called, when
the outward parts reach no great way, and look something like a Beard about the
Star. The Comet with a Tail is that which spreads it self a great way on one
side or other, and appears to us like a Star with a long tail. Of this last
sort there have appeared several in our Time; but none of so prodigious a
length as that which is yet so fresh in our Memory, I mean the great Comet that
was seen but last Year.

The proper Time (if any) for the appearance of Comets is Autumn, a Season
which does most abound with Vapors and Exhalations. Their Duration is
uncertain, for it falls out according to the Pabulum. However it is observed,
that the longest continuance of a Comet is six Months, and the shortest a Week.


Phil. But do you think, Sophronius, that Comets are Ominous?


Sophr. I confess it is a vulgar Opinion, grounded upon this Experience, that
few Comets appear but what are followed with Wars, Pestilence, Famine, or some
other public Calamity. But, whether those Things be really influenced by the
Comets (which are a natural Meteor) it is more than can be proved.

Now, to proceed,

Fulgur, a Lightning, is a flash of Fire that comes out of a Cloud. The matter
of which Meteor being but thin and dispersed is the reason why it catches fire
but here and there, and that it vanishes away presently.

Fulmen, a Thunderbolt, is a fiery Meteor that breaks out of a Cloud with great
Violence, and dashes in pieces whatever it falls upon. And this is properly
that which the Philosophers call Fulmen Discutiens. But there is another sort
of Fulmen called Terebrans, because it does only bore a hole where it chances
to fall. And lastly, there is Fulmen Urens, which does nothing but blast, and
therefore we only call it a blasting Lightning.


Phil. But what have you to say of the Thunder, which commonly go's along with
the Lightning?


Sophr. The Thunder is a Noise caused by the clashing of the Exhalations
against the sides of a Cloud, or by their breaking out of it. Now the
Exhalations do either break out all at once, as when we break a Bladder full of
Wind, and then we hear a great crack; or else at diverse times, and then the
noise is re-doubled. But, when the Exhalations do not break out of the Cloud,
and remain shut up in it, then it is that we hear a Grumbling Noise.


Phil. How comes it that sometimes it Lightens without Thunder, and that on the
contrary it sometimes Thunders without any Lightning?


Sophr. When the Cloud makes no great resistance to the Exhalations, then it
Lightens without Thunder; and, when the Exhalation is not apt to catch fire,
then it Thunders without Lightning.


Phil. But how comes it to pass that when the Thunder and Lightning go
together, we sooner see the Lightning than we hear the Thunder?


Sophr. By the same reason that we sooner see the fire of a Cannon shot off at
some distance, than we hear the noise of it. And that is, because our Sight is
quicker than our Hearing.

Now Philalethes, I think we have done pretty well as to the fiery Meteors, let
us proceed to the Watery ones. Some of which belong

To the Middle Region, Viz. Clouds, Rain, and Snow;


Some to the Lower, as Hail, Dew, Hoar-Frost, Mist, Ice.


A Cloud is a great heap of Vapors raised up by the Sun and other Stars to the
middle Region of the Air, and there condensated by the coldness of it. Now some
Clouds are thin, bright, and airy, apt to be dissipated either by the heat of
the Sun, or by the force of Winds; when others are thick, black, full of
moisture, and consequently fit for the production of Rain.

For Rain is nothing else but a Cloud dissolved. And, when the Vapors are but
thin, then it Rains small; when thick, the Rain is greater. Sometimes there has
been seen Frogs, little Fishes, Blood, Milk, Stones; Iron, and the like, come
down with the Rain; but then it is, as the Philosophers call it, Pluvia
Prodigiosa, a Prodigious Rain. Of all the Winds, none is so apt to bring Rain
as a South Wind; and of all other signs of Rain, a pale Moon is one of the
truest, according to the foresaid Verse, Pallida Luna pluit, etc.

The Snow is a Meteor of a Spungious Nature, into which the Clouds do
frequently dissolve themselves in Winter. For then, the middle Region of the
Air being colder than ordinary, the Clouds are so affected, and (as it were)
bound with the coldness thereof, that instead of Rain, they dissolve themselves
into that white, fleece-like, and light Substance we call Snow. Some think the
Clouds that produce this Meteor have almost in them as great a quantity of
Exhalations as Vapors, and that those being extinguished in these, make that
spungious substance which at last breaks, and comes fleeting down.

Hail is nothing else but Rain congealed in the Air; when the Rain coming down
from the middle Region is surprised by the heat of the lower Region, and so
congeals it self into hail to resist it. Whereby you may conclude, and it is
found so by experience, that hot Country's are most of all subject to this kind
of Meteor.

The Dew is but a thin and light Vapor, raised not much above the Ground.
Which Vapor being condensated by a temperate cool Night, dissolves it self
into small drops of Water, and falls down here and there. But then it must be
calm weather, or else those light Vapors (if disturbed by any Wind) cannot
condensate.

Hoar-Frost, or Rhyme, is nothing else but a Winter Dew, congealed into the form
of white Salt, by the cold Air of a Winter-night


Phil. And what is that, I pray, which is called Honey-Dew?


Sophr. It Is a Dew which Men gather upon some Trees, and the Bees upon some
sorts of Flowers, qualified by a Spirit which those Trees and Flowers do
sometimes exhale into their Leaves.

To proceed, a Mist, or Fog, is a Vapor that seldom rises but at the
Sunrising or Sunset, and which the cold weather does so condensate by degrees,
that it lies about us and darkens the very Air we breath. This Meteor (which
sometimes has an unwholesome smell with it) is most common in Autumn and in
Winter, when the Sun being farthest from us has not strength to raise those
thick Vapors above us up to the middle Region.


Phil. Now you led me into a stinking Mist, pray, bring me out of it.


Sophr. Then you must come over the Ice, which is but congealed water. And that
which helps the Congelation, besides the extreme coldness of the Weather, is
when there is some mixture of Earth with the Water.

And so, Philalethes, I have done with the Real Meteors, both Fiery and Watery.
I shall now briefly conclude with those Meteors which the Greeks call Phasmata,
and the Latins Meteora apparentia.

Such as Parhelius, or the Image of the Sun. Paraselene, the Image of the Moon.
Iris, the Rainbow. Halo, a circle about the Sun or Moon. Vorago, a great Gap.
Virgae perpendiculares, the perpendicular Rods.


Parhelius is the Image of the Sun reflected upon a Cloud. And, when it happens
that we see several Suns, it is but by the Impression of one Cloud upon another
disposed to receive that Image.

The same it is with Paraselene, or the Image of the Moon.

Iris, or the Rainbow, is the Representation of a Bow or Semicircle upon a
Drizling Cloud, which is caused by the reflected beams of the Sun. This is the
most common of all these luminous Meteors, frequently seen either in a Morning
or in an Evening, and that with these four Colors, red, green, white; and
yellow. In the Morning it presages cloudy weather, and in the Evening it
promises fair weather.

Halo, otherwise called Area, or Corona, is a white and bright Circle; which
appears sometimes upon a Cloud, either under the Sun, or (which is most common)
under the Moon.

Vorag, a great Gap, is an Exhalation raised up into the Air, where having
contracted a brightness, but no where so little as in the middle part of it, as
being thicker than the rest, makes this look like a great Gap. The lesser sort
of which is more properly called Hiatus, or Chasma.

Virgae Perpendiculares are nothing else but the Reflection of the beams of the
Sun through a thick Cloud.

And so much for this time. In our next Conference, I shall entertain you with
the Globe of the Earth.


The Fourth Discourse.
Of the Terr-Aqueous Globe in general, and the Earth in particular.

Sophrnius. At last from the Heavens and the Air we are now come to our cloggy
Element, the Earth, the Mother of Stones, Metals, Minerals, Plants, and living
Creatures. This Earth where God has displayed the Wonders of his Infinite
Wisdom, Goodness, and Omnipotency; but where Men show daily their Madnels,
Malice, and Weakness. This Earth, the general Stage of Mankind, where are daily
acted innumerable ridiculous Farces and fatal Tragedy's. Which made a
merry-conceited Author cry out, not without reason, in these Words, Where shall
a Man walk, and not meet with Seignior Deliro? that is Mr. Madman. This Earth
in fine, which has been of old a Prey to Ambitious and Greedy Conquerors, those
cruel and blood-thirsty Leeches that take such delight in Blood, those Enemies
and Disturbers of Mankind, whose boundless Ambition and Avarice the World
cannot satiate. These are the Idols that will not be appeased without Humane
Sacrifices; These, the wild Boars that waste our Arcadia's. But where is the
Hercules?

And now to give you a Geographical Account of this Earth, I must tell you in
the first place, that the Earth and Waters together make a round Body, commonly
called Terrestrial, but more properly Terr-Aqueous, Globe. Terr-Aqueous,
because it consists of Earth and Waters; and Globe, from its Figure. Now this
Globe is all surrounded with the Air, and hangs in the midst of it.


Phil. How is it possible for the Earth and Waters together to make a round
Body, when there are so many Mountains, and some of them of a prodigious height?


Sophr. Those Mountains in respect to the Globe are nothing, if compared to the
greatness of it. Witness el Pico, one of the highest Hills in the known World,
and yet not above two Leagues high perpendicularly. And what is, I pray, the
disproportion of two Leagues in a Body which no less than 1200. only to the
Center, or the middle point?


Phil. Do you say so? How big is then the Terr-Aqueous Globe about?


Sophr. It is no less than 360. Degrees, which at 20. Leagues (or 60. miles) a
Degree comes to 7200. leagues, or 21600. miles. And yet it is all but a Point,
if compared with Heaven.

Now the Diameter being in all round Bodies the third part of the
Circumference, it follows that the Diameter of the Terrestrial Globe is 2400.
leagues, and consequently the Semi-Diameter (which reaches but to the Center)
1200. leagues.


Phil. I am satisfied as to that, but I am gravelled upon another account. For
I cannot conceive how so great and so heavy a Body as is the Terr-Aqueous Globe
(as you call it) should hang in the Air without any support, when if we throw
but a stone into the Air it presently falls down.


Sophr. The Reason is, because all heavy things do naturally incline to their
Center, which is thought to have an attractive faculty to that purpose.

The next Thing we must consider is, that one part of the Earth is visible, and
the other part under Water. Now the Question is, you will say, which of the two
Superficies is greater, that of the Earth, or that of the Water. But this we
cannot tell certainly, because one great Part of the Terr-Aqueous Globe is as
yet unknown to us. And, if we speak only of that Part which is known, there is
no doubt, in case that we do reckon Lakes and Rivers, but that the Superficies
of the Water exceeds that of the Land. Otherwise I find no great odds betwixt
the Sea and the Land. It Is true, the Sea gets ground now and then, and
incroaches upon the Land; but it is as true on the other side, that it leaves
some places dry. Witness Zealand, which formerly was under the Sea, as we may
guess by the great Bonefishes and Anchors that have been dug up there; and
now is a pleasant, fertile, and populous Country. But however all this is
nothing, if compared to the whole Superficies of the Earth and Waters.

And so, Philalethes, we have hitherto spoke of the Earth and Waters as an
Aggregate Body, now we must treat of them separately.

First You must know the Land, as it is more or less encompassed with Water, is
principally divided

Into Continents, Islands, Peninsules.

A Continent, otherwise called Firm Land, is a great part of Earth, but partly
watered by the Sea; as France, and Germany.

An Island is a part of Earth environed round about with Water; as great
Britain, and Ireland.

A Peninsule is a part of Earth almost surrounded with Water, and only joined
to the Continent by a narrow neck of Land; as Morea in Greece.

Now in Continents, Islands, and Peninsule's are to be considered these natural
Parts following;

Viz. Isthmus, or Neck of Land. Cape, or Promontory. Point, or Foreland. Coast,
or Seacoast. Shore, or Bank. Hill, Mount, or Mountain. Valley, or Dale. Pit,
or Precipice. Marsh, Mere, or Fens. Plain, or Champaign Ground. Downs. Heaths.
Forest, or Wood. Desert, or Wilderness.


An Isthmus is a narrow Neck of Land that joins a Peninsule to a Continent. A
Cape, or Promontory, is a Hill that shoots forth into the Sea. A Point, or
Foreland, is a narrow piece of Ground that runs point-wise into the Sea. A
Coast, or Seacoast, is that part of a Country which lies by the Seaside. A
Shore, the very extremity of Land that borders upon any Water; and, if raised
much higher than the Water, then it is termed a Bank. A Hill is a part of Earth
rising more or less above the neighboring Ground; but, if it be of a great
height or extent, then it is also called by the name of Mount, or Mountain. A
Valley, or a Dale, is a low Ground that lies at the bottom of a Hill, or
betwixt two distinct Hills. A Pit, or Precipice, is a great fall of Earth apt
to strike with horror those that look down into it. Marsh, Meers, Fens, or
Marshy Ground, a Quantity of Land so intermixed with Water, that it is not
passable but in a great Drought or hard Frost. A Plain, or Champaign Ground, is
a great plot of Ground lying level and open. Which, if upon a Hill, is called
Downs; and, if overgrown with Heath, is named a Heath. By a Forest, or Wood,
is properly meant a great Plot of Ground covered with Trees unplanted and
growing of their own accord. Lastly we call a Desert, or Wilderness, a vast
quantity of Barren and uninhabited Land.


Phil. To make some useful Reflections upon what is said, I desire to know in
the first place which are the chiefest and most remarkable Islands.


Sophr. To answer your Desire, there is first in Europe, Great Britain, and
Ireland, both surrounded with the Ocean. These are the two largest Islands of
Europe; and great Britain, as it is one of the best, so it is one of the
greatest Islands in the World. Then in the Mediterranean, if you begin from the
Streights, you will find these goodly Islands East of Spain, viz. Yvica,
Majorca, and Minorca, the two last being the Baleares Insulae of the Ancients.
Further Eastward you will meet with Sardinia, and North of that with Corsica.
Then at the very Foot of Italy is Sicily, the greatest Island in the
Mediterranean. Not much Inferior to which is Candia, formerly called Creet,
lying South-East of Morea in Greece. In the Archipelago, or the Aegean Sea, (a
Sea which swarms with Islands) the principal Island for bigness is the
Negropont, formerly known by the name of Euboea. As to the Northern Sea, called
the Baltic, there are few Islands of any great note, besides Zealand and
Fuinen; which make part of Denmark, and in the first of which you will find
Copenhagen the Royal Seat of that Kingdom.

Secondly, In Asia, the chief Islands for bigness, and first in the
Mediterranean, are Cyprus in the furthest parts of the Sea toward the East.
Next to which is the Isle of Rhodes lying Westward from it. But in the Ocean
you will find, besides Ceylan a considerable Island in the East Indies, these
following incomparably bigger, viz. Borneo, Sumatra, Java, Celebes, Mindanao,
Lucon or Manille, and East of China Japan.

Africa cannot boast of any great Island, besides that of Madagascar, which
indeed is a vast Island, lying South-East-ward.

In the New World, or America, you will find near the Month of the River
Canada, a great Island called New Foundland; and in the Gulf of Mexico, Cuba,
and Hispaniola. West of Mare Vermejo, or the Vermilion Sea, there is an Island
as big as those three, which is called California; and South of the Streights
of Magellan is also a large Island called Terra del Fuego, or the Land of Fire.
The Rest are not to be compared in bigness to any of those.

But toward Terra Borealis, North of America, you will find three great (but
wild) Islands, called Cumberlands Isles, lying betwixt the Streights of Hudson
and Davis; and another near Furbisher's Streights. Further toward the East is
Iseland, another great Island belonging to the King of Denmark, which is but
thinly Inhabited. The Arctick Circle passes through the middle of it.


Phil. What do you think, Sophronius, of Europe, Asia and Africa? Are they not
surrounded with the Sea?


Sophr. They are so. But, because of their vast Extent, they are usually called
by the name of Continents.


Phil. I have heard say of Sicily, that it was credibly supposed to have been
in former times joined to Italy. Pray, what ground is there for it?


Sophr. The Narrowness of the Streights, and the Shallowness of it, besides
that the Land on both sides is very brittle. First, the Straight is so narrow,
that where narrowest, it is not above a mile and a half broad; and it is
observed that, at the taking of Messina by the Carthaginians, many of the
Inhabitants saved themselves by swimming over into Italy. Secondly, It is so
Shallow that upon a diligent Sounding it is found not to be above eight Fathom
deep. Thirdly, the Land on both sides is so very brittle and so full of hollow
Caverns and Chinks, that it is looked upon as the effects of a working Sea on
this separation. To which add, that on the Italian Coast there stands a City of
old called Rhegium, and now Regio, from the Greek Verb (...), to break off or
pull asunder, supposed to be so called upon this occasion. The Poets themselves
give us to understand as much, when they tell us that Neptune with his Trident
broke this Island off from the Continent in savor of Jocastus the Son of
Aeolus, that so he might Inhabit there with the greater safety. And indeed, if
by Neptune we understand the Sea, and by Aeolus the Winds, we may easily with
some help from the Mythologists make a Story good enough of that Poetical
Fiction.


Phil. By what you said the Thing seems very probable. And who knows but that
our Island here was once joined to the Continent of France, and broke off from
it by the violence of the Sea and the fury of blustering Winds, or perhaps by
some Earthquake? It Is you know, but twenty miles over.


Sophr. That Is a great way, Philalethes, and I look upon that distance as the
greatest Argument against it, though I know there be those who are apt to
believe it. But let there be a Demurr upon that Subject; and, if you will, let
us now take a Survey of the chief Peninsules.

First, I begin with Africa, the largest and truest Peninsule of all, being
every where surrounded with Seas, except where it joins to Asia by the narrow
Isthmus of Sues. As for Europe and Asia, you may call them (if you will)
Peninsules, but not so properly as Africa. For, though they be almost
surrounded with Seas, yet there is more than an Isthmus in the case; Europe
being joined to Asia a good way by Land, and this last besides to Africa by the
aforesaid Isthmus. But the Northern and Southern America make of themselves two
large and perfect Peninsules, every where encompassed with Seas, but where they
join together in the middle by the Isthmus of Panama.

Besides those great Peninsules, there are others of a less compass, and yet
much taken notice of. As 1. Jutland in Denmark, known amongst the Ancients by
the name of Cimbrica Chersonesus, Chersonesus being Originally a Greek Word for
a Peninsule. 2. The Taurick Chersonese, from the Latin Taurica Chersonesus,
which is properly the European Tartary, lying betwixt the Black Sea and Palus
Maeotis. 3. The Thracian Chersonese, from the Latin Thracica Chersonesus, a
Peninsule which runs North from the Hellespont in Greece. 4. Morea (formerly
called Peloponesus) in the Southern parts of Greece, this Peninsule being
joined but by a very little Isthmus (called the Corinthian Isthmus) to the
Continent of Greece. 5. The Golden Chersonese, from the Latin Aurea
Chersonesus, a famous Peninsule in the East Indies, where now lies the Kingdom
of Malacca and the South part of that of Siam. 6. The Peninsule of Corea, in
the North-East parts of China. 7. Those of Acadia, Florida, and Yucatan, in the
Northern America; the first lying Southward of St. Laurence's Gulf; the second
in Florida, North of the Island Cuba; and the third being part of Mexico, or
New Spain.

Now, among the Istmus's that join these Peninsules to their several
Continents, there are three of special note, viz. the Isthmus of Sues, the
Corinthian Isthmus, and that of Panama.

And it is observable, first, as to the Corinthian Isthmus, that there was a
Design of old to cut it through (being but six miles in breadth) and so make a
perfect Island of Morea. This was attempted (but in vain) first by Demetrius
King of Macedon, then by Julius Caesar, afterward by Caius Caligula, and most
of all by the Emperor Nero. Who, to hearten his Soldiers, took himself a Spade
in hand, and began the Work. But at last they being frighted with the Blood
which abundantly broke forth, with the Groans and Roarings they continually
heard, and with the Hobgoblins and Furies which were always in their sight (as
if God had not been pleased with so proud an Enterprise) persuaded the Emperor
to give over this unprofitable Design, as had done the former Princes on the
like Discouragements.

As to that of Panama, which is twenty Leagues in breadth (a small Ligament for
so great a Body as the Northern and Southern America) there has been also some
thoughts of cutting a Navigable Channel through that Isthmus; whereby those two
Peninsules should be turned into Islands, and the long Voyages to China and the
Molucca's might be very much shortened. The Thing it self has been oftentimes
moved to the Council of Spain. But it was not thought convenient to attempt it.

In Egypt Sesostris King of that Country attempted to cut a main Channel from
the Red Sea to the River Nilus fit for Ships of great Burden, the marks of
which proud Attempt are remaining still. His Project was seconded by Darius the
great Persian Monarch, and one of the Ptolomies. But they all gave it over for
this Reason, lest by letting in the Red Sea they should drown the Country, that
Sea being found to be much higher than the Mediterranean and the Flats of
Egypt.


Phil. So perhaps a second Deluge was prevented.


Sophr. I could tell you more of these Projects, which never came to
perfection. As that of Nicanor King of Syria, to have made a Channel from the
Caspian to the Euxine (or Black) Sea, which was a prodigious Project; That of
Lucius Verus, who intended to join the Rhine and the Rhone; and the Project of
Charles the Great, to let the Rhine into the Danube. There is none but great
Lewis, the now Almighty King of France, who by a long and chargeable Channel
carried through his Dominions has at last joined the Ocean to the Mediterranean.

I should now resume, Philalethes, the thread of our Discourse, but that I am
loath to pass by the strange and famous Adventure of John Oxenham, an English
man, in his Passage over the Isthmus of Panama by Land. An Adventure not to be
forgotten, and recorded by Spanish Writers with much Admiration. This Man, one
of the Followers of Sir Francis Drake, being arrived in a small Barque, with
seventy of his Companions, a little above Nombre de Dios the chiefest Town of
all the Isthmus, drew his Barque on Land, covered it with Boughs, and marched
over the Land with his Company, guided by Negroes, till he came to a River.
There he cut down Wood, made him a Pinnace, entered the South Sea, and went to
the Isle of Pearls, where he stayed some days. During which he intercepted in
two Spanish Ships (who feared no Enemy on that side) 60000 pound weight of
Gold, 200000 pound weight in Bars of Silver, and so returned in safety to the
Land.


Phil. The Attempt was bold, the Success strange, and the Booty prodigious. But
what became of the Adventurer at last?


Sophr. It happened, by the Mutiny of some of his Company, that he never lived
to return unto his Ship, nor into his own Country.

Thus having done, Philalethes, with Isthmus's, shall I now give you an Account
of such Capes as are most famous amongst us?


Phil. With all my heart.


Sophr. Then, to begin with Europe, there is in Lap-land the North Cape, being
the most Northern part of Europe, in the 72. Degree of Northern Latitude. In
Galicia, a Province of Spain, the Cape of Finisterra, in the 44th Degree of the
same Latitude. In Algarve, the most Southern Province of Portugal, the Cape of
St. Vincent, in the 37th Degree of the same Latitude. And in the most Southern
part of Greece, the Capes of Gallo and Matapan, in the 35th Degree of the same
Latitude.

In Asia, Cape Raz, the most Eastern part of Arabia, in the 22th Degree of
Northern Latitude. Cape Mosandan, upon the Streights of the Persian Gulf, in
the 27th Degree of the same Latitude. Cape Comori, in the most Southern part of
Malabar in India, and in the 8th Degree of Northern Latitude.

In Africa, the Cape of Bone upon the Mediterranean, South and by West of
Sicily; and toward the Streights Cabo de las tres furcas. Then, upon the
Atlantic Sea, Cape Cantin, in the Kingdom of Morocco, and in the 32d. Degree
of Northern Latitude. Cabo biance, or the white Cape, in the Negro's Land, and
in the 21th Degree of the same Latitude. Cape verd, or the green Cape, also in
the Negro's Land, but in the 15th Degree, of Northern Latitude. And Cabo
Formoso, or the Fair Cape, in Guinea, and in the 4th Degree of the same
Latitnde. Then Cabo Negro, or the Black Cape, upon the Coast of Cafraria, and
in the 17th Degree of Southern Latitude. And in the most Southern Parts of
Africa, the famous Cape of good Hope, being in the 35th Degree of Southern
Latitude. First Discovered Anno. 1487. by Bartholomew de Diez a Portuguese,
whom John, 11. King of Portugal employed to find out the way to the
East Indies. But he went no further, and returned home again, either
discouraged by cross Winds, or unruly Seas, or the untractableness of his
Mariners, or by all together. Vasques de Gama was the Man to whom the Honor of
this Enterprise was reserved. Who being employed in this Service by Emanuel
King of Portugal in the year 1497. doubled the Cape, and called it Cabo de
Buena Speranza, or the Cape of good Hope, because of the good hope it gave him
of finding the desired Way to the Trade of India. Wherein he was so
successful, that having found there the Port of Calicut, he with infinite Joy
and Honor returned to Lisbon in the year 1500, and so opened the way to the
East India Trade by Sea. Upon the Eastern Coast there are two noted Capes, that
of Corrientes, and the Cape of Guardafuy; this last being the most Eastern part
of Africa, 130 Leagues East of the Streights of Babelmandel, and in the 12th
Degree of the Northern Latitude.

In the Northern America, near Hudscn's Streights, you will find Cape Worsnam,
Cape Charles, and Cape Henry. In Virginia, another Cape Charles; and in an
Island near the Coast of Florida, the Cape of Canaveral.

In the Southern America, Cabo de la Vela, upon the Gulf of Mexico; and Cabo
Raz, or North Cape, in Caribana. In Brazil, the Cape of St. Augustine; and
further Southward, Cape Erio. On the South Side of the mouth of Rio de la
Plata, St. Anthony's Cape; and further Southward, St. Andrews Cape. Lastly, the
Cape of Virgins, upon the Streights of Magellan; and the Cape of Victory, on
the West end of those Streights.

Toward, and upon the Coast of Greenland, you may take notice of these Capes,
first found out by the English. Viz. Cape Discord, Cape Farewell, Cape
Christian, Cape Desolation, Cape Comfort, Cape Chidley, Cape Walsingham, etc.
And so I have done with Capes, a Thing of great use to Mariners. Now I am
resolved to divert you with Hills and Mountains.


Phil. You are more like to fright me with the Height and Steepness of them.


Sophr. The highest Hill we know of is el Pico aforesaid, a prodigious high
Hill of Tenariffe, one of the Canary Islands West of Africa. It has been
reckoned by some 15. miles high, by others 40 and more, but with little credit.
Warenius allows it to be 2. Leagues (that is six miles) high perpendicularly,
and it is said that it may be seen 80 Leagues at Sea in a fair clear day. The
form of it is Pyramidal, in shape agreeing to those Wonders of Art, the
Egyptian Pyramids. The Top whereof ending in a sharp point, called the Pike of
Tenariffe, is never without Snow.

But there are other great Hills, famous not only for their Height, but also
for their vast Extent. As in Europe, 1. The Alps, that part Italy from France
and Germany. 2. The Pyrenees, that divide Spain from France. 3. The Apennine,
that part Italy almost in the very middle. 4. The Carpathian Hills, extending
from the Borders of Austria to the Black Sea, and so dividing Hungary,
Transylvania, and Moldavia, from Poland. 5. Mount Haemus, reaching from the
Gulf of Venice, as far as the Black Sea, and so parting Greece from Servia and
Bulgaria. 6. The Dofrine Hills, a vast and continual Ridge of Mountains, which
divide Norway from Sweden.

In the other Parts of the World, you have first in Asia, Taurus (of which
Caucasus is a part) and Imaus, greater than any in Europe; That, running a vast
way from West to East, and This from North to South. In Africa, Atlas,
extending from the Atlantic Ocean a prodigious way Eastward; besides the
Mountains of the Moon, in the South parts. In the Northern America, the
Mountains of New Mexico, which run also North of Florida. And in the Southern
America, the Andes, reaching from the North parts of Peru to the Streights of
Magellan, above three thousand Miles.

Those are, Philalethes, the greatest and most noted Mountains in the World.
All of them generally of a Rocky Substance, and in most places overspread with
Forests. None of them free from Snow, even in the heat of Summer In short, they
are all troublesome and very dangerous to travel over, by reason of their steep
and tedious Ascents, narrow ways, and craggy Rocks, deep and dreadful
Precipices, fierce Whirl-winds, and huge Balls of Snow which sometimes tumble
down from the top with great noise and violence. And yet (which is Remarkable)
amongst some of these dreadful Hills, as the Alps, there are Valleys incredibly
fruitful and temperate, with Towns and Villages in them. Generally these Hills
are Impassable, except in a few Places, which therefore were by the Romans
called Portae, or (from the Greek) Pylae, or Thermopylae. And, as from Lakes,
so from these Mountains spring many of the greatest Rivers. Some produce
Metals, as Gold, Silver, Iron, etc. and others produce none at all.

Now the lesser sort of Hills are commonly Sandy, Chalky, or Clammy. And some
of these, as Mount Aetna in Sicily, Vesuvius in the Kingdom of Naples, and
Hecla in Iseland are famous for those dreadful Fires which sometimes do break
out of them.


Phil. Pray, what is the cause of those frequent Eruptions of Fire and Vomiting
of Flames?


Sophr. The great Abundance of Sulphurous Matter contained in the bosom of
those Hills, the Wind which gets in at the chinks blowing the Fire, and the
Water on the other side adding to the force of it.


Phil. Then it is to be supposed, that when the Combustible Matter shall be
wasted, the Conflagration shall cease.


Sophr. Sure enough. And therefore in Tercera and St. Michael (two of the
Azores Islands) there are now no such Fires to be seen as there has been
formerly, but only now and then a Smoke: And it is observable, that in the
Ascension Island and St. Helena the Soil is so like Ashes, that it may be
credibly supposed there have been formerly some Fires of this kind.


Phil. But do you think, Sophronius, the Hills are of as old standing as the
World?


Sophr. For my part I am inclined to believe, the greatest Hills were created
at first as they are. Not that I think (as some do) that God, having first made
the Earth perfectly Round, without any hollowness, or one part higher than
another, and then contrived hollow places in the Earth to contain the Waters,
the Hills came of that Earth which made room for the Waters. For certainly as
many more Mountains as there are in the World could not fill up all those
Concavities.

And yet I am apt to think, that some Hills have been raised accidentally; as
those Sandy Hills near the Sea in the Low Countries, wherein are found many
shells. For it is very probable, those Shells were carried thither with the Sand
by some violent Winds, and afterward compacted together by succeeding Rains,
and so hardened in process of time.


Phil. I confess it is not unlikely. Now I would sain know, Sophronius, whether
or no there be Concavity's or hollow places, Windings and Turnings, Precipices,
and the like, in the Bowels of the Earth.


Sophr. There Is no doubt of it, if you consider the nature of Earthquakes, and
those Rivers that having run a good way under ground come up again.


Phil. What have you now to say as to Forests and Deserts?


Soph. In Europe, the Forest of most note was the Hercynian Forest, which
overrun not only a great part of Germany, but following the course of the
Danube spread it self over Hungary and Transylvania, and from thence on the
left hand over Poland and Moscovy. A Wood so formidable to the Romans, that
when they had gone 60. days Journey through it, they came back, and durst not
venture to search the end of it. But in Germany the greatest part thereof is
long, since consumed, and no place there so much overspread with it as Bohemia.
In Poland and Moscovy this Forest is the most.visible, and in the last
especially. Which is so overrun with it, that, when I was there an Attendant
on the Right Honorable the Earl of Carlisle his Majesty's Ambassador to the
Court of Moscovy, we traveled 15 hundred miles through that Country, and all
within that Forest. Next to which for Fame was the Forest called Ardennes in
the Lower Germany. Which in the time of Caesar extended from the Rhine one way
as far as Tournay in Flanders, and was in Compass at least 500. miles. An
inconsiderable Length, you will say, in comparison to that of Hercynia. But now
it is not above 30. Leagues in length reaching, but from Thionville in Luxemburg
to Liege. And yet not all that Woodland neither, though within the Verge of
that Forest; there being in that Tract of Ground many Villages, and a great
deal of Arable Land.

In short, I shall observe to you, that most of our European Forests are of
Fruitless Tree, as Oak, Beech, Pine, Juniper, Alder, and Mapletree, of Elm,
Ash, and Poplar-tree, but above all of Firr. Though there are some indeed of
Olive, Orange, and Myrtle-trees. But in Asia, there are whole Forests of
Cedar, Cinnamon, Nutmeg, and Clove-trees. In Africa, of Limon, Orange, Palm,
and Tamarind-trees. And lastly America is famous for its Cedars, but
particularly for that red and exceeding hard Wood called Brasil, from the name
of a Country there which has whole Forests thereof.

As to Deserts, or Wildernesses properly so called, they are either Sandy,
Stony, or Moorish. In Europe we are little troubled with them. But in Asia
there is enough of 'em, and especially in that part of Arabia which from hence
is called Arabia Deserta. A Country, (says Melchior, who had traveled in it)
where are sound neither Men nor Beasts, no, not so much as Birds or Trees,
Grass or Pasture; but only Stony, High, and Craggy Mountains. In short, it is a
wild Place, and full of vast Deserts, so wast and desolate, that such as travel
there must carry their Provisions with them, and guide themselves in their
Journey by the course of the Stars. It Is true that toward Euphrates, and near
the Mountains of Arabia foelix, it has some few Towns, resorted to by
Merchants. But this is only in those Parts. North-West of China there is a
notable Desert, a Sandy one, called Xamo Desertum, the Desert of Lop, or Xamo;
through some part of which runs Hoang, the great River of China. As for Africa,
Deserts are as common there as Forests in Europe. And there is a good Part of
it, lying betwixt Biledulgerid Northward and the Negroes Land Southward, that
is but a continual Desert. It Is that we call in Latin Lybia Deserta, or by the
name of the Country Zara, which signifies a Desert or Wilderness. In America,
it is said there are likewise vast Deserts, but we have as yet no good Account
of them.

So, Philalethes, I shall conclude with these Reflections upon the different
Nature of Country's, as Parts of the Earth. For, whereas some Country's are
Flat, and only set out with some pleasant little Hills here and there; others
are Mountainous, full of huge Hills and dreadful Precipices. Some are Fat and
Marshy, when others are Sand or Stony.

Some Country's are fruitful, irrigated with fair and Navigable Rivers, and in
short blessed with all Necessaries; whilst others are barren, unhappy, and full
of Deserts, fit only to bring forth wild and venomous Beasts. Some produce one
Thing, some another, according to that of Ovid,

Nec eadem Tellus parit omnia, Vitibus illa
Convenit, haec Oleis, hic been Farra virent.
Some Country's enjoy a Temperate Air, as most Country's of Europe; whilst some
are even Scorched by an extreme Heat of the Sun, and others Frozen up almost
all the Year round. And here it is that they have almost a continual Daylight
for six Months, and as long a time of continual Darkness; whilst most part of
the World enjoys in the space of 24 hours the more convenient and daily
Vicissitude of Day and Night, more or less. Again, some Country's (but Islands
especially) are extremely subject to Fogs, Winds, Rain, and Change of Weather;
whilst Country's remote from the Sea do commonly enjoy a purer Air, a more
Serene Sky, and such Weather as is suitable to the Season. Those are commonly
Unhealthful, and subject to diverse Diseases; These nothing near so much. In
fine, some Country's (as in the East) are much subject to Earthquakes, some
(as the Caribby Islands) to Hurricanes and dreadful Tempests, and others (as
Sicily and Iseland) to Deluges of Fire.


The Fifth Discourse.
Of the Waters.

SOphr. In our last Discourse I have given you, Philalethes, such an Account of
the visible Earth, as might fill your Expectation. Now I shall make it my
business to be as Accurate in the Description of the Waters, which (as I said
before) make up together with the Earth the Terr-Aqueous Globe.

In order to which I must tell you in the first place, that, as the Earth is
chiefly divided into Continents, Islands, and Peninsules, so are the Waters
principally divided into Seas, Lakes, and Rivers.

By the Sea in general is meant that great Body of Waters which is thought to
incompass the Earth on every side, and is properly called by the Name of Ocean.
But there are particular Seas, which flow out of the Ocean through a narrow
Passage, and stretch themselves a long way through several Country's, therefore
called Inland Seas; as the Mediterranean, the Baltic, and Red Sea, of which
more afterward.

A Lake is a considerable Body of Waters, having no visible Intercourse with
the Sea, or influx into it; as the Lake of Geneva.

A River is a Watercourse issuing from some Spring or Lake, and continually
running in its proper Channel, till it emptys it self, either into the Sea
immediately, or else into a greater River. The Place where it begins is called
Spring, Head, or Source; where it runs into another, Fall, Influx, or
Confluence; and where it loses it self in any Sea, that is properly termed the
Mouth of the River.

But next to Seas, Lakes, and Rivers, I must explain unto you these Words.

Viz. Gulf. Bay. Creek. Straight, Haven. Pond. Torrent. Brook. Spring.


A Gulf is properly a part of the Sea that makes a crooked or circling Shore of
a large extent; as the Gulf of Bengala in the East Indies, and that of Mexico
in America. A Bay is nothing else but a midling sort of Gulf; Though I confess
there are great Gulfs which bear the name of Bay, as ( North of America)
Baffins, Hudsons, and Buttons Bay. A Creek is a little Bay. A Straight is an
Arm, or a narrow Passage of a Sea; as the Streights of Magellan, Gibraltar, and
the Hellespont. A Haven, or an Harbor, is a safe Place for Ships to ride at
Anchor. A Pond, or Pool, is but a small Body of standing Waters, apt to be
dried up in Summer, if not fed with some Spring or other. A Torrent is a rapid
Water caused by some great Rain or Thaw, and so rushing down the Hills with
great swiftness. A Brook, or Rivulet, is but a little running Stream, of a
small extent. And by a Spring, or Fountain, is meant a little Stream
immediately Springing out of the Ground.

Now, to follow the same Method we used in the Description of the Earth, I must
give you, Philalethes, a particular Account of the Seas, Lakes, Rivers, etc.

The Ocean, which surrounds the World, may be divided, according to its four
Quarters, into Northern, Eastern, Southern, Western. The Northern Ocean is that
which lies North of Europe, Asia, and the Northern America; and so parts them
from Terra Borealis. But it is also called the Frozen Sea, as being commonly
clogged with Ice in Wintertime. The Eastern lies between Asia and America;
called Eastern in respect to Asia. But about the Southern America it is best
known by the name of Mar del zur, or South Sea, or by the name of Pacifick. The
Southern Ocean ly's South of Asia, Africa, and America; and so parts them from
Terra Australis. The Western lies betwixt Europe and Africa of one side and
America on the other side; called Western, because it ly's West of Europe and
Africa. But toward America it is named Mar del North, or the North Sea.

Now the Ocean has several particular Names, commonly taken from the adjacent
Country's. So about Britain it is called the British Sea; about Ireland,
Irish Sea; about the lower Germany, the German Sea, or the German Ocean; and
about Spain, the Spanish Sea. Toward the East Indies it is named the Indian
Sea. On the West side of Africa, from Atlas the great African Mountain, it
bears the name of Atlantic Sea, or Atlantic Ocean; and toward Aethiopia, it
is from hence called Aethiopick.

But besides the Ocean, there are some Inland Seas, into which the Ocean
diffuses it self. As the Mediterranean, which runs Eastward from the Streights
of Gibraltar above a thousand Leagues, betwixt Europe Northwards and Africa
Southwards, as far as the Shore of Asia. Therefore it is called the
Mediterranean (that is, the Midland) Sea, from the Latin Mare Mediterraneum.
And the Grecians upon the same account termed it in their Language (...), that
is the Inland Sea. By the Spaniards it is usually called Mar di Levante,
because it runs East from Spain. In the Scriptures it is called the Great Sea,
as Numb. 34. where it is said, You shall have the great Sea for a Border. And
that in opposition to the Dead-Sea and the Sea of Galilee, lying on the other
side of the Land of Palestine, which are properly but Lakes of an indifferent
compass.

But, as the Camelion is said to apply it self to the color of the nearest
adjacent Body, so this Sea takes its denomination from the nearest Shores. And
accordingly the Romans of old gave it these several Names; as Mare Hispanicum
or Ibericum, Balearicum, Gallicum, Ligusticum, Tuscum or Tyrrhenum, Liburnicum,
Corsicum, Sardinium, Siculum, Ausonium, Ionium, Creticum, etc.


Phil. Then I was all this while under a great Mistake. For I took them all
(for want of better skill) to be so many distinct Seas from the Mediterranean,
and so could never find them out to fix them in my mind.


Sophr. You see what it is to be left without a Guide in the dark.


Phil. But whereabouts is the Adriatic Sea?


Sophr. The Adriatic is that which is called now a days from Venice the Gulf
of Venice, a Sea (or Gulf) which runs up a great way Northwest-ward, betwixt
Italy of one side, part of Greece and Sclavonia on the other side.

It Is properly but a Part (or Limb) of the Mediterranean, which makes an
Excursion that way. And of this Mare Illyricum and Dalmaticum were but Parts.


Phil. What Sea is that which is called the Aegean Sea?


Sophr. The same that is now termed the Archipelago, being likewise but an
Excursion of the Mediterranean to the Northward. A Sea remarkable for its Swarm
of Islands, and for parting (so far as it runs) Europe from Asia. About the
Island Myrtos, it was called Myrtoum; about Icaria, Icarium; and so from
Carpathus, it took the name of Carpathium.


Phil. Whereabout is the Propontis?


Sophr. The Propontis, now called the Sea of Marmora, is a Sea that ly's
betwixt the Archipelago Southward, and the Black Sea Northward; being parted
from that by the Streights called Hellespont, or the Streights of. Gallipoly;
and from this, by the Thracian Bosphorus, or the Streights of Constantinople.
This Sea continues the Separation of Europe from Asia.

And so does the Black Sea, otherwise called Pont Euxin, or the Euxine Sea. A
huge Sea, that spreads it self a great way to the Eastward.


Phil. Does not the Palus Maeotis lie hereabouts?


Sophr. Right North from the Black Sea* there being but the Cimmerian
Bosphorus, or the Straight of Caffa, between. A Sea much lesser than the
Euxine, but bigger than the Propontis. And therefore the Name of Palus Maeotis,
or Maeotick Fens, is a Name much below the greatness of it. It is now called
otherwise the Sea of Zabache, from a Fish of that name caught here at some
times of the Year. Pliny calls it the Mother of the Sea, as if the
Mediterranean had its Original from hence, and not from the Ocean. The same is
also a Boundary betwixt Europe and Asia.

But in the North of Europe, and altogether within the Bounds of it, there is
also an Inland Sea, commonly called the Baltic, and by the Durch Oost Zee,
which washes on the North-side the Shore of Sweden, and on the South Side part
of Denmark, Germany, and Poland. The same begins at the Streights called the
Sund, and ends in two considerable Gulfs, the one called the Gulf of Bothnia,
and the other the Gulf of Finland; from two Provinces of that Name about which
they lie, both under the Crown of Sweden. The first of those Gulss, being the
greater of the two, runs Northwards, and the other Eastwards. Further
Northward, betwixt Lapland and Moscovy, you will find the White Sea, a pretty
large Arm of the Northern Ocean, which runs from North to South.

Betwixt Asia and Africa is the Red Sea, otherwise called the Sea of Mecca, or
the Gulf if Arabia. This begins at the Streights of Babelmandel, from whence it
runs Northward as far as the Isthmus of Sues, above 400 Leagues, but the
breadth of it is not proportionable. This is the Sea so famous for the
miraculous Passage of the Children of Israel, and the drowning Pharaoh King of
Egypt.

Betwixt Arabia foelix and Persia ly's an Inland Sea commonly called the
Persian Gulf, or the Gulf of Persia, or else the Gulf of Balsora, or the Gulf
of Elcatif, from two Towns of the greatest note upon the Sea, that lying just
upon the fall of Euphrates into it Northward, and this 90. Leagues South of
that in Arabia foelix. This Sea is a pretty large Arm of the Southern Ocean,
which breaks in at the Streights of Mossandan, whilst the River Euphrates falls
in at the other end. The continual clashing of which two great Waters makes
this a turbulent and unruly Sea.

In the Northern America you will find as large a Sea as that by the name of
Hudson's Bay, and the way to it through Hudson's Streights. From whence it runs
full South, betwixt Estotiland Eastward and New South Wales Westward.

West from this Sea you will find Buttons Bay. And, about Terra Borealis, the
Sea called Baffin's Bay.

Thus, Philalethes, you have a brief and general Account of the Seas. What
remains is to give you an Account of their respective Gulfs and Streights.

The chiefest Gulfs of the Ocean, I mean such as do only make a circling Shore,
are (in Europe) the little (but famous) Gulf in Holland called the Zuyder Zee,
or South Sea, upon which Amsterdam is Seated; about France, the Aquitanick
Ocean, so called from Aquitain, of which the Province of Guienne is a part; and
about Spain, the Gulf of Cadiz. In Asia there is the Gulf of Ormuz, South of
Persia; then the great Gulf of Bengala, in the Indies; the Gulf of Sian,
further Eastward; the Gulf of Tunquin, or Cochinchine, further toward China;
that of Nanquin, in the North Parts of China; a great Gulf, North of Japon; and
lastly, another large Gulf, on the North of Tartary. In Africa there is a great
Gulf, toward Guinea. In America you will find St. Laurences Gulf, and the Gulf
of Mexico, this last one of the greatest that are.

And, as the Ocean, so the Mediterranean has several remarkable Gulfs. As That
of Valencia in Spain, the Gulf of Lion in France, and on the Coast of Italy the
Gulfs of Genoa, Gaeta, Naples, Salerno, Policastro, St. Eufemia, Squillaci or
delli Castelli, and Taranto. On the Coast of Greece, the Gulfs of Larta,
Lepanto, Arcadia, Coron or Calamata, Colochina or Castle Rampani.

Those of the Gulf of Venice are, on the side of Italy, the Gulfs of
Manfredonia and Trieste; and on the other side Those of Carnero, Narenza,
Drino, and Valona.

Those of the Archipelago, anciently so famous in Greece, are now known by the
Names of Napoli, Engia, Negroponte, Ziton, Armiro, Salonichi, Aiomama or St.
Anna, Monte Santo, Contessa, and Caridia, all upon the Coast of Greece.

As to the Baltic Sea, besides the great Gulfs of Bothnia and Finland in which
it ends, those of most note are the Gulfs of Lubeck, Dantzick, and Riga. And so
I proceed to Streights.

From what has been said before it does appear that there are three sorts of
Streights. Some that afford a Passage out of one part of the Ocean into
another, some out of the Ocean into an Inland Sea, and others out of one Inland
Sea into another.


Phil. Pray, let us have them all together.


Sophr. As to Those that make way from one part of the Ocean into another,
there is none of note either in Europe or Africa; Unless we should reckon in
Europe the Channel for one, and the Irish Sea for another. In Asia there are
many; as the Streights of Weygatz, betwixt Nova Zemla in Terra Borealis and
some North Parts of the Asian Tartary; of Uriez,, near the Land of Jesso; of
Zungar, betwixt Japon and Yupi, in Tartary; of Manille, South of a great Island
of that name, the chief of the Philippine; of Macassar, South of Celebes,
another great Island in the Indian Sea; of Palambua, East of the great Island
called Java; of Bantam, betwixt Java and Sumatra; of Malacca, betwixt Malacca
in the Golden Chersonese and the Island Sumatra; and lastly of Chilao, betwixt
the Indian Peninsule on this side Ganges and the Island called Ceylon. In
America there is the Streights of Magellan, betwixt the Southern America and del
Fuego. To which we may add Mare Vermejo, or the Vermilion Sea, betwixt New
Mexico an Island of California; which (though never so long) is properly but a
Straight of this nature.

Those that make way from the Ocean into Inland Seas are, in Europe, the Sund,
which gives an entrance into the Baltic; and, betwixt Europe and Africa, the
famous Streights of Gibraltar (otherwise called only the Streights) which is an
Inlet into the Mediterranean. In Asia there is the Streights of Babelmandel,
which afford a Passage into the Red Sea; and of Mossandan, into the Persian
Gulf: North of America you will find the Streights of Davis, that lead into
Baffin's Bay; and That of Hudson, which brings one into Hudson's Bay.

Lastly, there are three Streights that afford a Passage out of one Inland Sea
into another. Viz. the Hellespont, now called the Streights of Gallipoli, and
by the French les Dardanelles, or le Bras S. George, betwixt the Archipelago
and the Propontis or Sea of Marmora. Then the Thracian Bosphorus, or the
Streights of Constantinople, betwixt the said Propontis and the Euxine (or
Black) Sea. Thirdly, Bosphorus Cimmerius, now the Streights of Caffa, betwixt
that Sea and Palus Maeotis.


Phil. Is not the Hellespont that little Channel about a mile broad, over which
the Persian King Xerxes, intending to Invade all Greece, made a Bridge of
Ships, and so wasted over his propigious Army of above two Millions of Men?


Sophr. The very same. But a Sudden Tempest being risen, whereby this
Prodigious Bridge was dangerously battered, Xerxes was so incensed against this
Sea, that he caused it to be beaten with 300. Stripes, and cast a pair of
Fetters into it, to make it know to whom it was Subject. Yet at last his Fleet
was so broken both by the Valor of the Greeks and the Fury of the Sea, that he
was fain to fly away over this Hellespont, and to make use of a poor
Fisher-boat.


Phil. So the proud King was fain to stoop at last, and run away with shame. A
very fit Reward for so extravagant a Pride.


Sophr. Thus having taken a Survey of the Seas, Gulfs, and Streights, now we
shall make (if you think fit) some Useful Reflections upon the Sea, and examine
its Height, Depth, Color, Taste, and several Motions.


Phil. Do you believe, Sophronius, the Sea is higher than the Land, or no?


Sophr. There are many that do, and who conclude it therefore a Miracle that
the Land is not overflown. For my part, I do allow of a Globosity in the Sea,
but not such as may endanger the Land, except where the Ground by the Seaside
is lower than ordinary. And in such a case the Inhabitants truly don't rely
upon Miracles, but are fain to raise Banks in order to prevent an Invasion of
the Sea, which never fails to incroach upon the Land when there is any way for
it. But the very Course of the Rivers down to the Sea does manifestly prove the
Sea to be no higher than the Land, but rather lower. In short, we must
conclude, that, if the Sea were higher than the Rivers, that would certainly
come down into their Channels, and drown not only the Land, but the Rivers. So
natural it is for Water, where there is the least descent; to move that way,
one part following still another without intermission.


Phil. I am very well satisfied as to this Point, Let us now proceed, if you
please, to the Depth of the Sea.


Sophr. Its Depth is very unequal. For, as the Land has Hills both great and
small, Valleys, and Precipices; so there are in the Sea, Shelves, Rocks,
Whirl-pools, and Places not to be fadomed. To be short, the further from Land
is the Sea, the deeper it is commonly; and in some places it has been found no
less than five or six miles deep.

As for the Color of the Sea, it appears generally to be of a Sky-colour. But
Northward it looks darkish; in the Torrid Zone, Brownish; and in some other
Places, Whitish, and Yellowish.


Phil. I wonder, Sophronius, you should forget the Red Color amongst all the
rest. Or else how comes the Red Sea to be so called?


Sophr. Not from the Redness of the Waters, nor from that of the Sands, as some
conceived; the Sea and Sands being found by latter Observation to be colored
here as in other places. But you must know this Sea was originally called the
Sea of Edom, because it took beginning on the Coasts of that Country. Now Edom
in Hebrew signifies Red, as appears Gen, 25.30. A Nickname first given to
Esau, and from him afterward to Mount Seir or the Land of Edom, Genesis 36.31.
and then to the Neighboring Sea. Which by the Greeks was rendered Erythraeum,
and by the Latins Rubrum. Whence the Name of the Red Sea became known to all,
but the Reason of the Name to few.

So the White Sea in the Northern Parts of Europe is probably so called,
because it washes the Shore of White Russia or Moscovy. For I guess it must be
from hence the Moscovites call it Bella More, and we accordingly White Sea. I
am sure by my own Experience, that it cannot be from any Whiteness it has.
Neither has the Black Sea took that Name from its Blackness; but either from
the great Mists that arise from thence, or from the frequent Shipwracks that
happen there, the Shore being very dangerous by reason of its Rocks and Sands.
How Mare Vermejo, or the Vermilion Sea, that runs betwixt the Northern America
and the Island of California, came to be so called, I am as yet to seek. But,
toward Cabo Verde in Africa, the Atlantic Ocean looks so green with a kind of
herb, that in calm weather one would take it to be Land; and from that herb,
which is something like Watercresses, the Portugueze call this Sea Mare di
Sargasso. In the Year, 1599. the Sea toward the Mouth of Rio de la Plata in
the Southern America appeared as red as Blood to the Hollanders that were upon
that Road; but then it was occasioned by certain red Worms wherewith the Sea
was covered, and which they saw swim upon the Water.

Now from the Depth and Color of the Sea I proceed to its Saltness. For it is
generally Salt, but chiefly in the Torrid Zone; except where great Rivers
disimbogue themselves into the Sea by several Mouth. And it is observable, that
the Salter the Sea is the heavier it is, and less apt to be frozen.

Lastly, there are several Motions of the Sea; and first a general Motion from
East to West Secondly, the Tide, or the Flux and Reflux, when the Sea flows in
for some hours and then go's off again. The Cause of which is Arcanum Naturae,
a Secret of Nature, which puzzles still the ablest Philosophers. Now the
greatest Tides are upon a Full Moon and New Moon, and likewise in the Spring
and Fall. But in some Places the Flux is greater than in others, and there is
some Seas where it is scarce discernable. The Baltic Sea has none, and the
Mediterranean so little, that (except the Gulf of Venice) it is hardly to be
seen. To be short, in most Places where there is a Tide, the Sea flows
constantly during 6 hours and 12 minutes, and then ebbs in the same proportion
of time. Whereas in the Garonne, one of the chief Rivers of France, it is
flowing water during seven hours, and ebbing water but five. And toward
Zenega, a branch of the River Niger in Africa, the Tide flows but four hours,
and ebbs as long again.

The Sea has also some proper Currents in some Places. As between the Cape of
Good Hope and Madagascar the great African Island; where the Sea moves
Southwestward so strongly that it is hard to overcome that Current even with a
fair Wind. Whereas from Madagascar to the Cape a Ship may come with ease by the
savor of that strong Current without the help of any Wind. In the West Indies
there is also a violent Current, that is the Streights of Bahama, so called
from an Island of that name toward Florida. The same it is with those Places
where great Rivers fall into the Sea. As betwixt Loango and Congo in Africa,
where the great River Zaire empty's it self into the Ocean with such a
rapidity, that no Ship (as my Author says) can get above half a League a day
forward toward the Shore.


Phil. I long to know the nature of Whirlpools.


Sophr. This is another Motion of the Sea, proper to some particular Places. As
that of the Aegean Sea in the famous Euripus of old, betwixt Eubaea (an Island
now known by the name of Negropont) and Achaia in Greece; Reported to ebb and
flow seven times in one day. The Reason of which when Aristotle could not find,
it is said (but hardly believed) that he threw himself into the Sea, with these
words, Quia ego non Capio te, tu Copies me. Sicily has been also most famous
for her Charybdis, a Gulf or Whirlpool, of which and Scylla opposite to it in
Italy, many fabulous Things are reported by the ancient Poets. Wherefore Florus
the Historian calls the Fare of Messina, Fabulosis infame Monstris Fretum.
However it is said of this Charybdis, that it attracts and devours all Vessels
that come too nigh it, then casts up their Wracks at the Shore of Tauromenium
now called Taormina. And, as to Scylla, it is but a Rock that stands dangerously
on the side of Italy, with many little Rocks that shoot out at the foot of it.
On which the Water beating very strongly makes that Noise the Poets seigned to
be the Barking of Dogs. Now the Passage between these two, being to unskilful
Mariners exceeding Perilous, gave beginning to the Proverb,

Incidit in Scyllam cupiens vitare Charybdim. Upon the Coast of Normandy in
France, and not far from Havre de Grace, there is a kind of Whirl-pool, which
draws a Ship to it with great Force, but beats her off at last. But the
greatest of all the Whirlpools we know of is the Maelstroom upon the Coast of
Norway. This is some four Leagues about, and for the space of six hours it
swallows up whatever comes near it, then brings it up again six hours after
with a dreadful noise,


Phil. What other Motion of the Sea have you to speak of?


Sophr. That which is caused by the Winds, And these (you know) when strong and
violent, make the Sea rage and foam, with an hideous noise. A fearful Object to
see this Element, which in a Calm looks like an Azure Field, become in a Storm
a continual Series of tumbling Mountains and Abysses of Water.

Me miserum, quanti Montes volvuntur aquarum!
Jam jam tacturos Sydera summa putes.
Quantae diducto subsidunt Aequore Valles!
Jam jam tacturos Tartara nigra putes.
Thus Ovid bemoans himself in his Book De Tristibus, where he makes an
excellent Description of a Storm he met with in his way to Pontus.


Phil. I understand you, Sophronius; and certainly a Man must be void of Sense,
that exposes himself voluntarily to the Mercy of that Element.


Sophr. Not so neither, Philalethes. The Sea, as well as the Land, was made for
the service of Man, and from it we reap many great Advantages. By the Sea we
have the opportunity of an Intercourse with the remotest Country's. And, if all
men had been of your Temper, how should so many fair Islands have been peopled
that are now flourishing? In fine, if no Body had had Courage enough to venture
upon the Sea, how should we be acquainted with the Wonders of it?


Phil. For my part, I confess I am not cut out for the Sea. I love to go upon
sure Ground, and I am for that Element which is most proper for Mankind. In
short, I like the Proverb, Praise the Sea, but keep on Land.


Sophr. There is nothing to the World so formidable, but one may use himself to
it. If the Sea be sometimes troublesome and cruel, it is as often pleasant and
delightful, and those that are used to it can hardly live from it.


Phil. Well, I wish 'em well to do. Trahit sua quemque Voluptas, every one as
he likes. I have kit a puking Stomach, I cannot endure to be tossed. And, when
all is done, those that go to Sea are in continual Danger of Fire, Water, and
Pirates. If one be Sea-sick, what Agony? and what help is there for it? Who can
expect a Relief in such a Case, either from those which are in the same
condition, or from them who being in health do but make sport with the. Sick?
What Cordial (think ye) is the smell of Pitch and Tar? What Lodging, a Hammock
hung up in the Air, or a close and fusty Cabin? It makes me dry to think of
their Salt Vittles, and my Teeth (as strong as they are) tremble with the very
Thoughts of cracking a Stone-hard Biscuit, when I might have a new Roll at home.
And, to digest those hard Vittles, what Place is there to walk in? A Deck so
tossed to and fro, that every step one runs the hazard of a fall, and of a
boisterous rude Sea about ones ears into the Bargain.


Sophr. What a fine Speech you made now, Philalethes! I see you can make the
worst of any Thing. But I am sorry to see you so unmanly, and all your
Rhetoric serves only to set out your Faint-heartedness. I wonder how you dare
venture to go along the Streets, for the Tiles may chance to tumble upon your
head; and how can you with a safe conscience walk the length of your Room, when
who knows but that you may shake the Foundations of the House? I see you are in
a Fright, and therefore let us leave the Sea, to take a view of the chief Lakes
and Rivers. But you must know beforehand, Philalethes, that some of them are
like so many Seas.


Phil. It Is no matter. Their Name is not so formidable.


Sophr. What think you then of the Caspian Sea in Asia, which in truth is but a
Lake, but bears the name of Sea by reason of its vast Compass, being no lest
than 260 Leagues long, and at least an 100 broad?


Phil. This is a fine Lake indeed.


Sophr. The Greatest we know of. Next to which there is another (according to
Sansons Maps) about half the bigness of that, called by the name Carantia,
which he places almost in the heart of the Asian Tartary. In Africa you will
find the great Lakes of Zaire and Zaflan. In the Northern America, the
Karegnondi, and other Lakes adjoining to it, the length of which is not yet
fully discovered. And. in the Southern America, the great Lake of Parime,
through the South part of which runs the Equinoctial. This is at least 120
Leagues in length, and 50 where broadest.

Our Europe also is stocked with a great many fine Lakes. As in Moscovy the
Ladoga, and the Onega; and in Sweden, the Wener. And about the bigness of these
are the Beruan, in the Asian Tartary; Chiamay, in the East Indies; the Lakes of
Niger, Borno, and Guarda, in Africa; Ontorio, Eric, and the Lake of Nicaragua,
in the Northern America; Lago de los Xarayes, Cassipa, and Titicaca, in the
Southern America.

I pass by the Lakes of Constance and Geneva, of Ilmen in Moscovy, the Dead Sea
in Palestine, and a great many other of good note in all Parts of the World.
Which, though they be looked upon as great Lakes, if compared to those of the
lesser sort, yet are much inferior to the foresaid in bigness.

And, as Lakes differ in Bigness, so they do in Figure. For some are Round,
some Long, and others Oval.


Phil. Is their Water sweet, or not?


Sophr. It is sweet for the most part. But there are some indeed whose Water is
Salt; as the Caspian Sea aforesaid, and the Dead Sea in Palestine. And this
must be either by some secret Intercourse.they have with the Sea, or else by
some Salt Springs thereby these Lakes are fed.

One Thing, Philalethes, is remarkable about the Lake Leman (otherwise called
the Lake of Geneva) which is about 16 Leagues in length, and 4 broad where it
is broadest; That, whereas both Lakes and Rivers do generally decrease in
Summertime, this Lake swells most in the heat of that Season. And the chief
reason they give for it is the Thawing of the Snow, which comes down into it
from several parts of the Alps.


Phil. But how came the Dead Sea in Palestine by that name?


Sophr. It Is thought it came to be called Sea by reason of its Length and
Saltness, being about 70. miles long and 16. broad, and furnishing with Salt
the whole Country. But it is called the Dead Sea, in Latin Mare Mortuum, either
because it has no visible Efflux, or because no living Creature is nourished in
it, by reason of the bituminous savor it sends forth, from whence it has
been called Asphaltis and Asphaltites. Near this Lake it was that stood once
the infamous City's of Sodom and Gomorrah, before they were consumed with Fire
and Brimstone.

Now you must know, that many Rivers spring from Lakes, and that Lakes are fed
with Rivers. So that there is a great and perpetual Intercourse betwixt Lakes
and Rovers


Phil. I am now pretty well acquainted with Lakes, and I would gladly know what
you have to say about the Rivers.


Sophr. The Principal Rivers of Europe are, in Spain, the Douro, Tajo,
Guadiana, Guadalquivir, and Ebro; in France la Loire, la Seine, le Rhone, la
Garonne; in Italy, the Po; in Germany, the Danube, the Rhine, the Elb, the
Oder, and the Wesel; in Poland, the Nieper, and the Duna; in Moscovy, Volga,
Tanais, Duina.

In Asia there is the Euphrates, in the Turks Dominions; Indus, Ganges, and
Menan, in the East Indies; Kiang, and Hoang, in China; Ghammas according to
Sanson, Oby, and the Volga aforesaid, in Tartary. In Africa you will find
Nilus, Nubia, Niger, Zaire, Zambeze, Zambere and Rio de Spiritu Santo, or the
Holy Ghost River.

In the Northern America, the Canada, or St. Laurences Rives, Chucagua, and Rio
del Norto or the North River. And in the Southern, the Orenoque, the Amazone,
Rio de la Plata, Rio Parana, and Rio Desaguadero. Amongst which the Amazone is
a most prodigious River, and the greatest of the Known World.

Now there is this common amongst Rivers, I mean their Windings and Turnings,
whereby the Land is most conveniently watered and irrigated. And the great
Rivers, which are only to be found in Continents, swell into their bigness by
the continual Influx of lesser Rivers that empty themselves into them as they
run down their Channels toward the Sea, the general Rendezvous of all Rivers.
From whence it comes to pass most commonly, that further a River runs from its
Spring, the larger it grows still.

Again, as some Rivers are remarkable, for their Length and Breadth, so there
are some of a notable Swiftness; as the Rhone, the Rhine, and Danube in Europe;
the Euphrates, and Tigris in Asia; the Zaire, in Africa; the Saguenay, a River
of New France in the Northern America; and the Amazone, in the Southern.
Amongst which the Saguenay, though but a mean River, is reported to be of so
strong a Current, that it suffers not the Sea to flow up its Channel; so deep,
that in many places it attains to a 100. fathoms. And, which is observable, the
same is narrower at the Influx of it into the great Canada than it is at the
very head. A Thing quite contrary to the general Rule.

Some Rivers run under Ground more or less in the midst of their Course, and at
last come up again as new Rivers. Such are the Guadiana and the Rhone in
Europe, Tigris in Asia, Niger and Nubia in Africa.

Some spread themselves into the form of a Lake, as the Tanais and Oby. And
others cross a Lake with so swift a course, that they preserve themselves
distinct from the Waters of it; as the. Rhone aforesaid, which coming down the
Alps falls into the Lake Leman, and having run through the whole length of it
from East to West comes out at Geneva.

Some Rivers have great Cataracts or Falls, as the Rhine betwixt Bilefelt and
Shaffausen, the Rhone betwixt Geneva and Lion, and la Sum betwixt Amiens and
Abbeville. So it is said of the River Nilus in Africa, that in two several.
places it falls amongst Rocks with so terrible a noise that the Neighboring
People grow deaf with it.


Phil. Pray, let us hear something of their Fall into the Sea.


Sophr. Many of the greatest Rivers fall in through several Mouths, as the
Danube and Nilus, which have no less than seven each of them. And Olearius, in
his Travels through Tartary to Persia, tells us of 70. Mouths through which the
River Volga (that I have been upon several times) disburdeneth it self, after a
winding Course of a thousand leagues into the Caspian Sea.

But there are some Rivers, and commonly small ones, that neither fall into
other Rivers, nor yet into the Sea; but either lose themselves in the Ground,
or turn into a Lake.


Phil. Are all Rivers of the same Color as ours are?


Sophr. They are generally so. But yet there be some of a blackish color, some
whitish, and others reddish. Of this last sort was the Adonis a River of
Phaenicia in Syria, which rises out of Mount Libanus, and falls into the Sea 6.
miles South of Barut. This River in Summertime used to contract a kind of;
Redness, occasioned by the Winds, which then blowing most vehemently did
thereby carry down the Stream a great quantity of minium or red Earth from the
sides of the Hills wherewith the Water was discolored.


Phil. Is not this the River which was reported (as Lucian has it) to stream
blood, when the obsequies of Adonis the Darling of Venus were yearly celebrated?


Sophr. The very same. Thus a natural Accident was made use of to give the
better color to the Superstition, as if Adonis's Wounds did bleed every year.


Phil. Now, as to the Taste of River-Water, are all Rivers sweet as ours are.


Sophr. It Is to be observed first, that all Rivers subject to the Tide have a
Taste of the Seawater, especially near their Fall into the Sea; and, so far as
the Tide go's, they have a brackish kind of Taste. But there are other Rivers,
that have a brackish and mineral Taste upon another Account, that is from such
Minerals as they meet in their Course.


Phil. You know that Rivers are apt to overflow after a great Rain or Thaw, as
it frequently happens either at the beginning or at the latter end of Winter.
But I have heard of a more general and constant Overflowing of some great
Rivers beyond Sea, which I much, admire at.


Sophr. It Is this overflowing upon which depends the Want or Plenty of those
Countries. And the River Nilus, amongst others, is as famous for that as it is
for its Crocodiles. In May, says Thevenot, it begins to flow, and so increases
every day some Inches till die latter end of September, or the beginning of
October. At which time it begins to fall, and is as long ebbing as flowing. In
the Year 1658. it increased (according to the same Author who was then in the
great Caire) to the height of almost 22 Pics, each Pic at 24 Inches. And then
the River began to decrease the 23d. of September.


Phil. What becomes in the mean time of the Inhabitants and their Cattle during
this great Land-Flood? For Egypt at that time must needs look like a Sea.


Sophr. They retire upon Hills, and there abide till the decrease of the
Waters, holding still a Commerce by the Intercourse of Boats.

Now, as it happens sometimes that we have some Years too wet and others too
dry; so, if Nilus overflows too much or too little, Egypt does suffer for it.
Unless it rise to 16 Pics, it is a bad Year; and when it does rise to 24. it is
as bad. But, if it chance at any time not to overflow at all, it is worst of
all. For then it does not only presage a Famine in Egypt, but (as some will
have it) prognosticates a Change in the State. And accordingly it is said that
in the tenth and eleventh Years of Cleopatra, a little before her Fall with her
Sweetheart Antonius, the River increased not at all.


Phil. This is indeed very Remarkable. But, when the Water of Nilus is
withdrawn to its natural Channel, I suppose the Ground is very Slimy, having
lain so long under Water.


Sophr. So very Slimy, that whereas we are fain to dung our Grounds, the
Egyptians throw Sand upon theirs before they Sow or Plant any thing. And of
this Slime is engendered many living Creatures, and as some say) such
innumerable heaps of Frogs, that if the Country were not furnished as it is
with a proportionable number of Storks, by whom they are greedily devoured, the
Plague of Frogs would come a second time upon the Inhabitants.


Phil. Is it true that it never rains in Egypt?


Sophr. It Is a Vulgar Error, strongly confuted by Monsieur Thevenot; Who affirms
that it rains much in Alexandria and Rosetta, but not indeed so much in the,
City of Caire. However, he says, that he has seen it rain there two days
together very hard, and with great Thunderclaps in the Month of December.


The Sixth Discourse.
Of the National Tarts of the Earth.

SOphr. Besides the Natural Division of the World into Earth and Waters, there
is a National Division of it, which is to be the Subject of our present
Discourse.

And, to make it clear to ye, you must know first, the World is divided into
two Principal Parts, the Known and the Unknown World. The Unknown World, or
that Part of the World which is yet Unknown to us, lies about the Poles, but
the greater Part toward the Southern Pole. That Part which lies toward the
North Pole is called in Latin Terra Borealis, or Terra Polaris Arctica; and the
other Part that lies toward the South Pole, Terra Australis, or Terra Polaris
Antarctica.

The Known World is usually divided into four Parts, Europe, Asia, Africa and
America. But it is a most unequal Division, and I think it more rational to
divide it thus. Viz. the Known World, first into two Parts, the Old and the New
World; then the Old World into three, Europe, Asia, and Africa; and the New
into two, the Northern and Southern America. For, as the Old World does visibly
consist of three distinct Peninsules, so is the New as clearly divided by
Nature into two other Peninsules, holding proportion with the former. Thus the
Known World shall be divided (if you will) into five Parts.

Viz. EUROPE; ASIA, AFRICA, The Northern AMERICA. and The Southern AMERICA.



Phil. How comes that Distinction of Old and New World, when they are both of a
Date?


Sophr. That Distinction came into use since America was first discovered. For
then it begun to be called, and that most aptly, the New World; New, for the
late Discovery; and World, for the vast Greatness of it.


Phil. Which of these five Parts is the biggest?


Sophr. Asia is the biggest, Europe the least. For this is little above half
the compass of Asia. And yet from East to West, as from the Cape of Finisterra
in Spain to Constantinople in Greece, it is no less than 950. Leagues; and from
North to South, as from the North Cape in Lapland to Cape Matapan in the most
Southern part of Greece, 750.


Phil. Whereabouts does Europe lie in respect to the other Parts?


Sophr. Europe is bounded on the North with the Northern Ocean, which separates
it from Terra Borealis; Westward, with the Western Ocean, which parts it from
America; Southwards, with the Streights of Gibraltar and the Mediterranean,
whereby it is divided from Africa; Eastward it is parted from Asia by all those
Seas and Streights that run up successively Northward from the Mediterranean.
But from Palus Maeotis upward, the Bounds are uncertain, and not yet agreed on
amongst Geographers. The Ancients, I know, made the River Tanais a Boundary as
far as it would go: But they were so little acquainted with these Parts, and
with the Course of that winding River, that to follow them here were to follow
a blind Guide. For my part I will not presume to prescribe any Bounds. But, if
I were to choose, I would only draw a line from the most Northern part of the
said Palus Maeotis North-East-ward as far as the Gulf of Petzora, a little on
this side the Streights of Weygatz.

I should be loath either to contract Europe so much as to confine it within the
Bounds of the White Sea, as some do; or to overstretch it, as others do, as far
as the River Oby, whereby they edge into Europe a good part of the Asian
Tartary.


Phil. So you are for a Medium.


Sophr. I am so.


Phil. But how comes Europe to be so called?


Sophr. Don't you know the old Story, Europe from Europa the Daughter of Agenor
King of Phaenicia? Which Lady Europa Jupiter brought to Creet, and so she gave
the name to Europe. A very credible Story, that Jupiters bringing of that Lady
from Phaenicia to so small a part of Europe as the Isle of Creet where she came
should give denomination to all this Part of the World.

For my part I should rather think the name of Europe to be derived from a
Maritime Province of Thracia so called, and that those of Asia gave the name of
Europe to this Part of the World, according to the name of that Province which
lay nearest to them. Just so the Europeans gave the name of Asia to that other
Part of the World from one small part of it called Asia, which lay next to
Greece. And in the same manner the Romans called Africa so, after the name of
that particular Province or Part thereof which they brought first under their
Obedience.


Phil. What makes us put always Europe first, when we speak of the chief Parts
of the World? I would fain know how this little Part came to that great
Preferment.


Phil. The best Reason I know for it is, that we love to prefer our selves.
Because we are born and live in Europe, therefore Europe must march in the
Front. Though Asia by right, and that upon such Grounds as you shall see
afterward, should have the Precedence. But I suppose they will scarce fall out
about it.

And yet one might say much in the behalf of Europe, as it is now improved.
Europe so generally fruitful, temperate, and populous; so extremely improved in
all Arts both Liberal and Mechanical. Europe famous besides for having Ruled a
long time over Asia and Africa, during, the Greek and Roman Monarchy's. Famous
for its wonderful Discoveries and Conquests (not to say Invasions) of the New
World in these latter Ages. To which we may add that great Prerogative we have
above the rest of the World, the Christian Faith.


Phil. Now you have done Europe a good turn, and 'twere pity but Europe should
consider it. But which of the Sons of Noah first peopled it after the Deluge?


Sophr. Whilst Shem peopled Asia, Cham Africa, the Isles of the Gentiles (says
Moses, Genesis 10.) were divided amongst the Sons of Japhet. Now by these Isles is
understood Europe, a great part whereof does indeed consist of Islands and
Demi-Islands. Nor was the Name and Memory of Japhet so much forgotten by the
Children which descended of him, but that the Greeks who were the first of
their European Plantations retained it a long time in their Japetus, the Son
(as they said) of Caelum and Terra, and Father of the wise Prometheus.


Phil. Pray what is the meaning of God's Promise unto Japhet, that he would make
him dwell in the Tents of Shem?


Sophr. The same is to be understood both in a literal and mystical Sense. In
the first Sense the Promise was fulfilled, when the Posterity of Japhet, both
Greeks and Romans, subdued Judaea or the Land of Canaan, and the Eastern Parts
promised to and possessed by the Seed of Shem. And in the second Sense, when it
pleased God to break down the Partition Wall, and to Incorporate the Gentiles
of the House of Japhet into the Body of the Church, which for a long time was
restrained to the Line of Shem.


Phil. Now we shall proceed, if you please, to the Division of the five Parts
of the World into their Principal Countries.


Sophr. As for Europe, this is my general Division thereof. Viz.

Into Spain, France, Great Britain and Ireland, Germany, Italy, Turkey, Poland,
Tartary the lesser, Moscovy, or Russia, Sweden, Norway, Denmark.


In Spain you will find the Kingdoms of Spain and Portugal. In Great Britain,
the Kingdoms of England and Scotland, and the Principality of Wales.

In Germany, besides the Emperors Dominions (consisting chiefly of the
Arch-Dukedom of Austria, part of. Hungary, and the Kingdom of Bohemia) you will
find both the Dukedom and Upper Palatinate of Bavaria, Suaben, Swisserland,
Alsace, the Lower Palatinate of the Rhine, Franconia, Hesse, the Low-Country's,
Westphaly, Saxony, Brandenburg, and Pomeren.

In Italy there are the Kingdom of Naples; the Pope's Land, the Dukedom of
Tuscany, the States of Genoa and Luca, the Principality of Piemont, the
Dukedoms of Milan, Mont-ferrat, Mantua, Parma, Modena, and the State of Venice,
besides the Islands and Kingdoms of Sicily and Sardinia.

Turkey in Europe comprehends 1. all Greece, divided into Thracia, Macedon,
Albania, Epirus, Thessaly, Achaia, Peloponesus, besides the Islands, amongst
which Creet (now Candia) and Euboea (now Negroponte) are the chiefest. 2.
Moesia, containing Servia, Bulgaria, and Bessarabia. 3. the South parts of
Podolia in Poland, and Caffa in the Taurick Chersonese. 4. Bosnia, with the
greatest part of Hungary, Sclavonia, Croatia, and Dalmatia. And lastly, though
the Grand-Signior be not fully possessed of Moldavia, Valachia, and
Transylvania, yet the respective Princes thereof are Tributary to Him. And so
is the Cham of Tartary the lesser.

As to the Kingdom of Norway, it belongs to the Crown of Denmark; and the
greatest part of Livonia, to Sweden. The great Dukedom of Lithuania is united
to the Crown of Poland, Lapland is divided betwixt the Czar of Moscovy and the
Kings of Sweden and Denmark; Savoy, within the Alps,, belongs to the Duke of
that Name. Adjoining to which is Valesia, and the Country of Grisons.

Now most of the Country's aforesaid are subdivided into several Provinces, and
some of these into lesser Parts. But I shall forbear at present those
Subdivisions, and leave that till another time. My Design is only to give you a
general Account of the World, till I have more time to come to Particulars.


Phil. Then let us proceed to Asia.


Sophr. Asia, the greatest of the five Parts of the World, is a Peninsule
almost as big again as Europe, and every way encompassed by the Ocean, except
on the West side. Northwards the Ocean parts it, as it does Europe, from Terra
Borealis; Eastwards, from America; and Southwards, from Terra Australis. Then
on the West it is bounded with the Red Sea, which parts it from Africa; Next to
that, with the narrow Isthmus of Sues, where Asia joins to Africa; afterward,
with the East end of the Mediterranean; and lastly, with those Seas, and
Streights, etc. that part it from Europe, for which I refer you thither.

The same, as I hinted before, was first called Asia by the Europeans from the
nearest part to Greece called by that name. Which spread it self from that
Lydian Asia to Asia properly so called whereof that was, but a Part, the proper
Asia to the whole Body of Anatolia, and this to the whole Continent. Now this
being known by the name of Asia occasioned the Distinction of Asia the greater
and Asia the lesser, by which last name Anatolia is still called amongst us.


Phil. Now, Sophronius, let me know upon what Grounds Asia should have (as you
think) the Precedence.


Sophr. Not to insist upon the Largenest of its Extent, or the Riches of its
Soil, I think Asia ought to be had in special honor for these Reasons
following. First, for the Creation of Man, who had his first making in this
Part of the World. For here stood the Garden of Eden, the first place of his
Habitation, and from hence all Nations of the World had their first beginning.
Secondly, because here flourished the two first great Monarchies of the
Assyrians and Persians; the first signified by the Image with the Golden Head
in Daniel, and the last by the Arms and Breast of Silver. Thirdly, because it
was the Scene of almost all the memorable Actions recorded in the Scriptures.
And lastly, because that here our Savior Christ was born, wrought his Divine
Miracles, and accomplished the great Work of our Redemption.


Phil. I am very well satisfied with your Reasons. The next Thing I desire to
know is the Division of Asia.


Sophr. Asia is chiefly divided

Into Turkey in Asia, Arabia, Persia, India, China, Tartary,


Besides the Islands.

Turkey in Asia comprehends 1. Asia the less, or Anatolia, now called by
contraction Natolia, which anciently was divided into these Provinces so noted
in History. Some Maritime ones, as Pontus, Bithynia, Phrygia the lesser, Mysia,
Aeolis and Ionia, Caria and Doris, Lycia, Pamphylia, Cilicia. And these Inland
Provinces, Viz. Isauria, Armenia the lesser, Cappadocia, Galatia, Paphlagonia,
Phrygia the greater, Lydia, Pisidia, Lycaonia. 2. It contains Armenia the
greater, now called Turcomania. 3. Chaldea, Assyria, and Mesopotamia, which
three Provinces together did properly and originally constitute the Assyrian
Empire. 4. Syria and Palestine; the first containing Syria propria,
Coelo-Syria, Phoenicia, Palmyrene; and Palestine being otherwise called the
Land of Canaan, or the Land of Promise, Judaea, and Israel. The Northern part
of which, when possessed by the Tribes of Asser, Nephthalim, Zabulon, and
Issachar, went properly by the name of Galilee, 5. part of Arabia.

Now Arabia is divided into Petraea or Stony, Deserta or Desert, and Faelix or
Happy, this last of a vast extent.

Persia, a large Continent, was anciently divided into Persis, Susiana,
Carmania, Gedrosia, Drangiana, Aria, Arachosia, Paropamisus, Parthia, Hyrcania,
Margiana, and Bactria. To Persia may be also referred Media and Georgia. Media
contained Atropatia, and Georgia comprehended Iberia, Colchis, and Albania.

India was divided from the River Ganges into India intra Gangem or India on
this side Ganges, and India extra Gangem or India beyond Ganges, Here is,
amongst other Kingdoms the vast Empire of the great Mogol.

China and Tartary are also two vast Continents, but this last especially,
which altogether takes up above one third part of Asia.

As for the chief Islands of Asia, you have had an Account of them in the
fourth Discourse. So I shall proceed to a general Account of Africa.


Phil. I am ready to hear you


Sophr. Africa, a complete Peninsule, is bounded on the North with the
Streights of Gibraltar and the Mediterranean, which part it from Europe; on the
South, with the Southern Ocean, which separates it from Terra Australis;
Eastward, with the Ocean likewise for the most part, then with the Red Sea
which parts it from Asia, and lastly with the foresaid Isthmus of Sues where it
joins to Asia, and without which Africa would be a complete Island.

It contains in chief Berbary, Biledulgerid, Zara, The Negroes Land, Guinea,
Congo, Cafraria, Monomotapa, Monomugi, Zanguebar, Abissinia, Nubia, Egypt.


Barbary, which runs as Far as Egypt along the Mediterranean, contains the
Kingdom of Morocco Westward upon the Atlantic Ocean, the Kingdom of Fesse
partly upon that Ocean, partly upon the Streights and the Mediterranean. Then,
still going Eastward, you will find the States of Algier, Tunis, Tripoli, and
the Kingdom of Barca. Now Mauritania took up the Western Part of Barbary. And,
as the Kingdom of Tunis was the Africa propria of the Ancients, so you will
find their Cyrehe and Marmarica in the Kingdom of Barca.

Biledulgerid, anciently called Numidia, being part of Lybia Interior, ly's
South of Barbary; and runs also from West to East, as far as Egypt. Zara or
Libya Deserta, anciently counted likewise as part of Libya Interior, ly's South
of Biledulgerid.

South of that you will find the Negroes Land, which runs also a great way from
the Atlantic Eastward, and is divided into several Kingdoms. And Southward is
Guinea, a Sea Coast Country. The first of note, amongst other Things, for the
Negroes that are commonly employed in the New World, to do the Europeans
Drudgery. This, for the Gold that is brought from thence.

Congo, Cafraria, Monomotapa, and Monomugi went all amongst the Ancients under
the name of Aethiopia Inferior; Zanguebar and Abissinia, under that of
Aethiopia Superior.

Congo contains several Kingdoms, which I forbear to mention, because of no
great Note. Cafraric is a Seacoast Country that extends it self from Angola
(part of Congo) as far as the Cape, of Good. Hope Southward, and from thence as
far as Zanguebar Eastward.

Monomotapa and Monomugi are two Inland Country's of Africa, lying, within the
Compass of Cafraria. But Zanguebar is a Seacoast Country toward the East.

Abissinia is a vast Empire, divided into several Kingdoms, and whereof the
Western part is watered by the River Nilus. Nubia ly's West and North of
Abissinia; and the Desert of Barca, or Libya Marmarica, North of Nubia.

Egypt, which next to Barbary is the most noted and frequented Country of
Africa, is bounded Eastward with the Isthmus of Sues and the Red Sea, Westward
with Barca and the Desert of that name, Northward with the Mediterranean, and
Southward with Nubia and Abissinia.

Thus much for the Old World. And now I come to the New, otherwise known by the
Name of America, or else the West Indies.


Phil. I remember you told me before, the New World was called New, for the
late Discovery; and World, for the vast Greatness of it. Pray, how long is it
since it was first discovered?


Sophr. It Is almost two hundred years ago, and the first Discoverer of it was
Christopher Columbus, an Italian born, of Genoa. He being a Man of great
ability's, and born to undertake great Matters, could not persuade himself,
when he considered the Motion of the Sun, but that there was another World to
which this Glorious Planet did impart both his Light and Heat, when he went
from us. This World he resolved to seek after, and accordingly in the year
1486. he opened his Design to the State of Genoa. But, the business being
slighted there, he sent his Brother to the Court of England. Who unluckily fell
in his way hither into the hands of Pirates, and was by them detained a long
while. However he got his Liberty at last, and so came over to England, where
his Proposition was so well relished, that Columbus was sent for to take
measures with him. But he, not having heard a long time from his Brother,
conceived the Offer of his Service to have been neglected, and had already made
his Address to the Court of Spain. At that time Reigned King Henry VII. here,
and Queen Isabella in Spain. Where Columbus at last, with much ado, and after
many delays, had three Ships furnished, not so much for Conquest as for
Discovery.


Phil. How came he at last to compass his Design?


Sophr. Being furnished with the Ships aforesaid, he ventured upon the main
Ocean, steering his Course to the Westward. Two whole Months did he float upon
this unknown Sea, before he could see any Land. Insomuch that his Men began to
Mutiny, and refused at last to go on. He promised them to return again, if they
did not see Land in three days. They agreed. And, as Providence would have it,
on the third day, they discovered the Island Guanahani, in the 24th Degree of
Northern Latititude. There having Landed, he took possession of it for the
Crown of Spain, October 11. Anno 1492. and called it St. Salvador, which is S.
Savior. Afterward he discovered and took possession of Hispaniola, and with
much treasure and applause returned into Spain. Preferred for this good
Service, first to be Admiral of these Indies, and afterward to a Coat of Arms
with this Motto, For Castille and Leon Columbus has got a New World, and in
conclusion to the Title of Duke de la Vega.

The next year he returned thither, discovered the Islands of Cuba, Jamaica,
and Hispaniola, and in this last built the Town now called St. Domingo. In the
Year 1497. (the same year that Vasquez de Gama found out the Passage by Sea to
the East Indies, a happy Time for Discovery's) he went another Voyage, in which
he discovered amongst other Places Paria in the Firm Land. And in the year
1500. he began his fourth and last Voyage, which he performed without adding
much to his former Discoveries. At last he died in Spain, in the year 1506; and
was honorably Interred at Sevil.

But, though Columbus be dead, yet Columbus's Fame shall live to all
Posterity's. It Is he we are indebted to for the Advantage we have of seeing
clearly those Things which either were Unknown, or but blindly guessed at by
the Ancients.

Next to Columbus, John Cabot a Venetian (the Father of Sebastian Cabot)
discovered a great part of this Continent, in behalf of Henry VII of England.
For in the year 1497. he found out all the North-East Coasts hereof from
Florida Southward to New Foundland and Terra di Laborador in the North. Then
came Americus Vesputius, a Florentine, employed therein by Emanuel King of
Portugal, Anno 1501. on a design of finding out a nearer way to the Molucca's
than by the Cape of Good Hope. And, though he passed not further than the Cape
of St. Augustine in Brasil, yet from him (to the great Injury and Neglect of
the first Discoverers) this Continent has got the Name of America.

Sic Vos non Vobis fertis Aratra Boves.
Phil. Indeed this is a great piece of Ingratitude. But Usus invaluit, and now
it is past cure.


Sophr. I have but this more to tell you upon the Subject of this Discovery,
that after Americus there came several private Adventurers and Undertakers out
of all parts of Europe bordering on the Ocean. Amongst whom Magellan was the
first that compassed the whole World, and found the South Passage called from
him the Streights of Magellan. Wherein he was followed by Drake and Cavendish
of England. Thus this New World became a Prey to Europe, but to Spain
especially. Thus the Natives were invaded, and (till the time of Charles V.)
Millions of them destroyed by the Spaniards Cruelty, who, to secure their
Usurpation, and satiate their Avarice, laid aside all sense of Religion and
Humanity it self, and so made Christianity a Bugbear to those naked Heathens.

Auri Sacra Fames, quid non mortalia cogis Pectora? But the Blood of these poor
People cry's for Vengeance still. And it is observable already how the Monarchy
of Spain, which was so formidable but in the last Century, has been almost ever
since Charles the Fifth's time in a declining condition. First overpowred by
the Hollanders, then by the English, and lately by the French.


Phil. I love to take notice of great Men. Pray, what was that Magellan who
first Sailed round about the World?


Sophr. He was a noble Portugueze, well skilled in Navigation. Who, upon some
Discontents received in the Court of Emanuel King of Portugal, made offer of
his Service to Charles the fifth King of Spain, and undertook the finding out a
shorter cut to the Molucca's than had been discovered. Which he effected in the
year 1520. by his Discovery of those narrow Seas, from him called the Streights
of Magellan, whereby he at last entered from the North into the South Sea.

And, to give you a Description of those Streights, I shall tell you in the
first place, that they are in the 53. Degree of Southern Latitude, about 100.
Leagues in length, with high Hills on both sides always covered with Snow. The
Passage, as it is tedious and unpleasant, so it is very dangerous. For here the
Sea ebbs and flows with a violent swiftness, and the very first fall into it is
extremely doubtful and hazardous. And then it is a Place of that Nature, that
which way soever a man Steer his Course, (as I told you before, speaking of the
Winds) he shall be sure to have the Wind against him. Besides that the Course
of the Water, says John Davis, is so full of Turnings and Changings, and those
so violent, that when a Ship is entered there is no returning. To which add,
that the Channel is so very deep (in some places no less than 300. fadoms) that
there is no hope of Anchorage.

In short, it was a whole month, ( viz. from the latter end of October to the
end of November) before Magellan could be clear of these Narrow Seas. From
whence he sailed at last to the East Indies. But there he was the year
following unfortunately slain. And, of five Ships that he set out with, there
was but one (by a happy Omen called Victoria) that returned to Spain in safety.
The Commander of that Ship was Sebastian del Cano, who after a very long and
dangerous Voyage (wherein it was thought he had Sailed at least 14000.
Leagues,) had the happiness to bring home the welcome News of his good Success.

But, to return to our Americans, they are credibly supposed to descend from
the Tartars of Asia. For, besides that the West side of America is disjoined
from Tartary but by a very small Straight, so that there is thence into these
Country's a very quick and ready Passage; it is certain the Americans are most
like the Tartars of any, in the whole course of their Life. To which add, that
the West side of America is far more populous than the East toward Europe or
Africa; Which argues that those Western Parts were first Inhabited, and that
from hence the rest was Peopled.

What remain now is to give you, Philalethes, first the Division of the
Northern America, and then that of the Southern, both of them according to the
present State of those two great Peninsules.

The Northern America, may be fitly divided into these principal Parts;

Viz. Mexico, or New Spain, New Mexico, Florida, Virginia, Canada, or New
France, Estotiland.


Mexico, the most Southern, the best, and most populous Part of all this
Peninsule, has on the East the Gulf of Mexico, and on the West the South Sea.
The same reaches from the Isthmus of Panama Southward to Rio del Norte in New
Mexico Northwestward above 400. Leagues, but the breadth of it is not
proportionable. It is called Mexico, from the chief Province of that name, as
this is from the chief City, the whole Kingdom is divided into three great
Prefectures, or Governments, called by the Spaniards Audiencas; viz. of Mexico,
of Guadalajara or New Gallicia, and of Guatimala, which comprehend several
Provinces. And, as the Gulf borrows its name from hence, so the whole Peninsule
is sometimes called from it Mexicana. This rich Kingdom belongs solely to
Spain, since the Conquest of it by Ferdinand Cortez, Anno 1519.

North of this Mexico you will find Nuevo Mexico, or the New Mexico; bounded
Eastward with Florida, and Westward with Mare Vermejo, which parts it from
California.

Florida ly's full North of the Gulf of Mexico, and Carolina is counted part of
it, lying near the Sea, and South of Virginia.

By Virginia, as a general Name, I mean all that Seacoast Country, which
reaches North-Eastward from Florida as far as the Gulf (or Bay) of S. Laurence.
And so it contains chiefly Virginia properly so called, New Sweden, the New
Netherlands, New England, and Acadia.

Canada, or New France, ly's on both sides of the River Canada. And on the West
side you will find the Saguenay, a part of New France so called from a River of
that name which runs into the Canada.

Estotiland comprehends those Regions that lie most toward the North and East.
Bounded Eastward with the main Ocean; Northwards, with Hudsons Streights;
Westward, with Hudson's Bay; and on the South, with Canada or New France. There
is nothing but the Seacoast of it discovered. The same is also called Terra
Corterealis, or Corterealis Ora, from Corterealis, a Portugueze, who in the
year 1500 left his name unto it. It has likewise got the name of Terra de
Labrador; and now the French call it Nouvelle Bretagne, that is, New Brittany,
from a French Province of that name.

One Thing is Observable concerning this Peninsule, that most of the Western
Parts (as being furthest from Europe) are still undiscovered. But Northwards
you will find some Parts of it, bearing the Name of New North Wales, New
South Wales, and West of these New Denmark.

The Southern America I divide into these chief Parts.

Viz. Terra firma, Brasil, Paraguay, Magellanica, Chili, Peru, Amazonia.


Terra Firma, in Spanish Tierra, Firm, comprehends those Regions which lie
most toward the North. As Terra firma properly and specially so called, the
Governments (or Country's) of Popayan, Cartagena, S. Martha, Rio de la Hacha,
and Venezuela, the new Realm of Granada, Paria, Caribana, and Guiana. All which
belong for the most part to Spain.

Brasil, which takes up the most Eastern Parts, and does chiefly belong to
Portugal, is divided into several Capitanias (as the Portugueze call them) or
Prefectures, the Principal of which is Capitania de Siara. The Rest are of a
less compass, and bear for the most part the names of their chief places, or
Principal Rivers. As Capitania de Para, de Maragnan, de Rio grande, Parayba,
Tamaraca, Pernambuco, Bahia, Ilheos, Porto Seguro, Spiritu Santo, Rio Janeiro,
and S. Vincente. But all this is only by the Seaside, the Inland Parts being
left (I suppose) for our Posterity to plant.

Paraguay ly's South and West of Brasil, and does chiefly belong to the
Spaniards. It is called Paraguay, from the great River of that name, otherwise
named Rio de la Plata, which runs through the midst of it. The same is at
present divided into Paraguay properly so called, Guayra, Parana, Uraguay, the
Province of Rio de la Plata, Chaco, and Tucuman.

Magellanica ly's South of Paraguay, and reaches to the very Streights of
Magellan, where this Peninsule (like Africa) draws toward a point not unlike
that of a Pyramid This wild Country has the Prospect, not only of the Streights
aforesaid Southwards, but also of the North-Sed. Eastward, and part of if of
the South Sea Westward.

Chili is a Seacoast Country, upon the South Sea, West of Magellanica. Most
part of which, and that toward the North, is subject to the Crown of Spain.

Peru, a Country famous for its Gold and Silver Mines, lies Northward of Chili,
East of the South (or Pacifick) Sea; and is parted from North to South, almost
in the midst, by the huge Mountains called Andes. The Country is about 600.
Leagues in length from North to South, but the breadth from East to West is not
proportionable. From hence it is that some can the whole Peninfule by the name
of Peruana, as they call the other from Mexico Mexicana.

This great and rich Kingdom was Conquered by the Spaniards ten years after
that of Mexico, viz. in the year 1522. Pizarro was the Man employed in Chief in
the Conquest of it, a Man basely extracted, and as sordidly brought up, who was
fain at last to steal for shelter into America. Where being grown Rich and Bold
by his Adventures, and being well informed of the Wealth of Peru, he undertook
the Conquest of it, and at last per fas and nefas got it for the Crown of Spain.

Since which Time the Spaniards have divided it into three Audiencas, or
Prefectures. Viz. Audienca de Quito, which takes up the Northern Parts;
Audienca de los Reyes, which contains the middle Parts, where you will find
Peru properly so called; and Audienca de los Charcas, which takes up the
Southern Parts.

By Amazonia I mean all those Inland and Unknown Countries which lie betwixt
Peru on the West and Brasil on the East, bounded North-wards with Terra-firma,
Southward with Paraguay and Part of Peru. Called Amazonia from the Amazone,
that great and prodigious River, which runs through the North Parts of this
Country from West to East into Mar del Nort, or North Sea.

Thus you have, Philalethes, a general Account of the Known Parts of the World.
In Terra Polaris Ar^ctica you will find Greenland, first discovered in the year
982: by Ericus Rufus; but little of it, besides the Seacoast, is known. Famous
most of all for the Fishing of Whales hereabouts. East of Greenland lies Nova
Zemla, of which nothing is discovered as yet besides the Western Shore. So that
it is not known, whether it be an Island; or part of the Continent.

In Terra Australis, or toward it, you will find these Country's as
imperfectly discovered as those. Viz. the Land of Papous, East of the
Molucca's; and New Guinea, East of that. But some take the Land of Papous to be
part of New Guinea. South of these is New Holland, not long since discovered by
the Hollanders. But, whether it is an Island or Continent, we are as yet to
seek.


Phil. I think we have run pretty well over the World. It is high time for us
to rest our selves. But I desire, next time we meet, to learn the Meaning of
the Circles, that so I may understand the use of Globes and Maps.


Sophr. With all my heart.


The Seventh Discourse.
Of the Use of Globes and Maps, with their several Circles.

SOphronius. In our former Discourses you have had a general Account of the
Real Parts of the Earth. Now I come to the Imaginary ones, I mean those Lines
or Circles, supposed to go about the World, and accordingly drawn in
Terrestrial Globes and Maps, for the better teaching and learning of Geography.


Phil. Pray, let me have their Definition.


Sophr. A Globe is a compendious Representation of the Earth in its round
Figure, with several Circles, and an exact Situation with the Names of its
several Country's, Seas, chief Lakes and Rivers, Hills, Towns or City's.

A Map is either general, or particular. By a general Map is meant a
Planisphere, or a Map of the whole Earth, describing the Old and New World by
themselves, the first on the right hand, and the other on the left.

A particular Map is a Representation of a particular Part of the World, as of
Europe, Asia, on Africa, the Northern, or Southern America. Which are but
particular Maps in respect of a Map of the whole World.

It Is true there are Maps indeed more particular, such as give an account of a
particular Country, or of one Province or more of that Country. In which
respect the Maps of Europe, Asia, Africa, and America be said to be general.

And so I come to the Circles. But first I begin with the Axel-tree of the
World, which is a right Line imagined to pass through the Center or midst of
the World, from one end of it to the other. The upper end of which Axel-tree is
called the Pole Arctick, or North Pole; and the nether end opposite to that,
the Pole Antarctick, or South Pole.


Phil. How many Circles are there?


Sophr. There are eight principal Circles, four greater, and four lesser.

The greater Circles are The Equinoxial, The great Meridian, The Zodiac, The
Horeon.


The lesser Circles, The Tropic of Cancer, The Tropic of Capricorn, The
Arctick. The Antarctick.


The Equinoctial, otherwise called Equator, and by Mariners the Line, is a
great Circle going round the. Globe in the very midst betwixt the two Poles. It
is called Equinoctial, because when the Sun is come to this Circle, then is the
Equinox, that is, the day and night are of an equal length. And it has the
name of Equator, because it divides the World into two equal Parts, the one
Northwards, the other Southwards. From whence comes the Distinction of Northern
and Southern Latitude, that reaching from this Circle as far as the North Pole,
and this from the same Circle as far as the South-Pole. Now this Circle is
divided into 360. Parts called Degrees of Longitude, as showing the Length of
the World. Whereof the first 90. Degrees run from West to East, then 180.
Degrees by the backside of the Globe from East to West, and at last 90.
Degrees more from West to East, all which make up the number of 360. Degrees.

The great Meridian is a Circle that go's round the Poles, and so divides the
World likewise into two equal Parts. In Globes it is made commonly of Brass.
The same has got the name of Meridian from the Latin Meridies, that is Noon
day, because when the Sun is come to that Circle then it is Noon in the Place
whereof it is the Meridian. And it is called great Meridian, in opposition to
those lesser Meridians which are to be seen in Globes and Maps. This is the
Circle wherein are set down the 360. Degrees of Latitude, or Breadth of the
World, divided into four times 90.

Now the Question is, which is the most proper place for the great or first
Meridian to pass through. For our Modern Geographers differ much about it,
which causes a great Confusion. Some follow still Ptolomy, who placed it in the
Canary Islands; others have removed it more Westward to the Azores. Neither do
these agree amongst themselves. For some will have it pass through S. Michael
and S. Mary, others through Corvo and Flores. For my part I don't admire an
Innovation that causes so much Distraction; and, whatever they pretend to, the
Remedy to be sure is worse than the Disease. Therefore it were much to be
wished, that they would agree in this particular, and unanimously fix their
Meridian somewhere, without which we cannot agree as to the Longitude of
Places. One should think, that el Pico in Tenariffe might be a Place very fit
for that purpose.

The Zodiac is a Circle to be seen in Globes, and general Maps, but not in
particular ones. The same is a sloping Circle, crossing the Equinoctial in two
places, and dividing it into two equal Parts. It is called Zodiac, from the
Greek word Zodion, that signifies a living Creature. For it consists of Twelve
Signs which are (as I said in a former Discourse) the Twelve chief
Constellations of all the fixed Stars, and most of which are represented to us
under the name and figure of living Creatures. The Use of this Circle is to
show the natural Motion of the Sun, which in a years time runs over those
Twelve Signs, and therefore those Signs are called the Houses of the Sun.
Amongst which Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, are Northern; and the
other six, Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricornus, Aquarius, and Pisces,
Southern.


Phil. I desire to know the Course of the Sun through those Signs.


Sophr. Supposing you remember what I told you formerly of the Equinoxes and
Solstices, I shall only add, that those Twelve Signs answer to the Twelve
Months of the Year, Aries to March, Taurus to April, and so forth; with this
difference, that when the Sun comes to Aries for exemple it is about the 10th of
March, and then is our Vernal Equinox. From whence the Sun proceeds to Taurus
and Gemini, till it comes to Cancer, and then is our Summer-Solstice. From
Cancer it comes through Leo and Virgo to Libra, and there we have our Autumnal
Equinox. From Libra it goes on through Scorpio and Sagittarius to the Sign of
Capricorn, and then is our Winter-Solstice. From whence it comes up again,
through Aquarius and Pisces, to Aries aforesaid. Thus the Sun passes every
Month from one Sign to another, and Seasons follow one another. Thus we have
the Vernal Equinox in March when the Sun is come to Aries, the Summer-Solstice
in June when the Sun is come to Cancer, the Autumnal Equinox in September when
it is come to Libra, and the Winter Solstice in December when it is come to the
Sign of Capricorn. And, as the Twelve Signs answer to the Twelve Months of the
Year, so the Degrees into which each of them is divided do answer pretty well
to the Days of the Month. For every Sign contains 30. Degrees, so that all of
them together make up 360. Degrees.


Phil. Now you made it out to me as clear as the Sun. But what Circle is the
Horizon?


Sophr. It Is an outside Circle, not to be seen in Maps, but only in Globes and
Spheres. And it is called Horizon, because it confines our sight, and divides
both Heaven and Earth into two parts called Hemispheres, the one seen, and the
other not seen. The Use of it is to show the Rising and Setting of the Stars,
and the four Quarters of the World. But, as we generally conceive a Horizon, it
is a moveable Circle. For we can never so little remove from any place, but we
make a new Horizon. So that it is with Horizons as with Meridians, of both
which we may fancy an infinite number, whereof the Vertical or Perpendicular
point hanging over our heads is called Zenith, and that over the heads of our
Antipodes Nadir.

In short, there are two kinds of Horizon, the one Rational or Intelligible,
and the other Sensible. That reaches to the Firmament, and divides the whole
World into two equal Parts, the one above and the other beneath our. Dwelling
Place. Whereas the Sensible Horizon is only that part of the World which our
sight can reach in a Plain, the rest of the World by reason of the Rotundity of
the Globe being out of our sight.


Phil. And what are the Tropic Circles?


Sophr. They are two Circles at an equal Distance from the Equator, that is
23. Degrees and and a half; that of Cancer in the Northern, and the other of
Capricorn in the. Southern Latitude. The same are called. Tropic from the
Greek word Tropos, which signifies Return; because, when the Sun is come to
either of these Circles, it goes no further Northward or Southward, but go's
back to the Equator* For (as I told you before) when the Sun comes to the
Tropic of Cancer, then, we have our Summer Solstice; and, when it gets to that
of Capricorn, then is our Winter-Solstice. So that these Circles do mark the
greatest Declination of the Sun, that, is its furthest Distance from the
Equator. Now they borrow, their Names of Cancer and Capricorn from the two
Signs so called, through which the Sun passes when he comes to those Circles.

As for the Arctick and Antarctick, they are two lesser Circles, each of them
66. Degrees and a half distant from the Equator, the Arctick Northward, and
the Antarctick Southward. And, there being but 90. Degrees from the Equator to
each Pole, it follows that these Circles are each of them but 23. Degrees and a
half from their respective Poles, viz. the Arctick from the Northern, and the
Antarctick from the Southern Pole. Therefore some call them otherwise me Polar
Circles, because nearest to the Poles.

Now the said four lesser Circles, viz. the Tropicks and Polar, serve to divide
the World into five Parts called Zones.


Phil. I long to know the Meaning of these Zones.


Sophr. Then you must know there is one Torrid, two Temperate, and two Frigid
Zones. The Torrid Zone reaches from one Tropic Circle to another, and so takes
up 47. Degrees of Latitude, which (at the rate of 20. leagues, or 60. miles, a
Degree) comes to 940. leagues, or 2820. miles. In this Zone it is that almost
all Africa, and the better part of the Southern America, lie; besides a small
part of Asia, and of the Northern America. And it is called Torrid, or
Over-hot, because of the great and constant Heat of it, caused by the Sun's
continual course and return betwixt the two Tropicks where this Zone is placed.
Which made the Ancients believe, that it could not be inhabited for heat. But
it is found since by experience, that it is not only Inhabited, but in some
places most fruitful and pleasant to live in.


Phil. What do you call then the Temperate Zones?


Sophr. There Is one Northern, and the other Southern. The Northern, wherein we
live, lies betwixt the Tropic of Cancer and the Arctick Circle; and the
Southern, betwixt the Tropic of Capricorn and the Antarctick Circle. Each of
them takes up 43. Degrees of Latitude, which comes to 860. Geometrical Leagues,
or 2580. miles. Both called Temperate Zones, because lying (as they do) betwixt
the Torrid Zone and the Frigid, they are so tempered with heat and cold, that
neither of them is so hot as the Torrid, or so cold as the Frigid. In the
Northern Temperate Zone lies almost all Europe and Asia, and the greatest part
of the Northern America; and in the Southern, a small part of Africa, and
almost one half of the Southern America, besides what has been discovered of
Terra Australis.


Phil. Now for the Frigid Zones.


Sophr. These are also one Northern, the other Southern. And they both lie in
the utmost Parts of the World, the Northern betwixt the Arctick Circle and the
Arctick Pole, and the Southern betwixt the Antarctick Circle and the Antarctick
Pole. So that each of them contains 23. Degrees and a half, which comes to 470.
Geometrical Leagues, or 1340. miles. And they are called Frigid, or Over-cold,
because being extremely remote from the Course of the Sun through the Zodiac
they partake but a little of its heat, and have Its beams but oblique, and
without any reflection. For which Reason, and because of their constant
Darkness in Wintertime for several Months; the Ancient Geographers and
Historians could not imagine these Zones to be at all Inhabited, no more than
the Torrid for its exceeding Heat. But it proves a Mistake; though it is
confessed, as to the Northern Frigid Zone which is, partly known to us, that it
is, but thinly Peopled. In which Zone part of Norway and Lapland in Europe is
situate, some part of Tartary in Asia, and Terra Borealis.

Thus much for the eight principal Circles, and the Use of them, Now let us
take a view of those inferior Circles, which are called Meridians and
Parallels.

The Meridians, or Circles of Longitude, are those Lines which (like the great
Meridian) go round the Globe from one Pole to the other. And the Parallels, or
Circles of Latitude, are those which cross the Globe on both sides of the
Equator.

You may suppose, if you please, as many of either sort as there are Degrees.
But, lest the Names of Places and Country's should be darkened with so many
Lines, therefore in Globes and Maps these Circles do commonly lie at ten
Degrees distance of each other.

And, as by the Meridians you may find out the longitude of any Place in a
Globe or Map; so by the Paralles, you may know the Latitude.


Phil. How so, Sophronius?


Sophr. The Longitude you will find thus, with a pair of Compasses. First, set
one foot of your Compass in the place the Longitude whereof you desire to know,
and the other in the next Meridian to it, whether it be on the right hand or
the left. From thence draw down your Compasses, following still that Meridian
till you come to the Equator, and there mark upon what Degree of the Equator
the foot of your Compasses which was upon the Place does rest. Then see upon
the Equator how many Degrees that is distant from the first Meridian, and that
is the true Longitude of the Place.


Phil. But then one must be ruled right or wrong by the great Meridian that is
set down in the Globe or Map.


Sophr. If you don't like it, it is but adding or bating the number of Degrees
which makes the difference.

The Latitude is to be taken thus. First set one foot of your Compasses upon
the Place of which you design to take the Latitude, and the other upon the next
Parallel, whether above or beneath. Then draw your Compasses from that Place,
following still that Parallel till you come to the Meridian which is marked
with the Degrees of Latitude, and mark upon what Degree the foot of your
Compasses which you did draw from the Place does rest. That you will find to be
the true Latitude of the Place. And of that Latitude are all Places Parallel to
that, how far soever they lie asunder, East and West.

From, what is said it is to be concluded, that all Places just under the great
Meridian have no Longitude, and those under the Equator no Latitude.


Phil. I apprehend you. Now I desire to know what is the meaning of Climates.


Sophr. A Clime, or Climate, is such a Space of the Terr-Aqueous Globe as is
included betwixt two Parallels.


Phi. How many Climes then do you reckon?


Sophr. The Ancient reckoned but fourteen, that is, seven in the Northern, and
as many in the Southern Latitude. Those in the Northern Latitude they called by
the name of some famous City, Island, River, or Hill, through which the middle
Parallel of the Climate passes; As (...). And the Southern Climes, opposite to
those, they called by the same Names, by putting only before them the Particle
(...), etc.

But, to those fourteen Climes some, Geographers have added two more, some
five, and others ten.


Phil. What is the Use of those Climes?


Sophr. To find out how long is the longest Day in any Place whatsoever. For
you must know, that the longest Day under the Equator is equal with the night,
that is 12. hours of Day and as many of Night. But the further you go from the
Equator, either Northwards or Southwards, the longest Day is longer by half an
hour in every Clime, till they come to the length of 24 hours, that is, without
any night. Which length attained, they increase no more by hours, but by
Months, till they come to the length of half a year, which is just under the
Poles.

But this Division of the Earth into Climes is not generally approved of, and
that for these two Reasons. First, because it is as easy to find out the
Length of Days for any Place as to find out the Climates; and secondly, because
of their vast Inequality.

Therefore, if we must divide the Terr-aqueous Globe into Climes, the best way
will be to divide each Latitude into nine Climes, and so each Clime shall
equally consist of ten Degrees. Thus the Situation of any Place will be
presently found out by the Degrees of Latitude. As for Exemple, Paris, Rome,
and Venice, being situate betwixt 40 and 50 Degrees of Northern Latitude, shall
be counted in the fifth Climate; London and Amsterdam, betwixt 50 and 60, in
the sixth Clime.


Phil. But then how shall one find out the Length of Days?


Sophr. By the Degrees of Latitude, without any more ado; as you have it in the
following Table. Where by the 30 Minutes you must understand half an hour; For,
as a Degree, so is an Hour divided into 60 Minutes.

A Table showing the Length of Days by the Degrees of Latitude.
Latitude. Longest Day. Degrees. Min. Hours. Min. 8 34 12 30 16 43 13 00 23 10 13
30 30 47 14 00 36 30 14 30 41 22 15 00 45 29 15 30 49 21 16 00 51 58 16 30 54
29 17 00 56 37 17 30 58 26 18 00 59 59 18 30 61 18 19 00 62 25 19 30 63 22 20
00 64 06 20 30 64 49 21 00 65 21 21 30 65 47 22 00 66 06 22 30 66 20 23 00 66
28 23 30 66 31 24 00

Now, from 66 Degrees 31 Minutes to the Pole it self set at 90 Degrees, we must
account by the Months. As Latitude. Degrees. Min. Months. 67 15 1 00 69 30 2 00 73
20 3 00 78 20 4 00 84 00 5 00 90 00 6 00

Now, Philalethes, you must know there are several Ways of measuring the Earth.
As by Miles, in most part of Europe; by Leagues, in France and Spain; and by
Versts, in Moscovy. Neither does any Nation make use every where exactly of one
and the same Measure. For the Leagues in France, as the Miles in England, are
in some places very short, and in others as long again. But, according to the
Geometrical Measure a League is to contain 3000. Paces, a German Mile 4000, and
other Miles (as English and Italian) 1000. So that there go three of our Miles
to a League, and four to a German Mile. Whereas they reckon four Moscovian
Versts to League. Thus a Degree is 20 Leagues, which comes to 60 English or
Italian Miles, and but 15 German. And so the Compass of the Earth being 360
Degrees comes to 7200 Leagues, 21600 English or Italian Miles, 5400 German.


Phil. But how shall I do, Sophronius, to find out the true Distance of any two
Places, either in a Globe or Map?


Sophr, In order to that you must first understand, that two Places may differ
three manner of ways, that is in Latitude only, in Longitude only, or in both.

If they differ only in Latitude, it is but taking with a pair of Compasses the
difference of Latitude, then summing up the Degrees it comes to, and
multiplying the said Degrees by Miles or Leagues, according to the foresaid
Geometrical Measure. And, if there be any odd Minutes, allow for every Minute
an English Mile, or for every three Minutes a League.

But, if the two Places be in the same Latitude, and differ only in the
Longitude, then take with your Compasses 5 or 10 Degrees of Longitude, more or
less, according to the distance of the Places. Take them upon the Equinoctial,
in the Longitude answering to the said Distance. Then look how many times the
Distance taken with your Compasses is comprehended in the space that lies
betwixt the two Places, and so compute how many Degrees it comes to. And, if so
be there remains any odd space not fully answering the first wideness of your
Compasses, then take that odd space with your Compasses being straightned and
made fit to it. That done, multiply the whole by Leagues or Miles, and you will
find the Product to be the true Distance of the Places.

Lastly, if the two Places differ both in Longitude and Latitude, do but take
with your Compasses the true Distance of the two Latitudes upon the first
Meridian. Then look, as before, how many times the foresaid Distance taken with
your Compasses is comprehended in the space that lies betwixt the two Places,
and multiply the Distance accordingly. Which being multiplied again by 20 for
Leagues, or 60 for Miles, you will find the Product thereof to be the true
Distance of the one Place from the other. And, if there be any odd space
remaining, do in this Case as in the former.

Thus you may take the Distance of any two Places in a Globe, or General Map,
as also in the Maps of Europe, Asia, Africa, the Northern, or Southern America.
As for other particular Maps, they have Scales, whereby you may readily find
out the Distance of any two Places therein mentioned. And so I have done with
this Part of Geography.

What remains is to give you a short Description

Of Amphiscii, Periscii, Heteroscii, Antoeci, Perioeci, Antipodes.



Phil. I have heard indeed of Antipodes, but I know not what is meant by the
rest.


Sophr. First you must know, the first three are so called in respect of their
Shadows, and the other three in respect of their Site and Position.

Those are called Amphiscii, that dwell in the Torrid Zone, between the two
Tropicks. For their Shadows are both ways, sometimes to the South, and
sometimes to the North.

Periscii are such as dwell beyond the Polar Circles, whose Shadows are on all
sides of them.

Heteroscii are those that dwell in either of the two Temperate Zones. Called
Heteroscii, because their Shadows reach but one way; viz. in own Zone to the
North only, as in the other to the South only.

Those we call Antoeci that dwell under the same Meridian, and are equally
remote from the Equator; but with this difference, that the one is in the
Northern, and the other in the Southern Latitude. So that the Summer of the one
is the others Winter.

Perioeci are those that dwell in the same Parallel, or Circle of Latitude; but
so distant

scheme Schema Incolarum Terra, ratione Umbrarum etc Situc.
Septentrio

Oriens

Meridies.

Occidens.



East and West, that (though the Season of the Year and the Length of Days be
to both alike, yet) it falls out the one's Midnight is the others Noon.

By the Antipodes we mean those that dwell feet to feet, so that a right Line
drawn from the one into the other passes from North to South through the
Center of the World. And these are distant 180 Degrees from each other, it
being half the Compass of the Earth. They differ in Seasons of the Year, Length
of Days, Rising and Setting of the Sun.


Phil. These Antipodes are odd kind of Creatures, and I do nor yet understand
them thoroughly. My Brains are a little giddy, and methinks I see them tumbling
down to Heaven.


Sophr. So our Antipodes might think of us, and yet you see we stand upon our
Legs, and every where the Heavens above (not under) us.


Phil. Well, I will beat it (if I can) into my head.


Sophr. Do but mind the following Scheme; and, if that do not convince you,
nothing will.

See the Scheme.


Phil. This is pretty, and now I see clearly what a gross Error I was in.


Sophr. It is, I confess, an unpardonable Error in these Times, when the World
has in a manner Through-Lights made in it. But, before the New World was found
out, the Doctrine of the Antipodes was counted an incredible ridiculous Fable.
S. Augustine, Lactantius, and some others of the Ancient Writers made no more
of it. Venerable Beda joined with them in their Error. And it is observable,
that Virgilius Bishop of Saltzburg in Germany was condemned of Hereresy by Pope
Zachary in the year 745. for having writ a Book inducing the belief of the
Antipodes. For which he was complained of by Boniface Archbishop of Mentz, as
if some damnable Doctrine had been designed under hand by it. And so the poor
Bishop of Saltzburgs Misfortune was to be Learned in a Time of Ignorance.


Phil. Well. But you don't tell me all this while how I shall find my Antipodes.


Sophr. When you have a Globe, and desire to know your Antipodes, it is but
turning the Globe East and West, till you bring your Dwelling Place just to the
Horizon. And then observe the Degree. If the Place in the Northern Latitude be
West from the Meridian, it is but telling so many Degrees on the East side of
the Meridian, and there will be your Antipodes.


FINIS

