THAT THE Lawful Successor Cannot be DEBARRED From Succeeding to the CROWN:
Maintained against Dolman, Buchannan, and others.

BY Sir GEORGE MACKENZIE His Majesty's Advocat.

EDINBVRGH, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno DOM. 1684.

King James In His Advice to Prince Henry.
Page 173. IF God give you not Succession, Defraud never the nearest by Right,
whatsoever conceit ye have of the Person; for Kingdoms are eve^ at Gods
Disposition, and in that Case we are but Liferenters, it lying no more in the
Kings, than in the Peoples Hands to Dispossess the Righteous Heir. Page 209.
Ibid. FOr at the very moment of the Expyring of the King Reigning, the nearest
and Lawful Heir enters in his place; and so to refuse him, or intrude
another, is not to hold out the Successor from coming in, but to expel and put
out their Righteous King: and I trust at this time whole France acknowledges
the Rebellion of the Leaguers, who upon pretense of Heresy by force of Arms,
held so long out, to the great Desolation of their whole Country, their Native
and Righteous King from possessing his own Crown and natural Kingdom. ERRATA.
Page 5. delet at his Majority. Page 33. for Richard 3d. Read ad.

The Right of the Succession Defended.
THe fourth Conclusion to be cleared was, that neither the People, not
Parliaments of this Kingdom, could seclude the lineall Successor, or could
raise to the throne any other of the same Royal line.

For clearing whereof, I shall according to my former method, first clear what
is our positive Law in this case; Secondly I shall show that this our Law is
founded upon excellent reason, and lastly, I shall answer the objections.

As to the first. It is by the second Act of our last Parliament acknowledged,
That the Kings of this realm deriving their Royal power from God Almighty
alone, do lineally succeed thereto, according to the known degrees of proximitie
in blood, which cannot be interrupted, suspended or diverted by any Act or
Statut whatsoever, and that none can attempt to alter or divert the said
Succession, without involving the subjects of this Kingdom in Perjury and
Rebellion, and without exposing them to all the fatal and dreadful consequences
of a civil war, Do THEREFORE from a hearty and sincere sense of their duty
Recognize, acknowledge and declare that the right to the Imperial Crown of this
realm, is by the inherent right and the nature of Monarchy, as well as by the
fundamental and unalterable laws of this realm, transmitted and devolved by a
lineal Succession, according to the proximity of blood. And that upon the death
of the King or Queen, who actually reigns, the Subjects of this Kingdom are
bound by Law, duty and alledgance to obey the nixt immediate and Lawful Heir
either male or female, upon whom the right and administration of the Government
is immediately devolved. And that no difference in Religion, nor no Law nor Act
of Parliament made, or to be made, can alter or divert the right of Succession
and lineal descent of the Crown to the nearest and Lawful Heirs, according to
the degrees foresaids: nor can stop or hinder them in the full, free and
actual administration of the Government according to the Laws of the Kingdom.
LIKE AS OUR SOVEREIGN LORD, with advice and consent of the said Estates of
Parliament, Do declare it is high treason in any of the Subjects of this
Kingdom, by writing, speaking, or any other manner of way to endeavor the
alteration, suspension or diversion of the said right of Succession, or the
debarring the next Lawful Successor from the immediate, actual, full and free
administration of the Government, conform to the Laws of the Kingdom. And that
all such attempts or designs shall infer against them the pain of treason.

This being not only ane Act of Parliament, declaring all such as shall
endeavor to alter the Succession, to be punishable, as Traitors; but
containing in it a Decision of this Point by the Parliament, as the Supreme
Judges of the nation, and ane acknowledgement by them, as the representatives
of the people, and nation. There can be no place for questioning a point, which
they have placed beyond all contraversie: especially seeing it past so
unanimously that there was not only no vote given but even no argument propon'd
against it. And the only doubt moved about it was, whither any Act of
Parliament, or acknowledgement, was necessary, in a point which was in it self
so uncontraverted. And which all who were not desperate fanatics, did conclude
to be so in this nation, even after they had heard all the arguments that were
used, and the Pamphlets that were written against it, in our Neighbor-kingdom.

But because so much noise has been made about this question, and that blind
bigotry leads some, and humorous faction draws others out of the common road.
I conceive it will be fit to remember my reader of these following reasons,
which will I hope clear that as this is our present positive Law, so it is
established upon the fundamental constitution of our Government, upon our old
Laws, upon the Laws of God, of Nature, of Nations, and particularly of the
Civil Law.

As to the fundamental constitution of our Government, I did formerly remark,
that our Historians tell us, that the Scots did swear alledgeance to FERGUS,
who was the first of our Kings, and to his Heirs. And that they should never
obey any other, but his Royal Race. Which Oath does in Law, and reason, bind
them to obey the lineal Successor, according to the proximity of Blood. For ane
indefinite obligation to obey the blood Royal, must be interpreted according to
the proximity in Blood, except the swearers had reserved to themselves a power
to choose any of the Royal Family, whom they pleased, which is so true, that
in Law, ane obligation granted to any man, does in the construction of Law
accresce to his Heirs, though they be not expressed. Qui sibi providet, and
haeredibus providet. And Boethius tells us that after King FERGUS'S death, the
Scots finding their new Kingdom infested with wars, under the powerful
influence of Picts, Romans, and Britans, they refused notwithstanding to
prefer the next of the Royal Race, who was of perfect age, and a man of great
merit, to the Son of King FERGUS, though ane infant; which certainly in reason
they would have done, if they had not been tied to the lineal Successor. But
lest the Kingdom should be prejudged during the minority, they enacted, that
for the future, the next of the Blood Royal should always in the minority of
our Kings administrat as Kings, till the true Heir were of perfect age. But
this does not prove, as Buchannan pretends, that the people had power to
advance to the Throne, any of the Royal Race: whom they judged most fit, for
common sense may tell us, that was not to choose a King, but a Viceroy, or a
Regent. For, though to give him the more authority, and so to enable him the
more to curb factions, and oppose enemies, he was called King, yet he was but
Rex fidei Commissarius, being obliged to restore it to the true Heir at his
majority: and so Governed only in his Vice, and consequently was only his
Viceroy.

But because the Uncles, and next Heirs being once admitted to this fidei
Commissarie tittle, were unwilling to restore the Crown to their Nephews, and
sometimes murdered them: and oftetimes raised factions against them. Therefore
the People abhorring these impieties, and weary of the distractions, and
divisions, which they occasioned, begged from King KENNETH the second, that
these following Laws might be made.

1. That upon the Kings death the next Heir of whatsoever age should succeed.

2. The Grandchild either by Son or Daughter should be preferred.

3. That till the King arrived at 14 years of age, some Wiseman should be
choos'd to Govern, after which, the King should enter to the free
administration, and according to this constitution, some fit Person has still
been choos'd Regent in the Kings minority, without respect to the proximity of
Blood, and our Kings have been oftentimes Crowned in the Cradle.

In conformity also to these principles, all the acknowledgements made to our
Kings, run still in favors of the King, and his Heirs. As in the first Act
Parl. 18. JAMES VI. and the II, III, IV. Acts Parl. 1. CHARLES II. And by our
Oath of Alledgeance, we are bound to bear faithful and true alledgeance to his
Majesty, his Heirs and Lawful Successors; which word LAWFUL, is insert, to cut
off the pretexts of such as should not succeed by Law, and the insolent
arbitrarieness of such, as being but subjects themselves, think they may choose
their King. viz. Act 1. Parl. 21. JAMES 6.

That this right of Succession according to the proximity of blood, is founded
on the Law of God, is clear by Number. Chap. 27. v. 9. and 10. If a man has no
Son or Daughter, his inheritance shall descend upon his Brother,; by Number. 36.
Where, God himself decides in favors of the Daughters of Zelophehad, telling
us, it was a just thing, they should have the inheritance of their father. And
ordaines, that if there were no Daughters, the estate should go to the
Brothers. Saint Paul likewayes concluds Romans 8. If Sons, then Heirs, looking
upon that, as a necessary consequence; which if it do not necessarly hold, or
can be any way disappointed, all his divine reasoning in that Chapter falls to
nothing. And thus Ahaziah 2 Chronicles. 22. v. 1. was made King (though the
youngest) in his Fathers stead; because says the text, the Arabians had slain
all the eldest: which clearly shows that by the Law of God, he could not have
succeeded, if the eldest had been alive. We hear likewayes in Scripture, God
often telling, By me Kings reign. And when he gives a Kingdom to any as to
Abraham, David, etc. He gives it to them and their posterity.

That this right of Succession flows from the Law of nature, is clear;
because, that is accounted to flow from the Law of nature, which every man
finds grafted in his own heart, and which is obeyed without any other Law, and
for which men neither seek nor can give another distinct reason; all which hold
in this case: for who doubts when he hears of ane hereditary Monarchy, but
that, the next in blood must Succeed; and for which we need no positive Law,
nor does any man enquire for a further reason, being satisfied therein by the
principles of his own heart. And from this ground it is, that though a remoter
Kinsman did possess as Heir, he could by no length of time prescribe a valide
right; since no man, as Lawyers conclude, can prescribe a right against the Law
of nature: and that this principle is founded thereupon is confessed l: cum ratio
naturalis ff. de bonis damnat: cum ratio naturalis, quasi lex quaedum tacita,
liberis parentum haereditatem adjecerit, veluti ad debitam successionem eos
vocando: propter quod suorum haeredum nomen eis indultum est; adeo ut ne a
parentibus quidem, ab ea successione amoveri possint. Et. emancipati Institut:
de haered: quae ab intest. Praetor naturalem aequitatem sequutus, iis etiam
bonorum possessionem contra 12 tabularum leges, and contra jus civil
permittit. Which text shows likewayes, that this right of nature was stronger
than the Laws of the 12 Tables, though these were the most ancient and chief
Statutes of Rome. Which principle is very clear likewayes from the Parable,
Math. 21. Where the Husbandmen who can be presumed to understand nothing but
the Law of nature, are brought in saying, this is the Heir, let us kill him and
seize on his inheritance. Nor does this hold only in the Succession of Children
or the direct line, but in the collateral Succession of Brothers and others L.
hac part ff. unde cognati. Hac part proconsul Naturali aequitate motus,
omnibus cognatis permittit bonorum possessionem quos sanguinis ratio Vocat ad
haereditatem. Vid. l. 1. ff. aegrad. and l. 1.. hoc autem ff. de bonor.
possess. And these who are now Brothers to the present King, have been Sons to
the former: and therefore whatever has been said for Sons, is also verified in
Brothers. As for instance, though his Royal Highness be only Brother to King
CHARLES the II., yet he is Son to King CHARLES I. and therefore, as Saint Paul
says, if a Son, then ane Heir, except he be secluded by the existence and
Succession of ane elder Brother.

That this gradual Succession is founded on the Law of nations, is as clear by
the Laws of the 12 Tables, and the Praetorian Law of Rome. And if we consider
the Monarchy either old or new, we will find, that wherever the Monarchy was
not elective, the degrees of succession were there exactly observed. And
Bodinus de Republ. lib. 6 Cap. 5. asserts, that, Ordo non tantum naturae and
divinae sed etiam omnium ubique gentium hoc postulat. From all which, Pope
Innocent in c. grand. de supplend. neglig. praelati concludes, In regnis
haereditariis caveri non potest ne filius aut frater succedat. And since it is
expressly determined, that the right of blood can be taken away by no positive
Law or Statute L. Jura Sanguinis ff. de Reg. jur. and L. 4. ff. de suis
legitim. and that the power of making a Testament, can be taken away by no Law
L. ita legatum ff. de conditionibus. I cannot see how the right of Succession
can be taken away by a Statute: for that is the same with the right of Blood,
and is more strongly founded upon the Law of nature, than the power of making
Testaments.

Since then this right is founded upon the Law of God, of nature and of
nations, it does clearly follow, that no Parliament can alter the same by their
municipal Statutes, as our Act of Parliament has justly observed.

For clearing whereof, it is fit to consider, that in all powers and
jurisdictions which are subordinat to one another, the Inferior should obey,
but not alter the power to which it is subordinat; and what it does contrary
thereto, is null and void. And thus, if the judges of England should publish
edicts contrare to Acts of Parliament, or if a Justice of Peace should ranverse
a decree of the judges of West-minster, these their endeavors would be void
and ineffectual. But so it is, that by the same principle, but in ane infinitely
more transcendent way, all Kings and Parliaments are subordinat to the Laws of
God, the Laws of Nature, and the Laws of Nations: And therefore no Act of
Parliament can be binding, to overturn what these have established.

This, as to the Law of God, is clear, not only from the general dictats of
Religion, but 28 Hen. 8. cap. 7. the Parliament uses these words, For no man
can dispense with Gods Laws; which we also affirm and think. And as to the
Laws of nature, they must be acknowledged to be immutable, from the principles
of reason. And the Law it self confesses that naturalia quaedam jura quae apud
omnes gentes peraeque observantur, divina quadam providentia constituta semper
firma, atque immutabilia permanent. sed naturalia Institut. de Jur, Natural.
and. singulorum de rer. divis: And when the Law declares, that a Supreme Prince
is free from the obligation of Laws, Solutus legibus, which is the highest
power that a Parliament can pretend to, or arrive at; Yet Lawyers still
acknowledge that this does not exeem these Supreme powers from being liable to
the Laws of God, nature and nations, Accurs: in l. Princeps ff. de Leg.
Clementina pasturalis de re judicata Bart. in l. ut vim de justitia and jure
Voet. de Statutis Sect. 5. Cap. 1. nor can the Law of nations be overturned by
private Statutes, or any Supreme power. And thus all Statuts to the prejudice
of Ambassadors, who are secured by the Law of nations, are confessed by all to
be null, and the highest power whatsoever cannot take off the necessity of
denuncing war before a war can be Lawful. And Lawyers observe very well,
that these who would oppose the common dictats of mankind, should be looked
upon as enemies to all mankind.

My second argument shall be, that the King and Parliament can have no more
power in Parliament than any absolute Monarch has in his own Kingdom: for, they
are when joined, but in place of the Supreme power, sitting in judgment; and
therefore they cannot in Law do what any other Supreme and absolute Monarch
cannot do. For all the power of Parliaments consists only in their consent, but
we must not think, that our Parliaments have ane unlimited power de jure, so,
as that they may forfeit or kill without a cause or decerne against the
Subjects without citing or hearing them; or, that they can alienat any part of
de Kingdom; or Subject the wholl Kingdom to France or any other Foreign
Prince: all which deeds would be null in themselves, and would not hinder the
party injured from a due redress. For if our Parliaments had such power, we
would be the greatest slaves, and live under the most arbitrary Government
imaginable. But so it is, that no Monarch whosoever can take from any man what
is due to him, by the Law of God, nature, and nations. For being himself
inferior to these he cannot overturne their statuts. Thus a Prince cannot even
ex plenitudine potestatis legitimat a Bastard in prejudice of former children
though they have only but a hope of Succession l. 4. and sequen de natal.
restituend. and for the same reason, it is declared in the same Law, that he
cannot restore a freed man (restituere libertum natalibus) in prejudice of his
Patron, who was to succeed, though that succession was but by a municipal Law.
For clearing which question, It is fit to know that the solid lawyers who treat
jus publicum, as ARNISAEUS and others, do distinguish betwixt such Kingdoms, as
were at first conferred by the People, and wherein the Kings succeed by
contract, and in these, the Laws made by King and People can exclude, or bind
the Successor. And yet even here, they confess, that this proceeds not, because
the Predecessor can bind the Successor, but because the People renew the
paction with the succeeding King. But where the Successor is to succeed ex jure
regni, in hereditary Monarchies, there they assert positively that the
Predecessor cannot prejudge the Successors right of Succession. Which they
prove by two arguments. First, that the Predecessor has no more power, nor
right, than the Successor: for the same right, that the present King has to the
possession, the next in Blood has to the Succession. And all our Laws run in
favors of the King, and his Heirs, and no man can tie his equal, or give him
the Law, par in parem non habet dominium. The second is, that it were unjust
and unequitable that the Predecessor should rob his Successor nulla ergo
(says Arnisaeus Cap. 7. Number. 5.) clausula Successori jus auferri potest, modo
succedat ille ex jure regni. And Hottoman: lib. 2. de Regno Galliae asserts,
that in France which is a very absolute Monarchy, Eaquae jure Regio primogenito
competunt, ne Testamento quidem patris adimi possunt. And thus when the King of
France designed to break the Salique Law of Succession, as in the Reign of
CHARLES the V. It was found impracticable by the three Estates, and when
Pyrrhus was to prefer his youngest Son to the Crown, the Epirots following
the Law of Nations, and their own, refused him, Paus. lib. 1. In the year 1649.
Also Amurat the grand Seignior, having left the Turkish Empire to Han the
Tartarian, passing by his Brother Ibrahim, the wholl Officers* of that State,
did unanimously Cancel that Testament, and restore Ibrahim, the true Heir tho a
silly fool.

Which shows the opinion not only of Lawyers but of whole nations and
Parliaments; Tho vander Graaff, an Hollander confesses, that it is not Lawful
to choose any of his Sons to succeed him, in which, the general quiet of the
Kingdom is much concerned. And therefore, tho the next Heir were wiser, braver,
and more generally beloved; Yet the more immediate must be received, as choos'd
by God, whither good or bad, and as honored with his Character. And if Kings
could have inverted their Succession, and choos'd their own Successor Saint
Lewis had preferred his own third Son to Lewis his eldest, and Alfonsus King of
Leon in Spain, had preferred his Daughters to Ferdinand his eldest Son. And
Edward the VI. of England had preferred, and did actually prefer the Lady
Iean Gray to his Sisters Mary, and Elizabeth. And if Successions especially of
such great importance, had not been fixed by immutable Laws of God, and nature,
the various and unconstant inclinations of the present Governors, especially
when shaken by the importunity of Step-mothers and Mothers, or clouded by the
jealousy of flatterers, or favorites, had made the Nations whom they Governed,
very unhappy: and therefore, God did very justly, and wisely setle this
Succession, that both King and People might know, that it is by him that Kings
Reign, and Kingdoms are secured in Peace against faction. and it were strange,
that this should not hold in Kings, since even amongst subjects the Honor and
Nobility that is bestowed upon a Man and his Heirs, does so necessarly descend
upon those Heirs, that the Father, or Predicessor cannot seclude the next
Successor, or derogat from his right, either by renuncing, resigning, following
base or mean Trades, or any other: For say those Lawyers, since he derives
this right from his old Progenitors, and owes it not to his Father, his Fathers
deed should not prejudge him therein. Fab. Cod. 9. Tit. 28. Def. 1. Warnee;
Consil. 20. Number. 7. And as yet the Estates of Parliament in both Nations have
no legislative power, otherwise than by assenting to what the King does; so
that if the King cannot himself make a Successor, neither can they by
consenting: and all that their consent could imply would only be that, they and
their Successors should not oppose his nomination, because of their consent.
But that can never amount to a power of transferring the Monarchy from one
branch to another, which would require, that the Transferrers; or bestowers had
the Supreme power Originally in themselves, nemo enim plus juris in alium
transfer potest quam ipse in se habet. And if the States of Parliament had
this power Originally in themselves to bestow, why might they not reserve it to
themselves? And so perpetuate the Government in their own hands: And this moved
judge Jenkins in his treatise concerning the liberty and freedom of the
subject, page 25. To say, that no King can be Named, or in any time made in
this Kingdom, by the People. A Parliament never made a King, for there were
Kings before there were Parliaments, and Parliaments are summoned by the Kings
writtes.

Fourthly, A King cannot in Law alienat his Crown, as is undeniable in the
opinion of all Lawyers, and if he do, that deed is void and null, nor could he
in Law consent to an Act of Parliament declaring that he should be the last
King. And if such consents and Acts had been sufficient to bind Successors,
many silly Kings in several parts of Europe had long since been prevailed upon,
to alter their Monarchy from Haereditarie to Elective; or to turn it in a
Commonwealth; and therefore by the same reason, they cannot consent to exclude
the true Successor: For if they may exclude one they may exclude all.

5. In all Societies and Governments, but especially where there is any
association of powers, as in our Parliaments, there are certain fundamentals,
which like the Noble parts in the Body are absolutely necessar for its
preservation; for without these, there would be no Balance, or certainty. And
thus with us, if the King and each of the Estates of Parliament had not
distinct and known limits (set by the gracious concessions of our Monarchs)
each of them would be ready to invade one another Privileges. And thus I
conceive that if the Parliament should consent to alienate the half of the
Kingdom, or to subject the whole to a Stranger, as in King John's case in
England, and the Baliols in Scotland, it has been found by the respective
Parliaments of both Kingdoms, that, that Statute would not oblidge the
Successor. Or if the House of commons in England, or the Burrowes of Scotland
should consent to any Act excluding their Estate and respresentatives from the
Parliament, doubtless that Statute excluding them would not prejudge their
Successors; because that Act was contrare to one of the fundamental Laws of the
Nation. And the late Acts of Parliaments excluding Bishops, were reprobated by
the ensuing Parliaments, as such; and therefore by the same rule, any Statute
made excluding the legal Successor, would be null and void, as contrare to one
of the great Fundamental Rights of the Nation. And what can be called more a
Fundamental Right than the Succession of our Monarchy? Since our Monarchy in
this Isle, has ever been acknowledged to be hereditary. And that this
acknowledgment is the great Basis whereupon most of all the positions of our
Law run, and are established: such as, that the King never dies, since the very
moment in which the last King dies, the next Successor in Blood is Legally
King, and that without any express recognizance from the People, and all that
oppose him are Rebels, His Commissions are valide, He may call Parliaments,
dispose the Lands pertaining to the Crown, all men are liable to do him homage;
and hold their Rights of him and his Heirs. And generally this principle runs
through all the veins of our Law. It is that, which gives life and Authority to
our Statutes, but receives none from them; which are the undeniable marks and
Characters of a Fundamental Right in all Nations. But that this right of lineal
Succession is one of the Fundamental, and unalterable Laws of the Kingdom of
Scotland, is clear, by the Commission granted by the Parliament for the union
in Anno 1604. In which these words are, his Majesty vouchsafeing, to assure
them of his sincere disposition and clear meaning, no way by the foresaid Union
to prejudge or hurt the Fundamental Laws, ancient Privileges, Offices and
Liberties of this Kingdom; whereby not only the Princely Authority of his most
Royal descent has been these many ages maintained, but also his Peoples
securities of their Lands and Livings, Rights, Liberties, Offices and dignities
preserved: Whilks if they should be innovated, such confusion should ensue; as
it could no more be a free Monarchy.

6. There would many great inconveniences arise, both to King and People, by
the Parliaments having this power: For weak Kings might by their own
simplicity, and Gentle Kings by the rebellion of their Subjects be induced to
consent to such Acts, in which their Subjects would be tempted to cheat in the
one case, and rebel in the other. Many Kings likewise might be wrought upon,
by the importunity of their Wives, or Concubins, or by the misrepresentations
of Favorites, to disinherit the true Successor; and he likewise to prevent this
arbitrarienesse, would be obliged to enter in a faction for his own support,
from his very infancy. This would likewise animate all of the Blood Royal, to
compete for the Throne, and in order thereto, they would be easily induced to
make factions in the Parliament, and to hate one another; whereas the true
Successor would be ingadg'd to hate them all, and to endeavor the ruin of
such as he thought more popular than himself. Nor would the people be in better
case, since they behooved to expect upon all these accounts, constant civil
wars and animosities, and by being unsure whom to follow, might be in great
hazard by following him who had no Right. And their rights bearing to hold of
the King and his Heirs, it would be dubious to the vassals, who should be their
superior, as well, as who should be their King. It is also in reason to be
expected, that Scotland will ever own the legal descent: and thus we should
under different Kings of the same Race, be involved in new and constant civil
wars; France shall have a constant door opened, by allyances with Scotland, to
disquiet the peace of the whole Isle; and England shab loose all the endeavors
it used to unite this Isle within it self. Another great absurdity and
inconveniency which would follow upon the exclusion of the lineal Successor
would be, that if he had a Son, that Son behoov'd certainly to succeed; and
therefore after the next Lawful Heir were brought from abroad to Reign, he
behooved to return upon the Birth of this Son; and if he dyed he would be again
called home, and would be sent back by the Birth of another Son: which would
occasion such affronts, uncertainties, divisions, factions, temptations, that I
am sure, no good nor wise man could admit of such a project.

I find also, that as the debarring the Righteous Heir, is in reason, the
fruitful seed of all civil war and misery, (for who can Imagine that the
Righteous Heir will depart from his Right, or that wise men will endanger their
lives and fortunes in opposition to it?) so experience has demonstrated, how
dangerous, and bloody this injustice has proved. Let us remember amongst many
Domestic examples, the miseries that ensued upon the exclusion of Mordredus
the Son of Lothus; the destruction of the Picts for having secluded Alpinus the
Righteous Heir; the wars during the reign of William the Conqueror; these
betwixt King Stevin and Henry the II. betwixt the Houses of Lancaster and York;
betwixt the Bruce and the Baliol; the murder of Arthur Duke of Britanny, true
Heir of the Crown of England, with many other foreign Histories, which tell
us of the dreadful michiefs arising from Pelops preferring his youngest Son to
the Kingdom of Micene; from Aedipus commanding that Polinices his youngest Son
should reign alternatly with the eldest; from Parisatis the Queen of Persia's
preferring her youngest Son Cyrus, to her eldest Artaxerxes, from Aristodemus
admitting his two Sons Proclus, and Euristhenes to an Equal share in the
Lacedemonian Throne. The like observations are to be made in the Succession of
Ptolemaeus Lagus and Ptolemaeus Phisco, In the Sons of Severus, in the
Succession of Sinesandus who killed his Brother Suintilla Righteours Heir of
Spain, And that of Francis and Fortia Duke of Millan with thousands of others:
In all which, either the usurpers or the Kingdom that obeyed them, perished
utterly. To prevent which differences and mischiefs, the Hungarians would not
admit Almus the younger Brother, in exclusion of the elder Colomanus, though
a silly deformed creature, albeit Almus was preferred by Ladislaus (the Kings
elder Brother) to both. Nor would France acquiesce in St. Lewis his preferring
CHARLES his 3 Son, to Lewis the eldest. And the English refused to obey Lady
Iean Gray, in prejudice of Queen Marie, though a Papist and persecuter. Tali
and constanti veneratione nos Angli legitimos Reges prosequimur etc. says an
English Historian.

7. If Parliaments had such powers as this, then our Monarchy would not be
hereditary, but elective; the very essence of ane hereditary Monarchy
consisting in the right of Succession, according to the contingency of blood.
Whereas if the Parliament can prefer the next, save one, they may prefer
the last of all the line: for the next save one, is no more next than the last
is next. And the same reason by which they can choose a Successor (which can
only be that they have a power above him) should likewayes in my opinion
justify their deposing of Kings. And since the Successor has as good Right to
succeed, as the present King has to Govern (for that Right of blood which makes
him first, makes the other next, and all these Statuts which acknowledge the
present Kings Prerogatives, acknowledge that they belong to him and his Heirs.)
It follows clearly, that if the Parliament can preclude the one, they may
exclude the other. And we saw even in the last age, that such reasons as are
now urged to incapacitat the children of our last Monarch, from the hope of
Succession. viz. Popery, and arbitrary Government, did embolden men to
Dethrone, and Murder the Father himself who was actual King.

8. That such Acts of Parliament, altering the Succession are ineffectual, and
null, Is clear from this, that though such an Act of Parliament were made, it
could not debar the true Successor: because by the Laws of all Nations, and
particularly of these Kingdoms, the Right of Succession purges all defects, and
removes all impediments, which can prejudge him who is to Succeed. And as Craig
one of our learned lawyers has very well expressed it, Tanta est Regii
sanguinis praerogativa, and dignitas, ut vitium non admittat, nec se
contaminari patiatur. And thus though he who were to succeed, had committed
murder, or were declared a traitor formerly to the Crown for open Rebellion
against the King, and Kingdom; yet he needed not be restored by Act of
Parliament upon his coming to the Crown: But his very Right of blood would
purge all these imperfections. Of which there are two reasons given by Lawyers,
one is, that no man can be a Rebel against himself, nor can the King have a
Superior. And consequently, there can be none whom he can offend. And it were
absurd that he who can restore all other men, should need to be restored
himself. The second reason is, because the punishment of crimes, such as
confiscations, etc. Are to be inflicted by the Kings Authority, or to fall to
the Kings Thesaury; and it were most absurd, that a man should exact from
himself a punishment. Likeas, upon this account it is, that though in the Canon
Law, Bastards cannot be promov'd to sacred orders without dispensation, nor can
alibi nati, that is to say, people born out of England be admitted to succeed
in England, by express Act of Parliament there; Yet Agapaetus, Theodorus,
Gelasius and many others, have been admitted to be Popes without any formal
dispensation, their election clearing that imperfection. And the Statute of
alibi nati, has been often found not to extend to the Royal line.

That the Succession to the Crown purges all defects, is clear, by many
instances, both at home and abroad. The instances at home are, in England Henry
the VI. Being disabled and attainted of high treason by Act of Parliament, it
was found by the Judges, notwithstanding that from the moment he assumed the
Crown, he had Right to succeed without being restored. And the like was
resolved by the Judges in the case of Henry the VII, As Bacon observes in his
History of Henry the VII. fol. 13. And in the case of Queen Elizabeth, who was
declared Bastard by Act of Parliament, as is clear by Cambden anno 2.
Elizabeth. And though in Scotland there be no express instances of this,
because though some Rebellious Ringleaders in Scotland, have often in a private
capacity been very injurious to their King; Yet their Parliaments have been
ever very tender of attainting the blood Royal, or presumptive Heirs. But
Alexander Duke of Albanie, and his Succession being declared traitors, by his
Brother King James the IV. his Son John was notwithstanding called home from
France upon his Uncles death, and declared Tutor and Governor, without any
remission, or being restored: that employment being found to be due to him by
the right of blood: therefore he had been much more declared the true Successor
of the Crown if his Cousin King James the V. had died.

These being sufficient to establish our design, I shall mention only some
foreign stories.

CHARLES the VII. of France who though banished by Sentence of the Parliament
of Paris* did thereafter succeed to the Crown. And though Lewis the XII. was
forfeited for taking up arms against CHARLES the VIII. Yet he succeeded to him
without restitution. And Lewis the II. his Son being declared a Rebel, whom his
Father desiring to disinherit, and to substitut in his place Charles Duke of
Normandy, that Son had succeeded if he had not been hindered by the Nobility,
who plainly told him it was impossible to exclude his Sone from the Succession.

My next task shall be to satisfy the arguments brought for mantaining this
opinion, whereof the first is.

That God himself has authorized the inverting the Right of Succession, by the
examples of Esau, Solomon, and others.

To which I answer, that these instances which are warranted by express
commands from God, are no more to be drawn into example, than the robbing of
the Egyptians earrings. And it is needing an express command, and the
expressing of that command, does evince, that otherwise Jacob, nor Solomon
could not have succeeded against the privilege of Birthright and possession.

The next objection, is that it is naturally implied in all Monarchies, that
the people shall obey whilst the Prince Governs justly, As in the paction
betwixt David, and the people 2 Samuel 5. Which is most suitable to the
principles of justice, and Government: Since relations cannot stand by one
side; so that when the King leaves off to be King, and becomes a Tyrant, the
people may consult their own security in laying him aside, as Tutors may be
removed when they are suspect. And that this is most just when Kings are
Idolaters since God is rather to be obeyed then men.

To all which it is answered, that God who loves order, and knows the
extravagant levity, and insolence of men, especially when baited by hope of
prey, or promotion, did wisely think fit to ordain under the pain of eternal
damnation, that all men should be subject to Superior powers for conscience
sake. 1 Pet. 2. 13. and that whoever resists the power, resists God, Romans 13.
2. reserving the punishment of Kings to himself, as being only their Superior.
And thus David, Asa, and others, committed crimes, but were not deposed, nor
debart'd by the people. Nor were even the Idolatrous Kings such as Achab,
Manasse, etc. judged by their subjects, nor did the Prophets exhort the people
to rise against them, though they were opposing Gods express, and immediate
will. And overturning the uncontraverted fundamentals of Religion. Nor did the
Fathers of the primitive Church, excite the Christians to oppose the Heathen,
and Idolatrous Princes, under which they lived: and Paul commands them to pray
for these Heathen Emperors. Nor was the Emperor Basilicus deposed for
abrogating the Council of Chalcedon, as is pretended by some Republicans, but
was turned out by the just Successor Zeno, whom he had formerly dethroned. Nor
were Zeno or Anastasius degraded for their errors in Religion, or their vices
by the ancient Christians: but were oppressed by private faction. And sure they
must think God unable to redress himself, who without warrant, and against his
express warrant, will usurp so high a power. And we in this rebellious
principle, own the greatest extravagancy with which We can charge the Pope and
Jesuits, and disowne not only our own Confession of faith which Article 1.
Chap. 22. acknowledges, that infidelity, or difference in Religion does not
make void the Magistrates just; or legal authority, nor free the People from
their due obedience to him, but contradict the best Protestant divines, as
Musculus, Melancthon and others vid. libell. de vitand, superstit. Anno 1150.
and Consil. Biden. Dec. 1. Consil. 10. and Decad. 10. Consil. 5. nor can the
subterfuge used by Buchanan, and others satisfy, whereby they contend that the
former Texts of Scripture prove only that the Office, but not the Persons of
Kings are Sacred* so that Parliaments or People may lay aside the Persons,
though not the Office, seeing the Sacred Text secures oftener the Person, than
the Office as I have formerly more fully prov'de. And if this principle
prevailed as to the differences in the Theory of Religion, it would in the next
step be urged as to the practice of Religion; and we would change our Kings,
because we thought them not pious, as well as Protestant. And did not our
Sectarians refine so far, as to think dominion founded on grace? and this
opinion seems to my self more solid than the other, for certainly an impious
Protestant, is a worse Governor, and less Gods Vicegerent, and image, than a
devout Papist. And amongst Protestants, every Sect will reject a King, because
he is not of their opinion. And thus our Covenanters, by the Act of the
West-kirk Anno 1650. declared, they would disown our present Monarch, if he did
not own the Covenant. And though a King were Protestant, yet still this pretext
that he designed to introduce Popery, would raise his People against him, if
differences in Religion could Lawfully Arm subjects against their King, or did
empower them to debar his Successor. And when this cheat prevailed against
devout King Charles the I, the Martyr of that Orthodox Faith to which he was
said to be enemy, what a madness is it to allow this fatal error, which was
able to ruin us in the last age, and went so near to destroy us in this? This
is indeed, to allow that arbitrariness against our Kings, which we would not
allow in them to us.

The second Objection is, that in England the Parliament has frequently
devolved the Crown and Government upon such as were not otherwise to have
succeeded, as in the instances of Edward the II. and Richard the III, the first
of whom was most unjustly deposed, for making use of Gavestoun, and the
Spencers; which shows how extravagant the People ar in their humors, rather
than how just their power is: for besides, that do not read, that these
Counselors were unsufferable, there is no good Christian that can say, that a
King can be deposed for using ill Counselors. And as to Richard the III. his
case is so fully examined, and all the Articles brought both against him, and
Edward the II. so fully answered by the learned Arnisaeus a Protestant Lawyer,
(and who had no other interest in that debate than a love to Truth and Law) in
that treatise, Quod nulla ex causa subditis fas sit contra legitimum principem
arma sumere, that we Protestants should be ashamed to bring again to the field
such instances, upon which Arnisaeus, in answer to the 14. Article against
Richard the II, viz. that he refused to allow the Laws made in Parliament,
does very well remark, that this was in effect to consent to their being King,
and to transfer upon them the Royal power, and this will be the event of all
such undertakings.

The instances of Henry the IV. and Henry the VII., are of no more weight than
the other two, since these were likewayes only Kings de facto, till King Henry
the VII. by his marriage with the Lady Elizabeth, eldest Daughter to King
Edward the IV., did by her transmit a just title to his Successor: and
therefore it was not strange, that either of these should allow the Parliament
to interpose, when they behooved to owe to them the possession of the Throne.
But yet Henry the VII. himself (as the Lord Bacon relates in his History)
shunned to have the Parliament declare his title to be just, being content with
these ambiguous words, viz. that the inheritance of the Crown should rest,
remain and abide in the King, etc. And upon this account it was, that the same
King caused make a Law, that such as should serve the King for the time, being
in his wars, could not be attainted or impeached in their persons or Estates.

As to Henry the VIII. his procuring an Act, whereby the Parliament declares
that in case he had no issue by the Lady Jean Seymour, he might dispose of the
Crown to whatsoever person he should in his own discretion think fit.

It is answered, that by a former Statute in the 25 year of his Reign, he by
Act of Parliament setles the Crown upon the Heirs male of his own body, and for
lack of such issue, to Lady Elizabeth, and for lack of such issue also, to the
next Heirs of the King, who should for ever succeed according to the right of
Succession of the Crown of England; which shows that the Succession to the
Crown of England is established by the Law of Nature, and the Fundamental Laws
of England, upon the Heirs of Blood, according to the proximity of degrees; so
that though that King did afterward prevail with the Parliament to declare
this Elizabeth a Bastard, as he did also his Daughter Mary, by another Act, and
resolve to setle the Crown, upon Henry Fitz Roy, Duke of Richmond, yet these
Acts teach us how dangerous it is to leave Parliaments to the impression of
Kings in the case of naming a Successor, as it is to expose Kings to the
arbitrariness of Parliaments. But such care had God of his own Laws, that Mary
succeeded notwithstanding She was Papist, and Elizabeth succeeded her, though
she was declared Bastard; the Rights of Blood prevailing over the formalities
of divorce, and the dispensations of Popes: as the strength of Nature does
often prevail over poisons. And God removed the Duke of Richmond by death, to
prevent the unjust competition, and so little notice was taken of this; and the
subsequent Act Anno 1535, that the Heirs of Blood succeeded without repealing
of that Act, as ane Act in it self invalide from the beginning: for only such
Acts are past by, without being repealed. And Blackwood page 45. observes very
well, that so conscious were the Makers of these Acts, of the illegality
thereof, and of their being contrary to the immutable Laws of God, Nature and
Nations, that none durst produce that Kings Testament wherein he did nominat a
Successor, conform to the power granted by these Acts, that how soon they were
freed by his death from the violent oppressions that had forced them to alter a
Successor three several times, and at last to swear implicitly to whomever he
should nominat, (a preparative which this age would not well bear though they
cite it) they proclaimed first Queen Mary their Queen though a Papist, and
thereafter Queen Elizabeth, whom themselves had formerly declared a Bastard.
And as in all these Acts there is nothing declaring the Parliaments to have
power to name a Successor, but only giving a power to the King, for preventing
mischiefs; that might arise upon the dubiousness of the Succession, to nominat
a Successor; two of the legal Successors having been declared Bastards upon
some niceties, not of nature, but of the Popes Bulls for divorcing their
Mothers: so, this instance can only prove, that the King may nominat a
Successor, and that the Parliament may consent, not to quarrel it, (which is
all that they do) but does not at all prove, that where the Right of Nature is
clear, the Parliament may invert the same. And strangers who considered more
the dictats of Law than of Passion, did in that age conclude, that no Statute
could be valide when made contrare to the fundamental Law of the Kingdom,
Arnisaeus Cap. 7. Number. 11. Henricus VIII. Angliae Rex Eduardum filium primo,
deinde Mariam, denique Elizabetham suos haeredes fecerat, verum non aliter ea
omnia valent quam sicum jure Regni conveniant, Vid. Curt. Tract. Feud. Par. 4.
Number. 129.

There seems greater difficulty to arise from the 13 Elizabeth c. 2. by which
it is enacted, that if any person shall affirm, that the Parliament of
England has not full power to bind and Govern the Crown in point of Succession
and descent, that such a person, during the Queens life, shall be guilty of
high treason.

But to this Act it is answered, that this Act does not debar the next legal
and natural Successor. And these words, That the Parliament has power to bind
and Govern the Succession, must be, as all other general expressions in
Statutes, interpreted and restricted by other uncontraverted Laws; and so the
sense must be, that the Parliament are Judge where there are differences
betwixt Competitors in nice and contravertable points which cannot be otherwise
decided: and both this and the former Acts made in Henry the VI. time, are not
general Laws but temporary Acts and personal Privileges; and so cannot
overturn the known current of Law. Quod vero contra rationem juris receptum
est, non est producendum ad consequentias. And in all these instances it is
remarkable, that the restriction was made upon the desire of the Sovereign,
and not of the Subject. And if we look upon this Act as made to secure against
Mary Queen of Scotland, and to let her know, that it was to no purpose for her
to design any thing against the Right, or Person of Queen Elizabeth, as being
declared a Bastard, by Act of Parliament in England; since her other right as
next undoubted Heir by Blood to the Crown, might be altered, or Governed: we
must acknowledge it to be only one of these Statutes, which the Law says, are
made ad terrorem and ex terrore only. Nor was there ever use made of it by
Queen Elizabeth, nor her Parliaments; so fully were they convinced, that this
pretended power was so unjust, as that it could not be justified by an Act of
Parliament, being contrair to the Laws of God, of Nature, of Nations, and of
the Fundamental Laws of both Kingdoms. But this Law being made to exclude Queen
Mary, and the Scottish line, as is clear by that clause, wherein it is declared
that every Person or Persons of what degree or Nation soever they be, shall
during the Queens life declare or publish, that they have Right to the Crown of
England during the Queens life, shall be disinabled to enjoy the Crown in
Succession, inheritance, or otherwise, after the Queens death; It therefore
follows, that it was never valide: For if it had, King James might have
thereby been excluded by that person who should have succeeded next to the
Scottish race. For it is undeniable, that Queen Marie did, during Queen
Elizabeth's life, pretend Right to the Crown, upon the account that Queen
Elizabeth was declared Bastard. And therefore the calling in of King James
after this Act, and the acknowledging his title, does clearly evince, that the
Parliament of England knew, that they had no power to make any such Act. The
words of which acknowledgement of King James's Right, I have thought fit to set
down, as it is in the statute it self, 1. Ja. Cap. 1. That the Crown of England
did descend upon King James by inherent Birthright, as being lineally, justly,
and Lawfully next, and sole Heir of the Blood Royal. And to this recognition
they do submit themselves, and posterities for ever, until the last drop of
their Blood be spilt. And further does beseech his Majesty to accept of the
same recognition, as the first Fruits of their Loyalty, and Faith to his
Majesty, and to his Royal progeny, and posterity for ever.

It may be also objected, that by the 8, Act. Parl. 1. Ja. 6. It is provided in
Scotland, that all Kings* and Princes that shall happen to reign and bear Rule
over that Kingdom, shall at the time of their Coronation, make their faithful
promise by Oath in presence of eternal God, that they shall mantaine the true
Religion of Jesus Christ, the preaching of the Holy Word, and due and Right
Administration of the Sacraments now received and preached within this Kingdom;
from which two conclusions may be inferred, 1. That by that Act the Successor
to the Crown may be restricted. 2. That the Successor to the Crown must be a
Protestant, that being the Religion which was Professed and established the
time of this Act.

To which it is answered, that this Act relates only to the Crowning of the
King, and not to the Succession. Nor is a coronation absolutely necessar,
Coronatio enim magis est ad ostentationem, quam ad necessitatem. Nec ideo Rex
est quia coronatur, sed coronatur quia Rex est. Oldard: consil. 90. number. 7.
Balbus lib. de coronat. page 40. Nor do we read that any Kings were Crowned in
Scripture except Ioas. And Clovis King of France was the first, who was Crowned
in Europe. Nor are any Kings of Spain Crowned till this day. Neither is ane
Coronation Oath requisite; Sisenandus being the first who in the 4. Tolletan
Council gave such an Oath amongst the Christians, as Trajan was the first
amongst the heathen Emperors. And we having had no Coronation Oath till the
Reign of King Gregory, which was in Anno 879, he having found the Kingdom
free from all Restrictions, could not have limited his Successor, or at least
could not have debarred him by an Oath. Nullam enim poterat legem dictare
posteris, cum par in parem non habeat imperium, as our Blackwood observes. page
13. (2.) There is no clause irritant in this Act debarring the Successor, or
declaring the Succession null in case his Successor gave not this Oath. 3. The
Lawful Successor though he were of a different Religion from his People (as
God forbid he should be) may easily swear, that he shall mantaine the Laws
presently standing. And any Parliament may legally secure the Successor from
overturning their Religion or Laws, though they cannot debar him. And though
the Successor did not swear to mantaine the Laws, Yet are they in little danger
by his Succession; since all Acts of Parliament stand in force, till they be
repealed by subsequent Parliaments: And the King cannot repeal an Act without
the consent of Parliament. But to put this beyond all debate, the 2. Act of
this current Parliament is opponed, whereby it is declared, that the Right and
administration of the Government is immediately devolved upon the nixt Lawful
Heir after the death of the King or Queen, and that no difference in Religion,
nor no Law nor Act of Parliament can stop or hinder them in the free and actual
administration; which is an abrogation of the foresaid Act concerning the
Coronation as to this point; for how can the administration be devolved
immediately upon the Successor, if he cannot administrat till he be Crowned, and
have sworn this Oath.

The next objection is, that since the King and Parl. may by Act of Parl. alter
the Successions of private families though transmitted by the Right of blood,
why may they not alter the Succession in the Royal family?

To which it is answered, that the reason of the difference lies in this, that
the Heirs of the Crown owe not their Succession to Parliaments: for they
succeed by the Laws of God, nature, and the Fundamental Laws of the nation;
whereas private Families are Subject to Parliaments, and inferior to them, and
owe their private Rights to a municipal Law, and so may and ought in point of
Right to be regulated by them. And yet I am very clear, that a Parliament
cannot arbitrarly debarr the eldest Son of a private Family, and devolve the
Succession upon the younger: and if they did so, their Acts would be null. But
if this argument were good, we might as well conclude by it, that no person
born out of England, or attainted of treason could succeed to the Crown;
Because he could not succeed to a private Estate. All which and many more
instances do clearly demonstrat that the Successor to the Crown cannot be
debarred, nor the Succession to the Crown diverted by Act of Parliament.

The last objection is, that Robert the III. King of Scotland, was by ane Act
of Parliament preferred to David and Walter, who (as he pretends) were truly
the eldest lawful Sons of Robert the 2d. because Euphan Daughter to the Earl of
Ross was first lawful Wife to King Robert the 2d, and she bore him David Earl
of Strathern, and Walter Earl of Athol, Alexander Earl of Buchan, and Euphan
who was married to James Earl of Dowglass, after whose deceass he married
Elizabeth Muir, Daughter to Sir Adam Muir; not so much (as Buchanan observes)
from any design to marry a second Wife, as from the great love he carried to
Elizabeth Muir, whom because of her extraordinary Beauty he had loved very
passionatly in his youth, and before he married the Earl of Rosses Daughter,
and from the love which he bore to the Sons whom Elizabeth had born before that
first Marriage, who were John Earl of Carrick (who thereafter succeeded to the
Crown by the Title of Robert the 3d,) and Robert Earl of Fife and Monteith, he
prevailed with the Parliament to prefer John eldest Son by Elizabeth Muir, to
the two Sons which he had by the Earl of Rosses Daughter, who was (as they
pretend) his first lawful Wife.

In which though I might debate many nice points of Law relating to this
Subject, yet I choose only to insist on these few convincing Answers.

1. That in a Case of so great moment Historians should be little credited,
except they could have produced very infallible Documents; and as in general
one Historian may make all who succeed him err, so in this Case Boethius (who
was the first) lived and wrote 200 years after the Marriage of King Robert the
2d, and wrote his History at Aberdeen, very remote from the Registers and
Records by which he should have instructed himself; nor did he know the
importance of this point, having touched it only transiently, though it has
been design'dly pressed by Buchanan, to evince that the Parliaments of Scotland
might prefer any of the Royal Line they pleased; and it is indeed probable that
King Robert the 2d. did for some time make no great noise of his first Marriage
with Elizabeth Muir, least the meaness of the Match should have weakened his
Interest upon his first coming to the Crown, he being himself the first of the
Race of the Stewarts, and having so strong Competitors as the Earl of Dowglass,
who claimed Right to the Crown in the Right of the Baliol and the Cummings, as
Boethius himself observes.

2. King Robert the 3d. having succeeded as the eldest lawful Son, and having
been received as such by that Parliament, and his Posterity by all succeeding
Parliaments, the Possession of the King and the Acquiescence of the People is
the most infallible proof that can be adduc'd for proving that Robert was the
eldest lawful Son, nor have most Kings in Europe, or the Heads of most private
Families any other proof of their being the eldest and lawful Sons, save that
they succeeded and were acknowledged as such.

3. To balance the authority of these Historians, I shall produce the
Testimony of the Learned Sir Lewis Stewart, one of the most famous Lawyers we
ever had, and who ought much more to be believed than Buchanan, not only
because he was more disinterested, but because he founds upon Acts of
Parliament and old Charters which he himself had seen in the Registers, in
which Elizabeth Muir is acknowledged to have been the first Wife. Buchananus
lib. 9. in vitam Roberti 2. affirmat Euphaniam Comitis Rossenssis filiam primam
Regis Roberti 2. uxorem fuisse and ea mortua, Regem superinduxisse Elizabetham
Moram ex qua prius Liberos ternos mares suscepisset, and ^am ^x^rem duxisse,
ejusque liberos regno desti^^sse, ut postea eorum natu maximus suc^^essit quod
quam falsum sit, apparet ex archivis in carcere Edinburgensi reconditis, ubi
exstant separata acta duorum Parliamentorum, subscripta manibus
Ecclesiasticorum praesulum, nobilium, baronum, and aliorum statuum Parliamenti,
and eorum sigillis roborata, quibus Elizabetha Mora agnoscitur prima uxor, and
Euphania Rosse secunda, and liberis ex Elizabetha Mora tanquam justis
haeredibus; Regni, successive regnum dcernitur, and post eos liberis Euphaniae
Rosse nec non ibidem cartae extant plurima factae per Davidem secundum, eorum
patruum magnum ex diversit terris. Ioanni filio primogenito, nepotis ejus
Roberti, dum Euphania Rosse viverit nec non Dar vidi filio natu maximo
Euphaniae Rosse quem solum filium indigitat Roberti nepotis, quod non fecisset
si Elizabetha Mora non prius fuisset nupta Roberto ejus nepoti, na^
primogenitus nunquam attribuitur notho in^ ego plures quam vigint^ cartas in
archivis inveni, ubi etiam eas reliqui, ex quibus sole clarius elucessit,
Elizabetham Moram prima^^ f^isse uxorem, and Euphaniam Rosse secundam, nam
extra contraversiam, liberi Elizabethae Morae etate grandiores era^t liberis
Euphaniae Rosse: which Paper I did get from the Lord Pitmeden, who has himself
written some learned Observations upon this point.

4. I have my self seen an Act of Parliament (found out by the industry of Sir
George Mackenzie of Tarbet, now Lord Register) having the entire Seals of the
Members of Parliament appended thereto, by which the Parliament do swear
Allegiance to Robert the 2d. the first King of the Race of the Stewarts; and
after him Roberto Comiti de Carrict, filio suo nat^ maximo (his eldest Son) in
Anno 1371, which was the first year of his Reign; and if the pretended defect
be true, it was a very palpable, and a very undeniable one, and could not but
have been unanswerably known to the whole Nation. And how can we imagine, that
the whole Parliament would have unanimously drawn upon themselves so dreadful a
Perjury, by excluding the lawful Heir, against their National Oath in the Reign
of K. Kenneth the 3d, whereby they swore to own* always the immediate Heir, or
that they would have entailed upon themselves a Civil War, by preferring even a
questionable Heir, after the Miseries which they had lately then felt, in the
competition betwixt the Bruce and the Baliol* Amongst which Seals, the Seal of
James Earl of Dowglass is one, and how ridiculous is it to think, that he would
sit and declare a Bastard preferable to the Brother of his own Lady, and to his
own Lady who would have succeeded if her Brothers had died without Succession:
Which Act of Parliament does also clearly prove, that Buchanan did not at all
understand matters of Fact in this part of the History, for he asserts, that
after the death of Euphan Ross, the King married Elizabeth Muir, and did by Act
of Parliament obtain the Crown to be settled upon Robert the 3d, Son to the
said Elizabeth Muir, upon whom he also bestowed the Title of Carrick; all which
is most false, for this Act of Parliament is dated in Anno 1371, and King
Robert the 2d. succeeded to the Crown that year, nor did Euphan Ross die till
the 3d. year after he succeeded to the Crown, and so not till the Year 1374,
and yet in Anno 1371 this Act is past, designing him Heir to the Crown, and
Earl of Carrick, and consequently he was so designed before the death of Euphan
Ross.

5. I have seen a Charter granted by King Robert the 2d, when he was only
Steward of Scotland, granted in anno 1165, and so long before he was King. In
which Charter likewise, John, thereafter King, by the name of Robert the 3d, is
a conjunct Disponer with him, under the express designation of the eldest Son
and Heir. Robertus Senescallus Scotiae, Comes de Strathern, and Ioannes
Senescallus primogenitus and haeresipsius Dominus Baroniae de Kyle, etc. which
Charter confirms to the Abbacy of Pasley several Lands disponed to them, by
Reginaldus More, Father to Sir William More of Abercorn. And I find that David
Duke of Rothsay, was always in the Charters granted by his Father King Robert
the first, called Primogenitus, and he was no Bastard, nor can this designation
be given to a Bastard, as is clear by Covar^v^as de Matrim. part. 2. cap. 8..
2. number 4. But how can it be imagined that the Monks of Pasley would have taken
a Right from a person as Heir to the Crown, who was not: for this would have
inferred Treason against them, beside the annulling their Right, or who could
understand better the lawfulness of a Marriage, than a body of Churchmen,
living in the time, and very near to the Residence of the married Persons, and
in whose Conventual-Church the said King Robert and Elizabeth Muir ly buried
together.

Item, I have seen in the Registers another Charter granted by King Robert the
2. in the first year of his Reign, with the consent of John Earl of Carrick,
primogenitus and haeres, Allano de Lavidia terrarum de Whitslet; And an other
granted by the said King, 1. June, anno primo regni, confirming to Paulo Mctire
a Charter granted by the Earl of Ross, Father to Euphan, wherein the said John
primogenitus and hares, is a Witness: And to show that the said Euphan Ross was
then living when he was so designed Heir, there is a Charter to her by the King
upon the very same day of the Lands of Lochleaven. As also, there is a Charter
granted by King Robert the 2d, the first year of his Reign, to Alexander his
Son, and another to John Kennedy of the Barrony of Dalrymple, in both which the
said John Earl of Carrick is called primogenitus, and is Witness with the Earl
of Dowglass; so that he has been designed eldest Son and Heir, openly,
uncontravertedly, and in all Papers, and with the consent of the second Wife
and her Relations.

6. In the Parliament 1372, the said John Earl of Carrick is designed to be
Lieutenant of the Kingdom, and all the Estates of Parliament swear to own him
in his Government, and which Statute is printed amongst the Satutes of King
Robert the 2d, Father to the said John, and which must be during the Marriage
with Euphan Ross, for she lived three years after her Husband was King, and he
succeeded to the Crown anno 1371: And this also confutes Buchanan, who asserts,
that he was created Earl of Carrick after the death of Euphan Ross, and it is
against all sense and reason to think that he could have been acknowledged
during her life, if he had not been the true Apparent Heir of the Crown and a
lawful Son.

7. Walter (who they pretend should have succeeded to the Crown,) having killed
his Nephew King James the first, Son to King Robert the 3d; He was not only not
owned after the death of the said King James, as certainly he had been if his
Title had been good, and his Right so recent and demonstrable, having so many
great and powerful Relations, that his Father was induced upon their account to
marry his Mother; but yet the said Walter was by all the Parliament unanimously
condemned as a Traitor, for having conspired the death of his lawful Prince.
Nor does Boethius justify Walter's Title in the least, but on the contrary,
magnifies the Parliament for their just Sentence. As did likewise Aeneas
Silvius the Popes learned Legate, who exhorted the Parliament to condemn him.

8. How is it imaginable, that King Robert who had so lately, and after a
strong competition come to the Crown, would have adventured to make his Title
yet more disputable, by preferring a Bastard to the true Heir, who had so many
Friends by his Mother, and who being an Infant had never disobliged him.

9. If we will consider the opinion of the Civilians, whom we and almost all
Nations follow in the Cases of Succession, we will find, that the said King
Robert the 3d was the eldest and lawful Son of King Robert the 2d. filius
legitimus, and non legitimatus. For, 1. They conclude, that a Son is proved to
be a lawful Son by the Assertion of the Father, Alciat tract praesumpt. Reg. 2,
praesumpt. 2. number. 6. and certainly the Father is the best Judge in such Cases;
but so it is we have the Father owning the said Robert the 3d. to be his eldest
Son and Heir, both in Charters and Acts of Parliamnets, which are the most
solemn of all Deeds. 2. Quando pater instituit aliquem tanquam filium s^um,
which holds in this Case, where the Father institutes and leaves him Heir, and
the Parliament swears Allegiance to him as the Heir, Mascard. de prob. vol. 2.
conclus. 799. And in dubious Cases, the Father's naming such a man as a Son,
presumes him to be a lawful Son, nominatio parentis inducit filiationem in
dubio, l. ex facto. si quis Rogatus ff. ad trebell. 3. Even Fame, and the
common opinion of the People, do in favors of these that are in Possession,
and in ancient Cases, prove and filiationem, and legitimationem, Mascard.
conclus. 792. but much more, where the Fame and common Opinion is adminiculated
by other Arguments, fulgos consil. 128. Panorm. in cap. transmiss, qui filii
sunt ligittimi. 4. When Writs are produced, calling a man a Son, the Law
concludes him to be a lawful Son. Mascard. vol. 2. conclus. 800. number 15. all
which can be easily subsum'd in our Case. In which Robert the 3d. is named not
only Son, but Heir, and Allegiance sworn to him, even in the lifetime of the
second Wife and her Relations sitting in Parliament, and all this acquiesc'd in
for many hundreds of years, and the Competitors punished as Traitors by the
unanimous consent of all the Parliament.

I know that Buchanan does most bitterly inveigh against those Laws made by
King Kenneth the 3d, as Laws whereby the ancient Right of Succession was
innovated, and whereby the Government was settled upon Children who were
neither able to consult with the People, nor to defend them, and whereby those
had the Government of the Nation conferred upon them who were not capable to
govern themselves.

To which my answer is, That in this Buchanan's Malice contradicts his History,
for his own History tells us, that the Scots swore Allegiance to Fergus and his
Posterity; and consequently Fergus's Son ought by Law to have succeeded, and
not his Brother, for his Brother was none of his Posterity, and therefore those
Laws made by K. Kenneth did but renew the old Law, and the innovation
introduced in favors of the Uncles, was a subversion of the fundamental Law to
which they had sworn. 2. That the old Law was not abrogated, but was in Being
by virtue of the first Oath, appears very clear by Buchanan himself, who
confesses, that upon the death of Durstus, a wicked Prince, it was debated
whether his Son should not succeed juxta sacramentum Fergusio prestitum
veteremque esse morem servandum, which acknowledges that the Succession was
even in these days established by Law, by Oath, and by Custom; and after the
death of Fergus the 2d, his Son Eugenius (though a Minor) was crowned, and his
Uncle Graemus allowed to be his Tutor. And Buchanan also brings in Bishop
Kennedy, lib. 12. praising this Law as made by Kenneth, a most wise and
glorious Prince, with advice of all his Estates of Parliament; and which rather
confirms (as he says) the old Law than introduces a new one, so far did
Buchanan's rage against Queen Mary prevail with him, to praise and rail at the
same individual Law; and it is observable, that it is very dangerous to recede
once from fundamental Laws, for Buchanan makes not only the Succession
Elective, but he makes no difference betwixt lawful Children and Bastards, and
excludes not only Minors during the Uncles life, but Women for ever. 3. In all
Nations where the Monarchy is Hereditary, Minors succeed, and so this
innovation of causing the next Male succeed for all his Life, was contrary to
the nature of the Monarchy and to the Customs of all Nations, and God in
Scripture gives us many instances of it: J^as succeeded when he was seven years
of Age, Josiah when he was eight, Manasseh in twelve, and Azariah in sixteen;
and yet in those days, God is said to have chosen the King, for it is said in
Deuteronomy. Thou shall set over thee, the King whom I have chosen, and consequently
the choice of Minors cannot be ill, since God Almighty used to make such a
choice. I know that Eccless. 10. 16. says, Woe unto the land when thy King is a
child, but the Critics interpret this of a King that is childish, puen
intellectu and moribus, or because Factions arise by the opposition to his
Regents, and this inconveniency did more necessarily attend the allowing a
Regent King during Life, for both the Subjects and the true Heir raised
Factions in that Case, whereas the Subjects only are factious in the other, and
yet even they are no more factious for that short time, than they are always in
Commonwealths. 4. The reason why the Minor King was to have one to supply his
Nonage ceasing with his Majority, it was unreasonable that the Remedy should
have lasted beyond the Disease, and the worst effect that could have been
occasioned by the Infant King's Minority was, that the Kingdom should have been
during that time governed by joint advice of Parliament, Councils, and Officers
of State, which in Buchanan's opinion in other places of his History and Book
De Jure Regni, is so excellent a Model, that he decrys Monarchy as much
inferior to it. 5. It was most inconvenient to accustom any private Family to
live in the quality of a King. 6. It could not but occasion many Murders, and
much Faction, for the true Heir could not live peaceably under this Eclipse and
Exclusion, nor could the Uncle live without making a Party to secure his
pleasant Usurpation. 7. As these Divisions and Factions were the natural and
necessary Effects that were to be expected from this irregular Succession, so
it is very observable, that from King Fergus to King Kenneth the 3d, we had 79.
Kings, amongst whom, almost the half were the most impious, tyranical, or lazy
Kings that ever we had, according to Buchanan's character of them; so happy and
wise a thing is this (so much magnified) Election of a Successor by the People
and their Representatives, to supply the defects of the lawful Heir, whereas
from King Kenneth the 3d, to King CHARLES the 2d, inclusive, we have had 3^.
Kings, 26. of whom have succeeded by a due lineal Right, and have proved
virtuous Princes, greater by their Merit than their Birth, as if God had
designed to let us see, that though most of them succeeded whilst they were
very young, yet that he can choose a fitter Successor than Parliameuts can do;
whereas the other 5. Kings who came to the Crown against that Law of Kenneth
the 3d, viz. Constantine the bald, Grimus, Mackbeath, Donal Bain, and Duncan
the 2d, were all persons who deserved very ill to be preferred to the true
Heir, and who, as they came to the Crown against Law, so governed without it:
And it is very strange, that the Fanatics, who think that every throw of the
Dice is influenced by a special Providence, will not allow, that God does by a
special Providence take care who shall be his Representative, who shall be the
Pastor of his Flock, and nursing Father of his Church; let us therefore trust
his Care more than our own, and hope to obtain more from him by Christian
Submission, Humility and Obedience than we can by Caballing, Rebelling, and
Sacrilegious-Murdering, or Excluding the true Successor.

FINIS.
What follows is immediately to be subjony'd to the Testimony of Calvin, Page 90.
I Know that to this it may be answered, That the same Calvin does qualify his
own words, which I have cited with this following Caution, Si qui sunt (says
he) populares Magistratus, ad moderandam Regum libidinem constituti (quales
olim erant qui Lacedemoniis regibus oppositi erant ephori; and qua etiam forte
potestate (ut nunc res habent) fuguntur in singulis regnis, tres ordines; quum
primarios conventus perag^nt) adeo illos ferocienti Regum licentiae, pro
officio intercedere non veto; ut si Regibus impotenter grassantibus, and humili
plebeculae insultantibus conniveant, eorum dissimulationem nefaria perfidia non
carere affirmam; quia populi libertatem, cujus se tutores Dei ordinatione
positos norunt, frandulenter produnt.

To which my reply is, That these words must be so constructed, as that they
may not be incosistent with his former clear and Orthodox Doctrine, of not
resisting Supreme Powers, the former being his positive Doctrine, and this but
a supervenient Caution, and they do very well consist* for though Calvin be
very clear, that Kings cannot be resisted, yet he thinks that this is only to
be mean'd of those Kings who have no Superiors to check them by Law, as the
Kings of the Lacedaemonians had, who by the fundamental Constitution of their
Monarchy, might have been called to an account by the Ephori, and so in effect
were only Titular Kings: Or of such Monarchs as had only a coordinate Power
with the States of their own Kingdom; and even in these Cases, he does not
positively assert, that these Monarchs may be resisted, but does only doubt
whether if there be any such Superior or coordinate Magistrate representing
the People they may not restrain the Rage and Licentiousness of their Kings:
But that Caution does not at all concern the Jus Regni apud Scotos, because
this cannot be said of the Kings of Great Britain, since the States of
Parliament are only called by the King, and derive their Authority from him,
and the Legislative Power is solely in the King, the States of Parliament being
only Consenters, he and not they can only make Peace and War, and grant
Remissions, and against him and not them Treason only is committed, and the Law
Books of both Nations do affirm, that the King is Supreme, and consequently
even according to Calvin's Doctrine, neither his People, nor any of their
Representatives, can justly oppose, and much less punish him.

I know that Grotius is by the Republicans, and the Fanatics, oft-times cited
to defend this their Doctrine, of opposing Princes; but though his Testimony
might be justly rejected, as being himself born under a Commonwealth, yet he is
most impudently cited, for he lib. 1. cap. 4. does positively lay down as a
general and undoubted Rule, that Summum imperium tenentibus, resisti non
potest, Those who have the Supreme Power cannot lawfully be resisted; whilch
Rule he founds upon the Principles of Reason, the Authority of Scripture, and
the Practice of the Primitive Church; and though he limits the same thereafter
by some exceptions, yet it will easily appear, that these exceptions extend not
at all to our Case.

For the first relates only to such Kings, as have received their Power with
express condition, that they may be tried by other Magistrates.

The second to such as have voluntarily resigned their Empire, as Charles the
5th. did; and so the one may be opposed, because they were only Titular Kings:
and the other, because they left off to be Kings, and consequently we are
concerned in neither of these Cases.

The third limitation is only in the Case where he who was truly a King, has
alienated his Kingdom to Strangers; In which Case, Grotius does contend, that
Subjects may refuse to obey, because he cease to be their King. But as this
is not our Case, so even in that Case Grotius is very clear, that if this
alienation be made by an Hereditary Monarch, the alienation is null, as being
done in prejudice of the lawful Successor, but he does not at all assert that
the Monarch may be thereupon deposed by his People.

The fourth relates only to such Kings, as from a hatred to their Country,
design its Destruction and utter Ruin; but as he confesses himself, Id vix
accidere potest in Rege mentis compote; and consequently can take only place in
a mad Man, in which Case all Laws allow the Kingdom to be ruled by Governors,
and Administrators in the King's Name, if the Madness be Natural, and a total
depravation of Sense. But if by Madness be mean'd a moral Madness, and design
to ruin the Kingdom and the Subjects, as was, and is most impiously pretended
against King CHARLES the first, and King CHARLES the 2d, the best and most
reasonable of Kings; then Opposition in such Cases is not at all warranted by
Grotius, who speaks only of a Physical and Natural Madness; for else, every
thing that displeases the People should be called Madness; and so the
exception should not limit but overturn the general rule, and should arm all
Subjects to rebel against their Princes, and make them the Sovereign Judges in
all Cases. Which is inconsistent with Grotius's own Doctrine, and is
excellently refuted by his own Reasons.

The fifth relates only to Kings, who by the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom
are tied to such and such Conditions, so as that if they fail in them, they may
be opposed.

The sixth relates only to Kingdoms where the Power is equally divided betwixt
the King and the Senate.

The seventh is incase the King was at first invested by the People, with
express reservation to them to resist in such and such Cases, and so is almost
the same with the fifth, and all these three differ little from the first. And
with Grotius good leave, they err also in this, that they are not properly
exceptions from his own rule, for the rule being only, that Supreme Powers
cannot be resisted, these Powers are not Supreme, and they needed not be
cautioned by an exception, since they did not fall under the rule. But neither
of these Cases extend to us, since our King is by the Acts of Parliament
fomerly cited, declared to be Supreme over all Persons and in all Causes, nor
made our Predecessors any such express reservations at the first erection of
the Monarchy, and consequently by Grotius own positive Doctrine cannot be
resisted. And so far is Grotius an enemy to such Fanatical Resistance, upon the
pretense of Liberty and Religion, that number. 6. he calls the Authors of these
Opinions, Time Servers only. And Gronovius a violent Republican and Fanatic,
taxes him extremely for it, in his Observations upon that fourth Chapter, whose
Arguments adduc'd against Grotius I shall answer amongst the other Objections.

Gronovius's first Argument why it should be lawful to resist the Supreme
Magistrate in defense of Religion, is, because if it be not lawful for Subjects
to Arm themselves for Religion against their Prince, it should not be lawful
for their Prince by the same rule to defend himself against Turks and Infidels,
who would endeavor to force him to comply with their Impieties. But to this it
is answered, That Resistance to Superiors is expressly discharged by the Laws
of God and Nature, as said is, but this cannot be extended to Cases where there
is no Subjection nor Allegiance; and it may be as well argued, that because one
private man may beat another who offers to strike him, that therefore a Child
may beat his Parent, or a Servant his Master, or that because I may violently
resist a private man who offers to take away my Goods unjustly, that therefore
I may oppose the Sentence of the Magistrate, because I forsooth do not think the
same just.

His second shift is, That our Savior commanded only absolute submission
without resistance in the Infancy of the Church when he himself was miraculosly
to assist his own Servants, but this Submission was to end with the Miracles,
to which it related. As to which, my answer is, 1. That all the Commands in
Scripture may be so eluded, nor is there any Duty more frequently and fully
inculcated than this is, and that too in the same Chapters amongst other
Duties, which are to last for ever, such as submission to Parents, and Masters,
and this is founded upon plain reason and convenience, and not upon Miracles.
2. This was received and acknowledged by the Pagans, as has been fully proved,
though it cannot be pretended that they relied upon any such miraculous
assistance. 3. It cannot be denied but the Fathers of the Primitive Church did
recommend and justify themselves in their Apologies to the Heathen Emperors
for bearing patiently, when they were able not only to have resisted, but to
have overthrown their Persecuters, as is clear by the Citations out of
Tertullian, Cyprian, Lactantius, Augustine, and others, to be seen in Grotius,
De Jure Belli,. lib. 1. cap. 4. number. 7. And it had been great impudence as well
as sin in them, to have boasted of a recent matter of Fact, which was not true;
nor could there be a greater injury done to the Primitive Christians, as
Grotius observes, than to ascribe that to their Weakness, which they considered
as an effect of Duty; and why should the Heathen Emperors have suffered those
to multiply, who obeyed only because Disobedience was not safe, for they might
have certainly concluded, that by the same Principle that they obeyed only
because they were weak, they would disobey how soon they were able. 4. If the
first Christians in general had obeyed only because they were not able to
resist, then any private Christian had resisted when he was able, or would have
fled or concealed himself, whereas it it acknowledged in the other Answer
pressed by Gronovius himself, that they sought for Martyrdom, and so these two
Answers are inconsistent; and the Thebean Legion, and others, did submit
themselves voluntarly to Martyrdom with their Arms in their hands, and when
they were able to have overthrown the Emperor. And lastly, If this Doctrine
were allowed, no Society could subsist, for when Dissenters grew strong, the
lawful Magistrate behooved to perish; whereas Jesus Christ did contrive the
Christian Religion; so as that all Governors should reasonably wish their
Subjects to be Christians; and so as no Christian should attempt to overthrow
the order and establishment of Civil Government, and that they should not be
drawn away from the practice of Christian Devotion by the carnal desires of
being great and strong in the World, nor have any hopes in the Arm of Flesh to
the lessening of their immediate dependence upon him.

His third shift is, That his Doctrine of Submission and of dying for the
Christian Religion without making Resistance, was only the Practice, but not
the Command of the Primitive Church, and proceeded from their immoderat
affection of the Crown of Martyrdom, as Milntoun also pretends. But since the
express Command of Scripture is founded upon such clear Reason, and since (as
Grotius well observes) the Practice of the Primitive Christians, who lived so
near the Age wherein these Scriptures were penned, is the best Interpreter of
the Scripture, it is horrid Impiety to make those blessed Martyrs pass for vain
Hypocrites, and distracted Self-murderers; and it becomes us with holy
reverence to imitate those whom the Christian Church has ever admired.

The fourth shift is, That the Protestant Churches have been reformed by such
Insurrections as these, contrary to the Royal Authority. But this is fully
answered by the learned Henry More in his Divine Dialogues, and by Du Moulin in
his Philanax Anglicus; where likewise are to be found the many Testimonies of
Protestant Churches, and Protestant Divines, condemning positively the taking
up of Arms against the Sovereign Power, even for the defense of Religion; and
the very Presbyterian Confession of Faith at Westminster, is so positive as to
this point, that the Presbyterians themselves can never answer it. The sum of
which answer is, That the King of Spain coming by Marriage in place of the Duke
of Burgundy, the said King of Spain could pretend to no more power than they
had, nor could the House of Burgundy pretend to any more power by marrying the
Heirs of the Counts of the several Provinces, than these Counts had over their
Provinces; and therefore since none of these were Sovereigns over their
Provinces, the Provinces might have resisted the King of Spain when he
oppressed them; and consequently that Resistance cannot defend such as resist
Supreme Powers upon pretense of Religion, Grotius de Antiq. Reipub. Ba^av. cap.
7.

The opposition made by the Protestants in France, was not occasioned by
Religion, but upon a Quarrel betwixt the Princes of the Blood and the House of
Guise in the Minority of Francis the 2d, and is defended most excellently by
King James himself, not to have been Rebellion, in his Defense of the Right of
Kings, page 14.

The Opposition made by the Princes of Germany to the Emperor, was founded upon
the inherent Right in the Princes, by the golden Charter of the Empire. And
Luther himself declared, that Magistrat^^ non erat resistendum, and has written
a Book to that purpose; nor would he engage in the Confederacy for Defensive
Arms at Smalcald, until the Lawyers declared that that Resistance was lawful by
the Laws of the Empire, Vide Slydan Hist. lib. 8. anno 1531.

The War that arose in Switzerland, was not occasioned by Religion; for the
Reformation was once established with the conconsent of the Magistrate. And the
Eruption that was made by other Cantons upon the Reformed Cantons eleven years
after that Establishment, Vide Slydan, anno 1522. Nor was it Calvin who
banished the Prince and Bishop of Geneva, for he fled eight Months before upon
the detecting of a Conspiracy, by which that Bishop was to deliver over the
Liberties of that City to the Duke of Savoy, and for which his Secretary was
hanged, Vide Turretin. Annal. Reformationis, anno 1529. And albeit those who
Reformed in Scotland, in the Reign of Queen Mary, pretended Authority from the
King, yet they were certainly Rebels, and are condemned by Rivet, a famous
Protestant Divine, who also inveighs bitterly against this Principle, Castiga
Not. in Epist. ad Balsac. cap. 13. number. 14. sub finem.

From all which, I observe, First, That all the Protestant Divines by making
Apollogies for such of their Profession as have risen in Arms against Supreme
Powers, must be thereby concluded to be ashamed of the Principle. 2. Immediately
upon the quieting those Rebellions, all the Protetestant Churches have in their
Confessions of Faith, declared their abhorrence of that Principle; which being
the product of Conviction and Experience, joined with Duty, must be the most
judicious and sincere Testimony of all others. 3. All these Rebellions have
been occasioned by a mistake in point of Law, and not in point of Religion; for
the Divines, as I have related, have been abused by the Lawyers: And therefore,
since in the Isle of Britain, the Laws of both Kingdoms have declared the
Rising in Arms against the King, to be Treason, albeit for the defense of
Religion; it necessarily follows, that this must be unlawful in point of
Conscience in this Kingdom. 4. Though good things may be occasioned by a
Rebellion, yet that does not justify a Rebellion; for though Jeroboam was
allowed by God to rise against Rehoboam, yet God Almighty himself calls his
revolt Rebellion, 1 Kings 12. 19. and 2 Chronicles. 10. 19. and it is observable,
that after this Revolt, there was but one good King amongst all the rebellious
Kings of Israel; whereas amongst the Kings of Judah, who were lawful Kings,
there was but one or two who were any ways impious; so far does God bless a
lawful Succession.

Some also use as a shift against this Orthodox Doctrine, that the reason why
the Primitive Christians did not oppose their Emperors in the defense of the
Christian Religion, was, because they had not been secured at that time in the
Exercise of their Religion by the Laws of the Empire; and therefore the
practice of those Christians can be no Argument why we may not now rise to
defend the Orthodox Religion, since it is now established by Law. But this
Objection is fully answered by that great great Antiquary Samuel Pelit.
Diatriba de Iur. Principum edictis Ecclesiae quaesito, where he clearly proves,
that they were actually secured by the Edicts of the Emperors in the days of
the Emperor Tiberius, and downward, and yet they would not rise in Arms though
they were persecuted under these same Emperors, because the Word of God and the
Christian Religion did command Obedience under Persecution, and discharged
Resistance and taking up of Arms.

Add to Page 73.
I have also seen in Fordon's History, lib. 14. page 73. a Charter granted by
King David to the Bishops, with the consent of Robert his Nephew, and his Sons
giving power to the Bishops to dispone in Testament upon their own Movables,
which before that time did by a corrupt custom fall to the King, in which
Charter, the Witnesses are, Robertus Senescallus Comes de Strathern, Nepos
noster Ioannes Senescallus Comes de Carrict, filius suus primogenitus and
haeres, Thomas Comes de Mar, Georgius de Dunbar, Comes de March, and Gulielmus
Comes de Dowglass; so that here is not only the attestation of the Father
before he was King, naming John Earl of Carrick, thereafter King Robert the 2d.
his eldest Son and Heir, but the attestation of the Grand-Uncle King David, who
could be no ways biased in the Affair; and here he is ranked before the three
eldest Earls in the Nation, who were then the three first Subjects therein; and
it is against all Sense, to think that the whole Bishops would have sought the
consent of the said John as Apparent Heir of the Crown, if he had not been
Apparent Heir. I find also, that Fordon calls him when he is crowned King,
Primogenitus Roberti secundi; nor was there the least opposition made to his
Coronation, nor to the Coronation of Annabella Drummond his Queen (a Daughter
of the House of Stob-hall, now Pearth,) though both the Sons of the second
Marriage were then alive. I sind also, that Boethius himself acknowledges, that
the Earl of Marches Son George, being pursued for having married clandestinly
one of the Daughters of Elizabeth Muir, his defense was, that he married her
when she was the Daughter of a private Subject, and before King Robert was
King, whereas if she had been only a Bastard-Daughter, it could have been no
Crime to have married her.


