THE TRIAL AND PROCESS OF High Treason AND Doom of Forfaulture AGAINST Mr.
Robert Baillie of Jerviswood TRAITOR.

By His Majesty's special Command, As a further proof of the late Fanatical
Conspiracy.

Edinburgh, Printed by the Heir of Andrew Anderson, Printer to His most Sacred
Majesty, Anno DOM. 1685.

The Trial and Process of High Treason, and Doom of Forefaulture against Mr.
Robert Baillie of Jerviswood Traitor.
CVria Justiciariae S. D. N. Regis tenta in praetorio burgi de Edinburgh
viges^mo tertio die mensis Decembris 1684. Per nobilem and Potentem Comitem
Georgium Comitem de Linlithgow, Dominum Livingstoun, etc. Justiciarium
generalem totius Regni Scotiae, and honorabiles viros, Domines Jacobum Foulis
de Colintoun Justiciariae Clericum, Joannem Lockhart de Castlehill, Davidem
Balfour de Forret, Rogerum Hoge de Harcarss, Alexandrum Seaton de Pitmedden,
and Patricium Lion de Carss, Commissionarios Justiciariae dicti. S. D. N.
Regis. Curia legitime affirmata. Intran
Mr. Robert Baillie of Jerviswood Prisoner
Indicted and accused, that where notwithstanding by the Common Law of this, and
all other well Governed Nations, the Conspiring to overturn the Government of
the Monarchy, or of the Established Government of this Kingdom, or the
concealing, and not revealing of any Treasonable Design, Project, or Discourse
tending thereto; Or the assisting, aiding, or abaiting such as have any such
Designs, does infer the Pains and Punishment of Treason. And by the third Act
of the first Parliament of King James the First, The Rebelling openly against
the Kings Person: and by the thretty seventh Act of His second Parliament, The
Resetting, Maintaining, or doing favors to open, or not our Rebellers against
the Kings Majesty, is Declared Treason, and punishable by Forefaulture. And by
the hundred forty and fourth* Act of the twelfth Parliament of King James the
Sixth, It is Declared Treason to Reset, Supply, or Intercommune with Traitors.
And by the first Act of the first Session of His Majesty's first Parliament, It
is Declared, That it shall be High Treason for the Subjects of this Realm, or
any number of them, less or more, upon any ground, or pretext whatsomever, to
rise, or continue in Arms, to make Peace or War, without His Majesty's special
Approbation. And by the second Act of the second Session of His Majesty's said
first Parliament, To Plot, Contrive, or intend Death, or Destruction, or to put
any Restraint upon His Majesty's Royal Person, or to Deprive, Depose, or
Suspend Him from the Exercise of His Royal Government, or to levy War, or take
up Arms against His Majesty, or any Commissionated by Him, or to entice any
Strangers, or others, to Invade any of His Majesty's Dominions, or to Write,
Print, or Speak any thing that may express or declare such their Treasonable
Intentions, is declared Treason, and punishable as such. Likeas, by the second
Act of His Majesty's third Parliament* It is Declared High Treason in any of
the Subjects of this Realm, by Writing, Speaking, or any other manner of way to
endeavor the alteration, Suspension, or Diversion of the Right of Succession,
or debarring the next lawful Successor. Nevertheless, it is of verity that the
said Mr. Robert Baillie of Jerviswood, shaking of all fear of God, respect and
regard to His Majesty's Authority and Laws; and having conceived most unjustly,
a great and extraordinary malice and hatred against His Majesty's Person and
Government, and having designed most Traitorously to debar His Royal Highness,
His Majesty's only Brother, from His due Right of Succession, did amongst many
other Traitorous Acts, tending* to promove that wicked Design, endeavor to get
himself Elected one of the Commissioners for Negotiating the settlement of a
Colony of this Nation in Carolina, in one or other of the days of the Months
of January, February, March, April, or May, One thousand six hundred and eighty
three years; and that he might thereby have the freer and better access to
Treat with the Earls of Shaftsbury and Essex, the Lord Russel and others, who
had entered into a Conspiracy in England against His Majesty's Person and
Government, and with Colonel Rumsay, Walcot, West, and Ferguson, and others who
had likewise Conspired the Murder of His Majesty's Sacred Person, and of the
Person of His Royal Highness; and finding that he could not get himself Elected
one of the said Commissioners, he resolved to go to London upon his own
expenses, and declared to severals (whom he took great pains to draw in^o be
his accomplices) that his Design was to push foreward the People of England,
who did nothing but talk, that they might go on effectually; and after he had
settled a Correspondency here, he did go up to London in one or other of the
said Months, with Sir John Cochran and Commissar Monro, and did then, and
there, Transact with the said Conspirators, or one or other of them, to get a
sum of Money to the late Earl of Argile, a Declaired Traitor, for bringing home
of Men and Arms, for raising a Rebellion against His Majesty, and invading this
his Native Country; and so earnest was he in the said Design, that he did
chide those English Conspirators, for not sending the same timeously, and
lamented the delays used in it; and persuaded the late Earl of Argile and
others in his name to accept of any sum, rather than not to engage: and amongst
the many meetings that he had at London, for carrying on the said Traitorous
design, there was one at his own Chamber, where he did meet with the Lord
Melvil, Sir John Cochran, and the Cessnocks Elder and Younger, and amongst
others, with Mr. William Veatch a declared Traitor, and there he did treat of
the carrying on of the said Rebellion, and of the money to be furnished by the
English for Argyle, for buying of Arms. And that if the Scots would attempt
any thing for their own relief, they would get assistance of Horse from
England; and from that meeting, he or ane, or other of them did send down Mr.
Robert Martin to prevent any rising, till it should be seasonable for carrying
on of their Designs, which Mr. Robert, after he came to Scotland, did treat
with Polwart and others, for carrying on of the said Rebellion; by securing His
Majesty's Officers of State, His Castles and Forces, and by putting his
Correspondents here, and there Associats, in readiness, to assist the late Earl
of Argyle, and after the said Mr. Baillie had engadged many of his Contrymen
in England, and had assured his Correspondantts here, that the English were
resolved to seclud his Royal-Highness from his due right of Succession, thereby
to encourage them to concur in the said Rebellion, and Exclusion, he flew to
that hight, that he did particularly and closly correspond with Mr. Robert
Ferguson, Sir Thomas Armstrong, Colonel Rumsay, and Walcot, who were accessory
to that horrid part of the Conspiracy, which was designed against the Sacred
Life of His Majesty, and the Life of His Royal-Highness, and did sit up several
nights with them, concerting that bloody Massacer: at least the said Mr. Robert
Baillie of Jerviswood was, and is guilty of having correspondence with the late
Earl of Argyle, and Mr. William Veatch declared Traitors, and of being art and
part of an Conspiracy, for assisting of these who were to rise in arms against
His Sacred Majesty, and for exclusion of His Royal Brother, and of concealing
and not revealing the accession and proposals of others for that effect.
Wherethrow he has committed, and is guilty of the Crimes of High Treason,
Rebellion, and others abovespecified, and is art and part of the samine, which
being found by ane Assize, he ought to be punished with Forfaulture of Life,
Land and Goods, to the terror of others to commit the like hereafter.

HIS Majesty's Advocat produced an Act, and Warrant from the Lords of His
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, for pursuing, and insisting against
the said Mr. Robert Baillie of Jerviswood, whereof the Tenor follows:

Edinburgh, The twenty two day of December, one thousand six hundred and eighty
four years.
The Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, do hereby give Order and Warrant to
His Majesty's Advocat, to pursue a Process of Treason and Forfaulture, before
the Lords of His Majesty's Justiciary, against Mr. Robert Baillie of
Jerviswood, to morrow at two a clock in the afternoon preceisly, and the said
Lords do hereby Require and Command, Sr. George Lockhart of Carnwath, and Sr.
John Lauder Advocats, to concur, and assist in the said Process with His
Majesty's Advocat, from the intenting until the end thereof, as they will be
answerable upon their alledgance. Extract by me, sic subscribitur.

Colin Mckenzie, Cls. Sti. Concilij.

Pursuers.
Sir George Mckenzie of Roshaugh Our Sovereign Lords Advocat Sir George
Lockhart Sir John Lauder. Advocats.

Procurators in Defense.
Sir Patrick Hume. Mr. Walter Pringle. Mr. James Graham. Mr. Welliam Fletcher.
Mr. William Baillie. Advocats.



THE Pannals Procurators produced ane Act of His Majesty's Privy Council, in
their favors, whereof the tenor follows:

Edinburgh, the twenty third of December, one thousand six hundred eighty four
years,
The Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council having considered ane Address made to
them, by Mr. Robert Baillie of Jerviswood, now indicted at the instance of His
Majesty's Advocat, before the Lords Commissioners of Justiciary, of Treason, do
hereby Require and Command Sir Patrick Hume, Mr. Walter Pringle, Mr. James
Graham, Mr. William Fletcher, Mr. James Falconer, Mr. William Baillie Advocats,
to Consult, Compear, and Debate for the Petitioner, in the Process of Treason,
mentioned in his Address, without any hazard, as they will be answerable at
their peril; Extract by me, sic Subscribitur.

William Paterson, Cls. Sti. Concilij.

AFter reading of the Indictment, the Lord Justice General required the Pannal
to make answer thereto.

The said Mr. Robert Baillie Pannal pleaded not Guilty.

MR. Walter Pringle Advocat, as Procurator for the said Mr. Robert Baillie of
Jerviswood Pannal, alleadges that he ought not to pass to the knowledge of an
Assize, because he had not got a Citation upon fyfteen days, or at least on a
competent time, which is usual, and absolutely necessar in all Actions, and
much more in Criminal Pursuits, especially, seeing, if a competent time be not
allowed to the Pannal, he is precludit of the benefit of ane exculpation,
without which he cannot prove his Objections against Witnesses, or Assyzers, or
any other Legal, or competent Defenses; And by the late Act of Parliament
concerning the Justice Court, all Pannalls are allowed to raise Precepts of
Exculpation, and thereupon to cite Witnesses, for proving the Objections
against Witnesses, and Assyzers, which necessarily pre-supposeth, that a
competent time must be allowed to the Pannal to execut his diligence, or
otherwise, how is it possible he can prove an Defense of alibi, or any other
just Defense: and as this is most consonant to that clear Act of Parliament,
and to material Justice, and to the Rules of Humanity, so this point has been
already fully and often decided, and lately in the case of one Robertson in
July 1673. The Instance whereof, is given by His Majesty's Advocat in his Book
of Criminals, and Title of Libels, where the Lords found, that albeit Robertson
got his Indictment in Prison, yet he behoved to get it upon fifteen days.

HIs Majesty's Advocat oppons the constant Tract of Decisions, whereby it is
found, that a person Incarcerated may be Tried upon twenty four hours; and the
late Act of Parliament is only in the case where a Summons or Libel is to be
Raised; but here there is no Libel or Summons, but only an Indictment; nor was
any Exculpation sought in this case, before the Trial, which is the case
provided for by the Act of Parliament.

THe Lords, Justice-General, Justice-Clerk, and Commissioners of Justiciary,
Repel the Defense, in respect the Pannal is a Prisoner, and that it has been
the constant Custom of the Court, and that the Pannal made no former
application for an Exculpation.

SIr Patrick Hume for the Pannal, alleadges (always denying the Libel, and
whole Members, and Qualifications thereof) that in so far as the Libel is
founded upon Harboring, maintaining, and Intercommuning with the persons
mentioned in the Dittay, the Pannal ought to be assoylzied; because it is res
hactenus judicata, he having been formerly pursued before the Lords of his
Majesty's Privy Council for the same Crimes, and Fined in an considerable Sum;
and therefore that Crime cannot now be made use of as a ground of Treason
against the Pannal.

HIs Majesty's Advocat answers, That he Restricts his Libel, to the Pannals
entering in a Conspiracy; for raising Rebellion, and for procuring Money to be
sent to the late Earl of Argile, for carrying on the said Rebellion; and for
concealing, and not revealing; neither of which is referred to his Oath; and
consequently was not res judicata, there being nothing referred to his Oath;
but his Converse and Correspondence with some Ministers, and others within the
Kingdom, and his own Gardener, and his Writing Letters to my Lord Argile; and
oppons the Decree of Council it self, and restricts the Libel to all the
Crimes not insisted on in the Decree.

SIr Patrick Hume Replies, That as to the Corresponding with the late Earl of
Argile, at any time since his Forefaulture, was expressly proponed as an
Interrogator to the Pannal in that Pursuit, at His Majesty's Advocat's Instance
against him, before the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council, and that not only
his own Correspondence by himself; but also by Major Holms, Mr. Carstares,
Robert West, Thomas Shepherd, Richard Rumbold, and Colonel Rumsay, as the
Interrogator bears, as appears by a double of the Act of Council, written by
the Clerk of Councils Servant, and is offered to be proven by my Lord Advocats
Oath: And as to any Correspondency with Mr. Veitch, it is not Relevant, since
he was not Declared Rebel.

SIr John Lauder for His Majesty's Interest, answers, That he oppons the
Decree of Privy Council, where no such Interrogator was put to the Pannal, and
the Decree must make more Faith than any pretended Scroll, and cannot be taken
away by His Majesty's Advocats Oath, to His Majesty's prejudice; and for Mr.
William Veitch, he stands expressly Forefault in anno 1667. and the Doom of
Forefaulture, is Ratified in the Parliament 1669.

SIr Patrick Hume oppons the Reply, That as to the Corresponding with Mr.
Veitch, it does not appear, that he is the person mentioned in the Act of
Parliament; and albeit he were, as he is not, he having thereafter come home to
Scoland, all the punishment inflicted upon him was Banishment, not to return
under the pain of Death, which did take off any former Punishment; and it was
no Crime in any Person to Intercommune with him, especially in another Kingdom;
and by the late Act of Council in anno 1683. Even the Conversing, and
Intercommuning with declared Traitors, is restricted to an Arbitrary punishment.

HIs Majesty's Advocat oppons the standing Doom of Forefaulture against Veitch,
and the Proclamation, or Act of Council it ^elf.

THe Lords, Justice-General, Justice-Clerk, and Commissioners of Justiciary,
having considered the Libel, pursued by His Majesty's Advocat, against Mr.
Robert Baillie of Jerviswood, with the Lord Advocats Declaration, whereby he
Restricts the same to the Crimes not insisted on in the Decree of Council
formerly pronunced against the Pannal. They find the same Relevant as it is
restricted, to infer the pain of Treason, and remits the same to the knowledge
of the Assize, and Repells the remnant Defenses proponed for the Pannal, in
respect of the Decree of Council produced, bearing no such thing as is
alleged, and of the answers made by His Majesty's Advocat thereto.

Assisa.
The Earl of Strathmore. The Earl of Belcarras. Sir George Skeen, Provost of
Aberdene. Sir James Fleming, late Provest of Edinburgh. Sir John Ramsay of
Whitehill. Adam Hepburn of Humby. Andrew Bru^e of Earleshall. John Stuart,
Tutor of Alpin. Alexander Miln of Carrin. Mr. James Elies of Stenhopsmilns. Sir
William Drummond of Halthornden. Major Andrew White, Lieutennent of Edinburgh
Castle, Mr. David Grahame, Sheriff of Wigtoun. Colin Mckenzie, Collector of
Ross. David Burnet Merchant.
THe Assise lawfully Sworn, no Objection of the Law in the contrary.

HIis Majesty's Advocat for Probation adduced the Witnesses and Writs
aftermentioned; and first, Walter Earl of Tarras.

SIr Patrick Hume Procurator for the Pannal, objects against the Earl of
Tarras, that he cannot be a Witness, because he is socius and particeps
criminis; and it is clear by the 34. Chap. Stat 2. Rob. 1. Concerning these
that are excluded from bearing of Testimony that socij and participes ejusdem
criminis, vel incarcerati and vinculati, cannot bear Testimony: As also, the
Earl of Tarras being presently under an Indictment of High Treason, and under
the Impressions of Fear, and Death, no person in his Circumstances can be
admitted a Witness, as is not only clear from the foresaid Statute, but from
the Common Law.

HIs Majesty's Advocat answers, That it is an exception from that Rule, both by
the Common Law, and ours, that in the Crime of lose Majesty, and especially,
that Branch thereof, which we call a Conspiracy, socius criminis may be a
witness, and which is introduced very reasonably by Lawyers, to secure the
common interest of mankind, which is the chief of all Interests; and because
Conspiracies cannot be otherwise proved, and not to allow this manner of
Probation, were to allow Treason, since no man can prove a Plot, but he that is
upon it, and how can a man object against him as a Witness, whom himself
trusted with his Life, his Fortune, and their common Plot, nor is the intenting
of the lybel any stronger qualification, since every man that is socius
criminis, is under the same impression, and it would rather seem the greater
and nearer apprehensions a man has of death, he will be the more sincere and
faithful; Nor has the Earl of Tarras, nor did he ever seek any security, in
order to his deponing. And this has been constantly, and latlie, conform to the
common Law, as may be seen in the hundreds of Citations set down by Mascard, de
probationibus, vol. 4. conclus. 1318. number. 21. and the contrary citations prove
only, that regularly socius criminis cannot be a Witness.

SIr Patrick Hume replies, that the Statutes of Robert the first is opponed,
and non est distinguendum ubi lex non distinguit, and not only was he socius
criminis, which is acknowledged, but he is incarceratus, and lying under an
Indytment of high Treason, and has thrown himself on the Kings Mercy, and it is
not proper he should be a Wintess, seeing he is in the Kings Mercy, who may give
him his life or not, and there was never a Person in these circumstances, that
ever was admitted a Witness.

MR. Walter Pringle adds, That the Earl of Tarras, is not only in the case of a
person who stands Indyted for High Treason; but must be looked upon, as a
person condemned for the said Crime, seeing he fully, and amply confessed the
Crime: and confessus habetur p^o convicto, and never any Lawyer asserted, That
damnatus criminis lesa Majestatis could be admitted as a Witness, and there is
nothing more clear, then that by the common Law, and the Law of all Nations,
this Objection ought to be sustained, for the Civil Law is clear, leg. 11. cod*
de testibus, and Matheus in his title de probationibus, cap. de testibus, does
assert positivlie, that the Crime of lose Majesty, Heresy, and generally all
these Crimes quae sine sociis non possuut facile admitti, are not excepted. And
he asserts, that the Lawyers, viz. Gomesius, and Decianus, who are of another
Opinion, do acknowledge, nominatum a reo damnandum non esse, and that they
contravert only, An nominatio rei sit indicium sufficiens ad torquendum
nominatum.

SIr George Lockhart Repeats, and oppons the Answer, and the Crime lybelled,
being a Conspiration of Treason, which of it is own nature is manadged, and
carried on by Secrecy and Contrivance; and which is only known to the Accomplices
of the Treason, and which cannot be committed sine sociis, the Law of this
Kingdom, and of all Nations, do allow socios criminis to be testes habiles, and
not only are they admitted in the case of such Conjurations, but generally in
omnibus criminibus exceptis, amongst which the Crime of Perduellion, and lose
Majesty is the chief, and it is absolutely impossible, that Plots, and
Conspirations of Treason can be otherwise proven, then per socios, and such as
are participes criminis, and which is the common opinion of all Lawyers, as may
appear by Farin. Quest: 45. And the Authorities cited by him, and which is the
inviolable practique of this Kingdom: and as to that pretense, that the Earl of
Tarras is under a Process of Treason, and has submitted to His Majesty's mercy,
and that confessus habetur pro convicto, it imports nothing, and infers no more
then that he is socius criminis, and is still a habil witness, as to Conjuration
of Treason socius criminis hoc ipso, that it is acknowledged, or proven, being
still under the hazard of Process, or condemnation, which Law regards not in
regard of the secrecy involved in the nature of the Crime, that either
witnesses neque actu neque habitu, can be present, so that the objection
amounts to no less then that Conjurations of Treason cannot at all be proven:
And as to the Law cited from the Majesty, it imports no more then that the
Objection regulariter pro^edit in Crimes, which of there own nature are not
perdifficilis probationis, and are not inter crimina excepta such as the Crime
of Conspiracy and Treason is*

MR. William Fleteher Oppons the Objection, and Reply, and further adds, that
albeit crimen lesae Majestatis be reckoned inter crimina excepta, and so have
some privilege, as to the qualification of Witnesses, yet it cannot be denied,
but there are some Objections competent against Witness adduced for proving
Conspiracies, and Treason, verbi causa, that a Witness is a Capital Enemy, or
that he is sub potestate accusatoris, and the Objection new pleaded, being
taken complexlie, viz. That the Earl of Tarras is not only socius criminis, but
also, that he is publico judicio reus, upon the same Crime, and that as means
to procure His Majesty's favor, he has submitted himself, and come in His
Majesty's mercy, by an acknowledgment of the Crime, before the Diet of
Citation, he is obnoxious to a most just Objection, viz. That he is sub
potestate, and by the submissiou, and Confession, his Life and Estate is now in
His Majesty's hands, so that he is not only in the case of a reus confessus,
but in the case of a Witness, who does absolutely depend upon His Majesty's
Advocat the Pursuer; and as a private accuser, could not adduce his own Servants
to be Witnesses, because they are testes domestici, and depend upon him, so far
less ought a Witness to be adduced, who not only depends, as to his Estate, but
as to his Life, and the Law gives a very good reason, and which is mentioned by
Paulus, lib. 1. receptarum sententiarum, cap. 12. parag. ult. In these words*
de se confessus, non est au^^endus ut testis, ne alienam salutem in dubium
deducat qui de sua desperavit; and as to the pretense that a Conjuration is a
Crime so occult, that it must either be proven by such Witnesses, or otherwise
the guilty person will escape. It is answered* that in this case, His Majesty's
Advocat had an easy remedy, for he might have pursued the Pannal, before he
pursued the Witness, and the Terror and Apprehension of the event of a Process
for Treason cannot be constructed otherwise, then to have influence upon the
Deposition of the Witness; and as to the Citation out of Farinacius, it is only
in the case of socius criminis, but when he comes to treat de test accusato
vel carcerato. Quest. 56. articulo 4to. He says, Regula sit in accusato quod
is pendente accusatione a testimonio repellitur* and be the 2d. Rule of the
same Article, He says, it is a principle quod carceratus testimonium far
prohibetur, and he gives this reason, quia praesumitur, quod falsum testimonium
diceret pro aliquo qui ei promiserit se liberare a vinculo, and limits this
Rule, that he must be carceratus propter crimen.

SIr Patrick Hume adds, that it is a certain principle, that any person that is
guilty infamia juris, cannot be a Witness, no more than a person that is
Convict, and Condemned of Treason; and if he were Convict, and Condemned of
Treason, he could not be a Witness, even in the case of Treason: so neither can
the Earl of Tarras in this case be received a VVitness, for he being adduced a
VVitness after he received his Indictment, and confessed the Crime, is
equivalent, as if he had been actually Convict; and whatever may be pretended,
that testes infames may be admitted; yet it was never asserted by any Lawyer,
that a person Convict of Treason can be admitted a VVitness.

THe Lords Repelled the Objection against the Earl of Tarras, Nota, That the
^arl of Tarras de^on'd nothing against Jerviswood ^ut what the other ^wo
Witnesses de^on'd against himself before the Try^l, and upon which ^hereafter
they being renewed, the Earl was forfault^d; so that there ^ould be no ground
^f suspicion from ^is Circumstances.
and ordains him to be received a Witness.

WAlter Earl of Tarras, aged forty years, married, purged, and sworn; being
Interrogat, if about the time that Sir John Cochran, and Commissar Monro got
their Commission from the Carolina Company for London, the Pannal Mr. Robert
Baillie of Jerviswood did not desire the Deponent to speak to Commissar Monro,
to try if he could get him the said Pannal added to that Commission, Depones
affirmative. Being Interrogat, if the said Jerviswood, the Pannal, did not tell
the Deponent, that he was resolved to go to London however upon his own
Expenses, and that his and their going about the Carolina Bussiness, was but a
pretense, and a blind; but that the true design was, to push foreward the
people of England, who could do nothing but talk, to go more effectually about
their bussiness, Depones affirmative. Depones that the Pannal did settle a
Correspondence with the Deponent, whereby he was to give an account to the
Deponent of what should pass betwixt the Country Party in England, and the
Scots men there: and on the other hand, the Deponent was to Write to him what
occurred here; Depones that the Pannal did say to the Deponent, if the King
would suffer the Parliament of England to sit, and pass the Bill of Seclusion,
that that was the only way to secure the Protestant Religion. Depons that the
Pannal said to him, that the King might be induced to do so, if the Parliament
would take sharp, or brisk measures with Him, or the like. Depones these words
were spoke to him by the Pannal, since the holding of the last Session of this
current Parliament; and before the Pannal and Commissar Monro went for London.
Depons that after the Pannal went to London, he did give the Deponent an
account by Letters, that things were in great Disorder there, and that he hoped
there would be effectual Courses taken to remeid them. Depones that Mr. Robert
Martin did come to Mr. Pringle of Torwoodlies House in May 1683. or thereby,
and brought a Letter to the Deponents Lady unsubscribed, but the Deponent knows
it was Jerviswoods Handwriting, who was then at London, and that Mr. Martin
told the Deponent, that things in England were in great disorder, and like to
come to a hight, and that the Country Party were considering on methods for
securing the Protestant Religion. And that Archibald, sometime Earl of Argile,
was to get ten thousand pounds Sterling, whereas thirty thousand pounds
Sterling was sought by the Scots-men at London, which was to be sent over to
Holland to provide Arms; and that the late Earl of Argile was to Land with
these Arms in the West-Highlands of Scotland, and that the Deponents Friend
Jerviswood the Pannal, was to be sent over with the Money. Depones that
Philiphaugh and he went to Gallowshiels House, where they met with Polwort and
Gallowshiels, and that it was talked amongst them there, that in case those in
England should rise in Arms, that it was necessary in that case, that so many
as could be got on the Borders should be in readiness to deal with Straglers
and seize upon Horses, and that thereafter they should join with those that
were in Arms on the Borders of England. Depons, That in the case foresaid, it
was said, it was convenient the Castle of Stirling, Berwick, and some other
Strengths should be seized upon; and it was likewise spoke amongst them, that
some persons should be employed to inquire what Arms was in that Country.
Depons, That it was spoke then, that the best time for Argyle was to land in
the West when there was a stur in England, or Scotland, or words to that
purpose. Depons, That every one desired another to speak to such particular
persons as they could trust, by letting a word fall indirectly upon
supposition, in case of the Rising in England concerning the Affair for
preparing of them: And that he was told by Philiphaugh thereafter, that there
was a Word and Sign to be used amongst them, viz. the Sign was by loosing a
Button on the Breast, and that the Word was Harmony. Depons, the Pannal spoke
to the Deponent to advertise Torwoodlie, that he might acquaint Mr. William
Veitch a forfault Traitor, who was in Northumberland, that he might keep
himself close, and be on his guard, lest he should be caught; which was since
the Pannal was Prisoner in the Tolbooth of Edinburgh. And this is the truth, as
he shall answer to God. Sic subscribitur,

Tarras, Linlithgow. I. P. D.

ALexander Monro of Bear-crofts, Aged forty five Years, or thereby; solutus,
solemnly sworn and purged. Depons, that the Earl of Tarras proposed to the
Deponent, that Jerviswood might be made one of the Commissioners for the Affair
of Carolina, for that he could not safely stay at Home; and that the Deponents
answer was, that he had no interest in the Affair, and so could not be a
Commissioner. Depons, that the Pannal did wait for the Deponent at Wooller, and
did go along with him to London, and that by the way he heard him regrate his
own hazard and others, because of Blackwoods Sentence; and that he heard him
regrate the hazard our Laws, and Liberties, and the Protestant Religion were
in. Depons, that the Pannal spoke to the Deponent and others, more then once at
London for getting of Money from the English to be sent to the late Earl of
Argile, for bringing home Arms for the said Earls use, as he understood, for
carrying on an Insurrection, and Rebellion in Scotland. Depons, that at the
time libelled, in Jerviswoods Chamber in London, Mr. William Veitch a forfault
Traitor was present; and that Sir John Cochran did at that Meeting expressly
speak of Money to be sent to Argile for bringing home Arms for invading the
Kingdom of Scotland; And that at another occasion he heard some of them say,
that there would be twenty Thousand Men in Scotland who would assist the
Rebellion, and that he heard Sir John Cochran and Jerviswood speaking of it,
but cannot be positive which of the two said it. Depons, that at that Meeting
he heard Jerviswood speak, but did not hear him oppose that ^reasonable
Proposal* or contradict the Overture proposed by Sir John Cochran. Depons, that
Mr. Robert Martin was sent down from that Meeting which was at Jerviswoods
Chamber, to Scotland, to try what the People of Scotland would do for their own
safety: And that it was understood that the people of Scotland should not rise
till there should be a rising in England, and that the Commission was granted
to Mr. Robert Martin by all the persons present, whereof Jerviswood was one,
and that there were present the Lord Melvill, Sir John Cochran, Cessnocks elder
and younger, Mr. William Carstares, Mr. William Veitch, Jerviswood, and the
Deponent; and depons they did contribute Money for Mr. Martins Journey: Depons,
that at his return he meeting with the Deponent, told him, that Matters were in
that condition in Scotland, and that the Country was in such a condition as
little would kindle the Fire in order to the Rebellion. And this is the truth,
as he shall answer to God. Sic subscribitur,

Alexander Monro, Linlithgow, I. P. D.

JAmes Murray of Philiphaugh, aged 30. Years, married, purged and sworn,
produces four Leaves of Depositions, emitted by him before the Lords of the
Secret Commitie, and all Written and Subscribed with his own hand, which being
publicly read, in presence of the Justices, and Assize, he adheres thereto, in
all points, whereof the Tenot follows.

Upon the day of May, 1683. Upon a letter from Mr. Pringle of Torwoodlie, I
came to his house in the morning, and he presently led me to a Chamber, where I
found Mr. Robert Martin, who was lately come from London, with whom we stayed a
little, and discoursed of the news* and about the present condition, and temper
of England, and in particular of London, which Mr. Martin said, was much
irritated through some attempts upon their Privileges, either as to the
concern of the Sheriffs, or their Charter, but that all honest men were of good
heart* and very brisk, and after some general discourses to this purpose,
Torwoodlie, and I left him, and walked out a little, and he told me, he was
expecting the E. of Tarras presently, for he had sent to him; and Mr. Martin
had a Letter to him from Jerviswood, then he told me that there were great
matters in agitation at London, and that Mr. Martin had come down with a
Commission from our friends there, (I do not remember he named any) but that I
behoved not to expect, he would impart his Instructions to me, for he was to
communicate them only to Polwart and himself, (at least for these Shyres) and
they were to pitch on such as they thought fit to entrust with the affair,
whereupon he assured me, that he had great confidence in me, and his kindness
to me oblidged him to send for me, to acquaint me, that matters were now come
to a crisis, and that he had reason to think England would shortly draw to
Arms, and stand by them, till they were satisfied anent the Bill of Exclusion,
and what other security they could propose for the protestant Religion, and
their Liberties, and that it was no project of any inconsiderable party but a
design through the Kingdom, and that many of the finest men, and of the
greatest interest and credit there, had adjusted almost every thing necessar
for the purpose, and had concerted matters with our Friends there, in order to
concurrence from this, and had agreed to advance Money for furnishing Arms
here, (I do not remember he told me more particulars at this time) but said,
Polwart would be at Gallow-shiels that night, and it would be necessar that the
E. of Tarras and I should confer with him fully, on the business, about this
time the E. of Tarras lighted, and Torwoodlie having left us for a little time,
being gone to bring Mr. Martin, the E. of Tarras asked me, what news, I told
him of Mr. Martins being there, but that he had given me no account of the
design of his down-coming, which perhaps he would acquaint him with, but by
what I had heard from Torwoodlie, I understood it to be, to engadge us to rise
in Arms shortly, whereat the E. of Tarras hummed, and said, he would look ere
he leapt, such a leap, or some such expressions, presently Mr. Martin came, and
the E. of Tarras and he retired a little, after the reading An Letter, he gave
him, the Contents whereof was (as the E. of Tarras informed me) only an order
from Jerviswood, to deliver some Money to the bearer, which he had left with
him, and the E. of Tarras called for his Servant, and bad him bring up the
Money; in the mean time, Torwoodlie asked me, if I had acquainted the E. of
Tarras with what he spoke to me, and I told him, I had let something of it fall
to him, but it was not to be thought, that persons of sense and quality would
engadge in such designs at random; so Torwoodlie said, that (though Mr. Martin
would not commune with us upon his Commission directly) yet he thought it would
be fit, we conferred, and without taking notice of his Commission, discoursed
of things upon suppositions, and as our own private notions, abstract from any
prospect of a present design, so after dinner, we four went to a Chamber, and
after some general discourses, of the discontents of both Kingdoms, these
suppositions following were discoursed (and as I remember) Mr. Martin started
them all, or the most part) viz. What if the country party in England should
have thoughts of going to Arms (whereof he knew nothing but only supposed such
a thing, for discoursing a little freely, and to know our sentiments, what we
thought could be expected here in such a case) would it not be expedient to
have a settled Correspondence betwixt that Party there and here, and might not
matters be so adjusted, that both Kingdoms should draw out in one day, and
might not as many be expected to undertake in these Shires, and about
Edinburgh, as would serve to surprise, and seize our Rulers (I do not remember
any named, but the then Chancellor and Thesaurer) and some to join with these
on the English borders, to assist them to surprise Berwick; and if for that
effect, any Horse, or Dragoons, that should be in the bounds might not be
surprised, that their Horse and Arms might be gotten to furnish the Country
people, and Stirling Castle; and if Argile should at the same time Land in the
West, and raise that Country, would not these Measures contribute much to the
advancement and security of the Interest of that Party here, since thereby the
Government would be disordered, and such steps would encourage all that had an
inclination to the Country Party, to draw to them frankly, and scar many of
the other side to act against them, and so they might have leisure to join from
all places; and might it not be expected, there would be as many in this
Kingdom, as would be able to deal with the Forces here, at least divert them
from troubling England. This is the sum, as I remember, of what was proposed,
and discourst of, though I cannot distinctly say, it was in this method, and
expression, nor was all moved at once, but droped now and then, as the
Discourse seemed to give rise to it; and though I cannot fully Re-count all
that was spoke on these Heads, and tell distinctly, what this and that man
said; yet I remember these following Answers were giving, and (as I judged)
acquiesced to by the whole Company; and they were certainly the E. of Tarras,
his sentiments and mine, and every one that spoke, used this or some such
Precaution, that if they were concerned, or to give counsel in any such case,
as they were not, etc.) 1. As to the settling a Correspondence, it was confessed
to be very convenient for those of a common Interest; but the present
circumstances of Affairs were such (as was thought,) that none could be found
here who was sit to manage it, and would undertake it. 2. As to the trysting
at the same time, it could not be done without the devulging the Design to all
Ranks of people, which none would undertake, except these already in desperate
Circumstances, and they could not have generally much influence. 3. The thing
was not at all advisable for this Kingdom, since if any of Englands own
measures miscarried, they would not stur for any such Trust; and the spring of
their motions being always at London, there might happen an interruption near
the appointment, whereof these here could have no timous notice, and so might
keep Tryst, whereby they would be exposed a prey; and if they should subsist
any time, or prevail (which was hardly possible) the multitude that must be
employed, are tainted with such wild and unruly Principles, that if once they
got the Sword in their Hands, they would never be brought to Order without a
greater force to overawe them; neither would any expectation of Argiles
Landing, be a just ground for such a Tryst, considering the uncertainty of
Sea-Voyages; and if Argile were to be the Head, undoubtedly many people would
conclude that he were to be suspected of private designs, and that restoring
him, might lay him aside: As also, that despair might blind his usual prudence,
and prompt him to unsolid, and undigested Methods; and so it was to be
expected, that few of the Gentry (except such as he had special influence on,
or such as were under hard Circumstances) could embarque with him. 4. As to the
surprising Rulers, etc. It was inveighed against, as an Action not to be
thought of amongst Protestants (especially when the very design of it was
pretended, to secure that Religion, which taught its Professors to abhor and
detest such Principles as Popish, yea un-christian) since it could not be
effectuat without Bloodshed of people, secure in Peace, which being by all
approven, Divines and Casuists condemned as unlawful, and mere Assassination;
it was not to be doubted, that as such a practice would cast a blot upon the
whole Affair, and quite take off any pretense of Defensive Arms, so it would
scar many from joining. These things were reasoned again and again: But I do
not remember there was any formal Conclusion made, but the Discourse was let
fall; and Mr. Martin told us, if any of us had a mind for a suit of Armor, he
could provide as many as we pleased, from one who had made a great many lately,
to honest men at London, of a new fashion, very light, and at an easy Rate; so
Torwoodlie and I gave him our measures, E. of Tarras told he had a suit
already; Then Torwoodlie said to the E. of Tarras and me, we would meet Polwort
at Gallowsheils, and desired we might Commun with him, anent what we had been
Discoursing, so we hasted away, that if possible, we might both get home that
Night, it being Saturnday, and we unfurnished, for staying abroad, and
Torwoodlie whispered me just as I was mounting (as I think) that he was not
clear we should commun before Gallowshiels, for he was sometimes too much
Good Fellow, or the like; so the E. of Tarras and I Rod away together, and upon
the way we were both of Opinion, that the Suppositions we had discoursed of,
were in effect Propositions, and resolved, if they were insisted on by Polwort,
as we suspected, we would adhere to the former Answer, and would undertake
nothing in these methods; When we came to Gallowsheils, the Lord was abroad,
and Polwort was not come, so we had thoughts to go away, being both damped with
what had passed, and inclining to be free of farther meddling; but the Lady would
by no means hear of our going till her Husband came; who, she assured us, was
about the Doors, and she having sent to call him, he would be in presently; yet
it was so late ere he came, that the E. of Tarras could hardly have day enough
to go home with; so Gallowsheils would not let him go, and he would not stay,
unless I stayed, so we both stayed; and not being resolved to Discourse with
Gallowsheils on what passed, we went to the Tavern, on pretense I might call
the Baillie, and seek Horses for Lime, and stayed there till Polwort came
(which seemed unknown to Gallowsheils) then we returned to Gallowsheils House,
and after Supper Polwort whispered the E. of Tarras and me, and enquired if we
had seen Mr. Martin; and we having told him we had, he enquired, if we were
free to commun on the Affair before Gallowsheils, we told, as he thought fit,
for we could trust him; Then he whispered Gallowsheils, and (as I understood
afterward) asked if he was free to commune on matters of great Secrecy and
importance with that Company, to which he assented, then we sat down closs
together, and as I remember, Polwort began the Discourse; But since I am not
able to follow exactly the method of our Conference, or keep the very
expressions used, or repeat all that was spoke, or to tell distinctly what was
every man's part of the Discourse; I shall set down the Heads, and most
remarkable Passages thereof, that I remember in some Articles following; 1.
Polwort signified that he was credibly informed (but I do not remember he named
his Informer) that the Country party in England would draw to the Fields
shortly, as he heard before Lambass, wherewith Gallowsheils seemed visibly
surprised; and being asked, if his Heart failed him already, he said he did
love it better truly to be walking in his own Parks in Peace, and quiet, than
to be meddling in such matters; however he assured the Company, that if there
came any troublesome world, he would join with them firmly; and the F. of
Tarras said, he wondered to hear of any such Resolution in England, for he took
it for a Principle amongst that Party there, that they should make no stir in
the Kings Life (which the whole Company owned to be their Opinion and desire)
because that might strengthen the Dukes interest; and he suspected it was the
project of the Commonwealths men, with whom he believed, few Scots Gentlemen
would join; and he was almost persuaded the D. of Monmouth would not concur in
any rising during the Kings Life, To which it was answered by Polwort, that he
had indeed heard that principle had been generally agreed to, but it seemed
they found, they behoved either to do their business now, or lay aside hopes of
doing it hereafter, which might be, that if the Charter of London were let
fall, they would not only lose all safe opportunity of digesting Matters; but a
great part of their strength, and he heard all things were concerted mutually,
betwixt Monmouths Friends and the Heads of the Commonwealth Party; and tho he
heard Monmouth was shy on that account, yet it was hoped he would engage, for
otherways he would be deserted by that Party. 2. Polwart told us the
suppositions above-written as overtures concerted betwixt our friends at
London, and the principal men of that Party there; so the E. of Tarras and I
renewed our former answers also above-written, and maintained them with all our
vigor, wherein Gallowshiels joined forwardly with us; and Polwart asserted, we
went on very good grounds, and he was fully of our opinion, if things were
entire, but referred it to be considered, whether it were better to comply with
some of these methods, tho not so proper and justifiable as were to be wished,
then to disappoint the business totally, which might be of the best consequence
to all the Party, yet we did not condescend as I remember to undertake any of
these methods. And there was a further argument adduced against the trysting
above-written, viz. That is was talked there was a day appointed in England
lately in Shaftsherry's time, which did not hold, so they were not to be relied
upon. 3. It was proposed to be considered what methods were most proper in the
Companies opinion for Scotland to follow in case of Englands rising, whereanent
it was said, that all that could be expected or desired from Scotland, was,
that upon the certain News of Englands being in the Fields, those in the
Southern Shires who would own that Party, should presently rise, and (how soon
they could get as many conveen'd as would be able to deal with straggling
Parties, or any sudden rising in the Country) march to join them, and that it
would be fit these in the Northern Shires of England waited near the Borders
for such, and that they had Officers trysted there to command, and that then it
would be seasonable for Argile to land in the West, and these Parties on the
Borders might divert the Forces til he had time to put himself in a posture.
These things seemed to be the sentiments of the whole Company, but were not
finally determined till the opinion of others who were to be communed with by
Polwart were known: And it was represented, there behoved not to be any wilful
and obstinate adhering to our own thoughts of things, (but an mutual
condescendance to others concerned,) otherwise it were not possible to bring a
public Design to any good issue. 4. All the Company seemed to agree, that they
should undertake nothing or move in that Affair, till they had a full and
certain account what England proposed, what methods they resolved to follow
there, who were to be their Heads, and that if they designed any attempt on the
Kings Person, or overturning Monarchy, they would not be forward or clear to
join: And it being here insinuated, that the most they could do (at least for
which there could be any plausible pretense to justify) was to draw together,
and without any act of Hostility, send Addresses to His Majesty for redress of
the present abuses of the Government, and for obtaining sufficient security
against the hazard they apprehended to their Religion and Liberties. It was
said by Polwart that he was apt to think, that was their very design, for he
had heard it was generally believed by that Party in England, that if once they
were in a Body, the King would be prevailed with to quite the Duke, to be tried
for Popery, correspondence with France, and accession to the Popish Plot, and
then if the King were once free from the influence of the Dukes Counsels, they
were confident he might be moved to reform their Abuses, and secure their
Religion and Liberties for the future to their contentment. 5. It was resolved,
that till we got the foresaid account from England, and were satisfied
thereanent, and knew others here (who were to be communed with) their
Sentiments of what methods were most proper for us, in case we should
undertake, we should not meddle further; only it was left to the Earl of Tarras
and me, if we thought fit to acquaint Sir William Scot younger with some of the
matter of this Conference overly, without taking notice of our Informers* or
such an Conference; and it was recommended to all to be enquiring (at such as
they had some trust in) indirectly about the affection of our Neighbors, and
what Arms there was amongst them; that if we should get an satisfying account,
and resolve to join, we might know where to seek Men and Arms suddenly; here it
was said by Polwart, as I think, that if the E. of Tarras, Torwoodlie,
Gallow-shiels, and I once took Horse, he thought the most part of the West end
of of Tiviotdale and Selkirk Shire would soon come to us, especially, when they
heard England was risen, then we trysted to meet there against Mid-summer Fair,
betwixt and which the forsaid account was expected, but in case it came to any
of our hands sooner, we promised to advertise the rest, that we might meet
presently, if the case required; this is the substance and sum of what passed
at the forsaid conference, that I can now rememeber; but I remember, I was
likewise told these following particulars in private* by Polwart, or Torwoodlie,
(which of them, I cannot distinctly tell) the day of the forsaid conference, or
within a short time after. 1. That Polwart kept the correspondence with our
friends at London, I remember not positively of any of them that was named, to
be on the entrigue there, except my Lord Melvil, Sir John Cochran, Jerviswood,
and Commissar Monro (for I hardly knew any of the rest) and as I think,
Commissar Monro was called his correspondent there. 2. That the Money to be
advanced by the English party to Scotland was ready, when Mr. Martin came from
London, and it was expected, that within few days after, it would be dispatched
with some confident to Holland, (whither by Bills, or in Cash, I cannot say) it
was called ten thousand pound Sterlin, and was to be employed (as I was told)
by that confident, at Argyles sight, for buying Arms, providing Ships to
transport them with Argyle, to the West here, and such other Charges. 3. That
how soon our friends at London got notice of the safe arrival, of the confident
forsaid, and all other things were finally concluded there (which was expected
would be about the middle of June, as I remember) they would come home, and as
they passed, would give them, or one of them, an particular account of all
resolutions taken, to be communicate to the rest, that it was not to be expected
by Letters, that behoved to be under figures, and dark expressions, and as I
remember, they were written as it were about the Carolina business, or some
household Furniture, as I was told, for I never remember, I saw any Letter,
either direct to London, or sent from it on that head. 4. I was told there was
a Sign, and a Word agreed on by that party, so that men might know with whom
they might use freedom, the Word, as I remember was Harmony, and the Sign, the
opening two Buttons in the breast coat and shutting them presently; this I
communicate to the Earl of Tarras, but does not mind I ever saw it used, except
when I visited Park-Hay here in Town, about the end of June; we discoursing a
little freely, he asked if I had the Word and Sign of the Carolina men, and I
having given them, he said something to this purpose, that he was afraid that
the Carolina business did not go well, for there had been some of the Managers
expected here (as I think he named Jerviswood or Commissar Monro) these eight
days past, but there was none come, nor could he learn that any of their
Friends had heard from them for several Posts. Polwart, Torwoodlie, and I met
at Gallowshiels, on Midsummer Fair, but I mind nothing passed but private
whisperings.

Dated September 15. 1684. and subscrived thus, James Murray.
Edinburgh, December 23. 1684.
THe Deposition above-written being read to the said James Murray of
Philiphaugh, in presence of the Justices and Assizers, he adheres thereto in
all points upon Oath. Sic subscribitur,

James Murray. Linlithgow, I. P. D.



THe said James Murray further depons,

That at their meeting at Gallowshiels, it was resolved, that they should keep
up their Cess unpayed till their next meeting at Midsummer, which was to be at
Gallowshiels, and should deal with all these they had influence upon to do the
like, and that upon the supposition mentioned in his Oath given in. It was
spoke amongst them that the Troupers Horses should be seized upon, when they
were grasing. And this is the truth, as he shall answer to God. Sic
subscribitur,

James Murray. Linlithgow, I. P. D.

HVgh Scot of Gallowshiels, aged 36. Years, married, purged, etc. and sworn.
Depons, That the Earl of Tarras and Philiphaugh did come to the Deponents
House, in May, 1683. and Polwart came likewise there, where there were
Discourses and Proposals, that if the English would rise in Arms, their Friends
in the South Shires should rise with them; and that they should seize the
Horses belonging to the Kings Troops where they grased, and the Town of
Berwick, and the Castle of Stirling: And likewise it was there discoursed anent
the late Earl of Argiles coming to invade Scotland, but because of the
uncertainty of Sea Voyages, there was not much stress laid upon it. Depons, It
was also proposed, that some of the South Country whom they trusted in should
be acquainted with it, and that endeavors should be used to learn what Arms
was in the Country. Depons, There was some such discourse there, as that the
Earl of Tarras, Philiphaugh, Torwoodlie, Polwart, and some others should draw
to Horse with the first when the rising should be in readiness, that it might
be expected that the South parts of Teviotdale and Selkirk Shire would join
with them. And this is the truth, as he shall answer to God. Sic subscribitur,

Hugh Scot. Linlithgow, I. P. D.

HIs Majesty's Advocat produced other Depositions, emitted by Gallowshiels
before the Lords of the Secret Committee, whereof the Tenor follows.

Edinburgh, the 14 of September 1684.
GAllowsheils Depons, that the E. of Tarras and Philiphaugh, being in his House
in May 1683. Discoursed of an intended rising in England, and of Proposals made
to Scots men, to rise with them, and of London in particular, and that Polwort
was present at that Meeting, and told he was sure the Englishmen intended so,
and that it was Discoursed at that Meeting amongst them, that it were fit to
seize Berwick and Stirling; and that it was talked amongst them of bringing the
Duke of York to Trial, and that the King would abandon him. Sic Subscribitur,

Hugh Scot. Perth, Cancel. Queensberry George Mckenzie. Jo. Drummond. George
Mckenzie.


Edinburgh, October 29. 1684.
Sederunt. Lord Chancellor. Lord President. Lord Secretary. Lord Advocat.

THe Lord of Gallowsheils, Prisoner in the Tolbuith of Edinburgh, being Called
and Examined upon Oath, Depons, that in the Month of May 1683. The E. of
Tarras, Hume of Polwert Elder, and Lord of Philiphaugh, came to the Deponents
House, himself being absent, at his coming home, they were speaking of the
Security of the Protestant Religion; and of a Party in England, who would
secure, or seize the King or Duke, and that if any should rise in Arms to
Defend them, or to rescue the King and Duke: There was another Party who would
rise in Arms against them, it was proposed, that some Country men should be
spoken to, to try their Resolutions, and that the Resolutions of England should
be told them, to see if they would concur. But the Deponent does not remember
that this proposition was approven, or undertaken to be done by any present;
nor does he remember who managed the Discourse. It was likewise proposed, to
seize the Officers of State, especially the Chancellor and Thesaurer, and they
said, Sir John Cochran was to come to the West from England, for advancement of
the Design; and that the Earl of Argile was to Land in the West-Highlands, and
to raise that Country. Of these matters, all these who were present
Discoursed, as of an Affair that they were agitating, and wherein themselves
were particularly concerned, though at that time they did not conclude what
their carriage should be; The reason why the Deponent cannot be more
particulars is, because he was sometimes going out, and sometimes walking up
and down the Room; and though the Deponent cannot be positive of the very
words; yet he is positive they were either these Words, or Words to that
purpose. Sic subscribitur,

Hugh Scot. Perth Cancellarius.

Edinburgh, December 23. 1684.
HVgh Scot of Gallowsheils being solemnly Sworn in presence of the Justices and
Assize, adheres to the Depositions within, and above-written in all points, Sic
subscribitur.

Hugh Scot. Linlithgow, I. P. D.

HIs Majesty's Advocat in fortification of the former Probation, adduces the
Printed Copy of Mr. William Carstares Depositions, emitted before the Officers
of State, and other Lords of Privy Council, and leaves the same to the Assise,
and uses it as an Adminicle of Probation; for though it was capitulat, that he
should not be made use of as a Witness; yet it was agreed, that the Deposition
should be published: and likewise produces the Principal Deposition signed by
himself, and the said Lords.

THe Lords, Justice-General, Justice-Clerk, and Commissioners of Justiciary,
admit the Paper produced as an Adminicle, and refers the import thereof to the
Inquest, and ordains the Printed Paper as it is Collationed, to be taken in,
and considered by the Inquest.

SIr William Paterson, and Mr. Colin Mckenzie, Clerks of His Majesty's Privy
Council being Interrogat, if they heard Mr. William Carstares own the
Depositions Read, Depons they saw and heard him Swear, and own the same upon
Oath, and they Collationed the Printed Copy with the Original formerly; and
now they heard it Collationed, Sic subscribitur,

Will. Paterson. Colin Mckenzie.

THe Deposition of Mr. William Carstares, when he was Examined before the Lords
of Secret Committee, given in by him, and renewed upon Oath; upon the 22. of
December 1684. in presence of the Lords of His Majesty's Privy Council.

Edinburgh Castle, September 8. 1684.
MR. William Carstares being Examined upon Oath, conform to the Condescension
given in by him, and on the Terms therein-mentioned; Depons, That about
November, or December 1682. James Stuart, Brother to the Lord of Cultness,
wrote a Letter to him from Holland, importing, that if any considerable sum of
Money could be procured from England, that something of importance might be
done in Scotland: The which Letter, the Deponent had an inclination to inform
Shepherd in Abb-Church-lane, Merchant in London of; but before he could do it,
he wrote to Mr. Stuart above-named to know from him, if he might do it; and Mr.
Stuart having consented, he communicate the said Letter to Mr. Shepherd, who
told the Deponent that he would communicate the Contents of it to some persons
in England; but did at that time name no body, as the Deponent thinks: Sometime
thereafter, Mr. Shepherd told the Deponent, that he had communicate the Contents
of the Letter abovenamed, to Colonel Sidney, and that Colonel Dunvers was
present, and told the Deponent, that Colonel Sidney was averse from employing
the late Earl of Argile, or meddling with him, judging him a man too much
affected to the Royal Family, and inclined to the present Church Government;
yet Mr. Shepherd being put upon it by the Deponent, still urged, that one might
be sent to the Earl of Argile; but as Mr. Shepherd told him, he was suspected
upon the account of his urging so much; yet afterward he pressed, without the
Deponents knowledge, that the Deponent being to go to Holland however, might
have some Commission to the Earl of Argile, which he having informed the
Deponent of, the Deponent told him, that he himself would not be concerned, but
if they would send another, he would introduce him; but nothing of this was
done: upon which the Deponent went over, without any Commission from any body,
to Holland, never meeting with James Stuart above-named: He was introduced to
the Earl of Argile, with whom he had never before conversed; and did there
Discourse what had past betwixt Mr. Shepherd and him; and particularly, about
remitting of Money to the said Earl from England; of which the said Mr. Stuart
had written to the Deponent, namely of 30000 pounds Sterling; and of the
raising of 1000 Horse and Dragoons; and the securing the Castle of Edinburgh,
as a matter of the greatest importance: The method of doing this was proposed
by the Deponent, to be one hour, or thereby, after the relieving of the Guards:
But the Earl did not relish this Proposition, as dangerous; and that the
Castles would fall of consequence, after the Work abroad was done. James Stuart
was of the Deponents Opinion for seizing the Castle; because it would secure
Edinburgh; the Magazins and Arms, as to the 1000 Horse and Dragoons. My Lord
Argile was of Opinion, that without them nothing was to be done; and that if
that number were raised in England to the said Earl, he would come into
Scotland with them; and that there being so few Horse and Dragoons to meet
them, he judged he might get the Country without trouble, having such a
standing Body for their Friends to Rendezvous to; and the said Earl said he
could show the Deponent the conventient places for Landing, if he understood;
and as the Deponent remembers, where the Ships could attend. The Deponent
remembers not the names of the places. The Deponent spoke to the Lord Stairs;
but cannot be positive that he named the Affair to him, but found him shy: but
the Earl of Argile told him, he thought Stairs might be gained to them: And
that the Earl of Lowdoun being a man of good Reason, and disobliged, would have
great influence upon the Country, and recommended the Deponent to Major Holms
with whom the Deponent had some acquaintance before, and had brought over a
Letter from him to the Earl of Argyle; but the Deponent had not then
communicate any thing to the said Holms. James Steuart laid down a way of
correspondence by Ciphers and false Names, and sent them over to Holms, and the
Deponent, for their use (which Ciphers and Names, are now in the hands of His
Majesty's Officers, as the Deponent supposes,) and did desire the Deponent
earnestly to propose the 30000. pound Sterling abovenamed to the party in
England, and did not propose any less; for as the Earl told the Deponent, he
had particularly calculate the Expense for Arms, Ammunition, etc. But James
Steuart said, that if some less could be had, the Earl would content himself,
if better might not be; but the Earl always said, that there was nothing to be
done without the body of Horse and Dragoons abovementioned. During the time of
the Deponent his abode in Holland, tho he had several Letters from Shepard, yet
there was no satisfactory account, till some time after the Deponent parted
from the Earl of Argyle, and was making for a Ship at Rotterdam to transport
himself to England. James Steuart wrote to him that there was hopes of the
Money. The next day after the Deponent came to England, he met with Sir John
Cochran, who, with Commissar Monro, and Jerviswood, was at London before he
came over; and depons, that he knows not the account of their coming, more then
for the perfecting the Transaction about Carolina: and having acquainted Sir
John Cochran with the Earls demands of the 30000 pound Sterling and the 1000.
Horse and Dragoons, Sir John carried him to the Lord Russel, to whom the
Deponent proposed the affair, but being an absolute Stranger to the Deponent,
had no return from him at that time; but afterward having met him accidently
at Mr. Shepards house, where he the Lord Bussel had come to speak to Shepard
about the Money abovenamed, as Mr. Shepard told the Deponent. The Deponent
(when they were done speaking) desired to speak to the Lord Russel, which the
Lord Russel did, and having reiterate the former Proposition for the 30000.
pound Sterling, and the 1000. Horse and Dragoons, he the Lord Russel told the
Deponent, they could not get so much raised at the time, but if they had 10000.
pound to begin, that would draw People in, and when they were once in, they
would soon be brought to more; but as for the 1000. Horse and Dragoons, he
could say nothing at the present, for that behoved to be concerted upon the
Borders. The Deponent made the same proposal to Mr. Ferguson, who was much
concerned in the Affair, and zealous for the promoving of it. This Mr. Ferguson
had in October or November before, as the Deponent remembers in a Conversation
with the Deponent in Cheap-fide, or the Street somewhere thereabout, said, that
for the saving of innocent Blood, it would be necessary to cut off a few,
insinuating the King and Duke, but cannot be positive whether he named them or
not, to which the Deponent said, that is work for our wild People in Scotland,
my Conscience does not serve me for such things; after which the Deponent had
never any particular discourse with Ferguson, as to that matter; but as to the
other Affair, Ferguson told the Deponent that he was doing what he could to get
it effectuate, as particularly that he spoke to one Major Wildman who is not of
the Deponent his acquaintance. Ferguson blamed always Sidney, as driving
designs of his own. The Deponent met twice or thrice with the Lord Melvil, Sir
John Cochran, Jerviswood, Commissar Monro, the two Cessnocks, Mongomery of
Langshaw, and one Mr. Veitch, where they discoursed of Money to be sent to
Argyle, in order to the carrying on the Affair, and tho he cannot be positive
the Affair was named, yet it was understood by himself, and as he conceives by
all present, to be for rising in Arms, for rectifying the Government.
Commissary Monro, Lord Melvil, and the two Cessnocks were against meddling with
the English, because they judged them men that would talk, and would not do,
but were more inclined to do something by themselves, if it could be done. The
Lord Melvil thought every thing hazardous, and therefore the Deponent cannot
say he was positive in any thing, but was most inclined to have the Duke of
Monmouth to head them in Scotland, of which no particular method was laid down.
Jerviswood, the Deponent, and Mr. Veitch, were for taking Money at one of these
Meetings. It was resolved, that Mr. Martin, late Clerk to the Justice Court
should be sent to Scotland, to desire their Friends to hinder the Country from
Rising, or taking rash Resolutions upon the account of the Council, till they
should see how matters went in England. The said Martin did go at the Charges
of the Gentlemen of the Meeting, and was directed to the Lord of Polwart and
Torwoodlie, who sent back word that it would not be found so easy a matter to
get the Gentry of Scotland to concur: But afterward in a Letter to Commissar
Monro, Polwart wrote that the Country was readier to concur than they had
imagined, or something to that purpose. The Deponent, as abovesaid, having
brought over a Key from Holland, to serve himself and Major Holms: he remembers
not that ever he had an exact Copy of it, but that sometimes the one, sometimes
the other kept It, and so it chanced to be in his custody when a Letter from
the Earl of Argyle came to Major Holms, intimating, that he would join with the
Duke of Monmouth, and follow his measures, or obey his Directions. This Mr.
Veitch thought fit to communicate to the Duke of Monmouth, and for the
Understanding of it was brought to the Deponent, and he gave the Key to Mr.
Veitch, who as the Deponent was informed, was to give it and the Letter to Mr.
Ferguson, and he to show it to the Duke of Monmouth; but what was done in it,
the Deponent knows not. The Deponent heard the Design of Killing the King and
Duke, from Mr. Shepard, who told the Deponent some were full upon it. The
Deponent heard that Aron Smith was sent by those in England to call Sir John
Cochran, on the account of Carolina, but that he does not know Aron Smith, or
any more of that matter, not being concerned in it. Shepard named young Hamden
frequently as concerned in these Matters.

Signed at Edinburgh Castle, the 8. of September, 1684. and renewed the 18 of
the same Month. William Carstares. PERTH CANCEL. I. P. D.

Edinburgh Castle 18 September 1684.
MR. William Carstares being again Examined, adheres to his former Deposition,
in all the parts of it, and Depones he knows of no Correspondence betwixt
Scotland and England, except by Martin before named; for those Gentlemen to
whom he was sent, were left to follow their own Methods. Veitch sometimes, as
the Deponent remembers, stayed sometimes at Nicolson, Stabler^s House, at
London-wall; sometimes with one Widow Hardcastle in More-fields. The Deponent
did Communicate the Design on foot to Doctor Owen, Mr. Griffil, and Mr. Meed,
at Stepney, who all concurred in the promoting of it, and were desirous it
should take effect; and to one Mr. Freth in the Temple, Councellor at Law, who
said that he would see what he could do in reference to the Money, but there
having gone a Report, that there was no Money to be raised, he did nothing in
it; nor does the Deponent think him any more concerned in the Affair. Nelthrop
frequently spoke to the Deponent of the Money to be sent to Argyle, whether it
was got or not, but the Deponent used no freedom with him in the Affair.
Goodenough did insinuate once, that the Lords were not inclined to the thing,
and that before, they would see what they could do in the City. The Deponent
saw Mr. Ferguson, and Mr. Rumsay, lurking after the Plot broke out, before the
Proclamation, having gone to Ferguson, in the back of Bishopsgate-street, at
some new Building, whether he was directed by Jerviswood, who was desirous to
know how things went. Rumsay was not of the Deponent his acquaintance before,
but they knew as little of the matter as the Deponent. This is what the
Deponent remembers, and if any thing come to his Memory, he is to deliver it in
betwixt* and the first of October. And this is the truth, as he shall answer to
God.

William Carstares PERTH, Cancel. I. P. D.

At Edinburgh, the 22. of December, 1684.
THese foregoing Depositions, Subscribed by Mr. William Carstares Deponent, and
by the Lord Chancellor, were acknowledged on Oath by the said Mr. William
Carstares, to be his true Depositions; and that the Subscriptions were his, in
presence of us Undersubscribers.

William Carstares. PERTH Cancel. David Falconer. George Mckenzie,
Queensberry. Athol.


HIs Majesty's Advocat for further probation, adduces the Examinations of Mr.
Shepard, taken before Sir Leolin Jenkins Secretary of State for England, with
the Information or Deposition of Mr. Zachary Bourn, relating to the Plot,
signed by him and Secretary Jenkins, of which Depositions the tenors follow.

THe Examination of Thomas Shepard of London Merchant, taken upon Oath before
the Right Honorable Sir Leolin Jenkins Knight, His Majesty's Principal
Secretary of State, the 23. day of December. 1683.

THe Deponent says, That Ferguson told him on, or about the Month of April
last, that an Insurrection was intended both in England and in Scotland, and
that for the settling that Affair betwixt the two Nations, Mr. Baillie, Mr.
Monro, Sir John Cochran, Sir Hugh and Sir George Campbels, with some others
(whose names this Deponent heard not) were come to London.

That the Deponent had some acquaintance with Mr. Baillie, Mr. Monro, and Sir
John Cochran, and none at all with Sir Hugh and Sir George Campbels; that Mr.
Baillie told the Deponent, that the Earl of Argile demanded Thirty Thousand
Pounds of the English to capacitat him to begin the business effectually in
Scotland, and that he the said Baillie likewise told the Deponent, that having
concerted things with the Lord Russel and others, he the said Baillie found an
impossibility of raising that Sum; After which the said Baillie had acquainted
the Deponent, that they were certainly promised Ten Thousand Pounds, which Sum
was agreed to be paid into the Deponents hands, in order to be remitted into
Holland, for the providing of Arms; and that the said Baillie told the Deponent
at diverse times, that the said Sum, or at least one half of it would be paid
such a day, and such a day; and sometimes asked the Deponent, if he had
received any part of the said Money, to which the Deponent replied that he had
not, and that he the Deponent scarce thought any would be paid.

And the Deponent also says, that having had some little conversation with Sir
John Cochran, he remembers well, that both of them did sometimes lament the
delays in not paying in the Money, and said, that although the said Ten
thousand Pounds were paid in, they, the said Sir John Cochran and Mr. Monro,
feared it would be too little; and this Deponent further says not, as to any
new matter. But the Deponent being asked, to Explain what he thought was meant
by the words above written, vi^s, to capacitat him (the Earl of Argile) to
begin the business, he, this Deponent says, that he did understand by the
Word business, an Insurrection in Scotland. Sic. subscribitur,

Thomas Shepard.
Jurat coram. L. Jenkins.

THe Information of Zachary Bourn of London, Brewer* taken upon Oath, the tenth
day of December 1683. before the Right honorable Mr. Secretary Jenkins.

THe Informant Deposes, and says, that Mr. Baillie sat up one Night, if not
two, with Mr. Ferguson, and went several times in the Evening with him to the
Duke of Monmouth, and the chief mannagers of the Conspiracy; That Ferguson told
the Deponent, that he the said Baillie was the chief man for the Scots, next to
the Lord Argile; that the said, Baillie did sit up the greatest part of one
night, with the said Ferguson; at which time this Deponent believes they were
busy in preparing the intended Declaration, which the Deponent has the more
reason to believe, in as much as the said Ferguson did go about to show him the
Deponent, such a Paper, wherein the said Ferguson was hindered by the coming up
Stairs of some person, to speak with the said Ferguson, that the said Ferguson
told the Deponent, that the main business of the said Baillie, in meeting the
said Conspirators, was in order to get from them the Ten thousand Pounds,
promised for the buying of Arms; for the Insurrection intended in Scotland.

That the Deponent saw Mr. William Carstares come often to the Lodgings of the
said Ferguson; but that the said Ferguson never told the Deponent of any
Discourse held by him with the said Carstares: and further this Deponent says
not. sic subscribitur,

Zac. Bourn. Jurat coram. L. Jenkins.

HIs Majesty's Advocat likewise produced several Warrands, and Papers to prove,
that those Depositions are signed by Sir Leolin Jenkins.

HIs Majesty's Advocat also produced the Books of Adjournal, bearing Mr.
William Veitch to be a Forefault Traitor, and the Act of Parliament whereby the
Forefaulture is Ratified.

His Majesty's Advocat's Speech to the Inquest.
My Lords and Gentlemen,
YOu have now a Conspiracy against His Majesty's Sacred Person, and Royal
Government, so fully discovered, that they must want Reason as well as Loyalty,
who do not believe the Discovery; and they must be enemies to sincerity, as
well as to the King, who do not acknowledge it. Beside, that the Councils of
all the three Nations, thought the proof sufficient, for Indicting a General
Thanksgiving through all these Nations; and that the Judges of England thought
the same strong enough to infer Forefaulture of Life and Estate, against some
of all Ranks there; you have a Discovery made here from the late E. of Argiles
own Letters, and the Confession of his own Emissaries, the two surest proofs
that Law ever invented, or the nature of Humane Affairs can allow; and I am
this day to add to all this, a new Set of Proofs in the Process that I now
lead against this Pannal, from the Confessions of Noblemen and Gentlemen, who
have been engaged in this wicked Conspiracy; and who from a sense of their
Guilt, are content freely to Depose against their nearest Relation, and their
most intimate Friend, in which having thus cleared to you, that there was
really such a Conspiracy, I shall, in the next place, proceed to prove this
Pannals Accession to it.

It cannot be imagined, that we would willingly involve our Country men in it,
without a Conviction stronger then our kindness to Scotland; nor did His
Majesty's Servants accuse this Pannal, without the opinion of the ablest
Lawyers of the Kingdom, who did* with them concur, to think that there was not
the least occasision of doubting left, to the most indifferent Inqueist of his
guilt, after they had seriously, and with reflection, read over, and pondered
the probation now laid before you:

The Person accused of accession to this Crime is the Ringleader of all those,
who in this Kingdom concurred with the English Conspirators, as you may see by
the Testimonies of all who have Deposed; and it was indeed sit and just to
begin with the most guilty, so that if he be not convicted, there should no man
be punished for this Conspiracy; all the noise we have heard of it, is but a
Cheat, the Kings Judges have been Murderers, all the Witnesses have been
Knaves, and such as dyed for it have been Martyrs.

The Accession charged on this Pannal, is not an accidental escape, nor is it
proved by Witnesses, who can be suspected of unkindnes to his Person, or his
Cause, for it is a long tract of a continued design, gone about with the
greatest deliberation and concern imaginable, and proved by his nearest
Relations, and persons so deeply engadged in that Cause, (for which he
Suffers,) that they were content with him to venture their Lives and Fortunes
in that quarrel. He is not accused of a Crime that can amount only to a single
Murder, though that be a dreadful Crime, but a Rebellion, which was to draw
upon us a Civil War, that Murder of Murders, in which hundreths of thousands
were to fall; and to Crown all, he was to begin, and to be the chief promoter
of a Rebellion, in which one of the first steps was to kill His Sacred
Majesty, and his Royal Brother; and one of the chief Witnesses which I have
led against him, is Bourn, which Bourn confessed that he was to kill the King,
and who confesses the Pannal sat up several nights with Ferguson, the other
contriver of the Kings Murder, and so familiar was he with him, that Bourn
depons, that the said Pannal had been with Ferguson* at the drawing of the
manifesto, whereby he was not only to be an Actor, but to be the Justifier of
that horrid Villainy: and therefore Bourns depons, that Ferguson, (the best
Judge in that case) looked upon him as the chief man, next to Argyle; But
because no man is presumed to go to such a hight, without previous inclination
and motives, I shall to convince you, that this Gentleman was very capable of
all that was lybelled against him, remember you, that he is Nephew, and Son in
Law to the late War^stoun, bred up in his Family and under his Tutory; about
the time of this Plot it was undenyably known, and is now sufficiently proved,
by two present Witnesses, the Earl of Tarras and Commissar Monro, that he
thought himself desperate, knowing himself to be guilty of Treason by Blackwoods
Case; and as it is presumable, that a man that is guilty of one point of Treason,
will commit another; so when a man is desperate as to his Life and Fortune, he
is capable of any thing; he was likewise animated to commit this Crime, by the
intelligence he had that there was a Plot in England, carried on by men of so
great Parts, Fortune and Influence, and by the too probable hopes, that they
would get all the Western Shires to join with them here, because of the common
guilt, in which they had engadged themselves, by their late extravagances, they
made and account of an assistance of twenty thousand men; and by Philiphaughs
Deposition, that these Gentlemen expected the concurse of the Southern-Shires;
and thus, I am to prove to you a Crime, which is in it self, so probable and
liklie, that it should need little probation, tho I have adduced for your
conviction sufficient evidences, albeit the Crime were in it self very unliklie.

The Crimes which I hope I have proved, are, That Jerviswood the Pannal
transacted for Money to the late Earl of Argyl, a declared Traitor. 2. That he
designed to raise a Rebellion. 3. That he intercommuned with the Earl of Argyle
and Mr. Veitch declared Traitors. 4. That he was present, where it was treated,
either that Argyle should have Money from the English and assistance from
Scotland, or that a Rebellion should be raised, and that he did not reveal the
samine; and all these being found relevant separatim, it is sufficient for me
to have proved any one of them. And if a Gentleman was lately found guilty of
High Treason, by the opinion of all the Lords of Session, for not revealing,
that Sir John Cochran sought fifty pound Sterling from him, though he refused
the same, and tho he believed, it was sought for a charitable subsistence to
preserve him from starving; what deserves this Pannal, who sought thirty
thousand pound sterling, to buy him Arms, to invade his Native Country?

That Jerviswood was designing to carry on a Rebellion, or at least was
accessory, or (as our Law terms it) was Art and Part thereof, is clearly
proved; but that in this occult and hidden Crime, which uses not to be proved
by clear witnesses; I may lead you through all the steps of the Probation, which
like the links of a Chain, hang upon one another. You will be pleased to
consider, that 1. It is proved that he desired a blind Commission to go to
England, not to manage the affairs of the Carolina Company, as he confessed,
but to push the People of England to do something for themselves, because they
did only talk and not do; and what he would have them to do, appears too
clearly, because he tells the Earl of Tarras it was probable, that if the King
were briskly put to it by the Parliament of England, he would consent to
exclude the Duke from the Succession: here is not only a Treasonable Design,
(though a design be sufficient in Treason) but here are express acts of Treason
proved, viz. The treating with the Earl of Tarras upon this Design, the
settling a Correspondence with him for the prosecution of it, and the writing
Letters from London to him concerning it, and the sending down Mr. Martin to
complete it by a general Rising: As he designed to push on the English, so he
prosecutes closely this Design upon all occasions. On the Road he complains
cunningly and bitterly, that our Lives, Laws and Liberties, and the Protestant
Religion were in danger, the style and method of all such as design to Rebel;
after he arrives at London, he engages the Conspirators there to assist the
late Earl of Argile* a declared Traitor, with Money to buy Arms; this was
indeed to push the English to do the most dangerous things by the most
dangerous man* and in the most dangerous methods. He enters also in a strict
Correspondence with Ferguson the Contriver* with Shepard the Thesaurer, and
Carstares the Chaplain of the Conspiracy.

Alexander Monro another present Witness, proves that he argued with him, that
it was necessary to give Argile Money expressly for carrying on the Rebellion,
and that they did meet at Jerviswoods Chamber where this was spoke of, and from
which Mr. Robert Martin was sent to their Friends in Scotland to know what they
would do; and though the silly caution was, that they sent him to prevent their
rising, yet a man must renounce common sense, not to see that the design was to
incite them to Rebellion, and to prevent only their doing any thing in this
rebellious design, by which they might lose themselves in a too early and
abortive Insurrection here, till things were ready in England. For, 1. This
Commission was given him in a place, and by a Company who had been themselves
treating immediately before of sending Money to the late E. of Argile to buy
Arms, and certainly those Arms were to be bought for Men, and not for a
Magazine. 2. They were treating how many Men could be raised in Scotland. 3.
Carstares Deposition bears, that Martin was sent to hinder rash Resolutions,
till they saw how Matters went in England, and the return to their Embassy
bore, that it would not be an easy matter to get the Gentry of Scotland to
concur; but afterward better hopes of their rising was given, which could not
have been, if the true Commission had not been to raise Scotland. 4. That Sir
John Cochran made a Speech to that purpose, is expressly proved, and that
Jerviswood spoke to the same purpose, is proved by a necessary consequence; for
since it is proved that he spoke, and that he did not speak against it, it must
necessarily follow that he spoke for it, though the Witness is so cautious,
that he cannot condescend upon the words now after so long a time; and it is
against Sense to think, that Jerviswood who in private pressed the same so much
upon Commissar Monro, and who was the Deacon-Conveener here, and who, as Mr.
Martin their Envoy declared, was the person who was to be sent for the Arms,
should not himself have been the most forward man in that Design, but above all
exitus acta probat, this Commissioner, (who being a mere Servant, durst not
have proposed any thing from himself, being a mean Person, and being one, who,
as the Earl of Tarras deposes, would say nothing, but what was in his Paper:)
does expressly declare, that he came from Jerviswood and others; and in the
meeting with him, a Rebellion is actually formed, and it is resolved, they
should seize the King's Officers of State, Garrisons, and Forces, and that they
should join with the late E. of Argyle, and put their own Forces in a condition
to join with these Forces that were to come from England, and they gave a Sign,
and a Word, which uses only to be done in actual War; So here is Treason
clearly proved, by two present Witnesses, from the first Design to it is last
perfection.

Nor can it be objected, that they are not concurring Witnesses, but testes
singulares upon separat Acts, for in reiterable Crimes, Witnesses deposing upon
different Acts; do prove if the deeds tend to the same end; as for instance, if
one Witness should depose, that they saw a Traitor sit in a Council of War, in
one place, and in another place, they saw him in Arms, or that one saw him
assist at a Proclamation in one place, and saw him in Arms in another; or that
one saw him writ a Treasonable Paper, and another saw him use it; These
Witnesses are still considered as contestes, or concurring Witnesses, and ten
or twelve Inqueists have so found, and upon their Verdict, Rebels have been
lately hanged. The learned Judges of England being all met together did
expressly find, that one Witness proving, that A. B. said, that he was going to
buy a Knife to kill the King, and another deposing, that he saw him buy a
Knife, without telling for what, that these two Witnesses were contestes, and
proved sufficiently the Crime of Treason, yet there the one Witness, proved only
a remote Design, and the other an Act, which was indifferent of it is own
nature, and became only Treasonable by the Connection; But no VVitnesses ever
Deposed upon things so coherent, and so connected together, as these do, for
they depose still upon the same person, carrying on the same Design of a
Rebellion; as to which, in one place, he is exciting his own Nephew, and
telling him his Resolutions, and settling a Correspondence with him, at another
time, he presses Commissar Monro to the same Rebellion. At a third, He holds a
meeting at his own Chamber, and speaks concerning it, and from that meeting, he
sends a Trusty, who forms the Rebellion. Besides all this, tho two VVitnesses
be sufficient, I have adduced Mr. William Carstares Chief Conspirator, and who
choos'd rather to suffer violent Torture, than to disclose it, he likewise
Deposes upon all these steps, and connects them together, and this his
Deposition is twice reiterated, upon Oath, after much premeditation. And I
likewise adduce two Depositions taken upon Oath, by Sir Leolin Jenkins, who was
empowered by the Law of England, and at the command of the King, and the
Council of England, upon a Letter from His Majesty's Officers of State here, In
which Deposition, Shepard, one of the VVitnesses, deposes, that Baillie came
frequently to him, and desired him to advance the Money, and lamented the
delays, and that there was so little to be advanced; and who should be better
believed then one who was his own Trusty, and a Person who was able to advance
so great a Sum; Bourn, another of the VVitnesses, Deposes, that Ferguson told
him, that the Pannal spoke frequently to him concerning the same Money, and
that he sat up several nights with Ferguson upon the said Conspiracy; and who
should be better believed then Fergusons confident, and one who was so far
trusted in the whole affair, that he was to take away that Sacred Life, which
Heaven has preserved by so many Miracls.

Against these three Depositions, you have heard it objected, that non
testimonia sed testes probant, especially by our Law, in which, by an express
Act of Parliament, no Probation is to be led, but in presence of the Assise and
Pannal. To which it is answered, that these Depositions are not mere
Testimonies; for I call a Testimony, a voluntar Declaration, emitted without an
Oath, and a Judge; but these Depositions are taken under the awe of an Oath,
and by the direction of a Judge. ^ Shepard was confronted with the Pannal
himself, and he had nothing to say against him; whereas the great thing that
can be objected against Testimonies (and by our Statute especially) is, that if
the Party who emits the Testimony had been confronted with the Pannal; the
impression of seeing a person that was to die, by his Deposition, would have
made him afraid to Depose laxly; and the Pannal likewise might, by proposing
Interrogators and Questions, have cleared himself, and satisfied the Judges in
many things Deposed against him: But so it is that Mr. Shepard having been
confronted with the Pannal, before the King Himself, who is as far above other
Judges, in His Reason and Justice, as He is in His Power and Authority; He
Deposes that the Pannal was the chief Mannager of this Conspiracy, next to
Argile, and that he was so passionat to have this Money to buy Arms, that he
lamented the delays; and can it be imagined that Mr. Shepard whom he trusted
with his Life and his Fortune, and whom all their Party trusted with their
Cash, would have Deposed any thing against him that was not true, especially
when he knew that what he was to Depose, was to take away his Life and his
Fortune; or that if the Pannal had been innocent, he would not when he was
confronted with Mr. Shepard, before the King Himself, have roared against Mr.
Shepard, if he had not been conscious to his own Guilt. There is a surprise in
innocence, which makes the innocent exclaim, and it inspires men with a
courage, which enables them to confound those who Depose falsely against them;
and in what occasion could either of these have appeared, more than in this,
wherein this Gentleman was charged to have Conspired with the greatest of
Rascals, against the best of Princes; and that too in presence of the Prince
himself, against whom he had Conspired, but Guilt stupifies indeed, and it did
never more than in this Gentleman's Case, whose silence was a more convincing
Witness than Mr. Shepard could be Mr. Carstares likewise knew when he was to
Depone, that his Deposition was to be used against Jerviswood, and he stood
more in awe of his love to his Friend, than of the fear of the Torture, and
hazarded rather to die for Jerviswood, than that Jerviswood should die by him:
How can it then be imagined, that if this man had seen Jerviswood in his Trial,
it would have altered his Deposition; or that this kindness, which we all
admired in him, would have suffered him to forget any thing in his Deposition,
which might have been advantageous in the least to his Friend: And they
understand ill this hight of Friendship, who think that it would not have been
more nice and careful, than any Advocat could have been: and if Carstares had
forgot at one time, would he not have supplied it at another; but especially at
this last time, when he knew his Friend was already brought upon his Trial: and
that this renewed Testimony was yet a further confirmation of what was said
against him; and albeit the Kings Servants were forced to engage, that
Carstares himself should not be made use of as a Witness against Jerviswood;
yet I think this kind scrupulosity in Carstares for Jerviswood, should convince
you more than twenty suspect, nay than even indifferent Witnesses; nor can it
be imagined, that the one of these Witnesses would not have been as much afraid
of God, and his Oath at London, as at Edinburgh; and the other in the
Council Chamger in the Forenoon, as in the Justice-Court in the Afternoon.

3. The Statute founded on, does not discharge the producing of Testimonies
otherways than after the Jury is enclosed; for then indeed they might be
dangerous, because the party could not object against them: But since the
Statute only discharges to produce Writ, or Witnesses, after the Jury is
enclosed; it seems clearly to insinuat, that they ought to prove when they are
produced in presence of the Party himself, as now they are. And though the
Civil Law did not allow their Judges to believe Testimonies, because they were
confined to observe strict Law; yet it does not from that follow, that our
Juries, whom the Law allows to be a Law to themselves, and to be confined by no
Rule, but their Conscience, may not trust entirely to the Depositions of
Witnesses, though not taken before themselves, when they know that the
Witnesses, by whom, and the Judges, before whom these Depositions were emited,
are persons beyond all suspicion, as in our case. But yet for all this, I
produce these Testimonies, as Adminicles here only to connect the Depositions
of the present Witnesses, and not to be equivalent to Witnesses in this legal
Process; albeit, as to the conviction of mankind, they are stronger than any
ordinary Witnesses.

When you, my Lords and Gentlemen, remember that it is not the revenge of a
private party, that accuses in this case; and that even in private Crimes, such
as Forgery, or the murder of Children, etc. many Juries here have proceeded
upon mere presumptions, and that even Solomon himself, founded his illustrious
Decision, approved by God Almighty, upon the presumed assertion of a Mother; I
hope ye will think two Friends Deposing, as present Witnesses, adminiculated
and connected by the Depositions of others, though absent; should beget in you
an entire belief, especially against a Pannal, who has been always known to
incline this way, and who, though he was desired in the Tolbooth to vindicat
himself from those Crimes, would not say any thing in his own defense, and
though he offers to clear himself of his accession to the Kings Murder, yet
says nothing to clear himself from the Conspiracy entered into with the late
Earl of Argile, for invading his Native Country, which is all that I here
Charge upon him, and which he inclines to Justify, as a necessary mean for
redressing Grievances; I must therefore remember you, that an Inquest of very
worthy Genlemen did find Rathillet guilty, tho there was but one Witness led
against him, because when he was put to it, he did not deny his accession: And
two Rogues were found guilty in the late Circuit at Glasgow, for having
murdered a Gentleman of the Guard, though no man saw them kill him; but the
Murderers having been pursued, they run to the place out of which the Pannals
then accused were taken, none having seen the face of the Run-aways; and the
Pannals being accused, and pressed to deny the accession, shunned to disown the
Guilt, but desired it might he proved against them. This may convince you that
there are Proofs which are stronger then Witnesses; and I am sure that there
were never more proving Witnesses then in this case, nor were the Depositions
of Witnesses ever more strongly adminiculated. Remember the danger likewise of
emboldening Conspiracies against the Kings Sacred Life, and of encouraging a
Civil War, wherein your selves and your Posterity may bleed, by making the
least difficulty to find a man Guilty by the strongest Proofs that ever were
adduced in so latent a Crime as a Conspiracy is. And I do justly conclude, that
whoever denis that a Conspiracy can be thus proved, does let all the World see
that he inclines that Conspiracies should be encouraged and allowed. Our Age is
so far from needing such Encouragements, that on the other hand* in this, as in
all other Crimes, because the Guilt grows frequent and dangerous, the Probation
should therefore be made the more easy, tho in this Case the King needs as
little desire your Favor, as fear your Justice. And I have insisted so much
upon this Probation, rather to convince the World of the Conspiracy, than you
that this Conspirator is Guilty.

THereafter the Lords Ordained the Assize to enclose, and return their Verdict
to morrow by Nine a Clock in the Morning.

Edinburgh, December 24. 1684
THe said day, The Persons who past upon the Assize of Mr. Robert Baillie of
Jerviswood, returned their Verdict in presence of the said Lords; whereof the
Tenor follows. The Assize, all in one Voice, finds the Crimes of Art and Part
in the Conspiracy, and Plot Libelled; and of concealing, and not revealing the
same, clearly proven against Mr. Robert Baillie the Pannal, in respect of the
Depositions of Witnesses and Adminicles adduced. Sic subscribitur,

Strathmore Chancellor.

AFter opening and reading of the which verdict of Assyze, The Lords, Justice
General, Justice Clerk, and Commissioners of Justiciary, therefore, by the
mouth of James Johnstoun Dempster of Court,

Decerned and Adjudged the said Mr. Robert Baillie of Jerviswood to be taken to
the Market Cross of Edinburgh, this twenty fourth day of December instant,
betwixt two and four a clock in the afternoon, and there to be hanged on a
Gibbet till he be dead, and his Head to be cut off, and his Body to be
Quartered in four, and his head to be affixt on the Nether-bow of Edinburgh,
and one of his Quarters to be affixt on the Tolbooth of Jedburgh, another on
the Tolbooth of Lanerk, a third on the Tolbooth of Air, and a fourth on the
Tolbooth of Glasgow; And ordains his Name, Fame, Memory, and Honors to be
extinct, his Blood to be Tainted, and his Arms to be riven forth, and delate
out of the Books of Arms, so that his Posterity may never have Place, nor be
able hereafter to bruik, or joyse any Honors, Offices, Titles or Dignities,
within this Realm in time coming; and to have Forfaulted, Ammitted and Tint all
and sundry his Lands, Heritages, Tacks, Steadings, Rooms, Possessions, Goods
and Gear whatsoever, pertaining to him, to Our Sovereign Lords use, to remain
perpetually with His Highness, in Property, which was pronunced for Doom. Sic
subscribitur.

LINLITHGOW. James Foulis, I. Lockhart, David Balfour, Roger Hog, Al. Seton, P.
Lion.
Extracted forth of the Books of Adjournal, by me Mr. Thomas Gordon, Clerk to
the Justice Court, sic subscribitur:

THO. GORDON



In pursuance of which Sentence, His Majesty's Heralds, and Pursevants, with
their Coats displayed (after sound of Trumpets,) Did publicly, in face of the
Court (conform to the custom, in the Sentences of Treason) in His Majesty's
Name and Authority, Cancel, Tear and Destroy the said Mr. Robert Baillie his
Arms, threw them in his Face, trampled them under foot; And ordained his Arms
to be expunged out of the Books of Herauldry, his Posterity to be ignoble, and
never to enjoy Honor and Dignity in time coming: And thereafter went to the
Mercat Cross of Edinburgh, and solemnly Tore and Cancelled the said Mr. Robert
Baillie his Arms, and affixed the samine on the said Mercat Cross Reversed,
with this Inscription; The Arms of Mr. Robert Baillie late of Jerviswood
Traitor.

FINIS.

