A COLLECTION OF THE Church History OF PALESTINE; From the Birth of CHRIST, TO
THE Beginning of the Empire OF DIOCLETIAN.

By I M B. D.

Imprimatur. Guil. Needham, Iul. 6. 1687.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Dring, at the Corner of Chancery Lane in
Fleet Street. 1688.

THE PREFACE.
THE Consideration of the great Benefit and Usefulness of History, of
Ecclesiastical History especially, which affords us so many Illustrious
Examples of true Virtue and Piety, and admonishes us, that being compassed
about with so great a Cloud of Witnesses, we run with Patience the Race that is
set before us, may perhaps prevail with the Reader to excuse the publishing
this brief Collection. That it might be the briefer, I have not transcribed at
large the Texts of Scripture, which contain an Historical Account of the
Places, and some of the Persons mentioned in it, but refer the Reader to them.
In like manner I desire that he will consult D. Cave, as to the greatest part
of the History of the Apostles, and some others; not repeating any thing that
may be found in his Lives of the Apostles, and Apostolical Persons. For the
same reason, I meddle not with the Niceties of Chronology or Geography; the
Reader may (if he pleases) consult D. Cave's Chronological Table, as to the
one; and I commonly follow D. Heylin, in that which appertains to the other.
For the same cause also I give an account only of Persons and Places. To have
treated of the Doctrine, Discipline, Worship, and Government of the Church,
together with the Sects, Heresies, Heretics, etc. which were in the three
first Centuries, would have swelled this Collection too much. When I allege
the Commentaries of the Ancient Writers and Others, I often do not mention the
place, but by observing the Text of Scripture, which I refer to, it may be
easily found. In alleging Josephus de bell. Jud. I follow the Greek, in which
the Books and Chapters are divided otherwise than in our English Translation;
and in some Latin ones. The example of Hegesippus may excuse the Style, of whom
the Martyrology says April, 7. Simplici sermon texuit historiam, ut quorum
vitam sectabatur dicendi quoque exprimeret charactere. If this Collection be so
happy as to incite any to be followers of the Holy Persons mentioned in it, as
they were of Christ, I have enough.

Io. Milner.
THE Church History OF PALESTINE.
CHAP. I. An Account of the Places within Palestine, which were honored with
the presence of Christ or his Apostles, and are mentioned in the History of the
New Testament.
Sect. 1.
JUDEA. Tertull. l. 3. contr. Marcion. c. 24. reports that in Judea for forty
days together, a City hung down from Heaven with all the habit of Walls. It
appeared in the Morning, and in the progress of the day vanished out of sight.
This was (as I conceive) but a little before the time of Tertullian's writing
it.

Jerusalem. Josephus gives a large account of the destruction of it by Titus.
The Christians in obedience to their Lords command, St. Luc. 21.20,21, and
perhaps alarmed with the many Prodigies, which preceded the City's Desolation;
as also admonished by an Oracle delivered to some approved Persons among them,
(as Eusebius. l. 3. c. 5.) or by an Angel (as Epiphaen. de ponder. and men's.) had
departed out of it, Cestius Gallus having given them an opportunity of doing
it, when having besieged the City, he, without any visible reason, suddenly
raised the Siege, at which time many of the Jews got out of it, as out of a
Ship ready to sink; so Josephus de bell. Iud. l. 2. c. 40. We are told by
Epiphanius ( ubi supra) that the Christians returned after a time; so that when
Adrian the Emperor came to view the City, he found a few houses there, together
with a Church. Adrian rebuilt it in part, taking in the place of our Saviors
passion within the Walls, which was without before ( v. S. Hieron. in loc. Act.
Apost.) and calling it AElia. (see Dio. l. 69. and Eusebius. in Chron.) And
perhaps it is this which Dionysius in discript. orbis, calls Elais. In the
front of the gate through which they went out to go to Bethlehem he caused a
swine to be ingraved in marble (see Eusebius. and Cassiodor. in Chron.) and forbad
the Jews to come into the Country near it (though they came only as travelers
and strangers;) yea they might not as much as behold it from an high place.
(See Tertul contr. Iudaeos c. 13. Apologet. c. 21. Justin Martyr Apol. 2.
Eusebius. l. 4. c. 6. Orosius l. 7. c. 13. Sulpit. Sever. l. 2. St. Hilary in
Psalm. 58. St. Hieron. in Zeph. 2. and Isa. 6. and Procop. Gaz. in Isa. 1. 7.)
But he permitted the Christians (at the least those of the Gentiles) to inhabit
there, who were renowned for the eminent Miracles of healing, etc. wrought by
them, so that the Church begun to enjoy a flourishing condition; see Epiphan.
ubi supra.

The Temple. If we will believe the Jews, St. Ioh. 2. 20. it was 46 years in
building; but whether they spoke this of Solomon's Temple, (as Origin in St.
Ioh.) or of Zerobabel's (as Eusebius. Demonstr. l. 8. Theophylact and Euthymius)
or Herod's (as others) it is not easy to determine. When Jesus said to his
Parents, St. Luc. 2 49. Wist ye not that I must be (...), we render it About my
Fathers business, but the Sir. and Pers. In my Fathers house; and so Epiphan.
Haer. 30. Theophylact and Leo Epist. 4. do expound it. (See also Origin Tit.
Bostr. and Euthym.) So the sense of our Saviors words will be, Why did you
seek me any where but in my Fathers house, the Temple, where I ought to be?
Thus in Josephus contr. Appion. l. 1. (...), signifies, In the House or Temple
of Jupiter, and (...), in the LXX. Esth. 7. 9. In the House of Haman, and
(...), in Theocritus, (...). The House of Lycon. What the Disciples say of the
stones and buildings of the Temple, St. Mar. 13. 1. may be compared with
Josephus his Description, Ant. l. 15. c. 14. It was built (says he) of white
and strong stones, which were about 25 cubits in length, about 12 in breadth,
and 8 in height. The whole structure was like a Princely Palace, etc. The same
Josephus gives us at large the History of its destruction by the Romans.
Sulpit. Sever. affirms, That both Titus and others were of opinion, that the
Temple especially should be destroyed, that the Religion of the Jews and
Christians might be more effectually extirpated: But Josephus de Bell. Iud. l.
6. c. 24, 26. assures us, That Titus was utterly against the burning of it.
Forty years before it was destroyed the doors of it flew open of their own
accord (so the Gemara in Ioma fol. 39. 2.) which may countenance that which
some say, That the doors of the Temple opened of themselves about the time of
our Saviors Passion. Also Josephus de bell. Iud. l. 6. c. 31. tells of the
Eastgate of the inner Temple, that, though it was so heavy that it could
hardly be shut by 20 Men, it was seen to open of its own accord; and it may
seem by him, that it was at the feast of the Passover that it did so. Dio. l.
6. relates that Adrian built a Temple to Jupiter, in the same place where the
Temple of God was, (see also Sulpit. Sever. l. 2.) as others say that he set up
his Statue where the Ark was, which Statue says Nicephorus, l. 3. c. 24. if
any Man call the abomination of desolation spoken of St. Mat. 24. he will not
err much. See Suidas in voc. (...).

The space between the Temple and the Altar St. Mat. 23. 35. St. Luc. 11. 51.
By the Temple we are here to understand that which was properly so called, and
by the Altar the Altar of Burnt-offerings. In Joel 3. 17. and the Misna in Ioma
c. 3.. 8. it is between the Porch and the Altar, but the sense is the same. The
space between them was 22 Cubits; so the Misna in Middoth, c. 31. 6.

A Pinnacle of the Temple. St. Mat. 4. 5. Luc. 4. 9. It is in vain to go about
certainly to determine what part of the Temple this was, whether some
battlement or turret of it, or some of the flying fanes, or of those sharp
broaches ( Josephus de bell. Iud. l. 5. c. 14. calls them golden spits) which
were set up to keep off Birds, lest they should defile the Temple. Some
understand by it the roof of the porch mentioned by Josephus Ant. l. 15. c. 14.
the height whereof was such, and it stood over a valley of such extraordinary
depth, that, if a Man looked down from it, his head would be vertiginous; his
sight not reaching to the bottom, because of the vast and unmeasurable
distance. St. James was also set (...), on a Pinnacle of the Temple, ( Eusebius.
l. 2. c. 23.) but perhaps that part of the Temple on which he was set, was not
so high as this on which the Devil set the holy Jesus. The Author de cardinal.
oper. sermon. de jejun. and tentat. held that it was not really or by a local
motion, that Jesus was carried and set on a Pinnacle of the Temple, but in
spirit only, as Ezekiel was carried in the Spirit to Jerusalem; but others
affirm that it was by a local motion. The Author oper. imperfect. seems to have
thought, that he was not seen when he was carried into the Holy City and set on
the Temple.

A Uail of the Temple. St. Mat. 27. 51. St. Mar. 15. 38. St. Luc. 23. 45. We
read Heb. 9.3. of the second Vail, so that there were at least two Vails of the
Temple; accordingly Josephus de bell. Iud. l. 5. c. 14. mentions two. The
Talmudists dispute whether there were two Vails be ore the Holy of Holies or
but one ( Misna in Ioma c. 5.. 1. and Gemar. fol. 51. 2.) and they seem to
resolve, that there were two: But R. Iose said there was but one. Now whether
it was this Vail before the Holy of Holies, called the second Vail Heb. 9.
which was rent at our Saviors Passion, or the outer Vail which was before the
Holy place, I shall not determine. Origin and S. Hieron. ad Hedibin. qu. 8.
thought that it was the outer Vail; but Lactantius l. 4. c. 19. S. Chrysostom. S.
Cyril. Alex. in S. Ioh. l. 10. c. 37. and Theophylact seem to have taken it to
have been the inner; (see also Euthymius and Leo de passione Dom. ser. 2.) We
read (says S. Hieron. in S. Mat. 27. and ad Hedib. qu. 8.) in the Gospel that
is written in Hebrew Letters, not that the Vail was rent, but that the
superliminare templi, of a wonderful Magnitude, did fall, or was broken and
divided. If we may believe Ephrem Syrus, a Dove was seen to fly out of the
Temple, at the same time that the Vail was rent.

The Treasury. St. Mar. 12. 41, 43. St. Luc. 21. 1. St. Ioh. 8. 20. The Misna
in Shekalim, c. 6.. 1. mentions thirteen Treasure-chests, and c. 5.. 6. two
Treasure-chambers, one of which was called the Chamber of the Silent, where
religious Men did silently or secretly put in their Offerings. When Josephus de
bell. Iud. l. 5. c. 14. and l. 6. c. 29. speaks of the Treasuries in the plural
Number, perhaps these Treasure-chests or Treasure-chambers are to be
understood; and it is probable that it was into one of those Chests or in the
one of those Chambers, that the Widow cast in her two Mites. But when in St.
Ioh. 8. we read of Christ's Speaking and Teaching in the Treasury, we are
perhaps by Treasury there to understand, the whole Court in which those Chests
were, and that as some suppose was the Court of the Women.

Solomon's Porch. St. Ioh. 10. 23. Act. 3. 11. 5. 12. Some (upon what grounds I
know not) will needs suppose, That the Court of the People is called so; as
others will have it to have been that (...), or Royal Porch, which Josephus
Ant. l. 15. c. 14. places on the Southside of the Temple; but it is most
probable, that it was that which he mentions Ant. l. 20. c. 8. and de bell. Iud.
l. 5. c. 14. calling it the Eastern Porch, and affirming that it was built by
Solomon. See 1 Kings 6. 3. 2 Chronicles. 3. 4.

The Beautiful Gate. Act. 3. 2, 10. It Is supposed that it was the Corinthian
Gate, which was of Corinthian Brass, and in beauty and elegance, far surpassed
those that were all over-laid with Gold and Silver, Joseph. de bell. Iud. l. 5.
c. 14. We read 2 Kings 15. 35. and 2 Chronicles. 27. 3. that Iotham built the
High-gate of the Temple. Whether Herod built this Gate in imitation of that,
and in the same place, they that have leisure may enquire.

The Castle. Acts 21. 34, 37. 22. 24. 23. 10, 16, 32. Some say that it was a
Castle on mount Sion, which was built out of the ruins of the Palace of David.
But it is most probable, that it was the Tower called Antonia, which was close
by the Temple, Joseph. Ant. l. 15. c. 14. de bell. Iud. l. 1. c. 16. Comestor
makes that Tower to have been called Agrippina as well as Antonia; but perhaps
it is a mistake.

An Upper Room. St. Mar. 14. 15. St. Luc. 22. 12. Act. 1. 13. Our Mr. Gregory
alleges a Syriack Scholiast, who affirms (as many others do) that it is the
same Room which is mentioned in all the three places. He also alleges an
Arabic Geographer, who finds this Upper room in the Temple of Sion, and the
Table still remaining there on which our Lord did eat with his Disciples.
Whether by the Temple of Sion, he meant that which S. Hieron. ad Paulinum calls
Coenaculum Sion, and which (as some think) St. Cyril. Hieros. calls the upper
Church of the Apostles, Catech. 16. and in which (as those Fathers tell us) the
Holy Ghost lighted on the Apostles, I know not: But there are who have thought
the Coenaculum Sion, to have been this upper Room mentioned by the Evangelists.
Yet others say that it was an upper Room in the Jewish Temple, see De Dieu in
Act 1.

Bethesda. St. Ioh. 5.2. etc. The Greek Copies generally, and St. Chrysostom.
favor our reading Bethesda, so Theophylact and Euthym. In the Sir. it is writ
(...) (and the Arab. and Pers. much agree with it) i. e. the house of mercy, as
the Arab. interprets it. Yet S. Cyril. Alex. and S. Hieron. de loc. Hebr. read
Bethsaida or Bethseida, and Tertul. de Bapt. c. 5. Betsaida, But contr. Iud. c.
13. Bethsaida, where he tells us that the miraculous healing virtue of the Pool
ceased, when the Jews arrived to that height of fury to blaspheme the name of
God, as they did by adding this to their other heinous wickednesses, the
crucifying his Son. The same Tertul. de bapt. and also S. Ambros. de his qui
initiantur Mysteriis c. 4. and S. Chrysostom. Edit. Savil. tom. 5. p. 585. l. 40.
seem to have thought that there was only one cured at the Pool in one year.
Some have thought it to be the same with that which is called the upper Pool,
Isa. 7. 3, etc. and the old Pool, Isa. 22. 11. and by Joseph. de bell. Iud. l.
5. c. 13. Solomon's Pool. We need not wonder at Josephus his silence concerning
the healing Virtue of the Pool, since (as Tertullian informs us) it ceased many
years before the time that he writ.

The Sheep-Market. St. Ioh. 5. 2. Because there is mention of the Sheep-gate,
Neh. 3. 1, 32. 12. 39. some choose to render it here not the Sheep-Market but
the Sheep-gate. But what if it be the Pool it self, (viz. Bethesda) that is
called (...), q. d. the Sheep-pool; so S. Hieron. de loc. Hebr. S. Chrysostom. S.
Cyril. Alex. Theophylact, also Mopsuest. and Ammon; and not only the Vulgar
Arab. and AEthiop. but also some Greek Copies do favor this; see Luc. Brugens.
And S. Hieron. gives this reason of the Pool's being called probatica or
pecualis, because they used to wash the Sacrifices in one of the two Lakes,
which (as he tells us) were in or near it: Theophylact also speaks of the
washing the entrails of the Sacrifices in this Pool, and Benjamin in Itinerar.
tells of a Pool that was to be seen in his time, in which they did anciently
wash their Sacrifices. Hence perhaps it is, that the Sir. instead of A
Sheep-pool, reads, A place of Washing, and the Pers. A fountain or well of
Washing.

Siloam. St. Luc. 13. 4. St. Ioh. 9. 7, 11. It is the same with Gihon; and
therefore 1 Kings 1. 33, 38. the Chald. Sir. and Arab. do all read Silohn
instead of Gihon; see Kimchi in rad. (...). On the last and great Day of the
feast of Tabernacles the Jews had a custom to draw water out of the Pool of
Siloam, and they themselves interpret it to refer to the drawing of the Holy
Ghost, according to Isa. 12. 3. Misna in Succah c. 4.. 9. and Buxtorf. in voc.
(...). Compare with this S. Ioh. 7. 37,38.39. The Tower mentioned, St. Luc. 13.
was perhaps built over the gate of Siloam, or near the River or Pool so called.
Some have fansied, that the fall of it was caused by that great Earthquake,
which happened in the 7 th. year of Herod the Great, and overthrew many
buildings, the fall of which slew thousands of Men, Joseph. Ant. l. 15. c. 7.
But this fall of the Tower in St. Luke is mentioned as a particular accident,
fatal to 18 Persons only; not as a general calamity in which thousands
perished, also as a thing that fell out later, and was fresh in Men's memories.
Siloa is mentioned in Joseph. de bell. Iud. l. 5. c. 13.

The Sepulcher of David. Act. 2. 29. There is mention of it in Joseph. Ant. l.
7. c. 12. and l. 13. c. 16. and l. 16. c. 11.

The Pavement^ St. Ioh. 19. 13. Why might it not be the Xystus which is
frequently mentioned in Joseph. de bell. Iud. l. 2. c. 28. l. 4. c. 34. l. 6. c.
19, 34. (...) says Phavorinus. Some will needs fansy that this Pavement was
the paved Chamber ((...)) of which we read so often in the Talmudists. De
Lithostrotis; see Plin. l. 36. c. 25.

The Common Prison. Act. 5. 18, 19, 22, 23, 25. Because v. 24. we have mention
of the Captain of the Temple, some have thought that this Prison was somewhere
near the Temple, and probably within the Tower Antonia. Others have guessed,
that it was the place which in Joseph. de bell. Iud. l. 5. c. 13. is called
Bethso.

The Prison in which St. Peter was kept. Act. c. 12. Some have thought that it
was the same with the Common Prison before mentioned; others that it was
appendant unto Herod's Palace; others that it was without the City in the
Suburbs of it. Others there are that cannot resolve whether it was in one of
the Towers which were built on the Walls, or that it was betwixt the first and
second Wall, or that it was within the Walls of the City, and yet without that
part, which was more properly called the City. I allow every Man his Liberty to
subscribe to which of these Conjectures he pleases, and only add that St.
Chrysostom. in Ephesians. 4. says that St. Peter was cast (...).

The Iron-Gate. Act. 12. 10. The City into which it lead was (say some) that
part of Jerusalem which was between mount Sion, and the Temple, for (say they)
Josephus often gives the name of City to that part of it. Others who think that
the Prison was appendant to Herod's Palace, say, that it lead from thence into
the City. Some affirm that it was usual in the East to have Gates at the end of
their streets, so that wheresoever the Prison was, this Gate (say they) was at
the end of the Street which lead from it.

Calvary or Golgotha. St. Mat. 27. 33. St. Mar. 15. 22. St. Luc. 23. 33. St.
Ioh. 19. 17. St. Hieron. in St. Mat. says, that he heard one affirm that it was
called so from Adam's being buried there (quia ibi antiqui hominis sit conditum
capur;) but (says he) we read in Joshua that Adam was buried near Hebron. He
therefore gives another reason of the name Calvary, viz. because condemned
Persons were beheaded there. Yet the tradition that Adam was buried there is
mentioned by Origin in St. Mat. Tertul. l. 2 contr. Marcion. in verse, the
Author de Cardinal. Chr. oper. sermon. de resur. S. Basil in caten. Graec. patrum
in S. Mat. 10. 2. S. Chrysostom. in S. Ioh. Epiphan. Haer. 46. Paula and Eustoch.
ad Marcellam. S. August sermon. 71. de Tempore. S. Ambros. in S. Luc. also
Anastas. Sinait. Germanus and Euthym. This Tradition Theophylact in St. Ioh.
after St. Athanes. in passionem and crucem Domini, fathers on the Jews; though
St. Hieron. in Epitaph. Paulae imputes the other opinion to the Jews, that Adam
was buried in Hebron. But they may be easily reconciled, if that be true which
some affirm that he was buried first at Hebron, and thence translated to
Calvary by Noah. St. Cyril. Hieros. Cateches. 13. says that this name Calvary
was given to it prophetically, to signify that Christ our head should suffer
Death there. Some will have it called thus only from the fashion of it, it was
(say they) rounded after the form of a Man's head. Another reason seems to be
given by St. Hilary, viz. because it was in the midst of the Earth, and tanquam
in vertice hujus universitatis. Adrian consecrated the Idol of Jupiter in the
place of Christ's Passion; so Paulinus epist. 11. yet S. Hieron. in an Epistle
to him, says, that a Marble Statue of Venus was set up in crucis rupe, and with
S. Hierom both Ruffin. Eccl. hist. l. 10. c. 7. and St. Ambros. in Psalm. 43.
and 47. seem to agree. The rock of Golgotha was rent at the passion of Christ;
so Lucian. the Presbyter ap. Ruffin. Hist. l. 9. c. 6. and S. Cyril. Hieros.
Catech. 13. seems to say the same. There are that can tell you the breadth and
depth of the rent, and describe the 3 holes of the rock, in which the ends of
the three-Crosses were put.

Our Saviors Sepulcher. S. Mat. c. 27. and c. 28. S Mar. c. 15. and c. 16. S
Luc. c. 23, and c. 24. S. Ioh. c. 19, and c. 20. Eusebius. in vit. Constant. l. 3.
c. 26. And Socrates l. 1. c. 13. relate, that the Heathens covered the place
with heaps of earth and rubbish that it might not be found; also that they
built there a Chapel to Venus, as St. Hieron. epist. ad Paulin. says, that they
placed the Idol of Jupiter there. S. Cyril. Hieros. Catech. 14. tells us, that
the stone which was rolled away from the Door of the Sepulcher remained till
his time. We have in Nicephorus, l. 1. c. 32. a large description, as from an
Ancient tradition, how the stone besides its being sealed, was made fast to the
door of the Sepulcher with Iron. If we may believe Ludolphus de Saxon. the
Sepulcher was fifty paces distant from Calvary.

The Garden in which the Sepulcher was S. Ioh. 19. 41.

The Potters Field or Aceldama. S. Mat. 27. 7. Act. 1. 18, 19. It may be that
he of whom it was purchased was a Potter, or that a noted Potter had been
anciently the Proprietor of it, or finally that the Earth was fit for the use
of a Potter, and so it had the name of the Potters Field. Some say that it was
near to Tophet, and that Judas both ended his unhappy Life and was buried in
it, and so possessed it. For so the Vulg. Act. 1. 18. reads, He possessed a
Field, though we read, He purchased a Field, i. e. by refunding the Money which
he had received, he was the occasion of the Chief Priests purchasing it; (see
S. Chrysostom. and Theophylact) or he purchased it as a lasting Monument of his
Infamy, whilst they who passed by said, This is the Field which was bought with
the Money for which Judas betrayed his Master. Of Aceldama see St. Hieron de
loc. Act. Apost.

Cedron. S. Ioh. 18. 1. Ammonius Nonnus and others seem to have thought, that
it had its name from Cedars. Perhaps they were induced thereto by the Article
(...) ((...)) But the LXX. use (...) and (...) without an Article promiscuously
(see the LXX. in 2 Samuel 15.23.) and in the Hebrew it is constantly (...), and
here S. Ioh. 18. MS. Alex. and March. Vales. have (...), and not (...): Yet I
confess that the Arab. seems to favor those that derive the name from Cedars.
It is mentioned by Joseph. de bell. Iud. l. 5. c. 8. and more frequently by
Gorionides. Some say, that the rude Soldiers plunged our Savior in this
brook, it being in the way as they lead him from the Garden to the City.

Gethsemane. S. Mat. 26. 36. S. Mar. 14. 32. S. Hieron. de loc. Heb. places it
at the foot of the Mount of Olives.

The Garden of Olivet. S. Ioh. 18. 1, etc. It was in or near to Gethsemane. In
the Gemar. in Bava Kama fol. 82. 2. and in Avoth R. Nathan fol. 9. 1. it is
said, that they do not make Gardens in Jerusalem, and so we see that both this
Garden, and also that in which was our Saviors Sepulcher was out of the City.

The Mount of Olives. S. Mat. 21. 1. 24. 3. 26. 30. S. Mar. 11. 1. 13. 3. 14.
26. S. Luc. 19. 29, 37. 21. 37. 22. 39. S. Ioh. 8. 1. Some say that it had
three eminent tops, and that Jesus ascended to Heaven from the middlemost of
them. From some part of the Mount he did certainly ascend, and that not far
from Bethany, or it was from that part of it which was called Bethany. An
Inscription upon a stone which was dug up in China acquaints us, that it was
about Midday that he ascended, Kircher. Prodrom. Copt. c. 3. It is affirmed by
Paulinus, epist. 11. Sulpitius Sever. l. 2. and S. Hieron. de loc. Act. Apost.
that his footsteps were imprinted on the place from whence he ascended, and
that it did retain the print of them a long time after. Also Eusebius. de vita
Constantin. l. 3. c. 42. and Optatus l. 6. may seem to allude to this. The
Mount was from Jerusalem a Sabbath Days journey, Act. 1. 12, i.e. 2000 Cubits,
as Suidas, in verb. (...), with whom agree Targ. Ionath. in Exodus 16. 29. and
Ruth. 1. 16. Moses Mikotsi praec. neg. 66. Gemar. in Erubin. fol. 42. 1. with
others. This Tradition of 2000 Cubits, is mentioned by Origin (...) l. 4. c. 2,
and 5. (...) ap. Oecumen. S. Hieron. ad Algaes. qu. 10. has 2000 pedes instead
of 2000 Cubits. Now 2000 Cubits, according to Tremellius's computation, make
about a Mile. De Dieu says that they make 5 furlongs, but withal, that 5 Greek
furlongs, make an Hebrew Mile. And so Gul. Tyrius ap. Seldom. de jure not. and
gent. l. 3. c. 9. affirms the Mount to be as it were a Mile distant from
Jerusalem; with whom the Sir. agrees, making the distance to be about 7
furlongs; see also Arator. in Act. 1. It is true Joseph. Ant. l. 20. c. 6.
makes the distance to be 5 furlongs, but besides that Theophylact alleges the
same, Josephus saying it was 7 furlongs, it is possible that he spoke of the
very skirt or extremity of the Mount, which was nearest the City, and which
might be only five furlongs distant from it; but other parts of the Mount were
further distant; for the same Josephus de bell. Iud. l. 5. c. 8. speaking of
some of the Romans, that were ordered to encamp along the Mount of Olives,
says, that they were to encamp six furlongs from the City. Or possibly
Josephus spoke of Greek furlongs, five of which (says De Dieu) make an Hebrew
Mile. From this Mount the Apostles admired the stones and buildings of the
Temple, there being the best prospect of it from hence; for the Eastern Wall of
the Temple, which was toward this Mount, was made lower than the rest, on
purpose that there might be a better view of it. Misna in Middoth, c. 2.. 4.

Bethphage. S. Matthew. 21. 1. S. Mar. 11. 1. S. Luc. 19. 29. It was a Village in
that part of the Mount of Olives which was nearest to Jerusalem, yea it may
seem that it reached to the very Walls of the City, see the Gemar, in Pesachin
fol. 63. 2. and 91. 1. Bava Metzia fol. 90. 1. Sanhedr. fol. 14. 2. Sotab fol.
45. 1. Some Copies have (...); see also the Goth. Gospels.

Bethany. S. Mat. 21. 17. 26.6. S. Mar. 11. 1, 11, 12. 14. 3. S. ^^c. 19. 29.
24. 50. S. Ioh. 11. 1, 18. 12. 1. It was fifteen furlongs from Jerusalem, i. e.
two Miles, as S. Hieron. in loc. Hebr. For seven Furlongs and an half make a
Mile, Suidas in voc. (...), with whom the Jews computation agrees, see Bava
Metzia, fol. 33. 1. whether it be the same with (...) in Pesachin, fol. 53. 1
or (...) as it is writ in Erubin fol. 28. 2. I shall not stand to dispute. The
Sir. S. Ioh. 11. 1. reads thus, A certain Man was Sick, Lazarus of the Town
Bethany, the Brother of Mary and Martha. See the Pers. it is said S. Mar. 11.
and S. Luc. 19. that Christ came nigh to Bethphage and Bethany, i. e. say some
to the place where that part of Mount Olivet which was called Bethphage, and
that tract of it which was called Bethany, joined one upon the other.

The Uillage where two Disciples found an Ass and a colt tied. S. Matthew 21. 2.
S. Mar. 11. 2. S. Luc. 19. 30. It was Bethany (say some,) Bethphage (as
others,) but whether it was either of them, or it was some other Village, (for
it is probable that there were several on Mount Olivet) it cannot be
determined: Nor yet who the two Disciples were, whether S. Peter and S. John
(as some,) or S. Peter and S. Philip, (as they whom the Author oper. imperfect.
alleges,) or some other. A question is also moved whether our Savior rode
both on the Ass and the Colt, ( viz. successively) or on the Colt only; on the
Colt only, the Ass following, say Euthym. and an Anonymous writer in caten.
patrum Graec. in S. Matthew. 10. 2. and the Sir. seems to favor them. But
Theophylact will have him to have rid first on the one then on the other, and
S. August. de consens. Evang. l. 2. c. 66. inclines to this, as the Arab. also
favors it; and finally it seems more agreeable to the Words of the Prophet
Zechary, to say with Origin, 10. 11. in S. Ioh. that he sat upon both. S.
Hieron. and the Author oper. imperf. seem to resolve, that according to the
mystical or spiritual sense he did sit on both, but not corporally or in the
literal sense.

Bethlehem. S. Matthew. c. 2. S. Luc. c. 2. S. Ioh. 7. 42. There was a Bethlehem
in the Tribe of Zabulon, and so for distinction's sake, this is styled
Bethlehem of Judea, or (as S. Hieron. would read it, and several Translations,
and Munster's Hebr. do read it) Judah. Justin Martyr in Dial. cum Tryph. makes
the Cave in which Christ was born, to have been not in, but near the Town or
City: And Eusebius. Demonstr. l. 7. calls the place where he was brought forth, a
Field. Neither is this repugnant to the Texts of Scripture, which say, that he
was born in Bethlehem; for it is usual to call the suburbs or edifices
adjoining to any City, by the name of the City. It was foretold that Christ
should suffer in Jerusalem, S. Luc. 9.31.13.33. yet it was out of the gates of
the City that he suffered. So Romae appellatio continentibus aedificiis
finitur. Paul. Digest. l. 50. tit. 16. And Justin Mart. in that very sentence
in which he says, that the Cave was near the Town, says also that Christ was
born in Bethlehem. Origin. contr. Celsum l. 1. Eusebius. de vit. Constant. l. 3.
c. 41, 43. S. Hieron. in Epitaph. Paulae, and frequently otherwhere. S. Basil.
in sanct. Christi nativ. Epiphan. Haer. 51. Chrysol. sermon. 156. Socrat. l. 1.
c. 13. Sozom. l. 2. Nicetas in G^^^. caten. patrum, and Theophylact in S. Mat.
do call the place of Christ's birth a Den or Cave. Epiphan. Haer. 20. adds that
he was circumcised in the same Cave. An Arab. Geographer ap. Casaubon Exercit.
2. c. 1. tells us, that they had in that Country, Houses and Cells hewn out of
Rocks; why might not this Stable and Manger be so? The Heathens profaned the
place of Christ's birth, by building there a Temple to Adonis. Paulinus Epist.
11. see also S. Hieron. Epist. ad Paulinum.

Emmaus. S. Luc. 24. 13, etc. Josephus l. 7. de bell. Iud. c. 27. according to
the Greek, agrees with S. Luke, that it was distant from Jerusalem about sixty
furlongs, whereas the Latin and English Versions of Josephus have only thirty.
Sozomen, l. 5. c. 20. tells of a Fountain near Emmaus, which was endued with a
Medicinal virtue; but that it had that virtue from Christ's washing his feet in
it, he delivers only as a thing that was reported. In the Talmud it is writ
sometimes (...) as Succah fol. 51. 1. sometimes (...) as Erachin, fol. 10. 1.

Jericho. S. Matthew. 20. 29. S. Mar. 10. 46. S. Luc. 18. 35.19.1.

The Wilderness of Judea. S. Matthew. 3. 1. see also S. Mar. 1. 4. S. Luc. 3.2.
Where it was Expositors are not very hasty to tell us. The Country from
Jerusalem to Jericho, and from thence to Jordan, is described by Joseph. de
bell. Iud. l. 4. c. 27. to be all along Desert. We read of the Wilderness of
Judah, Iud. 1. 16. and in the title of Psalm. 63. See also Josh. 15.61. But
whether this be the same Wilderness of which the Evangelists speak, I shall not
determine.

The Way from Jerusalem to Gaza. Act. 8. 26. where S. Luke adds, Which is
Desert. The question is whether it is Gaza that he calls Desert, or the Way to
it. Strabo l. 16. uses St. Luke's very word (...) concerning Gaza, of the
Desolation of which we may read as in him, so in Diodor. Sicul. l. 17. Joseph
Ant. l. 13. c. 21. and S. Hieron. in loc. Hebr. Yet S. Chrysostom. Oecumen. and
Theophylact with the Sir. apply it to the Way.

Azotus. Act. 8. 40. It was two hundred and seventy Furlongs from Gaza. Diodor.
Sicul. l. 19.

The Cities between Azotus and Cesarea. Act. 8. 40.

Ioppa. Act. 9. 36, etc. 10.5, etc. 11. 5. etc.

Sect. 2.
SAMARIA. Luc. 17. 11. S. Ioh. 4. 4,5,7. Act. 1. 8. also c. 8. and 9. 31. 15.
3. When S. Luc. 17. we read that Jesus passed through the midst of Samaria and
Galilee, as he went to Jerusalem, the Arab. says that he passed between
Samaria and Galilee: see also the Sir. This reading we may the rather embrace,
because if he had passed through the midst of those Countries to go to
Jerusalem, in all reason Galilee (not Samaria) would have been set first; for
Samaria is between Galilee and Judea. He then went between or along the
Confines of Samaria and Galilee, and so perhaps to the other side of Jordan,
which he crossed again to come to Jericho, and from thence to Jerusalem. See S.
Luc. 18. 31,35.

The City of Samaria. Act. 8.5, etc. Some suppose that by it is there meant the
City Samaria (or Sebaste) it self; as Vrbem Patavi in Virgil, and the Land of
Egypt, Act. 7. 36,40. i.e. the Land called Egypt. Yet others interpret it to
have been Sichem, the Metropolis (as they say) of Samaria; and it is true it
was the Metropolis in Alexander the Great's time, ( Joseph. Ant. l. 11. c. 8.)
whatsoever it was now. The MS. Alex. adding the Article, reads (...).

Many Uillages of Samaria. Act. 8. 25.

Cesarea. Act. 8. 40. 9. 30. 10. 1,24. 11. 11, 12. 19. 18, 22. 21. 8. 23. 23,
33. 25. 1, 4. It is said, Act. 18. When he ( i.e. S. Paul) had landed at
Cesarea, and gone up and saluted the Church, but the AEthiop. reads, Gone up to
the House of the Christians, and saluted it; and by the House of the Christians
there are who understand, some upper room in Cesarea, where the Christians used
to assemble, to which (say they) the Apostle went up and saluted the Christians
that were assembled in it. But the Sir. according to Tremellius, reads, Gone up
to Jerusalem, and though in the Bibl. Polygl. and perhaps other Copies of the
Sir. there is not To Jerusalem, yet it is very probable that this was S. Luke's
meaning, that S. Paul went up to Jerusalem, and saluted the Church there; for
it appears Act. 18. 21. that he designed to go up to Jerusalem, when he failed
from Ephesus, to come to Cesarea.

Herod's Iudgement-Hall. Act. 23.35.

Lydds. Act. 9. 32, etc. Some contend that it belonged (not to Samaria, but) to
Judea, alleging the Talmud. Hieros. I shall not stand to dispute the matter
with them.

Saron. Act. 9. 35. As the Greek Copies vary as to the name of this place, so
also does S. Hieron. who calls it sometimes Saronas, and sometimes Saron,
making it to be the Country betwixt Cesarea and Ioppa. See him in Isa. 33. 8.
and 65. 10, in Abdiam, in loc. Hebr. and in loc. Act. Apost. Some have thought
it to be the same with the plain of Ono mentioned. Neh. 6. 2. see also 1 Chronicles.
8. 12. and Neh. 11. 35. Sharon is often mentioned in the Old Testament, also in
the Misna in Bava Kama, c. 10.. 9. and the Gemar. in Shabbath fol. 77. 1. and
in Nidda, fol. 19. 1. In these two last places the Wine of Sharon is commended;
but the Inhabitants then tasted of the fruit of the true Vine indeed, when the
Gospel came to them.

Antipatris. Act. 23. 31.

Ephraim. S. Ioh. 11. 54. In one Greek Copy we have (...), and in S. Chrysostom.
(...), but this later is certainly the mistake of the Transcriber. It may be it
is the same with that which 2 Chronicles. 13. 19. is called Ephrain, and by Joseph.
de bell. Iud. l 4. c. 33. Ephraim. Perhaps also the Talmuds (...) or (...) is
the same, see the Misna in Menachoth, c. 8.. 1. and the Gemar. fol. 85. 1.
where is the story how (...) and (...). (the chief of the Sorcerers of Egypt,
as the gloss there informs us) said to Moses, Do thou bring straw to Ephraim?

Sychar. S. Ioh. 4. 5. Some think that when the right name of it was Sichem,
the Jews out of hatred to the Samaritans, nicknamed it Sychar; alluding to
Isa. 28. 1. where it is said, Woe to the ((...)) Drunkards of Ephraim. Others
observing that (...) may signify a Sepulcher (see Cethuboth, fol. 17. 1. and
the gloss there) fancy that it was called Sychar in Memory of the Patriarchs
being buried there.

Jacobs Well. S. Ioh. 4. 6, etc. A place called (...) is mentioned in Bava Kama
fol. 82. 2. and Menachoth fol. 64. 2. and said by the Gloss in Menach. to be at
a great distance from Jerusalem. Why may it not be rendered, The Well of Sychar,
and supposed to be the same with this Well? Jesus being weary, sat ((...)) so
on or by the Well, i.e. in the posture of a wearied Person, or so, i. e. (as S.
Chrysostom. and Theophylact) as it happened, after any manner, not on a seat but
on the ground.

Enon and Salim. S. Ioh. 3. 23. S. Hieron. places Salim eight Miles from
Scythopolis (so in loc. Hebr.) and other where near it, as in epist. ad
Evagrium, see also Primas. in Hebr. 7. 1. and the Jewish Map. Yet there are
others that send us to Judea or Galilee or beyond Jordan to seek these places.

Sect. 3.
GALILEE. Joseph. de bell. Iud. l. 3. c. 4. and Misna in Sheviith c. 9. 2. speak
of the higher and lower Galilee.

Cana. S. Ioh 2. 1 etc. 4. 46.21.2. Eusebius. ap Casaubon. Exercit. 13. c. 21.
speaks of three Cana's, one in the Tribe of Ephraim, another in the Tribe of
Manasseh, a third in the Tribe of Aser, and the last of these he will have to
be this Cana. And S. Hieron. in loc. Hebr. seems to agree with him. But in
epist. Paulae and Eustach. ad Marcellam, it it said to be not far from
Nazareth, as it may seem from S. Ioh. 4. that it was not far from Capernaum;
and accordingly S. Hieron. in Epitaph. Paulae joins these three, Nazareth,
Cana, and Capernaum together; so that we may believe that they were not far
distant from each other. I might add that the Jewish Map places a Catna near
Nazareth, calling it Catna of Galilee, even as the Sir. Version of the New
Testament, calls this place, (not (...) but) (...). Finally the very name Cana
of Galilee favors this, for Galilee without any addition is both in S. Hieron.
de loc. Hebr. and the Life of Josephus, the lower Galilee, in which was
Nazareth; the other that was near the Coasts of Tire, they call Galilee of the
Gentiles, or the higher Galilee. Cana of Galilee is mentioned twice by Josephus
in his Life.

Nazareth. S. Matthew. 2. 23. 4. 13. 21. 11. S Mar. 1. 9. S. Luc. 1. 26, etc. 2.
4, 39, 51. 4. 16, etc. S Ioh. 1. 45, 46. Act. 2. 22. 10. 38. When S. Matthew. 9.
1. we read of Christ's own City, S. Hieron. understands thereby Nazareth; but S.
Chrysostom. and Theophylact more probably judged the City which is spoken of
there to be Capernaum; compare S. Mar. 2. 1. However Sedul. Paschal. carm. l.
3. is much out, who makes it to be Bethlehem; though as S. Chrysostom. and
Theophylact observe, every one of the three Cities may be fitly called Christ's
own City. There is also mention of his own Country, S. Matthew. 13. 54, 57. and
S. Ioh. 4. 44. In S. Matthew. 13. S. Hieron. S Chrysostom. and Theophylact, do all
interpret it to be Nazareth. But in S. Ioh. 4. whether it refer to Nazareth as
S. Cyril, or to Capernaum as S. Chrysostom., or to Galilee it self as S. August.
and Theophylact, it is not easy to determine. See Origin in S. Ioh.

Capernaum. S. Matthew. 4. 13. 8. 5. 11. 23. 17. 24. S. Mar. 1. 21. 2. 1. 9. 33.
S. Luc. 4. 23, 31. 7. 1. 10. 15. S. Ioh. 2. 12. 4. 46. 6. 17, 24. etc. and
supra in Nazareth. Buxtorf. in voc. (...) observing how the Jewish Writers
brand the Men of Capernaum with Heresy, says, that it is because they
entertained Christ.

S. Peter's House. S. Matthew. 8. 14. S. Luc. 4. 38. or the House of Simon and
Andrew, S. Mar. 1. 29. All the three Evangelists seem to make it to have been
in Capernaum, where the Brothers might have taken an house for the convenience
of fishing, or upon some other account; (whether our Savior dwelt in this
House when he was at Capernaum, or in some other which he hired, I do not
know:) Yet some will have S. Peter's House to have been in Bethsaida, saying
that it was so near to Capernaum, that our Savior might go from the Synagogue
there, to dine or sup at Bethsaida.

The Receipt of Custom. S. Matthew. 9.9. S. Mar. 2. 14. S. Luc. 5. 27. Some
contend that (...) signifies the act or employment of receiving Custom, not the
place or House where they received it, (...) (say they) is the proper word for
the place, alleging Suidas. But Suidas seems to me, to make (...) and (...)
the same, (see the words of Pisides alleged by him) and the word for the
employment is (...) or (...). The Sir. has (...) for (...), as Munster's Hebr.
has (...), see Succah fol. 30. 1. Some place it near Capernaum, others near
Tiberias.

Bethsaida. S. Matthew. 11.21. S. Mar. 6.45. 8.22. S. Luc. 10. 13. S. Ioh. 12.21.
If Kirstemius's Arab. Writer say truly that S. John was of Bethsaida, we may
believe that S. James was of it also, and then there were five Apostles all of
one Town. See S. Ioh. 1.44.

The Desert of Bethsaida. S. Luc. 9. 10, etc. See also S. Matthew. 14. 13, etc.
S. Mar. 6. 32, etc. S. Ioh. 6. 33.

Cor^zin. S. Matthew. 11. 21. S. Hieron. in loc. Heb. expressly calls it a City of
Galilee. Whether it be the same with (...) in Targ. Jonathan in Deuteronomy. 3. 14 may
be enquired.

The Coasts of Magdala or Dalmanutha. S. Matthew. 15. 39. and 16.1. ad 5. S. Mar.
8. 10. ad 13. Whether these are two names, of one and the same place, or they
were two distinct Cities or Villages, and the place to which Jesus came, was in
the neighborhood of both; or whether the one is the general name of the Region
or Tract, the other the name of a Town or City within it, I shall not anxiously
enquire. For Magdala in S. Matthew. S Hieron. in loc. Hebr. and others read
Magedan, some Magadan, Mageddarum in oras, Iuvencus l. 3. see the Vulgar Sir.
and Pers. with the Sax. For Dalmanutha in S. Mar. S. Hieron. de loc. Hebr. also
reads Magedan, and S. August. de consens. l. 2. c. 51. says, that most Copies
(I suppose he means Latin Copies) read so, others have (...) or (...), one
Greek Copy (says Erasmus) has Magdala, and so the Arab. has Magdal, and the
Goth. Magdalan. There are some who seem to make Dalmanutha, Cesarea Philippi,
and Magedan to be all one. De Dieu informs us, that the Jewish Map places
Magedan between Dalmanutha and Gerges, like as (says he) S. Hieron. in loc.
Hebr. makes it to be circa Gerasam; and (...) Magdan, he supposes to be the
same name with (...) Magdal, Lamed being only changed into Nun, which is usual.

Tiberias. S. Ioh. 6. 23.

The Sea of Tiberias, called also the Lake of Gennesaret, or the Sea of
Galilee, and sometimes the Sea without any addition; yet Solinus c. 38. seems
to distinguish the Lake of Genesara, from the Lake of Tiberias, but I believe
he is alone in it. Both the City Tiberias and this Lake, are mentioned very
frequently by Josephus, also by Pliny l. 5. c. 15. where he tells us that the
Lake was called by some the Lake of Tarichea; see also Strabo l. 16. Kimchi and
Ialkut in Psalm. 24. 2. and the Gemar. in^ Bava bathra fol. 74.2 reckoning seven
Seas in the Land of Israel, name this as one. The fire of Coals, the Fishes,
and the Bread which the Disciples saw on the shore, S. Ioh. 21. 9. are supposed
to have been produced then by Christ, and of no pre-existent matter: See S.
Chrysostom. Theophylact, Theodor. Mopsuest. Euthymius, and Leontius. Yet
Nicephor. l. 1. c. 35. says, I think that this breakfast was provided by the
Ministry of Holy Angels.

The Land of Gennesaret. S. Matthew. 14. 34, etc. S. Mar. 6. 53, etc. It is
described by Joseph. de bell. Iud. l. 3. c. 35.

Nain. S. Luc. 7. 11, etc. S. Hieron. in loc. Hebr. says, that it was in
Galilee, two Miles from Mount Tabor, therefore if S. Greg. Nyssen say that it
was in Judea, we may suppose that he took Judea in a larger sense, as it
signifies all Palestine. Some question whether Nais, in Joseph. Ant. l. 20. c.
5. be the same with S. Luke's Nain, partly because Nais in Joseph. is called
only (...), not (...), as Nain in Luke; partly because Josephus seems to place
Nais in Samaria, not in Galilee. But as to the former, it is no news that the
same place is called (...) and (...) too, as Bethsaida which is most commonly
called (...), is yet, S. Mar. 8. 22,23. called (...); as to the latter,
Josephus says not that Nais was in Samaria, but only that the Galilaeans way
was through it, when a certain quarrel happened between them, and the
Samaritans; so that our ordinary Maps agree very well with Josephus, which
place Nain in Galilee, but near to Samaria, and to that campus magnus which
Josephus mentions. It was situate in the Hill Hermon: so Euthym. in Psalm. 88.

The Coasts or Towns of Cesarea Philippi. S. Matthew 16. 13. S. Mar. 8. 27. Of
this Cesarea, see Joseph. Ant. l. 18. c. 3. l. 20. c. 8. Plin. l. 5. c. 18.
Some say that it was the Metropolis of Iturea and Trachonitis, both which are
mentioned, S. Luc. 3. 1. (see S. Hieron. de loc. Act. Apost.) Iturea is
mentioned also by Dio. l. 49. the Itureans by Strabo l. 16. Plin. l. 5. c. 23.
Joseph. Ant. l. 13. c. 19. Eupolemus ap. Eusebius. Praep. Evang. l. 9. Trachonitis
is mentioned by Plin. l. 5. c. 18. Joseph. Ant. l. 17. c. 13. and otherwhere,
Trachones by Strabo l. 16.

The Country about Jordan. S. Matthew. 3. 5. S. Luc. 3. 3.

Jordan. S. Matthew. 3. 5, etc. S. Mar. 1. 5, etc. The Evangelists speaking of
the Holy Ghost's descending upon Christ at his Baptism in Jordan, say only that
he descended in a bodily shape, as it were a Dove; yet the Ancients unanimously
say, That he descended in the form or shape of a Dove, Justin Martyr Dial. cum
Tryph. Origin in S. Luc. Tertul. de bapt. c. 8. Lactant. l. 4. c. 15. S. Hilar.
S. Ambros. l. 1. de Sacram. c. 5. S. Cyril. Alex. in S. Ioh. S. Hieron. in S.
Matthew. Optatus l. 4. S. August. epist. 102. and S. Chrysostom. in S. Matthew. That
there was truly a Dove, was the opinion of Tertullian, de carne Christi c. 3.
with whom S. August. de agone Christ. c. 22. seems to agree.

Sect. 4.
THE Country beyond Jordan. S. Matthew. 4. 15, 25. S. Mar. 3. 8.

There are earnest disputes about the signification of the word (...), which we
translate Beyond, but others say it signifies also By, nigh to, or about; and
so they would have it rendered here, By or About Jordan. And so when according
to our Translation it is said, S. Matthew. 19. 1. that Christ came from Galilee
into the Coasts of Judea beyond Jordan, these Men would read it thus, Into the
Coasts of Judea by or near Jordan; and so we need not suppose that any part of
Judea was beyond Jordan, as some have said that it comprehended part of the
Tribe of Reuben. But after all, I do more approve our reading, Beyond, in all
these places, and yet think that it cannot be concluded from S. Matthew. 19. that
some part of Judea was beyond Jordan; for S. Mar. 10. 1. expounds S. Matthew's
meaning to be no more than this, That Christ went from Galilee into the Coasts
of Judea, by the farther side of Jordan.

Bethabara. S Ioh. 1. 28. Many Greek Copies, also S. Cyril. Alex. Nonnus, all
the Oriental Versions in Bibl. Polygl. the Vulg. and Saxon read Bethany not
Bethabara. But S. Chrysostom. says that the truer Copies have Bethabara, and with
him agree Origin in S. Ioh. Suidas in voc. (...), Theophylact and Euthymius.
Epiphanius also Haer. 51. reads Bethabara, but tells us that some Copies had
Bethany. S. Hieron. in loc. Hebr. has Bethaida, or (as other Editions)
Bethbaara. This Bethabara is most probably the place mentioned S. Ioh. 3. 26.
10. 40. whether or no it was the same with either. Bethbarah, Iud. 7. 24. or
Betharaba Josh. 18. 22. I determine not, nor yet what is to be thought of that
which is hinted by some, that Bethany crept into some Copies instead of Batanea.

The Country of the Gergesens or Gaderens. S. Matthew. 8.28. S. Mar. 5.1. S. Luc
8.26. Copies vary much here also, some reading Gergesens, where the usual
Copies have Gadarens, and contrariwise. According to the Sir. and Pers. all the
three Evangelists have Gadarens, according to the Arab. and AEthiop. they have
all Gergesens, and so perfectly agree. And if some Copies have Gerasens, that
needs not trouble us, for S. Hieron. in loc. Hebr. seems to make Gergesa, or
Gargasi, and Gerasa only two Names of the same City, as also do others. But
suppose S. Matthew to have writ Gergesens, S. Mark and S. Luke Gadarens, they
will be easily reconciled by saying, either that the Country of the one was
included in that of the other, or that Gadara and Gergesa, were neighboring
Cities, and that their fields lay in common pour cause de vicinage, as the
Lawyers phrase it. Epiphanius Haer. 30. tells of Tombs near Gadara, in which
some Juglers made their Enchantments. And both S. Hieron. de loc. Hebr. and he
do speak of hot Waters at the foot of the Hill on which the City stood, and
some conjecture that the Swine run down the Hill into those Waters. Also the
Jewish Map makes a Lake or Collection of Waters as they call it, to have been
near (...). Some think that the Swine run into that (...), of which Strabo l.
16: speaks, but it is much questioned, whether his Gadaris be the same with
Gadara, or any place near it. The common opinion is and has been, that they
were drowned in the Sea of Tiberias: see S. Hieron. in loc. Hebr. Origin. tom.
8. in Ioh. also Anselm. in. S. Matthew. and Zacharias Chrysopol.

Decapolis. S. Matthew. 4.25. S. Mar. 5. 20. 7. 31. It is named so from Ten
Cities, but Pliny l. 5. c. 18. says that in his time all did not agree which
the Cities were, that made up that number. He reckons among them several Cities
beyond Jordan, but withal Scythopolis on this side; so that he does not
altogether agree with those that seem to place all the Ten beyond Jordan. See
S. Hieron. in loc. Hebr.

Synagogues. They are frequently mentioned in the Historical part of the New
Testament. In some of the places the Word (...) may denote their Assemblies,
for civil Judicature; or perhaps more generally any places of public
concourse; but it signifies most frequently the places where they assembled for
Religious exercises. The Signs and Wonders which our Savior wrought, procured
him the reputation of a Prophet, and that might procure more easy admittance
for him to teach and preach in their Synagogues.

The Proseuchoe. One of them is mentioned, S. Luke 6. 12. as some have
believed; Jesus continued all Night (...), i. e. (say they) in a Proseucha or
Oratory, a place set apart for Prayer to God. Josephus (in his Life) makes
mention oftener than once of a Proseucha at Tiberias. In Philo there is frequent
mention of them ( in vita Mosis c. 3. and in legatione ad Caium, c. 9. see also
c. 16.) only he seems sometimes to comprehend the Synagogues under Proseuchae.
We have a description of these Proseuchae, in Epiphan. Haer. 80. See Iuvenal
Sat. 3. and Cleomedes, l. 2. c. 1.

Sect. 5.
The Places following are also mentioned in the History of the New Testament,
but only by more general Names, not by the particular Names which are here
given them.

MOunt Garizim. Supposed to be the Mountain of which the Woman of Sichem
speaks, S. Ioh. 4. 20. for Josephus Ant. l. 11. c. 8. plainly affirms, that
this Mount Garizim was near Sichem, and with him agree the Talmudists, in Sotah
fol. 33. 2. also Benjamin in his Itenerarium; yea, and S. Hieron. in Epitaph.
Paulae; see Iud. 9. 6, 7. I know that S. Hieron. in loc. Hebr. reproves the
Samaritans for placing it near Sichem, as Epiphan. Haer. 9. also does; but we
have good warrant to acquit the Samaritans from error in this. Origin in S.
Ioh. 4. 20. expressly says, that the Woman spoke of the Mountain which is
called Garizim.

Mount Tabor. Generally believed to be the Mountain on which our Lord was
transfigured; see S. Hieron. in Epitaph. Paulae; and epist. Paulae. and
Eustoch. ad Marcellam, S. Cyril. Hieros. Catech. 12. Euthym. in Psalm. 88. and
Theophylact in S. Matthew. 26. 37. and S. Mar. 14. 32. It was upon this Mount
also that he appeared after he was risen to above 500 Brethren at once, as some
suppose. Tertul. de resur. carnis c. 55. says, that Moses and Elias appeared at
Christ's Transfiguration, alter in imagine carnis nondum receptae, alter in
veritate nondum defunctae. But the Author de mirabil. sac. Scr. l. 3. c. 10.
says, that in his time it was unanimously concluded, that Moses also was
present in his own Body. Antiochus Ptolemaidis in Gr. caten. patr. in S. Matthew.
tom. 1. favors this, but Severus in the same Caten. thinks it safest not to
determine any thing peremptorily in it. The Au^or de mirab. sacr. Scr. speaks
also of Moses's Body being resumed from the Grave, as S. Hieron. in Matthew.
speaks of his rising from the dead. But S. Ambros. de Cain and Abel, l. 1. c.
2. seems to have thought that Moses did not die; and so the Jews, ap. Cappellum
in S. Matthew. 17. say that he died not, but ascended on high where he now
Ministers.

Mons Christi. The Mountain in which (as is supposed) our Lord Preached that
Divine Sermon recorded by S. Matthew, c. 5, etc. and therefore called by some
Mons beatitudinum; also in which he chose twelve out of the number of the
Disciples, whom he named Apostles, in which he continued all Night, S. Luc. 6.
12. and in which finally he fed the 4000, S. Matthew. 15.

Mons Diaboli. So some called the Mountain where he showed Christ all the
Kingdoms of the World, and the Glory of them.

Quarentana desertum. In this Desert (say some) Christ fasted forty days, and
forty Nights, being led into it by the Spirit, i. e. the Holy Spirit, as Origin
in S. Luc. S. Hilary, S. Chrysostom. S. Hieron. Author oper. imperfect.
Theophylact and Victor Antioch. do unanimously interpret it.

Macherus. In this Castle S. John the Baptist was kept Prisoner by Herod, and
in it slain, Joseph. Ant. l. 18. c. 7. In this very Castle also perhaps it was,
or in some place of Peraea near to it, that Herod celebrated his Birthday, and
feasted his Captains and the Nobility of Galilee, for he was Tetrarch of Peraea
as well as of Galilee, Joseph. l. 17. c. 13. Some say, that S. John the Baptist
was buried in this Castle, whereas S. Hieron. in loc. Hebr. and in Epitaph.
Paulae, and Ruffin. hist. l. 11. c. 28. speak of his Sepulcher at Sebaste or
Samaria. Both may say true; his Body might be translated from Macherus to
Sebaste. This Macherus is perhaps that which the Targum Ionath. and Ierus. in
Number. 32. 35. call (...) or (...).

CHAP. II.
Sect. 1.
Hitherto of Places, now follows an account of the Persons concerned in the
Church History of Palestine.

ZACHARIAS and ELIZABETH. See the account and Character given of them, S. Luc.
1. 5,6. Their House was in a City of Judah, in the Hill-Country, S. Luc. 1.
39,65. which City some have thought to be Bethlehem, (for the Bibl. Wechel.
instead of A City of Judah, read, The City of David) others Jerusalem; but if
Theophylact in S. Luc. 1. 23. was not mistaken, the Hill-Country was distant
from Jerusalem. The most think that it was Hebron, for we read Josh. 21. 11.
that Hebron was in the Hill-Country of Judah, (see Joseph. de bell. Iud. l. 4.
c. 33.) and withal Hebron was one of the Cities that were given to the Priests,
Josh. 21. 13. How it comes that some place the House of Zacharias, but a Mile
from Emmaus, I know not: A place called Beth-Zacharias is mentioned, 1 Macc. 6.
33. and by Joseph. Ant. l. 12. c. 14. and de bell. Iud. l. 1. c. 1. and in our
Maps placed not far from Hebron; it may be it was named so from some Ancestor
of our Zacharias, who had the same name. S. Chrysostom. S. Hieron. and
Theophylact speak of some, who affirmed that our Savior speaks of this
Zacharias, S. Matthew. 23. 35. Gregor. Nyssen in Gr. caten. Patr. in S. Luc. and
Euthym. held the same, as Origin also seems to do. It is a very ancient
Tradition, that this Zacharias was slain. The Jews slew him (say some) because
he suffered the Mother of our Lord, after the Birth of her Holy Son, to abide
in a certain place of the Temple, which was set apart for Virgins, affirming
that she was a Virgin still; see Origin, S. Basil. ad sanctam Christi nativit.
S. Greg. Nyssen. S. Cyril adv. Anthropomorph. and Theophylact. Others say that
when Herod murdered the Innocents, he sought after John also, called
afterward the Baptist, and when he could not find him (his Mother having fled
away with him) he slew Zacharias the Father; see Petrus Alex. in Canon. and
Cedrenus. Some say that he was slain, for that he had Preached, that the Child
which was born of Mary, was the King of the World; see S. Greg. Nyssen. ap.
Tit. Bostr. If Hippolytus ap. Nicephor. l. 2. c. 3. inform us aright, this
Zacharias was the Son of Barachias. Elizabeth and the Virgin Mother were
Cousins, S. Luc. 1. 36. though they were of distinct Tribes, the one of Judah,
the other of Levi; by reason of some inter-Marriage, either Elizabeth a
Daughter of Aaron was related to the Tribe of Judah, or the blessed Virgin,
though of Judah, had some relation to that of Levi; see S. August. Quaest. 47.
in lib. Iud. and 61 inter Quaest. 83. A Priest might marry any one that was of
the Tribe of Levi, or an Israelitess, Misna in Kiddushin, c. 4.. 1. and Gemar.
in Iebamoth, fol. 85. 1. Cedrenus says, that Elizabeth having retired into a
Cave for her Sons preservation, dyed there after forty days.

Herod the Great. S. Matthew. c. 2. Macrobius Satunal. l. 2. c. 4. reports that
Augustus being told, that Herod having commanded that the Children under two
years old, should be put to Death, a Son of his own was slain among them,
replied, that he had rather be Herod's Hog than his Son. Arnobius in Psalm. 47.
says, that Herod commanded the Ships to be vexed, ( i. e. as it is interpreted
burnt) lest the Magi who did not return to him from Bethlehem, should get away
in them. Joseph. Ant. l. 17. c. 8. and de. bell. Iud. l. 1. c. 21. describes his
miserable end thus. No ordinary, but a most fearful Disease seized upon him. He
was tormented with a slow fire, which was inwardly raging, and yet the heat
could not be perceived outwardly; his appetite was dog-like and insatiable, his
Feet swollen, his Bowels Ulcerous; Belchings, and those frequent and unsavory,
did much afflict him, together with intolerable Cholicks, difficulty of
breathing, Contractions of the Nerves, and Convulsions over the whole Body; his
natural parts were putrified and bred Worms; a very troublesome Itch all over,
with a noisome stench, did grievously molest him; the torment and loathsomeness
of his Disease made him once attempt to destroy himself. Add his extreme grief,
for that he saw how all despised and hated him, and for the distractions of his
Family, Antipater his eldest Son practicing against his Life, and being put to
Death by him, but five Days before that he himself ended his Life in most
fearful rage and torment. Gregor. Abulpharaius says, that he suffered these
Torments for two years together. It is observed by Joseph. Ant. l. 18. c. 7.
that though Herod had a very numerous issue, yet within one hundred years it
was all extinct but a few; so little (says he) does either a multiplied Issue
or any Humane power or prevalence avail without Religion, and the fear of God.

Archelaus. S. Matthew. 2. 22. He was Heir of his Father Herod's Cruelty and
Tyranny, for which the Jews and Samaritans complained of him to Augustus, and
he banished him to Vienna, Joseph. Ant. l. 17. c. 15. and de bell. Iud. l. 2. c.
11. Of his Cruelty see also R. Dav. Ganz. in Millenar. 4. An. 761.

Joseph. S. Matthew. c. 1. and c. 2. and S. Luc. c. 1. and c. 2. He is called
(...), S. Matthew. 13. 55. i.e as some have thought, a Smith; see S. Hilar.
Chrysolog. sermon. 48. Munster's Hebr. Gosp. as also the Saxon. Yet the more
received Opinion is that he was a Carpenter or Wright; see the Author oper.
imperf. in S. Matthew. 1. S. August. ap. Aquin. and long before them, Justin
Martyr dial. cum Tryph. who is very clear for it. Also Celsus ap. Origin. still
speaks of him as a Carpenter, as likewise that Holy Man took him for such, who
said that (...), was making a Bier or Coffin for Julian, Sozomen. l. 6. c. 2.
Finally the Oriental Versions in S. Matthew. 13. 55. seem to favor this opinion.
Boulduc. de Eccles. ante legem l. 1. c. 5. says, that Joseph was of the Order
of the Nethinim. How long he lived after the twelfth year of Christ, there is
no Constat either from Scripture or Antiquity. Author de cardinal. Christi oper.
De passione Christi, as also the sermon. 81. de Tempore, and S. Ambros. in S.
Luc. 23. make him to have survived our Lords Passion; but S. Chrysostom.
Theophylact and Oecumen. in Act. 1. and Epiphanius Haer. 78. conceive it to be
more probable that he did not. They think it strange, that he should not be
mentioned in all the time of Christ's public Ministry, and that on the Cross,
Christ should recommend his Mother to another, (not to him) if he had been then
alive. Also upon the account of his Age, if he was above Eighty years old when
our Lords Mother was betrothed to him, (as Epiphan. Haer. 78.) it is no way
likely that he did survive our Saviors Crucifixion. Nicephorus l. 1. c. 7.
also makes him to have attained to old age, when the Blessed Virgin was
espoused to him. It is not agreed whether Joseph was a Bachelor or a Widower,
when she was betrothed to him. Epiphanius and others say, that he was a
Widower, but S. Hieron. adv. Helvid. and others, inclined to think that he was
a Bachelor. Bid de loc. sanctis, c. 6. says, that his Sepulcher was in the
Valley of Iosaphat, near the Tomb of old Simeon.

Mary our Lords Mother. S. Matthew. c. 2. and c. 12. 46,47. S. Mar. 3. 31,32. S.
Luc. 2. S. Ioh. 2. 1, 3, 5, 12. 19.25, 26,27. Act. 1. 14. She was (say some)
twenty four years of Age, when she brought forth the Holy Jesus, others say
that she was no more than fifteen, or sixteen, or eighteen; according to Greg.
Abulpharaius, she was only thirteen. There is not much better agreement as to
the time that she lived after her Sons Ascension, which was, according to
Eusebius. in Chron. fifteen years; according to Aretas in Rev. 7. 4. but fourteen,
and if the Epistle called Lumen ap. Nicephor. l. 2. c. 3. say true, only
eleven. What some ap. Plutarch. relate of Cicero, that he was brought forth
without pain, the Ancients unanimously affirm to be true of Christ, S. Athanas.
de salutari adventis Christi. S. Greg. Nyssen orat. 1. de resur. Christi. Author
de Cardinal. oper. De nativ. Christi. Fulgent. de laudibus Mariae ex partu
Salvat. Zeno Veron. de nativ. ser. 3. The same Author de Cardinal. oper. S.
Hieron. ad. Helv. and others, affirm, that he was brought forth also without
Midwife, so that the story which some tell of the incredulous Midwifes
Punishment and Miraculous Cure is justly exploded. Some that were very near the
Apostles have Writ of the Blessed Virgin, that she was Baptized by Christ, so
we are told by Euthym. in S. Ioh. 3. Some allege S. Ambros. saying, that there
was so much of Piety and Devotion in her very Aspect and Deportment, that it
incited Religious thoughts in the beholders. From the mention of a pair of
Turtle Doves, or two young Pigeons, S. Luc. 2. 24. some conclude, that She and
Joseph were Poor; see Origin Hom. 8. in Levit. and S. August. quaest. 40. in
Levit. Others also speak of their Poverty, as S. Basil. Constitut. Monast. c.
4. S. Chrysostom. Hom. 6. and 66. in S. Matthew. Author de Cardin. oper. De nativ.
Christi. Nicetas in S. Matthew. 2. 11. Fulgent. de Epiphania, etc. Yet I do not
believe that they thought them to be extremely poor, it being manifest enough
from sacred Writ, that they were not so; yea some almost absolutely hold, that
the Virgin was an Inheritrix, and Nicephorus, l. 1. c. 13. speaks of the
Substance and Possession which they had at Nazareth. When it is said, S. Ioh.
19. 25. that She and other Women stood by the Cross, the word stood is to be
taken notice of; for perhaps they were not to sit in that case, for sitting was
a posture of Mourning and Lamentation, (see Job 2. 13. Isa. 3. 26. 47. 5. Lam.
2. 10) and the making solemn Lamention for those that suffered as Malefactors
was prohibited, both by the Jewish Law ( Misn. in Sanhedr. c 6.. 6.) and by the
Roman. (Digest. l. 3. tit. 2. c. 11.. Non solent) Some say that Christ after
his Resurrection, appeared first to his Mother, and allege some passages out
of the Ancients to countenance this; others say that he did not appear suddenly
to her; for this reason, because he knew that She was firmly established in the
belief of his Resurrection; and allege against the former, that both the
Scripture and those Fathers that treat purposely of Christ's several appearings
after his rising, are silent of his manifesting himself particularly to her;
and not only so, but also that it is said expressly, S. Mar. 16. 9. that he
appeared first to another Mary. Aretas in Rev. 7. 4. affirms, that S. John did
not leave Judea and go to Ephesus, till after her Death; and Nicephorus is
clear that She dwelt in Jerusalem to the last, as he speaks also of her
Sepulcher in the Vale of Iosaphat; see him l. 2. c. 3, 22, 23. l. 8. c. 30. l.
15. c. 14. as also the Author de assumpt. Virg. Glor.

S. John the Baptist. Origin hom. 10. in S. Luc. S. Chrysostom. in S. Matthew. 3.
4. and S. Hieron. contr. Lucifer. speak of his being in the Wilderness in his
very tender years or infancy; and Origin adds, that majori nutrimento dignus
apparuit, Nicephorus l. 1. c. 14. and Cedrenus speak of his having an Angel for
his Guide and Guardian there. An Arabic Writer, alleged by our Mr. Gregory
says, that when he was a Child, other Children asking him to play with them;
he answered, That he was not created for pastime. S. Hieron. contr. Lucifer.
tells of another play of his (parvulus cum serpentibus lusit;) but (as I take
it) he says it only by way of Rhetorical Allusion to Isa. 11. 8. As to his
Meat, Origin. hom. 11. in S. Luc. S. Hilary, S. Ambros. in S. Luc. S. Hieron.
adv. Iovinian. l. 2. Author oper. imperfecti. S. August. Confess. l. 10. c. 31.
Suidas in voc. (...), and Theophylact in S. Mar. 1. understand living
Creatures, to be meant by Locusts. The Locust is mentioned among the flying
creeping things that might be eaten, Levit. 11. 21, 22. and we read of
Acridophagi, i.e. Locust-eaters, or of the eating this Creature, in Strabo l.
16. Diodor. Sicul. l. 3. c. 11. ( vell. 4. c. 3.) Aristophan. Acharnens. Act.
4. Scen. 7. Agatharchid. ap. Photium Number. 250. c. 27. Dioscorid. l. 2. c. 57.
Plin. l. 6. c. 30. and l. 11. c. 29. S. Hieron. adv. Iovinian. Scaliger contr.
Cardan. Exercit. 192, etc. The Talmudists also speak of eating them, Cholin
fol. 65. 1. and of hunting them, Schabb. fol. 106. 2. They that please to
consult Kirstenius in his Notes, on S. Matthew. 3. 4. may see what his Master for
the Arabic Tongue told him of the Locusts about Jordan, their way of preparing
them, etc. We need not then by (...), here understand herbs or fruits, or the
tops of Herbs and Plants (as Isiodor. Pelus. l. 1. Ep. 5. and 132. Nicephor. l.
1. c. 14. and some ap. Theophylact. in S. Matthew. 3.) nor cancros fluviatiles
(as others;) nor yet turn (...) either into (...) (as some,) or into (...), as
the Gospel of S. Matthew. which the Ebionites had, did; see Epiphan. Haer. 30.
There is mention of Wild-honey in Diodor. Sicul. l. 19, (...). Pliny also, l.
11. c. 16. speaks of Mel sylvestre ericaeum. See likewise Suidas in voc. (...).
But we have the fullest account of it in the History of Saul and Jonathan, 1 Samuel 14. 25,26,27. Rabanus tells us out of Arnulphus, of the leaves of certain
Trees in the Wilderness of Judea having the taste of Honey, which they did rub
and eat; but that these should be the wild Honey spoken of here, seems to be
only a fancy. As to his raiment of Camels Hair, there is none more fit to
describe this sort of Garment, than Paulinus who wore it, and so had experience
of the asperity of it; see him epist. 10. S. Hieron. Author. oper. imperfecti,
and another Paulinus in collect. Poemat. Christian. assent that it was a rough
garment; soft clothing is for those that dwell in Kings Houses, not for the
Wilderness. See the description of Elias his habit, 2 Kings 1.8. R. D. Ganz.
An. 770. Millen. 4. and Iosippus do call John a great or chief Priest; and it
needs not seem strange since the Chald. Paraphr. gives the same Title to
Jeremiah, Lament. 1.1. and to Mattathiah, Cant. 6.6. According to Joseph. Ant.
l. 18. c. 7. that which moved Herod to behead him, was the great concourse of
People to hear him, and the great Authority that he had with them; so that he
feared lest he should cause their defection from him, (and probably this did
incline Herod the more to deprive John first of his Liberty, then of his Life;)
but the chief reason was that which the Evangelists assign, as also R. D. Ganz.
and Iosippus, viz. his being reproved by him, for having his Brothers Wife.

The Disciples of the Baptist. S. Matthew. 9. 14. 14. 12. S. Mar. 2. 18. S. Luc.
5. 33. 7. 18. 11. 1. S. Ioh. 1. 35,37. 3. 25. The Baptist sending his Disciples
with that Message, S. Matthew. 11. 2,3. Art thou he that should come, or look we
for another? Some may ask whether he doubted then whether Jesus was the Messiah
or no. S. Hilary, S. Chrysostom. S. Cyril. Alex. in Thesaur. l. 2. c. 4. Author
oper. imperfecti. Theophylact in S. Matthew. 11. 2. and S. Luc. 7. 19. and
Euthymius piously resolve, that he did not move the question out of any doubt
or distrust of his own, but for the satisfaction of his Disciples, who envyed
that Christ should have more followers than their Master, and so he could
hardly bring them to a right estimate of him. For their better information and
instruction concerning Christ, it was (say they) that S. John sent them upon
that Embassy. To the same purpose see S. Hieron. in S. Matthew. 11. and epist. ad
Algas. qu. 1. and Origin in praefat. ad S. Joan. There are others who likewise
acquit the Baptist from doubt or distrust, yet think that it is no impeachment
of his Dignity to say, that he sought the confirmation of his own belief by new
Documents.

Herod Antipas. S. Matthew. 14.1, etc. S. Mar. 6.14, etc. 8.15. S. Luc. 3.
1,19,20. 9. 7,9. 13. 31. 23. 7, etc. Act. 4. 27. He was the Son of Herod the
Great. Being entertained by his Brother in his way to Rome, he requited his
kindness by enticing from him his Wife Herodias, for whose sake he put away his
own Wife, the daughter of Aretas King of Arabia. A War ensues upon this between
Aretas and him, in which he received a great overthrow, which the Jews looked
upon as a just Judgment of God upon him, for the Murder of the Baptist. This
was the first fruits of his incestuous match with Herodias. Afterward she was
the occasion of his banishment. See all this in Joseph. Ant. l. 18. c. 7. and
9. There are two circumstances that aggravate Herod's Cruelty in Murdering
John. The first is that he did not abstain from slaughter on his Birthday, for
which very thing, Dio, l. 77. brands Caracalla; it being very improper to
deprive any of the Light on the Day that we received it, (see S. Chrysostom. in
S. Matthew. 14. Fragment. Varron. and Philo contr. Flaccum) yea Martial l. 10.
Ep. 87. thought all brawls and contentions to be unseasonable and unbecoming
then, Natalem colimus, tacete lites. I know some question whether by Herod^s
Birthday be signified the Day in which he first saw the Light, or the Day on
which he entered on his Dignity or Tetrarchy, even as Hos. 7. 5. the Day of the
King is by the Chald. Paraphr. R. Solom. Aben Ezra and Kimchi expounded to be
the Day in which he was made King; but the Ancients seem to take the Word
Birthday in the usual sense, viz. for the Day in which he was born into the
World. The other circumstance is, that they were at meat when the Baptists head
was cut off and brought to him. The Romans much condemned Marius for that when
he was banqueting, he handled with much pleasure and insolence the head of
Antonius a Consular Person, being brought to him, Valor. Maxim. l. 9. c. 2.
Florus. l. 3. c. 21. As also they did L. Quintius Flaminius or Flamininus, who
to satisfy an Harlots wanton Cruelty, caused a condemned Person to be beheaded
at Supper, ( Livy l. 39. and Cicero de senectute) as at another time when they
were Banqueting, he, ad nutum scorti, with his own hands slew a noble Boian, (
Livy ibid.) S. Hieron. in S. Matthew. 14. compares Herod's Cruelty with
Flaminius's in the former instance, but makes it to exceed his. When we read S.
Mar. 6. 20. that Herod observed the Baptist, the Word is (...), which may
signify that he took care to keep him safe, that neither Herodias nor any
other should do any violence to him, see v. 19. When it is said S. Matthew. 14.
9. that the King was sorry, S. Hieron. makes it to be a counterfeit sadness,
but S. Hilary, S. Chrysostom. Theophylact and Euthym. supposed it to be real. We
need not wonder that Herod, though but a Tetrarch, is called King, for Pliny l.
5. c. 18. makes Tetrarchies to differ little from Kingdoms, and Cicero de
Divinat. l. 1. says of Deiotarus, that a Caesare Tetrarchiae regno multatus
est, and a little before he calls him Deiotarum regem. Some ask how it came
that Herod heard not of the fame of Jesus until after the Baptists Death,
whereas he had Preached and wrought Miracles both before S. John's
imprisonment, and also all the time of it. To which it may be answered, that
before S. John's imprisonment, Herod was absent upon the account of his journey
to Rome; during the time of it he was preparing for the War against Aretas, and
perhaps also after S. John's Death; however the event of the War, and overthrow
that he received, might then distract him. It might also be some reason of
this, that Jesus was much in Galilee, and other parts more remote from the
place of Herod's residence, which at that time more especially was (as I
suppose) Beraea. Add that which S. Chrysostom. and Theophylact say, that Men in
great places are usually taken up with other things, and less inquisitive after
things of this nature. As also they that are about them neglect many times to
acquaint them with those things which it concerns them most to know; see
Lamprid. in Alexand. Sever. and Vopisc. in Aurelian. It is generally presumed
that our Lord called this Herod a Fox. S. Luc. 13. 32. and so Irenaeus l. 4. c.
80. S. Ambros. ser. 2. and 11. in Psalm. 118. expound the Text of Herod, as also
Chrysologus ser. 19. Yet Theophylact, Titus Bostr. and Euthymius make it to
refer to the Pharisees: It is not (say they) (...), but (...) this Fox, as
pointing to the Pharisees that were there present. In Nicephorus Gregor. l. 9.
in fin. the Image of a Fox (which was found in a Book of Oracles) is
interpreted to denote (...), the subtlety of the Emperor there spoken of:
accordingly here our Savior may be thought to intimate the subtlety of Herod,
or of the Pharisees, if with Theophylact, etc. we apply it to them. The Jews
have a Proverb, Worship a Fox in his time, Megillah, fol. 16. 2. i. e. the time
of his Prosperity, as the Gloss there; but our Savior would not Worship this
Fox. Some think that when Herod was at Jerusalem, he dwelt in that stately
Palace built by his Father, which Josephus describes, de bell. Iud l. 5. c. 13.
and that thither it was that Jesus was sent to him by Pilate.

Herod's Lords, High Captains, Chief Estates, and Men of War. S. Mar. 6. 21,
26. S. Luc. 23. 11. It is not easy to determine of what color the Gorgeous
robe was, with which Herod's Guard or Men of War arrayed Christ, whether white
(as the Vulg. and Saxon, and as S. Ambros. took it to be) or red, purple or
scarlet. See the Sir. Arab. and Pers. every one of which has the same Word, S.
Luc. 23.11. which they have S. Matthew. 27. 28. where the Greek has (...).

Philip. S. Matthew. 14. 3. S. Mar. 6. 17. S. Luc. 3. 19. Josephus Ant. l^ 18. c.
7. says, that Herodias was enticed not from Philip but Herod. But R.D Ganz, and
Iosippus call him Philip as the Evangelists do. Suidas in voc. (...) calls him
Herodes Philippus, saying that he had two Names, as Herod Antipas, and Herod
Agrippa also had. Tertul. contr. Marcion. l. 4. c. 34. S. Chrysostom. Isidor. in
gr. ca^en. in S. Matthew. tom. 2. and Euthym. say that Philip was dead when
Herodias was married to Herod, and so also some thought ap. Origin. in S.
Matthew. 14. but Origin himself, as also S. Hieron. Victor Antioch. R. D. Ganz,
and he that goes under the name of Hegesippus l. 2. c. 4. thought that he was
alive, and so Josephus says expressly that her former Husband was living when
Herodias left him to ^arry to Herod. Yet S. August. de fid. and oper. c. 19.
leaves it doubtful. ^ut suppose him dead, since he dyed not childless leaving a
Daughter, Herod could not lawfully marry his Relict.

Herodias. S. Matthew. c. 14. S. Mar. c. 6. S. Luc. 3. 19. She was Herod the
Great's Grandchild by Aristobulus. Her Ambition and Envy at her own Brother
Agrippa's Prosperity, made her put Herod upon a Journey to Rome, to obtain that
he might be King: But Agrippa followed him with such accusations, that the
Emperor Caligula banished him to Lions in France. He would have spared Herodias
for her Brother's sake, but she would accompany her Husband into Exile; see
Joseph. Ant. l. 18. c. 9. who adds, de bell. Iud. l. 2. c. 16. that both Herod
and Herodias fled into Spain, and that Herod dyed there. S. Hieron. adv.
Ruffin. l. 2. writes that Herodias did thrust the Baptist's Tongue through with
a bodkin, as Fulvia did Cicero's. Nicephorus. l. 1. c. 19. relates, that she
buried the Baptists head in a secret place of the Palace; but Theophylact says,
that primum in Emesan repositum fuit. Comestor speaks of its being buried in
Jerusalem.

Salome was the Daughter of Herodias, and (as far as we can perceive by
Josephus) her only Daughter; and so we may suppose that she was the Damosel
that danced before Herod, and asked the Baptist's head. Her Father was that
Philip who is by Josephus called Herod, and she was first married to another
Philip, who is mentioned S. Luc. 3. 1. after his Death, to one Ar^stobulus, by
whom she had three Sons; see Josephus Ant. l. 18. c. 7. We are told by
Nicephorus l. 1. c. 20. that her Mother Herodias saw this Salome's miserable
end, for attempting to pass over a frozen River, the Ice breaking, she fell in
to the Neck in water, and the fragments of the Ice closing, separated her head
from the Body. But of this, Baronius well says, Esto fides apud autorem; for
by Iosephus's account it is more probable that she lived to see her Mother
banished, than that her Mother saw her Death.

The ^^ecutioner that beheaded the Baptist. S. Mar. 6. 27. The Word is (...) i.
e. (...) as Suidas. It is originally a Latin Word, Speculator, and we have an
account of its signification in Seneca de ira l. 1. c. 16. and de benef. l. 3.
c. 25. Some instead of Speculatores read Spiculatores, both in Digest. l. 48.
tit. 20. l. 6. and in Tacitus, but my Books have Speculatores in both; and
Lipsius in not. in Tacit. Histor. l. 1. says, that it is to be read so
constantly, producing three ancient Inscriptions, in which it is writ so. Some
derive it a Speculando, as the Hebrews call a public Minister (...) from (...)
speculari. They Sir. has turned it into (...), which word or one near to it
occurs in Schab. fol. 108.1. and in Targum Ionath. and Ierus. in Genesis 37.36.
and 39. 1.

Jesus Christ. He was enrolled in Augustus's Censual Tables; see Origin Hom.
11. in S. Luc. Tertull. contr. Marcion. l. 4. c. 7. 19. Oros. l. 6. c. ult. and
l. 7. c. 3. ( al. 1.) In Suidas in voe. (...); we read of another inrolling of
him, viz. by the heads of the Priests, who having elected him in the place of a
certain Priest that was dead (for one said that though he was of Judah, yet his
stock was so mixed with the Tribe of Levi, that he might be elected) upon his
Mothers Testimony (his reputed Father being then dead) recorded his name thus,
Jesus the Son of the Living God, and of the Virgin Mary; but what cedit the Jew
Theodosius deserved, who imparted this as a great secret to one Philip a
Christian, and he to those from whom Suidas had it, I know not. The same Suidas
alleges Josephus, saying, that (...), but though Josephus does make very
honorable mention of Jesus, yet I nowhere find any such passage in him. As S.
Basil. in Constitut. Monast. c. 4. says, that Jesus to show his obedience to
his Parents, meekly underwent any bodily labor; so S. Justin Martyr. contr.
Tryph. tells, that he wrought at the Carpenters Trade, made Ploughs, Yokes,
etc. So S. Mar. 6. 3. Is not this the Carpenter? Every one was bound to teach
his Son a Trade, Misn. in Kiddushin, c. 4.. 14. (...) in Kiddushin, c. 1.. 43.
Gemar. in Berachoth, fol. 63. 1. so Joseph taught Jesus the Carpenters Trade.
The Martyrologies say, that he returned out of Egypt on the seventh of
January. Iuvencus l. 1. thought that his Parents, carried him with them every
year to Jerusalem, especially after that he was of the age of twelve years, and
S. August. de Consens. Evang. l. 2. c. 10. seems to say that they carried him
up before that age also, as soon and as often as they durst for fear of
Archelaus. When the Jews say to Christ, Thou art not yet fifty years old, S.
Joh. 8. 57. it may seem strange that they should speak of fifty years, when as,
if Theophylact say truly, he was then only of the age of thirty three years;
yea Epiphanius, Haer. 51. says, that he was but thirty three years old at his
Passion; see also Eusebius. l. 1. c. 10. and in Chron. S. August. de Doct. Christ.
l. 2. c. 20. To this (not to take notice that S. Chrysostom. and some Copies ap.
Euthym. read, not fifty years old, but only forty) it may be said, that his
maturity of Judgment, experience and gravity might incline them to think, that
he was toward fifty; or perhaps his sorrows did make him look elder than he
was; or they had respect to the Jubilee, and it is as if they had said, Thou
have not lived the time of one Jubilee; see Theophylact and Severus in caten.
gr. Perhaps their meaning was no more than this, That he was not within the
verge of old age; or finally they would pitch upon an age of which there could
be no doubt; they were not certain that he was not forty, but they were sure
that he was short of fifty. It may also seem strange, that the Baptist should
say of Christ, I knew him not, S. Joh. 1. 31,33. to which S. Chrysostom. and
Theophylact say, that those words refer to the time before Christ's coming to
S. John as he was baptizing, and it was by Revelation then that he knew him; S.
John before that had not seen his Face, or known him by sight, (...). Nonnus.
The Jews might suspect that the Baptist gave so high a Testimony of him, for
kindred or affection or former familiarity that had been between them; he
therefore repeats it that he knew him not in any such way, but by revelation
only; see Origin, and S. Cyril. in caten. gr. in S. Ioh. Some sentences are
attributed to Christ, which we find not in Sacred Writ, at least not in so many
words, as by S. Hieron. ad Minerium (vel Minervium) and Alexandrum, this,
Estote probati trapezitae vel nummularii; by Cassian this, Vbi te invenero ibi
judicabo. The rest that concerns the Holy Jesus see in the New Testament, and
Bishop Taylor's Gr. Exemplar.

Shepherds. S. Luc. 2. 8, etc. S. Hieron. in Epitaph. Paulae, and lib. quaest.
in Genes. says, that they kept their Flocks near the Tower of Ader i. e.
Gregis, see Genesis 35. 21. Arnobius in Psalm. 129. says, that the Angels appeared
to them in the fourth Watch of the Night. Some can tell you the Number and
Names of the Shepherds, but till they agree better among themselves, you are
not bound to believe them.

Simeon. S. Luc. 2. 25 etc. S. Athanas. de communi essentia Patris and Fill. and
Spir. Sancti. Author hom. de occursu Domini ap. S. Cyril. Hieros. and Author de
vit. and interit. prophet. ap. Epiphan. say, that he was a Priest, and how far
his taking Christ into his Arms, and blessing Joseph and Mary may favor this,
I shall not determine; but Theophylact and Euthymius thought that he was not.
Some make him the same with Rabban Schimeon the Son of Hillel, adding that both
he and his Father Hillel, were removed from the Presidentship, because they
differed somewhat from the rest of the Jews in their opinion touching the
Messiah. The Talmudists do not make so frequent and honorable mention of Rabban
Schimeon, as they do of other Presidents; and if he gave such an honorable
Testimony of our Lord, we need not seek further for the reason why they do not.
The forecited Author de vit. and interit. Prophet. says, that he dyed full of
years, and that the Priests would not vouchsafe him burial; but Bid de loc.
sanctis c. 6. makes him to have been buried in the Valley of Iosaphat. The
story of his blindness and receiving sight upon his taking Jesus in his Arms,
is rejected by Baronius as a Figment. And that deserves as little credit which
Eutychius and Almakinus relate, ap. Hottinger. Thesaur. p. 309. that he was one
of the seventy Interpreters, and lived three hundred and fifty years. Some (as
S. Chrysostom. and Oecumen. do inform us) took the Simeon mentioned, Act. 15. 14.
to be this Simeon, but by a great mistake.

Anna. S. Luc. 2. 36, 37, 38. It is doubted whether she was a Widow about
eighty four years, or only lived so many years in all, S. Ambrose inclined to
the former, Euthymius to the latter. Titus Bostr. fancies that she said, This
is the Worlds Redeemer, this Mankinds Savior, etc.

The Eastern Wisemen or Magi. S. Matthew. 2.1, etc. There is no certainty either
as to the time when, or the Country from whence they came. Some fetch them from
Arabia, others from Persia, from Chaldaea others; whom some would reconcile by
saying, that Chaldaea and Persia are sometimes comprehended under the name of
Arabia; but whether this will satisfy, I know not. As to the time, some say
that they came soon after our Saviors birth, others say that it was a year or
two after. The ancients do affirm more unanimously that they were Kings, yet it
is likely that they were not mighty Monarchs or potent Kings, but Reguli or
Toparchae, Rulers of lesser Cities or Territories, subordinate to the chief
Ruler of the Country; lecti proceres, as they are styled by Iuvencus, l. 1. It
is no less unanimously affirmed, that Balaam's Prophecy of a Star that should
arise out of Jacob, lead them to the understanding of the Star, that lead them
to Christ, Origin l. 1. contr. Celsum, and Hom. 13. in Number. S. Basil. in
sanctam Christi nativit. S. Chrysostom. tom. 7. p. 402. S. Hieron. and
Theophylact; see the Author oper. imperf. and Greg. Abulpharaius. Yea some ap.
S. Ambros. in S. Luc. 2. and ap. Theophylact report, that they were of the
Posterity of Balaam, (see also Origin hom. 13. in Number.) and S. Hieron. says,
that they were his Disciples and Successors; others have thought that they were
the remains of the School of Daniel. It was generally held by the Ancients,
that they practiced unlawful Arts, S. Justin Martyr contr. Tryph. Origin l. 1.
contr. Celsum. Tertul. de Idololat. c. 9. S. Basil ubi supra, S. Hilary, S.
Ambros. in S. Luc. 2. S. August. ser. 2. de Epiphan. Nicetas in caten. gr. in
S. Matthew. tom. 2. Chrysol. ser. 156. and to them we may add Theophylact,
whereas I have as yet found none of the contrary opinion, but the Author oper.
imperf. Some later writers are of opinion that the Star went before them only
from Jerusalem to Bethlehem, but S. Basil ubi supra, S. Chrysostom. S. Greg.
Nazianzen. orat. 4. Chrysologus ser. 156. Nicetas ubi supra, and Euthymius
thought that the Star was also their guide from the East to Palestine. S.
Chrysostom. and Theophylact conceived, that the Star descended into the lower
part of the Air, that it might point out the House where the Child was; yet S.
Cyril. in caten. gr. denies this, but gives us not the reason of his denial.
Author oper. imperf. gives us a relation of a Writing under the name of Seth,
that foretold of a Stars appearing, etc. but he confesses that it is uncertain.

The Infants of Bethlehem. S. Matthew. 2. 16. They suffered for Christ before he
suffered for them ( testimonium Christi sanguine litaverunt. Tertul. contr.
Valentin. c. 2.) and therefore are by the Ancients reputed and styled Martyrs;
see S. Irenaeus l. 3. c. 18. Origin hom. 3. in diversos, S. Cyprian. plebi
Thibari consistent. S. Hilary, S. August. epist. 28. Fulgent. de Epiphan. Some
say that the Soldiers gave order that all the Children of such an age, should
be brought into one place, and this being done (the poor Parents suspecting
nothing) they executed Herod's inhumane pleasure upon them. Comestor says, that
the greatest part of them was buried three Miles from Bethlehem, toward the
South. Greg. Abulpharaius relates, that Autognius a Philosopher, gave notice to
Augustus of the Magi's coming so far to worship a Child newly born, and that
Augustus sent to Herod to be informed more fully, who writ back what discourse
he had with the Magi, and the Massacre of the Infants. The number of which was
certainly very great, but the AEthiop. Liturgy and Greek Calendar, speaking of
fourteen thousand swell it too much, yet are very modest in Comparison of
others.

The Apostles. There was an ancient Tradition that our Lord commanded them not
to depart from Jerusalem till the end of twelve years, Eusebius. l. 5. c. 18.
Accordingly S. Chrysostom. hom. 69. in S. Matthew. says, that they remained a long
time in Judea before they went to other Nations. Before their departure they
agreed on a summary of the Christian Faith, which should be the Rule and
Groundwork of their future Preaching, Ruffin. in Symbol. Apost. We are told by
Socrates l. 1. c. 19. that they divided the Provinces by Lot, but this seems
not to be very consistent with that which S. Chrysostom. and Oecumen. in Act.
say, that they did not use Lots after the Holy Ghosts descent upon them.
Theodoret, S. August. and Euthymius in Psal^ 67. say, that all the Apostles
sprung from the Tribes of Judah, Zabulon, and Naphthali. Tertul. de baptist. c.
12. and Euthymius in Act. 1. 5. thought that they did receive John's Baptism,
but S. August. Epist. 108. leaves it doubtful, whether they received his or
Christ's; though he thinks it more probable that they received Christ's; yet
methinks we should not doubt but that the two Disciples of the Baptist,
mentioned S. Ioh. 1. 35. were baptized with his Baptism. We read in a certain
Book, this saying ascribed to the Apostles, Blessed is he that fasts that he
may feast the Poor. See the rest in Dr. Cave's Introduction.

S. Peter. Theophylact is positive that he was the Baptist's Disciple, as well
as his Brother S. Andrew; whereas he is called Simon Barjona, some Copies
instead of (...) have (...) or (...) or (...), the Vulg. in S. Ioh. 21.
Ioannis. Nonnus (...), and so some (says S. Hieron. in S. Matthew. 16.) thought
Iona to be writ corruptly for Iohanna; but the Oriental Versions accord with
the usual reading. There is some question when the name of Cephas or Peter was
given him, whether when Jesus said, Thou shall be called Cephas, S. Ioh. 1. (as
S. August. de consens. Evang. l. 2. c. 17. and 53. l. 4. c. 3.) or when he
ordained him an Apostle S. Mar. 3. (as S. Cyril. Alex.) or finally, when he
said, Thou art Peter, S. Matthew. 16. Lyra in S. Matthew. 27. reports out of
Itinerarium Clementis, that his Custom was to continue in Prayer from the first
Cock-crowing, weeping for his Lord and Master.

S. Andrew. Who that other Disciple of the Baptist was, that left him together
with S. Andrew (...) follow Jesus, we can only conjecture; some think that he
was some obscure Disciple, others that he was the Evangelist himself, viz. S.
John, who after this manner conceals his Name; others that he was S. Philip;
Epiphan. Haer. 51. that he was either S. Bhilip, or S. John, or his Brother S.
James. S. Chrysostom. Theophylact, Theodor. Mopsuest. in caten. gr. in Joan. and
Euthym. make mention of the two first Opinions. See S. Cyril. Alex.

S. James the Great. Whether he was surnamed the Great for his stature, or for
his age, being elder than the other S. James, or for that he was a Disciple
before the other, or because he was the first Martyr of the Apostles, or for
the peculiar honor vouchsafed him, in being admitted to more intimate
familiarity with Christ, I do not take upon me to determine. In the Jewish
writings there is frequent mention of R. Jacob the Son of (...), but I cannot
easily be persuaded that he was the same with our Apostle: Some say, that Saffa
and Saffra a City three Miles distant from Nazareth was the Birthplace of S.
James and S. John, but Theophylact in S. Matthew. 11. 21. says, that they were of
Bethsaida. So Kirstenius's Arab. MS. says of S. John, that he was of the City
Be^hsaida, and the Tribe of Zabulon. And therefore it seems to be a mistake in
the Compendium of S. Matthew's Life in Caten. gr. tom. 2. when it says, that
they were of the Tribe of Benjamin, they had both of them an Inheritance left
by their Father; so Nicephor. l. 2. c. 3. he is said to have converted Philetus
and Hermogenes who had been famed Magicians, and afterward erred again from
the Truth; but Baronius An. 44. Number. 2. reckons this, inter eaquae incerto
autore scripta feruntur. S. August. in Gal. 2. Eusebius. Emissenus, and the
interlin. Gloss. are alleged, as saying that this S. James was the first
Bishop of Jerusalem, and S. Ambros. in S. ^uc. 9. says of him, Primus solium
sacerdotale conscendit. Our Savior surnamed him and his Brother, Boanerges,
Sons of Thunder, as it is interpreted. S. Hieron. in Isa. 62. and and Dan. 1.
and Philemon v. 1. also de nomin. Hebr. will have Boanerges to be corrupted for
Benereem ((...)) which has exactly that signification; but Benereem not being
found either in the Oriental Versions, or in any Copy Greek or Latin that I
have seen, it is best to adhere to the usual reading Boanerges, i. e. (...) or
(...) the Sir. and Pers. have (...), all which may have the same signification,
viz. Sons of Commotion, or Concussion. The Targum, in Psalm. 81. 8. ins^ead of
Thunder, reads, The secret place of the House of my Majesty, and so perhaps
Sons of Thunder, are no other than Ambassadors of the Divine Majesty.
Theophylact in S. Mar. 9. 2. calls S. James, Theologum vocalissimum, as he does
S. John in praefat. ad S. Joan. perhaps he herein alludes to the Name
Boanerges. Some tell us that as he was lead to Execution he cured Paralytick,
and call the place where he suffered, Forum rerum venalium.

S. John. S. Hieron. contr. Iovin. l. 1. calls him an Apostle, and Evangelist,
a Prophet, and a Virgin. Polycrates ap. Eusebius. l. 5. c. 24. adds that he was a
Martyr and Doctor; yea a Priest ( Pontifex ejus, as S. Hieron. de vir. illustr.
translates it, a Priest of Christ) and wore the Petalum^ S. August. in S. Ioh.
18. 15. would not have us to affirm rashly who the Disciple was, that is said
there to have followed Jesus with S. Peter into the High Priests Palace, but
inclines to think, as diverse of the Ancients do, that it was S. John.
Nicephorus l. 1. c. 28. and l. 2. c. 3. says, that in his House Christ eat his
last Passover, and in it instituted the Sacrament of the Supper; but l. 1. c.
28. he delivers it only with an Vt aiunt, and S. Chrysostom. and Theophylact are
against it, for they were of opinion, that none of the Apostles had an House in
Jerusalem, otherwise they would have invited their Master to eat the Passover
with them, and that the Master of the House where it was eaten, was an unknown
Person; see them in S. Matthew, 26.17. see also S. Luc. 22. 8, etc. Aretas in
Rev. 7. 4. affirms that S. John^ went not from Jerusalem to Ephesus, till after
the Blessed Virgins Death. Some say that he was of the age of thirty one years
when he stood by the Cross of Jesus.

S. Philip. See above in S. Andrew. Clemens Alex. Strom. l. 3. says, that he
was the Disciple mentioned, S. Matthew. 8. 21, 22.

S. Bartholomew. Dionysius de mystica Theolog. c. 1. alleges this sentence of
his, (...), see Maximus and Pachymares.

S. Matthew. There is some question whether Levi mentioned, S. Mar. 2. 14. S.
Luc. 5. 27, 28. was the same with S. Matthew. Origin l. 1. contr. Celsum, and
Heracleon ap. Clement. Alex. say, that he was not; yet the same Origin Praefat.
in Epist. ad Roman. S. Hieron. in S. Matthew. 9. and de vir. illustr. S. August.
de consens. Evang. l. 2. c. 26. S. Chrysostom. ap. Aquin. in S. Mar. Theophylact
in S. Mar. Constitut. l. 8. c. 22. say that he was. In Sanhedr. fol. 43. ^.
five Disciples of Jesus are named, and the first is called (...). The
Compendium of his Life, in caten. gr. tom. 2. makes him to have been of the
Tribe of Benjamin, but Kirstenius's Arab. MS. says, that he was of the Tribe of
Issachar; perhaps he was of neither, for the same MS. affirms, that he was of
the City Nazareth, which was in the Tribe of Zabulon. In Euthym. in Psalm. 67.
he is said to have lived at Capernaum, others suppose that he dwelt at
Tiberias. The foresaid MS. adds, that he was buried in Arthagena Caesareae;
whether this Arthagena be some place belonging to Caesarea, or within the
Territories of it, to which later times have given that Name, I have not learnt.

S. Thomas. Theodoret. Quaest. 16. in Number. Nonnus calls him (...), as making
Thomas and Didymus two distinct Names, which Sedulius l. 4. also does; but some
will not allow this, saying, that it is the same Name, only expressed in
different Languages; but it may seem by Eusebius. l. 1. c. ult. that he had also
the name of Jude, and then he was certainly (...), had two names at least. S.
Chrysostom. in S. Ioh. 11. admires the change wrought in this Apostle, who was so
timorous before Christ's Ascension, and yet so constant and courageous in
Preaching the Gospel afterward; he judged those words of his v. 16. to be an
Argument of his timidity, viz. Let us go and dye with him. He feared that, if
they went so near Jerusalem as Bethany was, the Jews would put them to Death;
so S. Chrysostom. and to the same purpose Theophylact, Theodor. Mopsuest. and
Euthymius. Yet the same S. Chrysostom. acquaints us that there were some who
said, that Thomas desired to Die. So Origin and Ammonius in caten. gr. in S.
Ioh. and Iuvencus l. 4. say, that in those words he exhorted the other Apostles
to despise the Jews lying in wait, and to lay down their Lives for Christ. See
Nonnus.

S. James of Alpheus, i. e. the Son of Alpheus, as not only we but also all the
Oriental Versions do Translate it, S. Mar. 3. 18. I shall not engage in the
endless disputes about this Apostle, but with Mr. Thorndike and others, suppose
him to be the same with him who is called James the less, S. Mar. 15. 40. and
the Lords Brother, Gal. 1. 19. or the Brother of Jesus, who was called Christ,
Joseph. Ant. l. 20. c. 8. and who was Bishop of Jerusalem. It is the received
opinion, that he was called less or little, with respect to S. James the Son of
Zebedee; see S. Hieron. contr. Helvid, etc. though some say that he was called
so in respect of another James who was his Uncle, i. e. his Father Alpheus's
Brother, and S. Iude's Father. He was a Publican (says S. Chrysostom. hom. 32.
in S. Mat.) and dwelt at Capernaum, as says Euthym. in Psalm. 67. S. Hieron. in
Psalm. 37. Elias Cretensis and Theophylact thought that he was the young Man
mentioned, S. Mar. 14. 51. and Epiphan. Haer. 78. favors this. But if he lived
to the age of ninety six years in all, and yet but about twenty four years
after Christ's Passion, (both which Epiphanius affirms) he could not be a young
Man then, being seventy years old or more; but perhaps the Transcribers mistook
the Numeral Letters in Epiphanius, and so perhaps S. James did neither live so
much as ninety six years in all, nor so little as but about twenty four years
after Christ's Death; for Eusebius. in Chron. and S. Hieron. de vir. illustr. say,
that he lived thirty years after it. Some say that he was so like Christ both
in countenance and carriage, that Judas thought it necessary to give those that
came to apprehend Jesus, a Sign; least they should mistake the one for the
other. Clemens Alex. ap. Eusebius. l. 2. c. 1. says, that the Lord after his
Resurrection endued with Knowledge James the Just, and John, and Peter^ which
they imparted to the rest of the Apostles, and they to the Seventy. By
Knowledge I suppose is meant a greater measure of it, by reason of which those
three were looked upon to be Pillars. We are told by S. Chrysostom. hom. 5. in S.
Matthew. that he was so neglective of his Body, that all the parts of it were in
a manner dead; and that his very forehead had contracted a Callousness by his
frequent throwing himself on the floor, when he prayed. He was called Oblias;
and Hegesippus ap. Eusebius. l. 2. c. 23. and Epiphan. haer. 70. interpret it to
signify a Wall or Munition, perhaps from (...) murus, vallum, munimentum, or
from (...) which is the same with (...) munitio, says Kemchi. Some later
Writers report, that seven Years after Christ's Ascension, preaching to the
people, he was thrown down from the Stairs on which he stood, and was so hurt
thereby that he halted ever after. His Monument remained not far from the
Temple till the time of Hegesippus, who relates this; yet S. Hieron. de vir.
illustr. tells of some who said that he was buried in Mount Olivet, but adds
that they erred therein.

S. Simon. I shall not determine either why he is called the Cananite (whether
from Cana as it signifies Zeal, or as it was the name of a Town, S. Hieron.
seems not to reject either Opinion) or why he is named the Zelot, whether from
his flagrant Zeal to propagate the Gospel, as Nicephor. l. 2.40. or for that he
had been of the Sect of the Zelots, of which we have frequent mention in
Josephus. Origin. l. 2. contr. Celsum, calls the two Disciples to whom Jesus
appeared in the Way to Emmaus, Simon and Cleopas; but that he intended this
Simon, I cannot say. Perhaps he intended Simon Peter, who is supposed by some
to have been Cleopas's Associate.

S. Jude. al. Thaddaeus and Lebbeus, (...) is named the last of the five
Disciples of Jesus mentioned by the Talmud, Sanhedr. 43. 1. S. Hie^on. contr.
Helvid. as also in Gal. 4. makes this Apostle to be surnamed Zelotes, and
Sophronius says that Simon the Cananite was also called Jude; see also the
short account of the Apostles before Oecumen. in Act. Apost. S. Jude was an
Husbandman say the Constitut. l. 2. c. ult. in the Title of the Chapter. In S.
Luc. 6. 16. and Act. 1. 13. he is called Judas of James, and the Sir. and Arab.
render it, the Son of James in both places, as also the AEthiop. does, Act. 1.
13. but in the Epistle of S. Jude, v. 1. he is both in the Greek, and in the
Oriental Versions, expressly styled the Brother of James. Since then S. James
was the Son of Alpheus, it is very probable that S. Jude was so also; and what
if Levi the Son of Alpheus mentioned S. Mar. 2. 14. was the same with this
Thaddaeus? Theodoret. quaest. 16. in Number. says expressly, (...). And Grotius
conjectures from Origin l. 1. contr. Celsum, that some Copies in his time,
read, (...) or (...) instead of (...), S. Mar. 3. 14. as he does also that
Clemens Alex. calls him Levi, when he gives us the names of four Apostles from
Heracleon, thus, Matthew, Philip, Thomas, Levi. So that if it was not the
received opinion that Levi was the same with S. Matthew, and that made probable
by many concurrent circumstances, I should be apt to think that he was this
Thaddaeus.

S. Matthias. He taught that the flesh is to be overcome and tamed, in no wise
indulged and yielded to; and the Soul to be fed and nourished with Faith, and
saving Knowledge; see Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 3. Eusebius. l. 3. c. 29. The same
Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 7. alleges this sentence of his, If the Neighbor of a
chosen Person sin, the chosen Person has sinned; for if he had demeaned
himself as he ought, his Neighbor would have reverenced his Life so, that he
would not have sinned. And Strom. l. 2. he alleges this, That if we admire
things, it will be a step to further Knowledge. Also Strom. l. 4. he seems to
make Matthias the same with Zaccheus. Some think that he was very skilful and
knowing in the Law. There are various Opinions of the place and manner of his
Death. The Martyrol. in Febr. 24. says, that he suffered in Judea.

S. Paul. al. Saul. Some have thought that he was one of them of Cilicia, that
disputed with S. Stephen. Perhaps he calls himself an Abortive, because he was
taken in over and above the number of twelve Apostles; just as the Vulgar sort
at Rome, called the supernumerary Senators Abortives, see Sueton. in Octavio c.
35. In what year of Christ, or of his own Age, he was converted, and how many
years he lived after his Conversion, there is no Constat; that which Fasciculus
^emporum says, that he was about twenty six years of age at his Conversion,
seems very probable; and yet he is called a young Man, Act. 7. just as Polybius
l. 2. calls Annibal a young Man; and yet he was of the age of twenty six years
then or very near it. So Ptolomaeus is called immaturus juvenis in Justin, l.
24. and (...) by Diodor. Sicul. in excerptis Constantin. Porphyrogen. when
Philadelphus his younger Brother had reigned in Egypt some years. Yea when
Cicero in Cat. says, Qui citius Adolescen^iae senectus quam pueritiae
Adolescentia obrepit, does he not seem to comprehend all the time between
Childhood and old Age, under Adolescentia? and Phavorinus in voc^ (...) says,
that from twenty three years to thirty four or forty one, a Man may be called
so.

Judas Iscariot. S. Matthew. 10.4. 26. 14, 25,47. 27. 3. S. Mar 3.19. 14. 10,43.
S. Luc. 6. 16. 22. 3,47. S. Ioh. 12. 4, 5, 6. 18. 3, 5. Act. 1. 16, 25. The
Sir. Arab. and Pers. read, S. Ioh. 6.71. and 13. 2, 26. Judas the Son of Simon,
as we also do (though in the Greek there is no more than Judas of Simon) so
that it seems one Simon was the Father of this unhappy Son. Caninius de locis
No. Testam. c. 13. tells of some that said, that Judas was Natione Gallus, but
it is probable that they said this only by way of abuse to that Nation. We do
not oblige any Man to believe, that before his being called to be an Apostle,
he was guilty of such prodigious crimes as some impute to him; he wrought
Miracles (S. Ambros. in Romans 9. S. Hieron. l. 2. contr. Iovinian. Anastas.
Nicen. qu. 23. Isidor. Pelus. epist. l. 3. ep. 44. Victor Antioch. in S. Mar.
9.38. and Theophylact in S. Mat. 26. and S. Mar. 3.) cast out Devils, ( S.
Cyril Hieros. Catech. 7. and Leo) healed the sick, ( Leo ibid.) and yet S.
Hieron. in S. Matthew. 26.48. tells us, that he ascribed our Savior's Miracles
to the Power of Magic. The Opinions of Modern Writers about his Death are
various, but the Ancients (not one of them that I have yet met with dissenting)
say that he hanged himself; and Munster's Heb. the Sir. Pers. as also the Goth.
and Saxon do all favor this. Iuvencus l. 4. either using a poetical License,
or following some ancient Tradition, says, that he hanged himself on a
fig tree. Origin seems to have thought that he dyed before Christ's Death, and
S. August. in Psalm. 108. is of that Opinion; yet in quaest. No. and Vet.
Testam. l. 2. qu. 47. he is doubtful of it, and unwilling to determine what day
or what time he dyed. Also in Psalm. 108. he seems to say that his Progeny was
wholly extinct within one Generation. S. Chrysostom. S. Cyril Alex. Leontius,
Theodorus, Heracleot. Theophylact and Euthym. thought that Judas did not know
Jesus then, when he asked, Whom seek ye? S. Joh. 18. 4. and S. Chrysostom. adds,
that he fell to the Earth together with those that came to apprehend Jesus; who
if he had pleased could have opposed more than twelve Legions of Angels to
them, every one of which could have done more than all Caesar's Legions, though
he proudly boasted of them, that vel Coelum diruere possent; see A. Hirt. de
bell. Hispan. in fin. Thirty Shekels or pieces of Silver was the price of a
Servant, Exodus 21.32 and for this Judas sold his Master. Some say that he was
buried in the Field, which was purchased with that Money.

The LXX. or LXXII. Disciples. S. Luc. 10. 1, etc. Some Copies and ancient
Writers say, that they were LXX. others that they were LXXII. accordingly the
Versions differ, the Sir. Arab. and Ethiop. have LXX. the Pers. LXXII. the
Saxon has LXXII. and the Goth. but LXX. Whatsoever their precise number was,
Eusebius. l. 1. c. 12. tells us, that he could no where find a Catalogue of them.
Yet both he and Epiphan. name Matthias abovementioned, Barnabas and Iustus as
being of that number. Eusebius adds Sosthenes, Thaddaeus and Cephas, as
Epiphanius does the VII. Deacons, Act. 6. S. Mark, S. Luke, Apelles, Rufus and
Niger; see Epiphan. Haer. 20. and in Anacephal. The Ancients (says Grotius) do
probably think that Cleopas and his Companion mentioned S. Luc. 24. 13, etc.
were of the LXX. and of Andronicus and Iunias, or Iulias, Romans 16.7. Origin
says, that perhaps they were of that Number. The short account of the Apostles
and some others before Oecumen. in Act. mentions Linus as one of them, as the
Martyrol. in Feb. 22. does Aristion, alleging Papias, but Papias only says,
that he was a Disciple of the Lord. There are those that name others. Dorotheus
has given us a Catalogue of them, but of no great Authority; yea, concerning
some of those who are mentioned by Eusebius. and Epiphan. there is some question
made, whether they were of the LXX. or no. Eusebius names Thaddaeus and Cephas,
but of Thaddaeus says only, (...). There are that say, that he was one of the
LXX; and whereas many fansy, that the Thaddaeus that was sent to Agabrus, was
of the LXX, S. Hieron. in S. Matthew. 10. says expressly, that Thaddaeus the
Apostle (as Ecclesiastical History delivered) was sent to him. As to Cephas,
there is only the Authority of Clemens Alex. (unless you add Dorotheus) and the
Cephas that he speaks of, is he whom S. Paul resisted at Antioch; for whereas
most Greek Copies, and the Arab. read Peter, Gal. 2. 11. he with some Greek
Copies, and the Sir. and AEthiop. reads Cephas. But the Person whom S. Paul
resisted (whether you call him Peter or Cephas) is understood to be S. Peter
the Apostle by Tertull. praescript. adv. Haer. c. 23. and l. 4. contr. Marcion.
c. 3. S. Cyprian epist. ad Quintum vel Quintinum, S. Ambros. S. Chrysostom.
Primas. Oecumen. and Theophylact. There were sharp debates between S. Hieron.
and S. August. about the Exposition of Gal. 2. 11. but they in this agreed that
S. Peter was the Person there spoken off: Yea S. Hieron. was ignorant of any
Cephas beside S. Peter, and in Gal. 2. sets himself to refute those, that held
that S. Paul speaks there of another Cephas. Epiphanius names S. Mark and S.
Luke as being of the LXX, and with him agree Origin in Dialog. de recta fide,
Kirstenius's Arab. MS. Nicephor. l. 2. c. 43. and Euthym. but the last of these
bears Testimony only as to S. Luke, our Church also may seem by the Gospel
appointed for S. Luke's Day, to have been of the Opinion, that he was of the
number of the LXX; but S. August. de consens. Evang. l. 1. c. 1,2. seems to be
of Opinion that they were not of that number, and Papias ap. Eusebius. l. 3. c.
ult. says of S. Mark that he was not an hearer and follower of Christ, as S.
Hieron. in proem. in S. Matthew. asserts that he did not see him; and in Isa. 65.
he says that S. Paul begat S. Luke, and S. Peter S. Mark. So that it may seem
doubtful whether these two were of the number of the LXX or ^0.

Our Lord's Brethren. S. Matthew. 12. 46,47. S. Mar. 3. 31, 32. 6. 3. S. Luc. 8.
19,20. S. Ioh. 2. 12. 7. 3, etc. Act. 1. 14. 1 Cor. 9. 5. Gal. 1.19. They were
his Brethren, either as being the Sons of Joseph, (his reputed Father) viz. by
a former Wife, which he had before our Lords Mother was espoused to him; or as
being the Sons of our Lords Aunt, i.e. his Mothers Sister, and so his Cousins,
for in the Scripture Cousins are frequently styled Brethren; see S. August.
quaest. Evang. l 3. c. 16. There are four so called S. Matthew. 13. 55. of two of
which, viz. Simon and Joseph we know nothing, (says Origin) but the other James
and Jude we believe to have been of the twelve Apostles. It is true the
Brethren of the Lord are mentioned as distinct from the Apostles, Act. 1. and 1
Cor. 9. but we cannot conclude thence, that none of them were Apostles, but
only that some of them were not. The (...), S. Mar. 3.21. were perhaps his
Brethren, (see Theophylact) or his Friends, or Kinsmen as we render it; see the
Oriental Versions and Euthym. The Comment. on S. Mar. ap. S. Hieron.
understands by them his Disciples, and says, that they thought their Master to
be beside himself. But it is not very probable that his Brethren, or Friends,
or Kinsmen had that Opinion of him; and S. Mark's words are (...), where (...)
may refer not to (...), but to the Multitude of the Jews then present. They, i.
e. the Multitude said, He is beside himself, some make the sense to be, that
those that were with Christ in the House, went out to restrain the Multitude,
who thronged so that they said of them, ( viz. of the Multitude) that they were
Mad. According to these (...) and (...) refer not to Christ, but to (...), v.
20. They that please may consult the MS. Cant.

Our Lords Sisters. S. Matthew. 13. 55. S. Mar. 6. 3. Epiphan. Haer. 78. and
Theophylact in S. Matthew. 13. say that they were two, and that their Names were
Mary and Salome, not Esther and Thamar, as in Nicephor. l. 2. c. 3.

Nathanael. S. Ioh. 1. 45, etc. 21. 2. Some suppose that he was the same with
S. Matthias, because the two Names Nathanael and Matthias agree in
signification; others supposing that Simon the Cananite was of Cana in Galilee,
as Nathanael was, have conjectured that Nathanael was the same with that Simon;
see the Menalog. 6. Id. Maii. some fansy that he was the same with the Apostle
S. Bartholomew, and say that many both anciently and of later times were of
this Opinion; yet after all they produce none more ancient than Rupertus
Tuitiensis, who indeed mentions this Opinion saying fortasis, Perhaps he was
the same with S. Bartholomew; but he mentions also another Opinion, viz. S.
Augustine's, who both in Psalm. 65. and in S. Ioh. is positive that Nathanael
was none of the twelve Apostles. There want not some who have supposed, that he
was the same with S. Stephen, for S. Stephen saw Heaven opened, which Jesus
told Nathanael that he should do, besides S. Stephen was skilful in the Law,
and S. August. ibid. says the same of Nathanael, that he was learned and
skilled in the Law, and the like Encomium is bestowed on him by S. Cyril. Alex.
S. Chrysostom. and Theophylact, that he was very studious in the Scripture^, and
a diligent searcher after the Truth. Epiphanius Haer. 23. says, that he was
the other Disciple that was with Cleopas, when Jesus appeared to them, S. Luc.
24. some have thought that he was Brother to S. Philip. Origin and S. August.
observe that Nathanael's words, S. Ioh. 1. 46. may be read either by way of
Interrogation, Can any good come out of Nazareth? or by way of Affirmation,
Some good may come out of Nazareth, S. Chrysostom. and S. Cyril Alex. incline to
the former, S. August. to the latter.

The Governor of the Feast. S. Ioh. 2. 8,9, 10. Some will have the
Architriclinus to have been no more than the chief guest at the Feast, but S.
Chrysostom. Theophylact and Severus Antioch. in caten. gr. in S. Ioh. say, that
he was the Moderator of it, presided in, managed, and ordered it^
Ecclesiasticus c. 32. v. 1,2. gives a lively description of him, and how he was
to demean himself; for our Translators, and other judicious Persons, do by
Governor there, understand the Ruler of the Feast, and the Greek Vulg. Sir.
and Arab. do all favor this Interpretation, though some have been chastised
severely for it. S. Chrysostom. and Theophylact say, that this Office was
committed to those that were themselves sober and temperate. Gaudentius
Brixian. tract. 9. affirms, that among the Jews one of the Priests used to be
chosen in Marriages, for this Office. They that please may see how Athenaeus,
l. 10. describes the Office of the (...), who were also called (...), and how
Plutarch Symposiac. l. 1. c. 4. describes the Office of the (...).

They that sold Oxen, Sheep, and Doves. S. Matthew. 21. 12, 13. S. Mar. 11. 15,
17. S. Ioh. 2. 14,15,16. S. Hieron. in S. Matthew. S. August. in S. Ioh. and
Theophylact in S. Mar. say, that these Oxen, etc. were sold to such as came to
sacrifice, and this saved them that came from far, the labor of bringing their
Bullocks, Lambs, etc. along with them. By sellers of Doves, some understand
those that taught or trained them up to fly with or carry Letters; see Seldom
de Diis Sir. Synt. 2. c. 3. and de jur. not. l. 4. c. 5. these were so infamous
among the Jews, that they ^were not admitted to give Testimony in any cause,
Misn. in Sanhedr. c. 3.. 3. Of the fifteen Officers of the Temple mentioned in
Misn. in Shekal, c. 5.. 1. (...) the chief Overseer of the Birds or Turtles was
one, and some may conjecture, that it was this Officer or his Underofficers
and Servants, that sold Doves. S. Hieron. says, that the Priests themselves
sold Oxen, Sheep, and Doves; now if the Priests or any Officers of the Temple,
to whom it appertained to preserve it from Profanation, did themselves
profane it, our Savior had still more cause to express so great indignation.
Another of the Officers mentioned in Shekal was (...) the Officer of the Whip,
who whipped or scourged those Priests or Levites that were asleep when they
should have watched in the Temple, (see the Gloss) and our Savior turned now
Officer of the Whip, and scourged the profaners of the Temple out of it.
Origin. in S. Ioh. says, that this Action demonstrated a greater power, than
the Miracles of turning Water into Wine, giving sight to the Blind, or raising
the Dead, and Hom. 15. in S. Matthew. he hints, that if any Prince or armed Power
had attempted to do this, they would have met with more resistance than our
Lord did. Likewise S. Hieron. extols this above any of the Miracles wrought by
Christ, adding that igneum quoddam and sydereum did shine forth in his
countenance, when he did this, see Anastas. Sinait. de rectis fid. dogmat. l.
3. Yet some will needs refer all this to the almost uncontrollable Power which
the Zelots had, the rather because the Disciples applied those words of the
Psalmist to this very Fact of his, The Zeal of thine House has eaten me up.
Christ drove them out twice, viz. at two Passovers, his First and Last.

Money Changers. S. Matthew. 21. S. Mar. 11. S. Ioh. 2. The Greek word is (...),
by whom S. Hieron. understands those, who, if Persons came that had not
wherewith to buy an Offering, let them have Money for that end, and received of
them the value, or more in fruits or such things as they had. Colyba (says he)
dicuntur tragemata vel vilia munuscula, viz. frixi ciceris uvarumque passarum,
and poma. So say Hesychius and Phavorinus, (...), and Suidas and Phavorinus,
(...); see Aristophan. in Pluto, and in Iren. (...) is also a kind of small
Money says Theophylact, as Hesychius says, and Phavorinus from him, that (...)
is a kind of Money, and Pollux interprets it the exchange of Money. In this
sense we conceive it to be used by Cicero in Verr. l. 3. and by Sueton. in
Octavio c. 4. S. John uses also another word for Money Changers, viz. (...),
from (...) small pieces of Money, so Hesychius (...) as Suidas followed by
Phavorinus (...). In Isidore's Glossary, we read Collybum (...) probably for
(...). From all this we may Collect, that these Money Changers did exchange
greater Money which was brought to them, for less; and perhaps they did also
furnish the poorer sort with Money, and received the value of it with
advantage, in Fruits or the like. In Misn. in Shekal, c. 1.. 3,6,7. we are
told, that the Collectors of the half Shekel, did begin to sit in the Temple,
on the twenty fifth of the Month Adar, and when any one brought a Shekel, they
gave him two half Shekels for it. For this trouble they expected some profit,
which they called (...), a word near in sound to (...).

Many that believed in Christ. S. Ioh. 2.23,24. 7. 31,40,41. 8.30, 31,32. 10.
42. 11. 45. 12. 11.

Nicodemus. S. Ioh. c. 3. and c. 7. v. 50,51,52. and c. 19. v. 39,40, 42. There
is frequent mention of one (...) in the Jewish Writings, as in Taanith fol. 19.
2. and 20. 1. Cithuboth fol. 66. 2. Gittin fol. 56. 1. Pirke R. Eliezer c. 2.
R. D. Ganz Millen. 4. An. 757. in Taanith fol. 20. 1. it is said that his
proper name was Bonai, and in Sanhedr. fol. 43. 1. Bonai is reckoned among the
Disciples of Jesus; and this might incline us to think that he was our
Nicodemus, if other circumstances did not persuade the contrary. What ground
some have to affirm as certain, that the Colloquy between Jesus and him, S.
Ioh. 3. was at the Feast of Pentecost, I know not; there is as little certainty
as to the place where they had that Conference, whether at Cana of Galilee, as
an Anonymous Writer in gr. caten in Ioh. in prooem. or at Bethany as Ammon. or
at Jerusalem which is the most general Opinion, and favored by the Sir. and
Pers. who read S. Ioh. 3. 1. thus, There was there one of the Pharisees, where
There surely refers to Jerusalem, S. Ioh. 2. 23. It may seem to make for the
first Opinion and against the two latter, that S. Ioh. 3. 22. it is said, that
after these things, Jesus came into the Land of Judea, viz. after this
discourse with Nicodemus; so that he may seem not to have been in the Land of
Judea, when Nicodemus came to him, and consequently not at Bethany or
Jerusalem; also Nonnus paraphraseth it thus, He left Galilee, and came into the
Land of Judea; but Theophylact and others think, that the Land or Country of
Judea, is there opposed to the Metropolis or Mother City of it, and so the
meaning is, that Jesus came from the City into the Country, from Jerusalem into
some other part of Judea. Some speak of the house of Nicodemus in Rama.
Chrysippus's History ap. Photium, Number. 171. says, that he was Gamaliel's
Cousin, and baptized by S. Peter, and S. John, and that the Jews hearing that
he was baptized, beat him so severely that (though he suffered it with much
Christian fortitude) he dyed shortly after. The Epistle de revelatione S.
Stephani, ascribed to Lucian, gives a different relation, That when the Jews
had deprived him of his Authority as Ruler, had anathematized and banished him
out of the City, Gamaliel received and nourished him till his Death, and then
interred him honorably by S. Stephen.

A Woman of Samaria and other Samaritans. S. Luc. 17. 15,16,18, 19. S. Ioh. c.
4. Act. c. 8. The Martyrologies in Mart. 20. and the Menology speak of Photina
a Samaritane (whom they suppose to be the Woman mentioned S. Ioh. 4.) and
Joseph and Victor her Sons, affirming that they were all Martyrs.

Galileans. S. Ioh. 4. 45.

A. N^bleman. S. Ioh. 4. 46, etc. The Greek Word is (...), and S. Chrysostom.
Theophylact, Leontius and Euthym. say, that he was called so, ^ither because he
was descended from Kings, or because he was dignified with a Principality. By
S. Hieron. in Isa. 65. (...) is rendered palatinus, one that belonged to the
Kings Court or Palace; the Sir. renders it, A Servant of the King, and Nonnus
makes him an Officer in the Kings Army. He was (as some have conjectured)
Herod's Steward, viz. that Chuza mentioned S. Luke 8.3. and so the AEthiop.
seems to render it, The Kings Steward, as if (...) was put for (...), as we
have (...), 3 Esdr. 6.68. He had then (as is most probable) some Office or
place of Dignity under the King, but whether under Herod or the Roman Emperor,
Origin will not determine. S. Chrysostom. Leontius and Euthym. tell of some, that
made the Centurion mentioned S. Matthew. 8. and S. Luc. 7. and this Nobleman the
same, but Chrysostom. sufficiently refutes their Opinion. Origin observes, that
it is not affirmed that he was a Jew, and S. Hieron. in Isa. 65. joining him
with the Centurion S. Matthew. 8. and the Woman of Caanan, S. Matthew. 15. seems to
have thought that he was not a Jew. Yet some will needs conclude from those
words ( Except ye see Signs, and Wonders ye will not believe) that he was a
Jew, for the Jews seek a Sign. It is ambiguous in the Greek, whether he lived
in Capernaum, or only his Son lay sick there, but S. Chrysostom. and Theophylact
say, that he himself was of or from Capernaum, and the Anonymous Writer in gr.
caten. in S. Ioh. in proaem. with the Sir. Arab. and AEthiop. does favor this,
though Leontius is of the other Opinion.

A Centurion at Capernaum. S. Matthew. 8. 50 etc. S. Luke 7. 1. etc. There has
been some Doubt whether the two Evangelists speak of the same Centurion, but it
is fully removed by S. Chrysostom. S. August. de cons. Evang. l. 2. c. 20.
Theophylact, etc. It is unanimously concluded by Origin hom. 5. in diverse. S.
Hieron. S. Chrysostom. S. Ambros. S. August. de verbis Dom. ser. 6. Opus imperf.
Theophylact, Eusebius. Emiss. or Eucherius Dom. 3. post Epiphan. that he was a
Gentile. And therefore when S. Hilary says, that he was not of the Gentiles,
but an Israelite; perhaps his meaning is, that he was an Israelite as to
Religion, though by Birth a Gentile, for there are that think that he was a
Proselyte to the Jewish Religion. Some say that he was a Centurion of the Iron
Legion, which quartered in Judea, as Dio l. 55. informs us; and if Dio had said
that it was quartered in Judea in Tiberius's time, there had been good ground
for this supposal, but h^ speaks it of the time when he writ his History, which
was many years after.

I^irus, his Daughter, the Minstrels, and Others, that were in the House. S.
Matthew. 9. 18, etc. S. Mar. 5. 22. and S. Luc. 8.41, etc. According to our
Translation, it is said of his Daughter, in S. Matthew. She is even now Dead, in
S. Mark only, She lies at the point of Death, as in S. Luc. She lay a Dying.
To reconcile them Euthym. supposes that Iairus said both, viz. thus, My
Daughter is at the point of Death, or by this time Dead. But perhaps S.
Matthew's (...) is no more than S. Mark's (...) as Hesichius, and so (...) may
be no more than (...). Iairus is thought to have been of Capernaum, and ruler
of the Synagogue there, the Ruler of the Synagogue is called (...), see Iomac.
7.. 1. his Office is described by the Gloss there. That the Jews hired
Minstrels at their Funerals appears by Joseph. de bell. Iud. 3. c. 30. where he
relates how they of Jerusalem mourned for him, supposing that he was Dead. See
also Shabbath c. 23.. 4. Cethuboth c. 4.. 4. Bava Metzia c. 6.. 1. also that
(...) sicut cantus tibiarum moerebit (Targum in Ier. 48. 36.) may refer to
this. As to the use of them among the Heathens, it was easy to abound in
Testimonies out of their Writers, and probably the Jews borrowed it from them.
Theophylact says, that Nuptial Pipes were used for Iairus's Daughter, because
she was unmarryed; but whence he had this I know not.

Persons possessed with Devils or unclean Spirits. S. Matthew. 4. 24. 8. 16,28.
9.32. 12. 22, etc. S. Mar. 1. 23,32,39. 5. 2, etc. S. Luc. 4. 33,41. 6.18.
7.21. 8.27, etc. Act. 5. 16. 8.7. There is mention of an Unclean Spirit, or a
Spirit of Uncleaness, in Sanhedr. fol. 65.2. which the Gloss interprets, (...),
A Devil that has his habitation among the Graves and Tombs. Buxtorf. in voc.
(...) observes that it sign^^ies not only a Legion, out also a single Person
commanding a Legion; and so perhaps the evil Spirit that said, My name is
Legion, was the Chief or Commander of all that multitude of Devils, with which
the Man was possessed. Of the Roman Legion, see fragmenta Varron.

Luna^icks. As the possessed with Devils, and these are joined together, S.
Matthew. 4. 24. so he that is called a Lunatic, S. Matthew. 17. 15. had a Devil v.
18. a Dumb and Deaf Spirit S. Mar. 9. 25. an Unclean Spirit S. Luc. 9. 42. S.
Hieron. in S. Matthew. 4. says, that they were not really Lunaticks, but the evil
Spirits observed certain seasons of the Moon, and vexed them then, that it
might be believed that the Moon was the cause of the Disease, and that this
disgrace of the Creature might reflect Blasphemy upon the Creator. In like
manner Origin and S. Chrysostom. in S. Matthew. 17. S. Basil in Psalm. 14. Iuvencus
l. 3. Nicetas in gr. ^aten. in S. Matthew. 4. and Theophylact. ibid. speak of the
evil Spirits vexing them at certain Seasons of the Moon; see Euthym. The Arab
in S. Matthew. 17. explains the Lunatic to be, He ^^at is vexed in ini^iis
pleniluniorum or lunationum. The Syr^ is more obscure (...), S. Matthew. 4.
(...), S. Matthew. 17. where some interpret (...) filius agrorum, others filius
tecti, some extra tecta degens, some filius aegrorum. Schindler reads (...),
i.e. (says he) filius vestium, Chemnitius (...), which he renders pythones
sylvestres. According to the Greek in S. Matthew. 17. 18. there is no more than
this, Jesus rebuked him, so that (as S. Hieron. observes) it may refer either
to the Lunatic or to the Devil, but if we consult S. Mark 9. 25. and S. Luke
9. 42. we shall incline, with our Translators, to refer it to the latter, as S.
Hilary also does, saying Increpato daemone, though Theophylact says that he
rebuked the Lunatic. But whom does he rebuke when he says, O fai^hless and
perverse generation! S. Matthew. 17. 17? whether his Disciples, as Origin and S.
Hilary, or the Lunaticks Father, and the faithless Jews, as S. Hieron. S.
Chysost. Victor Antioch. and Theophylact; or all of them, viz. his Disciples
(as being weak in the Faith) and the Jews too.

Persons afflicted with the Palsy. S. Matthew. 4. 24. 8.6. 9. 2. S. Mar. 2. 3.
S. Luc 5. 18. Act. 8. 7.

Lepers. S. Matthew. 8. 2. 11. 5. S. Mar. 2. 40. S. Luc. 5. 12. 7. 22. 17. 12.
Some gather from Levit. 13. 46. Number 5. 3. and 2 Kings 7. 3, 4, 10. that a Leper
might not come into any City, yet it is said S. Luke 5. that Christ was in a
certain City, when a Leper came to him and was healed. Did then the Lepers
earnest desire of Cure make him to transgress his bounds? or when S. Luke says
that he was full of Leprosy, was it his meaning that it covered all his skin
from head to foot, in which case the Priest was to pronounce him clean, Levit.
13. 12, 13. and so (though he was not perfectly cured) he might enter into the
City? or finally is it certain that a Leper was not to enter into any City? In
Misn. in Celim c. 1.. 7. we read that he was excluded from walled Cities, but
it appears not that this was such. In Misn. in Negaim, c. 13.. 12. we are told,
that he might come into their Synagogues, a distinct apartment being made for
him. Others say that he might not inhabit in their Cities, but he might enter
into and pass through them. Some speak of an Hospital of Lepers near Capernaum,
out of which they suppose this Leper to have come. The Village in which the ten
Lepers were healed, S. Luc. 17. is by some called Iemni.

Simon the Leper. S. Matthew. 26. 6. S. Mar. 14. 3. S. Ambros. tho^ght that he
was the same with the Simon mentioned S. Luc. 7. 40. but S. August. de consens.
Evang. l. 2. c. 70. and Euthym. inclined to think that he was not. S. Hieron.
S. Chrysostom. and Iuvencus l. 4. do all agree, that Christ had cleansed him from
his Leprosy, only Origin seems to suppose that at that time he stood in need
of being cleansed by him. Some ap. Theophylact affirm, that he was the Father
of Lazarus, and it is probable that he was related to him; but that which he
adds that some said, that it was in this Simon's House that Christ kept his
last Passover, is altogether improbable. Some write that he was afterward
called Iulianus.

Impotent and infirm ^ersons. S. Ioh. 5. 3. and S. Irenaeus l. 2. c. 39. S.
Chrysostom. S. Ambros. de Sacrament. l. 2. c. 2. Theophylact^ Leontius and
Euthym. do all call the Impotent Man, S. Ioh. 5. 5. a Paralytick. It seems to
me that it was at the Feast of Pentecost (says S. Chrysostom.) that the Impotent
Person was healed, and S. Cyril, Theophylact and Euthymius are of the same
Opinion; yet later Writers say, that it was at the Feast of Tabernacles, or
(for so some of them say) of the Passover. Haud dubium, etc. (says one) there
is no doubt but that it was at the Passover; and I grant that S. Irenaeus l. 2.
c. 39. is of that Opinion, but why are any so confident in a matter that admits
not of any certain determination. S. Chrysostom. believed that it was not with a
malevolous intent that this Person told, v. 15. that Jesus had made him whole,
but out of a sincere desire that he should have the Glory of the miraculous
Cure; see Euthym.

Persons Wit^ered and D^yed. S. Matthew. 12. 10. S. Mar. 3. 1. S. Luc. 6.6. S.
Ioh. 5. 3. S. Hieron. tells us, that the Man with the withered Hand, S. Matthew.
12. is in the Gospel which the Nazarens used, said to have been Caement^rius.

The P^lt or Lame. S. Matthew. 11. 5. 15^ 30. 21. 14. S. Luc. 7. 22. S. Ioh. 5.3.
A Lame Man is mentioned also Act. 3. 2. 4. 14,22. whom the Gloss calls a
Paralytick.

Maimed Persons. S. Matthew. 15.30,31. The Word is (...), and S. Hieron. says,
Quomodo claudus dicitur qui uno claudicat pede, sic (...) appellatur qui unam
manum debilem habet. The Paroemiographi alleged by Heinsius, say, that the
Atticks used the Word (...) of the Feet, as well as of the Hands. But here
(...) are distinguished from (...), i.e. those that are lame or maimed of their
Feet, therefore here it must refer to the hand.

Deaf or Dumb Persons. S. Matthew. 9. 32, 33. 11.5. 12.22. 15.30,31. S. Mar. 7.
37. 9. 25. S. Luc. 7.22. 11. 14. The Word (...) according to the usual
acceptance of it, signifies rather one Deaf than one Dumb, but in sacred Writ,
it is used indifferently for either, (so S. Hieron. in S. Matthew. 9.) and
possibly some of these Persons were both; see Theophylact in Luc. 11. and
Sedulius. l. 3. speaking of the Dumb Devil mentioned there.

A Man that had the Dropsy. S. Luc. 14. 2. S. Cyril apud Lyr. ^ays, that he
did not desire of Christ to be healed for fear of the Pharisees, but only
appeared before him as an Object of his Commiseration.

Bartimeus. S. Mar. 10. 46. S. August. de consens. Evang. l. 2. c. 65. believed
that he was cast down from great Prosperity, to the depth of outward Misery and
Poverty. S. Hieron. in lib. Nom. says, that some read Bartimeus for Barsemia,
which Barsemia he had perhaps from the Sir. in which it is thus, (...), i. e.
Timai the Son of Timai the Blind.

Other Blind Men. S. Matthew. 9. 27,28. 15.30. 20. 30. 21. 14. S. Mar. 8.22. S.
Luc. 7. 21,22. 18. 35. It is questioned whether it be one and the same History
which is related, S. Matthew. 20. and S. Luc. 18. and S. Mar. 10. 46. Euthymius
who thought them to be three distinct Histories would persuade us that there
were four blind Men that received sight near Jericho. S. August. de consens.
Evang. l. 2. c. 65. and quaest. Evang. l. 2. c. 48. thought that they were
three; to one Christ gave sight when he came nigh to Jericho, and to two when
he went out thence. But Theophylact and others say that they were but two in
all, of which S. Mark and S. Luke mention only one, because he was more known
and famed than the other, or else (S. Mark names the one, S. Luke the other;
but S. Matthew a lover of brevity joins both together. It is not against this,
that S. Luke's blind Man, is said to have been cured, as Christ came nigh to
Jericho, S. Matthew's blind Men when he went out thence, for (...) sometimes
signifies (not to draw near, but) only to be near, and so (...) S. Luc. 18. 35.
may be rendered, when he was nigh to Jericho; now he was nigh to Jericho when he
went out of it, as well as when he was about to enter into it. Thus Deuteronomy. 25.
5. in the LXX. (...) is, To a Man that is not near, or that is a Stranger, in
the Hebr. it is (...).

A Man Blind from his Birth. S. Ioh. 9. 1. The Pharisees blamed our Savior for
curing this Man on the Sabbath Day, by making clay with his Spittle, and
spreading it upon his Eyes; which calls to mind that which some Jewish Writers
ap. Buxtorf. in voc. (...) say, viz. that it was forbid to put fasting Spittle
on the eye on the Sabbath. Nonnus seems to have thought that he had no Eyes at
all, but that Christ made him Eyes; and S. Cyprian de bono patient. says, Sputo
suo coeci oculos formavit, and S. Chrysostom. uses the Words (...) and (...),
see Hom. 49. in S. Matthew. and 56. in S. Ioh. see also Asterius ap. Photium Number.
271. and Theophylact. But perhaps their meaning is not that he created Eyes
when he had none at all before, but only that he formed and fashioned them, so
that they might be fit Organs of sight.

A Woman bo^ed together. S. Luc. 13. 11.

S. Peter's Wife and her Mother. S. Matthew. 8. 14,15. S. Mar. 1. 30,31. S. Luc.
4. 38, 39. Epiphanius Haer. 51. says, that S. Peter married his Wife from
Capernaum. Sophronius affirms, that she was the Daughter of Aristobulus,
Barnabas's Brother, and her Name (says fragment. Helenae) was Concordia. She
dyed a Martyr; so Clem. Alex. Strom. 7. Some say that her Mother was Salome,
the Mother also of S. James and S. John. S. Ambrose calls her socrus Petri and
Andreae, as if she were their stepmother: But see Tertullian de Monogam. c. 8.
and Theophylact.

A Woman that was diseased with an Issue of Blood. S. Matthew. 9. 20. S. Mar.
5.25. S. Luc. 8. 43. S. Ambrose l. de Solomon. c. 5. seems to have thought that
she was Martha, Lazarus's Sister; but Martha was of Bethany, whereas this Woman
is said to have been of Paneas or Cesarea Philippi, and her House was showed
there in Eusebius's time; see Eusebius. l. 7. c. 18. S. Hieron. says, that it was
not in the City, that she came to Jesus and was healed, but as he was going to
the City, viz. to restore Iairus's Daughter. Some have conceived that she was a
Gentile. John Malala's Chronicle calls her Berenice, but see what censure
Baronius An. 31. Number. 75. passes upon that Chronicle.

A Widow and her Son. S. Luc. 7. 11. Some conjecture that she was not of the
meaner rank, because so great a train accompanied the Corpse to the place of
Burial. Josephus Ant. l. 20. c. 5. says, that the Galileans sometimes passed
though Nais, as they went to Jerusalem at their Feasts; and so it is probable
that our Savior was going that way to Jerusalem, when he raised the Widows Son.

The Woman or Women that anointed Christ. S. Matthew. 26. 7. S. Mar. 14. 3. S.
Luke 7. 37. S. Ioh. 11. 2. 12. 3. Expositors do not agree either as to the
Number of the Women that anointed Christ, or as to the number of the Unctions.
Some conceive that they were three several Women that anointed him, and then
the Unctions were as many. Others that he was anointed by two Women, and twice
at the least. Some finally say that he was anointed twice, but by one and the
same Woman. I dare not determine which of these Opinions is to be preferred.
The Roman Matrons, when Annibal was at the Gates, wiped the Altars of the Gods
with their Hair ( Livy l. 26.) but Mary wiped the Feet of Christ with her Hair,
which argues a great Ecstasie of Affection and Devotion. Pliny l. 13. c. 3.
accounted it a thing more rare to anoint the Feet, adding that M. Otho was
reported to have showed it to Nero. As to Nard Pistich, S. August. thought that
it was so called from the place whence it was brought, and some later Writers
name Opis a Town near Babylon, where (as they say) most precious Ointments of
Nard were made; others name Bist or Pist, the Metropolis (as they tell us) of
Carimania, or of Chabul in India. Some say that (...) is corrupted from
Spicata, and that Spikenard and Nard Pistich are the same, and so our
Translators render it Spikenard, S. Ioh. 12. and S. Mar. 14. and the Vulg. S.
Mar. 14. has Spicati. Others derive (...) from (...), some from (...), some
from (...) which we have in Gittin fol. 69. 1. and the Gloss there interprets
it (...), i.e. Glans Cedri. The most will have it to signify Fidelis, (see S.
Hieron. in S. Matthew. 26. 7. Theophylact and Euthym.) so that this Nard was
pure, sincere, not adulterated with the Pseudonard, spoken of by Pliny ( l. 12.
c. 12.) or otherwise, see Pliny ibid. and Dioscorides l. 1. c. 6. So a Faithful
Wife is called (...), by Artemidorus ap. Cappellum Spicileg. in S. Mar. 14. and
to the same purpose Casaubon Exercit. 15. c. 13. expounds (...) and (...). The
Sir. renders it Chief or Excellent (or as others Capitatae) and the AEthiop. in
S. Mar. Pure, Select, not Adulterate; in S. Ioh. it retains the Greek Word as
the Goth. also does. It is said S. Mar. 14. that the Woman brake the box, yet
perhaps she did not break it all in pieces (for if we may believe Suidas in
voc. (...) it was preserved to the time of Theodosius the Great) but only brake
an hole in it, that the Ointment might be poured out. The Sir. and AEthiop.
say, She opened it, the Pers. She opened the Head of the Vessel, which in
Pollux l. 10. c. 26. is called (...). The Greek Word is (...), which we render
only to bruise, S. Luc. 9. 39. and Lucian in Demonax has (...) fustibus
contundere, so that possibly she only knocked and shak'd the Vessel that the
Ointment might run out more fluently, as A. Gellius l. 17. c. 8. says, Guttum
concussum vehementius iterum in ollam vertit. Some say that the box was made of
Stone or Marble, and could not be easily broken. S. Hieron. says, that it was
a kind of Marble, and we have (...) in Nonnus. And it may be that these Vessels
were more frequently made of stone, particularly of that Lapis alabastrites in
Pliny l. 36. c. 8. but it is manifest that they were also made of other matter,
as of Gold or Silver, yea Epiphanius de mensuris describes (...) to be a
Glass-Vessel, as also the Etymologic. magnum ap. Causaubon. says, that it
signifies among other things a certain Vessel of Glass, Pliny says, that
Ointments are kept best in these boxes, l. 13. c. 2. and l. 36. c. 8. (...) was
among the Presents which Cambyses sent to the King of the AEthiopians; see
Herodotus in Thalia. Epiphanius de mensuris makes (...) to hold a pound of Oil,
and so Mary took a pound of Ointment, for which Nonnus has (...). A MS. cited
by Baronius An. 32. Number. 22. will have the Woman mentioned, S. Luc. ^. to have
been a Gentile, arguing from Deuteronomy. 23. 17. where it is said, There shall be no
Whore of the Daughters of Israel. But the Jewish Writers understand this of a
common Prostitute, one that for hire prostituted her self to the Lust of all
comers, (see Seldon. de jur. nature. l. 5. c. 4.) whereas it does not appear,
that this Woman was such a publicae libidinis victima, though she had lived a
lewd and dishonest Life, and is therefore called Meretrix, by S. Hieron. in S.
Matthew. 26. and S. August. ser. 58. de tempore, and by the Pers. an impure or
unclean Woman.

Mary Magdalen. S. Mat. 27. 56,61. 28. 1. S. Mar. 15. 47. 16. 1. S. Luc. 8. 2.
24. 10. S. Ioh. 19. 25. 20. 1. I shall not engage in the Disputes whether she
was the same with the Woman mentioned S. Luc. 7. or with Mary the Sister of
Martha. Some say that she was Married to a great Person who was a Native of
Magdala or Magdalum; others that her Father was a Noble Man of great Estate,
and left her the Castle of Magdalum for her Inheritance; but Origin Hom. 35.
says, that she was not noble on any Account, save only her following Jesus, and
ministering to him. Some in Nicephorus l. 1. c. 33. say, that she was the
Daughter of the Woman of Canaan, S. Matthew. 15. others that she was the Bride in
the Marriage at Cana, and one Anacletus the Bridegroom. Sabellicus reports,
that she was thirty years in the Wilderness after Christ's Ascension; but more
ancient Writers are silent as to these things. When S. Matthew c. 28. tells how
this Mary and another Mary laid hold of Christ's Feet, he says nothing of
Christ's forbidding them; yet S. Ioh. 20. he forbad her to touch him; the
reason of which possibly was this, that at that time he perceived her to be in
such an Ecstasie of Admiration and Joy, that she would not barely touch him,
but embrace and cleave to him, whereas he was for her going quickly to tell his
Brethren that he was not yet ascended, but should shortly ascend to his Father.
Some of late have contended that there were three Mary Magdalen's, and S.
Hieron. ad Hedibiam qu. 4. tells of those that affirmed that there were two,
and S. Ambros. in S. Luc. 23. says, that perhaps there were more than one. Of
one (...) we read in Sanhedr. fol. 67. 1. Shabbath, fol. 104. 2. and Chagigah,
fol. 4. 2. but in all these places (...) does signify (not any place from
which she had the Denomination) but plicatrix one that platted or broided, viz.
Women's Hair; see Chagigah.

Mary, Martha, and Lazarus. S. Luc. 10. 38. S. Ioh. c. 11. and c. 12. It being
not agreed upon as certain that this Mary was the same with Mary Magdalen, I
set her here as distinct. The name Martha occurs in Plutarch in Mario, and in
the Jewish Writings frequently, as in Ievamoth fol. 120. 1. Succah fol. 52. 2.
and in Misn. in Ievamoth c. 6.. 4. Because it is said, S. Luc. 10. that Martha
received Jesus into her House, S. Bernard de assumptione Mariae ser. 3.
conjectures that she was the elder Sister, as others do that she was a Widow
and kept the House, and that her Brother and Sister lived with her. Nonnus
seems to have thought that Lazarus's distemper was a Fever, for he calls it
(...), and (...) is sometimes used by the Physicians to signify a Fever, as in
the Chald. and Sir. it is called (...). The Supper mentioned S. Ioh. 12. was in
Martha's House, so S. Chysost. (who yet acknowledges that some were of another
mind) also Theophylact, and to them we may add Theodor. Heracleotes in^gr.
caten. who says that Lazarus and his Sisters received Christ. Likewise Origin.
Hom. 35. in S. Matthew. and Euthym. thought that Mary and Martha made that
Supper, though some have supposed that Simon the Leper made it, or perhaps the
Town of Bethany at a common charge. Theophylact says that on the sixth day
before the Passover they begun to Feast more plentifully. Epiphanius. Haer. 66.
mentions a Tradition that Lazarus lived thirty years after his being raised
from Death, and had lived thirty years before. Some say that he never laughed
after that he was raised. The Hist. Lombardica ap. Chemnit. feigns that he and
his Sisters were descended of Kings.

Mary the Mother of James and Ioses. S. Matthew. 27. 56, 61. 28. 1. S. Mar. 15.
40, 41, 47. 16. 1. S. Luc. 24. 10. Munster's Hebr. and the AEthiop. in S.
Matthew. 27. 56. read Mary of James and the Mother of Iose or Joseph, but the
rest of the Versions read as we do, or to the same sense. S. Hieron. in S.
Matthew. and contr. Helvid. also Euthymius, and Eusebius. Emiss. or Eucherius in die
r^surrect. say, that she was our Lords Aunt or his Mothers Sister, and to these
I should rather assent than to those who would have our Lords Mother to be
called the Mother of James and Ioses, because (as they say) she was Stepmother
to them.

Mary of Cleopas. S. Ioh. 19. 25. Our Translation has, The Wife of Cleopas,
the Arab. The Daughter of Cleopas, in the Greek there is not either Wife or
Daughter or Mother, so that it is uncertain whether Cleopas was her Son, or her
Father, or her Husband. Nicephorus l. 1. c. 33. says, that she was begat by
Joseph (the Blessed ^irgins Husband) of the Wife of Cleopas, who was his
Brother, and had dyed without Issue; but if she was Ioseph's Daughter, how was
she our Lords Mothers Sister? She was her Daughter, (not Sister) if Joseph was
her Father. Euthymius thought that she was the Wife of Cleopas, Ioseph's
Brother, and so the Sister of our Lords Mother. The truth is the Sir. Pers. and
AEthiop. read, His Mother's Sister, and Mary of Cleophas, as if Mary of
Cleopas, and his Mothers Sister^ were distinct Persons; but the Vulg. Arab. and
the Greek it self, read as our Translation does. S. Hieron. contr. Helvid.
inclined to think, that she was the same with the Mother of James and Ioses,
but if any be of another Opinion he was not for contending with them. Neither
would he determine on what account she was surnamed of Cleopas, (sive a patre,
sive a gentilitate familiae sive quacunque alia causa) but he says that she was
the Wife of Alpheus, and then supposing (as many do) Alpheus and Cleopas to be
one and the same name, it is easy to determine why she was so named.

Salome, and Zebedee her Husband. S. Matthew. 4. 21. 10.2. 20.20. 27. 56. S. Mar.
1. 19,20. 3. 17. 10. 35. 15.40. 16. 1. S. Luc. 5. 10. S. Ioh. 21. 2. From the
number of the Servants which Zebedee employed some conclude, that he was a
Person considerable in the Trade or way of Living which he followed, viz. that
of Fishing, and Nicephorus l. 2. c. 3. tells us, that he left an Estate to his
Children, and was a Man of note among the Galileans; but S. Chrysostom.
Theophylact and Author oper. imperf. did not apprehend him to be so rich.
Theophylact says that he did not believe, and Origin in caten. gr. tom. 1. in
S. Matthew. that his Sons left him in the state of Unbelief; but though it is
probable that he did not believe at that time when they left him, yet he might
afterward. The name Zabdi or Zebedee occurs frequently in the Jewish Writings.
He that compares S. Matthew. 27. 5^^ with S. Mar. 15. 40. will conclude with
Origin Hom. 35. in S. Matthew. the Aut. oper. imperf. in S. Matthew. 20.
Theophylact, Euthym. and Kirstenius's Arab. MS. in vit. S. Ioh. that the Mother
of Zebedee's Children, and Salome was the same. The MS. adds, that she had also
the name of Mary or Marjum, and Kirstenius tells us as from the MS. that she
had a third name, viz. Taviphilia, but upon consulting the MS. it self, I
incline to think that the Word which he reads Taviphilia, was not intended for
a proper Name, but to express the Greek Word (...). She was the Daughter (as
some say) of Cleopas or Alpheus, Brother to Joseph, the Blessed Virgin's
Husband; but others ap. Theophylact in praefat. in S. Ioh. and in S. Matthew. 27.
say, that she was the Daughter of Joseph himself, and Epiphanius Haer. 78. and
in Anchorat. saying, that one of Ioseph's Daughters was called Salome, does
countenance this. A discourse between our Savior and her is recited out of
Clemens Alex. by Grotius in S. Matthew. 20. 20. but that judicious Writer adds,
de quo merito antiqui etiam dubitarunt.

Ioanna the Wife of Chuza, Herod's Steward. S. Luc. 8. 3. 24. 10. If Chuza was
living when Ioanna followed Christ and ministered to him, it is probable that he
was also a Disciple, though perhaps secretly for fear of Herod and the Jews.
Some have guessed that he was the Nobleman mentioned, S. Ioh. 4 46. We may
wonder that Nicephorus, l. 1. c. 33. should make her the Mother of Zebedee's
Children. See the Martyrolog. in Maii 24.

Susanna and other Women. S. Luc. 8. 3. It is probable that Ioanna and these
were healed of some Infirmity by Christ, for S. Luke having said, v. 2. that
certain Women who were healed of Evil Spirits and Infirmities were with Christ,
instanceth in Mary-Magdalen, Ioanna and These. These or some of These were of
the number of the Women mentioned S. Matthew. 27. 55. S. Mar. 15. 40,41. S. Luc.
24. 10. Act. 1. 14.

A Woman that blessed the Womb that bare Christ. S. Luc. 11. 27. Some say that
she was Marcella, a Servant of Martha, Lazarus's Sister. Our Savior was
Preaching not far from Tire (as some tell us) when she said this, but what
ground they have for this, I know not. S. August. tract. 10. in Joan. says,
Admiratae quaedam animae dixerunt, Felix venture, etc. as if some Women in the
Company consented at least to what she spoke. As the Jews speaking of a
Praiseworthy Person, used to bless her that bare him; so on the other hand,
they cursed the Breasts that gave suck to one that was Vile and Debauched. See
Buxtorf. in voc. (...).

A Poor Widow. S. Mar. 12. 42. S. Luc. 21. 2. The Jews are said to have given
something by way of Alms and Offerings, before their Prayers. Euthymius makes
(...) and (...) to have been the same, as instead of (...), S. Matthew. 5 26. we
have (...), S. Luc. 12. 59. and Plutarch, in the Life of Cicero says, (...),
and the Sir. also seems to favor this, but S. Hieron. in S. Matthew. 5. 26.
Hesychius and Suidas make (...) to contain two (...), and so we Translate it
Two Mites which make a Farthing.

Children brought to Christ. S. Matthew. 19. 43. S. Mar. 10. 13. S. Luc. 18. 15^
crying, Hosanna to Him, S. Matthew. 21. 15. The Disciples forbad the Children to
be brought, lest their Master should be too much crowded or pressed, (S.
Ambros.) or lest he should be wearyed with their continued Importunity; or
perhaps thinking that it did not suit with his Dignity to take notice of such
young Children; see S. Hieron. S. Chrysostom. and Opus imperf.

A Child set by Christ in the midst of the Disciples. S. Matthew. 18. 2. S. Mar.
9. 36. S. Luc. 9. 47. Some say that the Child was Martialis afterward Bishop of
Limoges; others say that he was Ignatius, as two Sir. Writers, ap. Usher in
Actis Ignatii, Nicephorus, l. 2. c. 35. Menolog. December. 20. etc. But S.
Chrysostom. Hom. de S. Ignatio says, that Ignatius never saw Christ. It is true
Ignatius in ep. ad Smyrn. (if S. Hieron. de vir. illustr. have translated his
words aright) does tell us, that he saw him, but that was after his
Resurrection, and so belongs not to this matter. Besides, whereas S. Hieron.
seems to have read (...), vidi, our Editions of Ignatius and likewise Eusebius. l.
3. c. 36. have (...) novi; so that Ignatius only says, I know and believe that
Christ was in the Flesh after his Resurrection.

One that was called by Christ, Another that offered himself voluntarily to
follow him. S. Luc. 9. 59,61. The former is mentioned, S. Mat. 8. 21. and said
to be a Disciple of Christ ( Clemens Alex. says, that he was Philip) and S.
Basil Constitut. Monast. c. 20. is of Opinion that the other was a Disciple
also.

Many Disciples that went back from Christ. S. Ioh. 6. 66. S. August. in Psalm.
98. seems to have thought that many of these were of the LXX. Scandalizati sunt
quidam discipuli ejus, septuaginta ferme. Epiphanius seems to have been of the
same Opinion, Haer. 51. where he names the Evangelist's, S. Mark, and S. Luke
as two of them that went back, but (as he adds) were seasonably reclaimed, the
one by S. Peter, the other by S. Paul; see also Euthymius. Yet others think
that the LXX never deserted Christ. These forsook the Faith of Christ (or
Profession of it) as well as his Company; see S. Chrysostom. S. Cyril. Alex. S.
August. Theophylact and Euthym.

Five Thousand fed miraculously, and at another time Four Thousand. S. Matthew.
14. 15. 16.9. S. Mar. 6. 35. 8. 1, 19. S. Luc. 9. 12. S Ioh. 6. 5. The Words
concerning the Women and Children, S. Matthew. 14. 21. seemed to Origin to be
ambiguous, so that he thought it doubtful whether they did eat or no; but there
seems to be Evidence enough otherwise (if not from those Words) that they did.
Crescit materies, nescio utrum in mensarum loco, an in manibus sumentium, an in
ore edentium, says S Hilary; he might have added, an in manibus Christi and
discipulorum ejus, an in manibus horum omnium, Nicephorus l. 8. c. 30. says,
that it was at or near Tiberias, that our Savior fed the five thousand, and
others say that it was on the sixth of January. Piscator in S. Ioh. 6.
endeavors to represent how they sat down by hundreds and fifties.

The Gergesens and Gadarens. S. Matthew. 8. 28. S. Mar. 5. 1. S. Luc 8. 26. S.
Hieron. had that Charity for them, as to think that it was out of their
Humility, that they desired Christ to depart out of their Coasts, even as S.
Peter said, Depart from me, I am a Sinful Man, O Lord. But others are not so
favorable to them, S. Chrysostom. imputing it to their ingratitude and
insensibleness; Theophylact to their Covetousness; they had lost their Swine,
and feared that they should be further damnified, if he stayed among them; see
Euthym. It may seem strange that there should be such a Multitude of Swine in
these parts, Swines flesh being an Abomination to the Jews, and they that bred
or kept them almost equally abominable; especially when they had in the time of
Hyrcanus and Aristobulus, denounced all that kept or bred them Accursed, so
Gemar. in Bava Kama fol. 82. 2. See also Rabenu Ascher in Bava Kam. fol. 137.
1. who says, that they might not breed them to be sold to Strangers. They that
please may also see Misn. in Bava Kama c. 7.. 7. But to this it may be
answered, that though the Gadarens were many of them Jews, yet a great number
of Greeks inhabited among them. Yea Josephus Ant. 17. 13. expressly calls Gadara
a Greek City, and de bell. Iud. l. 2. c. 33, 34, 35. he relates how the Jews
wasted the Cities of Gerasa and Gadara, and how the Gerasens and Gadarens dealt
with them. Also S Greg. Nyssen. in caten. gr. in S. Luc. 8. resolves, that
these Gergesens were Gentiles. But suppose that they were Jews, might not their
Covetousness induce some of them to transgress the Constitutions of their
Elders? When they might sell their Swine to very vast profit to the Romans, to
whom Swines flesh was a dainty; see Plin. l. 8. c. 51. Bashan was adorned with
goodly Woods of Oaks, Isa. 2. 13. Zach. 11. 2. and so we may suppose that this
Country of the Gadarens being part of it, was so; and consequently Commodious
for feeding Swine.

The Collectors of the Tribute-Money. S. Matthew. 17. 24. It is not easy to
determine, whether this Tribute-Money was the half Shekel, which every
Israelite paid yearly for the Redemption of his Life, Exodus 30. 13. (as S.
Hilary; see also S. Cyril in S. Ioh. l. 3. c. 29.) or the Tribute which was
paid for the Redemption of the Firstborn, Exodus 13. 13, 15. Number. 18. 15, 16.
(as S. Chrysostom. Theophylact and Euthym.) or a Tribute paid to the Romans,
since Judea was made Tributary by Augustus, as S. Hieron. which Opinion Origin
in S. Matthew. seems to favor, by his speaking of giving to Caesar the things
that are Caesar's, and of the Didrachmum's having Caesar's Image upon it; see
him also in epist. ad African. As to the value of the Didrachmum which we
render Tribute Money, in the LXX it constantly answers to the Word (...), and
so Epiphanius de pondr. confounds the Shekel and the Didrachmon, making the
Shekel to be only half of the Stater. Whereas Josephus Ant. l. 3. c. 9. makes
the Shekel to contain four Drachms, and consequently two Didrachma. With him
agrees S. Hieron. in Ezekiel. 3. also Philo, De voti satisfactione, who says, that
fifty Shekels did contain two hundred Drachms. S. Hieron. ibid. makes the
Shekel and Stater the same, and Aquila frequently: Symmachus sometimes
Translates (...) by (...), now it appears from S. Matthew that a Stater did
contain two Didrachma. Yet perhaps these, who seem to thwart one another so
directly, may be reconciled by distinguishing between the Alexandrian Dram,
and the Attick; the former of which was as much again as the latter, just as
Fastus makes the Alexandrian Talent, as much again as the Attick Talent. Now
Josephus saying that the Shekel contained four Drachms, speaks of Attick
Drachms ((...) (...) are his Words) but the LXX translating at Alexandria had
respect to the Alexandrian Dram, and so making the Shekel to contain only two
Drachms rendered it (...). Suppose then that S. Matthew had respect to the
Attick Dram, his didrachmum will be no more than half the Value of the LXX's
and so half a Shekel, as the Sir. renders it 2 Zuzim.

O^e that ca^ out Devils, and yet followed not Christ. S. Mar. 9. 38. S. Luke
9. 49. S Ambros. S. Chrysostom. ap. Aquin. and Euthym. thought that he believed
in Christ though he did not follow him; but Victor Antioch. was of a contrary
Opinion. S. Cyril Alex. seems to allow us Liberty to follow whether Opinion we
will. Howsoever it was, the Name of Christ which was efficacious for expelling
the Devils, and the Effect was to be ascribed to it, not to the Person, whether
he was Believer or Infidel. S. Chrysostom. Theophylact, Victor Antioch. and Titus
Bostr. do all resolve, that it was not out of Envy or Emulation, but out of a
good Affection that the Apostles did forbid the Man, viz. out of Love to
Christ; as S. Ambrose supposes that it was S. John's great Affection to his
Master that made him concern himself so much, as to his acquainting Christ with
their Forbidding him. Theophylact says, it was for that he doubted whether they
had done well or no in it; others think that he did it for that he expected
that they should be commended for it.

A Woman taken in Adultery. S. Ioh. 8.3. The Misn. in Sanhedr. c. 10.. 1. and
Targ. Ionath. in Levit. 20 10. make Strangling (not Stoning) to be the
Punishment for Adultery; how comes it then that the Scribes here say, that by
Moses's Law the Adulteress was to be stoned: To this it may be said, that
perhaps this Woman was not married, but only espoused; and Moses says expressly
Deuteronomy 22. 24. that such an one should be stoned. And observe the Reason that is
given there, why he that lay with a betrothed Damsel should be stoned, viz.
because he had humbled his Neighbors Wife; does not this imply that every one
that humbles his Neighbors Wife, i. e. every Adulterer, should be stoned?
Some also gather from Ezekiel 16. v. 38. compared with v. 40. that Stoning was the
Punishment for Adultery, as also from the History of Susanna. Finally, perhaps
those Scribes did expound the Law that the Adulterer should be put to death,
Levit. 20. 10. by v. 2. where putting to death is explained by stoning. It is
impossible to know what it was that our Savior writ on the Ground, whether
some of the Sins of the Woman's Accusers, or that which he said to them v. 7.
He that is without Sin, etc. or some such Sentence as that, Terra, terra,
scribe hos viros abdicatos; or that, Festucam in fratris oculo vides non trabem
in tuo; or that, Recedentes a te in terra scribentur; see S. Ambros. epist. 76.
S. Hieron. l. 2. contr. Pelagian. etc.

The Parents of him that was born blind. S. Ioh. 9. 2,3,18.

One that came to Christ about ^ividing an Inheritance. S. Luke 12. 13. His
Brother was like him in Ioma fol. 39. 1. who took his own part and his Fellows
too, and was therefore called (...) to his Death.

One that asked if few should be saved. S. Luke 13. 23.

One that sat at meat with Christ. S. Luc. 14. 15.

A Rich Man, and Lezarus a Beggar. S. Luc. 16. 19. Several of the Ancients have
thought that there were really such Persons, Irenaeus l. 2. c. 62. (al. 63.)
and l. 4. c. 4. Tertul. de anima c. 7. and a great number more, who speak of
the Rich Man and Lazarus as really existing. Yea Leontius and Euthym^ give us
the Rich Man's Name, viz. Nimeusis or Nineusis, and some take upon them to tell
us where his House was in Jerusalem. Yet Clemens Alex. Strom. 4. S. Chrysostom.
tom. 5. orat. 35. in Lazar. Ammonius, Titus Bostr. Eulogius ap. Photium Number.
280. and Theophylact say that it is a Parable; also two Greek Copies usher in
the mention of Dives and Lazarus thus, (...). Yet Titus Bostr. and Theophylact
tell us from the Tradition of the Jews, that there was a Lazarus who lived in
extreme Poverty about that time. Author Quaest. and Respons. ap. Justin Mart.
qu. 60. says, that it is neither a Parable nor an History, his meaning seems to
be that it is mixed of both, i. e. an History expressed Parabolically. Lazarus
is by Tertul. de Idololat. c. 13. called Eleazar; for as Drusius tells us out
of Iuchasin, Omnis R. Eleazar in Talmud Hierosdicitur (...).

Publicans. S. Matthew. 5. 46,47. 9. 10. 21. 32. S. Mar. 2. 15. S. Luc. 3. 12. 5.
29. 7. 29. 15. 1. Cicero pro lege Manilia, as also pro Cn. Plancio highly
extols the Order of Publicans. He likewise commends particular Persons for
having demeaned themselves well in that Office: See what a Character he gives
of C. Curious a Publican, in orat. pro Posthumo. Sabinus, Vespasian's Father
managed it so well, that the Cities erected Statues for him with this Title,
(...). Sueton. in Vespasian c. 1. But generally they were infamous for their
Rapine and Extortion, S. Chrysostom. in S. Matthew. 9. Suidas in voc. (...), and
Asterius ap. Photium Number. 271. The Romans therefore were forced to make Laws,
to restrain their shameless Exactions and Avarice, (see Tacit. l. 13. and
Digest. l. 39. tit. 4.) sometimes the People rise against them, ( Dio. l. 48.)
sometimes they were punished very severely; see in Livy l. 25. how Posthumous a
Publican was dealt with at Rome, and in Plutarch in vit. Luculli, how Lucullus
dealt with the Publicans in Asia. More especially they were hated by the Jews,
and if any of their own Nation were employed in that Office, they were still
more execrable to them. They were not admitted to give Testimony in Judgment (
Gemar. in Sanhedr. fol. 25. 2.) the Jews might not change Money out of the
Chests of the Publicans ( Misna in Bava Kama c. 10.. 1) nor Marry a Wife out of
a Family where there was a Publican. Tertull. de Pudicit. c 9. seems to have
thought that the Publicans were all Heathens, but S. Hieron. ad Damasum
evinceth the contrary; also Josephus de bell. Iud. l. 2. c. 25. mentions John a
Publican who was certainly a Jew.

Zaccheus. S. Luc. 19. 1. Tertul. l. 4. contr. Marcion. c. 37. and S. Chrysostom.
sermon. in Zacchaeum, and S. Ambrose were of Opinion that he was an Heathen, and
S. Cyprian l. 2. ep. 3. seems to agree with them. Asterius ap. Photium Number.
271. expresses himself somewhat doubtfully. But later Writers say, that his
Name speaks him a Jew, the name Zaccai being a pure Hebrew Name, Ezr. 2. 9.
Neh. 7. 14. Rabban Iothanan Ben Zaccai or Zechai is much celebrated; see Avoth
c. 2. and R. D. Ganz Millen. 4. An. 713. Cicero pro Plancio says, that the
Father of Plancius was Princeps Publicanorum; and ad Quintum fratrem l. 1. ep.
1. he speaks of the Societies of Publicans, as Tacitus l. 13. does of
Vectigalium Societates. It is probable that he that was styled Princeps
Publicanorum, was Governor of one of those Societies; and such a Governor of
a Society, we may suppose Zaccheus to have been. Perhaps also the (...),
mentioned in Schabb. fol. 78. 2. was he whom we call the chief of the
Publicans. S. Hieron. in epitaph. Paul. speaks of Paula's visiting Zaccheus's
Sycamore Tree. Chrysologus ser. 54. says, that he was Episcopatus honor
fultus, and the Constitut. Apost. l. 7. c. 46. that he was Bishop of Cesarea.

Certain Greeks. S. Ioh. 12. 20. It is not agreed whether these that are called
Greeks, were of the Jews that were dispersed through Asia and Greece, or they
were Gentiles but Proselyted to the Jewish Religion, and Circumcised; or they
were finally uncircumcised Gentiles. The first Opinion is earnestly contended
for by some later Writers, others are for the second Opinion; see Gloss.
interlin. But Epiphanius Haer. 30. S. August. Ammonius and Leontius were of the
third Opinion, and S. Chrysostom. Theophylact, and S. Cyril. Alex. agree with
them, that they were Gentiles; but the two former add that they were near the
being Proselytes, or inclined to it; and S. Cyril says, that they concurred
with the Jews in the belief of a supreme Deity. The Sir. also seems to favor
this. Their coming to Jerusalem to Worship, and that at the Feast, may seem to
be against this that they were Gentiles; but it is well known that the Gentiles
were permitted to Worship in the Temple, i. e. in that part of it which was
called the Court of the Gentiles, and a desire of seeing the Solemnity,
together with the general concourse of People to Jerusalem at the Feast, might
invite them to come then, rather than at another time. The reason why they
addressed themselves to Philip might be, either for that they had some
acquaintance with him (see Gaudentins Brixiens.) or because they met
accidentally first with him.

The Master of the House in which Christ kept the Passover. S. Mat. 26. 18. S.
Mar. 14. 14. S. Luc. 22. 11. S. Chrysostom. and Theophylact say, that he was a
Person unknown to the Disciples, and S. Ambrose took him to be poor and
ignoble. Yet some later Writers have thought that he was Rich and Noble, and
also a Disciple of Christ, but secretly like Nicodemus and Joseph of Arimathea.

A Young Man. S. Mar. 14. 15. Whether he was S. John, (as S. Ambros. in Psalm.
36.) or S. James the less, (as S. Hieron. in Psalm. 37 and some ap. Theophylact,
see also Epiphan. Haer. 78.) or one of the House where they did eat the
Passover, (to which Theophylact himself, Victor Antioch. and Euthym. did
incline) or he was of some Village near the Garden; or finally one that dwelt
near to the way by which they led Jesus, I shall not determine.

Malchus and his Kinsman. S. Matthew. 26. 51. S. Mar. 14. 47. S. Luke 22. 50. S.
Ioh. 18. 10. Of Malchus Vida episc. Cremon. sings thus, Venit Idumaeis missus
captivas ab oris.
S. Peter directed the Blow against his Head, which he shunned so far as that
it took of only his Ear; see S. Chrysostom. in S. Ioh. If it was Malchus that
smote Christ, S. Ioh. 18. 22. (as the same S. Chrysostom. supposes) he showed
himself very ungrateful to him in requiting him thus, for the Miraculous
healing his Ear. If it be asked how the Apostles came to have Swords, S.
Chrysostom. in S. Matthew. and S. Ioh. answers, that probably they had used them
for slaying the Lamb; or they had heard that some would come against their
Master, and had provided them for his Defense; so also Theophylact. Perhaps
also the way from Galilee to Jerusalem, had begun ^to be pestered with Thieves:
And Joseph. de bell. Iud. l. 2. c. 12. observes of the Essaeans, that they armed
themselves against Thieves in their Journey, though they carried nothing else
with them.

A Maid that kept the Door. S. Ioh. 18. 16. and other Servants, v. 18. In the
LXX and Vulg. in 2 Samuel 4. 5. we read likewise of a She Porter (...).

False Witnesses. S. Matthew. 26. 60. S. Mar. 14. 56. Act. 6. 13. In S. Matthew.
and S. Mar. they deposed that Jesus said, I am able to Destroy the Temple of
God, and to build it in three Days; or, I will Destroy this Temple made with
hands, and build another in three Days made without hands; which differs much
from that which our Savior really said, S. Ioh. 2. 19. both as to Words and
Sense; see Origin, S. Hieron. S. Chrysostom. Victor Antioch. and Theophylact. S.
Mark's Words (...), are rendered by Origin in S. Matthew. also by Arab. AEthiop.
and our Translators, Their Witness did not agree together; but others render
them thus, Their Witness was not equal, i. e. not sufficient to take away Life.
The Phrase (...) answers to (...) Misn. in Sanhedr. c. 5.. 4. The False
Witnesses that came in against Stephen, laid to his charge that he had foretold
that Jesus would destroy the Temple. Their Zeal for the Temple was such, that
none might speak a Word against it; yea the Zealots arrived at last at that
height of Impiety, that they derided all Prophecies against it, and laughed at
them as Fables. In Misn. in Sanhedr. c. 6.. 4. it is enacted that the hands of
the Witnesses, should be first upon him that was to be stoned, (see also Moses
Mikotsi praec. aff. 101. and Deuteronomy. 17. 7.) This formality they used in the
Stoning of S. Stephen.

The Captain of the Temple. Act. 4. 1. 5. 24. S. Chrysostom. and Euthym. expound
the Words [ Captain of the Temple] thus, Captain of the Soldiers of the
Temple, or of the Soldiers that kept the Temple. Some say that he was the
Roman Commander of those that were placed in the Castle Antonia, to Guard the
Temple, especially at the time of the Jewish Feasts, because of the great
concourse of People from all parts then, Ios. de bell. Iud. l. 5. c. 15. But it
makes against this, that S. Luke always calls the Chief Commander of the Roman
Garrison there (...) (which we render Chief Captain) never (...) the Captain of
the Temple. And Joseph. Ant. l. 15. c. 14. calls him (...). Others therefore
think that he was one of the Priests, that had the oversight of those that
watched in the Temple, Josephus calls Eleazar a Priest (...), Ant. l. 20. c. 8.
and de bell. Iud. l. 2. c. 30. and Ananus (...) Ant. l. 20. c. 5. There was one
who is called the Man of the Mountain of the House, Misn. in Middoth c. 1.. 2.
he had the oversight of all the Watches that were kept in the Temple. Might not
this Man of the Temple, be he that is called the Captain of the Temple? However
if by the Captain of the Temple, we understand one Person that had the Rule and
Inspection over the rest, (let him be a Roman Commander or any other;) then, by
the Captains of the Temple, S. Luc. 22. 4, 52. may be meant his Underofficers,
or those that he used as his Assistants, or perhaps he together with them. Some
have conceited that those fifteen Prefects of the Temple in Shekalim c. 5.. 1.
or some of them, were these Captains of the Temple. Rulers of the House of God,
are mentioned 2 Chronicles. 35. 8.

Soldiers. Of them consisted the Watch, S. Matthew. 27. 65. where we render
(...), Ye have a Watch, taking (...) with the Vulg. to be the Indicative Mood;
as also the Sir. Arab. and Munster's Hebr. seem to have done; but the AEthiop.
renders it, Take ye Soldiers, for (...) may be of the Imperative Mood, as well
as the Indicative. For Custodia the Sir. has (...) (which is rendered Custodes)
not as some would read it (...) from Quaestionarii. The Manual (in S. August.)
c. 23. calls the Soldier that pierced Christ's side, Longinus, and under that
name he has found a place in the Martyrol. Mart. 15. yet some suspect that
they, who first gave him the Name, took the hint from (...), the Weapon with
which he pierced our Savior. He did it either designing to gratify the Jews,
(as S. Chrysostom. supposes) or because he doubted whether he was really dead;
see S. Cyril. Alex. He pierced Christ's right side, says the Arab. in
Erpenius's Edition. The story of his being Blind, and receiving sight by
Christ's Blood lighting upon his Eyes, is rejected by Baronius An. 34. Number.
131. In the Miraculous efflux of Blood and Water, whether the Blood did flow
first, and the Water afterward, (as Nonnus) or both flowed together, yet
unmixed and discernible one from the other, cannot be determined. The Soldiers
gave Christ Vinegar mingled with Gall, S. Matthew. 27. 34. for which, S. Mar. 15.
23. we have Wine mingled with Myrrh. S. Hilary, S. Ambros. in S. Luc. 23. and
S. August. de consens. Evang. l. 3. c. 11. make S. Matthew to have writ (not
Vinegar, but) Wine, and not only the Vulg. but also some Greek Copies, the
AEthiop. Munster's Hebr. Iuvencus and Sedulius do all confirm this reading. Yet
suppose S. Matthew to have Writ (...), (which we render Vinegar) the Greeks
called vinum factitii saporis by the name of (...), and so we have (...) in
Suidas, not to urge the affinity of Vinegar to Wine: (...), Plutarch. Sympos.
l. 3. qu. 5. But still how do the Evangelists accord, when one says that it was
mingled with Gall, with Myrrh the other? S. August. (ubi supra) answers, First,
that S. Matthew put Gall for bitterness, and that Wine mingled with Myrrh is
very bitter. Secondly, That perhaps the Wine was imbittereed with Gall and
Myrrh too. Isidore Orig. l. 17. c. 8. says, that Myrrh has its name from
bitterness. The Hebr. Word is (...) which may well be from (...) to be bitter.
Dioscorides i. 1. c. 77. and Galen de simplic. medicam. l. 8. bear Witness to
its bitterness. Nor is it against this, that Pliny l. 14. c. 13. reckons
Murrhina among sweet Wines, for it is possible that Murrhina has no relation
at all to Myrrh. Festus says, that some thought that it was so called ex uvae
genere Murrinae nomine. Hesychius says, that some call (...) a Drink, (...),
making it to refer to (...), as AElian also does l. 12. c. 31. and Pollux l. 6.
c. 2. the latter thereupon calling it (...), as also it is called Murina in
several Editions of A. Gellius l. 10. c. 23. though in some Murrhina. S.
August. had also reason to suppose that S. Matthew might put (...) (Gall) for
bitterness, for in the LXX (...) signifies not only Gall, but also Wormwood,
(answering to the Hebr. (...) Prove. 5. 4. Lam. 3. 15.) viz. because of its
bitterness; it answers also to (...) (bitterness) Job 16. 13. 20. 14. The Arab.
in S. Matthew. renders it by the very Word Myrrh, the Sir. by (...) ( bitterness)
the Pers. has the same Word in S. Matthew, which it has in S. Mark. When a
Person was to be put to Death, they gave him Frankincense in a Cup of Wine to
Drink, to the end that it might stupifie him, ( Sanhedr. fol. 43. 1.) and this
Potion was prepared and sent by some honorable Women in Jerusalem. Perhaps
they sometimes used Myrrh instead of Frankincense, supposing it to have a like
stupifying faculty. S. Hieron. in S. Matthew. 27. 48. alludes to the Narcotick
quality of Myrrh, saying that Jews and Infidels gave Christ Wine mixed with
Myrrh, ut eum consopiant and mala eorum non videat, also Dioscorid. l. 1. c.
77. says of Myrrh, that it begets sleep. They stripped Christ of all his
Garments in the Opinion of the Ancients, who say that he was Crucified naked:
S. Chrysostom. in S. Matthew. S. Ambros. Vt nudi nudum sequamur, says S. Hieron.
Some gather from a Law of Adrian mentioned by Grotius, that it was the manner
among the Romans, for the Executioners to seize on the Garments of those that
were put to Death; and then we may with S. Cyril of Alexand. suppose that they
divided the Thieves Garments also; but S. Chrysostom. and Euthym. thought that
they not. In Taanith fol. 11. 2. they tell us that Moses ministered in a
seamless Garment, and of the Highpriests seamless coat; see Ios^ph. l. 3. c.
8. and S. Chrysostom. says, that in Palaestine they weave their Garments, by
joining one piece to another. As to our Saviors seamless Coat, Euthymius
mentions a Tradition, that it was made by his Mother; and S. August. in S. Ioh.
is of Opinion, that they did not cast Lots for his other Garments, but for that
only; but S. Mar. 15. 21. seems to imply the contrary; for there it is not only
said that they cast Lots upon them, i. e. his Garments in the plur. Number, but
S. Mark adds (...), what every one should take; see S^ Ambros. and Euthym. Of
the Soldiers that kept S. Peter, Act. 12. S. Chrysostom. says, that for
sureness they were bound in the same chain with the Apostle, and therefore he
is said to have slept between two Soldiers bound with two chains, i. e. with
one of the chains he was made fast to one Soldier, and with the other chained
to the other. It was usual for the Prisoner to be chained to his keeper; see
the story of Manlius Aquilius and Bastarnes in Athenaeus l. 5. In Act. 12. 19.
ours Translation renders (...), He (i. e. Herod) commanded them ( viz. the
Keepers) to be put to Death; the Sir. renders it, and S. Chrysostom. interprets
it accordingly; and yet (...) signifies only, To be lead. In the very same
sense Pliny, epist. l. 10. ep. 97. says, Perseverantes duci jussi. Petrus
Alexandr. seems to have read (...), as if Herod commanded them to be strangled.

Pontius Pilate. S. Matthew. c. 27. S. Mar. c. 15. S. Luc. 3. 1. 13. 1. and c.
23. S. Ioh. c. 18. and c. 19. Act. 3. 13. 4. 27. 13.28. 1 Timothy 6. 13. Pontius
was an usual name among the Romans, so that they are not to be regarded, who
say that Pilate had that name from Pontus (from whence they say that he came to
Judea) or from an Island called Ponta near Rome; see Eutychius Patriarch. Alex.
The Answer of the Jews to Pilate, It is not Lawful for us to put any Man to
Death, admits of a twofold sense, (says S. Chrysostom.) First, We cannot put any
Man to that Death, which we would have this deceiver to die, viz. the Death of
the Cross. Secondly, We cannot put any to Death at this time, i. e. the time of
the Feast. S. Cyril Alex. and S. August. are for the latter of these
Expositions, Theophylact and Euthym. for the former. Ammonius in gr. caten. in
S. Joan. says, that the calling himself King, (for which they accused Christ)^
was (...) a popular crime, and fell not under their cognizance. Others say that
their meaning is, that since they were subdued by the Romans, they could not
put any to Death, without the Roman Governors consent; and S. Chrysostom.
acknowledges that much of their Power was taken from them, and gives this as
one reason why they brought Christ to Pilate, and did not put him to Death
themselves. Their Doctors also speak much of a Tradition, that their Power as
to Life and Death, ceased forty years before the Destruction of the Temple,
(see them alleged by Buxtorf. in (...)) but some say that it was not taken
away by the Romans, but Malefactors and Murderers were grown so numerous and
heady, that they could not execute Capital Punishments upon them; and this is
rendered as the reason of their not judging in Capital matters in Avoda Zara
fol. 8. 2. and Moses Mikotsi praec. affirm. 99. This might perhaps be some
reason, but in Joseph. Ant. l. 20. c. 8. the Jews told Albinus that it was not
Lawful for Ananus to assemble the Council without his License, and without a
Council he could not put any one to Death. To conclude this, the Jews (as best
served their present turn) sometimes denied that they had power in Capital
matters, as here in our Saviors case, sometimes pretended that they had, as in
S. Paul's case, Act. 24. 6. and therefore I see no reason why we should trouble
our selves so much about this answer of theirs. The Procurators of Judea had
Power of Life and Death from the first, which was Coponius, who was sent with
this Power (as Josephus testifies de bell. Iud. l. 2. c. 11.) and it was enjoyed
and exercised by his Successors, of which Pilate^ was one; see Philo Leg. ad
Caium c. 18. Ios. Ant. l. 18. c. 3. and de bell. Iud. l. 2^ c. 14. and Tacitus
l. 15. Some will needs gather from S. Ioh. 19.1. that Pilate scourged Jesus
himself, but they are answered sufficiently by those words of Tertull. de bapt.
c. 11. Imperator proposuit edictum^ aut Praefectus fustibus cecidit. Numquid
ipse proponit? aut nu^quid ipse cedit? No, but they do it by their Officers,
and so did Pilate. They that were to be scourged, used in order to it, to be
bound to a Pillar: Astringite ad columnam fortiter. Plautus in Bacch. see also
the Misn. in Maccoth c. 3.. 12. accordingly S. Hieron. in Epitaph. Paulae
speaks of the Pillar, to which our Savior was bound when he was scourged,
saying that it was showed unto Paula; of the Pillar see also Prudentius in
Enchir. Some pretend to give us the very words, in which Pilate pronounced
sentence upon Christ; first, that he should be scourged, then that he should be
crucified; but they do not agree among themselves. The Jews desirous that
Christ should be Crucified, accused him for being a mover of Sedition, for
Auctores seditionis and tumultus, aut in crucem tolluntur, etc. Paulus l. 5.
tit. 22. The Constitut. Apost. l. 5. c. 13. say, that the Roman Laws forbad the
putting any Man to Death, that was not Convicted, and l. 2. c. 52. they tell us
how the Heathens did not presently lead away Malefactors to Punishment, but
enquired of them many Days with great deliberation; and Sueton. in Tiber. c.
75. mentions a Decree of the Senate, that the Punishment of condemned Persons
should be deferred to the tenth Day (it is mentioned also by Tacit. l. 3. and
Dio l. 57. but these seem to restrain it to those that were condemned by the
Senate.) These Rules were not observed in the Death of Christ. The same
Constitut. l. 2. c. 52. tells us, that among the Heathen, the Judge being about
to give sentence, did with hands lifted up, protest that he was clear from the
Blood of the Person; perhaps Pilate protested his Innocence by both washing his
hands and lifting them up. Whereas S. Mark c. 15. 25. says, that it was the
third Hour, and they Crucified him, S. Ioh. c. 19. 14. that it was about the
sixth Hour, when Pilate had not yet delivered up Jesus to be Crucified, S.
Hieron. in Psalm. 77. suspects that the Copies are vitiated in S. Mark, as
Ammonius in caten. gr. in. S. Ioh. and Theophylact do, that they are vitiated
in S. John, viz. by the fault of the Transcribers who might easily mistake one
Numeral Letter for another, as (...) for (...) or contrariwise. So the AEthiop.
in Mark has not the Third but the Sixth hour, on the other side several
ancient Copies, and those very exact, (says Petrus Alexand. in disput. de
Pasch.) and an (...) of S. John kept in the Church of Ephesus (if the Chronic.
Alex. do not deceive us) and Nonnus have the third Hour in S. John, not the
sixth. Besides this, some tell us that the Jews divided the Day into four Parts
(as it is clear that the Romans did; see Censorinus c. 23.) each of which
contained three hours, so that the second of those Parts, into which the Day
was divided, contained all the time from our Nine to our Twelve, and all that
time they called the Third Hour; the third of those Parts, all the time from
our Twelve to our Three afternoon, and this they called the Sixth Hour. Now if
these things be true, and if our Saviors Crucifixion was somewhat before our
Twelve of Clock, then S. Mark might truly say, that it was the Third Hour, and
S. John as truly, that it was as it were the Sixth Hour. Some finally there are
that say, that S. John followed the Roman account of the Hours of the Day, so
that his Sixth Hour is the same with our Six of Clock in the Morning, when S.
Mark followed the Jewish account. Pilate gave the Emperor Tiberius an account
of Jesus's having risen from the Dead, and other things concerning him,
Tertull. Apologet. c. 21. Some say that Pilate repented, and certainly (if they
mean no more by repentance) he had reason enough to be sorry, for having taken
away the Life of a Person, whom he knew to be innocent, as being ipse pro
conscientia sua Christianus, Tertull. ibid. The story that Volusianus was sent
in Embassage to Tiberius by Pilate, is censured and rejected by Baronius, An.
34. Number. 230. The Samaritans accusing Pilate to Vitellius President of Syria,
he was sent by him to Rome, Joseph. Ant. l. 18. c. 5. I shall not anxiously
dispute whether the Title, which Pilate set over our Savior, was written in
that which is properly called Hebrew, or in Syriack. In Syriack says Nonnus;
others say, in Sir. Words, but Hebr. Letters.

Pilate's Wife. S. Matthew. 27. 19. Not long before that Pilate was sent to
Judea, it was earnestly debated at Rome, whether they who were sent into the
Provinces, should be permitted to take their Wives along with them, but carried
in the Affirmative, Tacit. Annal. l. 3. Origin, S. Athanas^ de passion. and
cruce Dom. S. Ambros. in S. Luc. 23. S. Hieron. Leo, Euthym. and Theophylact
were all of Opinion, that the Dream was sent to Pilate's Wife by God; and
Origin and Theophylact say, that God designed her Conversion and Salvation in
the sending of it. Origin adds, that she had the beginning of her Conversion
from the Dream. Yet (say some) the Dream was sent by the Devil; but they are
either later Writers, or such as are of less Authority, as the Authors of the
Epistle to the Philippians, in S. Ignat. and of the sermon. de passione Christi
in S. Cyprian. The Dream (says S. Chrysostom.) was sent not to Pilate, but his
Wife; either because she was more worthy, or because the Jews would have
thought that he feigned it for an excuse, or perhaps he would not have
communicated, but concealed it. Nicephorus l. 1. c. 30. calls her Procle,
Lucius Dexter in Chron. Claudia Procula.

Barabbas. S. Matthew. 27. 16. S. Mar. 15. 7. S. Luc. 23. 18. S. Ioh 18. 40. Act.
3. 14. In Origin we read, Quem vultis dimittam vobis, Iesum Barabbam, a^ Iesum
qui vocatur Christus? but he adds that the name Jesus was not given to Barabbas
in all Copies, and suspects that it was super-added by Heretics. As to the
releasing a Prisoner at the Feast, Cyril. Alex. qu. Titus Bostr. and
Theophylact thought that it was upon the account of some ancient custom among
the Jews, they delivering one at the Passover, in Memory of the deliverance
from the Destroying Angel, and from their being kept as Prisoners in Egypt.
But since we read not of any such ancient Custom among the Jews, there are that
incline to Origen's Opinion, that it was from the Romans, a favor granted the
Jews by them; for we read in Livy l. 5. Vinctis dempta in eos dies vincula, i.
e. the Days lectisternii indicti, by which it seems that they released
Prisoners at more solemn times.

Simon of Cyrene. S. Matthew. 27. 32. S. Mar. 15. 21. S. Luc. 23. ^6. Origin, S.
August. de pastorib. c. ult. and Theophylact understand by Cyrene, the African
Cyrene, though some will have it to be Cyrene of Cyprus, or a Cyrene which they
fansy to be in Decapolis. S. Hilary, S. Ambros. S. Hieron. and S. Leo de
passione Dom. ser. 8. took Simon to be a Gentile. S. Athanas. de passion. and
cruce Dom. S. Hieron. S. Au^ust. de consens. l. 3. c. 10. S. Cyril. in caten.
gr. in S. Matthew. Theophylact and Euthym. conceived that Jesus himself carried
the Cross first, S. Ioh. 19. 17. and Simon afterward; yet Origin leaves it
doubtful whether of the two carried it first. Others suppose that he only
carried the end of the Cross after Jesus. Some tell us, that our Savior had
fallen under the Cross twice, before he was relieved by Simon. Theophylact
says, It is likely that Simon was living, when S. Mark writ his Gospel; see
also Victor Antioch. We are told by Suidas in voc. (...), that (...), the Word
used concerning Simon, and rendered to compel, is originally a Persian word.
Some have said that the Cross was fifteen foot in length.

Alexander and Rufus. S. Mar. 15. 21. They are mentioned either for the more
exact description of what was done, or that it might be better known what Simon
it was (Victor Antioch.) or for that they were Disciples (Commentar. in S. Mar.
ap. S. Hieron.) and that of some Note, who could certify those that would
enquire of them, what they had heard their Father Simon relate concerning
Christ. Whether the Alexander mentioned, Act. 19. 33. was the same with this
Alexander, or this Rufus, the same with the Rufus in Romans 16. 13. cannot be
determined. Some tell us that there was a third Brother named Lucius. Erasmus
instead of (...) has (...).

A great number of People and Women. S. Luc. 23. 27.

Two Thieues. S. Matthew. 27. 38. S. Mar. 15. 27. S. Luc. 23. 32. S. Ioh. 19. 18.
S. Matthew and S. Mark say, that the Thieves reviled Christ speaking in the
plur. Number: S. Luke says, that one of the Malefactors railed on him, so that
either S. Matthew and S. Mark used the Plural for the Singular, (see S. August.
de consens. l. 3. c. 16. S. Athanas. ser. contr. omnes Haereses, S. Cyril.
Hieros. Catech. 13. and Sedulius l. 4.) or else both the Thieves reviled him at
the first, afterward one of them instead of reproaching vindicated him, (see
S. Hilary, S. Chrysostom. S. Prosper. contr. Collator. c. 14. Iuvenc. l. 4. Tit.
Bostr. Victor Antioch. Theophylact and Euthym.) S. Hieron. and S. Ambrose take
notice of both these ways of reconciling the Evangelists, as Origin does of the
latter, and then adds, nisi forte alii sunt hi duo latrones qui ambo
blasphemaverunt. S. Hilary seems to have believed that the penitent Thief did
hang on Christ's Right hand, (and so the impenitent Thief on his Left hand)
just as the Righteous and the Wicked shall be disposed at the last Day, those
on the Right, these on the Left hand of the Judge. (See also S. Leo ser. 4. de
pass.) Some have inclined to believe that the converted Thief, was sprinkled
with the Water and Blood, which leaped out of Christ's pierced side. There are
those that say, that Christ had the Prerogative to be Crucified on an higher
Cross than the Thieves were, but this agrees not well wi^h the History of the
invention of the Cross, ap. Ruffin. l. 10. c. 7,8. Theodoret. l. 1. c. 18.
Sozomen l. 2. c. 1. Of breaking the Legs of those that were Crucified, see
Lactant. l. 4. c. 26. They that pretend to give us the Names of the Thieves
agree not among themselves, ^ome calling the Convert Thief Dimas, the other
Gesmas, but others call the former Vicinius, the latter Justinius. Seneca de
vit. beata tells, how some ex patibulo spectatores suos conspuerent, the
impenitent Thief could not forbear even upon the Cross, to spit out the venom
of his Reproaches upon our Lord.

Some that passed by, or stood beholding Jesus on the Cross. S. Mat. 27. 39. S.
Mar. 15. 29. S. Luc. 23. 35. S. Ioh. 19. 29. S. Matthew and S. Mark say, that
having filled a sponge with Vinegar, they put it on a Reed; S. John says, that
they put it on Hyssop, suppose that the Reed was a Rod of Hyssop, and there is
no difference between S. John and S. Matthe^ with S. Mark. Some ap. Theophylact
say expressly, that Hyssop is called a Reed, (see also Euthym.) and the Arab.
and Pers. render (...) in S. Ioh. just as they do (...) in S. Matthew. The Hyssop
that sprung out of the Wall (though supposed to be the least of Hyssops) is
reckoned a Tree, 1 Kings 4. 33. and called (...) by Joseph. Ant. l. 8. c. 2.
Accordingly the Misn. in Parah c. 11.. 8. distinguishes between gathering
Hyssop for Meat, and gathering it for Wood. Finally among the Reeds, etc.
wherewith they covered their Tents in the Feast of Tabernacles, the Gemar. in
Succah fol. 13. 1. reckons Hyssop. If this satisfy not, we may suppose that as
the Misn. in Parah c. 12.. 1. speaks of tying Hyssop with a Thread, (suppose to
or about a staff) so here Hyssop might be tied about the Reed, and the sponge
then about the Hyssop; or contrariwise the sponge was bound about the Reed with
Hyssop as with a Thread; see the AEthiop. in S. Ioh. Some of the Ancients make
the meaning to be, that Hyssop was mingled with the Vinegar, as Gall was in a
former Potion, (see Origin S. Chrysostom. Nonnus and Theophylact) which may also
be the meaning of those Words of S. Hilary, in Psalm. 68. spongiam plenam aceto
Hysopo admiscentes. We need not then hearken to those that will have (...)
here, to have the signification of (...). Neither need we enquire so anxiously
as some do, how it came that a Vessel of Vinegar was set there, for the Roman
Soldiers drunk Vinegar; yea Pescernius Niger commanded that they should all be
content with it, (as AElius Spartianus informs us) and refrain from Wine.

Many Bodies of Saints that Arose. S. Matthew. 27. 52. S. Hieron. and some ap.
Theophylact say, that they rose not till after Christ's Resurrection, as Origin
says, that they went not out of their Graves till after it. Yet some later
Writers think that they both arose, and also came out of their Graves before
Christ's rising, but lurked about the City till he was risen. The Sir. and
Pers. favor this Opinion, reading thus, They came forth, and after his
Resurrection entered into the Holy City. The Arab. and AEthiop. with Glycas,
read not After his, but After their Resurrection. The Author of the Quaest. and
Answ. ap Justin. Mart. qu. 85. Eusebius. de Demonstr. l. 4. c. 12. and Epiphan.
Haer. 75. thought that they did not die again, but ascend with Christ into
Heaven. On the other hand, Theophylact is positive that they did die again. The
Author de assumpt. Virginis ap. S. Hieron. is unwilling to determine either
way. Quadratus ap. S. Hieron. de vir. illustr. says, that he saw many that were
healed of Infirmities in Judea, and had risen from the Dead; as likewise ap.
Eusebius. l. 4. c. 3. he says that some of them lived to his time; but it may be
questioned whether he speaks this of these Saints in S. Matthew. 27. or of some
others that had been raised by Christ. S. Chrysostom. speaking of those that were
now raised says, (...), so that (though we cannot necessarily conclude so much
from the Word (...)) perhaps he had respect to the Patriarchs Noah, Abraham,
etc. but others think that they were such as had been known to those to whom
they appeared, as Zachary, Elizabeth, Simeon, Anna and the like. A later writer
names one Scarioth as one of them.

The Centurion and Others that watched Jesus on the Cross. S. Matthew. 27. 54. S.
Mar. 15. 39. S. Luc. 23. 47. Constantin. Porphyrogen. calls (...); and perhaps
it was upon this account, that this Centurion got the name Longinus, though
Lucius Dexter in Chron. calls him C. Oppius. He was not only a Convert, but
also a Martyr, (as some ap. S. Chrysostom. do affirm) and Metaphrastes Mart. 15.
says, that Pilate beheaded him with two Soldiers, and that he was
ignominiously treated after his Death; but how will this be reconciled, with
that which the same Metaphrastes says, October. 16. viz. that the Jews being
enraged against him, for asserting the Truth of our Lords Resurrection, he left
his Office (as two Soldiers left their Service) and published the Works of
Christ in Cappadocia.

Joseph of Arimathes. S. Matthew. 27. 57. S. Mar. 15. 43. S. Luc. 23. 50. S. Ioh.
19. 38. S. Hieron. de loc. Heb. makes Arimathea, to have been that which is
called Ramathaim Zophim, and was Samuel's Town, 1 Samuel 1. 1. and therefore some
suppose that Joseph was a Priest or Levite S. Hieron. also, both de loc. Hebr.
and in Epitaph. Paulae says, that it was not far from Lydda or Diospolis. And
de loc. Heb. speaking of Rima, (which we call Arumah, Iud. 9. 41.) he informs
us that many called it Arimathea. Theophylact. and Euthym. say, that Joseph was
one of the LXX Disciples, and S. Chrysostom. in S. Ioh. says (...), Perhaps he
was of the LXX; but indeed it seems not probable that he was. The word rendered
Counselor is (...), and it occurs frequently in the Talmud. In Ioma fol. 8.
2. we read of (...), which was also called (...), i. e when the High-Preists
came to be changed every twelve Months, and it was distinct from the (...)
where the Sanhedrim or great Senate sat, and therefore these (...) are such as
were distinct from them of the great Senate, though possibly the same Person
might be both a Counselor and a Senator. In Joseph. de bell. Iud. l. 2. c. 29.
(...) and (...) are found together, and perhaps as the (...) there were these
Counselors, so the (...) were the Men of the great Senate. Some suppose that
these (...) were Counselors for the Temple, such as consulted and took care
about things appertaining to it. What affinity the (...), in Joseph. de bell.
Iud. l. 5. c. 33. had to the (...), I know not. (...) is often rendered Decurio,
for the Decuriones were such as were singled out for public Counsel, when any
Colony was deduced, decima pars eorum qui ducerentur consilii publici causa
conscribi solita est. Digest. l. 50. tit. 16. l. 239.. 5. S. Cyril Alex. calls
Joseph a young Man. Some ap. S. Hieron. thought that the first Psalm was made
of him, and Tertul. l. 4. contr. Marcion. c. 42. applies the first verse of it
to him. Though Arimathea was the place of his Nativity, he dwelt at Jerusalem,
and so had his Sepulcher hewn out in his Garden, without the Walls of it. One
says, Nullibi mentio (...) Hierosolymitani, but Buxtorf. in voc. (...)
alleges out of the Jewish Writings, the very Words (...), Ioseph's asking the
Body of Jesus may remind us of the Laws de cadaveribus punitorum. Digest. l.
48. tit. 24. and Cod. l. 3. tit. 44. l. 11. which enact that the Bodies of
Persons executed should be granted to their relations or others that desired
them; and Vlpian adds, that Augustus wrote in the tenth Book of his Life, that
he observed this. But Verres made Men purchase the Liberty of burying the
Bodies of such, ( Cicer. in Verrem l. 5. and Quintilian declamat. 6.) and
Theophylact says, It is probable that Joseph purchased the Body of Jesus of
Pilate; but Pilate was guilty enough otherways, we need not load him with this.
S. Chrysostom. in S. Ioh. thought that he was known to Pilate, and so went in to
him more boldly, and had his suit granted. It was (says Metaphrastes) by the
perswa^ion of the Mother of our Lord, that he begged the Body. They wrapped the
Body of a condemned Person in an old worn linen cloth, ( Megilla fol. 26. 2.4.)
but Joseph did not wrap the Body of Jesus so. Some relate that he was
imprisoned that Night in which he buried his Body, and that to comfort him our
Lord appeared first to him; others say, that he was put into a Cell, and
watched there by the Priests themselves, yet miraculously delivered; but
Baronius An. 34. Number. 192. gives little credit to the latter relation, and the
former seems not to deserve much.

Cleopas. S. Luc. 24. 13. According to Dorotheus he was also called Simon, and
was the Lords Cousin-germain, and the second Bishop of Jerusalem; and as to
Simon or Simeon the second Bishop of Ierusalam, it is possible that he also had
the name of Cleopas; for Eusebius. l. 3. c. 11. says, that Simeon the second
Bishop of Jerusalem was the Son of Clopas or Cleopas, and so he might be called
Cleopas after his Father. Some have thought that this Cleopas was that very
Cleopas, who (as Hegesippus says) was the Father of Simeon, and Brother of
Joseph the Blessed Virgins Husband; but this cannot be, if that be true which
Nicephorus says, that Joseph married the Widow of his Brother Cleopas, (see
him l. 1. c. 33.) for then it is clear, that that Cleopas was dead long before
our Saviors appearing to our Cleopas. Of whom S. Hieron. de vir. illustr.
says, that he was of Emmaus; and in epitaph. Paulae, that Jesus being known at
Emmaus in the breaking of Bread, ejus domum in Eccesiam consecravit. The
Martyrol. Sept. 25. adds, that he was slain in the same House for the
Confession of Christ; see the Menolog. Octob^ 13. The Ancients (says Grotius)
probably thought that both he and the other Disciple, who went with him to
Emmaus, were of the number of the LXX; but who that other Disciple was there is
no Constat. He was Nathanael, (says Epiphan. Haer. 23.) S. Luke (say some ap.
Theophylact. and Nicephorus l. 1. c. 34.) see Anastas. Sinai^. in Hex. l. 10.
one Simon as Origin l. 2. contr. Celsum. S. Basil also in Isa. calls him Simon
(though some Copies have Menahem instead of Simon.) S. Ambros. in S. Luc. 12.
calls him Amaus, in S. Luc. 2^. Ammaon, (which Grotius will needs have to be
put for Simeon.) The two Disciples mentioned S. Mar. 16. 12. were the same with
these two in S. Luc. 24. in the Opinion of Theophylact, and all others that I
have consulted, except Euthymius.

Five Hundred Brethren, 1 Cor. 15. 6. with Others added to them afterward, Act.
2. 41. 4. 4. 5. 14. 6. 1,7. 21, 20. When it is said, 1 Cor. 156. (...), S.
Chrysostom. Oecumenius, and Theophylact observe the Ambiguity of the Word (...),
that it may either signify Above, referring to the number of the Brethren, or
From above, denoting that Jesus appeared to them from Heaven, viz. after his
Ascension. But Theophylact adds, that the most are for the former
Interpretation, making it to refer to the Number of the Brethren, and so do the
Sir. Arab. and Vulg. as well as our Translators. The Tradition is, that this
famous appearing to so many, was in Galilee upon Mount Tabor; see S. Matthew. 28.
16. The hundred and twenty mentioned Act. 1. 15. were not the whole number of
the Disciples, which our Lord had at his Ascension, but the Disciples then
present amounted to so many. The Conversion of the three thousand, Act. 2. was
the Fruit of Christ's Prayer for his Crucifiers, Father forgive them, so S.
Chrysostom. Leo de passione Dom. ser. 11. and S. August. in Psalm. 93. and ser. 4.
de Sanctis. As to the five thousand Act. 4. the question is whether they were
distinct from the three thousand, so that eight thousand in all were now gained
by the Apostles Sermons, or whether they were now made five thousand in all. S.
Hieron. in Isa. 11. S. Chrysostom in S. Matthew. Hom. 1. and 32. and in Act.
Theodoret. in Zach. 13. S. August. Tract. 39. in S. Ioh. also contr. Crescon.
l. 4. c. 54. and Oecumen. seem all to be for the former Opinion that the five
thousand are to be taken as distinct from the other, and that they were now in
all eight thousand. Whether the Men alone came into the computation, or the
Women also, I shall not determine. They that were added, Act. 5. 14. were of
the common sort, called the People, v. 13. for we are told there that the rest,
i. e. the Wealthier sort, or those that were in Office, or place of Rule, durst
not join themselves to the Church, for fear of losing their Estates and Places,
though they were moved to it, by the notable Miracles which they saw wrought.

Joseph surnamed Barsabas and Iustus. Act. 1. 21, etc. Some have thought him
the same with S. Barnabas, lead thereto by the Affinity of the Names; but
Eusebius. l. 1. c. 12. Epiphan. Haer. 20. and S. Chrysostom. in Act. 4. make them
distinct Persons. Others say that he was the same with Ioses the Lord's
Brother, S. Mar. 6. 3. If the Epitome (...) say true, he was that Iustus who
was the third Bishop of Ierusalem^ Dionysius de Divin. nomin. c. 11. alleges
one Iustus, calling him (...), and the Greek Scholiasts on Dionysius, viz.
Maximus and Pachymeres say, that it is this Iustus, and call him Ioses, even as
one of Beza's Copies, Act. 1. 23. has (not Joseph, but) Ioses. Papias (ap.
Eusebius. l. 3. c. ult.) reports, that he drunk deadly poison, and received no
harm by it. He was Bishop of Eleutheropolis, according to Dorotheus. He
suffered great Persecution from the Jews, and being a glorious Conqueror over
all, finished his course in Judea; so the Martyrolog. Iul. 20.

Devout Jews out of other Nations. Act. 2. If they had their fixed habitation
at Jerusalem, (of which Opinion S. Chrysostom. Oecumen. and Theophylact seem to
have been) it is probable that the general expectation of the Messiah's
appearing about that time, had brought them thither. But others are of Opinion
as to many of them, that they were come thither only upon occasion of the
Feast. From the Word (...), v. 5. nothing can be concluded, for though (...)
often signifies. To dwell, yet many times it signifies no more than to sojourn
or tarry for a time, see the LXX in Genesis 27. 44. 1 Kings 17. 20. Ier. 42. 15.
43. 5. 44. 8,28. 49. 17, 32. 50. 40. It may seem by those Words of Josephus, in
his Life, (...), as also from those of Augustus ap. Sueton. c. 76. Ne Iudaeus
quidem tam diligenter Sabbatis jejunium servat, quam ego hodie servavi, that it
was the manner of the Jews on their Feast-days to fast, however till the sixth
hour; therefore when they scoffingly said, that the Disciples were full of new
Wine, S. Peter replied, that it was but the third hour of the Day. It was
improbable that they should be drunk at that hour, when they used no^ to eat or
drink till the sixth hour.

Ioses called Barnabas. Act. 4. 36, 37. 9. 27. and c. 15. Gal. 2. 1, 9. The MS.
Alex. and several other ancient Copies, as also the Sir. AEthiop. and Vulg.
instead of Ioses, Act. 4. read Joseph. The Name (...) occurs frequently in
Pirke Avoth, see c. 1.. 4, etc. The Name Barnabas is by S. Luke interpreted
(...) A Son of Consolation or Exhortation, and is by some derived from (...) to
Prophecy, (for the Prophetic Office comprehends both Exhortation and
Consolation) by others from (...) which in the Arab signifies To Exhort.
According to others (...) is put for (...), and (...) is a Contraction of (...)
Consolation. Some say that (...) signifies sometimes to be refreshed, and will
have Barnabas to be put for Barnaphas. Some finally would derive it from (...),
whence comes (...) Consolation, the very Word which the Sir. uses Act. 4. 36.
but they do not find it easy to form (...) from (...). To the enquiry how S.
Barnabas a Levite came to have Lands, it is answered, that perhaps he had them
not in Judea but in Cyprus, where the Jewish Constitutions did not take place.
Others add, that a Levite might have or purchase an Estate even in the Land of
Judea. Abiathar had Fields in Anathoth, 1 Kings 2. 26. and Jeremiah a Priest,
bought a Field there of his Uncles Son, Ier. 32. 8,9. The Hill in which Eleazar
was buried belonged to Phinehas his Son, as being given him, Josh. 24. 33. Some
collect from 1 Samuel 1. 1. and 9. 5. that Samuel was born on his own Land, which
descended to him from Zuph. Of the Sale and Redemption of the Levites
Possession, see Levit. 25. 33. Theodoret and Oecumenius in 2 Cor. 8. 18.
incline to think, that the Brother mentioned there was S. Barnabas; and the
latter adds that many were of that Opinion, yet grants that others said, that
he was S. Luke. See S. Chrysostom. What reason some have to say that he was the
Brother of Zebedee, viz. by the Mother, I know not.

Ananias and Sapphira. Act. 5. Origin. Hom. 8. in S. Matthew. had the Charity for
them to think that they were judged so severely of the Lord, that they might
not be condemned with the World. Whereas we Act. 5. 1, 3, 8. call that which
they sold A Possession or The Land, the AEthiop. still calls it A Vineyard.

Hellenists. Act. 6. 1. 9. 29. (we in both places Translate it Grecians.) They
were the Jews of the Dispersion (say some) such as were Jews ( i. e.
Proselytes) as to their Religion, but Greeks by Nation, (say others.) The Sir.
in Act. 9. says, that they were such Jews as knew the Greek Tongue, and with
the Sir. agree S. Chrysostom. Oecumen. and Theophylact. It is probable that these
Hellenists read the Old Testament in Greek, as afterward some Hebrews desired
License of the Emperor, to read the Scripture in Greek, and had it granted,
when others of them were for reading it in the Hebrew Tongue only; see
Justinian Novel. 146.

Stephen. Act. 6. item c. 7. and c. 8. 2. 22. 20. He was a young Man and
beautiful, says S. August. ser. 6. de Sanctis. The Misn. in Sanhedr. c. 6. and
Moses Mikotsi praecept. aff. 100. set down the Rules or Orders which were
observed in stoning Persons. The hands of the Witnesses were to be first upon
them, according to Deuteronomy. 17. 7. The place of stoning was without the City, or
without the Three Camps, see the Gemar. in Sanhedr. fol. 42. 2. These two Rules
they did observe in stoning S. Stephen. But their eager thirst after his Blood,
would not permit them to observe other Circumstances, or as much as to wait
until a judicial sentence was past upon him. The place of his suffering was a
furlong from the City, says Nicephor. l. 14. c. 50. Some later Writers say,
that he suffered on the third of August, but S. Greg. Ny^sen. and Fulgentius in
their Sermons de S. Stephano, and S. August. de diversis ser. 97, 98. and de
Sanctis ser. 5. did celebrate the twenty sixth of December. as the Day of his
Martyrdom. See the rest in D. Cave.

Philip. Act. 6. 5. also c. 8. and c. 21. Epiphan. Hae^. 21. S. Hieron. contr.
Lucifer. S. Chrysostom. and Oecumen. and Theophylact agree, that this S. Philip
the Deacon (not S. Philip the Apostle) preached to the Samaritans, Act. 8. I
know that he who baptized the Eunuch is called an Apostle by Tert. de Bapt. c.
18. and S. August. de doctr. Christ. in Proleg. but the Word Apostle is
frequently used in a larger sense, and so from the bare name of Apostle, no
certain Argument can be drawn. Yet I acknowledge that S. August. tract. 6. in
S. Ioh. leaves it doubtful whether S. Philip it was, whether the Apostle or
this. When Act. 8. 39. we read that the Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip:
some Copies read, The Angel of the Lord caught away Philip; the Spirit of the
Lord did it by the Ministry of an Angel. S. Philip built a Sepulcher in which
he and his Daughters did rest, Gratian. c. 13. q. 2.. Vnaquaeque.

Prochorus. Act. 6. 5. Petrus de Natal. says, that he was S. Stephani Nepos,
but Genebrard. in Calend. Apr. 9. makes that Prochorus not to have suffered
till An. Dom. 170.

Nicanor. Act. 6. 5. Dorotheus relates, that he suffered the same day with S.
Stephen, but it is strange that S. Luke who so particularly describes S.
Stephen's, should omit the mention of Nicanor's Martyrdom, if he dyed the same
Day with him.

Timon. Act. 6. 5. He was also called Timotheus (as some say,) but was not
Timothy, S. Paul's Disciple.

Parmenas. Act. 6. 5. He dyed Ministering in the presence of the Apostles, says
Dorotheus.

Nicolaus. Act. 6. 5. He was first a Proselyte to the Jewish Religion, then a
Convert to the Christian, Epiphan. Haer. 25. a Proselyte not of the Gate, but
of Circumcision or of Righteousness. He was Bishop of the Samaritans, as say
Hippolytus and Dorotheus in the Lat. Edition.

Convert Priests. Act. 6. 7. and Rulers, S. Ioh. 12. 42. The Sir. i^stead of A
great Company of the Priests, Act. 6. has Much People of the Jews, but the
other Versions, and also the Greek Copies themselves read, Of the Priests, as
we do. Whether these Priests did openly profess the Faith to which they were
obedient, or they were Disciples secretly like those Rulers, S. Ioh. 12. may be
questioned.

Many Christians that were punished, imprisoned, dispersed and slain in the
Persecution raised about S. Stephen, Act. 8 1, 3, 4. 26. 10, 11.

An Eunuch. Act. 8. 27. Tertul. de Bapt. c. 18. S. Athanas. ad solitarios, S.
Hieron. in Isa. 56. S. August. Hom. 23. inter Hom. 50. Chrysol. ser. 160.
Arator, etc. understood him to be an Eunuch, in the sense in which we
ordinarily use the Word. Pontius Diaconus says, that he was a Jew, but whether
the meaning be that he was so by Birth, or that he was a Jew as proselyted to
the Jewish Religion, I know not. Eusebius calls him the First Fruits of the
believers through the World, and the first of the Nations or Gentiles that had
knowledge of the Mysteries of the Word of God, so that he seems to have thought
that he was a Gentile. And he might be originally so, but such an one as was
praecatechizatus and in timore Dei praeaptatus a Propheris, as S. Irenaeus l. 4
c. 40. says of him. The AEthiopians worshipped a God which they accounted
immortal, and the cause of all things, (so Strabo l. 17.) they were Circumcised
( Herodotus ap. Joseph. Ant. l. 8. c. 4.) and in these respects they were not
at so great a distance from the Jewish Religion as others, and so more easily
proselyted to it. S. Hieron. de loc. Hebr. says, that he was baptized in a
Fountain bubling up at the Foot of an Hill near Bethsura, a Village in the way
from Jerusalem to Hebron, and (as some add) therefore called sons AEthiopis.
Later Writers say, that he was baptized in the Brook or River Sorech, or in a
Brook near Nehel Eshcol, or in a River which some call Eleutherus, and say that
it gave the name to Eleutheropolis; but why we should believe them more than S.
Hieron. I know not. The MS. Alex. and several ancient Greek Copies, and S.
Hieron. contr. Lucifer. read Act. 8.39. thus, When they came up out of the
Water, the Holy Spirit came, or f^ll upon the Eunuch, but the Angel of the Lord
caught away Philip. S. Greg. Nazianz. orat. 40. Anastas. Sinait. and Euthym. in
Psalm. 67. seem to have thought that Candaces was the name of the Eunuch, but
the Sir. Arab. AEthiop. and Vulg. do all make Candace the name of the Queen,
and the Greek it self is sufficiently plain, not to add that Strabo l. 17. and
Dio l. 54. mention a Candace that was Queen of the AEthiopians, and that Pliny
l. 6. c. 29. says, that Candace was for many years a common name of their
Queens; also some call this Eunuch not Candac but Indich. He was Governor of
the City Gaza, says the AEthiop. taking (...), Act. 8. 27. to be a proper name
there, as it is in the very Verse foregoing; perhaps also S. Chrysostom. took it
to be ^o; s^e Theophylact. Some say that he brought gifts from Candace for the
Temple at Jerusalem.

Ananias of Damascus. Act. 9. 10^ 22. 12. Oecumenius, Dorotheus and the
Menolog. say, that he was one of the LXX Disciples. The Martyrolog. Ianuar. 25
and the Menolog. both affirm, that he Preached the Gospel in Eleutheropolis in
Palestine.

AE^eas. Act. 9. 33. It may be that (...) is the same name with (...) in the
Talmudists, in whom there is mention of (...). Oecumenius calls this AEneas
(...).

Tabitha. Act. 9. 36. The Sir. Word (...) (from the Hebr. (...)) signifies a
Roe, as Dorcas does in the Greek. The Upper Chamber in which she was laid, was,
it may be, the place where the Christians assembled for Divine Worship.

Simon a Tanner. Act. 9. 43. 10. 6, 17.

Corne^ius, and two of his Servants, a Soldier, his Kinsmen and near Friends,
Act. c. 10 and 11. The Gens Cornelia was Famous at Rome, and it is probable
that our Cornelius belonged to some Branch or Family of it. It is probable
also, that the Italian Band, of which he was Centurion, did belong to one of
the Italian Legions mentioned in Dio l. 55. and an ancient Inscription in
Lipsius's notes in Tacit. hist. l. 2. S. Hieron. in epitaph. Paulae, says of
her, Cornelii Domum Christi vidit ecclesiam, and in Epist. ad Salvinam he makes
Cornelius to have been the first Fruits of the Gentiles. The Constit. Apost. l.
7. c. 47. say that he was Bishop of Cesarea after Zaccheus; see the Martyrol.
Feb. 2.

Six Brethren that went with S. Peter to Cesarea. Act. 10. 23,45. 11. 12. The
Jews had a Maxim that the Holy Ghost would not dwell upon a Gentile, therefore
Cornelius and his friends being such, these Brethren who were of the
Circumcision, marvelled that the Holy Ghost fell upon them. Cornelius was well
reported of by the Jews for his fearing God, but being uncircumcised, he was in
their account no better than a Gentile.

Agabus and Other Prophets. Act. 11. 27. 21. 10. Orosius l. 7. says, that in
the Famine foretold by Agabus, the Christians in Jerusalem were relieved by
Helen Queen of the Adiabeni.

Herod Agrippa. Act. 12. S. Hieron. ad Eustochium de vinculis B. Petri, seems
to have thought the Herod Act. 12. to have been Herod the Tetrarch above
mentioned, others contend that he was Herod King of Chalcis, but the most
received Opinion is, that this Herod is he who is called Agrippa, as by
Josephus, so also by Philo in legate. ad Caium, who both of them testify his
Zeal for the Jewish Religion, and that together with his desire to gratify the
Jews put him upon persecuting the Christians. The Sir. says expressly, Herod
who was called Agrippa, and accordingly Suidas calls him Herod Agrippa; see
Eusebius. l. 2. c. 10. and Oecumen. It is said Act. 12. 23. that an Angel of the
Lord smote him, and some question whether it was a good Angel, (suppose the
Angel that delivered S. Peter v. 7.) or an Evil Angel; for some think that an
Evil Angel may be called an Angel of the Lord; as according to the Hebr. LXX.
Vulg. and Sir. in 1 Samuel 18. 10. it is said, An Evil Spirit of God came upon
Saul, (though we Translate An Evil Spirit from God) and so when Psalm. 35. 5. it
is said, Let the Angel of the Lord chase them. S. Hieron. says, Angelus
Domini, i. e. spiritus malus. Si malus, cur Domini? Si Domini, cur malus?
Domini quia Dominus illum creavit, and Dominus illum habet in potestate.
Malignus non natura sed sua adinventione. Josephus Ant. l. 19. c. 7. describes
the manner of his Death thus, Having proclaimed solemn Sports and Shows in
Honor of Caesar, on the second Day of the Festivity he came early in the
Morning into the Theater, having on a Robe most curiously wrought with Silver,
which encountering the beams of the rising Sun, reflected such a luster upon the
Eyes of the People, as begat an equal Wonder and Veneration in them. Hereupon
some Flatterers beginning the Acclamation, saluted him as a God, and desired
that he would be propitious to them. He did not repel their impious Flattery,
or express his dislike of it. Looking up he espied an Owl over his head, which
he beheld as a presage of his Death, as it had been before of his Advancement
or Prosperity. Suddenly an hearty Grief siezeth him, with a vehement Griping,
and extreme Torment in his bowels. So looking on his Friends he said, Behold
the Deity which ye admired, and your selves convinced of Flattery and Falsehood,
see him hurried to Death, whom even now ye proclaimed to be immortal. His
Torments not remitting put an end to his Life in five Days: Thus Josephus.
Compare the Description of Antiochus's Death 2 Mac. 9. 5, 9. with this. When it
is said that he was eaten up of Worms Act. 12. 23. MS. Cant. adds (...), i. e.
being yet alive.

The Accuser of S. James the Great, or he that drew him before the Tribunal,
beholding his constant Resolution and Courage, confessed himself to be a
Christian. So being lead with the Apostle to be executed, in the way he
heartily begged his Pardon, who said, Peace be to thee my Son, and kissed him;
so they were beheaded together Eusebius. l. 2. c. 9. and Suidas in voc. (...).
Some say that his Name was Josias.

Mary the Mother of Iohn-Mark. Act. 12. 12. She is supposed to have been S.
Barnabas's Sister. They say that he being convinced by the sight of Christ's
Miracles, communicated the notice of the Messiah to her, who thereupon hasted
to come to Christ, and invited him to her House. In that house (as some tell
us) he celebrated his last Supper, and appeared to Thomas and the rest, in it
the hundred and twenty Disciples met, Act. 1. and in it the Holy Ghost
descended on the Apostles. See Acta Alexandri.

Iohn-Mark. Act. 12. 12, 25. 13. 13. 15. 37. Origin, Oecumen. Euthym. Victor
Antioch. Kirstenius's MS. Arab. and Theophylact argument. in S. Mar. make him
and the Evangelist to be the same. Also S. Hieron. in Philem. 24. makes the
Mark spoken of there, S. Paul's Companion, to be the same with the Evangelist.
It is true S. Hieron. de vir. illustr. calls Iohn-Mark, S. Barnabas's Disciple,
and the Evangelist, S. Peter's, (see him both in S. Barnab. and S. Mar.) so
that he may seem there to distinguish them, but we cannot certainly conclude
from thence that he does; for the same Person might be the Disciple first of
the one, then of the other. Dorotheus says, that there were three Marks, one
S. Barnabas's Disciple, another S. Paul's, the third S. Peter's; how can he be
refuted, but by saying that the same Person might be the Disciple of more than
one Apostle? Papias ap. Eusebius. l. 3. c. ult. S. Irenaeus l. 3. c. 1. and S.
Hieron. de vir. illustr. say, that he was Interpres Petri. That Prologue to S.
Mark's Gospel which we have in Lyra (and which he fathers upon S. Hieron.) has
these Words of S. Mark, Sacerdotium in Israel agens secundum carn^m Levita; and
afterward these, Amputasse sibi post fidem pollicem dicitur, ut sacerdotio
reprobus haberetur. There are others that say, that he wore the Petalum; yea
some will needs suppose that he was one of the Priests mentioned Act. 6. 7.
Some conjecture that he was the young Man that bare the Pitcher of Water S.
Mar. 14. 13. See the rest in D. Cave.

Rh^d^. Act. 12. 13. Whether she was a Servant as S. Chrysostom. Proclus, etc.
supposed her to be, or a young Damosel of some note, yet so officious as to go
to the door and listen, they that please may determine. Some call her Rosulia
perhaps for that they thought that Rhoda and Rosulia have the same
signification.

Manaen. Act. 13. 1. R. D. Ganz, Millen. 4. An. 728. tells of one Menahem that
was joined with Hillel, but went away to the King ( i. e. Herod the Great) with
eighty Men richly arrayed. This Manaen Act. 13. was brought up with Herod the
Tetrarch, and so as Herod the Tetrarch was Herod the Great's Son, in like
manner this Manaen might be the Son of that Menahem mentioned by Ganz. By Herod
the Tetrarch here Act. 13. I suppose S. Luke meant that Herod whom he
constantly calls so in his Gospel, (see S. Luc. 3. 1, 19. and 9. 7.) and not
Agrippa the younger, as some would have it.

Simeon^ that was called Niger. Act. 13. 1. The Arab. and Vulg. call him Simon,
for Simon and Simeon is one and the same name.

S. Luke. He was one of the two Disciples to whom Jesus appeared in the way to
Emmaus, if we may believe some ap. Theophylact, and Niceph. l. 1. c. 34. see
also Eusebius. Emiss. or Eucher. fer. 2. post Pascha. A Greek Expositor ap. Aquin.
in proem. in S. Luc. affirms, that he was a perfect Master of Grammar, Poetry,
and Rhetoric, not wanting the Gifts of Prophecy; that going into Judea, he
there learned the Truth of Christ, and remained with him as his Disciple.
Eusebius. l. 3. c. 4. says^ that in his Gospel, he writ the things which they who
were eyewitnesses of them had delivered to him, in the Acts the things which
he had himself heard and seen; see also S. Hieron. in proem. in S. Matthew. and
de vir. illustr. He was the Brother mentioned 2 Cor. 8. 18, 19. according to S.
Ignat. ep. ad Ephesians. Origin Hom. 1. in S. Luc. S. Hieron. (ubi supra) Titus
Bostr. in S. Luc. 1. By S. Irenaeus l. 1. c. 2. he is styled a Disciple or
follower of the Apostles^ by Tertul. contr. Marcion. l. 4. c. 2. etc. S. Paul's
Disciple; Kirsten. MS. Arab. says, that he was first Christ's Disciple, then S.
Peter's, then S. Paul's. See the rest in D. Cave.

Certain Persons that went with S. Paul from Antioch to Jerusalem. Act. 15. 2.
I conceive that they were some of the Brethren, and not of the Jewish Zealots
or false Teachers mentioned v. 1. though it is possible that some of the
Zealots also went up at the same time. For S. Hieron. ep. 11. inter epist.
Augustini says, that both the accusers and the accused determined to go. The
MS. Cant. Act. 15. 2. adds, that the Zealots bid Paul and Barnabas and some
others to go up to be judged by the Apostles, and S. Irenaeus says l. 3. c.
13. His qui ad Apostolos vocaverunt eum, de quaestione acquievit Paulus, and
ascendit ad eos.

Titus. Gal. 2. 1, 3. If S. Paul's going up to Jerusalem mentioned here Gal. 2.
was the same with that Act. 15. 2. then it is probable that Titus was one of
those, who were sent by them of Antioch to Jerusalem, with S. Barnabas and S.
Paul. S. Irenaeus l. 3. c. 13. some ap. S. Hieron. and Primasius were of
Opinion, that it was the same with that Act. 15. but S. Chrysostom. and Epiphan.
Haer. 28. do dissent. S. Paul says, Gal. 2. that he went up by Revelation,
when as Act. 15. it is said that he was sent up by the Church of Antioch,
therefore it may seem not to be one and the same going up which is spoken of in
those places. But to this it may be answered, First, that he might be sent up
by the Church, and yet encouraged also to the Journey by a particular
Revelation; or secondly, the Church might be directed by Revelation, to take
that course, i. e. to send S. Paul and Others to Jerusalem. It was the Opinion
of the Incertus Author ap. S. Hieron. and also of some mentioned by S. Hieron.
himself, that Titus was Circumcised, (see also Primas.) but S. Ambros.
Theodoret, S. Hieron. etc. were of Opinion that he was not. S. Hieron. also
acquaints us what it was that misled those that conceived that he was
Circumcised, viz. when we read, Gal. 2. 5. To whom we gave place by Subjection,
no not for an hour, they left out the Negative, and read thus, To whom we gave
place by Subjection for an hour; and it is true, that S. Irenaeus l. 3. c. 13.
S. Ambros. the Latin Copy alleged by S. Hieron. and the Copies which Primas.
consulted, did follow this latter reading, and Tertull. contr. Marc. l. 5. c.
3. earnestly contends for it. But on the other hand the Greek and Latin Copies
which we have now; and so Theodoret, Epiphan. Haer. 28. the Sir. Arab. and
AEthiop. have the Negative, and read to the same sense that we do; so did also
the Greek Copies in S. Hierom's time. But suppose that S. Paul did write thus,
To whom we gave place for an hour, it does not follow that he gave place so far
as to Circumcise Titus. S. Hieron. ad Hedib. Qu. 11. says, that Titus was S.
Paul's Interpres.

Judas surnamed Barsabas. Act. 15. 22, 27, 32, 33. Perhaps he was the Brother
of Joseph called Barsabas, Act. 1. And (if Judas and Thaddeus was one and the
same name) possibly he was the Thaddeus whom Eusebius. l. 1. c. 12. affirms to
have been one of the LXX Disciples.

Silas. Act. 15. 22, 27, 32, 33, 34, 40. S. Hieron. epist. 143. ad Damasum, and
Anselm. in 2 Cor. 1. 19. thought, that Silas is he, who is otherwhere called
Silvanus, and S. Athanasius (on these Words, Omnia mihi tradita sunt a patre)
seems to favor this, when he says, that S. Paul took Sylvanus to be his
Associate. Hippolytus, Dorotheus, and the Menolog. make Silas and Silvanus to
have been distinct Persons; but the Authority of the former may well oversway
theirs. Some later Writers have thought that Silas was the Brother mentioned, 2
Cor. 8. 18.

Trophimus. It is evident from Act. 21. 29. and 27. 2. that he and Aristarchus
went up with S. Paul to Jerusalem, and it is believed that Sopater, Secundus,
Gaius, Tychicus, and Timothy, who are named together with them, Act. 20. 4. did
the same.

The Daughters of S. Philip. Act. 21. 9. S. Ambros. in Ephesians. 4. 11. and S
Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. 11. 5. say, that they foretold things to come. Yet S.
Chrysostom. denies that they foretold the things which befell S. Paul, though some
later Writers affirm that they did. The Menolog. in Sept. 4. calls one of them
Hermione.

Mnason. Act. 21. 16. (...), which we render, And brought with them, one
Mnason, with whom we should lodge, as do also the Vulg. Sir. and AEthiop. yet
we may render it thus, And brought us to one Mnason, with whom we should lodge.
Some Latin Copies have Jason instead of Mnason, (and so March. Veles. (...)) as
others have in place of it Nason. It is uncertain whether he was to lodge them
in the way from Cesarea to Jerusalem, or when they came thither; S. Chrysostom.
inclined to the later. It is uncertain also whether he was one of the LXX, and
therefore said to be an old Disciple, or whether he was called so only because
he was a more early Convert than many others.

Disciples of Cesarea. Act. 21. 12, 16.

Certain Asian Jews. Act. 21. 27. 24. 18.

Four Men that had a Vow. Act. 21. 23, 24. i. e. the Vow of a Nazarite, not of
a perpetual Nazarite (Nazaraeus seculi) but of a Temporary Nazarite, (Nazaraeus
dierum) of whom see Number. 6. Some conceive that they were Poor, and therefore S.
Paul was at charges with them. It was the custom (says Joseph. de bell. Iud. l.
2. c. 26.) for those that were in any sickness or distress to Vow Abstinence
from Wine, and to shave their heads certain Days, before that they offered
Sacrifice.

Claudius Lysias his Centurions and Soldiers. Act. 21. 31. 22. 24. 23. 10, 17.
He was Commander in Chief of the Roman Garrison, which kept the Castle or Tower
Antonia. Both Lysias and the Centurion knew that it was not Lawful to scourge a
Roman, and Uncondemned, Act. 22. 25, 26, 29. see what Cicero pleads against
Verres l. 5. for his scourging Gavins; also that Oration of Julius Caesar,
which we have in Salust. de bell. Catilin. See S. Chrysostom. in Act. 22. 25. with
whom agrees Oecumenius.

Above forty Jewish Zealots. Act. 23. 12. Some fansy that they might be of
those Priests (spoken of by Josephus in his Life) who being sent bound to Rome
by Felix, lived there on Figs and Nuts; but there is little ground for such a
Conjecture.

S. Paul's Sister's Son. Act. 23. 16. He perhaps overheard accidentally when
the forty Jews made the compact to kill S. Paul, or chanced to be present when
they came to the Chief Priests, or finally being sollicitous for his Uncle, he
set himself purposely to observe the Conspiracies of the Jews against him.

Felix. Act. c. 23. and c. 24. He is in Tacitus, Hist. l. 5. called Antonius
Felix, in Josephus Ant. l. 20. c. 5. Claudius Felix, perhaps he had both Names,
that of Claudius from the Emperor of that Name, whose Freed-Man he was (see
Sueton. in Claudio c. 28. and Tacitus) and that of Antonius he might have from
Antonia the Emperors Mother. He is branded by Tacitus with the practice of all
Cruelty and Incontinence, and so S. Paul's discourse of Righteousness (the
contrary to his Injustice and Cruelty) and Continence, (the contrary to his
Libidinousness) was a direct reproof of the Vices that were chiefly predominant
in him. The Jews requited his leaving S. Paul bound to pleasure them by
repairing to Rome, to inform against him, Joseph. Ant. l. 20. c. 7.

Drusilla. Act. 24. 24. Tacitus, Hist. l. 5. says, that Felix took to Wife
Drusilla the Grandchild of Cleopatra and Antonius; so that as Sueton. in
Claudio c. 28. tells us, that he was the Husband of three Queens, so it seems
he Married two Drusilla's. The Drusilla mentioned by Tacitus, was the Daughter
of Iuba King of Mauritania. This in the Acts was the Daughter of Herod Agrippa
abovementioned, and first Married to Azizus King of the Emessenians, but Felix
so wrought upon her by the Persuasion of Simon a Magician, that for him she
left both her Husband and her Religion, Joseph. Ant. 20. c. 5.

Tertullus. Act. 24. 1. He is believed to have been a Roman, though putting on
the Person of his Clients, he speaks, v. 6. as if he were a Jew.

Porcius Festus. Act. c. 24. and c. 25. and c. 26. See also Joseph. Ant. l. 20.
c. 7. and de bell. Iud. l. 2. c. 24. Lyra has Porticius instead of Porcius; but
perhaps it is only through the fault of the Transcriber.

The Council which Festus conferred with. Act. 25. 12. It was the Jewish
Council or Sanhedrim, (says S. Chrysostom. together with others) or those of them
that were then present. But the Word here used is not (...) (the usual Word for
the Jewish Council) but (...), by the AEthiop. rendered, His Counselors; by
the Sir. The Sons of his Council. Add hereto that we are told that the Judges
used to have some to assist them, or with whom they might consult as occasion
was, so that those may be they who are here called the Council. That passage in
Cicero pro P. Quintio; Quaeso C. Aquili vosque qui estis in consilio, may help
to explain this.

Agrippa the Younger. Act. c. 25. and c. 26. He was the Son of Herod Agrippa
abovementioned. S. Chrysostom. says, that he had also the Name of Herod, as his
Father had before him. He removed Ananus from the Highpriests Office, because
he had called a Council, and sentenced S. James and others to be stoned.

Bernice. Act. 25. 13. 26. 30. She was the Sister both of Agrippa the younger,
and of Drusilla beforementioned. Yet S Chrysostom. seems to call her Agrippa's
Wife, ((...)) and inclined to think that she also was desirous of hearing S.
Paul. The great Pomp of which S. Luke speaks, has reminded some of the Diamond
on Bernice's finger, mentioned by Iuvenal. Sat. 6. There is mention of her in
Tacit. Hist. l. 2. in Josephus often, and in Gorionides. Some have taken
Bernice in the Acts to be a Man's Name, which to me is matter of admiration.

Julius, Act. 27. 1. In Dio l. 55. and the ancient Inscription which we have in
Lipsius's Notes on Tacitus, both the second and the eighth Legion have the Name
of Augusta, it is probable that the Augustan Band, of which Julius was
Centurion, belonged to one of those Legions. The Milites Augustales in Dio l.
61. and the Equites Augustani in Tacit. Annal. l. 14. were perhaps called so
upon some other account, and did not belong to those Legions. The MS. Alex. in
Act. 27. 3. has Iulianus instead of Julius.

According to Dorotheus, Erastus was Steward of the Church of Jerusalem,
afterward Bishop of Paneas; and Philemon was Bishop of Gaza.

Apollos with Twelve more. Act. 18. 25. 19. 1. S. August. de unic. Bapt. c. 7.
alleges, some who thought that the Twelve Persons lied in saying that they
were Baptized into John's Baptism, but he himself was of another Mind, Tract.
5. in Joan. and de Bapt. l. 5. c. 9. and so Tertul. de Bapt. c. 10. Origin tom.
8. in Joan. S. Hieron. contr. Lucifer. Optatus l. 5. They are by S. Chrysostom.
supposed to have been Asian Jews, who going up to Jerusalem at some of the
Feasts, heard the fame of John, and were Baptized of him. We may suppose, that
Apollos likewise was Baptized by John, when he went up to some of the Feasts.

Albinus succeeded Festus in the Procuratorship of Judea. All Good Men and
Studious of the Law in Jerusalem, were so displeased with Ananus, for
Condemning S. James and his Fellow-Martyrs, that they not only desired Agrippa
to charge him to desist from such rash Proceedings, but also acquainted Albinus
with his presumptuous Fact in calling a Council to Condemn S. James and the
rest, which they said he ought not to have done without his leave. Hereupon
Albinus Writ a sharp and menacing Letter to Ananus, Joseph. Ant. l. 20. c. 8.

Zocharias the Son of Baruch was slain by the Zealots in the midst of the
Temple, and is supposed by some to be the Zacharias mentioned S. Matthew. 23. 35.
He has the Character, that he was a just, unblameable Person, and an Enemy to
Wicked Men; see Joseph. de bell. Iud. l. 4. c. 19. and Gorionid.

Certain of our Lord's Kindred, Nephews or Grandchildren of S. Jude, called the
Brother of Christ, were accused to the Emperor Domitian, as being of the Stock
of David, but dismissed by him. Being looked upon now not only as the Lords
Kinsmen, but also as Martyrs, (because they had born Testimony to the Truth
before Domitian) they had the Presidence of Churches, and continued to the time
of Trajan. They seem to have been only two; see Eusebius. l. 3. c. 20, 32. The
Person that accused them to Domitian, is in some Copies of Eusebius called
(...), in others (...), in others (...), in Nicephorus. l. 3. c. 10. (...), by
Ruffinus Revocatus, and by some Evocatus. So that some think that it is not a
proper Name, but that he was Miles evocatus. There is frequent mention of
Milites evocati in the Roman History, but Dio gives the best account of them,
both what they were l. 45. and when they began l. 55. see also l. 48.

Simeon Bishop of Jerusalem, after S. James was of the number of them that saw
and heard Christ, so Hegesippus ap. Eusebius. l. 3. c. 32. See also Eusebius. l. 4.
c. 22. above in Cleopas, and D. Cave.

The place to which the Christians betook themselves, when they fled out of
Jerusalem before the Destruction of it, is said to have been Pella.

Sect. 2.
ATTICUS was the Person to whom Simeon was accused in the time of Trajan. He
was amazed to see a Man of the Age of one hundred and twenty years, endure most
cruel Torments for many Days together. Eusebius. l. 3. c. 32.

Simeon's Accusers, who had impleaded him as being descended from David,
enquiry being made, were found to be of the Royal Line of Judah themselves.
Eusebius. ibid.

Tiberian^s, Governor of Palaestina Prima, writ to Trajan, That he was wearied
out with executing the Laws against the Christians who offered themselves
freely to Punishment. Suidas in voc. (...).

Simeon's ^^^^ess^rs in the Second Century according to Eusebius. were these that
follow:

Iustus the Third Bishop of Jerusalem, whom Epiphan. Haer. 66. calls Judas. See
above in Joseph called Barsabas.

The Fourth Zache^s. Epiphan. and Nicephorus Patriarch. ap Ios, Scalig. call
him Zacharias.

The Fifth Tobias.

The Sixth Benjamin.

The Seventh John.

The Eighth Matthias. The Martyrolog. Ianuar. 30. says, that he suffered much
under Hadrian for the Name of Jesus.

The Ninth Philip.

The Tenth Senecas or Seneca.

The Eleventh Iustus.

The Twelfth Levi, or Levis, or Lebes; see Nicephor. l. 3. c. 25.

The Thirteenth Ephres. Epiphan. calls him Vaphres. Nicephorus Patriarch. ap.
Vales. and the other Necephorus, Ephrem.

The Fourteenth Joseph, or Ioses, or Iosis; see Epiphan.

The Fifteenth Judas. All these were of the Circumcision, Eusebius. l. 4. c. 5.
Epiphan. Haer. 66. So Sulpitius Severus l. 2. says, that almost all the Jews in
Judea, to Hadrian's time, joined the observance of the Law, with the Profession
of the Faith of Christ. Eusebius could no where find how many years each of
these Bishops sat, but it is certain that they continued but a short time in
the Sea, yea, perhaps Simeon alone held it longer than all the Thirteen that
followed him.

The Sixteenth Mark, the first after them of the Circumcision; for now a Church
begun to be gathered in Jerusalem of the Gentiles. Eusebius. l. 4. c. 6. see also
Epiphan. and Sulpit. Sever. l. 2. The Martyrol. October. 22. says, that he dyed a
Martyr.

The Seventeenth Cassianus.

The Eighteenth Publius.

The Nineteenth Maximus.

The Twentieth Iulianus, called by some Julius; see Nicephor. l. 4. ^c. 19. in
Marg.

The Twenty first Gaius, Eusebius. l. 5. c. 12. but in Chron. he calls him
Gaianus, as Epiphanius calls him Gratianus, Nicephor. Caius.

The Twenty second Symmachus.

The Twenty third another Gaius, or Caius. See Eusebius. Hist. and Chron.

The Twenty fourth, another Iulianus.

The Twenty fifth Capito. Nicephorus Patriarch. in Ios. Scalig. places Elias
between Iulianus the Second and him.

The Twenty sixth Ualens. Eusebius. l. 5. c. 12. but in Chron. he puts two Bishops
between Capito and Valens, viz. Maximus and Antoninus. Epiphan. and Nicephorus
Patriarch. agree with his Chron. but the other Nicephor. with the History. The
Truth is, those two Bishops seem to be omitted in his History, through the
Negligence of the Transcribers, for in that very place, l. 5. c. 12. Eusebius.
makes Narcissus the Thirtieth Bishop in Succession from the Apostles, and the
Fifteenth from the Overthrow of the Jews, by Hadrian; whereas if these two be
left out of the Catalogue, Narcissus was not the Thirtieth, but only the Twenty
eighth from the one, and only the Thirteenth from the other.

The Twenty seventh, or Twenty ninth Dolic^ianus, or Dulychianus.

The Twenty eighth, or Thirtieth Narcissus, of whom hereafter.

Hegesippus was one of those that first succeeded the Apostles, Eusebius. l. 2. c.
23. he was near to the time of the Apostles, S. Hieron. de vir. illustr. He
Writ in five Books the Ecclesiastical History, from the Passion of Christ to
his time, S. Hieron. ibid. There are several fragments of his Writings here and
there in Eusebius, who l. 4. c. 22. informs us, that he alleges some things
out of the Gospel according to the Hebrews, and the Syriack Gospel, and has
some things that relate to the Hebrew Dialect, whence he Collects, that he was
an Hebrew by Birth, and converted to the Faith of Christ. See the Martyrolog.
April. 7.

Justin M^^tar was (...) Photius Number. 125. the Son of Priscus Bacchius. He
calls himself in his Second Apology, (...), where (say some) (...) plainly
shows, that Priscus and Bacchius, are not names of one and the same Person, but
Priscus was the Son of Bacchius, and Justin the Son of Priscus. But it is not
necessary that (...) should refer to (...), for (as I conceive) (...) denotes,
the Inhabitants of Flavia or Neapolis, and the meaning is, that Justin was of
them of Neapolis. The Spanish Annals. ap. Vasaeum, An. Dom. 140. make him the
same with Justin the Historian, the Epitomizer of Trogus Pompeius, and so does
the Fasciculus Temporum; but Vasaeus refutes this, though it is true, that our
Justin, and the Historian, were Contemporaries. Irenaeus has recorded two
sayings of his, one l. 4. c. 14. that he would not have believed our Lord
himself, if he had Preached any other God, than the Maker of the World; the
other l. 5. c. 26. that before our Lords coming, Satan durst not blaspheme God,
for until that time he knew not of his own Damnation. Tatianus (who calls him
the most admirable Justin) adds a Third, wherein he compares the Devils curing
Diseases, to the practice of Thieves, in helping Persons to that which they
themselves have stolen. Whereas Eusebius. l. 4. c. 18. speaks of a Book of his in
which he disputes, (...) de natura Daemonum (see S. Hieron. de vir. illustr.)
Suidas instead thereof has (...) of the Flight of Demons. Some speak of a
Commentary of his on Genesis, others of a Commentary upon the Revelation; but
probably the former, is that Commentary on the Hexemeron, mentioned by Anastas.
Sinaita, the latter only what he discourses of the One Thousand years; or
perhaps when Eusebius. says of him, that he makes mention of the Revelation, some
have improved that mention into a Commentary. The Tract called Quorundam
Aristotelicorum dogmatum eversio, may be that which Photius Intitules, Contra
Primum and Secundum librum Physicae auscultationis. Possevinus mentions a
Commentary of his on Dionysius's Eccles. Hierarchy, but never saw it; only he
found such an Inscription in some MS. Books. It is imputed to him as a great
Error in Chronology, that he in Dialog. cum Tryph. makes Christ to have
suffered under Herod the Ascalonite; and some add that he makes his Son
Antipas, to have been then the High Priest, But the latter Imputation is wholly
groundless, and all that Justin says as to the former is, that the Jews said
it, (...). See the rest in D. Cave.

Tryphon was an Hebrew of the Circumcision, and fled out of Judea because of
the Wars there, ( viz. in the Emperor Adrian's time) as he himself told Justin
in his Dialogue with him. In init. There is some Affinity between the Names
Tryphon and Tarphon: also Eusebius. l. 4. c. 18. says, that Tryphon was a Man of
great Note amongst the Hebrews, therefore some have thought that he was R.
Tarphon the wealthy Priest, the Master, (say some) the Colleague, or Associate
(say others) of R. Akiba; see K. D. Ganz.

Narciss^s Bishop of Jerusalem was a Chief Person in a Synod assembled about
the Paschal Controversy, Eus. l. 5. c. 23. The Inhabitants related many
Miracles wrought by him, this amongst the rest. In the Easter-Vigils it
happened, that the Ministers wanted Oil, at which the Multitude was much
grieved. Narcissus seeing this commanded Water to be brought, over which having
prayed, he bid them pour it out into the Lamps with a firm Faith in God, which
they did, and found the Water changed into the Nature of Oil; some of which the
Brethren reserved for a Memorial of the Miracle. Certain lewd Persons fearing
some severe censure from Narcissus; to prevent this, accused him of a very
heinous crime, confirming the Accusation with grievous Oaths and Imprecations.
One wished that if he lied he might be burnt to ashes, the second that he might
die by a cruel Disease, the third that he might be smitten with Blindness; all
which befell them. A small spark of Fire kindling in the House of the first,
consumed it, him, and his whole Family to ashes. The second was seized from
head to foot, with a most grievous Disease. The third being alarmed with these
dreadful Judgments upon the other, confessed their wicked Compact, and wept for
it so much and so long, that he lost both his Eyes. In the mean time Narcissus
much troubled at the Accusation, (though none of the Faithful believed it) had
retired into Deserts, but after some years, he showed himself again, as one
risen from the Dead, and being now more admired than ever (God having
vindicated his innocence so miraculously) was entreated to resume his
Bishopric, Eusebius. l. 6. c. 9, 10. Being one hundred and sixteen years old,
(not one hundred and six as Nicephor. l. 5. c. 10.) he saluted the Antinoites,
and besought them to be of one Mind, Eusebius. l. 6. c. 11. Hierosolymis natalis
beati Narcissi Episcopi. Martyrolog. October. 29.

Theoph^lus was Cornelius's Successor, and the third Bishop of Cesarea; so the
Constitut. Apost. l. 7. c. 47. However he was Bishop there, and presided in a
Synod, held about the Controversy of Easter, together with Narcissus, Eusebius.
l. 5. c. 23.

Sect. 3.
WHEN Narcissus had gone aside into the Deserts, the Neighboring Bishops
ordained Dios, or Dius, Bishop of Jerusalem, who held not the Sea long. To him
succeeded Germanion, or Germanio, and to him Gordius, in whose time Narcissus
appeared again after his recess, Eusebius. l. 6. c. 10.

Alexander was a Confessor in the Persecution under the Emperor Severus. Being
admonished by a Vision he went up to Jerusalem, to visit the places there, and
to Pray. Coming thither he was met, and joyfully received by the chief Persons
of that Church, who were also warned in a Vision to hasten out of the City, and
meet the Bishop ordained of God for them. So by the Concurrence and Assistance
of the Bishops of the Neighboring Cities, they constrained him to abide with
them, and to assist Narcissus, who by reason of his great Age, was now unable
to execute the Office. Nicephorus l. 5. c. 10. tells of a Voice from Heaven,
after they were gone out of the City to meet Alexander, which encouraged them
to receive him as their Bishop. He Writ sundry Epistles. One to the Antinoites,
desiring them to be of one Mind. Another to the Church of Antioch, Writ in
Prison, in which he Congratulates their Happiness, in having Asclepiades for
their Bishop. A third to Origin, in which he calls Pantenus and Clemens
Al^xand. his Masters and Progenitors, acknowledging how much he had profited by
them. A fourth to Demetrius, who expressed his dislike of Origen's expounding
the Scriptures in the Church, when he was not in Holy Orders, but Alexander
produced sundry Examples of those that had done the like. He and the Bishop of
Cesarea approved themselves firm Friends to Origin all along, they also
ordained him Presbyter, about which there was no small stir. He erected a
Library at Jerusalem. In Decius's Persecution, he was brought before the
President at Cesarea, and constantly confessing the Faith, by him cast into
Prison; where having now attained to a great Age, he ended his mortal Life,
Eusebius. l. 6. c. 8, 11, 14, 19,20, 23, 39. and in Chron. and S. Hieron. de vir.
illustr. in Origene and Alexandro. As to his Ordaining Origin, he said that he
did it upon the Testimonial of Demetrius himself, S. Hieron. ibid. in
Alexandro. Alexander sent his Letter to the Church of Antioch, by Clemens a
Presbyter, upon whom he bestowed an high Encomium. S. Hieron. ibid. in Clement.
Alex. thinks, that that Clemens was S. Clemens Alexandrinus, but according to
Ruffinus's Translation of Eusebius. l. 6. c. 11. he was a Presbyter of the Church
of Antioch. Sixtus Senensis says, that Alexander left behind him a Commentary
on the Epistle to the Galatians; S. Hieron. also in his Preface to that
Epistle, mentions an Alexander that was the Author of a Commentary upon it; but
he calls him an old Heretic, therefore he could not be our Alexander. To our
Alexander, Clemens Alex. dedicates his Book called The Ecclesiastical Canon,
and Dionysius of Alexandria gave an honorable Testimony of him, Eusebius. l. 6.
c. 13, 46.

Clemens Alexandrinus was sometime in Palestine, as he himself acquaints us in
Stromat. l. 1. The Master which he had there is supposed to have been either
Theophilus abovementioned, or one Theodotus, the Epitome of his Hypotyposes,
being thus inscribed, (...). See Vales. Annot. in Eusebius. l. 5. c. 11.

Theoctistus, Bishop of Cesarea, had a great Veneration for Origin, as
Alexander Bishop of Jerusalem had, joined with Alexander in Ordaining him
Presbyter, also in defending him against the Accusations of Demetrius. He was
one of those that invited Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, to a Synod held at
Antioch, about the Novatian Heresy; see Eusebius. l. 6. c. 19, 23, 27, 46.

Aphricanus, a Person of great Renown, writ an Epistle to Origin, touching the
History of Susanna, another to A^istides, about the seeming Dissonancy of S.
Matthew, and S. Luke, as to our Saviors Genealogy. He left five Volumes of
Chronicles accurately composed, and was Author of the Books called (...),
Eusebius. l. 1. c. 6, 7. and l. 6. c. 31. In his Epistle to Origin he calls him
his Son. His History or Chronicle begun at the Creation of the World, and was
continued to the Empire of Macrinus, Photius Number. 34. The (...) were written in
fourteen Books says Photius, in twenty four says Suidas, in voc. (...), but
this difference might happen by the fault of the Transcribers. Whereas Eusebius.
in Chron. and S. Hieron. de vir. illustr. give Aphricanus the name of Julius,
Suidas calls him (...), adding that he was a Philosopher, (whereas others call
him an Historian, Eusebius. l. 1. c. 6. and S. Basil de Spiritu Sancto c. 29.) and
a Man of Libya, whereas he is generally supposed to be of Palestine. Some
therefore have thought that it was another Aphricanus (not ours) that was
Author of the Books inscribed (...), and when they are pressed with the Authority
of Eusebius. Photius, Suidas, Niceph^r. l. 5. c. 21. the (...), and Historiarum
Synagoge, ap. Ios. Scal. who do all ascribe them to our Aphricanus; they say
that the passage concerning the (...) crept into Eusebius's Copies, and they
mi^led all the rest, and the truth is, it does not appear either in Ruffinus's
Translation of Eusebius, or in S. Hieron. de vir. illustr. Tri^hemius
attributes other Books to Aphricanus besides the abovementioned, as, Of the
Trinity of Attalus, Of the Circumcision, Of the Passover, and Of the Sabbath.
He says also that he erected and furnished a Library at Cesarea at his own
Charge. He undertook an Embassy to Rome about rebuilding Emmaus, Eusebius. in
Chron. and S. Hieron. de vir. illustr.

Origin was s^veral times in Palestine. if any would know what he did, or is
said to have suffered there, they may consult D. Cave in his Life,. 11, 14, 15,
16, 18, 19, 23.

Firmilianus, Bishop of Cesarea in Cappadocia, had that Esteem and Reverence
for Origin that he would come sometimes from thence to visit him, and would
stay a considerable time that he might improve himself by his Society and
Converse, Eusebius. l. 6. c. 27.

Theodorus ( al. Gregorius) and his Brother Athe^^dorus, were Origen's Scholars
at Cesarea among many others, whom the Fame of such a Master has drawn, not
only from the Country adjacent, but also from Provinces more remote, Eusebius. l.
6. c. 30. See the rest in D. Cave in the Life of S. Greg. Thaumaturgus.

Another Theodorus is reckoned among Origen's Scholars, by Nicephor l. 5. c.
20. of whom he says, In Palaestina cum magna gloria sacerdotio functus est.

Protostetus was a Presbyter of Cesarea, and a Glorious Confessor in the
Persecution by Maximinus, in which he suffered no small Affliction. Origin
dedicated his Book of Martyrdom to him, and Ambrose, Eusebius. l. 6. c. 28. See
Origin exhort^ ad Martyr.

Repara^a, a Noble Virgin, is said to have obtained the Crown of Martyrdom at
Cesarea under Decius, being, after she had with much Christian courage endured
sundry sorts of Torment, at last beheaded. Some fansied that they saw her Soul
fly up to Heaven in the shape of a Dove, Martyrolog. October. 8. and Volaterran,
l. 19. who says, that she was but twelve years old.

Christophorus the Martyr mentioned by Nicephor. l. 5. c. 27. is said by
Volaterran, l. 14. to have been genere Iud^us, natione Chananaeus.

Mazabanes, or as Epiphan. Haer. 66. calls him Mazabanus, was Bishop of
Jerusalem next after Alexander, Eusebius. l. 6. c. 39. and l. 7. c. 5. and in
Chron.

Priscus, Malchus, and Alexander, blaming themselves for their sloth, in not
striving for the Crown of Martyrdom, repaired to the President of Cesarea, and
confessing themselves Christians, were sentenced by him to be devoured with
Wild Beasts, Eusebius. l. 7. c. 12.

Domnus succeeded Theoctistus in the Sea of Cesarea, Eusebius. l. 7. c. 14.

The^tecnus followed Domnus, and governed the Church with great Care and
Diligence. He had been Origen's Scholar, and was present at a Synod at Antioch,
against Paulus Samosatenus. He Ordained Anatolius Bishop, designing him for his
Successor, Eusebius. l. 7. c. 14, 28.

Anatolius did not succeed Theotecnus as was designed, yet for some time he
governed the Church of Cesarea together with him, Eusebius. l. 7. c. 32.

Hymeraeus was Bishop of I^rusalem after Mazabanes, and present at a Synod held
at Antioch, against Paulus Samosatenus, Eusebius. l. 7. c. 28. Nicephorus l. 5. c.
26. says, that he was of a very great Age.

Marinus, a Person rich and well descended, being to be advanced to a Military
Dignity called the Vine, or to the place of a Centurion, another steps forth
and objecteth, that by the Ancient Laws he was incapable of that Dignity, being
a Christian, and not sacrificing to the Emperors. Being examined by the
President whether he was so, and confessing it, he has only the space of three
Hours granted to deliberate. When he came forth from the President, Theotecnus
beforementioned took him by the hand, lead him into the Church, and having
brought him into the Chancel, after other discourses, showed him the Sword that
hung by his side, laying the New Testament over against it, and bid him choose
whether of them he would. Marinus forthwith takes up the Testament, whereupon
Theotecnus said to him, Hold fast then, cleave firmly to God, and thou shall
enjoy the things that thou desire. So having received the Bishops solemn
Benediction, and the time allowed for deliberating being expired, he is called
again to the Bar, and there manifested that undaunted Courage and firm
Resolution, that he was sentenced to be beheaded, and the Sentence was
accordingly executed, Eusebius. l. 7. c. 15. Ruffinus makes Marinus to have been a
Citizen of Jerusalem. Of the Vine, see Lucan. l. 6.

Astyrius a Roman Senator, very dear to the Emperors, rich as well as noble,
being present when Marinus was beheaded, laid his Body (being decently bound
up) upon his Shoulders, and interred it very honorably. Several things are
related of him; This amongst the rest: Near Cesarea Philippi or Paneas, is the
Hill Panius, at the Foot whereof are certain Fountains which are the Original
of the River Jordan. Here the Inhabitants on a solemn Day offered Sacrifice,
which being cast into those Waters, by some diabolical Art never appeared
afterward. Astyrius being present at the offering the Sacrifice, and pitying
the deluded People (who looked upon its Disappearing as a notable Miracle) with
Eyes lifted up, prayed to God through Christ, that he would rebuke Satan, and
restrain him from seducing men. Which done, the Sacrifice is said to have
floated on the top of the Water, Eusebius. l. 7. c. 17. Ruffinus says that
Astyrius was himself a Martyr.

Acbaius or Acheus was the President that condemned Marinus. Some Question
there is, whether when Eusebius. l. 7. c. 15^ says (...), we are to take (...) to
be the President's proper Name, or the Name of his Country. Of his Country we
must say, if we with some render the Words thus, Achivus hic erat genere. But
when we consider that (...) was a proper Name, as well as a common, (we may
instance in that (...) of whom Polybius speaks so much, l. 5. and 8.) we may
perhaps incline to think, that it was his proper Name.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 3. lin. 4. for 6. r. 69. l. 13. for 3. 17. r. 2. 17. l. 15. for 31. 6. r.
3.. 6. l. 44. r. Hedibiam. p. 5. l. 40. r. Siloha. p. 6. l. 12. r. (...). p. 7.
l. 1. for 10. 2. r. to. 2. p. 9. l. 16. r. (...). l. 40. for 10. 2. r. to. 2.
l. 44. for 10. 11. r. to. 11. p. 12. l. 14. r. (...) or (...). l. 16. r. (...).
p. 13. l. ult. r. (...). p. 14. l. 29. r. (...). p. 16. l. 36. r. (...). p. 25.
l. 8. r. Per^a p. 26. l. 16. r. Emesam. p. 30. l. 9. r. Baptis. l. 33. r. his.
p. 31. l. 44. dele years. p. 32. l. 4. r. Pachymeres. l. 21. r^and Nonnus call.
p. 34. l. 11. r. (...). p. 35. l. 15. r. Leo de pass. Dom. l. 14. r. Abgarus.
p. 37. l. 7. r. (...). p. 39. l. 18. r. (...). l. 28. r. (...). p. 43. l. 6.
for 70. r. 79. p. 57. l. 41. r. they did not. p. 58. l. 1. for 21. r. 24. l.
11. r. our. l. 15. r. (...). p. 59. l. 12. r. caedit. l. 20. r. tell. p. 61. l.
2. dele qu. l. 24. r. (...) and (...). p. 64. l. 38. dele 4. p. 69. l. 39. r.
o. l. 40. r. (...). p. 72. l. 29. for 2. r. 20.

As for other faults either in Pointing or Spelling, which are less material,
the Reader is desired to excuse them.


