THE HISTORY OF THE HOLY WAR, Began Anno 1095. by the Christian Princes of
Europe AGAINST The Turks, FOR THE Recovery of the Holy Land, and Continued to
the Year 1294.

IN TWO BOOKS.

To which is added, A Particular ACCOUNT of the Present War, managed by the
Emperor, King of Poland, and several other Princes against the Turks.

By THO. MILLS, Gent.

Illustrated with Copper Plates.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Malthus, at the Sun in the Poultrey, 1685.

To the Right Honorable Sir JAMES SMITH, Knight. Lord Mayor Of the Honorable City
of London.
My Lord,
HIstories in general are like so many Registers, and Records of time, that
convey to us the knowledge of what passed in the Ages before us, and thereby
helps us to look back, with Pleasure upon the great Actions, and Noble
Atcheivments, of our Worthy Predecessors; which renders the reading of them
very Pleasant, and Delightful.

The History of the Holy War, has not only been the amusement of the Learned
Pens of other Nations, but of a Dr. Fuller.
Celebrated Author of our own, which though written in a less critical time than
this, wherein that War seems to have a new resurrection, was received with the
general approbation of all lovers of History. But this Excellent History being
now rare to be found, several Persons, who were extremely delighted, with its
agreeable variety, wherein no History, in the World does excel it; mightily
Importuned me to revive it or else to write, a more Brief and Compendious
account of that Religous War, that so it might be rendered the more Capable of
an Universal Reading, the latter of which, I was upon their persuasions,
prevailed upon to undertake; But having performed the Task imposed upon me;, I
found my self at a loss, for a Suitable Person to whom I might address, to own
and Patronise the work, till at length I happily pitched my thoughts upon Your
Lordship.

To Dedicate it, is made necessary by Custom; and to Dedicate it to Your
Lordship, as necessary, by the nature and design of the Book it self.

My Lord, it is a discourse of War, and therefore to have offered it to any
other than a Soldier, and a Brave Son of Mars, had been an unpardonable Folly,
and a Sacrilegious Robery of the God of War. And among all the Brave Commanders
of this Honorable City, I find none whose Courage and Valiour, Prudence, and
LOYALTY, bears a better sound then Your Lordships; Not only in the Opinion of
Your Fellow Subjects, but of the King too, for it was the singular Wisdom and
LOYALTY, which you have Manifested upon all Occasions, that Recommended You
both to his Majesty's Gracious Choice, and the Peoples Universal desire for the
Chief Magestrate of Englands Metropolis. Wherefore I Humbly Beg, You will be
Pleased to Accept of the Dedication; and Permit this History to pass into the
World, under the shelter of your Lordships Name, and Approbation, and Pardon
the Authors Presumption, in aspiring to so great an Honor.

Although for an Atonement of the ambition of this offering, I can only urge it
is the History of the Holy War, wherein those of our Nation gave as large a
Testimony of their Courage, and Bravery against those Infidels, and Enemies of
our Faith, as any Nation whatsoever.

Which Consideration may Peradventure prevail upon Your Lordship, to allow it
as a sufficient Expiation for the pride of this Oblation, Especially in a
Person who is with the most Profound Zeal and Respect,

My Lord, Your Lordships, most humble and most devoted Servant, THO. MILLS.

By the absence of the Author from the Press, several faults have escaped,
which the Reader is desired to mend with his Pen.

ERATTA.

PAge 38 Read Gerard. p. 62. l. 18 r. Baldwine. p. 63 l. 13 r. Pilgrims. p. 69
l. 4 r. their own p. 75 l. 15 Dele prevented it p. 74 r. Ignatius Book 2 p. 49
l. 22 r. conceit p 52 l r Cyprus p 53 l 6 r Meladine p. 67. ad of Lancaster p.
71. l. 13 r. fight.

Directions to the Binder. Place the Cut of the King of Poland page 84. and the
Standard page 86.

THE HISTORY OF THE Holy War. BOOK I.
CHAP. I.
The Description of the City of Jerusalem, and the Land of Judea: Why it was
called the Holy Land: It is conquered by the Egyptians, by the Galdeans, and by
the Romans.

JAcob having just before his death, called all his Twelve Sons together, to
bless them, and to tell them what should happen both to them and to their
Children in succeeding Ages, he preferred Judah (although not the Eldest, but the
Fourth Son) before the rest of his Brethren, and advanced him to the Throne,
saying, Judah, thou art he whom thy brethren shall praise; thy hand shall be in
the neck of thy enemies, and thy Fathers children shall bow before thee. Judah
is a Lions whelp: from the prey my son thou art gone up. The Scepter shall not
depart from Judah, nor a Lawgiver from between his feet until Shiloh come
(meaning Christ the Savior of the World) to whom the gathering of the people
shall be.

And after the return of the Israelites out of Egypt, and the destroying the
Canaanites and other Nations who inhabited Palestine, a larger and fairer
proportion thereof was allotted for the inheritance of this Royal Tribe than any
of their Brethren enjoyed; in which Patrimony there were several large fenced
Cities, the chief whereof was Hebron, and great numbers of pleasant and
fruitful Villages.

But although Judah had received the promise of the Kingly Dignity, yet he was
not till many years after the return out of Egypt invested with it, but the
Government was laid on the shoulders sometimes of one man and sometimes of
another, who were either by the special direction of Heaven, or the favor of
the People, indifferently chosen out of any Tribe. And when the Israelites,
grown weary of the Judges rule, requested a King, and God commanded Samuel to
establish a Monarchical Government among them, as though Jacob had been mistaken
in his measures or the Promise to Judah, had been quite forgotten, that Tribe
is neglected, and a King chosen out of the Offspring of Benjamen the youngest
Son of Jacob.

But Saal proving disobedient and rebellious against the Command of the Great
and Supreme Monarch of Heaven and Earth, by whom alone King Reign, the Royal
Dignity was rent both from him and his Tribe, and according to the Prediction
of the Patriarch, given to David, the youngest Son of Jesse the Bethlehemite of
the Tribe of Judah, out of whose Loins, according to the flesh, our Savior
came.

When he was first advanced to the Throne, he only reigned over the Tribe of
Judah, and made choice of Hebron as his Royal Seat. But being afterward by the
unanimous consent of all the Tribes, chosen to be King of Israel, he took the
City of Jerusalem, which is the Subject of this History from the Jebusites, and
made it the Royal Seat of the Kings of Isreal, whereupon it was preferred by
the great Jehovah, before all the Cities of the Earth, to be the place of his
own habitation, dwelling as were in a most immediate manner in the Temple of
Jerusalem, which was afterward built by King Solomon, and commanding all the
Tribes of Israel to repair thither to do him homage and adoration: And says of
it himself, That he loved the gates of Sion more than all the dwelling places
of Jacob. Whereby it became a lively Type both of the Gospel Church and the
state of the Redeemed in the everlasting enjoyment of Heaven, which is
frequently in Sacred Writ called by the name of the New Jerusalem. For which
reason, as well as its being the place of the Nativity and Death of our
Savior, it has acquired the Name of Holy.

But although Jerusalem and the Land of Judea was thus dignified by the Almighty,
yet the ungrateful Jews were perpetually multiplying Rebellions against him,
whereby he was provoked to scurge them with the Rod of the Gentels, and give
them up to the spoil and cruelty of their Enemies. So that it was twice
plundered by the Egyptians, once in the Reign of Rehoboam, and a second time
upon the death of Josiah: once by the Assyrians, in the Reign of Manassch:
three times by Nebuchadnezzar, King of Babylon; first, in the Reign of
Jehoiakim; secondly, in the Reign of Jehoiachin; and thirdly, in the Reign of
Zedekiah; carrying all those three Kings, and all the Inhabitants of the Land,
Captive into Babylon, together with all the Treasure and Riches of the Kingdom,
and spoiling the City of Jerusalem and the Temple of the Lord; so that it lay
wast for 70 years: At the end whereof, according to the Prophecy of the Prophet
Jeremiah, they were freed from their Captivity, by Cyrus, King of Persia. When
returning home, they rebuilt the City and the Temple, and by degrees became as
formidable to their Enemies as ever they had been before, till by their
increasing wickedness they pulled down upon themselves the Vengeance of Heaven,
to their utter and final ruin.

The People of Judea, and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem, having filled up the
^easure of their sins by putting to death ^he Lord of Life, and murdering him
who came to save them from everlasting ^isery, were presently after swallowed
up ^y an universal and irrecoverable ^uine, and rooted out from being any
longer a Nation, by the victorious Arms of the conquering Romans, who ^ackt the
City of Jerusalem, destroyed ^he Temple, and carried away the Inha^itants
captive, according to the unerring ^rediction of our blessed Savior. But a^out
sixty years after this Destruction by ^itus, Adrian the Emperor rebuilt the
City, ^hanging the situation of it somewhat more Westward, and calling it by
the name ^f Aelia. And to show his hatred to the ^weet and adorable name of
Christ, and ^espite against the Professors of Christi^nity, he erected a Temple
over our Sa^iours Sepulcher, wherein he placed the ^mages of Jupiter and Venus.
And, that ^e might inrage the Jews likewise, he ^aused Swine to be engraven
over the ^ates of the City, which they accounting ^o be a great profanation of
their Land, ^rake out into open Rebellion, but were ^asily overcome and subdued
by the Em^erour, who to prevent the like Attempt or the future, caused them all
to be transported into Spain, and left the who^^ Country waste and forlorn,
which part^ with its Inhabitants and fruitfulness t^gether; those delicious
streams of Mi^ and Honey wherewith it was wont (...) flow, being now wholly
exhausted, dri^ up, and the Soil become altogeth^^ barren and unfruitful. The
wretch^ Jews being thus transported into Spa^ were from thence scattered into
all pa^^ of the World; so that there is scarce a^ Nation under Heaven where
some of the^ are not to be found at this day.

After this Pagan Worship flourishe^ in Jury, and the Professors of Christian^
were inhumanely and barbarously u^ by the Roman Emperors under the f^ Ten
Persecutions, until at last God out compassion to their deplorable mise^ raised
up Constantine the Great, a Br^tain born, as most Historians affir^ whose
healing hand quickly stanch that Issue of Blod wherewith the Chur^ of Christ
had been so long afflicted, a^ blessed her Borders with Peace a^ Tranquillity.

Whereupon the devout Helen, w^ was Mother to Constantine, and as mu^ famed
among the Christians for her Pie^ as the Ancient Helen was among the P^gans for
her Beauty. Notwithstanding ^he greatness of her Age, being about Eighty years
old, traveled to Jerusalem; and having first purged Mount Calvary and
Bethlehem from Idolatry, built in ^he places of Christ's death and burial, and
elsewhere in Palestine, diverse very ^ately and magnificent Churches, so that
Christianity flourished through all Pa^stine, being well provided of able
Bi^ops and Preachers, and they endued with very liberal Maintenance.

But Constantine being succeeded by ^ulian, who shamefully apostatized from ^he
Christian Religion, and turned again (...) the Pagan Idolatry, the Sun of the
^ospel was for a while eclipsed: For in ^ope to prove Christ's Prediction false,
^e gave the Jews leave to rebuild their Temple, who thereupon flockt together
(...) great numbers, with Spades and Matocks of Silver, to clear the
Foundation, and were so desirous of accomplishing ^e work, that the Women
carried way the Rubbish in their Aprons, and ontributed all their Jewels to
advance ^e great design. But a sudden and ama^ng Tempest, which carried away
their ^ools and Materials for Building, and ^ith Balls of Fire scorched the
for^ardest, and most adventurous of ^he Builders, made them desist, and give
over the Enterprise. Yet the Christians afterward in the place where the
Temple stood built a stately Church for the Worship of Christ, which remained a
long time in the Christians hands, and was the Ancient Seat of the Patriarchs
of Jerusalem, but is now in the possession of the Turks, and the very entering
into it prohibited to Christians upon pain of forfeiting their Lives, or
renouncing their Religion.

CHAP. II.
The Holy Land conquered, 1. By the Persians; 2. By the Saracens; And 3. By the
Turks.

THE next remarkable Accident that happened in the Holy Land was under Phocas
the Emperor, who having murdered Mauritius, and usurped the Imperial Dignity,
abandoned himself wholly to ease and pleasure, whereby he betrayed the Empire
to Forreig^^ Foes, and invited Chosrees the Persian to invade his Territories,
who with a great Army subdued Syria and Jerusalem, and carried away many
Thousand Christians many of whom he sold to their Ancient Enemies the Jews. And
to grace his Conquest the more, he carried the Cross away with him. But
Heraclius who succeeded Phocas, having gotten an Army together, passed into
Persia, and gave him an absolute overthrow, and in his return took Jerusalem in
his way, and restored the Cross (which was then accounted as a most precious
Jewel) to the Temple of the Sepulcher, and appointed the fourteenth day of
September to be the Feast of the exaltation of the Cross.

But wickedness and impiety, abounding in and among the Inhabitants of those
Countries, and many damnable Heresies being every where embraced, God hastened
to pour forth his threatened Judgments upon those Eastern Churches. For the
Saracens under the Command of Haumer Prince of Arabia, possessed themselves of
all Syria and Jerusalem, so that those who would not be reduced to order by
Christian Councils, were subdued by the Pagan Sword.

But all things under the Sun being subject to Changes and Mutations, this new
Erected Empire of the Saracens, though strong and powerful, was of no very long
continuance but was forced to make its Exit and give way to the rise of one far
more memorable, both for strength and continuance, viz. That of the Turks,
whereby the Christians in Palestine changed their Masters, though not their
condition.

Those powerful and spreading people which have stretched their Dominion to so
vast an extent, and proved so formidable to Europe, are no less wonderful for
the obscurity of their Original then for the increase of their vast Dominion;
whence they came when first they appeared to the World is so difficult to
determine, that Authors only agree in disagreeing about it. But most probably
it was out of Scythia now called Tartaria, an hungry and barren Country.

The first place whereon they settled at their first appearance, was Turcomania,
a Northern part of Armenia, from whence they passed into Persia, being called
thither by Mahomet Sultan of the Saracens, to assist him against his Enemies,
whom they soon vanquished. But having observed their ow^ strength, the S^racens
Cowardice, and the pleasant situation of Persia, they set up for themselves,
and under Tangrolipix their first King, overthrow Sultan Mahomet, and made
themselves Masters of all that large Dominion. But that which is yet much
stranger, than either their Original or increase, is, That after they had
conquered the Saracens, by their valor, they should notwithstanding
voluntarily subject themselves to their senseless superstition, and embrace the
Religion of Mahomet. As if his not being able to defend his former Proselytes
from the slaughter of their Swords, was an argument that they also ought to put
themselves under his Protection; whereas it was ever the custom of Conquerours
to bring their Religion to the places which they subdued, and not take it
thence.

The next great step the Turks took was into Babylon, the Caliph whereof they
easily overcame and added his Dominion to their former Conquest. And shortly
after under Cutlu-Moses their Second King they wan Mesopota^^a, the greatest
part of Syria, and the City of Jerusalem; which spreading of the Turks over
most part of the Eastern world is generally believed to be the letting loose of
the four Angels, mentioned in the Revelations, which are there said to be bound
in the River Euphrates, and reserved for an Hour, and a Day, a Month, and a
Year, for to slay the Third part of men; their strength and fierceness is there
likewise described, the former by the number of their Horsemen which are said
to be Two hundred thousand. The latter by the Breast Plates of Fire, and
Jacinct, and Brimstone, wherewith they are sai^ to be Armed, and the
terribleness of their Horses, whose Heads are there describe to be like the
Heads of Lions, and Fire and Smoke, and Brimstone, are said t^ issue out of
their Mouths; but it is t^ be hoped that God has now almost done his work with
them, and will shortly bur^ that Rod wherewith he has been so lon^ Scourging
the Christian World, and mak^ their downfall to be as sudden and remarkable as
their first appearance and increase was terrible to the World.

CHAP. III.
Of the Original and cause of the Holy War^

A Certain Hermit, born at Amiens in France, whose name was Peter, (a person
of a contemptible aspect, and one whose silly looks carried in them a despair
of any real worth or excellency to be found in him) notwithstanding which (as
the richest Mines commonly lie under the basest and barrennest ground) he had
(...) good Wit, a quick Apprehension, an eloquent Tongue, and was seemingly
very religious, (which got him the genera^ estimation of all those with whom he
conversed) undertook a Pilgrimage to portrait of Peter the Hermit Peter ye
Hermit first Mover of the Holy War

Jerusalem, where getting acquainted with Simon the Patriarch, they often
discoursed together of the miseries the Christians endured under the Turks,
what hopes there might be of relief, and how the matter might be secretly
contrived, that the Princes of Europe might come and rescue those Sacred Places
out of the Pagans possession, and thereby free them from their deplorable
Slavery. Whereupon Peter readily undertook the whole business, and departed
immediately to Rome, to consult with Pope Vrbane the Second about the advancing
of so pious a design; pretending likewise that some day before his departure
from Jerusalem he saw a Vision wherein Christ himself appeared to him, and
appointed him to be his Legate, and gave him a Commission to negotiate that
Holy and Christian Cause.

The Pope, who is suspected to be the first Contriver of the business, and to
have sent the Hermit to Jerusalem as his Emissary, to consult the matter with
the Patriarch, and thereby render himself the more capable of fathering a Plot
of his own begetting, joyfully embraced the Project, and with all imaginable
zeal endeavored to engage all the Princes of Europe in that Holy Cause, in
order whereunto he immediately called a Council at Clermont i^ France, where,
to a great Assembly o^ Princes and Prelates, he made a long Oration, wherein he
greatly bemoane^ the miseries of the Christians in Asia, and the devastation of
those holy places in Jerusalem, and the parts adjacent, which were once the Joy
of the whole Earth; but were now become the general grief of all the Professors
of Christianity, telling that the Chapel of Christ's Conception at Nazareth,
his Birth at Bethlehem, his Burial on Mount Calvary, and his Ascension on Mount
Olivet, which were once the Fountains of Piety, were now become the sinks of
all profaneness: and that it was therefore highly necessary for them to take
Arms against those Infidels, and endeavor to break their Bonds asunder, and
cast away their Cords far from them; for if they would not now lend their
helping hand to quench their Neighbors Houses, they might speedily expect the
burning of their own; and that those barbarous Nations would shortly overrun
all Europe. And the better to whet their Courage, he promised a full remission
of all their sins and Penance here, and the enjoyment of Heaven hereafter, to
all those who would undertake this Voyage. Now thereforesaid he, Gird your
Swords to your Thighs, O ye Princes and Potentates of Europe; It is our parts
to pray, yours to fight ours with Moses to lift up our unwearied hands to
Heaven, and yours to stretch forth the Sword against those Children of Amalck.
Amen.

It is almost incredible to believe with what a wonderful cheerfulness this
motion, meeting with an active and zealous World, was generally entertained:
The whole Assembly crying out aloud, God wills it, God wills it. Then many
of them wore a Cross of Red Cloth upon their shoulders as a badge of their
Devotion. And that the Virgin Mary might lend her favorable assistance to their
warlike undertakings, her Office was instituted, and certain Prayers were
appointed therein to be made to her at Canonical hours.

CHAP. IV.
The first beginning of the War unfortunate.

ALL things being now resolved on, and every one striving to contribute some
way or other to the carrying on this grand Design, the Turks, who had no^ for a
long time enjoyed the quiet possession of Palestine, and by taking advantage of
the great stupidity of the Grecian Emperors, who abandoned themselves to case
and pleasure, had extended their Conquest to the Lesser Asia, were forced for a
time to suspend the further enlarging of their Dominion, and employ themselves
wholly in the defense of what they had already obtained; some of which was,
notwithstanding their strenuous opposition, forcibly wrested out of their hands
by the Christian Warriors.

The beginning of this War was checked with some bad success, for Walter
Sensaver a Nobleman, who had more valor then skill in ^ the feats of War,
marched with a strange contrived and ill proportioned Army, wherein were
several Thousand Foot, and Eight Horsemen only. By which means they were soon
after their setting out slain, and routed by the Bulgarians, he himself hardly
escaping. And Peter the Hermit, having obtained the command of an Army, went
somewhat further to meet his own ruin, for having after many difficulties,
crossed the Bosphorus, and got into Asia, they found several Cities forsaken by
their Turkish Inhabitants, which they imagined to be the effect of their fear,
although it really proceeded from their Policy; and thereupon being more greedy of
Gain then desirous of Honor, neglected to fortify the places which they had
taken, and fell to plundring and seeking after spoil, whereby they themselves
became an easy prey to their watchful and observing Enemies. Not had Hugh (who
was surnamed the Great) Brother to the French King, any better success, being
also overthrown by the Bulgarians, in his passage toward the Holy Land, and
himself taken Prisoner one Gotescall^s likewise a Scandalo^s Priest, and
Emmicho a certain Tyrannou^ Prince, near the Rhine, led forth a rout of base
and disorderly People, who wore in deed the Badg of the Cross, but served the
Devil under Christ's Livery, killing and pillaging the Poor Jews, and others as
they went through Germany, which made Coloman King of Hungary, oppos^ their
passage through his Country, and put most of them to the Sword. Some believing
those badbeginnings to have an^ ill omen, abandoned their former Re^ solutions,
and returned home. But other^ took little or no notice of them, looking upon
them as necessary Physic, to purge the Christian Army, from the dreg^ of base
and ruder People.

CHAP. V.
The Pilgrims arrive at Constantinople, Besiege and take Nice and Antroachia;
overcome Solomon and Corboran in Fight, and win the City of Jerusalem.

NOtwithstanding the bad success of the first adventurers, many others
addressed themselves to try their fortunes in this Religious War, for Godfrey
Duke of Bovillon, having sold that Dukedom to the Bishop of Liege, and the
Castles of Sartensy and Monsa to the Bishop of Verdune, raised a brave and well
managed Army, wherewith he marched through Hungary to Constantinople, and so
did Robert Duke of Normandy, Second Son to William the Conqueror, King of
England, Reimond Earl of Toulouse, and diverse more who though they set forward
at several times, and marched through different Countries, yet they all met
together at Constantinople, which being then the seat of the Grecian Empire,
was appointed for the place of their General Rendezvous. But although Alexias
the Emperor pretended to be over-joyed at their arrival, yet he was inwardly
grieved thereat, for being conscious to himself of his own guilt in deposing
and cloistering up Nicephorus his Predecessor, and then usurping his Imperial
Dignity, it was no pleasant sight for him to behold the Sea full of Ships, and
the Shores covered over, and crowded with Soldiers, fancying to himself, that
notwithstanding all their fair pretenses of a Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, to wrest
the holy land out of the Pagans Possession, they only came to undermine him,
and designed to terminate their Pilgrimage in his destruction. And that which
is somewhat strange, he seems to have entailed his groundless jealousies, to
all his Successors, none where of could ever heartily reconcile themselves to
this War, but suspected tha^ those Western Christians made a false blow at
Jerusalem, but intended it at Constantinople. However, notwithstanding his
secret regret, yet finding that his Guests were powerful enough to command
their own welcome, he entertained them with a seeming complacence, and granted
them passage through his Country upon Condition that whatsoever they won^
Jerusalem only excepted, that belonged formerly to the Grecian Empire, should
be restored to him, in lieu whereof he covenanted to furnish them with
Shipping, Armor, and all other warlike Provisions; which he never performed,
but contrary to his Solemn Engagements endeavored to retard their generous
Designs.

From hence they marched forward, and sat down before the City of Nice
(formerly famed for the first General Council called by Constantine the Great
against Arius the Heretic) with as glorious an Army, and as brave Commanders
as ever the Sun saw. The Pilgrims had a Lumbard for their Engineer, and the
Neighboring Woods afford them Materials for the making many warlike
Instruments, wherewith they fancied they should soon make themselves Masters of
the City But in regard it was strongly fortified both by Art and Nature, and
garrisoned with a great number of well experienced and resolute Soldiers, they
found it more difficult than they expected. But at length the Grecian Fleet
blocking up the Lake Ascanius, and thereby cutting off from the Besieged all
hope of Relief, they were forced to surrender upon condition that the
Inhabitants Lives and Goods should be indempnified; whereat the Soldiers, who
promised themselves the Plunder of the City, and were thereby frustrated of
their hope, showed no small discontent. Solymans Wife and young Children were
made Prisoners, and the City according to the former Agreement with the Grecian
Emperor, was delivered to Tatinus the Admiral, on the behalf of Alexius his
Master.

Having made themselves Masters o^ this place, and thereby flushed themselve
with Victory, they advance forward to the Vale of Dogorgan, where Solomon who
had now gotten together a great Army, fell upon them suddenly like lightning,
so that there followed a fierce and Bloody Battle, fought with much courage,
and great variety of success o^ both sides; Clouds of Arrows darkning the Sky
were soon dissolved into Showe^ of Blood. The Europian Pilgrims in this Battle
grapled with many disadvantages; for their Enemies were three to one, and
Valor it self may sometimes be beaten down by multitudes. The weather was
extreme hot, and the scorchnig Sun much annoyed those Northern People, while
use had made the Pagans bodies proo^ against the extremity of the heat. Their
Horses likewise unaccustomed to the bar^ barous sound of the Turkish Drums,
were affrighted, that they became altogethe^ useless; notwithstanding which,
the^ bravely maintained their ground, an^ by the special Valor and Conduct
(...) their undaunted Leaders, gave the Infidels an absolute overthrow, whereat
Solomon being desperately enraged, as he fled away, burned all before him; and
the better to prop up his broken Credit, gave out, that he had obtained the
Victory, and thereby pleased himself with the thoughts of being a Conqueror,
though only in report.

From thence with invincible industry and patience they forced their passage
through Valleys, up Mountains, and over Rivers, taking in as they went the
famous Cities Iconium, Heraclea, Tarsus, and conquering all the Country about
Cilicia. But being too much puffed up with ^his great Success, Heaven, to cure
them of the Pleurisy of Pride, let them blood with the tedious and costly
Siege of An^iochia; which City being called Reblath by the Hebrews, was built
by Seleucus Nicanor, and watered by the River ^rontes, but enlarged by
Antiochus, who ^ncompassed it round with a double Wall, one of square Stone,
and the over of Brick; strengthened with 460 Towers, and such an invincible
Castle on ^e East part of it, that it was rather to be ^dmired than assaulted.
In this City, it was ^^at the Professors of Christianity were ^^st called
Christians, and the Apostle Peter first sat as Bishop, whose fair Church was a
Patriarchal Seat for man^ hundred years after.

Before this City the Pilgrims Army sat^ down, and closely besieged it: But the
Turks within making a vigorous Defen^ under Auxianus their Governor, frustrate
their expectations of forcing the Tow^ as soon as they appeared before it;
(...) the Siege grew very long, and Provision very short in the Christians Cam^
which made Peter the Hermit, no^ withstanding his pretended Delegation (...)
manage this War on the behalf of Christ run away; but being pursued an^ brought
back again, was bound by a new Oath to prosecute the War. Howeve^ at length one
within the City, of who^ Name and Religion Authors cannot agre^ (some making
him a Turk, others Christian; some call him by one name and some by another) in
the dead of the night betrayed the City to Boemun^ whereupon the Pilgrims
entered in, an^ being highly exasperated by the leng^ of the Seige, they so
remembered the miseries they had endured, that they for got all pity and
moderation, killing an^ slaying promiscuously Christians and Tur^ and all that
came to hand.

The Town was offered to A^^^us the Emperor, but he refused it out of
suspicion, that there was some deceit in the tender, it being common with ill
men to measure other men's minds by the crooked rule of their own, whereupon ^t
was given to Boe^^^nd. But notwithstanding the dearness of the purchase, it was
not long enjoyed in quiet, for Corboran the Turkish General came with a vast
Army of Persian Soldiers and besieged them in the City, so that they were
greatly distressed between hunger within and their enemies without, which made
many of them to steal away out of the City; whereat the rest no whit
discouraged, accounting the loss of Cowards the gain of an Army, bravely
resolved rather to sell their lives by wholesale, on the point of the Sword,
than to retail them out by famine, who is the worst of Tyrants. And to hasten
the putting this generous resolution into practice, they happened to find in
the Church of St. Peter a certain Lance which they were made to believe was the
very same Lance, wherewith our Saviors side was pierced by the Soldier,
whereat they greatly rejoiced; As though this military relic had by wounding
of Christ been endued with a certain virtue of wounding and destroying his
Enemies, and carried with it an infallible pledge of victory. And there upon
sallying out they fell upon the Besiegers with such fury, that they were glad
to quit the siege and be gone.

The Pride of the Turks being abate^ by the loss of this Battle, an Hundre^
Thousand of them being slain, the Christians grew very insolent, and for got to
give God the Honor of the victory; whereupon followed a great morta^ty, 50000
dying within a few days. B^ cold weather having at last cleansed the Chambers
of the Air, and cleared the Christians camp from that fatal infectio^ their
zeal now moved the swifter, being come nearer to its center the City (...)
Jerusalem. And therefore they s^ forwards, and take the City (...) Martha, and
employ themselves in s^ curing the Country round about them that so they might
clear the way as the^ went. They kept their Easter at Tripp^ ly, and their
Whitsuntide at Cesar^ Stratonis, taking diverse considerable pl^ces in their
passage, and at last came to J^rusalem, when discovering the City a far o^ it
was a pleasant sight to behold the ha^ money they made in the differing manne^
of their expressing their joy, and to observ^ how they all clothed the same
passion with various gestures, some cast them selves prostrate on the Earth,
some kneeled, and others wept, and all were so transported with the sight, that
they had much a do to manage, so great a gladness. Then they advanced with a
bundance of joy and immediately began the Siege on the Northside, it being
scarce assaltable on any other part, by reason of steep and broken Rocks, which
would not permit any near approach. The siege being once laid they assaulted
the Town with such invincible courage and valor, that they had certainly taken
it within four days, had they not wanted scaling Ladders to mount the walls
withal. But the siege continuing longer, they were oppressed with the want of
that which was of far greater consequence, for the springs being all stopped or
poisoned by the Turks, they were forced to fetch Water above five Miles off. As
for their want of scaling Ladders, it was quickly supplied by the Genoans, who
arriving in Palestine with a Fleet of Ships, brought with them several curious
and accurate Engineers who in about a Months time framed a Wooden Tower, and
all other instruments for battering the Wall, at a place about seven Miles from
the City, for ^earer there grew no stick of bigness Which being all finished,
and the Pilgrims having as the best preparative for Victory begun with a Fast
and a solemn Procession toward Mount Olivet, they proceeded the next day to
give a general assault, which was performed with an incredible Pierceness, the
very Women playing the men, and fighting most valiantly in Armor. But they
within being Forty Thousand strong, well victualled and provided of all things
necessary, made a stout resistance till the injurious Night abruptly put an end
to their fighting in the very midst of all their heat and courage.

But no sooner had the first glimmerings of light brought news of the
approaching morning but they fell on a fresh with a^ resolution to carry the
Town before night; which they did the rather because they had intercepted a
certain letter tied to the legs of a Dove (it being a common thing in those
Eastern Parts to make use of that creature as a Post) wherein the Persian
Emperor had promised with all imaginable speed to relieve it. The Turks in
hopes of rendering the new framed instruments of Battery useless cased the
outside of their Wall with bag^ of chaff, and such like pliable matte^ which
conquered the Christians Engine^ by yielding to them. But one of them being so
very strong and sturdy, that its force would not be tamed by those ordinary
Methods, they brought two old Witches and placed them on the Wall, to inchant
it; but this Spirit being too fierce, and unruly, for their Spells to tame,
they both of them miserably perished on the place, and the approaching Night
commanded a cessation of Arms for that time.

But the next day Duke Godfrey having fired a great heap of combustible matter,
the smoke of it was so driven before the wind, that it blinded the Pagans Eyes,
and gave the Christians an opportunity under its Protection of entering the
City. The Duke himself, being the first man that set footing on the Walls. The
Turks seeing the Christians enter the City in such numbers, retired to Solomon's
Temple (so called because it was built in or near the same place) with a
resolution there to take the last farewell of their lives. The Christians
followed them thither, and in a fierce, and desperate conflict, the foremost of
them were miserably slain, being thrust upon their Enemies weapons, by their
own fellows who followed them, so that the pavement swom with humane gore, and
none could go either in or out, but he must wade through a River of Blood, or
pass over a Bridge of dead Bodies. In this fight valor was n^ wanting in the
Turks; but it was supe^ latively abundant in the Christians, wh^ still pressed
forward upon their Enemie^ till the want of light compelled them t^ give over.
Thus was Jerusalem won (...) the Christians and Twenty Thousa^ Turks slain
therein on the Fifteenth (...) July.

Then many Christians, who had till no^ lived in Jerusalem, in a most deplorab^
slavery, being forced to lurk in secre came forth rejoicing, and heartily we
comed, and embraced, those Pilgrin who were the happy procurers of the liberty.
And the next Morning, mer^ being proclaimed to all those who wou^ lay down
their Arms, the Turks yield^ upon promise of saving their lives, no
withstanding which they were three day after all put to the Sword, witho^
respect to Age or Sex, upon the idle prtence of fear of Treason in them, if t^
Persian Emperor should come and besie^ them. But the Noble Tancred decla^
himself highly displeased with that ^vage and barbarous action.

CHAP. VI.
Robert Duke of Normandy refuses the Kingdom of Jerusalem; whereupon Duke
Godfrey is advanced to the new erected Throne.

EIght days after the taking of Jerusalem, they proceeded to the Election of a
King; but having so many Princes whose shining Virtues made them equally
deserving, they knew not which of them to pitch upon; however, at last they
unanimously resolve on Robert Duke of Normandy, as a person of the highest
Descent; notwithstanding which, the Duke, contrary to all men's expectation,
refused this honorable offer, either because he had an Eye to the English
Diadem, which was now fallen to him by the death of William Rufus, who was his
Elder Brother; or else because he imagined (and that truly enough) that the
Kingdom of Jerusalem would in all probability, be encumbered with a continual
War. But he who would not accept of the Crown with the Cross, was afterward
forced to take the Cross without the Crown; for from that day forward, he never
thrived in any thing he undertook, bu^ lived to see abundance of misery, and
fe^ more, being shut up in Prison, and de^ prived of his sight by King Henry h^
Brother.

Robert having declared his refusal, the^ proceed to a second Choice; and the
they might acquaint themselves the be^ter with the temper and disposition
^those Princes, out of which the Choi^ was to be made, they examined the^
Servants upon Oath concerning the^ Masters faults; and when they came^ examine
the Servants of Godfrey Du^ of Bovillon, they all protested that the only fault
they knew their Master guil^ of, was, that when he went to Church ^sing
Mattens, he would stay so long aft^ they were done, to learn of the Pri^ the
meaning of every Image and Pictur^ that Dinner at home was utterly spoil^ by
his long tarrying. This relation b^ gat him the admiration of all men, w^
admiring that the Dukes worst Vi^ should prove so great a Virtue, man choice of
him to be their King. T^ Duke accepted of the Title, but not (...) the
solemnity of it, refusing to wear^ Crown of Gold there where the Savi^^ of
Mankind had been tortured with Crown of Thorns.

This Godfrey, who was the first Christian King of Jerusalem, was nobly
descended, being Son and Heir to Eustace, Duke of Bovillon, and Ida, Daughter
and Heir to Godfrey Duke of Lorrain: He was bred in that School of portrait of
Godfrey Duke of Bovillon Godfrey Dk of Bovelion.

The First Christian King of Jerusalem

War, the Court of Henry the fourth Emperor of Germany; about which time there
happened to be a difference between him and another Prince, about a Title to
Land, which proving so intricate, that the Judges could not untie the knot, it
was agreed on, that the two Princes should cut it asunder with their Swords in
a single Combat. But Godfrey was very unwilling to fight, not that he was the
worst Soldier, but the better Christian, and could not satisfy himself that a
private Title to Land was asufficient foundation whereon to ground a Duel.
However, since fight he must he yielded to the Tyranny of Custom and according
to the fashion of the Country, entered the Lists, where, notwithstanding his
Sword broke at the first Encounter, yet he struck his Adversar^ down with the
Hilt, whereby he both saved his Enemies Life, and gained hi^ own Inheritance.
Nor was he less for tunate when Standard Bearer to the Emperor, for with the
Imperal Ensign h^ killed Rodulphus Duke of Saxony in singl^ fight, and fed the
Roman Eagle on the bowels of that Arch-Traitor.

CHAP. VII.
Of the Establishing of Ecclesiastical Affairs, and settling Patriarchs in
Antioch and Jerusalem; the numerosity of Palestine Bishops.

Godfrey being now possessed of the Crown, took care to settle the ^itre, and
provide for the well-ordering ^f the Ecclesiastical Affairs. Well, con^dering
that the Commonwealth never ^rives so well as when the Church and ^tate are
equally interested in the Princes ^are.

So soon as Antioch was taken, one Bernard a Reverent Prelate was with a
^eneral consent advanced to the Patri^rchal Seat. But more difficulty there ^as
to settle that Dignity in Jerusalem. ^or first Arnulphus a vicious and
worthless man, was by popular Faction lifted ^p into the Patriarchs Chair, but
being ^ith much difficulty put by, Robert Arch^ishop of Pisa was substituted in
his place, (...) person wise, politic and learned, but ^nfected with the
general humor of the Clergy of that Age, a delight to justle with Princes for
more Elbow-room. Arnulphus never ceased to molest him, and all those who
succeeded him, till by many changes he found means to struggle himself into the
Chair again.

Under these Two Patriarchs were diverse Archbishops and Bishops, who were
placed as near as could be, where they were before the Saracens had overrun
the Country, and liberal Maintenance allotted to most of them: But they were
too numerous for all to grow great, and Palestine fed too many Cathedral
Churches to have them generally fat; for there was Lydda, Jomnia, and Joppa,
three Episcopal Towns within four Miles of each other. Nay, Tyrius tells us of
Fourteen Bishops under the Archbishop of Tire, 20 under the Archbishop of
Caesarea, Nine under the Archbishop of Scythopolis, Twelve under the Archbishop
of Rabbah, besides Twenty five Suffragan Churches, which were immediately
depending on the Patriarch, without subordination to any Archbishop. From
whence we may observe, that in those days Bishops kept their Sees at mean and
contemptible Villages (as here in Engl. before the Conquest Sunning in Bark
shire, and Dorchester near Oxford, had Cathedral Churches in them, though now
they have removed them to the great and most Principal Towns.

CHAP. VIII.
The Saracens overthrown at Askelon.

MAhomets Tomb was not so firmly fixed to the attractive Lodestone, but that
now it began to shake, and was in all probability like to have tumbled down,
the Christians victories giving daily wounds to that silly and foppish
Religion, which made the Saracens enter into a Combination with the Turks to
assist them in stopping, if possible, the further progress of their Victorious
Arms: wherefore coming out of Egypt, under the command of Ammitavissius their
General, near Askelon they gave the Christians Battle, but God sent such a
qualm upon these Infidels hearts, that 100000 of them were presently slain, and
their Rich Tents, which seemed as if they were the Exchequer of the East
Country, possessed by the Pilgrims, who now so much abounded with wealth, that
they knew not how to value it. Which made many of the Pilgrims who were
Merchants for honor, and had now made so gainful an Adventure, think of
returning home, and those who remained were advanced to honorable Titles and
Places in the Land.

But by this return of the Pilgrims, the heat of the Christians Victories was
some^ what staid, for Boemund Prince of Antioch^ marching into Mesopotamia, was
taken Prisoner, and the Heroic Godfrey, wh^ had till now been ever accustomed
to Conquer, was forced to depart with disgrace from the Siege of Antipatris.

CHAP. IX.
The Original of the Hospitallers. The scuffling between the King and Patriarch
of Jerusalem, about the division of the City. The Issue of the quarrel, and the
Death of Godfrey the first King.

ABout this time under Serard their first Master began the Order o^ Knights
Hospitallers. There was indee^ an Order called by that name more anciently in
Jerusalem, but they were n^ Knights, but poor Alms-men, whose House was
founded, and themselves maintained by the Merchants of Amu^ phia, a City in
Italy. But they had now more stately Buildings assigned them, and their House
dedicated to St. John o^ Jerusalem; the conditions upon which they were to be
admitted to the Highest Order of this Knighthood, were these, they must be
Eighteen years old at least, of an able body, not descended of Jewish or
Turkish Parents, no Bastards (except to a Prince, there being honor in that
dishonor) but born of honest and worshipful Parents; they always wore a Red
Belt, with a White Cross, and a Black Cloak, whereon was the White Cross of
Jerusalem, which was a Cross crossed, or five Crosses together, in memory of
our Saviors five Wounds. Their Profession was to fight against Infidels, and
secure Pilgrims in their coming to the Sepulcher; they vowed Poverty, Chastity
and Obedience, to which was added by Reimundus de Podio, their second Master,
that they must receive the Sacrament thrice a year, hear Mass once a day, be no
Merchants or Usurers, fight no private Duels, and always stand neuters, and
take part with neither side, if the Princes of Europe should fall out.

At their Inauguration they received a Sword, to intimate that they must be
valiant, which Sword had a Cross Hilt, to remember them that they must
therewith defend Religion. 2ly. With this Sword they were struck three times
over the shoulders, to teach them patiently to suffer for Christ. Thirdly, They
must wipe the Sword, to intimate that their lives must be clean and undefiled.
Fourthly, They had gilt Spurs put upon them, to intimate that they must scorn
Wealth, and spurn it at their heels. Fifthly, They were to take a Taper in
their hands, to intimate that they were to enlighten others by their exemplary
lives.

About the same time also were ordained the Knights of the Sepulcher, who were
for their Original and Profession much like the former, and their Order
continues to this day, they being made by the Padre Guardian of Jerusalem, of
such as have seen the Sepulcher, and should be all Gentlemen, but the Padre
frequently dispenses with the severity of that Law, and admits of those who
bring fat enough, though no blood.

Now also there arose a great Controversy between the King and the Patriarch,
the latter claiming the Cities of Jerusalem and Joppa, with all their
dependances, as belonging of right to him, and the other denying to deliver
them. The Patriarch affirmed they had always belonged to his Predecessors, and
that it did not become Princes, who ought to be Nursing Fathers to the Church,
sacrilegiously to suck from, and devour it.

On the other side, the King alleged, that the Christian Princes had now
purchased Jerusalem with their Blood, and bestowed it on him, so that the
Patriarchs overgrown Title was lost in that Conquest, from which, as upon a
new Foundation, all must now build their claims who challenge a right to any
part in that City: Besides which, it would be unreasonable for the King of
Jerusalem to enjoy nothing in Jerusalem, but live there more like a Sojourner
than a Prince in his Royal Palace, and be confined only to an airy Title,
whilst the Patriarch should enjoy all the Command.

To this the Patriarch answered, That the Christians new Conquest could not
cancel his Ancient Right, which he said was enjoyed even under the Saracens,
especially since that Voyage was purposely undertaken for the advancing of the
Church, and not the bare restoring her to her Liberty only; which Argument he
pressed so home, that Godfrey, notwithstanding he was unwilling at first, yet
afterward not only granted him on Candlemas day a fourth part of the City, but
on the Easter following (the King lying then on his Deathbed) gave him all
Jerusalem, Joppa, and whatsoever else he desired upon condition that he should
hold it of the Patriarch, till he should Conquer Babylon, or some other Royal
City, to keep his Court in. And that i^ in the mean time he should have died
without Issue, it should immediately b^delivered into the Patriarchs Possession.

Not long after Godfrey had made this liberal Grant, wherein he frankly gave
away his whole Kingdom at once, he died, having Reigned one year wanting five
days, and was buried in the Temple of the Sepulcher, where his Tomb remains
inviolated to this day.

CHAP. X.
Baldwin chosen King; he keeps Jerusalem in despite of the Patriarch.

GOdfrey being dead, the Christians with an unanimous consent made choice of
Bald^in, who was ^^ount of Edessa (a City in Arabia) and Brother to Godfrey, to
succeed him, a Prince who was tall, and of a comely Personage, being like Saul,
higher by the head than any of his Subjects; and being thus chosen to the
Kingdom, without troubling his head about his Brothers Religious scruple of
wearing a Crown of Gold where Christ wore one of Thorns, he accepted the
Ceremony as well as the Title, and was Crowned on the Christmas day following.

But before his Coronation there was a desperate Quarrel between him and the
Patriarch, who upon the death of Godfrey devoured Jerusalem, and the Tower of
David in his hope; but coming to take possession, found that a more difficult
task, than it was to obtain the grant from the dying King. For Garnier Earl of
Gretz, refused to surrender it, telling him that he would, according to his
duty, keep it on the behalf of King Baldwin, who was not yet arrived from
Edessa. This unexpected refusal made the Patriarch storm exceedingly; but
however, Baldwin having the stronger Sword, and actual possession of the City,
kept it perforce, which made the Patriarch complain to Boemund Prince of
Antioch, and stir him up to take Arms against King Baldwin, for the recovery of
the Churches Right, as he was pleased to term it. But not succeeding therein,
the difference was made up for the present by the mediation of friends,
although it was not long before it brake out again to that degree, that the
Patriarch was glad to flee to Antioch, and from thence to Rome, to complain to
the Pope, from whom h^ obtained a command to King Baldwin for the re
establishing him in the Patriarcha^ Seat, with which as he was returning home
he died at Messena in Cicilia^ whereupon Bremarus an holy and devou^ man, was
against his own will advance^ by King Baldwin to the Chair. But being disliked
by the Pope, because the King chose him, he was soon deposed, and Gibellinus
the Popes Legate chosen in his stead, who being thought by Arnulphus, who had
been chosen Patriarch, a^ the first taking of Jerusalem, and was thrust out
again, to go to slowly to his Grave, he was suspected to have hastened his
death; upon which he was substituted in his room by the especial favor of King
Baldwin.

CHAP. XI.
A mighty Army of new Adventurers after many hardships and difficulty effect
nothing, Alexius his Treachery.

THE spreading Fame of the Christians great Success in Palestine, summoned a
new supply of Pilgrims out of Christendom, Germany, and other places, which had
been sparing at the first Voyage, ^ut resolved now to make amends with ^ouble
liberality. The chief Adventurers ^ere Guelpho Duke of Bavaria, Hugh Bro^er to
the French King, and Stephen Earl ^f Bloys (both which had very much suf^ered
in their Reputation for having de^erted their fellows in the first Expedi^on,
and therefore sought to regain their ^ost Honor by this second Adventure;) The
Duke of Aquitain, the Earl of Burundy, and the Couar of Bogen, with ma^y more
grear Men and Prelates, lead^ng with them an Army of 250000 Men. All Europe was
now big with expecta^ion, to see what so great an Army would atchieve, it being
common for most men to measure Victories by the ^ultitudes of the Soldiers.
But in this ^ase it signified little, for they did nothing worthy admiration,
unless it were that they went so far to do just nothing, their sufferings being
far more famous ^han their doings, being so consumed by Plague, Famine and
Sword, that scarce one thousand of them ever reached Pa^estine, and those
fitter to be sent to Hos^itals, than to march into the Field.

But the chief cause why this Voyage miscarried so miserably, was the Treathery
of Alexius, who perplexing himself with a groundless and ridiculous fear, lest
between the Latins in the East, who were come thither upon pretense of
conquering Palestine, and those in the West his Grecian Empire, lying in the
midst should be ground to powder, as betwee^ two Milstones, did them all the
private mischief he could possibly procure whilst he publicly pretended to
have the greatest kindness for them imagin^able, calling the chief Captains of
their Army his Sons, and thereby verifying the Proverb, The more courtesy, the
morcraft. But in private he would say to his friends, that he took as great a
plea^ sure to see those European Pilgrims i^ Battle with the Turk, as he would
do to see two Mastiff Dogs sighting together^ hoping that which side soever
lost, h^ himself should be a gainer. Wherefore he so ordered the matter, that
they ha^^ no sooner passed Graecia, and crossed the Bosphorus, but they were
for thirty day^ together exposed as a mark to the Turkis^ Arrows, and cut off
by their cowardly Enemies, whilst they were pent up in the straits of unknown
passages.

But in the mean time King Baldwi^ employed himself with better success i^
Palestine. For by the assistance of the Genoan Fleet, (who were for their pain^
to have a third part of the spoil, and a Street in every place that was taken)
he ^on several very considerable Havens ^ong the midland Sea, there being be^re
this but one only part for the Chri^ians to land at, viz. Joppa. He began with
Antipatris to redeem the Christian honor which was morgaged there, when
Godfrey was forced to rise from before it. But the Turks having gotten together
a good Army, gave him Battle ^t Rhamula, where he gave them a very ^reat
overthrow.

The Joy of which Victory continued ^ot long, for the Turks being recruited,
and resolving upon revenge, set upon him ^gain in the same place, and after a
re^olute fight obtained the Victory, it being ^he first great overthrow the
Christians ^ad ever received in Palestine; where^n, besides many others, the
Earls of Bloys and Burgundy lost their lives, and the King himself was reported
to be slain. This Victory so entoxicated the Turks with Joy, that they gave
themselves to ^mirth and jollity, without the least sus^icion of a Reincounter,
which Baldwin ^eing informed of by his Spies, returned suddenly upon them with
fresh Soldiers, and with the back-blow of an unlooked for Enemy (which is
commonly the most fatal) bravely wrested the Victory out of the Infidels hands.

Nor were the rest of the Christian Princes idle, but endeavored likewise the
enlarging of the Christian Dominions Tancred Prince of Galilee possessing him
self of Apamea and Laodicea, two Citie^ in Coelosyria, which were both built b^
Antiochus. Nor was it long before Ptolemais fell likewise into the Christian
hands, a City on the Mediterranean Sea which took its name from Ptolemeus
Philometor King of Egypt. The Genoan Galleys being ten in number, doing the
greatest service in the taking of it, and therefore as a reward, had granted
them large profits from the Harbor, a Church to themselves, and Jurisdiction
over the fourth part of the City, which came a^ last to be the very Seat of the
Holy War^ there being in it a continual fighting against the Turks for an
hundred and eighty years together.

But whilst the Arms of the Christians prospered so well in some places, they
were unsuccessful in others; for Baldw^^ Count of Edossa, and Earl Joceline
besieging Charran in Mesopotamia, had brough^ it into such straits, that it was
ready to b^ delivered to them, when the Christian Captains falling out among
themselves were set upon and defeated by the Pagans, and the two Earls, with
diver others taken Prisoners. However, to mitigate the sorrow for this
misfortune, Byblus, which was a very good Haven, and built by Heveus the Sixth
Son of Canaan, was taken by King Baldwin, and shortly after Tripoli was
likewise conquered by his Victorious Arms, who created one Bertram (a Nobleman
that had behaved himself well in the Siege) Earl of Tripoli, it being accounted
a Title of great Honor, in regard Tripoli was ever reckoned one of the four
Tetrarchies of the Kingdom of Jerusalem.

And to revenge the many injuries they had received from treacherous Alexius,
Boemund, Prince of Antioch, with a great Navy spoiled the Havens of Graecia;
every one abhorring his unfaithful practice, were willing to list themselves as
Volunteers for this Service. But an Agreement was soon made between them.

Sidon the most ancient and famous City of Phoenicia, was by the help of the
Danish and Norway Fleet added likewise to the Kingdom of Jerusalem, flushed
with which Conquest, and the series of success that had for a long ^^me
attended them, they next set down before Tire, a City which Sea and Land,
Nature and Art had combined together to make strong and impregnable, it being
encompassed by the Sea all but a narrow ne^ of Land that tacks it to the
Co^nent, which was fortified with m^ Walls and Towers, so that it was h^ to
determine whether the strength of^ City, or the Wealth of its Inhabita^ was
greatest. But not being able to ca^ it, he raised his Siege, and depart^ when
meeting with the Persian Gene^ who had an Army far superior to (...) he rashly
gave him Battle, and after desperate Fight lost all his Baggage, a hardly
escaped himself.

After a long Tempest of War ca^ a calm of Peace, wherein Baldwin enj^ed a five
years quiet in his old age, ^ring which time he made several V^ages for his
pleasure, and to take a vi^ of the Country, and satisfy himself of (...)
situation and strength of the several p^ces. One of his Journeys was to (...)
Red Sea, not so called from the red^^ of the Water or Sand, as some foolis^
conceit, but from the neighboring Emites, whom the Graecians call Erythrea or
Red Men. And another he made to Egypt, supposing himself obliged give one visit
to that Country, that so might in part repay the many Incursi^ the Egyptians
had made into his Kingdom Where having first taken the City Pharamia, anciently
called Rameses, and given the Spoil of it to his Soldiers, he spent a
considerable time in viewing that riddle of Nature, the River of Nilus, whose
flowing Stream is a Confluence of Wonders; first in regard of its
undiscoverable Original, but chiefly its increasing from the first of June, to
the midst of September, in which time it overflows all Egypt, and rises too
high for the most penetrating Judgment ever to dive to its bottom, or render
the true reason of its Flux.

Great delight he took in viewing this River, wherein he eat many Fish, and his
death in eating them; for a Surfeit which he then got, brought upon him the
grief of an old wound, which he received at the Siege of Ptolomais, and ended
in his death. He died at Laris in his return from Egypt, and was brought to
Jerusalem, and buried on Palm Sunday in the Temple of the Sepulcher, having
Reigned almost Eighteen years.

The same day that Baldwin was buried, Baldwin de Burgo his Kinsman, and Count
of Edessa, accidentally came into the City, intending there to keep his Easter:
At which time the Christian Princes were met together for the Electing a new
King, the most whereof were for bestowing the Crown upon Prince Estace, Brother
to the two former King but then absent in France, in regard was unsafe to break
the chain of Succesion, there being nothing more comm^ in those cases, than for
the inverting (...) order to bring confusion, alleging lik^ wise that it would
be high ingratitude the memories of Godfrey and Baldwin ^ exclude their
Brother, since he was in a points fit to be a King.

Others opposed it, objecting the dager of an Inter-regnum, especially und^
their circumstances, who living in t^ mouth of their Enemies, to stay for
Kingdom, was the way to lose the Kin^dom. And at length after much deba on both
sides, they proceeded to a p^sent Election, and made choice of Ba^win, who on
the Easter Day following w^ Crowned by Arnulphus the Patriarch, (...) the name
of Baldwin the Second. In t^ mean time some were secretly dispatch^ to acquaint
Prince Eustace with wh^ had passed, and invite him to come a^ challenge the
Crown; but he hear^ that Baldwin was in possession of it, p^ferred quietness
before honor; and (...) though he was part of the way on (...) Journey
thither, yet he very quietly w^ back again.

About this time happened the death ^f that Arch Hypocrite Alexius the Grae^an
Emperor, who was succeeded by Calo Johannes, of whom we shall have occasion to
speak often in the succeeding part of this History.

Arnulphus, who enjoyed the Patriarchal Dignity, when Baldwin the Second came
to the Crown, was so infamous, that the report of his baseness at length came
to the Popes Ear, who sent away a Legate to depose him; but Arnulphus hasted to
Rome, and with a great sum of Money bought himself innocent, and ob^ained yet
the enjoyment of his place du^ing life.

Guarimund succeeded him, being a very Religious man, and one by whom the
Christians obtained many Victories; he called a Council at Neapolis, wherein
ma^y wholesome things were concluded on for the reformation of manners. After his
death Stephen Abbot of St. John de ^alia was advanced, who awakened the
Patriarchs Title to Jerusalem, after it had ^lept during the lives of his three
Predecessors, demanding it very imperiously of the King, being a man of a high
spirit; but he died in the midst of his Age, and in the beginning of his
Projects, his place being filled by William, Prior of the Sepulcher, who was a
Flemin born, an^ better beloved than learned.

CHAP. XII.
The Knights Templars, and Teutonicks inst^tuted. Tire taken by the Christians.
T^ Death of Baldwin the Second.

ABout the beginning of this Kin^ Reign the two great Orders (...) Templars and
Teutonicks first appear^ in the world, the former under Hugh (...) Pagaris, and
Ganfred of St. Omer, the first Founders; they were much like t^ Hospitallers in
all things, and like the^ were poor at first, but being afterwar^ confirmed by
the Pope, at the intreaty^ Stephen Patriarch of Jerusalem, who e^joyned them to
wear a White garme^ to which was afterward added by ^^genius the Third a Red
Cross on the Breast; they grew wonderful rich (...) the Bounty of several
Princely Patro^ The latter were all Dutchmen, well (...) scended, living at
Jerusalem in a ho^^ which one of that Nation bequeathed his Countrymen, that
came thither (...) Pilgrimage, in the year 1190. their Or^ was honored with a
Grand Mast^ ^hereof the first was Henry A-walpot, their Habit being Black
Crosses on White Robes.

It will certainly be very pleasant for ^he Reader, to observe as he goes
along, ^ow this Kings Reign is strangely che^uered with great variety of
Fortune. ^or first Roger, Guardian to young Boe^und, Prince of Antioch, going
forth to ^ght the Turks, was conquered and kil^d. But Baldwin on the 14th of
August ^llowing compelled them to make a Re^tution of their Victory, and with a
shall Army gives them a great over^row. And to moderate the Christians ^y for
this Victory, Joceline unadvised^^ fights with Balack, a petty King of ^^e
Turks, and is beaten and taken Pri^ner, and the King attempting to rescue ^^m,
was also taken himself.

However, the Christians hands were ^t bound by the captivity of their King, ^r
Eustace Grenier, who was chosen ^ice-Roy whilst the King was a Priso^r, stoutly
defended the Country, and ^oceline having made his escape out of ^ison, fought
Balack again at Hircapolis, ^uted his Army, and killed him upon the ^lace with
his own hands; and to crownall, ^uarimund the Patriarch, by the assistance
(...) the Venetian Fleet, which were commanded by the Duke of Venice, cook the
impregnable City of Tire, the Venetia^ were for this service to have a third
p^^ of the City to themselves. The Ci^ was, besides its own natural strength,
we stored with Men and Ammunition; b^^ Famine increasing, they consented (...)
yield upon honorable terms.

Not long after this the King return home, after having been eighteen month a
Prisoner, and was to pay a Ransom (...) an hundred thousand Michaelets, for t^^
security whereof, he left his Daughter (...) Hostage: But he paid the Turks
with t^^ Saracens money, whom he beat first (...) Antioch, and then at
Damascus; whi^^ place he unfortunately besieged, a^^ thereby damped the Joy of
his two fo^mer Victories. And the more to qu^ their swelling pride, the young
Prince^ Antioch was overthrown in Battle a^^ slain.

Which ill success so afflicted Ki^^ Baldwins mind, that for some time b^ fore
his death, he renounced the wor^^ and took upon him a Religious Habit^ thing
not very unusual in those days, a^ sometimes, though not often, practi^^ still,
as by the Late Queen of Sweden, W^ is yet living.

CHAP. XIII.
Of Fulco the Fourth King of Jerusalem. The remarkable Ruin of Rodolphus
Patriarch of Antioch. The Grecian Emperor demands Anti och. The Prince
thereof pays him Homage for it. The^amentable Death of Fulco.

FVlco Earl of Tours, Mam and Anjou, came about three years before on
Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, where he ob^ained in Marriage Mellesent the Kings
Daughter, and thereupon had assigned ^he City of Tire, and some other Prince^y
Accommodations for his present main^enance, and the Kingdom after his
Father-in-laws decease, which he received ^ccordingly. He had one Son by a
for^er Wife, which was Jeffry Plantagenet, Earl of Anjou, to whom he left all
his Lands in France, and from whom our Kings of England are descended.

This Fulco was a very valiant man, endued with many perfections both of body
and mind. In his Reign there was ^o Alterations worth remark in the Church of
Jerusalem, but in that of Antioch there was much stir who should succeed
Bernard, that peaceable and long lived Prelate, who sat Thirty six year^ in
the Chair, and survived Eight Patriarchs of Jerusalem. For the Clerg^ being
long in their choice before the^ could come to a result, the Laity wa^ too
nimble for them, and clapped o^ Rodolphus of honorable descent into the Chair,
who cast off his Obedience to the Pope, and refused to acknowledge a^^
Superior but St. Peter. He was the Darling of the Gentry, but bated of the
Clergy, because advanced without the^ suffrage; wherefore being conscious (...)
himself that he needed strong Arms, sin^ he was to swim against the stream,
(...) screwed himself into the favor of t^^ Princess of Antioch, Widow to
you^ Boemund, so that with her strength (...) beat down all his Enemies,
promising h^ in requital, to make a Marriage betw^^ her and Reimund Earl of
Poictou, who w^ then coming into those parts. But (...) deceived her, and
procured the Earl (...) marry with the Lady Constantia h^ Daughter, who was but
a Child wi^^ whom he had the Principality of Antio^

The Patriarch, that he might ma^^ sure work, and oblige him for ever to (...)
his friend, bound him to it by an Oat^ But as it is usual in those cases,
frien^ unjustly gotten, are seldom long enjoyed, of a sworn Friend, he became
his sworn Enemy, and forced him to go to Rome, there to answer many Accusations
laid to his charge. The chief whereof was, that he made odious comparisons
between Antioch and Rome, and accounted himself equal to his Holiness.

When he arrived at Rome, he found the Popes Doors shut against him, but he
quickly opened them with a Golden Key, and upon his repentance for having
refused to acknowledge Obedience to the Church of Rome, he was dismissed, only
it was ordered by his Holiness, that the Bishop of Ostia should be sent into
Byria, to examine matters relating to his other Crimes, and proceed
accordingly: Whereat his Adversaries stormed extremely, expecting that he
should have been immediately deposed: But having mist their mark, they resolved
to have a second blow at him; wherefore they prevailed with Albericus the
Legate to favor their design, (which was not unknown to Rodolphus) who coming
to Antioch, cited the Patriarch to appear, but being called three several
times, came not, which was variously commented upon by those who were present,
according as they affected or disaffected him. Whereupon the Legate directed
himself to the Archbishop of Apamea, who had formerly been one of the most
vehemen^ Accusers of Rodolphus, but had lately bee^ reconciled to him, and
demanded why he did not accuse the Patriarch now o^ those Crimes which he had
formerly laid to his charge: To which the Archbishop answered, That what he
the^ did was done out of heat and prejudice, and he thought it was his great
sin so unadvisedly to discover the nakedness o^ his Father, like cursed Cham,
from which God had so far reclaimed him, that he would rather die for his
safety, than accuse him. Upon which Speech the Legate (such was the Martial-Law
in a Prelate in those days) immediately deposed him, and shortly after thrust
out the Patriarch with great violence, and shut him up in Prison, where he
remained a long time in Chains, till at last he made his escape, and went to
Rome, with an intent to have traversed his Cause again, had not death cut him
off.

About this time Calo Johannes the Grecian Emperor came with a great Army of
Horse and Foot, and demanded of Reimund Prince of Antioch, to resign to him
that whole Signiory, according to the Composition which the Christian Princes
made with Alexius his Father; which insolent demand fretted Reimund and all the
Latins to the heart, in regard they had purchased an Inheritance with their
own Blood, and yet were required to turn Tenants at will to another.

They told him it was offered his Father when first taken, and he refused it:
That Alexius kept not his Covenants, nor assisted them according to the
Agreement. He called them his Sons indeed, but disinherited them of their
hopes, and all the Portion that he gave them lay in promises never paid. But
all these Arguments signified little, the Emperors Sword being far stronger
than theirs; for coming with so great a force, he conquered in a few days all
Cilicia, and then besieged the City of Antioch it self; whereupon the King of
Jerusalem fearing it would give too great advantage to the Infidels, to have
the Christians fall together by the Ears among themselves, made composition
between them, wherein Reimund obliged himself to do homage to the Emperor, and
hold his Principality of him: Notwithstanding which, about four years after he
returned again, but did not much harm, only pillaged the Country. And some few
years after that he died, being accidentally poisoned by one of his own Arrows
which he had prepared for the Wild Bore, having always carried it much fairer
to the Latins than his Father had done, in regard an honorable Foe is much
more desirable than a Treacherous Friend.

Falco having Reigned in Jerusalem about Eleven years, with abundance o^ care
and industry, being almost continually imbroiled in Civil Discords, which
hindered him from much enlarging of hi^ Dominion, was slain as he was following
his sport in Hunting, to the great grie^ of his Subjects. He was buried with
his Predecessors in the Temple of the Sepulcher, leaving two Sons behind him
Balder and Almerick, the former being about Thirteen, and the latter Eleve^
years old.

CHAP. XIV.
The Reign of Baldwin the Third. Of Fulche^ Patriarch of Jerusalem, and the
insole^ carriage of the Hospitallers toward him. The Institution of Carmelites.

BAldwin the Eldest Son of Falco, succeeded his Father, and quickly gre^ up as
well in Age, as in Royal Qualifications, and became a most complete and well
accomplished Prince. During his minority, his Mother who governed all, made up
his want of Age with her abundant care, she being a Woman in sex, but of a
masculine Spirit.

William, who was last possessed of the Patriarchs Chair in Jerusalem, was no
great Clerk, being better at Building of Castles than at Edifying the Church:
He built one at Askelon, one at Ramula, a third called Blankguard, for the
securing of Prisoners: But having enjoyed the Dignity Fifteen years, he was
translated to Heaven, and Fulcher Archbishop of Tire succeeded him, whose old
Age was much molested with the Pride and Rebellion of the Hospitallers, who had
then obtained from the Pope a plenary Exemption from the Jurisdiction of the
Patriarch, which he did the more easily grant, because he hoped thereby to make
himself absolute Master of all Orders, and link them entirely to himself by an
immediate dependence, whereby he made every Covent a Castle of Rebels, and
armed them with Privileges to fight their lawful Diocesan.

Those Hospitallers were by this means become so rude, that they would without
all shame Ring their Bells when the Patriarch Preached, that so his Voice might
not be heard, and shoot Arrows into the Church, to disturb him and the People
in Divine Service. A bundle whereof was hung up in the Church as a Monument of
their monstrous Impiety. Fulcher crawled to Rome when an hundred years old, to
complain of those outrages, but the Hospitallers prevented him, and bribed off
the business beforehand, so that the good old man was forced to return without
redress, whereupon they grew more insolent than ever.

Nor was Haymericus, who succeeded Rodolphus at Antioch, much quieter. He
instituted about the year 1160. the Order of Carmelites, who pretended to an
imitation of the Prophet Elias. Some indeed had formerly lived dispersed about
the Mount of Carmel, but he gathered them into one House. But although
Palestine brought them forth, yet England proved the most officious in nursing
of them up: For being first brought into it by Ralph Freshburgh in the year
1240. they were first seated at Newenden in Kent, and in a little time
scattered themselves all over England, and lived in great pomp, till dispersed
by King Henry the Eighth, when he demolished the Abbeys.

CHAP. XV.
Edessa lost. The Voyage of the French King, and the Emperor of Germany
blasted by the perfidiousness of the Grecian Emperor. The Turks beaten at
Meander. Damascus besieged in vain.

ALL Empires, like the swelling Sea, have bounds set to them, whither being
once come, they can rise no higher. And the Kingdom of Jerusalem, being now
arrived at its full growth, began to decline apace, till at last all revolved
again into the Infidels hands. And the first considerable step which it made in
its declension, was the loss of Edessa, one of the four Tetrarchies of that
Kingdom, and a place wherein the Christian Religion had always flourished from
the time of the Apostles.

Which loss moved Conrade, Emperor of the West, and Lewis the Seventh surnamed
the Young King of France, by the persuasion of St. Bernard, to undertake a
Voyage to the Holy Land. The Emperor for this design had gotten together an
Army of 200000 Foot, and 50000 Horse, and the King near as many more. For in
France they sent a Dista^^ and a Spindle to those that would not go^ with them,
as upbraiding their Effeminacy; and no wonder, for Women themselves went in
Armor to this War, and had a brave Heroic Lass, like another Penthesilea, for
their Leader, who was so richly clad, and befringed with Gold, that she was
generally known by the name of Golden Foot.

Conrade with his Army, took his way through Graecia, where Emmanuel the
Emperor, possessed with an hereditary fear of the Latins, fortified his
Cities, concluding that there needed strong Banks where such a stream of people
were to pass, using them most treacherously, and giving them a very bad welcome,
in hope thereby to get rid of them the sooner. And to increase their misery as
they lay encamped by the River Melas (if it be proper to call that a River,
which is all Mud in Summer, and all Sea in Winter) it drowned many of them by
its sudden and unexpected overflowing, as if it had learned Treachery of the
Graecians, and conspired with them to spoil the Emperors generous Design.

And those of them that survived this unhappy accident, were reserved for a
more lingering misery, the Emperor endeavoring by all imaginable ways to
accomplish their Ruin; as by mixing Lime with their Meal, killing those who
strayed from the Army, holding intelligence with the Turks, corrupting his
Coin, and giving them false Conductors, who designedly led them into danger,
and made the way less doubtful than the Guides.

And no sooner had the Emperor got through all those dangers, and escaped the
Treachery of the Greeks, but he was immediately encountered by the Hostility of
the Turks, who waited for them on the Banks of the River Meander, which being
not fordable, and the Christians having neither Boat nor Bridge to convey them
over, the undaunted Emperor, after an Exhortation to his Soldiers to follow
his brave Example, plunged himself into the Water, and quickly reached the
other Shore, where, in despite of the Enemy, he Landed with all his Army.
Whereat the affrighted Turks did as it were offer their Throats to the
Christians Swords, and were slain in such numbers, that whole piles of dead
Bones remain there for a monument of their Victory, flushed with this success,
he marched forward to Iconium, now called Cogni, which he besieged in vain, to
the wasting and lo^ of his Army,

The French King followed after wit^ a numerous Army, and drank of the sam^ Cup
at the Graecians hands (though no^ so deeply) as the Emperor had done before
him. But at last finding that tho^ who marched to Palestine by Land me with an
Ocean of misery, though the came not to Sea, he thought it much safer to trust
the Winds and the Wave^ than the perfidious Graecians; and therefore shipping
himself and his Army, h^ arrived safe in Palestine, where he wa^ highly
welcomed by the Prince of A^tioch. Some weeks were spent in Princely
Entertainments, and visiting of holy Places before they entered upon action.

But having sufficiently recreated themselves, and rested their Soldiers, the
Emperor and the King of France both resolve upon the Siege of Damascus,
accounting a smaller Town too mean a trifle for them to employ their Arms in
its Conquests; wherefore they immediately sat down before it, and had
certainly conquered it, had they not fallen out among themselves about parting
of it before it was theirs to dispose of. Conrade and King Lewis designed it
for Theodorick Earl of Flanders, who was lately arrived in those parts, whilst
other Princes who had been there a long time, and born the brunt of the War,
could not endure to see a raw Upstart to be preferred before them. For which
reason, together with their being corrupted with Turkish money (although it
proved but Brass gilt, may all Traitors be so paid) they persuaded the King of
France to remove his Camp to a stronger part of the Wall, whereby they rendered
the design of taking the Town fruitless, and forced them to raise the Siege,
and return home, leaving the City of Damascus, and even Honor both behind
them. Many thousand Christians perished in that adventure, whose Souls are said
by all the Writers of that Age, to be carried up to Heaven upon the Wings of
that Holy Cause they died for. And the King of France in his return home was
taken Prisoner by the Grecian Fleet, but rescued again by Gregory, who was
Admiral to Roger King of Sicilia.

The King and Emperor being returned, Noradine the Turk prevailed in
Palestine, which was very much occasioned by the unhappy difference which arose
between Queen Millesent, and her Son Baldwin, who was egged on by some of the
Nobles that were offended with the Queen for having advanced a certain Nobleman
whose name was Manasses, to be Constable of the Kingdom (who being unable to
manage his own happiness grew so insolent, that spurning his equals and
trampling on his Inferiors, he drew upon himself the general hatred and envy
of all men) quarrelled with his Mother, imprisoned first, and then banished her
Favorite; and at last, to conclude the difference, the Kingdom was divided
between them, the City of Jerusalem, and all the Inland part was allotted to
her, and what bordered upon the Se^ to him. But the widest Throne being too
narrow for two to sit on together, he was not long content with this division
but marched with a great deal of fury to besiege his Mother in Jerusalem, and
dispossess her of all. When he first approach the City, the Patriarch went out
to him and with abundance of freedom reproved him sharply for his rash and
unnatural attempt, and upbraided him for his ingratitude, in going about to
take all from so good a Mother, who had not only proved a good Steward in his
minority, but had also consented to accept of one hal^ of the Kingdom, when the
whole of right belonged to her.

But he was so enchanted with ambltion, that no Arguments would prevail; which
when the Queen perceived, she did by the advice of her friends, consent to
yield up all, lest the Christian Cause should suffer by their differences.

Noradine being encouraged by those Civil Discords, came up with a great Army,
and wasted all the Country of Antioch; and Prince Reimund going forth to give
him Battle, had his Army beaten, and himself slain. And not long after Joceline
Count of Edessa was taken Prisoner.

In the mean while King Baldwin is not idle, but having made great preparations
for the besieging of Askelon, at last sat down before it, and having made a
large breach in the Wall, the Templars, to whom the King promised the spoil if
they took it, entered through the breach into the City, and supposing they were
able without any more help to master the Place, set a Guard to prevent any more
of their fellow Christians from entering in to be sharers with them in the
Booty; which covetousness of theirs cost them their lives; for the Turks
contemning the smalness of their number, put them all to the Sword;
notwithstanding which the City was shortly after taken, though with abundance
of difficulty.

Diverse other considerable Victories King Baldwin obtained over the Turks
especially one near the River of Jordan where he vanquished Noradine, and twice
relieved Caesarea Philippi, which the Turk had straightly besieged; but death at
la^^ made a Conquest of him, being poisoned by a Jewish Physician (as it was
believed) in regard the remainder of the potion afterward killed a Dog to whom
it was given. He was very much lamented by his Subjects, and not without
reason, being so brave and worthy a Prince, that even Noradine his mortal Enemy
honorably refused to invade his Kingdom during his Funeral Solemnities,
protesting that in his Opinion the Christians had just cause of sorrow, having
lost such (...) King, whose equal for Justice and Valor the whole World could
not produce. He died without Issue, when he had Reigned about one and twenty
years.

CHAP. XVI.
Almerick Brother to Baldwin succeeds in the Kingdom of Jerusalem. The Sultan
of Iconium, and the Master of the Assassines desire to be baptized. Commotions
in Egypt. The Turks called thither, and set up for themselves. The King of
Jerusalem 's Aid implored to drive them out. He afterward invades Egypt. His
Death.

ALmerick Brother to King Baldwin, and Earl of Joppa and Askelon, succeeded to
the Kingdom of Jerusalem, but was, before he could be admitted to his
Coronation, enjoined by the Popes Legate, and the Patriarch of Jerusalem, to
put away Anes his Wife, Daughter to Joceline, Count of Edessa, because she was
his Cosen in the fourth degree, with this reservation, that the two Children,
Baldwin and Sybill, which he had by her, should be accounted legitimate, and
capable of their Fathers Possessions.

In this Kings time the Sultan of Jcenium freely embraced the Christian
Religion, and was baptized, more of his Courtiers designing to follow him
therein, had not his Ambassador then at Ro^^ taken great offense at the vicious
and debauched lives which he there observe^ the Christians to lead; which thing
ma^^ many of the Pagans step back, when the had one foot in the Church,
abhorring to see Christians who believe so well and live so ill.

Not long after the great Master of the Assassines offered to receive the
Christian Faith, which good intention wa^ spoiled by the base and treacherous
killing his Ambassador, which he sent t^^ Jerusalem, to treat with the King
about it, by one of the Templars, (...) The King demanded the Murderer of the
Master of the Templars, that so Justice might pass upon him: But the Master
insolently denied to deliver him, saying, he had already enjoined him Penance,
and intended to send him to the Pope, but would part with him to none else.

These Assassines were a certain precise Sect of Mahometans, who had in them
the very spirit and quintessence of that poisonous Superstition; they were
about forty thousand in number, and were possessed of six Cities near Antaradus
in Syria, having over them a Chief Master whom they called the Old Man of the
Mountains, at whose command they would refuse no pain or peril, but immediately
address themselves to assassinate my Prince whom he had appointed out for
death, and always find hands to accomplish whatsoever he enjoyed. There are now
none of them left, they being rooted out and destroyed by Selemus the Turkish
Emperor, when he conquered Syria and Egypt, or as others say, by the
Tartarians Anno 1257. unless we may suppose them to be revived again in the
Jesuits gracious Loyola, having fetched his Platform of blind obedience from
them.

Whilst the Turks Lorded it over Syria, and the lesser Asia, the Saracen Caliph
commanded in Egypt, which was the Stage whereon most of the remarkable
passages of King Almericks life were acted. For Dargan and Sanar, two great
Saracen Lords belonging to the Caliph of Egypt, falling out about the Sultany,
or Viceroyship of the Land, made way for the calling of him thither.

Sanar finding that he was too weak to contend with his Rival, craved Aid of
Noradine King of the Turks, that then Reigned at Damascus, who sent him an Army
of Turks under the Command of Syracon, an experienced Captain. Notwithstanding
which, Dargan obtained the Victory, but enjoyed it not long, being shortly
after slain by Treachery whereby Sanar got the Sultans place. It the mean while
the voluptuous Calip^ carelessly pursued his private pleasures without
concerning himself about their difference, or regarding their introducing
foreign Force to decide their Quarrel, as though the tottering of his Kingdom
had rocked him into a Lethargy out of which nothing would awake him.

Sanar having now obtained his desire by the death of Dargan, liberally
rewarded the Turks, and desired them to return home; but Syracon refused to be
gone; and having seized on the City of Belbis, fortified it, and there waited
for the coming of more Turks for the Conquest of Egypt, which made Sanar
implore the help of Almerick King of Jerusalem to drive them out of Egypt,
which he effectually performed.

But whilst he was Victorious in Egypt an unfortunate Battle was fought
between Boemund the Third Prince of Antioch, Reimund Prince of Tripoli,
Calamar^ Governor of Cilicia, and Joceline Coun^ of Edessa on one side, and
Noradine the Turkish King on the other; wherein the Turk obtained the Victory,
and took those four Christian Princes Prisoners.

As for Syracon the Turk, though he was forced to retire for the present out of
Egypt by the Victorious Arms of Almerick, yet he resolved not to part with it
so; wherefore he presently went to the Caliph of Babylon, who was opposite to
him of Egypt, and accounted him an Usurper (each of them claiming, as sole Heir
to Mahomet their false Prophet, the Sovereignty over all the Saracens in the
World) and offered him, that if he would furnish him with a good number of
Soldiers, he would extirpate this Schismatical Caliph, and reduce all Egypt to
the Obedience of the Babylonian; which motion being joyfully embraced by the
greedy and aspiring Fop, Syracon once again invadeth Egypt with a great and
powerful Army.

Whereupon Sanar, who was greatly affrighted thereat, made new and larger
offers to King Almericus, to come and stop this deluge of his Enemies,
promising him a Pension of Forty thousand Ducats yearly, if he would lend him
his Assistance. But Almerick perceiving that the Sultan, notwithstanding he
took so much upon him, was subject to a high Lord, refused to make any Bargain
with him, but with the Caliph himself, in order whereunto he sent Hugh Earl of
^sarea, and a Knight Templar as his E^bassadours to Caliph Elhadach, who the
kept his Court at Cairo: Who being a^rived at his Palace, were conducted (...)
the Sultan through several dark passag^ well guarded with armed Ethiopians, a^
then into diverse spacious open Courts, such beauty and riches, that the
Embasadours were amazed, and even astonis^ed at the rarities they beheld. And
s^^ the farther they went, the greater t^ state appeared, till at last they we^
brought to the Caliphs own Loding^ where, as soon as they entered the
Pr^sence-Chamber, the Sultan prostra^ himself three several times to t^ ground
before the Curtain, behind whi^ the magnificent Caliph was sitting, a^
thereupon the Traverse, which was (...) rich Silk, wrought all over with Pea^
of inestimable value was immediate drawn, and the Caliph himself discover^
sitting with great Majesty on a Thro^ of massy Gold, having only some few^ his
most confiding Eunuchs about him.

The Caliph having discovered himself and the Sultan humbly kissed his feet, ^
briefly related the cause of their comin^ the eminent danger which then
threa^ned them, and the offers which he h^ made to King Almerick, which he
entreated him now to ratify, and in demonstration thereof, to give his hand to
^he Kings Ambassador. The Calip'^ having heard what he had to say, demur^ed a
while upon the Ceremony of gi^ing them his hand, accounting such a ge^ure
beneath the greatness of his state, and would by no means consent to give ^em
his bare hand, but offered it them with his Glove on, to which the reso^te Earl
of Caesarea replied, Sir, truth ^eks no holes to hide it self in, and Prin^es
who intend to keep Covenant, ought ^ deal openly and nakedly; give us there^re
your hand, or we will make no bar^in with your Glove. He was loath to ^o it, but
necessity, which was at that ^me a more imperious Caliph than him^lf,
commanding it, he at last consented, and dismissed the Christian Ambassadors
^ith such liberal Gifts as testified his ^reatness.

Almerick, according to this Agree^ent, faithfully used his utmost endea^our to
expel Syracon with his Turks out ^f Egypt, and in order thereunto he met them
in the Field, and gave them Battle, ^herein he got the day, but lost all his
^aggage, so that the Conquest was as it ^ere divided, the Turks gaining the
Wealth, and the Christians the Hono^ of the Victory. But Almerick followi^ his
success, pursued them to Alexandr^ and pent them up, and straightly besieg^ them
in that City, and thereby for^^ them to accept of conditions of Pea^ wherein
they were obliged to depart (...) of Egypt, without performing what the had
promised, and the Caliph of Baby expected, and then returned himself w^^ honor
to Askelon.

But when a Crown is the Prize play^ for, it is vain to expect fair play in
(...) Gamesters. For King Almerick have once beheld the Beauty and Riches^
Egypt, was so enamoured therewith, t^ he longed to obtain that Kingdom (...)
himself: And the next year, contr^ to his Solemn League with the Cal^ invaded
it with a great Army, pretend^ (though falsely) that the Caliph wo^ make a
private Peace with Nora^ King of the Turks. Guilbert Master the Hospitallers,
was the chief Instrum^ in stirring up the King to this treac^rous and unjust
War, hoping that (...) Country of Perlusium, if conquered, sho^ be given to
their order: But the Te^plars very much opposed the design ((...) of their
Order being Ambassador at (...) ratifying the Agreement between (...) King and
Caliph) and with much Zeal ^otested against it, as undertaken against ^ath and
Fidelity.

However, the King would not be di^erted from his design, but having made ^reat
preparations for this War, descend^d into Egypt, where he was for a while
^ccessful, and won the City of Belbis or ^erlusium. Notwithstanding which
Au^ors, from that time, date the ill Success ^f the Holy War, and show us a
whole ^loud of Miseries, which immediately fol^wed thereupon; and no wonder,
for God ^ldom lets Perjury go long unpunished.

First, Whilst Almerick was absent in Egypt, Noradine won diverse considerable
^laces about Antioch.

Secondly, Meller Prince of Armenia, ^ho was a Christian, entered into a ^eague
with Noradine, and kept it in^iolable, to the great disadvantage of the King of
Jerusalem, which act of Mellers must be condemned, and yet the Justice of God
ought to be admired in punish^ng the Christians thereby, for their ^reach of
Covenant with the Saracens ^n Egypt.

Thirdly, The Saracens finding themselves faithlesly dealt with, and laid at on
all sides, began to learn War, and grew good Soldiers on a sudden; and
although they formerly fought with Bows only, yet no^ they learned of the
Christians to use a^ offensive and defensive Weapons, it being usual with rude
Nations to better them selves by fighting with a skilful Enem^

And Fourthly, Almericks hope of co^quering Egypt was wholly frustrated, b^ing
after some few Victories drive^ out, and the whole Kingdom conquer by Saladine
(Nephew to Syracon) wh^ beat out the Caliphs brains when he pr^tended to do him
reverence, and there^ changed the Government of Egypt from the Saracen Caliph
to a Turkifh King. A^ shortly after, upon the death of Noradi^ the Kingdom of
the Turks in Syria, an^ the lesser Asia, was likewise bestowe^ upon him,
whereby he became the mo^potent Monarch in the World.

Whilst Jerusalem was left as a po^ Weather-beaten Kingdom, bleak an^ open to
the Storms of its Enemies o^ every side, lying as it were between the Lions
Teeth, Damascus on the North^ and Egypt on the South, two pote^ Turkish
Kingdoms united under a valian^ and successful Prince, which made A^merick fend
for Succors into Europ^ there being now but few Voluntie^ flocking to this
service, and Souldie^ were forced to be pressed with import^nity before they
would consent to under^ake the Voyage: But it being just with God, that those
who had betrayed the ^aracens, whom they undertook to suc^our, should want
succor themselves, ^hen they stood most in need of it; his Ambassadors were
forced to return without any other supplies than pity and ^ommiseration.

And Lastly, The King himself, wea^ied with so many successive miseries, ^nded
his life of a Bloody Flux, when he ^ad reigned about Eleven years, leaving
^esides his two Children by his first Wife, one Daughter named Isabel by Mary
his second Wife (Daughter to John Proto-Sebastus, a Grecian Prince) who was
afterward married to Humphred the third Prince of Thorone.

CHAP. XVII.
Baldwin the Fourth succeeds. The Viciousness of the Patriarch of Jerusalem.
His Embassy to Henry the Second King of England. The Original and Power of the
Mammalukes. Saladine conquered by Baldwin, yet afterward conquers Mesopotamia.
Baldwins death.

Baldwin his Son, the fourth of that name, succeeded his Father, having had the
benefit of an excellent Education under William Archbishop of Tire, a very
Pious Learned Man, skilled in all the Oriental Tongues, besides the Dutch and
French, his Native Languages. Heraclius, who was now Patriarch of Jerusalem,
being preferred to that Dignity for his handsomness, by Queen Mary, second Wife
to King Almerick, and Mother to Baldwin, was a man of a debauched and vicious
life, keeping company with a Vintners Wife, whom he maintained in great state
like an Empress, so that she was generally saluted by the name of Patriarchs.
His ill Example infected the inferior Clergy, whose corrupt manners was a sad
presage of the approaching Ruin of that Kingdom.

This Man was sent by King Baldwin, as his Ambassador to Henry the Second King
of England, to crave his personal assistance in the Holy War, and as an
inducement thereunto, to deliver him the Royal Standard of that Kingdom, the
Keys of our Saviors Sepulcher, the Tower of David, and the City of Jerusalem.
Henry was chosen out before any other Prince, because the world justly esteemed
him valiant, wise, rich and fortunate, and which was the main, that so he might
thereby expiate his Murder, and gather up again the innocent Blood that he had
spilt in the death of Thomas Becket. And that he might the more easily be drawn
to undertake the Voyage, the Patriarch entitled him to the Kingdom of
Jerusalem, because Geoffrey ^^^ntagenet his Father was Son to Fulco the Fourth
King of Jerusalem. But he was too wise a Prince to be so easily wheedled.
However, he pretended he would go, and got together a Mass of Money toward the
defraying the Charge of his Voyage, making every one, as well the Clergy as the
Laity, pay that year the Tenth of all their Revenues, both movables and
immovables; and when he bad filled his Purse, all men expected he should
perform his promise, but he changed the Voyage into Palestine for a Journey
into France.

The Patriarch, while he stayed in England, consecrated the Temple Church near
St. Dunstans in the West, and the House adjoining belonging then to Knights
Templars, but since employed to a better use, viz. the entertaining those
Gentlemen who study and practice the English Laws.

In the minority of King Baldwin, who was but thirteen years old, Milo de
Planci a Nobleman, was Protector of the Kingdom, whose Pride and Insolence
could not be endured by the great men, and therefore they got him to be stabbed
at Ptolemais, and chose Raimund Count of Tripoli to suceeed him.

And Saladine, having now seriously resolved upon the Ruin of the Kingdom of
Jerusalem, endeavored to furnish himself with such Soldiers as might be most
fit for that service; in order whereunto he bought a great number of Slaves of
the Circassians, a People by the Lake of Meotis near Taurica Chersonesus, who
were brought up to be extreme hardy, and inured to War by their continual
skirmishing with the neighboring Tartars.

Those Slaves he trained up in Military Discipline after the Turkish manner.
They had most of them been Christians, and were baptized in their Infancy; but
being taken from their Parents whilst young, they were untaught Christ, and
instructed in the Mohammedan Superstition, whereby they became the more
implacable Enemies to Christianity, for having been once its friends. They
received from Saladine the name of Mammalukes, and were so courageous and
expert in War, that his, and his Successors greatness, was not to be so much
attributed to their own Conduct, as to those Mammalukes Valor, till at last
perceiving their own strength, they wrested the Sovereignty from the Turkish
Kings, and advanced one of their own number to the Regal Dignity.

Saladine having thus furnished himself with a new sort of Soldiers, resolved
to try their Valor upon the Christian, and therefore invaded the Holy Land,
slaying and burning all before him, till he came to Askelon, where King Baldwin
then was, before which he sat down, and closely besieged it. And Count
Raimund, Protector of the Kingdom, Philip Earl of Flanders, and the chief
strength of the Kingdom being then absent in Celosyria, wasting the Country
about Emissa and Cesarea. Baldwin was forced to keep himself close in the City,
not daring to venture on so strong an Enemy; which fear of Baldwins having
possessed Saladine with a belief that he needed not so great an Army to lie
before the City, he sent out several Parties to forage and spoil the Country,
which the King observing, resolved to take opportunity by the forelock, and set
on him when he least expected it. To which end he sallied out with great
privacy and silence, and with about four hundred Horse, and a few Footmen,
suddenly assaulted his secure Enemies with such invincible Courage and
Resolution, that notwithstanding their number, being Twenty six thousand Horse
and Foot, they were utterly routed, and the Christians returned with great
Triumph and Joy to Jerusalem.

But Saladine, who was rather enraged than daunted by this overthrow, resolved
not to be long before he recovered his credit, and therefore, about two months
after he fell with his Mammalukes, like a mighty and raging Tempest, upon the
Christians as they were dividing the spoil of a Party of Turks, whom they had
vanquished a little before, putting most of them to the Sword, and the rest to
flight and taking Otto Grand Master of the Templars, and Hugh, Son-in-law to
the Count of Tripoli Prisoners, the King himself hardly escaping: So that both
sides having sufficiently smarted, consented to refresh themselves with a short
Peace, under the shelter whereof, their troubled States breathed quietly for
the space of about two years, which Truce was the more willingly embraced by
Saladine, because a Famine then raged in the Kingdom of Damascus, where it had
scarcely rained for five years together.

But this welcome Calm was somewhat troubled with an unexpected Storm raised by
Domestic Discords in King Baldwins Court. For the Kings Mother and Uncle, two
persons of turbulent spirits, accused the Count of Tripoli of Treason, as if he
had, when he was Governor of the Kingdom, affected the Crown for himself;
which accusation so stung the King in the head, that the Count coming shortly
after to Jerusalem, was, as he was on the way thither, commanded to stay, which
he looked upon as a great disgrace. But some of the Nobility fearing the
mischiefs which might proceed from this unhappy difference, brought them to be
reconciled. But, though the matter was seemingly made up, yet the King ever
after looked upon the Earl with a jealous Eye. And the Earl seeing himself
suspected, proved afterward really treacherous and disloyal, though he is
supposed by most Historians to be innocent of what he was then charged withal.

The Kingdom of Damascus having now recovered its self from the Famine, and
Saladine obtained his ends by the Truce, would observe it no longer; wherefore
having gotten together a good Army, he marched out of Egypt through Palestine,
destroying and spoiling the Country all along as he went to Damascus. And
having strengthened himself with the addition of what Forces he had in Syria,
he entered the Holy Land again. But the King, who had not above seven hundred
Men to twenty thousand, met him at a small Village called Frobolt, and opposing
Valor to his multitudes, overthrew him in a great and bloody Battle, wherein
Saladine himself was forced by speedy flight to escape the danger, and by long
Marches get him again to Damascus. Nor had he any better success, when shortly
after he besieged Berytus, being forced by the valor and courage of Baldwin to
raise his Siege, and depart with disgrace.

Wherefore Saladine finding such tough resistance in the Holy Land, hoped to
gain a better purchase by employing his Arms in Mesopotamia, to which end
passing the River Euphrates, he won Charran, and diverse other Towns, after
which, returning again into Syria, he besieged Aleppo, which was the strongest
place the Christians had in the whole Country, being so fortified both by
Nature and Art, that it would have been almost impossible for him to have taken
it, had he not by his Bribes made a far larger Breach in the Governors
Loyalty, than he was able to do in the Walls of the City.

But having by this means possessed himself of Aleppo, he marched again into
the Holy Land, being now more formidable than ever he had been before; and
carrying an Army of Terror in the very mention of his name, so that the poor
Christians unanimously fled into their fenced Cities. As for King Baldwin, the
Leprosy had arrested and confined him within the compass of his own Court,
where his great spirit long strove with his infirmity, being loath to part with
his Crown, and disrobe himself of his Royalty, before they were plucked away by
death; but was however forced at last to stoop and retire himself to a private
life, appointing Baldwin his Nephew (a Child of five years old) to be his
Successor, and Guy Earl of Joppa, and Askelon, who was the young Child's Father
inlaw, to be Protector of the Realm in his minority. But soon after finding Guy
to be a silly, soft man, he revoked the latter Act, and designed Raimund Earl
of Tripoli to succeed him.

Guy, who though he was not valiant, yet was very sullen, stormed extremely at
his disgrace, and leaving the Court in discontent, returned home, and fortified
his Cities of Joppa and Askelon, which greatly perplexed the Kings thoughts,
not knowing whom to name for Protector, fearing lest Guys cowardliness should
lose the Kingdom to the Turks, or Raimunds treachery get it for himself, so
that anguish of mind, and weakness of body ended his days, when he was about
five and twenty years of age, happy in dying before the death of his Kingdom.

CHAP. XVIII.
The short Reign, and woeful Death of Baldwin the Fifth. Guy succeeds him.
Tripoli revolts. The Christians overthrown. Their King taken Prisoner. And the
City of Jerusalem won by the Turks.

IT has ever been accounted one of the greatest happinesses that can befall a
Family, for the Heirs to be of Age before their Fathers death, in regard Minors
have not only been the Ruin of Families, but the overthrow of Kingdoms too.
And it being one of Gods threatenings against a wicked and disobedient People to
give Children to be their Princes, and Babes to Rule over them, he scourged the
Kingdom of Jerusalem three several times with that Rod, within the compass of
forty years. Baldwin the Third, Fourth and Fifth, being all under Age, and the
last but five years old being the Posthumus Son of William Marquets of
Montferat, by Sybil his Wife, Sister to Baldwin the Fourth, and Daughter to
King Almerick, who was after the death of the Marquess married to this Guy.

Now the Earl of Tripoli demanding to be Protector of this young King,
according to the designation of his Uncle before his death; Sybil, who was
Mother to this Infant, to defeat Raimunds hopes of obtaining the Protectorship,
first murdered all natural affections in her own breast, and then murdered
her Son, by giving him a dose of Poison, that so the Crown in her right might
come to Guy her Husband. This Prince unhappy in springing from so inhuman and
barbarous a Mother, Reigned but eight Months and eight Days.

Baldwin being thus dispatched, Guy obtained by large Bribes to the Templars,
and Heraclius the Patriarch, to be immediately crowned, from which time the
Christians affairs in the Kingdom of Jesalem, posted toward their fatal
period, being spurred on the faster by the woeful jarrings and discords among
the Princes. But we shall at present leave the Civil, to discourse a little of
the Ecclesiastical affairs of this declining Realm.

Whilst Heraclius was Patriarch of Jerusalem, one Hymericus enjoyed that honor
at Antioch, who wrote a bemoaning Letter to Henry the Second of England,
wherein he much lamented the woeful state of the Christians in the East, and
endeavored to persuade that Prince to undertake a Voyage into Palestine for
their succor and relief; and received from him in answer thereunto a Letter
fraught with fair and ample promises, the performance whereof I could never yet
meet with in any of those Historians, who wrote the Transactions of the Holy
War.

But besides those Latin Patriarchs which commanded in the Churches of
Jerusalem and Antioch, there were Grecian Anti-Patriarchs, who were appointed
by the Emperor of Constantinople, and having no temporal Power nor
Jurisdiction over the Latins, nor Profits of Church Lands, were forced to
content themselves with a Jurisdiction over those of the Greek Church only. We
are not able to find out the exact Chain of their Succession, and therefore are
forced to content our selves with discovering here and there a Link. And about
this time we light on three that enjoyed that titular Dignity successively one
after another; the first whereof was Athanasius, who was (notwithstanding his
being called Schismatic by some of the Historians of that Age) a very learned
and pious Man, as appears by the many excellent Epistles which he wrote upon
several occasions. The second was Leontius, commended likewise to Posterity for
an honest Man, and a good Scholar. The third was Dositheus, who was much
inferior to the two former both for Piety and Learning, and being offered the
Patriarchship of Constantinople, by Isaac the Grecian Emperor, he attempted to
grasp at both, and by that means held neither, but between two Patriarchal
Chairs fell irrecoverably to the ground.

In Antioch likewise we find several Greek Patriarchs, whereof one, whose name
was Sotericus, being displaced for several Heretical Tenets which he held
concerning our Savior, he was succeeded by Theodorus Balsamon, who was in his
time the very Oracle of the Civil Law, compiling and publishing many Learned
Commentaries upon the Ancient Canons, wherein he proved the Patriarch of
Constantinople to have greater privileges than the Bishop of Rome, catching,
say the Romanists, at every thing that sounded to the advancing of the Eastern
Churches, and the pulling down Rome, when she lifts up her Head above
Constantinople, for which reason Bellar min will not allow him to be a good
Author. This Balsamon was likewise deceived by Isaac the Grecian Emperor, who
pretended that he would remove him to Constantinople, upon condition he could
prove the Translation of Patriarchs to be lawful, in regard the Canons forbid
it; but having performed the task, the Emperor, who was very mutable in his
mind, bestowed the Patriarchs place upon another, and left Balsamon to remain
still at Antioch.

There being about this time a Truce between the Turks and Christians, and
Saladine's Mother, supposing her self sufficiently guarded thereby, adventuring
to travel from Egypt to Damascus, with abundance of Treasure, and a very small
Train, she was, notwithstanding the Truce, surprised, and riffled of all she
had by Reinold of Castile, which base and unchristian act so enraged Saladine,
that gathering together all his strength, he immediately besieged Ptolemais.
And the Earl of Tripoli vexed at his losing the Government, was so blinded by
passion, and filled with rage against King Guy, that he mistook his Enemy, and
revenged himself on God and Religion, by basely revolting with his whole
Principality (which was a third part of the Kingdom of Jerusalem) to Saladine,
and assisting him in that Siege.

But the Knights Templars and Hospitallers sallying out, and falling on the
Turks in their Camp, killed 20000 thousand of them, but not without some loss
to themselves; the Master of the Hospitallers, and diverse other persons of note
being slain in the Fight. However, the Victory remained to the Christians, an^
Saladine was forced to raise his Siege an^ be gone, which made the Earl of
Tripol^ either out of fear that the Christian^ might prevail, or else moved
thereun^ out of remorse of Conscience, or disco^tented with the entertainment
he me withal from Saladine (who had learne^ that Politic Maxim, to give some
honor, but place no trust in a Fugitive) reconcile himself to the King, and
sorry for his offense, return again to the Christians.

Whereupon Guy gathered togethe^ the whole strength of his weak and declining
Kingdom, to do their last endeavor against the Turks, to whom he adventured to
give Battle near Tiberias, although he had but 1500 Horse, and 15000 Foot
against 120000 Horse, and 160000 Foot. The Fight began about three of the Clock
in the afternoon, but night coming on, forced them to give over till the next
morning, when both sides began afresh, and the Christians fought with so much
courage and resolution, that their valor poised their Enemies numbers, till at
length the day waxing extreme hot, turned the Scales to the Pagans side, there
being more Christians slain by thirst, and the Beams darted on them from the
scorching Sun, than with their Enemies weapons. Reinold of Castile was slain
upon the place, and so were most of the Templars and Hospitallers. And Gerard
Master of the Templars, and Boniface Marquess of Montferat were taken
Prisoners, together with the King himself, who seeing his servants all slain
before his Eyes, with much importunity prevailed with Saladine to spare his
Schoolmaster; yea in this unfortunate Battle the very flower of the Christians
Chivalry was cut down, and what was yet most lamented (says Matthew Paris) the
Cross which freed men from the captivity of their sins, was for men's sins taken
captive. This fatal Overthrow was generally imputed to the Earl of Tripoli, who
that day commanded a good part of the Christian Army, and is reported by some
Historians to have treacherously run away in the midst of the Battle. But when
a great action miscarries, some or other must bear the blame; and he having
been false before, this loss was charged on him right or wrong.

Saladine having obtained this Victory, improved it so well, that in one months
time he conquered Berytus, Biblus, Ptolemais, and all the Havens except Air
from Sidon to Askelon. He used his Conque^ with great moderation, giving life
an^ goods to all, and forcing no Christians (...) quit their habitations, save
only the L^tines, knowing full well, that if the Christians could not buy their
lives chea^ they would not fail to sell them dear, a^ fight it out to the last
man.

Saladine flushed with this great succe^ summoned Askelon, but the Governo^
refusing to surrender it, he concluded would not be convenient to hazard the
checking of his fortune in so long a Sieg^ and therefore left it, and went to
Jerus^lem, which he looked upon to be a pla^ of less difficulty, and more
honor (...) conquer; and so indeed he found it; f^^ though they within the
City valiantly defended it for about fourteen days, yet a last considering that
it was but playing out a desperate game, which must certainly be lost in the
end, in regard the^ Enemies were near, and their Friends f^^ off, and unable to
send them any other relief than vain and helpless pity, they resolved to lavish
out no more valor, b^ yield up the City upon condition the all their lives
might be redeemed, (...) man for Ten, a woman for five, and child for one
Besent. But 14000 w^^ were not able to discharge their Ransom, were kept as
perpetual Slaves. Those of the Greek Church were permitted to stay in the City,
but all the Latins were commanded to depart, except two Frenchmen, to whom
Saladine gave leave to stay, and allowed them maintenance to live on, in
Reverence to their great Age; one of them having been a Soldier under Godfrey,
when he first took the City, and the other the first Child that was born in it,
after it was conquered by the Christians.

Thus Jerusalem after it had been enjoyed by the Christians for the space of
eighty eight years was, by the just Judgment of God, wrested from them again by
the Turks and all their stately Churches turned into Stables, except those of
the Sepulcher, and the Temple. The former whereof Saladine spared for a great
Sum of Money, to the Chiristians, which is enjoyed by them to this day, by
license from the Grand Signior, and innumerable Pilgrimages continually made to
it, by all sorts of Christians either out of Zeal or Curiosity. And the other
he Converted to a Mosque for the Worship of Mahomet, sprinkling it all over
with Rosewater, as if he intended thereby to cleanse it from its Profanation by
the Christians, whilst he really defiled it by his unholy washing.

It was generally observed that the Sun, as sympathizing with the Christians in
their approaching Miseries, suffered an Eclipse, which was afterward looked
upon as a sad presage of the loss of tha^ City. But that which was much more
deplorable and threatening than the Suns Eclipse, was the total Eclipse of
Piety; Wickedness abounding in every corner, and scarce one honest Woman to be
found in the whole City of Jerusalem; For Heraclius the Patriarch, and the
whole Clergy, being exceedingly debaucht, the Laity imitated their bad Example.

When this doleful News of Jerusalem'^ loss arrived in Europe, it filled every
Eye with Tears, and swelled all Hearts with Sorrow and Anguish.

CHAP. XIX.
Conrade Valiantly defending Tire, is chosen King. The Voyage of Frederick
Emperor of Germany to the Holy Land. The Siege of Ptolemais. The Voyage of
Richard King of England, and Philip King of France to the Holy Land.

IN this sad and deplorable State, stood the affairs in Palestine, when Conrade
arrived there; whose Worth and Excellence commands my Pen to attend him from
his own Country thither. He was Son to Boniface Marquess of Montferrat, who was
taken Prisoner in that Fatal Battle wherein King Guy lost himself and his
Kingdom. His Youth was for the most part spent in the Service of Isaaccius
Angelus the Grecian Emperor; who being bred in a Monastery, the confining of
his Body seemed to have brought him to a pent and narrow Soul, and endued him
with Accomplishments more becoming a Priest than a Prince: For when his
Rebellious Subjects affronted him to the face, instead of sending an Army
against them, to reduce them to their obedience he only committed his cause to
a company of Bald-pated Friars, whom he kept in his Court, to pray for his
Prosperity; Hoping that, by their supposed Pious Tears, he should be able to
quench the Combustions of his Empire. But this Conrade told him plainly, that
if ever he intended to sit upon the Imperial Throne in Peace, he must make use
of the Weapons of the left Hand, as well as those of the right, and Fight as
well as Pray. Which advice being taken by the Emperor, he did, by the help of
this General, quickly subdue all his Enemies: But our brave Conrade found but a
small reward for so great a service, being only graced, in consideration
thereof, to wear his Shoes of the Imperial Fashion; And it being usual with
Princes, not to love the sight of those to whom they know themselves obliged,
and yet care not to reward, Isaaccius, by the persuasion of some about him, who
envied his Courage and Bravery, spurred on Conrade, who was free enough of
himself to any Noble Enterprise, to go into Palestine, and endeavor to support
the ruinous affairs of the afflicted Christians. And although he was sensible
of their Plot yet, being weary of the Grecians baseness, he suffered himself to
be prevailed upon to undertake that Honorable Employment, and therefore set
forward, with all convenient speed, for the Holy Land, with a gallant Band of
Gentlemen, who fitted out themselves at their own charge, wherewith he marched
to the City of Tire, where we will leave him for the present, to return again
to Saladine.

Who having won the City, and possessed himself of the greatest part of the
Kingdom of Jerusalem, laid close Siege to the City of Askelon, which had
refused to surrender, when Ptolemais and the rest yielded to his victorious
Arms; but was now, after a short Siege, delivered to him, upon condition that
King Guy and Gerard, Masters of the Templars, should be set at Liberty And
shortly after the Castle of Antioch was betrayed to him by the Patriarch: And
Antioch it self, which cost the Christians 11 Months Siege was by that means
lost in an instant, besides several Provinces thereunto belonging, and Five and
Twenty strong Towns more, which followed the like Fate with Antioch, and fell
into the Possession of the Turks. After which he sat down likewise before
Tripoli, but that City being, after the death of Earl Reimond, delivered to the
Christians by his Wife, they Bravely defended it against all Saladines Force,
so that having once tasted of their Valor in Tripoli he had no great Stomach
to make a second trial, but raised his Siege, and marched away to Tire, where
he hoped to speed better. But he found himself greatly mistaken, for Conrade
being a little before got thither with his Army, gave him so hot a Welcome that
he was glad to fly, and leave all his Tents behind him, which were sufficiently
lined with Treasure, whereby the Christians had the happiness to enrich
themselves with their own Spoil.

Those in the City over-joyed at their great deliverance, chose Conrade to be
King of Jerusalem, swearing Fealty to him, and promising to be for ever his
Subjects, whose Valor had preserved them from being Saladines Slaves. And the
better to strengthen his Title he married Elisa, or, as others call her,
Isabella, Sister to Baldwin the fourth, and Daughter to King Almerick.

So that King Guy, who was about this time delivered out of Prison having, when
he was released, sworn never more to bear Arms against Saladine (which Oath the
Clergy judged void, because forced from him when detained in Prison contrary to
promise) obtained his Liberty, but could not get his Kingdom: For coming to
Tire, he found the Gates shut against him, and his Subjects refusing to
acknowledge any other King then Conrade. Whereupon Guy, packing up a Cloth of
Remnants, with his broken Army, went and besieged Ptolemais, the Pisans,
Venetians, and Florentines, with their Sea-Forces, assisting him therein; But
it went on notwithstanding so slowly, that it could hardly be perceived to have
made any advance in a Twelve Months time.

Things going thus woefully to wrack in Palestine, the Christians sighs there
alarmed their Brethren in Europe, to repair thither to their Succor, and among
the rest Frederick Barbarossa, Emperor of Germany, moved by the strength of
his Devotion, undertook a Voyage thither, when he was Seventy Years old, having
one foot in the Grave, and yet adventureing, with the other, to go on
Pilgrimage. He had been long chained to the Stake, as it were, and baited by
several successive Popes, till at length wearied with their continual worrying
of him, he gave up himself wholly to their direction, and was sent by Pope
Clement the third, on this Errand into the Holy Land.

And having made great Preparations for this Adventure, he marched through
Hungary, with a gallant Army of an Hundred and Fifty Thousand Valiant Men,
being kindly received and Welcomed by King Bela. But changing his Host, he
changed his Entertainment to being basely used as he passed through the Grecian
Empire: Insomuch that Frederick, contrary to his expectation, finding such
perfidious dealing from the Greeks, drew his Sword, and resolving to fight his
way through, took Philippople, Adrianople, and diverse other Citys, not so much
to get their Spoil, as to secure his passage toward Palestine. But when
Isaaccius saw that those Pilgrims would either find or force their passage, he
left off all terms of Enmity, and presently accommodated them with all things
necessary for their Transportation over the Bosphorus, pretending to hasten
them away, because the Christians Exigencies in Palestine admitted of no delay;
although it was really the effect of his fear, the Greeks ever loving the
Latin, best when they were furthest off.

Old Frederick, having now left the treacherous Grecian Shore, and entered into
the Turkish Territories, found great resistance from the Sultan of Iconium,
whom he vanquished, and overcame in four several Battles; And then, besieging
the City of Iconium, he took it by force and gave the Spoil of it to his
Soldiers, to revenge the injury done by that Sultan to his Uncle Conrade the
Emperor: And removing from thence to Philomela, he took that likewise, razing
it to the ground, and executing the Inhabitants therein, as Rebels against the
Law of Nations, for killing his Ambassadors; after which he passed with much
difficulty, but more honor, into Syria.

Saladine shook for fear at the rumor of his coming, and thought it best to
follow the advice of Charatux, his chief Counselor, who was at that time
accounted one of the wisest men in the world, tho his Person was mean and
contemptible, and dismantled all his Citys, in the Holy Land, except his
Frontire Towns that so they might not be tenable with an Army, fearing lest, if
the Germans won those places, it would be no easy matter to drive them out
again, but being naked from shelter, he thought he should soon weary them with
set Battles, in regard he had Soldiers without number, and those near at hand.

But Frederick, soon after he was entered into the Holy Land, was suddenly
taken away being, to the great grief of all Christians, unhappily drowned in
the River of Saleph; the occasion whereof is variously reported by Historians,
but they all agree that there he lost his Life, and some of them, pretending to
acquaint the World with the reason why the Almighty permitted this Fatal
Accident, tell us, that it was because he had, in his Younger Years, fought
against the Popes, and Church of Rome: But seeing so great an Emperor drowned
in a shallow River, it was a great piece of audacious boldness in them, to
adventure into the fathomless depths of Gods secret Council: Let it suffice
therefore for us to know that he who disposes of all humane affairs, according
to his own Arbitrary Pleasure, sometimes blasts the fairest hopes, and makes
the Feet of Monarchs to slip, just when they are stepping into their Enemies
Throne.

After his death Frederick Duke of Su^ via, his second Son, undertook the
conduct of the Army, when the Turks, supposing that grief for the loss of the
Emperor had steeped, and moistened those Pilgrims Hearts, and taken off the edg
of their Valor, gave them a sudden charge, in hope to have overthrown them
before they had recovered themselves; But the Valiant Dutchmen, though they
had scarce wiped their Eyes, had however sufficiently scowred their Swords, and
gave them so warm a welcome that they quickly forced them to retire. Then
Frederick summoning the City of Antioch, had it presently delivered to him,
where his hungry Soldiers being well refreshed by the Citizens who were yet
for the most part Christians, he marched forth in Battle Array, and meeting
with Dodequin, General of Saladines forces, he gave him a mighty overthrow,
wherein he slew four thousand upon the place, and took a thousand Turks
Prisoners, with little or no loss to himself. After which he went to the City
of Tire, in the Cathedral Church whereof he buried the Corpse of his worthy and
warlike Father, near the Tomb of the Learned Origin: His Funeral Sermon being
preached by the worthy Archbishop Gulielmus of Tire.

So soon as the Emperors Funeral Rites were solemnly performed, they were
conveyed by Sea to the Christian Army before Ptolemais, where young Frederick
died of the Plague, and all his huge Army, which at their setting out of
Germany consisted of an hundred and fifty thousand men, were now reduced to
eighteen hundred only

And thus, by following this numerous Army to their graves, we have once again
overtaken the tedious and slow-paced siege of Ptolemais, before which place lay
an Army that was, as it were, the abridgment of the Christian World, there
being scarce a petty state or populous City in Europe, that had not some
representatitives there. So that there were many bloody Blows lent on both
sides, and repayed again with interest in innumerable Sallys, fierce Assaults,
and bloody Encounters. The Christians lying between Saladine and the City were
besieged themselves, whilst they besieged Ptolemais. It was at last proposed by
Saladine, that both sides should try their fortune in the field, which was
easily assented to by the Christians, in hopes that they should thereby both
obtain the victory and win the City, which they concluded would not hold out
long, if Saladine were beaten. But when they were going to engage, an imaginary
fear suddenly seizing them, they all turned their backs and fled; So wavering
are the Scales of Victory, that sometimes the least mote will turn them. In
which confusion many would have thought themselves happy if they could have
exchanged a strong Hand, for a swift Foot. But Geoffrey Lusignan, Brother to
King Guy, who was left to guard the Camp, seeing the Christians shamefully to
run away, marched out with his men to meet them, and having convinced them of
the causelessness of their fear, and prevailed with them to return again, they
set upon the Turks with so much fierceness and rage, that they quickly won the
day, though it cost them the loss of two thousand men, and Gerard Master of the
Templars.

After this victory it was vainly expected by the Christians, that the City
would presently be surrendered to them, but the Turks still continued to defend
it with much resolution, though most of their houses were already burnt, or
beaten down, and the whole City reduced to a perfect Sceleton of Walls and
Towers. They fought with their wits as well as with their weapons, and both
sides employed themselves in devising strange and hitherto unknown offensive
and defensive Engines: So that Mars himself, had he resided either in that Camp
or City, might have learnt to fight and have informed himself in feats of war,
from their practice. But in the mean time famine raged exceedingly in the
Christian Camp, in regard they had no provision but what they were forced to
send for, as far as Italy.

At this time under the Walls of Ptolemais the Teutonick order of Dutch
Knights, who had hitherto lived as private pilgrims, were honored with a Grand
Master, and their (...) were dispensed with by the Bishop of Rome. Most of his
Forces he sent about by Spain, but went himself and some few of his friends
through France, having his Pilgrims scrip and staff delivered him at Tours by
the Archbishop, and at Lions he met with the other Royal pilgrim, Philip the
Second surnamed Augustus, King of France, but parting again by consent they
went several ways toward Syria.

King Richard, in his passage through Italy, went within fifteen Miles of Rome,
and yet never vouchsafed his Holiness a Visit, but told Octavian Bishop of
Ostia, the Popes Confessor that, having better objects before him, he would not
stir one step out of his way to see the Pope, because he had lately extorted,
without all reason, a great Sum of Money from the English Prelates: And
therefore passing forward, at Messina in Sicily the two Kings meet again; where
likewise King Richard, to his exceeding joy, found his fleet safely arrived,
but having met with much difficulty and danger in their passage. Richard learnt
by his own experience, what miseries and dangers Merchants and Mariners at Sea
meet withal, being always within a few inches, and after within an hairs
breadth of death, which made him revoke the Law of Wracks, which entitled. the
King of England to all Ship wrackt goods

Tankred was at this time King of Sicily, who, being a Bastard born, had
usurped the Crown, detained the Dowry, and imprisoned the person of Joan, Wife
to William the Late King of Sicily, and Sister to K. Richard: So that he was in
a miserable plight at the arrival of those two mighty Monarchs, and knew not
what course to steer. To keep them out was impossible, and above his Power, and
to let them in was dangerous, and might prove his ruin, and therefore resolved
(how Justly or Prudently let the Reader judge) to secure himself by creating a
misunderstanding between those two Kings: And therefore applying himself to the
French King, he insinuated several false Stories of the King of England,
permitting his Subjects likewise to do the English all the secret mischief they
could; for which Richard, who was not ignorant of what passed between him and
the French King, demanded satisfaction, which was denied him, wherefore,
resolving to avenge himself, he assaulted and took Messina it self, together
with most of the chief Forts in the Island, demanding satisfaction for all the
wrongs done both to himself and Sister. Whereupon Tankred, though he was dull
at first, yet now being prickd with the Sword, he freely bled many Thousand
Ounces of Gold, and finding that as the case stood hi^ best Thrift was to be
Prodigal, he gave ou^ King what conditions soever he demanded.

However the misunderstanding, which he had procured between the two Royal
Pilgrims, daily increased, and Richard slighting the French Kings Sister, whom
he had formerly promised to marry, expressed more affection to Berengari^
Daughter to the King of Navarr, which vexed Philip to the Heart, but some
Princes interposing between them, healed the breach for the present; but the
cause remaining, the Malady quickly returned with worse symptoms then before.

King Philip, thinking to be revenged on Richard by fore, staling the Market of
Honor, and engrossing all to himself, posted many to Ptolemais, whilst Richard
followed after at his leisure, taking Cyprus in his way, where reigned Isaac,
Or, as others call him, Cursac, who, under Andronicus the Grecian Emperor
(when it was common for every Factious Nobleman to snatch a plank of that
shipwrack'd and sinking Empire) had seized on that Island, and there Tyrannized
as an absolute King, but being so foolhardy, as to abuse our Royal Pilgrim, at
his Arrival there, by killing diverse of his Soldiers, who landed in his
Island, and refusing to ^ermit the Sea-sick Lady Berengaria to ^ome on Shore,
he lost both himself, and ^is new erected Kingdom at once. For ^ing Richard
easily conquered the whole ^land, and honored the insolent Grecian, with the
Magnificent Captivity of Silver Fetters: Yet like a noble and generous
Conqueror, he set his Daughter at Liberty, and gave her Princely Usage; the
Island ^he pawned to the Templars for ready Money, and because Cyprus had been
anciently accounted the Seat of Venus; that it might prove so to him, in the
pleasant Month of May he there solemnized his Marriage with his Beloved Lady
Berengaria.

Whilst Richard was thus detained in Cyprus, the Siege of Ptolemais was carried
on with abundance of fierceness and resolution by the French King, who hoped to
get the Renown of its Conquest before King Richards Arrival, but found it so
strenuously defended by the Turks within, that all his strength was not
sufficient to force those Walls, which had now above 2 years withstood the
Christians Batteries; and by reason of the length of the Siege the Turks and
Christians were become well acquainted with each others Way of fighting: so
that what advantages happened to either side were merely casual, and not the
effect of Carelessness or Cowardice in the losing party. But it was some help to
the Christians, that a certain concealed Christian within the City, by Letters
unsubscribed, gave them constant and faithful Intelligence of all remarkable
passages among the Turks within.

In the mean while the Plague and Famine raged in the Christian Camp, and in
the compass of one year, had swept away above Fifty Princes and Prelates of
note, who together with all the rest of the common Soldiers, in the opinion of
those who wrote the History of that Siege, went undoubtedly to Heaven; Although
it were before Pope Clement the sixth, had commanded the Angels, (who durst not
disobey him,) to convey every Soul into Paradise, which should die in their
Pilgrimage.

Among those who survived, no Prince showed more Valor, and deserved greater
commendation than Leopoldus, Archduke of Austria, who fought so long in
assaulting this City, that his Armor was all gore Blood, save only that part
of it, which was covered with his Belt: For which reason renouncing the six
Golden Larks, the Ancient Arms of his Family, he had assigned him by the
Emperor, as a Testimony of his valor, a Fess Argentin a Field Gules.

And King Richard, being now at last arrived in the Camp before Ptolemais
(having taken a Dromand or Saracen Ship, which he met in his way thither,
wherein were Fifteen Hundred Soldiers and two hundred and fifty Scorpions
designed for the poisoning of Christians) the Siege was carried on by him, and
his English Soldiers, more fiercely than ever it had been before. So that the
Turks, despairing of relief and their provisions wholly spent, offered to yield
up the City, which the Christians would not accept of, unless Saladine would
promise to deliver all the Christian Prisoners which were then in his custody,
and restore them the Cross again, which he promising to do, the City was
delivered and the Turkish Soldiers guarded safely out of it.

The Houses, which were yet left standing in the City, together with the Spoil
and Prisoners were, by the Kings of England and France, divided among
themselves, whereupon diverse great Persons, who had been sharers in the pains,
but were hereby excluded from the gains, departed in discontent, and King
Richards Soldiers rudely pulled down the Archduke of Austria's Ensigns, which
he ha^^ advanced in a principal Tower in tha^ City, and as some write, threw
them in to the Jakes; whereat the Duke wa^ highly displeased, but yet wisely
dissen^bled his anger, and seemed to forget th^^ Injury, till he might remember
it to hisadvantage: which he afterward did, and made King Richard pay severely
for this affron^.

When the City was taken, it grieve^ the Christians, that they could not fin^
out their Faithful Intelligencer, wh^ had all along by his Letters acquainted
them with the State of the City, b^ more that the Cross did no where appear
being either carelessly lost, or enviou^^ concealed by the Turks. They demanded
(...) of Saladine, with the delivery of the Christian Prisoners; which he
refused not but demanded a longer time for the performance, in regard the Cross
could not be found. But King Richard supposing that it was only a pretense to
gain time resolved to have all things performed according to their agreement,
which being not done, he in the heat of his Passion commanded Seven Thousand
Turkish Prisoners, to be immediately cut to pieces for which rash and cruel
act, he suffere^ much in his reputation, and was looke^ upon as the Murderer
of the like number of Christians, whom Saladine in revenge, put to the Sword:
whereas on the contrary, the moderation of the French King was very much
commended for sparing his Prisoners, and reserving them to ransom so many
Christians.

But that which most obscured the Glory of this Victory was the Christians
being tent asunder with Faction, and divided among themselves. King Philip, the
Dukes of Burgundy and Austria, most of the Dutch and all the Genoans and
Templars, fiding with King Conrade, and King Richard, Henry Count of
Champaigne, with the Hospitallers, the Venetians, and Pisans, taking part with
Guy. Conrades side was very much weakened, by the sudden departure of the French
King, who eighteen days, after the taking of Ptolemais, returned home,
pretending want of necessaries, and indisposition of body through the distemper
of the Climate: but the true cause was his not enduring to hear King Richards
Fame so much transcend his own, together with a desire to seize on the
Dominions of the Earl of Flanders, who was then lately dead.

His own Soldiers mightily dissuaded him from returning, and besought him not
to stop in so glorious a work, wherein he had prospered so well already,
telling him that Saladine being already on his Knees, he might peradventure be
brought on his Face, if this Victory were well pursued: And since one of his
pretenses was want of necessaries, King Richard generously offered him one half
of his Provisions, but all this would not prevail with him to stay, and
therefore with great importunity, he obtained leave to depart; having first
taken an Oath not to molest the King of Englands Dominions, during his stay in
the Holy Land, which Oath was forgot as soon as he got home. And at his
departure he left his instructions, together with his Army, to the Duke of
Burgundy, ordering him to move as slowly as possible, in advancing that work,
wherein the King of England would have all the Honor, which rendered this great
undertaking less advantageous to the Christians in Syria, than otherwise it
might have been.

THE HOLY WAR. BOOK II.
CHAP. I.
Conrade slain, Guy exchanges his Kingdom for the Isle of Cyprus, Henry of
Champaign chosen King. King Richard obtains many Victories, but at last makes a
dishonorable Peace, and in his return home, is taken Prisoner in Austria.

SOon after the French Kings departure, Conrade King of Jerusalem was cruelly
murdered in the Marketplace of Tire; the cause of whose Death is variously
reported, some falsely charging our King Richard with having procured it, and
others say, he was killed by Humphred Prince of Thoron, for marrying Isabella,
who had been before espoused to him: But most affirm, that he was stabbed by
two Assassines by command of their Master the Old man of the Mountains, whose
only Quarrel with him was, his being a Christian; and that the two Murderers
being immediately taken and put to a cruel Death, Gloried in the
Meritoriousness of their suffering. He had Reigned about five years, and left
ont Daughter, Maria Jole, on whom the Templers bestowed Princely Education.

But though Conrade was Dead, his Faction still survived, and those of his party
affronted King Guy, and strove to have him deposed; telling him, that the Crown
was only tied on his Head with a Woman's Fillet, which being now broken, by the
Death of Queen Sibyl who dyed together with all her Children, of the Plague at
the Siege of Ptolomais, he had no longer any Right to the Kingdom, especially,
being a worthless and an unfortunate man: Though the truth is, the measuring a
Princes worth by his Success, is a Rule often false, and always uncertain; and
the common Consent of all Nations will plead this in his Favor, that having
been once a King, he ought ever to remain so. But to put a sinal end to this
unhappy Controversy, King Richard made a pleasing Motion, which rellished well
to the Palate of that hungry Prince, offering him the Island of Cyprus, in
exchange for his Kingdom of Jerusalem. Which motion was willingly embraced, and
the exchange actually made, to the Content of both parties, and the Kings of
England bore the Title of King of Jerusalem in their style, for many years
after. But in this exchange, Guy had really the better Bargain, in regard he
bought a real Possession for an Airy Title: However, he lived not long to enjoy
it, for he dyed soon after his Arrival there, but his Family enjoyed it, for
some hundred years, after which it fell by some Transaction, to the state of
Venice; and was at last wrested from them by the Turks, who enjoy it at this
day.

Conrade being killed, and Guy having renounced his Kingdom. Henry Earl of
Champaign was advanced to the Kingdom of Jerusalem, by the procurement of King
Richard his Uncle, who to corroborate his Election, by some Right of
Succession, married Isabella the Widow of Conrade, and Daughter of Almerick
King of Jerusalem, he was a Prince valiant enough, but in regard his Reign was
short, and most of it spent in a Truce; he had not an opportunity to express
it: He took more delight in the style of Prince of Tire, then he did in that,
of being King of Jerusalem, as accounting it more honorable, to be Prince of
what he had, then to be called King of what he enjoyed not.

And now the Christians promising themselves abundance of Peace and
Tranquillity, began every where to build, and to beautify their Habitations.
The Templers fortified Gaza, and King Richard repaired and walled Ptolemais,
Pomphyria, Joppa, and Askelon. But alas, this short lived Prosperity like an
Autumn Spring, came too late, and was gone too soon, to bring forth any mature
Fruit: However it was now agreed on by all parties, that they should march
immediately toward the City of Jerusalem, which Holy and Sacred place, was the
mark at which they all principally Aimed. And having prepared all things for
the putting this resolution into Practice: King Richard lead the Vant Guard of
English, the Duke of Burgundy Commanded in the main Body over his French, and
James of Avergn with his Flemings, and Brabanters brought up the Rear. Saladine
who understood by his Spies, the manner of their march, Serpent like bit them
by the Heels, for not far from Bethlehem, he violently assaulted the Rear of
their Army; but the English and French suddenly Wheeling about, charged the
Turks most furiously, and Emulation formerly, Poison, here proved a Cordial;
every Christian unanimously striving, not only to Conquer their Enemies; but to
overcome their Friends to, in the Honor of the Victory. And our Royal Pilgrim
in this Battle was so adventrous, and fought with such invincible Courage, and
Resolution against those Enemies of Christianity, that his Valor brought his
Judgment into question, in regard he was more careless of himself, and exposed
his Person to greater danger, then beseemed the prudence of a General; for
having received a Wound, as though by losing his Blood, he had received a new
Addition to his Strength, he laid about him like a Madman, killing diverse of
the Infidels with his own hands. The Turks withstood the Christians force for a
long time, and strove hard to carry away the Honor of the Day; but were at
last forced to give Ground, and leave the Christians in the Possession of the
Victory, which they obtained with little or no loss to themselves, save James
of Avergn, who dyed here in the Bed of Honor. But there were more Turks slain
in this Battle, then there had been in any other for forty years before.

And had the Christian improved this Victory, and marched immediately to
Jerusalem, they might in all Probability have surprised it, whilst the Turks
were Blind-folded, and in a kind of a maze at this Prodigious overthrow: But
the opportunity was wholly lost by the backwardness of King Richard and his
English Soldiers, say the French Writers, whilst others impute it, altogether
to the Envy, and Emulation of the French, who rather chose to have so Glorious
an Action left undone, then to see it performed by the English, together with
the Treachery of Odo Duke of Burgundy, who being more grieved for the loss of
his Credit, than careful to preserve a good Conscience, was choked with the
shame of the sin which he had swallowed, and dyed for Grief, that his holding
Correspondence with the Turks, came to be discovered: But most are of the
Opinion, that Richard attempted not the taking of Jerusalem, because like a
wise Architect, he intended to build his Victories, so as they might stand
unshaken, by securing the Country all along as he went. It being Senseless and
Imprudent to besiege Jerusalem an Inland City, whilst the Turks were still in
Possession of all the Seaports, and other places of Strength thereabouts.

Sometime after this Victory, he intercepted diverse Camels laden with very rich
Commodities; those Eastern Wars containing a great deal of Treasure in a little
Room. And yet of all this, and of all that abundance of Wealth of England,
Sicily and Cyprus, which he brought hither, he carried nothing home, save only
one Gold-Ring, all the rest being melted away, and consumed in this hot Service.

He spent the Winter at Askelon, and intended the following Spring to have gone
to Jerusalem, had not bad News out of Europe altered his resolution, and put
him in mind of returning home. William Bishop of Ely, whom he had left his
Viceroy in England, used many unsufferable Insolences toward his Subjects:
So hard and difficult a thing it is, for one of a mean and Contemptible Birth,
to personate a King without going beyond his Limits, and over Acting his part.
And that which was yet worse, his Brother John Earl of Morton, had conspired
with the French King to invade his Dominions. Which reports, and the concluding
of this War, (a Subject not likely to answer the expense and Charge of of it;
especially, now the Venetians, Genoans, Pisans and Florentines were gone away
with their Fleet; wisely shrinking themselves out of the Collar, when they
found their Necks too much Galled with their hard employment;) made him desire
a Peace of Saladine, who thereby finding, that he had all the Cords in his own
hands, knew well enough how to play his Game, and make his best of those
Exigencies wherein he knew King Richard to be plunged; for he had those about
him, who had cunning and skill enough, to read in King Richards Face what
grieved and perplexed his mind, and knew by his Spies every thing, that was
worth Observation in the English Army. He offered therefore to Consent, that a
Truce should be concluded on for three (some say five) years, upon condition
that the Christians would demolish all places which they had fortified since
the taking of Ptolemais, which was in Effect to be at the Charge of undoing all
that they had hitherto done. But however such was the urgency of King Richards
occasion, that he was glad to accept of those hard Conditions, though he hated
them at his Heart.

And thus this great undertaking of those two mighty and Warlike Kings, began
with great Confidence, managed with much Courage, and attended with good
Success, ended, notwithstanding with some Honor indeed to the undertakers, but
no manner of Profit, either to themselves, or the Christian cause.

King Richard in this Voyage eternized his Memory, and to the Glory of the
English Nation, rendered his Name so terrible to the Turks, that they were used
to say to their Horses when they started for fear, what do thou think King
Richard is here? But Profit, neither he, nor the French King got any, both of
them loosing the Hair of their Head in an acute disease, which says, one
Historian was more then either of them got by the Voyage. And as for the poor
Christians in Syria, they left them in a far worse Case than they found them.

But to refresh the Readers Spirits a little, amidst so many Miseries and sad
Stories, I must not omit one thing that King Richard did in Palestine, which
was no doubt, an abundant Compensation for all the cost and pains of his
Journey: Which was his redeeming from the Turks for a great sum of Money, a
large Chest as much as four Men could lift, full of Holy Relics, which
precious Treasure they had gotten from the Christians, at the taking of
Jerusalem.

portrait of Richard the 2d King of England and Jerusalem Richard the 2d. king
of Englad. and Jerusalem



King Richard having now signed the Peace with Saladine, and thereby ended his
Pilgrimage, took Shipping in Syria to return to his Kingdom; but meeting with a
Storm on the Coast of Germany, he suffered Shipwreck, and therefore resolved to
travel through that Country by Land, as being his nearest way home, without
considering that the nearness of the way ought to have been measured, not so
much by the shortness of it, as the safeness of it.

But however to prevent all danger, he disguised himself, and pretended to be
one Hugo a Merchant, whose only Commodity was himself, whereof he made but a
bad Bargain; for being discovered in Austria by his large Expenses, which so
far exceeded the degree of a Merchant, that his Hostess detected him, and the
common People flocking about him, used much Rudeness and Insolence toward him.
And being seized on by the Duke, who resolved now to be revenged on him for the
affront done him in Palestine; he sold him to Henry the Emperor, who kept him
in Bonds, Charging him with a Thousand faults committed in Sicily, Cyprus and
Palestine, the Prooss whereof were as slender as the Crime, were small, so that
Richard having an eloquent Tongue, an innocent Heart, and a bold Spirit, easily
acquitted himself of all those furious Charges, in the Judgment of all that
heard him. However before he could obtain his Liberty, he was forced to pay a
Ransom of an Hundred and Twenty Thousand Marks Collen weight, which was in that
age before the Indies had filled those Northern parts of the World, with Gold
and Silver, so greata sum that to raise it in England, they were forced to sell
all their Church Plate, and in lieu thereof for some Hundred years after, to
Celebrate the Sacrament in Challices of Latten or Tin. After this Money Peter
of Bloys (who had drank as deep of this Helicon, as any of that age,) sent this
Prayer, making an Apostrophe to the Emperor, or to the Duke of Austria, or to
both together.

And now thou basest Avarice,
Drink till thy Belly burst,
Whilst England powers large silver showers,
To Satiate thy thirst,
And this we pray thy Money may
And thou be like accursed.
Part of this Ransom being paid, and Hostages left for the securing the rest,
he returned into England, having endured Eighteen Months Imprisonment. But the
Duke was after this sorely aflicted in his Dominions, by Fire and Famine, And
in his Body by a Gangren, which seized on him with that Violence that he was
forced to cut his leg off with his own hand, and died thereof; but before his
death he fortified Vienna with a strong Wall, which he caused to be built with
this Money, and being in the time of his sickness, troubled in conscience for
having been so Cruel to our King, he willed some Thousand Crowns to be returned
to him again.

CHAP. II.
The Death of Saladine. Discords among the Turks, the Death of Henry King of
Jerusalem, Almerick the Second Succeeds him. The Pilgrims divert their Arms
from Palestine to Constantinople and Conquer the Grecian Empire.

NOT long after King Richards return out of Palestine, Saladine who had for
sixteen years together been the Terror of the East ended his life. He was a
Prince fierce in fighting, and yet mild in Conquering, and when he had his
Enemies in his hands, delighted himself more in having the power, then he did
in the Act of revenge; finding his life draw to a period, he Commanded those
about him to use no other Solemnities at his Funeral then a Black Cloth, which
he ordered them to carry before him, and Proclaim that. Saladine Conqueror of
the East had now nothing left of all his Conquest, but only this Black Shirt to
attend him to his Grave.

He Left Nine (some say Twelve) Sons behind him who were all except one,
Murdered by Saphradin their Uncle, whom Saladine made the overseer of his
Will, and he was not preserved by his Uncles pity, but by the favor of some of
his fathers Friends, his name being likewise Saphradin Sultan of Aleppo.
Whereupon there arose much Intestine difference among the Turks, during which
time the Christians enjoyed their Truce with much quiet and security, only
their peace was somewhat imbittered by the unfortunate death of King Henry, who
fell (as he was walking in his. Palace to solace himself) out of a Window and
brake his Neck.

After whose death Almerick Lusignan, Brother to King Guy, Marrying Isabella,
his Relict was in her right Crowned King of Jerusalem. The Christians in Syria
promising themselves much aid from his Isle of Cyprus, of which he was also
King, but he abandoning himself to ease and pleasure, proved a worthless and an
unfortunate Prince.

In his time Henry Emperor of Germany to make amends for his Cruelty against
King Richard, and regain his Credit which was very much impaired thereby, set
on foot an other Voyage to the Holy Land; Pope Celestine the third sending his
Legate about to promote it, by showing how God himself had sounded the Alarm in
the dissension of the Turks, and persuading them that Jerusalem might now be
recovered, with the blows of her adversaries, only it was convenient to send an
Army, not so much to Conquer it as to receive it. Henry Duke of Saxony was
chosen General of the Pilgrims, who was acompanied by Frederick Duke of
Austria, Hermand Landgrave of Thuringia, Henry Palatine of the Rhine, the
Archbishops of Ments and Wittenburgh, the Bishops of Bream and Halberstadt,
and Regenspurg, and diverse other Prelates, so that it was an Episcopal Army,
and one might there have truly seen the Church Militant.

In their passage through Greece they found better usage then some of their
Predecessors, and being conveyed from thence by Shiping into Syria, they
presently brake the Truce made with the Turks by the King of England, being
empowered so to do by a Dispensation from the Pope, who looked upon a peace
Solemnly made the Usurper, and free his Father from his Miserable Captivity.
The Soldiers were well enough pleased with the exchange of service, for they
knew well enough that in Palestine there was nothing to be got but Honor, and
here they hoped to get both Honor and Spoil.

Wherefore setting sail from Jadera, they went directly to Constantinople, and
after some few hot skirmishes easily took the City, whereupon Alexius the
Usurper, with his Wife, Whores and Treasure, being fled away, blind Isaac and
his son Alexius were saluted Joint Emperors; which brittle Honor was quickly
broken, for the Old Emperor being now brought out of a close pent Dungeon, into
the open Air died soon after, and his Son was thereupon Villainously strangled
by Alexius Ducas, a man of base Parentage, who was in a tumultuous manner
chosen Emperor by the People, but growing proud upon his being thus advanced to
the Imperial Throne, he gave some affronts to the Latins, who still lay in
their Ships before Constantinople, whereupon they assaulted the City again the
Second time, and taking it by main force plundered all the inhabitants,
Ravishing the Women, and using a Thousand Insolences, wherein the very
Sanctuaries needed Sanctuaries to defend them, from the violence of the enraged
Soldiers.

And the Latins having thus Possessed themselves of Constantinople, within
twelve Months conquered all the Grecian Empire except Adrinople, and divided it
among themselves. Making Baldwine Earl of Flanders Emperor of Grecia, Boniface
Marquess of Montferrat, King of Thessaly, and Geoffrey a French Noble man
Prince of Achaia, and Duke of Athens. And the Venetians got many rich Islands
in the Egean and Ionian Seas. And Thomas Maucrocenus was Elected the first
Latin Patriarch of Constantinople.

CHAP. III.
The Holy War turned upon the Albigenses.

THe Pope having lately diverted the Holy War, and turned it upon the Grecian,
liked the Success of it so well, that he afterward made a common Trade of it,
for having about two years after, procured the Levying a great Army, for the
Holy War, he sent them against the Albingenses in France: Who being accounted
Heretics by his Holiness, he resolved to destroy them without Mercy. That
pretended Shepherd of the Church, knowing no other way to bring home wandering
Sheep, then by worrying them to Death; for the promoting which Pious Work, he
promised all those who would undertake it, the same Pardon, and Indulgences, as
to them that went to Conquer the Holy Land. And the better to persuade People
to undertake it, he only requests their Aid for forty days, hoping to have
eaten up those despised Heretics at a mouthful. Though therein he found himself
mistaken, for they found him, and his Successor work enough for fifty years
together. However in regard, the Seat of the War was nearer, the Service
shorter, and the Wages the same with the Voyage into Palestine; many entered
themselves for this employ, and neglected the other: The chief whereof were the
Duke of Burgundy, the Earls of Nevers, St. Paul Auxierne, Geneva, Poictiers,
and Montfort. And of Churchmen, Milo the Popes Legate, the Archbishops of
Sens, and Roven the Bishop of Clearmort, Nevers Charters, Baguex and many more,
every Bishop with the Pilgrims of his own Jurisdiction. Their work was to
destroy the Albingenses, which were in great numbers in Daulphine Province, and
other parts of France, and to Root out all their Friends and Favorers, or
suspected to be so.

Pope Innocent the Third, having gathered together an Army of an hundred
thousand Pilgrims; Sacked the Cities of Besiers and Carcassone, destroying many
Papists among the Albingenses, and cutting the Priests themselves in pieces,
even in their Priestly Ornaments. After which Simon Earl of Monfort, was made
General of the Pilgrims, who had been hitherto Commanded by Milo the Popes
Legate, which made the Earls of Fayl, Toulouse, and Cammurge, with the Prince
of Berne, who were the Patrons of the Albingenses, to shelter themselves under
Peter King of Aragon, whose Homagers they were. One great Inconvenience ever
attended that Army of Pilgrims, for so soon as ever their forty days were
expired, in regard it was the full time set them by the Pope, to merit Paradise
in, they would not stay a Night longer, least peradventure having purchased
Heaven, they might by continuing longer in the Service, be put into the
Possession of it sooner then they were willing, which being observed by the
King of Aragon; and that between the going out of the Old, and the coming in of
the New store of Pilgrims; there was usually a very low ebb, and their Army was
almost dwindled to nothing, he took the Earl of Monfort at the advantage before
he was reinforced with new Pilgrims, and gave him Battle, when he had not
above two thousand two hundred Men left himself, having an Army of thirty
thousand Foot, and seven thousand Horse; which made him so over-Confident of
Victory, that out of Pride and Vanity, he exposed his Person so openly at the
Head of the Army, that he did as it were invite his Enemies Arrows to hit so
fair a Mark, by which he was so mortally Wounded, that he fell from his Horse,
and with his Body sunk the Hearts of his Soldiers, who all presently run away;
Simon pursuing them to the very Gates of Thoulose, and killing many thousands
of them.

Yet in a few years, the Face of this War was Changed, for young Reimund Earl
of Thoulose, exceeding his Father both in Valor and Success, re-gained in a
few Months what Simon and his Pilgrims had been many years in Conquering. And
at last Simon as he laid Siege to Tholose, had his Head shot off from his Body
by a stone, which a Woman let fly out of an Engine from the City wall.

In whose Death, the raging storm of open War against those Albingenses, ended.
In the prosecution, whereof Three Hundred Thousand Craised Pilgrims had within
the compass of fifteen years lost their lives, so that there was not a City or
Village in France, but what had in it some Widows or Orphans, to curse the
Promoters of this Expedition; but though the great storm was over, yet many great
drops feil upon them afterward, the Pope being still stiring up one or other
to molest them.

CHAP. IV.
King Almerick Deposed by the Pope. John Bren succeeds him, the seat of the War
removed to Egypt with various success.

HAving followed this Holy War into France; and observed its several steps
among the Albingenses, we will now return with ita gain into Palestine, where
we find the Flood of Pilgrims run very low, in regard the Pope had diverted the
stream, and as for King Almerick we find him as we left him, drowning his cares
in Wine without once concerning Church was a Patriarchal Seat for man^ hundred
years after.

Before this City the Pilgrims Army sat down, and closely besieged it: But the
Turks within making a vigorous Defend under Auxianus their Governor, frustrate
their expectations of forcing the Tow^ as soon as they appeared before it;
(...) the Siege grew very long, and Provision very short in the Christians Cam^
which made Peter the Hermit, no^ withstanding his pretended Delegation t^
manage this War on the behalf of Christ run away; but being pursued an^ brought
back again, was bound by a new Oath to prosecute the War. Howev^^ at length one
within the City, of who Name and Religion Authors cannot agr^ (some making him
a Turk, others. Christian; some call him by one name and some by another) in
the dead of the night betrayed the City to Boemun^ whereupon the Pilgrims
entered in, a^ being highly exasperated by the leng^ of the Seige, they so
remembered the miseries they had endured, that they for got all pity and
moderation, killing a^ slaying promiscuously Christians (...) and all that came
to hand (...).

The Town was offered (...) Emperor, but he refused (...) out of suspicion,
that there was some deceit in the tender, it being common with ill men to
measure other men's minds by the crooked rule of their own, whereupon it was
given to Boemund. But notwithstanding the dearness of the purchase, it was not
long enjoyed in quiet, for Corboran the Turkish General came with a vast Army
of Persian Soldiers and besieged them in the City, so that they were greatly
distressed between hunger within and their enemies without, which made many of
them to steal away out of the City; whereat the rest no whit discouraged,
accounting the loss of Cowards the gain of an Army, bravely resolved rather to
sell their lives by wholesale, on the point of the Sword, than to retail them
out by famine, who is the worst of Tyrants. And to hasten the putting this
generous resolution into practice, they happened to find in the Church of St.
Peter a certain Lance which they were made to believe was the very same Lance,
wherewith our Saviors side was pierced by the Soldier, whereat they greatly
rejoiced; As though this military relic had by wounding of Christ been endued
with a certain virtue of wounding and destroying his Enemies, and carried with
it Reign of King Almerick, to the great annoyance of the Christians, but though
they were unsuccessful in this siege, yet King John was more fortunate in
taking the Castle of Pilgrims, a piece of great strength on the Sea side.

Whereupon it was resolved on to translate the War into Egypt, in hope to
discourage the Egyptians by the Invasion, and ruin of their Country; and
therefore Hoisting Sail, they came before Damiata a chief Haven of Egypt, lying
on the East side of the River Nilus, In the siege whereof they had four
difficulties to encounter with, besides the City it self, first with a great
Chain that lay a cross the Harbor which with indefatigable pains and Industry
mingled with Art they break asunder. Secondly the River Nilus which now
suddenly, and unexpectedly overflowed, and drowned the whole Country, so that
the Fish came swimming into the Christians Tents, and against which mischief
they had no other defense but Prayer, and a public Fast enjoined by the
Legate, upon which the water abated, and a Public Thanksgiving thereupon
enjoined, that so the mercy obtained by Prayer might be kept by Praise.
Thirdly, they were to grapple with the Fort of Pharria, A seeming Impregnable
Piece between them and Damiata; for the taking whereof they built a Tower on
Ships, which falling down killed and wounded many of the Pilgrims: and those
who had the good hap to escape the blow, were notwithstanding terrified by the
fright which the fall occasioned among them, but King John comforted his
Soldiers, and desired them not to be discouraged at a thing which was purely
accidental, and against which there could be no guard or defense by any rules
of Wisdom or Valor, but immediately address themselves to the Raising one more
substantial, by his direction and advice, which was when finished the rariest
piece in that kind, that ever the world saw, by means whereof after many bloody
affaults they Conquered the Fort.

And the fourth and wonst enemy they had to do withal, was Meladine King of
Egypt who lay near them with a great Army, Constantly furnishing the City with
Men and Victuals, and excercising them with continual Skirmishes, in one
whereof he did them abundance of harm with his Wild fire, whereby King John
himself was dangerously Scorched, but at last seeing that the Christians hewed
their way through all those Rocks of difficulties, he propounded a Peace to
them, by the mediation of his Brother Coradine King of Damalcus, wherein he
offered, that if they would depart out of Egypt, he would restore them the
Cross, the City of Jerusalem, and all the Land of Palestine.

The English, French, and Italians were willing to embrace so large an offer,
but the Legate would no ways consent, alleging that the Voyage was undertaken
not for the recovery of Palestine only, but for the extirpation of the
Mohammedan Religion, it being for his Masters Interest to keep that War always
on foot: Which refusal so enraged Coradine, that he beat down the Walls of
Jerusalem, and all the Beautiful Buildings therein, save only the Tower of
David, and the Temple of the Sepulcher.

However the siege of Damiata went on, and was at length taken by the
Christians without resistance; most of those that should have defended it being
either slain, or dead with the Famine or Plague, so that the Christians who
enraged with the length of the siege, entered with a resolution to kill all, had
their fury soon melted into pity, by beholding the streets every where strewed
with dead Corpse, so that of threescore and ten Thousand there was now but one
thousand remained alive, who were all pardoned by the Conquerors; upon
Condition that they would cleanse the City, which they were three Months in
performing.

Great was the spoil, the Pilgrims found in Damiata, being as it were a strong
barred Chest, wherein the Merchants of Egypt and India had as they imagined,
safely Locked up all their Treasures, which detained them there a full year,
being most of them Content to make that Inn their home; during which time, the
Pope ordered John de Columna a Cardinal, to reside there, as his Legate in the
place of Pelagius.

CHAP. V.
Discords between the King of Jerusalem' and the new Legate. The miserable
Effects thereof, John resigns his Kingdom to Frederick Emperor of Germany.

NOt long after, the Arrival of this new Legate, there arose a great diference
between him and the King of Jerusalem, in regard he Challenged Damiatia for his
Holiness, which had at the taking of it by public Agreement been assigned to
the King: Whereupon Bren in anger returned to Ptolomais, as well to puff out
his discontent in private, as to teach the Christians his worth by their want
of him, who presently after his departure found themselves at so great a loss,
that they were neither able to stand still without disgrace, nor proceed in the
War without danger. The Legate commanded them to march, but he found they had
too great a Spirit to be ruled by a Churchman; for they swore they would not
stir one step, unless the King were with them: So that the Legate was fain to
send Messengers to entreat his return to the Army, which at last he Consented
to, by the persuasion of the Messengers, and a promise of having Damatia
according to the first Agreement.

But no sooner was the King and the Legate met again, after eight Months
absence, but new Divisions were started between them. The Legate persuaded the
Army to march up, and besiege Grand Cairo; assuring them, that they might
thereby quickly command all Egypt: God having as he pretended, opened them such
a door of victory, that they might easily enter into Possession of their
Enemies Country, if they did not bar it up by their own Idleness.

But the King opposed it, and advised them to return again into Syria, in
regard that City was difficult to take, and impossible to keep, the Ground
whereon they were to march was altogether as Treacherous as the People, against
whom they were to fight; so that it was better for them, now to retire with
Honor, then hereafter to fly with shame. But the Legate persisting in his
resolution, thundered out Excommunications against all those who refused to go
forwards; therefore they must needs go, when the Devil drove them.

Whereupon the crafty Egyptians, whose flight was more to be feared, then their
fight; seeing the Christians advance, pretended to fly before them, the better
to draw them into the Snare. But the Legate fancying, that the pretended flight
was the Effect of their Cowardice and Fear, hugged himself in his own Imaginary
Happiness, and highly applauded his Sagacity, in giving that Successful advice,
though he quickly found his Joy turned into Sorrow.

For Egypt being a low level Ground, through the midst whereof runs the River
Nilus; whose stream the Egyptians had by their Industry, so bridled with Banks
and Sluices, that they could easily Command it, to be their own Servant, and
their Enemies Master. And therefore, when the Christians had Confidently
marched on without the least Suspicion, till it was impossible for them, either
to retire or be relieved; the Turks pierced their Banks, and let the River run
open mouthed upon them, yet so, as they only drowned them up to the middle,
reserving their Lives for the Ransom of Damatia.

So that there you might have the Land of Egypt, in an instant turned into a
Sea; and an Army of sixty thousand, as the Neck of one Man streached on the
Block, and expecting the fatal blow; every one Cursed the Legate, and blamed
their own folly, in complying with the Advice of a Clergyman, and neglecting
that of a King. But it was now too late, to complain; and they must bear with
Patience the Misery, which they had brought upon themselves by their own
Rashness.

Meladine King of Egypt, seeing the deplorable Misery of those drowned
Christians, and the Constancy, and Patience wherewith they endured their
Calamity, was moved with Compassion toward them; being himself as was thought,
somewhat inclined to ibrace the Christian Religion, and offered them their
Lives upon condition, that they would quit the Country and restore Damiata.
They glady accepted the conditions, and presently dispatched Messengers to the
City, to prepare them for the Surrendering of it, but they within the City
being themselves safe on the shore, knew not how to simpathise with their Poor
Brethren in Shipwreck, and therefore told the Messengers that those drowned
Pilgrims deserved no pity, in regard they had invited this misery upon
themselves by their own rashness, and that if they yielded up this City for
nothing, which cost so many Lives, they should thereby expose themselves to the
derision of the whole World; that if those Pilgrims perished, more might be
had, but no more Damata's, it being a place of such Importance that it would
always be a curb to the excursions of the Egyptian King, but however those poor
distressed wretches had some friends in the City, who confessed that the Voyage
was indeed undertaken unadvisedly, and was justly to be blamed, but yet pleaded
that worse and more inconsiderate projects had some times been undertaken by
others, and when they have been Crowned with Success, have passed unquestioned,
and so they supposed would this have done, had it Succeeded, and that therefore
it was most unreasonable to add misery to the miserable, beseeching them to
pity their Brethren, and not leave them in that forlorn state.

But finding their arguments to avail little, they betook themselves to their
Arms, resolving to force the adverse party to resign the City, and King John
who of all others had the least reason to pity them, in regard their project
was wholly against his advice, was notwithstanding so touched with a sense of
their calamity, that he generously threatened in case they refused to surrender
it, to give Meladine, Ptolemais in Syria, in the stead of it, whereupon they
consented, and Damiata was restored to the Turks, and the Legate and his Army
let out of the trap wherein they were taken, Meladine out of his Princely
goodness furnishing them with Victuals, and Horses to carry their feeble
persons upon, and thus the Christians received an overthrow without a wound,
and the Turks obtained an absolute Victory without Blood.

And there being at this time, besides the agreement for the Exchange of
Damiata, a Peace made with the Turks for eight years, whereby things were
settled in Syria, King John took a Journey to Rome, where he was Honorably
entertained by the Pope; And shortly after though for what reason I cannot find,
he resigned the Kingdom of Jerusalem to Froderick, the second Emperor of
Germany, upon condition that he should marry Jole the only Daughter of King
John, by his first Wife, although by a second Wife he had another named Martha,
Married to Robert Emperor of Greece, so that by Marriage he was now become
Father to both the Emperors of the East and West.

portrait of Frederick the 2d Emperor of Germany and the King of Jerusalem Fred
ye 2d. Empr. of Germani and K. of Jerusalem

F. H. Van. Houe. Sculp.


Some condemn his resignation as an unadvised Act, and conclude that if he had
not first parted with his wits he would never have parted so freely with his
Kingdom. But others on the contrary commend it, as a Wise and Considerate
Action, and give us those reasons to prove it. First, his Wife was dead, by
whose Right he held his Kingdom. Secondly he knew the Turks power to Invade it,
and his own weakness to defend it. Thirdly, before his resignation, he had
little left but the bare Title, and after it he had nothing less; it being so
customary for all men to salute him by the name of King of Jerusalem, that he
was called so to his dying day. Fourthly he thereby provided better for his
Daughter, then otherwise he could in all probability have done. And Lastly
because he got more after the surrender, then he did before, for in England he
received many great presents from Henry the Third; In France, besides rich
gifts left to himself he had the managing of 60000 Crowns, left by Phillip
Augustus the French King, to the Templars, for the carrying on the Holy War. In
Spain he got a rich Wife, Beringaria the Daughter of the King of Castile, and
in Italy he tasted largely of the Popes liberality, lived there in great
plenty, but at last Perfidiously raising Rebellion against the Emperor of
Germany, his Son in Law, at the Instigation of the Pope, he lost the General
Esteem of most men, and went off the stage without Applause.

Fredericks Nuptials with the Lady Jole, was solemnized at Rome in the presence
of the Pope, with all the Ceremonies of Majesty imaginable, and he engaged
himself by promise, that he would within two years prosecute his Title in
Palestine, but by Discords and Jealousies between the Pope and him; he was much
longer before he got things in readiness to march, and when he was on his way
to Palestine, the Plague seized on his Army at Brindisi in Italy, where he
likewise was shortly after Visited with a desperate fit of sickness which
stayed his Journey for many Months.

It went against the grain with the Pope to have the Emperor so near him, and
therefore he Excommunicated him afresh, (having done it diverse times before,)
pretending his sickness was only the Cramp of Laziness, and charging him with
the unjust seizing on the goods of Lewis Lantgrave of Thuringia, who died a
little before in the Camp, The Emperor protested his innocence and accused the
Pope of injustice, offering for the proof of it to put himself on the trial of
all Christian Princes. However at last health came, and Frederick departed with
his Fleet for the Holy Land, wherea^ the Pope who was neither well full nor
fasting stormed exceedingly, and be libel'd him more then ever, because he had
forsooth departed without his Fathers Blessing, or being Absolved and
Reconciled to his Mother the Church.

But we may observe that Gods Blessing often times goes along with the Popes
curses, for the Fame of Fredericks Valor and his Virgin Fortune, never yet
stained with ill Success, hastening like an Harbinger before perpared Victory to
entertain him at his arrval there, This Emperor Swifter then Caesar himself,
overcame before he came to Palestine; so that Coradine being dead and his
Children in their Minority, the Sultan of Babylon who was then of greatest
Authority among the Turks, and Governed Syria, offered him what he could never
have expected, viz. To restore him Jerusalem, and all Palestine in as full and
ample a manner as it was enjoyed by Baldwine the Fourth, before it was
Conquered by S^ladine, and to release all Christian Prisoners upon condition
that the Turks might be permitted in small numbers to have access to the
Sepulcher, they likewise having some Knowledge off, and some kind of Veneration
for Christ.

Before Frederick would ratify any thing by Oath he sent to have the Popes
approbation, but hearing that he had Imprisoned his Messengers and in a most
contemptuous manner torn his Letters, he concluded a Truce with the Sultan for
Ten years without the Popes consent, and entering on Easter Day Triumphantly
into Jerusalem, he Crowned himself King with his own hands, for the Patriarch,
the Master of the Templars, and all the Clergy absented themselves, neither was
there any Mass Sung in the City, so long as the Emperor staid there, because he
was Excommunicated.

And thus by the Valor and Policy of Frederick, was the Holy Land recovered
without blood, which had been for many years before attempted without success,
and the affairs of Palestine brought into a good condition, and rendered
capable of improving, had not the Pope ruined all by forcing the Emperor to
return sooner then he intended to supress the Rebellion, which the Pope had
caused John Bren to raise against him at home, At his departure he appointed
Reinoldus Duke of Bavaria to be his Lieutenant in Syria, who wisely discharged
his Office, and preserved the Peace entire, which was concluded with the Sultan
of Babylon, although the Temp^ars endeavored to bring that Ten years Truce to
an untimely end, it being an insufferable thing with them to fast from
Fighting, which was Meat and Drink to their Turbulent Spirits, Condemning him
for his want of Zeal in the Holy War, and giving him many a lift to heave him
from his place, but still he sat sure nor was he much troubled at the envy of
Henry King of Cyprus who challenged the principality of Antioch, as next of kin
the last deceased Prince; for the Duke met him and defeated him in battle, and
gave that Principality to Frederick, base Son to the Emperor.

But that which kept both Turks and Christians in awe, and made them the more
careful to observe the Truce, was their mutual fear of the Tartars, a fierce
People which at this time took their first flight out of their own nest into
the Neighboring Countries, they were anciently called Scythians, and Inhabited
the Northern parts of Asia a country never Conquered by any of the Monarchs,
being privileged from their Victorious Arms by its own barrenness, which was
the reason why after they had made several incursions into Europe, and the
lesser Asia, they found it so sweet that they cared not to return home.

They were by their multitudes and ferceness become so formidable that the Pope
himself began to fear them in Italy, to prevent which he sent Askelin a Friar
much famed in those days, and three others to Convert them to the Christian
Religion, who instead of instructing them the Rudiments of Christianity,
acquainted them with the greatness and power of the Pope, who was as he told
them, exalted above all the Princes of Europe, but Baiothnoi Chief Captain of
the Tartarian Army (for they were not admitted to the Great Cham himself)
crying quits with this Friar, outvyed him in discribing his Cham, whose
greatness and Divinity he affirmed to exceed that of the Popes, and sent him
back with a blunt Letter, which he concluded thus, If thou will set upon our
Land and Inheritance, it behooves that Thou Pope in thy proper Person come unto
us, and that Thou come to him who contains the Face of the Whole Earth,
meaning their Great Cham.

Never did his Holiness so meet with his match before, however he loved his
Flock in Europe too well to run the hazard of losing them by a long Journey
into Tartaria, and so the Conversion of the Tartarians was neglected.

About this time likewise the Grecian Emperor, who had been now near sixty
years confined to the Citys of Nice and Adrianople, only recovered every foot
of Land that the Latins had won from the Greeks, after it had been enjoyed by
five Succesive Latin Emperors, except what was enjoyed by the Venetians, who
kept Candia, till lately wrested from them by the Turks, and presently after
the Greek Church wholly cast of their subjection to the Pope, and declared the
Patriarch of Constantinople to be absolute of himself, without having any
dependency on Rome, the occasion of their disavowing the Popes Authority was
this Germanus, being upon this new revolution of the Grecian Empire, chosen
Patriarch of Constantinople, a certain Archbishop preferred by him, went to
Rome, there to have his confirmation, but finding that Court so unreasonable in
their demands of Fees, that it would weaken him to be confirmed, and shake his
Estate to settle him in his Bishopric, he returned again without confirmation,
but with so great an outcry upon the Extortion of Rome, that the Patriarch and
the whole Clergy for ever after threw off the Popes heavy Yoke, which they were
no longer able to bear.

His Holiness stormed exceedingly at this loss, and therefore dispairing to
reduce them by fair means, proclaimed open War against them, and resolved to
send an Army of Crossed Soldiers against those Schismatical Grecians, as he had
formerly done against the Albigenses: It being customary with that imperious
Prelate, to make use of the Secular Power, as his Hangman, to execute those
whom he shall please to condemn. But his Commands were herein but little
regarded, very few Volunteers entering themselves for this Service, and most
men entertaining a Religious Horror and Detestation of so odious an Employment.

This irrepairable rent and division between the two Churches was very
advantageous to the Turks, and a greath inderance to the Holy War; for the
Greeks in Syria, who had hitherto lived in some kind of friendly correspondency
with the Latins, differing indeed in Judgment, but complying in Affections, and
uniting against the Turk, the common Enemy of both, began now to conceive so
great a hatered for the Latins, that they wished the Turk, from whom they
expected fair Quarter, the free Exercise of their Religion, and a secure
dwelling in any City, for paying a set Tribute, might conquer rather than their
fellow Christians, from whom they expected nothing but a forcing of their
Conscience, and the bringing their Souls into subjection to the Popes
Supremacy; and therefore from thence forward, never lent a helping hand to that
War.

CHAP. VI.
The Voyage of Theobald, Kingof Navarre; Of Robert Earl of Cornwall. Jerusalem
taken by the Corasines.

THe Ten Years Truce made by Frederick, being ended, he ordered Reinold, his
Viceroy, to conclude another, for the same term of years; which, though
honorable enough, and without any other fault, than Frederick's having made
it, yet the Templars would not endure it, pretending, that it was a great
Indignity to the Christians, for the Turks to have access to the Sepulcher. And
Pope Gregory, to despite the Emperor, commanded his Trumpeters, the Dominican
and Franciscan Friars, to sound a fresh Alarm to the Holy War; who amplifying,
with their Rhetoric, the Calamity of the Christians, the Tyranny of the Turks,
the Merit of the Cause, and the Probability of Success, prevailed with many to
undertake the Voyage; the principal whereof was, Theobald, King of Navarre;
Almerick, Earl of Montfort; Henry, Earl of Champaigne; Peter, Earl of
Bretaigne; who having no Ships, were forced to march with their Armies by Land,
through Grecia, where they were entertained, as others had been before them,
with Treachery, Famine, and all the Miseries that could attend an unfortunate
Army; insomuch, that none ever after adventured to go that way into the Holy
Land.

But having passed the Bosporus, they marched to Antioch, being more than half
of them destroyed by the Turks in their passage thither, and the rest miserably
weakened and almost dead with sickness and famine. However, after they had for
sometime refreshed themselves there, the Templars conducted them to Gaza, where
they fell to spoiling and foraging the Sultan's Country, assaulting no place of
strength, but only poor Villages, who thought themselves sufficiently walled by
the Truce. But as they were returning home, laden with Treasure, the Turks in
great numbers fell upon them near Gaza; where, after a bloody fight, wherein
the Christians behaved themselves with so much bravery, that they were rather
killed than conquered, they were utterly overthrown; Earl Henry being slain,
Almerick taken prisoner, and the King of Navarre forced to save himself by the
swiftness of his Spanish Gennet.

In the mean while, the other Christians looked on and saw their Brethren
slaughtered before their faces, without being able to help them, in regard
their hands were tied by the Truce; and Reinoldus charged them not to infringe
the Peace made with the Sultan. As for the King of Navarre, he stole home with
as much fecresie as possible, being greatly ashamed, that his Voyage, from
which so much was expected, had effected nothing, but the ruin of its
undertakers.

Fifteen days after his departure, Richard, Earl of Cornwall, and Brother to
King Henry the Third, landed at Ptolemais, accompanied by Theodoricus, Lord
Prior of the English Hospitallers, diverse Barons, and an Army of brave and
well-appointed Soldiers, where he was joyfully received, especially by the
Clergy, who Sang at his arrival, Blessed is he who comes in the Name of the
Lord.

This Prince was our English Croesus, and the Tinn-Mines in Cornwall were his
Indies that enriched him, so that England never had a poorer King, and a richer
Subject, than those two Brothers. When he was got as far as the Mediterranean
Sea, the the Pope sent his Legate, to command him back, and forbid his
proceeding any farther in his Voyage. Whereat our Heroic Pilgrim was somewhat
astonished, that the Pope should so solemnly summon, and then as suddenly
discharge his Holy Soldiers, as though he designed only to delude peoples
devotions with false alarums. However, having vowed the Voyage, and his Honor
and Treasure being engaged therein, he resolved that his Holiness should not
with a breath blast his generous Resolutions, but went forward, notwithstanding
this Command to the contrary.

The Sultans in Syria, hearing of his arrival, offered him Peace; but whilst he
was treating of it, he fortified Askelon, which was the best Harbor in all
Syria, and beautified it with Marble and Statues, caused the Christians, killed
at the late Battle of Gaza, to be decently buried, and gave a Priest an yearly
Salary, to Pray for their Souls: so that the living being much taken with his
kindness to the dead, he thereby purchased as much love and honor, as though he
had slain so many Turks. And having at last concluded a Peace with the Sultans
for Ten Years; wherein it was agreed, That all Christian Captives should be
released, several Forts restored, and things reduced to the same state they
were at the first Peace made with Frederick the Emperor. He returned home with
abundance of Honor, Having, says the Historian, compelled those Infidels to
offer Terms of Peace, without offering them any other violence, than showing
his Sword in the Scabbard, without ever drawing it. And indeed such was the
general esteem which he obtained by his Success in this Voyage, that he
afterward bid fair for the Imperial Crown of Germany.

Not long after the Earls return, died Reinoldus, Frederick's Lieutenant in
Syria, in whose Grave was buried all the Happiness and Glory of the Christians
in Palestine. For now the lawless Templars would observe no other Rule than
their own Will, and the inundation of the rude Tartars, having, maugre all
opposition, run over all the North of Asia, and forced many Nations to forsake
their ancient Habitations; among whom was a certain People, called Corasine,
who being thus unkennelled, had recourse to the Sultan of Babylon, desiring him
to give them a place to live in. The Sultan, who was free enough of that which
was none of his own, frankly gave them all the Land that the Christians held in
Syria, upon condition, that they would conquer it; which he told them was easy
to do, in regard the People were few and weak, and the Country rich and
fruitful.

The Corasines being thus animated by the by the Sultan, came with their Wives
and Children and their whole Households into Syria, to win Houses and Land for
them there. And finding the City of Jerusalem unguarded, and without the least
suspicion of an Enemy, easily surprised it, and entered without resistance.
Many of the Christians thereupon flying out of the City with their Wives and
Families, took their course toward Joppa, but unfortunately looking back, and
seeing their own Ensigns advanced on the Walls, were so infatuated as to go
back to the City again, upon a confute, that their fellows had beaten the
Corasines, and by those Banners, invited them to return, whereby they were
every Mother's Child of them slain.

Things being brought to this pass in Syria, a desperate Disease must have a
desperate Remedy, whereupon the Christians clapped up a hasty Peace with the two
Sultans of Damascus and Cracci, between whom, and the Sultan of Babylon, there
was at that time some discord. And swearing them to be faithful, borrowed an
Army of their Forces, to assist them in taking vengeance on the Corasines.
Robert, Patriarch of Jerusalem, was the chief Commander, and St. Luke's day the
time agreed on for this fatal Battle, which was fought on a Plain near
Tyberius. But the two Armies were no sooner joined, but the Turks, who were
placed in the front of the Battle, ran over to the Enemy, or at least fled
through cowardice, so that the Christians being overpowered in number, though
they made a great slaughter of their Enemies, were at last utterly overthrown,
and most of them slain, there escaping no more, but Three of the Teutonick
Order, Eighteen Templers, and Nineteen Hospitallers, besides the Patriarch; who
says of himself, That God, accounting him unwortby of Martyrdom, permitted him
to escape among the rest. The Corafines improving this Victory, won all from
the Christians, except Tire, Ptolemais, and Antioch, with a few Forts.

So that the Christians were beaten by a beaten People, who shortly after
falling out with the Sultan of Babylon, were by him wholly routed out, so as
none of their Name remained. And it is very observable, that all Historians,
both before and after this time, are wholly silent concerning them; whereby it
seems, as though God had created this People to punish the Christian, and as soon
as they had done their work, annihilated them again.

CHAP. VII.
The French King's Voyage into Palestine: He carries the War into Egypt again:
Damiata taken the second time, but afterward exchanged for King Lewis.

ABout two years after this overthrow, Lewis the Ninth of that Name, King of
France, arrived in Palestine, to assist the Christians, in recovering what they
had lost. That which moved him to undertake this Voyage, was his recovering of
a desperate fit of sickness, upon the application of a Piece of the Cross. He
was accompanied therein, besides three of his own Brothers, and diverse of the
French Nobility, by William Longspath, Earl of Shrewsbury, with a brave company
of valiant English Soldiers. When he came to Cyprus, he was met by an
Ambassador from a great Tartarian Prince, who in vited, by the fame of his
Piety, acquainted him with his design to embrace the Christian Religion. He
received and entertained the Ambassadors with much affability, dismissed them
with liberal Gifts, and by them sent, as a Present to their Master, a curious
Tent, wherein the History of the Bible was very dexteriously and richly wrought
in Needle Work, hoping thereby to catch his Soul in his Eyes, Pictures being in
that Age of Ignorance accounted Laymens Books, though since they have been
generally condemned, as full of many damnable Errata's, and never published by
any Authority of the King of Heaven, to be either the means or workers of Faith.

Thither also the Templers, who were afraid of being checked by this Pious King
for their debauched Lives, wrote to him to accept of a Peace, which the King of
Egypt offered to make with the Christians. But he being informed by the King of
Syria, that it was only a trick of the Templers, to prevent his intentions of
going into Syria, to behold their wickedness, commanded the Grand Master, that
from thence forward, upon the price of his Head, he should receive no Messages,
nor hold any correspondence with the Enemy, resolving with himself once more to
invade Egypt, and make that Country the Seat of the War.

But having once declared his intentions, and making no great haste to put it
into execution, Ateladine had time enough to provide against the storm, by
fortifying the Seacoast, which he did for an Hundred and Eighty Miles
together; so that their landing was now much more difficult than when King John
invaded it. However, Lewis being reinforced with a new Army, by Robert, Duke
of Burgundy, and Alphonse, the King's Brother, set forward for Egypt, and
intended to land near Damiata: But the Governor with a Band of resolute
Mammalakes, opposed it, between whom, and the Christians, there was for some
hours a fierce and bloody Fight, wherein the Turks were at last overthrown and
forced to fly into the Town, leaving the Christians Landing-place, without any
other Guard, but their Governor and Five Hundred of their best Soldiers, whom
they left dead on the place.

portrait of Lewis the 9th King of France Lewis the 9th. King of France.



Damiata was a City so strong and well fortified, that the taking of it was
accounted a good Task, if performed by an Army within the compass of a Year.
But those within remembering the Miseries of the last Siege, and fearing the
same Tragedy would be acted over again, set fire to the Houses, and in the
Night saved themselves by flight; whereupon the French issued in, and quenching
the fire, saved abundance of Treasure from the fury of the flames. Which Loss
so discouraged Meladine, that to purchase Peace with the Christians, he offered
to restore them the whole Kingdom of Jerusalem, in as ample a manner as ever it
had been enjoyed by any of their Predecessors, to release all Prisoners, and
disburse a great Sum of Money to defray the Charge of the War. But such was
their Pride and Folly, that they refused to accept of it, unless Alexandria,
the best Port in all Egypt, were given them as an Overplus; the Pope's Legate,
and Robert, Earl of Artois, persuading them to grant Peace upon no other terms.
Wherefore the Turk seeing themselves in so desperate a condition, their
Extremity rendered their Sword the keener, and made them provide with the
greater resolution to defend their Country to the utmost.

About this time there arose a difference between the French and the English,
to the great prejudice of their Proceedings. And Meladine, King of Egypt, died
likewise the same Year, and left his imbroiled Kingdom to Melcchsala, his Son.

From Damiata the French marched up toward Cairo, the Governor whereof being
offended with the new King, promised to deliver it into their hands. And having
passed an arm of the River Nilus, Earl Robert marched forward with a third part
of the Army and suddenly assaulted the Turks in their Tents, whilst the King
was absent, and put them to flight; which Victory so lifted him up with
conceit, that he adventured contrary to the advice of the Master of the
Templers, to set on the whole Turkish Power, which lay encamped not far off,
without staying for the rest of the Army, whereby he was utterly overthrown,
and as he was crossing the River, in his flight, found Water enough to drown
him, though not to wash away the stain of rashness and cowardice from his memory;
and our English Earl refusing to fly, died fighting in the midst of his
Enemies, there escaping no more but four persons to carry News of this fatal
overthrow to the rest of the Army.

It is easier for the Reader to conceive, than for my Pen to express, the
general grief wherewith these doleful Tidings were received by the French,
among whom the Plague raged so furiously, that it daily swept away Thousands.
And to increase their sorrow, several sick persons, whom the King had sent down
the River to Damiata, were set upon by the Egyptian King, and having neither
Hands to fight, nor Legs to run, were every one either burned or drowned,
except Alexander Gifford, an Englishman, whose Name and Family still remains
at Chellingworth in Staffordshire, who acquainted the French with what had
happened. They would now have been glad of those Terms, which a little before
they slighted, but it was too late, for the Turks now scorned to treat with
them.

The French would have had the King provided for his own safety, by flying back
to Damiata. But he refused, and resolving to live or die, overcome or perish
with them, marched forward to the fatal place, where the last Battle was
fought. And whilst they were astonished at the sight of their mangled fellows,
the Egyptian King set upon them with an infinite number of men, and put them
all (being but few in number, and those very weak) to the sword, except Lewis
and his two Brothers, whom he took Prisoners.

The Turks having thus slain all the French Pilgrims, instantly marched up with
their Ensigns to Damiata, hoping thereby to surprise it, which if they had
done, King Lewis had been for ever lost. But God disappointed them, for they
were easily discovered, notwithstanding their disguise, and forced to go away
without their desire.

The News of this sorrowful Accident coming to Europe, filled every one with
grief, and made Henry, King of England, who had made great preparation to
undertake the Voyage, to alter his mind, and employ his Money to a better use.

But to return to Egypt: Melechsala did not long survive this Victory, being
slain soon after by Tanquemine, a sturdy Mammaluke, who succeeded him in the
Egyptian Kingdom, by whom King Lewis was released, in exchange for Damiata;
being obliged, besides the surrender of the City, to pay many Thousand Pounds
for the releasing of Christian Captives, and to make satisfaction for the
Damage done in Egypt; for the securing whereof, he was forced to pawn to the
Turks, the Pyx and Host: whence it is, that a Wafer-Cake and a Box is always
wrote in the Borders of that Tapestry which we have brought us out of Egypt, as
a perpetual Memorial of that Victory. But though Lewis was set at liberty, yet he
got not home, till four years after.

CHAP. VIII.
The Mammalukes described: The Death of Frederick: The Conversion of the
Tartars; And the extinguishing the Caliphs of Babylon: Charles made King of
Sicily and Jerusalem: King Lewis makes a second Voyage.

THose Mammalukes which had now seized on the Kingdom of Egypt were the
Children of Christian-Parents, which were by Saladine and his Successors taught
the Mohammedan Superstition, and instructed in all Military Discipline at
several Nurseries, and being found by their Valor and Courage to be the chief
support of the Turkish Kings, were by them advanced to the chief places of
profit and trust, and thereby the better enabled to pull down their raisers.
Which was performed during the captivity of King Lewis, by Tarquemine, who slew
Melechsala, and thinking it unfit so great a Prince should go to the grave
alone, sent all his Children after him. And was afterward chosen by the rest
of the Mammalukes, King of Egypt; whereupon he, by their advice and consent,
made several Laws, which were ever afterward observed by them as irrevokable,
The first whereof was,

That the Sultan, or chief of the servile Empire, should not succeed by
Inheritance, but be chosen out of the Mammalukes.

The second, That none should be admitted into the Order of the Mammalukes,
that were born either of Turkish or Jewish Parents, but only such as were born
Christians.

The third was, That though the Sons of Mammalukes should enjoy their Fathers
Lands and Wealth, yet they should not take upon them the Name and Honor of a
Mammaluke.

The fourth was, That the Native Egyptians should be permitted the use of no
other Weapons, but such wherewith they were to fight against Weeds and Till and
Manure their Land.

There were in this Government several things worthy admiration.

First, That of Slaves they should act the King, without playing the Tyrant.

Secondly, That they should neglect their own Children when it is common for
other men to idolize them and sacrifice all that they have to their welfare.

Thirdly, That they should not fall out in the Election of their Kings, in
regard they were all equal among themselves.

Lastly, That it should endure so long, for it lasted Two hundred sixty and
seven Years, till overcome by Selimus, the great Turkish Emperor, in the Year
1517. by the help of the Janissaries, an Order of Men for Birth and Breeding not
unlike themselves.

In that Year likewise, it being a Year of great Revolutions, died Frederick,
Emperor of Germany and King of Jerusalem, whereupon followed an Interegnum in
that Kingdom for fourteen Years together; the right indeed lay in Conrade,
Frederick's Son, by Jole, King John's Daughter; but he was so employed in
defending himself in Sicily, against Maufred his Bastard Brother, (who quickly
after dispatched him out of the way) that he had no leisure to look after the
fragments of the Kingdom of Jerusalem.

Near about this time a certain Hungarian Peasant, said to have been an
Apostate to Mahomet, and well learned, gathered together several Thousand
people, who took on them the Name and Habit of Pastorelli, in imitation of
those in the Gospel who were warned by Angels to go to Bethlehem, they had the
Holy Lamb for their Ensign, and pretended to have intelligence from Heaven to
march into the Holy Land, but mistaking West for the East, they shaped their
course into France and committing several outrages that no way suited either
with their Habit or Banner, they were incountred near Bordeaux, and threescore
Thousand of them slain, and the rest dispersed.

Things being now brought into a sad and deplorable condition in Syria, without
any hope of amendment, behold a strange and unexpected accident revived them
again! For Haito King of Armenia taking the pains to travel himself to Margo,
the Great Cham of Tartaria, to acquaint him with the danger he was in from the
Turks as well as others, telling him, Though he lay something out of their way,
yet the only favor he must expect from them was to be last devoured, whereupon
he not only promised to assist the Christians in suppressing them, but himself,
and by his example, a great part of the Country embraced the Christian Faith,
and thereupon sent Haalon his Brother with a great Army to suppress the Turks,
and assist the Christians in recovering what they had lost, in the performing
whereof his Army seemed to ride post, conquering Persia in as little time as
one can well travel it within six Months: The City of Samarchanda was the only
place that resisted him, and therefore being unwilling to tempt his Fortune
with a long siege, he left it to one of his Captains, who besieged it seven and
twenty year, and at last did not take it, but had it surrendered to him.

Haalon having Conquered Persia marched to Babylon, the Caliph whereof called
Musteazem, Idolized his wealth so much that he would not provide necessaries
for the defense of the City, so that it became an easy Conquest to this
Tartarian Prince, who having famished the Covetous Caliph to death filled his
mouth, with melted Gold, and now Mosques every where went down, and Churches
went up, from thence he went into Mesopotamia, where having Conquered the City
of Aleppo and Edessa. he restored them to the Christians, and many other places
which he wan from the Turks, whereby he so awed Melechem the Mammaluke who
Succeeded Tarminus in Egypt that he durst not budg.

But of this Tartarian help they were altogether unworthy, in regard they would
not be at leisure to make use of it, but busied themselves in private
dissentions, the Genoans and Ventians two states in Italy, who had thrown of
the Imperial Command, and had erected themselves into commonwealths, being not
content to quarrel at home would needs go into Syria to fight it out there,
that so the Turks might look on and laugh at them, the pretense of the quarrel
was about superiority in the Church of St. Sabbas, which was appointed by the
Pope for them and the Pisans, who likewise engaged themselves in the quarrel
sometimes siding with one side and some times with the other.

The Venetians being at length compelled by the Genoans to forsake the City,
were so incensed thereat, that they came with thirteen Galleys, and having
forced asunder the chain which-crossed the Haven, burned five and twenty of the
Genoans Ships, that lay there; to revenge which loss the state of Genoa sent a
great Navy into Syria, which meeting with the Duke of Venice at Tire, with the
united power of the Venetians and Pisans, being in all seventy four Vessels
well provided, would have set upon them in the Haven, had not the Governor
forbid it, telling them that they should not fight under his nose, but if they
loved quarreling so well let them out and try their Fortunes in the open Sea,
which they did accordingly, the manner of Seafights in those days before the
thundering Ordnance was found out, being only for one Vessel to run against
another, so that the the Ships were both Guns and Bullets themselves. In which
fight the Venetians prevailed, destroying near thirty of the Genoans Ships, and
forcing the rest to save themselves in the Haven of Tire.

Whereupon entering Ptolemais they expelled all the Genoans out of the City,
pulled down their Buildings and plundered all their Shops, and Warehouses, but
after a ten years War they were at last reconciled in Palestine, by the
Authority of Pope Clement the fourth, though their War lasted longer in Italy.

Charles Duke of Anjou, and Brother to King Lewis, was now made King of Sicily
and Jerusalem, by the Pope upon condition that he should conquer Maufred, who
then Reigned in Sicily, and Molested His Holiness, and root out all the
remaining Race of Frederick, and as an acknowledgment that he held those
Kingdoms from the Pope, pay him an annual pension of four (some say forty)
thousand Pounds.

But having Conquered Maufred and possessed himself of Sicily, he so little
minded the regaining of Jerusalem, that he never looked after it or came there
at all, which neglect gave an opportunity to Hugh King of Cyprus to furbish up
his old Title to that Kingdom as Linealy descended from Almerick the second,
who coming to Ptolemais was there Crowned King of Jerusalem.

However the Christians affairs in Syria began now to hasten to their fatal
Catastrophe, and the Kingdom of Jerusalem was in a little time between two
Kings wholly lost, for Haalon the Tartarian Prince being sent for home to
Succeed his Brother Mango, who died without Issue, left Abaga his Son with
sufficient forces in the City of Damascus, which he had likewise wan from the
Turks, who following his Father, soon after substituted Guirboca his Lieutenant
in Damascus, who having his Nephew rashly slain, by the Christians in an unhapy
Broil about parting a great Booty taken from the Turks; wholly renounced the
Christian Religion, together with all the Tartarians under his Command, so that
the Kingdom of Jerusalem having lost its best support, soon after tumbled down.

Bondocdar who Succeeded Melechem in Egypt, taking advantage of their being
thus deserted by the Tartars, took the City of Joppa, all the inhabitants
whereof he either killed; or which was worse, forced them to forswear their
Religion, and then marching to Antioch took that likewise, slaying twenty, and
carrying away an hundred, thousand Christians, though it is to be suspected that
the number of the Captives were at first written in figures, and in time
increased some thousands by the addition of nothing, after which he laid seige
to Ptolemais it self.

Those woeful tidings brought into Europe, so wrought on the good disposition of
King Lewis, that he resolved upon a second Voyage to Palestine, from which all
the persuasions of his Nobles could no way divert him, in which Voyage there
went with him his two Sons, Philip and Tristram, Theobald King of Navarre, his
Son in law, Guido Earl of Flanders, and Prince Edward eldest Son of Henry King
of England, who was attended by his Brother Edmund, Earl surnamed Crouchback,
not because he was crook-shouldered, as was pretended by Henry Duke of
Lancaster, when he usurped King Richard's Throne, but from his being a Croised
Soldier in the Holy War.

Lewis being now on his way to Palestine, it was concluded by the general
consent of his Council, That for securing the Christians passage to Syria, they
should first take the City of Carthage in Africa, or rather Tunis, which being
raised out of the Ruins of that famous City, was now become a Nest of Pirates,
who had killed and taken captive many Pilgrims, who were sailing that way to
the Holy Land. But no sooner was the Siege began than the Plague seized on the
Christian Army, whereof Thousands died, and among the rest, Tristram, King
Lewis's Son, and he himself of a Flux soon followed after. His loss was much
lamented, he being accounted the French Josia, as well for the Piety of his
Life, as the Wofulness of his Death, and his wilful engaging himself in a
needless and unfortunate War.

But notwithstanding this Mortality, the Siege was continued, and Tunis brought
into such distress, that they were glad to surrender the Town on these
Conditions:

That it should pay yearly to Charles, King of Sicily and Jerusalem, the Sum of
Forty Thousand Crowns.

That they should receive Christian Ministers freely to Exercise their Religion.

And that they should be at the whole charge of that Voyage.

Prince Edward would have had the Town beaten down and all the Inhabitants put
to the Sword, accounting the foulest Quarter too fair for such Villains, and
their Goods sacrificed as an Anathema to God and burnt to ashes, because gotten
by Robbery. But seeing he could not prevail with others, he resolved however to
show his own detestation, by execrating his part of the Spoil, and causing it
to be burnt, forbidding the English Soldiers to save any thing of it, telling
them, that Coals stolen out of that Fire, would sooner burn their Houses than
warm their Hands. It troubled not the conscience of other Princes however, to
enrich themselves therewith and glut themselves with the stolen Honey found in
that Hive of Drones: And not only so, but terminated their Pilgrimage there
too, refusing to proceed any further therein. Whereat Edward astonished, struck
his Hands on his Breast, and swore, That though they all forsook him, yet he
would enter Ptolemais, if accompanied with Fowin his Horse-keeper only. And
accordingly he arrived safe there, to the great comfort of the Christians, who
were in sore distress. Whilst Theobald, King of Navarre, with the Queen, and
the Earl of Flanders, died in their way home, and most of the Spoil was cast
away.

At his arrival at Ptolemis, he found the Christians just losing their last
stake, Bondocdar having brought them to so low an ebb, that they had resolved
if some unexpected Succor reversed not their intentions, within three days to
resign it up. But Edward's coming in the interim, revived their hopes, and made
them take Courage both to desie their Enemies and their own thoughts of
surrendering the City. Having sufficiently victualed and manned Ptolemais, he
marched with Six or Seven Thousand Men to Nazareth, which he took, and slew
those he found therein. And being afterward informed, that the Turks were
gathered together at Cakhow, about Forty Miles from thence, he marched thither,
and setting upon them early in the Morning, slew a Thousand of them, and put
the rest to flight. In which Battle, as well as in several other Skirmishes, he
gave sufficient proof of his own personal Valor, slaying many of the Infidels
in single combat.

After this Victory he returned to Ptolemais, where Elenor his Consort was
delivered of a fair Daugher, but the Joy occasioned thereby was soon turned
into Sorrow, by the apprehension of his being mortally wounded by one of the
Assassines, who resorting to him several times with Letters and Messages from
the Admiral of Joppa, who pretended a desire to turn Christian. The first time
of his coming, as the Prince was lying on his Bed and reading the Letters he
brought, none being in the Room but them two, he suddenly struck him into the
Arm with an invenomed Knife, and attempted to have fetched another blow; but
the Prince, whose Valor was now awakened, gave him such a blow with his Foot,
that he felled him to the ground, and wresting the poisoned Knife out of his
hand, thrust it into the Murtherer's Belly and slew him; yet so that he hurt
himself therewith in the Forehead. It is storied, that his Lady sucked out all
the venom of his Wounds, without prejudicing her self. But however, certain it
is, that by the help of Physic, good Attendance, and an Antidote, the Master
of the Templars gave him, he showed himself on Horse back safe and well within
fifteen days after.

The Admiral hearing of his recovery, solemnly disavowed his having any hand in
the Treachery, it being seldom known that any will own themselves the Parent of
an unsucceeding Villainy. And having done as much and more than could have been
expected from so small a number as he had with him, he returned home full
fraught with Honor: And his Father, King Henry, being dead, the English
Nobility met him as far as the Alps, to attend him in his return home.

CHAP. IX.
Rodulphus the Emperor hindered from going into Palestine, sends the Duke of
Mechlenburg. Charles King of Jerusalem prevented in his intended Voyage.

MUch talk there was now in Syria of the great preparations of Rodulphus, who
was after two and twenty years Interregnum, chosen Emperor of Germany, and
though but a mere Earl of Haspurg, yet being now advanced to the Emperial
dignity, laid the first foundation of the Anstrian Family, but he was too much
employed at home by Civil Discords, and reducing the Princes to obedience,
whose Knees were too stiff to do him Homage, till he had rendered them more
pliable by degrees, to think of going into Syria.

But yet being somewhat unwilling to render their great expectations wholly
frustrat, he sent the Duke of Mechlenburgh with a good Army to assist the
Christians, who coming to Ptolemais made several succesful incursions into the
Enemies Countries about Damascus, destroying all before him with fire and
sword, and carrying away many rich booties, till at last he was circumvented and
taken prisoner by the Mammalukes, who kept him in Captivity twenty six years,
till at length the Sultan of Egypt a Runegado German, who had formerly been
Enginneer to this Dukes Father, set him at Liberty together with Martin his
Servant, thinking it but reasonable, that he who had been his Partner in Misery
should likewise partake of his Happiness; but they were no sooner at Liberty,
but they were both took again by Pirates, as they were sailing into Syria, which
the Sultan hearing of pitied the misfortune of that distressed Prince, and
scorning that any should frustrate his designed courtesy, set him free once
more, and then returning home he was welcomed with as much wonder as joy by his
Subjects, who supposed him to have been dead long before.

When he came home he found two Counterfeits, who both pretended to be the
Duke, and challenged lodging with his Lady; but upon his arrival to confute
their false pretenses they were both condemned to lose their lives, by two
contrary deaths, the one being Burned, and the other Drowned.

Charles King of Sicily and Jerusalem, having at length made great preparations
for the Holy War, and strengthened his claim to the Kingdom of Jerusalem, by
purchasing the Title of Maria, Domicella Princess of Antioch, who likewise
pretended to a Right, he sent Roger Count of Severine as his Viceroy to
Ptolemais where he was received with a great deal of Honor in despite of King
Hugh, but when his Navy and all things were said to be ready for his own
departure, and that he had by the way a design upon Michael Paleologus the
Grecian Emperor, a sudden and unexpected accident blasted all,

For on Easter Day as the Bell tolled to Even-Song all the Frenchmen in Sicily
had their Throats Cut, in a moment by the Natives, the contriver of this
Massacre was one, Jacobus Prochyta a Doctor of Physic, who thereby killed more
in an hour then he cured in his Whole Life; but the secrecy of its contrivance
was little less then a Miracle, that so many should know of it, and yet none
either through accident or design discover it, from whence came the Proverb
the Sicilian Vispers.

Charles himself was at Rome when this Tragedy was acted, to see the Pope make
Cardinals, and when he received the news it struck him so to the Heart that he
never enjoyed himself after; But living as without Life for about two years he
died and left his Son Charles to Succeed him in the Kingdom of Naples, and the
Title of Jerusalem, who had little remarkable in his Life, but only that being
offended with the Templars in Palestine, for taking part with the King of
Cyprus against him, he siesed all the Lands, and Goods they had in Naples, or
any other part of his dominions.

CHAP. X.
Ptolemais Besieged and taken by the Sultan of Egypt, and thereby the Holy War
ended.

MElechsaites or as others call him Melechmessor, about this time wan the
strong Castle of Mergarh, from the Hospitallers, who kept it and banished the
Carmalites out of Syria, because they had changed their Habits, at the
appointment of Pope Honorious; the Turks being generally haters of innovations.

And Alphir who was his next Successor, understanding that the Christian
Princes of Europe were at variance among themselves, resolved to lay hold of
that opportunity as the fitest time finally to expel the Christians out of
Palestine, and therefore coming out of Egypt with a great Army, he besieged and
won the Cities of Tripoli, Sidon, and Berytus, and being encouraged with this
Success, he adventured to Besiege Tire it self and notwithstanding its
invincible strength, took it in a very short time, and beat it down to the
ground as he did the other three Cities.

So that now there remained nothing of all that the Christians had won in
Palestine, but Ptolemais, which he might easily have taken, if he would have
sat down before with his Army, but he was unwilling to venture for fear, least
if he should attempt the taking all from them at once, he might thereby alarm
the Christian Princes to repair thither for their Relief; and therefore
concluded a Peace with the Venetians for five years, thinking that the bitter
potion would be the more easily swallowed by them, if it were divided into two
doses.

But though the City Ptolemais did at this time escape the Turks Victorious Arms'
yet it was notwithstanding in a most Woeful and Dismal condition, for there
were in it some of all Countries, and every Nation had their several Courts, to
deside causes in; so that the great plenty of Judges occasiond a scarcity of
Justice, and Malefactors when they were impeached for any Crime, would by
appealing to a Trial in the Court of their own Country: escape the deserved
Punishment, it being a sufficient proof of the Criminals innocence in the
Venetians, or Genoans Court, to say, that he was a Subject of the State, to
which the Court belonged; wherefore Personal Crimes were made National, and
particular faults by being espoused, rendered public offenses, so that
outrages were every where practiced, and no where punished, as if they had been
resolved to spare Divine Vengance the pains of overtaking them, by going forth
to meet it.

Besides which there was at this time a great number of Pretenders, eagerly
pro, secuting their several Titles to that City being no fewer then the
Venetians, Genoans, Pisans, Florentins, the King of Cyprus and Sicily, the
Agents of the King of England and France, the Princes of Tripoli and Antioch,
the Patriarch of Jerusalem, the Master of the Templars and Hospitallers, and
the Popes Legate, who would if he were now living think himself highly abused,
in not being first named. All which Pretenders did at once with much Heat and
Violence, urge there Right to the Airy Title of the Kingdom of Jerusalem; and
the Command of that City, like Bees making the greatest noise and Bwzzing, when
they were just ready to forsake the Hive.

There was within the City at this time many new Pilgrims, who were lately come
thither out of Europe, five hundred whereof were of the Popes sending, although
he afterward took no care for their Pay, for though he loved to see the Golden
Tide flow into his Coffers, yet he could not endure to see it ebb again. But
the soldiers being not paid resolved according to their blunt but usual custom
to pay themselves, and therefore Marching out of the City Pillaged the Enemies
Country, contrary to the Peace made with Alphir. The Turks demand satisfaction,
which was not only denied by those of Ptolomais, but their Ambassadors likewise
abused.

Which so enraged Sultan Serapha ( Alphir being now dead) that he gathered
together all his Forces, and sat down before the City, with an Army of six
hundred thousand men say some Historians, though others make them not half the
number, and concluding that that City was so great a purchase, that if once
obtained it could not be too dearly bought, he resolved to take it before he
stirred from the place.

Peter Belvise Master of the Templars, a Valiant and Courageous General, being
made Governor of the City by the general consent of those within, he
encouraged the Christians to be Valiant, and play the Men and not like Prodigal
Heirs part with the City for nothing, which cost their Predecessors so much
pains, and Blood to get, or at leastwise to make one Blaze of Valor before
their Lamp expired, telling them, it would be a shame for them to show their
Friends their Faces, if they turned their Backs to their Enemies; and thefore
exhorted them to fight it out manfully, that so if forced at last to surrender
it they might rather be pitied for want of Fortune, then justly blamed for
lack of Valor. And the City being now to wrestle its last fall, he stripped it
of all things that were combersom and unuseful, for all the Women and Children
and the Men too that were either aged or feeble, and had Mouths to eat and no
Arms to fight he sent away, retaining only twelve thousand, which he conceived
enough to defend the place notwithstanding the vast number of the besiegers.

The Sultan Assaulted the City diverse times with great Fury, but was still
beaten back by the Christians Artillery, and great numbers of the Turks killed,
but in one of those conflicts the undaunted Governor was unfortunately slain
by a poisoned Arrow; a loss above grieving for, and the greater because
irreparable, many indeed were strong in desiring the Honor, but all too weak
to discharge the Office; so that the Christians being divided among themseves
neglected to defend the City, imagining that if it should be taken, yet every
Nation would be able to defend its part in regard their buildings were all
fortified within themselves, which idle and dangerous fancy took off their
thoughts from minding the public good, and fixed them only on their own
private ends.

The Turks at length taking the advantage of this Preposterous neglect, entered
the City at a breach which they had made in the Wall, by undermining of it,
thinking their work had then been done, though they quickly found to their cost
that it was but just begun, for to their astonishment and wonder, they found
Ptolemais not a City but a great heap of Citys, as it were thrown together, the
people of every Nation having so Fortified themselves in their several Forts,
that they didfrom thence Power forth whole vollies of shot upon the Turks, when
they entered the Streets, which makes it a thing hardly to be paralelled in
History, for a City to hold out so long after it was taken, for they bravely
defended themselves against the Whole Turkish power for fifty days together,
and after all the rest were subdued the Knights Hospitallers who allways bore
an implacable hatred to the Turks, maintained their Castle near a month longer,
but their unhappy devision rendering them unable to subsist long, they were at
length most of them slain, and the City wholly subdued by there numerous enemies.

However it was a Bloody Victory to the Conqueror, most of those who entered
the City being burned with Fire, killed with Arrows, or Smothered by the fall
of Towers, of the very Ruins being as it were greedy of revenge, killed those
who destroyed them.

Ptolemais being now taken the Sultan thought it a good penyworth, though it cost
him so dear, and therefore to make sure work and prevent all feuture occasion
of Ejecting such sturdy Tennants, Levelled it even with the Ground.

No fewer then an hundred thousand Christians which were all the Latins that
were left; fled at this time out of Palestine into Cyprus, where they were
freely entertained by Henry King of that Island and Jerusalem, to his great
cost but greater commendation.

Five hundred Matrons and Virgins of Noble Blood, are by the Mirracle Monger of
that age, said to stand on the shore of Ptolemais, with all their rich Jewels
and cry out with a lamentable voice for some body to Transport them from that
dangerous place, proffering any Mariner that would undertake it all their
Wealth for his pains, and that he should chose out of them any one whom he best
liked for a Wife, and that thereupon a certain Mariner came and Transported
them all freely, Landing them safely in Cyprus. But when he was sent for to
receive his Hire, it could not by the strictest enquiry be ever learnt who this
Mariner was, or what became of him afterward.

The Hospitallers were forced for have to leave their Treasure behind them
which they hid in a Vault, making it known from time to time to their
Successors. About three hundred years after it was fetched away by the Galleys
of Malta.

Thus after an hundred thirty four years had this Holy War its final period,
having been for continuance the longest, for Charges the most expensive, for
Slaughter of Men the most Bloody, for Pretense the most Pious, and for the True
Intent of it the most Politic and Subtle that ever the World saw. And at this
day the Turks to spare the Christians pains in going so far as Palestine, have
done them the unwelcome courtesy, to come more then half the way to meet them,
but yet it is to be hoped that if they lose Buda, which they cannot in all
possibility avoid, they will be wholly driven out of Europe, by the Victorious
Arms of the Christians; and that it will not be long before their vast and
overgrown Empire be finally ruined, and sink under the Ponderous Weight of its
own greatness, to which let all who love the name of Christ, say, Amen.

CHAP. XI.
The Holy War revived again by the present Emperor of Germany, and the King of
Poland. With the Parallel between that and the former War.

SInce the Holy War was ended there has been some offers of Christian Princes
to revive it again. For Henry the Fourth King of England, toward the latter
end of his Reign, purposed to have made a Voyage into Palestine, being told by
some pretenders to the gift of Prophecy, that he should not die tell he had
heard Mass in Jerusalem, but Henry was deceived, and the Voyage prevented by
his dying soon after in a Chamber in his own Palace, at Westminster called by
that name. And Charles the Eighth King of France after his return out of Italy,
sent a huffing Embassage to our Henry the seventh, wherein he gave him to
understand that he had resolved to make a second conquest of Naples, with a
design to make use of it as a bridge, to transport his Forces into Grecia,
resolving neither to spare blood nor treasure, although it were to the imparing
of his Crown, and dispeopling of his Kingdom, till he had either ruined the
Ottaman Empire, or taken it in his way to Par adice, (meaning the City of
Jerusalem) but the French having had enough of the first adventure for Naples,
we never hear more of this threatened Voyage, to Jerusalem which is thought to
be propounded, only to amuse Henry till Charles should have performed some
projects he had then on foot, in the Dukedom of Britain, which design being
scented by our King he used him accordingly.

More Cordial was the design of James the Fourth of Scotland, Who being touched
in conscience for his Fathers death (which though he did not procure, yet he
seemed to countenance by his presence) to expiate his Crime, intended a voyage
to the Holy Land. In order whereunto he had prepared his Soldiers, and
imparted his design to Foreign Princes, and had certainly gone had not other
wars breaking out unexpectedly, and his own sudden death prevented him.

Among those Overtures, we find one said to be really performed by William
Lantgrave of Hesse, who with only Ninety eight Noblemen and Earls in his
Company, made a Holy Voyage into Palestine, which he performed in Seven Months
time. And upon his return, brought away with him Forty six Ensigns of Horse,
which he had taken from the Turks, with the loss of one Man only, and he not
slain neither, but died at Cyprus in their return home. A Victory so absolute
and bloodless to the Conqueror, that were it true it would admit no parallel;
but the Voyage and Victory were both fictitious, being found only in
Calvisious, who quotes one Fab, an Historian no where to be met withal, for his
Author; and the Chronology wherein it is recorded being Printed after the
Author's death, it is most probable, that those to whom the care of Printing it
was committed, found this story in some Paper he had put in his Chronicle, and
for the improbability of it, marked it to be Fabulous; which word in regard he
had written it defectively with the three first Letters only, they thought to
have been some Historian whose Name was Fab, and so inserted it in the
Chronicle it self.

Ever since the huffing Embassy of Charles, the French King, the Holy War has,
for any thing I can find to the contrary, been wholly laid asleep till revived
again by the present Emperor of Germany, and John Sobieski, King of Poland, in
the Year 1683. The occasion whereof was briefly thus:

The Grand Seignior having by the persuasions of Count Teckeley, sent an huge
Army under the leading of the Grand Vizier, to invade the Imperial Territories
in Hugaria; against which the Duke of Lorain, who then commanded the Emperors
Forces there, being not able to make head, they destroyed all before them with
Fire and Sword; and passing forward, sat down before Vienna, the Imperial City
of Germany, not doubting but that they should with their vast Army have quickly
devoured that Important Place, and notwithstanding its having been ever
accounted the Bulwork of Christendom, have added it to the rest of the Ottoman
Conquest. The Emperor of Germany, and the King of Poland, seeing the sad
Estate to which things were now like to be reduced, entered into a League
offensive and defensive, and resolved with their united Forces, to chastise the
Turk for that proud Attempt.

The Vizier's Army, wherewith he had now begirt Vienna, consisted of an Hundred
and Fifty Thousand Men, which were the very Flower of the Turkish Soldiery,
wherewith he made several fierce Attacks upon the City, which were carried on
with all the Courage and Skill imaginable, and sprang several Mines, whereby he
did more mischief, than by his Batteries. Notwithstanding which, the City, by
the resolution and encouragement of Count Starembergh, their undaunted
Governor, bravely defended it self from the fourteenth of July, till the
twelfth of the following September, when the Turks were Forced to raise the
Siege, and retire with great disorder into Hungaria, whither they were so
closely persued by the Victorious Christians, that very few of that numerous
Army escaped to carry the tidings, of their Overthrow to Constantinople. Vast
quantities of Provision and Ammunition, above an hundred pieces of Cannon, two
Horse Tayls, which the Turks allways use to hang out as a Denounciation of War,
when ever they undertake any great expedition, all their Tents, which were
above thirty thousand in number, all the Enemies Baggage, together with the
Viziers own Horse, and the Grand Seignors STANDARD, which was extraordinary
Rich and Sumptuous, being curiously Embroidered with charactars of Gold and
Silver, upon Green and Red Silk, were here taken by the Christians, as Trophies
of their Victory; the form and shape of the Standard you have here described in
this figure. The Infidels receiving likewise at the same time several great
overthrows by the Sieur Kiniski, General of the Cossacks who having slain about
thirty thousand Turks and Taratrs, entered the Country of Budziak destroying all
before him, slaying an hundred thousand of them, and taking the Cities of
Bialogrod, and Ketin.

The Christians encouraged by these Victories resolved to pursue them, and
drive the Turks quite out of Europe, in order whereunto after they had taken
the City of Tytchin, and several other places which the Turks held in Upper
Hungaria, the Duke of Lorraein invested Buda it self with the greatest part of
the Imperial Army, Commanding Count Leslie to Encamp with the rest, about
Virovitzie, on the Drove, to cover the Siege. This City is the strongest place
the Turks enjoy in Hungary, it being formerly the Metropolis of that Kingdom,
where the Kings of Hungary kept their Courts, but being taken from the
Christians in the Year 1591. By Solomon the Magnificent, Emperor of the Turks;
they have ever since made it the seat and constant residence of their Chief
Bassa, or Viceroy of that part of Hungary, which is ssposseed by them, so that
it is very populous and rich. And being exceedingly well fortified with a
strong built Wall, and an Invincible Castle, and having between 18 or 19
Thousand Men in Garrison, they have made a stout resistance, and declared a
resolution to defend it to the last Man. Notwithstanding which it is verily
believed that it cannot hold out much longer, but the Turks must be forced to
surrender that City to the Emperor, after having enjoyed it near an hundred
years.

And that the Turk might be employed on all sides, the Venetians were invited
likewise into this League against them, which they accepted of, and sent out a
brave fleet under the Command of their General Morosini, to attack them at
home, to whch Fleet the Pope and the Knights of Malta also joined several of
their Galleys, and so did the Duke of Tuscany, making in all forty six Galleys,
six Galliesses, thirty three Men of War, twenty four Petaches, four Fire Ships,
sixteen Brigantines armed, and eighty two Galliots, on Board whereof they had
an Army of twenty five thousand Men or upwards.

Sancta Maria a strong Fortress of great consequence to the Turks, was the
first place that felt the force of their victorious Arms, which being quickly
compelled to a surrender, they took their course towardsd Lepanto. And General
Moraseni concluding it necessary, for the maintaining the Conquest of Sancta
Maria, to possess himself of Prevese, a place of great importance in regard it
is situated at the very entrance, and Commands the Gulf of Arta, resolved to
attempt it.

Wherefore having Commanded five Galleys and six Galliesses, to approach
toward the Castles of Gomenizze, not far from Prevese, thereby to amuse the
Turks and oblige them to devide their Troops, by sending reinforcements
thither, which succeeded accordingly. For Saban Bassa Governor of Prevese,
believing the Ventians designed to attack those Castles, sent thither the
greatest part of those he had drawn together, for the security of the Town. He
brought his whole Fleet to an Anchor at the entrance of the Gulf, and the next
morning ordered Captain Menetta with twenty four Barks, and several Armed
Brigantines to enter the Gulf, and land with part of the Forces under the
Command of General Strasoldo. The Turks who expected them to land where the
Galleys had posted themselves, and had therefore employed their Chief care on
that side, now perceiving their error, immediately sent away five hundred
Spahees to charge them, but they having put themselves into order of Battle,
gave them so hot a welcome that many af them were slain, and the rest fled in
such disorder that they were most of them cut off, before they could reach the
Town. Then the Christians advancing, and having without opposition possessed
themselves of a Hill near the Town, the General sent to summon it, but the
Officer who cammanded it in the absence of the Governor, (who was then abroad
at the Head of a party of Turks, to observe the Christians and fancied they
durst not undertake the Siege of so strong a place,) would not receive the
Generals letter, but fired upon the Messenger that carried it; Whereupon four
pieces of Cannon and as many Mortars were landed, and being placed upon a
Battery, the next day about three hundred Bombs were shot into the Town, which
burnt several Houses, and before night all their Cannon were dismounted, except
one. The next day they Lodged themselves in the Ditch, and began to undermine
the great Tower, whereupon twenty Turks made a salley in the night, and
surprised some of the Christians, which did but whet the Christians Valor, and
make them carry on their works with the greater eagerness and speed,
notwithstanding the Enemy plied them very close, with their small shot. So that
the Mine being ready and a considerable breach made in the Wall, order was
given for a general asault, but the Turks unwilling to run that hazard, hung
out a white flag and sent five of their Principals to treat with the General,
about surrendering the place. Who demanded the same conditions that were
granted to the garrison of Sancta Maria, but the General would consent to no
other terms, then only to permit thirty of the most considerable of them to
march out with their arms, and baggage, and the rest without arms, taking with
them what they could carry, which the Turks were forced to submit to, and leave
the Town to the Conqerours. The Turks by the loss of this place, besides the
Town it self lost above 100000 Crowns, which they got yearly by the Fishery.

This War may very well be paralleled to the sormer and as Justly deserves the
Name of Holy.

First, because in this War the Quarrel is between Christians and Turks, as
well as in that and the design of the Wariours, is to Check the spreading of
the Mohammedan Superstition, as well as to put a stop to the progress of the
Ottoman Arms.

Secondly, as the former was undertaken to wrest from the Turks, what had been
before enjoyed by the Christians, and free the Professors of Chrstianity from
the Yoke of Infidelity, so was this.

Thirdly, as the former had the blessing of the Pope, and his Holiness's
Contribution of money, and men for the carrying of it on, so had this and
therefore will without doubt be looked upon, by Succeeding ages, as an Holy and
Religious War, which I hope will never have a Period, till Mahomets Tomb be
tumbled down, and the Ottoman Empire overthrown.

FINIS.

