A Farewell Sermon Preached at the TABERNACLE IN SPITTLE-FIELDS.

By LUKE MILBOURN, Presbyter, and Curate there.

Published at the Request of the Hearers.

LONDON; Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Sign of the Three Pigeons in
Cornhill, 1699.

A Farewell Sermon.
PHILIPPIANS IV. 9. Those things which ye have both learned, and received, and
heard, and seen in me, do; and the God of Peace shall be with you.
COULD my most earnest Prayers, or my Willingness to have struggled with the
greatest Difficulties and Discouragements, or to spend my self in indefatigable
Labors and Studies for you, have prevailed with Almighty God; or had His
All-wise Providence seen it good to find out any thing about this City
consistent with my Care for You, there had been no Occasion given for our
present necessary Separation. I never was ambitious of any great Things in the
Church; an opportunity of studying and promoting the Salvation of others,
without disturbance, has ever been my utmost Aim; and the Devil, and wicked Men
have, at all times, been very active to hinder me. The Ministry of God's holy
Word was what I was originally devoted to, and the faithful Execution of that
Ministry is the greatest Eyesore to the Prince of Darkness. But however, since
there must be a Separation between us, it is my great Satisfaction that my
Conscience cannot accuse me of any Unfaithfulness in my Employment among you. I
have Preached no False Doctrines among you, nor have I robbed the Treasures of
other Men's Labors to Preach to you; I have set you no Ill Examples, nor
fomented any Broils or Quarrels among you; but now, when I come to take my
solemn Leave of you, I can, with a clear and quiet Conscience, speak to you in
the Apostle's Language, Those things which you have both learned, and received,
and seen, and heard in me do; and the God of Peace shall be with you.

That the Apostle could close his Epistle to his dear Flock at Philippi with
such Expressions, was to the Honor of the Gospel, and was the Completing of
his own Happiness. That a dying Minister of Christ, when he speaks his last
Words to his People, can say the same things to them, is an inconceivable
Comfort; and, thanks be to God, that I, one of the meanest of his Ambassadors,
have obtained mercy of the Lord to be Faithful, (1 Cor. 7.26.) that I, who am
now dying a Civil Death to you, can give the same Charge to your, and not doubt
of the same happy Consequence, if you observe and keep it.

The Sum of all our Apostle's Writings was to endear Christianity by all
suitable means, both to those who were without, and those who were within the
Pale of the Church of Christ, and the same is the substance of this Chapter. As
there always is a dearness of Affection between a faithful Teacher and a
willing People, so it appears there was such a mutual Tenderness between St.
Paul and the Philippians; Therefore, says he, my brethren, dearly beloved, my
joy and my crown, even so stand fast in the Lord, my dearly beloved: All the
pretenses between Men to a carnal worldly Love, are nothing when compared with
the Bowels of a spiritual Father; for He who rightly weighs the Worth of an
immortal Soul; he whom God accounts so far faithful, as to Honor him with a
Capacity of assisting to the Salvation of any Man. He who considers how
inevitable Damnation is to himself, in case of Infidelity to his Trust, and how
inestimable a Crown shall be his Reward, in case he discharges his Duty
sincerely, and pursues it earnestly; He who reflects on these things, must love
those Souls for whom his Master shed his most precious Blood, far beyond any
thing which the dearest Friends in the World, without such a Relation, can
pretend to. After these Expressions of Love, he promotes Unity and Charity, and
then, consecrating the Name of some eminent Saints to futurity, he gives
several general Advices, or Exhortations.

He advises them to spiritual Joy, the best support of a Christian, when
encompassed with the greatest Difficulties, Rejoice in the Lord always, and
again, I say rejoice, ver. 4.

He advises them to convince the World of the Excellency of their Holy
Religion, by the evident Amendment of their natural Tempers who profess it; Let
your moderation be known unto all men; the reason of which stands still in full
force, for the Lord is at hand, ver. 5

He teaches them not to torment themselves with worldly Cares, i. e. not to be
too sollicitous about what they should eat, or drink, or wherewith they should
be clothed; to be distrustfully careful for nothing, but in every thing by
Prayer and Supplication with Thanksgiving, to let their Requests be made known
to God. Honest Industry attended with a faithful dependence on the Goodness and
Blessing of God, would be a sufficient Security for their subsistence in this
World, ver. 5.

To encourage his Philippians to these things, he tells them, that, in case of
Obedience, the Peace of God, a Blessing more valuable than all the Friendships
of the World, that Peace which passes all understanding, whose power and energy
none have any agreeable Conceptions of but those who have it, that happy Peace
shall keep your Hearts and Minds through Jesus Christ. That heavenly Peace can
have no place where too much carefulness reigns; but where the World has no
possession, there the Blessed Jesus takes up his Residence, and all is Heaven
about the believing Soul, ver. 7.

To Sum up all his Injunctions in one compendious Rule, he adds, what I would
have you take as spoken by me to you, on the same Reason, and by the same
Authority. Finally, my Brethren, whatsver things are true, whatsoever things
are honest, whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever
things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, if there be any
virtue, if there be any praise in the ways of Holiness, think on these things;
and to enforce this Summary of Christian Duty, he subjoins, Those things which
ye have both learned, and received, and heard, and seen in me, do; (...) of
Peace be with you, i. e.

Whoever is an Ambassador or Minister commissioned by Christ, ought to be apt
to teach, to show Men the way to Heaven; a just Credit ought to be given by
good Men to such a Minister, and his Doctrine to be believed and embraced; he
ought to have a good Report among good Men, and among such as are without, and
he ought to be an Example to Believers in Word, in Conversation, in Charity, in
Spirit, in Faith, in Purity, (1 Timothy 4.12.) such a Teacher have I been to you,
and you have pretended to receive the Word which I preached. The Enemies of the
Gospel have been able to prove nothing of ill against me, and your selves have
seen my Conversation how blameless and innocent it has been among you; Be ye
therefore followers of me, as I have been of Christ; let my Example make a just
impression on your Minds, and my Doctrine be read in your Lives, and then the
God of Peace, your Lord and your Savior, will so influence your Minds by his
Spirit, that you shall be partakers of inward Peace here, and of eternal Peace
hereafter. The words then contain, I. The Character of a faithful Minister of
Jesus Christ; He must be a good Teacher, a Man of a good Character, and a Man
of an Exemplary Life and Conversation, or One of whom Men may learn, and hear,
and see only what is good and tends to edification. II. Here Is the Character and
Duty of a pious People; They ought to hear, and to believe, and to put in
practice what such a Minister delivers to them; what they learn, receive, hear,
and see, they ought to do. III. Here Is the Happiness attending such a People;
The God of Peace shall be with them. They shall be blessed with the extraordinary
Influences of his Spirit, and find Peace in their own Bosoms, whatsoever Storms
they meet with from the Devil or the World.


1. The Character of a faithful Minister of Jesus Christ
A faithful Minister I instance in, because every One who takes upon himself
the work of Preaching to others, is not such a Minister: There were those of
old who could run forth in the Name of God, and yet were not sent by him; who
would prophecy, though God had not spoken to them, Jerem. 23.21. Nor were the
Jews only liable to this Mischief, for our Savior tells his Disciples, that,
under the Times of the Gospel, there should arise false Christ's, and false
Prophets, and should show great signs and wonders, insomuch that, if it were
possible, they should deceive the very Elect, Mat. 24.44. And St. Peter lays
both these Ages together, and tells the Christians, that there were false
Prophets among the Jews, even as there shall be false Teachers among us, who,
privily, shall bring in damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord who bought
them, and bring upon themselves swift destruction: And, what is more unhappy
yet, many shall follow their pernicious ways, by reason of whom the way of
truth shall be evil spoken of, 2 Pet. 2.1, 2.

And I may, with respect to these Passages, say, as our Savior did in another
case, This day is this Scripture fulfilled in our ears: We have many Pretenders
to the Pastoral Office, who, having no Authority for that Office they assume,
make Merchandise of Souls with feigned Words, through their unreasonable
Covetousness, and under this Calamity the Church of England smarts severely at
this time.

The Salvation of Souls is a noble, as well as divine Employ, but it is
extremely hazardous, as well as laborious. God has appointed an Order of Men
particularly to engage themselves in the Work, but I fear the generality of
professed Christians have a very false Notion of their Business; as if their Work
were no more than that of Men following their ordinary Trades, in which, if
they thrive and get Money apace, they are supposed to acquit themselves very
well. I confess, it would render the Task much easier, could but all those who
are called to the Service of the Altar, sit down quietly with that Opinion; but
though that Lunacy prevails too far, all of us, thanks be to God, are not yet
touched with it; our Business is of the greatest weight, and, who is sufficient
for these things? is a reasonable Question. Where Men come in at the door,
according to Christ's appointment, spiritual Assistances and a Blessing are
promised to their Labors. But where Men come over the Wall, or irregularly,
though their Parts are never so great, their Industry never so commendable,
their Sobriety and Sanctity never so plausible, they never are, nor can be,
faithful Ministers, because they are no Ministers at all of Jesus Christ. But,
supposing an Ambassador of Heaven lawfully sent, he must, according to the
Text, have these Qualities to recommend him.

1. He must be a good Teacher; he must be (...), fit to teach, or apt for that
Work, as the Apostle phrases it, 1 Timothy 3.2. i. e. He who is a good Teacher,
must understand the Work of Instruction thoroughly; his Reading, his Study, his
own Experience, and the Grace of God, humbly implored, must fit him to his
Work. He must have the Pathetic Eloquence of a good Pleader, that he may use
acceptable Words, and enforce them in their proper places; he must have the
tenderness of a Father, to compassionate the Infirmities of the Weak, and the
general dangerous Condition of careless Sinners; he must have the Skill of an
expert Surgeon, to handle the Wounds of the Mind gently, to search and
cleanse them thoroughly, to apply his Caustics or his Lenitives seasonably, and
to heal them at last with prudence and discretion: He must have the Temper of a
Philosopher, to exercise Patience when assaulted by the Ignorance of some, the
slowness and impertinence of others, when Line upon Line, and Precept upon
Precept are altogether ineffectual: He must have the Learning of a Rabbin, be
thoroughly verst in Scripture, and knowing in Humane Writings, that he may
assert Truth with a sacred Authority, and baffle Error with undeniable Reason:
He must have the steadiness and solidity of an inspired Person, that he may
restrain others from waving, be always like himself sound in his Principles,
and charitable and exemplary in his Practices: He must have the sincerity of a
Friend, that he may be impartial in his Reflections and Advices; the Meekness
and Humility of a Moses or a Savior, that he may, without Haughtiness,
condescend to the poorest; and the Zeal of a Martyr, that nothing may affright
him from his heavenly Work.

These Qualifications must all of them concur, in some measure, in a good
Teacher; and, tho he must be no Wrangler, nor Disputatious, yet he must be able
and ready to defend the Truths of God, against all Heretical and Atheistical
Gainsayers; he must keep a careful Watch over his Flock, that neither the
Boars, the Wolves, the Foxes, nor the little Foxes may be able to break in upon
them. And he must not confine his Labors to the Days of Public Service only,
but he must Preach every day by his Life and by his Example: He must be ready
to discourse in private with those who come to him for Resolution of
Difficulties, for quieting the Conscience, for rectifying the Judgment, and
informing of the Understanding: He ought to be an Oracle to his People, whom
they may consult upon all occasions; who may present his Prayers to God for
them with an indefatigable Ardour; who may draw out of his Treasures things
both new and old for their good; who may bind up the brokenhearted, preach
deliverance to the Captives, recovering of sight to the Blind, and set at
liberty such as are bruised: He must follow them, find them out, and reduce
them in their Wanderings. And all these things he must do with such earnestness,
take such delight in his Work, and be so far pleased with his Success, if any
at all, that all may see it is his Meat and his Drink to do the will of him who
sent him.

2. The Faithful Minister of Jesus Christ, must be one of a good Character, one
of whom we may hear well. Every lawful Preacher or Pastor is not Faithful in
his Office; a Judas may get in among the Disciples of the blessed Jesus
himself; and the Devil, as he appears sometimes as an Angel of Light, so he
often teaches ill Men cunning enough to insinuate themselves into the good
Opinion of Church Governors, who are but Men and fallible, and by that means
to get hands laid upon them. St. Paul had his Demas, false to his Commission;
and Simon Magus might have past upon the Apostles themselves, had they not been
immediately illuminated by the Holy Ghost. Such Men may appear as Angels in the
Pulpit, but be no better than Devils when they are out of it: Such were the
Pharisees of old, and Scribes and Lawyers, lawful Teachers, and therefore to be
heard, where there was no choice; but wicked Wretches, therefore not to be
imitated, because every day afforded better Examples. Now weak Heads, who would
rather have their Ears tickled, than their Soul's saved, may be very fond of
sounding Brass, and of tinkling Cymbals; wise Men and good Christians look upon
such as the Plague of the Church, the Scandals of Religion, and the Harbingers
of Destruction. Men of small Understanding in Divine Matters may run after
them. Those who have their Senses better Exercised, pray earnestly to be
delivered from them. Men of ill Morals, wicked and debauched Wretches, without
Reason and without Conscience, may love such, as most resembling, and therefore
in some measure excusing themselves: Men of Holy and Christian Lives fear them
as they would Monsters, and fly from them as they would from Wolves and Tigers;
yet such Men as these have found means to creep into all Churches from the
beginnings of Christianity till the present time; and our own unhappy Church
feels every day, the cruel Wounds she receives from such an unnatural
Offspring.

But a Faithful Minister will have a good Character from all those who love
Goodness; Thy Name is as Ointment poured forth, i. e. It sounds so well, it is
so pure, so holy, and consequently so charming and delightful, that therefore
the Virgins, all the true Professors of true Religion, love thee; so says the
Church to her Spouse in the Canticles 1.3. where Learning, Sobriety and
Innocence appear in one of Heaven's Ambassadors. Those who endeavor after the
same Perfections will find them out. Holy Souls will sympathize with one
another, and like strings in a Viol tuned to the same Note, rest, and move, and
sound together. A good Man will endeavor to hide the Faults of God's Priests,
unless they be too notorious and undeniable; and therefore he will certainly give
his Testimony to their Virtues, and recommend their Piety to the World, since
nothing tends more to the Honor of our common Master than the Holiness of his
more immediate Servants. This will make even such as are envious and angry
Enemies to the Person, yet celebrate his Merits, and do right to his Reputation.

Now to be Praised and Applauded by an unthinking Multitude, to be cried up and
almost deified by such as can have no Notion of real Worth, is no more pleasing
to a Man of a truly Apostolical Spirit, than the Applauses of the Lystrians
were to Paul and Barnabas, when they brought Oxen and Garlands, and would have
offered sacrifice to them, and fancied the Gods were come down to them in the
likeness of Men, Acts 14.11, 13. The good Opinions of such are easily bought
and sold, and no wise Man, unless he has some by-design to carry on, can value
himself upon them. But when Men of Vnstanding, who have themselves a good
Reputation among those of the best Judgments, give their Attestations to the
Merits of a Gospel Minister; when Men of other Persuasions and Interests
acknowledge the Justice of such Attestations; when those who are without the
Pale of the Church, who look upon the Profession of Christianity it self to be
no better than an impertinent Sham, or a mere Politic Invention, to keep Men
of mean Parts in awe; when such Men shall, notwithstanding all these slight
Thoughts of Religion, assert the Innocence and excellent Endowments of one of
the Teachers of Christianity; when he shall call him a very good Man, abating
only his Name and Profession, such a Man ought to be valued, he comes up to the
Character of a Primitive Pastor, or Bishop; he has a good Report of such as are
without, as well as such as are within, and therefore is in the less danger of
falling into Reproach, and the snare of the Devil, 1 Timothy 3.7. This good
Character then is what is justly required as the Test of a Faithful Minister of
Christ. Good and wise Men will not be drawn to prostitute their Names to the
Interests of ill Men; and where I see a Testimonial given by any to a careless,
unlettered or immoral Man, I Am so far from thinking the better of him, that I
think the worse of them, and conclude, That the Honor of Religion and of the
Church is very little esteemed by them.

3. The Faithful Minister of Jesus Christ ought to be a Man of an Exemplary
Life and Conversation. He cannot be Faithful in his Station, be it never so
high in the Church of Christ, who has not this to Crown all his other
Seize. Examples are of a far greater Influence than Rules or Doctrines. I
may talk a great deal and very Learnedly on the Reasons of such or such a
Mechanic Operation, and few may understand me; let them see me practice upon my
Rule, they will apprehend me presently, and be soon able to do the like. Hence
the Apostle requires, that a Bishop should be blameless, the husband of one
wife, vigilant, sober, of good behavior, given to hospitality, not given to
wine, no striker, not greedy of filthy lucre, but patient, not a brawler, not
covetous, one that rules his own house well, 1 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4. To which he
adds, He must be no self-willed man, but a lover of good men, sober, just,
holy, temperate, Tit. 1.7, 8. Now, howsoever the Law of a Nation may give
opportunity to wicked and ill-minded Patrons to present Preachers, like
themselves, to Ecclesiastical Benefices, under whose Ministry Men well affected
to Religion may groan, but not be able to help themselves, yet none but Madmen,
when they have their Choice, will give their Votes to such; and God has
certainly a Controversy with any people whom he gives over to such Delusions.

For what can a good Christian learn from such a Man, whose Life is a
contradiction to his Doctrine? I tell a wicked lewd Wretch from the Pulpit,
That Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge; it affects him at present, but
soon after he takes me in the very Act, or in the lewd Preliminaries to it; his
Thoughts are quiet presently, he is sure I don't believe my Doctrine my self,
and why should he? I declare against Swearing and Profaneness, and denounce
God's Vengeance against the Guilty; but will it work at all upon that Man who
finds me passionate and mad, and as ready to take God's Name in vain as other
Men? I preach against Drunkenness and Intemperance; but will a Sot reform
himself a whit the sooner, when he finds me strong to Wine, and mighty to pour
in strong Drink, and ready to indulge my self in that sin at least on every
private Opportunity? I recommend Hospitality and Almsgiving by many and weighty
and Arguments, but can they melt down the hard hearted Churl, when he sees me
expensive and wastful in other things, but administering no Comfort nor Relief
to the craving Poor? Will a Sermon of mine against Covetousness or Injustice do
any good upon the Guilty, when I can Gripe and use Extortion my self, injure
others both by Word and Deed, and never think of doing by them as they would
they should do to me? All which, and a thousand more Instances which might be
given, show us how reasonably the Apostle expostulates with such, Behold thou
know the Will of God, and approvest the things that are more excellent, and
art confident that thou thy self art a guide of the blind, a light to such as
are in darkness, an Instructor of the foolish, a teacher of babes, which have
the form of knowledge, and of the truth in the law: Thou therefore who
teach, teach thou not thy self? thou, who preachest a man should not
steal, do thou steal? thou, who say a man should not commit adultery, do
thou commit adultery? thou, who abhorrest Idols, do thou commit sacrilege?
thou, who make thy boast of the Law, through breaking the law dishonourest
thou God? Romans 2.18, -- 23.

But what a Scandal does the ill Practice of a Clergyman bring upon the
Gospel? How ready are Lewd and Atheistical Wretches to take advantages against
Religion, when the pretendedly zealous Ministers expose themselves and their
Offices by their Follies and Inadvertencies? The several Clans of Sectaries
endeavor indeed, as far as possible, to conceal the Crimes of their Leaders
from vulgar Eyes; but it is their Interest to find out or make faults in those
who have a lawful Commission from Heaven, and to publish the most improbable
Hearsay on the House-tops, for it is by this craft that many of them get their
Livelihoods. Therefore such Men as give them just Occasion of Reflection ought
to receive no Encouragement till the Evidence of their Reformation is as
notorious as that of their Miscarriages. It is through such that the Name of
God is Blasphemed among the Enemies of Religion. It was the Cry even of such
Enemies in Ancient Times, How good must that God needs be, whose Servants are
so good! and it is too easy a thing to a prejudiced Mind to reverse the
Expression, and to infer how little regard must be due to that God, whose
servants can manage themselves no better! A Faithful Minister of Christ will
lay no such Burdens upon Others, as to the bearing of which he will not be ready
to put a Hand; but thinks himself very happy indeed when he can say to his
People, without blushing, Brethren, be ye followers together of me, and mark
them who walk so as ye have us for an example, Phil. 3.17. Thus far then we
have the Character of a Good Pastor; He Is one of and in whom men may learn, and
hear, and see only what is good and tends to Edification. But,

2. The Character and Duty of a truly Pious People
They ought to hear, to believe, and to put in practice what they learn, hear
and see in and of such a Minister; that do, says the Text; but Faith comes by
hearing, and shows its self in Conversation: The Peoples Duty then is,

1. To hear what the lawful Messenger of Heaven delivers in prosecution of his
Duty. A Preacher without Hearers, an Instructor without Scholars, a Shepherd
without a Flock, are Absurdities; but, as we are willing to hear a Statute
read, on the Observation of which our Lives and Fortunes depend, so much more
should we be ready to hear the Laws of God, the Obedience or Disobedience to
which infers our Salvation or Damnation. God so loved the world, that he sent
his only begotten Son into it, that whosoever believes in him shall not perish,
but have everlasting life: It Is a faithful saying indeed, and worthy of all
acceptance; but the Question comes in presently, How shall they believe in him
of whom they have not heard? And how shall hear without a Preacher? and how
shall they preach unless they be sent? Romans 10.14, 15. From whence we learn,
That none can Preach indeed, or to any purpose, but such as are lawfully
Ordained to that World; and that those who are so sent, and none else, ought to
be attended to. But as there is a We entailed upon those in holy Orders if they
do not Preach the Gospel, so the Woe's as heavy upon the People, who will not
give ear when the Lord has spoken by them.

While Men run eagerly after it, and long to be satisfied with the Bread of
Life, the enjoyment of it is an inestimable Blessing: When they neglect and
slight it, it brings Curses upon them with the most insupportable Aggravations.
It looks dismally in such a City as this, when the Streets are overgrown with
Grass, because the raging Pestilence has laid heaps upon heaps in the midst of
it; and is it not as astonishing a sight, when the Ways of Sion mourn? and the
Paths leading to God's House are unoccupied, and the Travelers pass through
By-ways? There is indeed in some a Spirit of Laziness, in others a Spirit of
Giddiness, which teaches them to make a thousand frivolous Pretenses for the
neglect of their Duty; and yet, if we'll believe them, they would fain be saved for
all this: But how? Is it reasonable for Rebels to claim an Interest in their
Soverein? For lazy Creatures to expect Wages? for Weather Cocks and Changlings
to claim the Rewards of Loyalty? Or can any Man dream of Happiness hereafter,
who casts God's Testimonies behind his back, and will not attend the offers of a
Crown? God has appointed one day in seven particularly for his own Service; It
was his Right to do so, and his Goodness that he would condescend to do so;
every Day we ought to acquaint our selves with his Will, and to approach and
humble our selves on our Knees before him; but on that Day, above all, our
attendance should be in earnest. We should be eager and early to watch the
goings of our God and King in his Sanctuaries; His House indeed is the House of
Prayer, that is the Character its more particularly known by. Yet there too we
have the opportunity of hearing his Word read, of hearing it explained, and
applied to our particular Uses, and is not this a Privilege for which we ought
to adore the Mercy and Compassion of our God? Should such a Prize be put into
Men's hands, and shall they not make use of it? Does not the Book of Life
concern us? Were we indicted for Capital Crimes before a Judge, and condemned,
would not a Reprieve or a Pardon be very welcome? Would we not hear it read with
the greatest attention? We are those Wretched Criminals who, from the Hand of
God, have deserved no less than Eternal Vengeance; The Word of God, that God
who is and must be our Judge; that very Word, by which we must be tried,
contains the offer of a Pardon; from that we learn how dearly that Pardon has
been purchased for us: God's Ambassadors are appointed to proclaim it in our
Ears; to interpret it to us faithfully: And shall we not listen earnestly to
that, which teaches us how we may escape everlasting Burnings? We talk of
knowing much, but I Am sure he who knows not his Duty in this respect, knows
nothing yet as he ought to know. However, whether unhappy Sinners will hear, or
whether they will forbear, our Business lies before Us: We shall be accountable
for our Neglect of that; if we do it diligently and impartially, the People may
perish, but we have discharged our own Souls.

2. What we hear from Faithful lawful Ministers, we are to receive or to
embrace, we are to believe it heartily. Not but that the best of Pastors may be
mistaken, especially if they depend too much upon their own Learning and
Understandings. But a Minister so qualified, will be very careful not to give
People Stones for Bread; and, that he may not, he will ever beg his Master's
Divine Assistance to enable him to be such a Workman as needs not to be
ashamed; and God is not wont to deny that to those who faithfully ask it. But,
after all, our Savior gives a necessary Rule, Take heed how you hear, Luke
8.18. What you hear, says St. Matthew; i. e. examine well what is delivered to
you in the Name of God, let no humane Authority sway you to believe any thing
contrary to what you find there. The force of which Direction is fully cleared
by what our Savior says elsewhere to the Pharisees, Search the Scriptures,
John 5.39. and what the Bereans are commended for, Acts 17.11. These were more
noble than those of Thessalonica, in that they received the Word with all
readiness of mind, and searched the scriptures daily, whether those things were
so; Therefore many of them believed. A Man, who will take pains, will easily
find out whether the Doctrine preached be agreeable to the general import of
Scripture, for, whatsoever that is, every particular Text of Scripture is
agreeable to it, and must be explained by it; and, if any Man affix another
Sense on any single Text, or preach any Doctrine, which is not agreeable to
that general Tenor of Scripture, that Doctrine is to be rejected.

But it is only such Doctrine which may be rejected; that which is sound and
good ought to be embraced and to be believed readily, at our utmost peril. To
what purpose do I Preach, or you hear, if you don't believe? If I speak not the
Mind of God, if I deliver not what tends to the Honor of God and your
Salvation, it is time lost to hear me. If I preach the Truth as it is in Christ
Jesus, why do you not believe me? Has the Word of God any thing really
incredible in it? I renounce it then, I Am sure it is none of his. Is there any
thing in it which seems incredible to my Reason? It argues that my Reason's
vitiated, not that the Word of God's defective: other Men have Reason as well
as I, and it is as freely exercised, and its as well improved as mine; they are
fully satisfied of the Truth of many very difficult things; why should they not
be as credible to me? The true Reason of this is, They acknowledge their own
Weakness, they value and beg the assistance of God's Spirit, which leads them
effectually into all Truth; I admire my own Wit and Reason, and build mightily
upon them, and so fall into every Error. Faith is the Gift of God, the meek and
lowly have it, the proud and opiniative know nothing of the Matter. But, if the
Messengers of Christ really deliver his Will to Men, it will be no excuse to
say, We don't believe them; they will be dreadful Witnesses against us at the
last day; and our Case will be as bad as that of the Israelites of old, they
could not enter into the Earthly, nor shall we get admission into the Heavenly
Canaan, because of unbelief. But few are willing to own, that they don't
believe the Word of God; the Test of their Faith follows immediately, i. e.

3. Their Practice, or acting according to their Belief. That which ye have
learned, and received, and heard, and seen in me, that do. Practice is the only
Evidence of Faith, and without the first all the Pretenses to the last are
vain; True Faith and Holy Works are relatives, and suppose and take away one
another. Faith without Works is dead, Works without Faith are insignificant;
hence the Apostle St. James, when he had advised us before, that, laying apart
all filthiness and superfluity of naughtiness, we would receive with meekness
the engrafted Word, which is able to save our souls, James 1.21. He immediately
adds, ver. 22. But be ye doers of the Word, and not hearers only, deceiving
your own souls: No Deceit is more dangerous than what our Souls suffer by; no
Deceit is more certain than when we imagine God will accept of our readiness to
hear, without any regard to our exactness in Practice. Peace, and Quietness,
and common Good are what every one, not only as a Christian, but as a Man,
ought to aim at. But wherein do all the soundest Doctrines tend to advance
these things, if those Doctrines are not reduced to Practice in Men's Lives and
Conversations? If I am a Brawler, if Quarrelsom and Litigious, and continue so,
though I every day hear Sermons and Discourses tending to Peace and Unity, what
am I the better for them? they will bear Witness against me indeed, in case of an
irreclaimable Temper, but can do me no service either in this, or in a future
World. It Is a great Privilege to have opportunities of Hearing, and unhappy are
those People whose Faithful Pastors are driven into Corners. Great was the
Character for a Man to be related to our Savior according to the Flesh, yet
neither of 'em comparable to Practice and Obedience, if we may give any Credit
to our Master; yea, rather happy are they who hear the Word of God, and keep
it, Luke 11.28. The other Privileges may be enjoyed, and those who enjoy them
may perish for ever. Holy Practice proves and demonstrates a sincere Faith, and
Faith justifies us in the sight of God. If ye know good things, therefore happy
are ye if ye do them; and if ye know never so much, without such Practice ye
are altogether unhappy.

Not every one who says to me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, but he who does the Will of my Father which is in Heaven; is our
Savior's unchangeable determination, Matthew. 7.21. Here then we may take some
notice of the Discourse of Christians concerning Edification: Edifying,
primarily, signifies raising up a Building on a Foundation already laid:
Edifying, in a spiritual sense, signifies making a complete Christian upon
Principles of sound Faith laid in before, so that the Person truly Edified is
one upon whom the Word of God preached makes such impressions, that he grows
larger every day, and wiser by it in his Understanding, and better in his
Practice; his Faith, as it is sound and good at first, by the help of what he
hears, so the Fruits of that Faith are Holiness and Righteousness; which, if
true, then no Man can be said to edify by a Sermon, who does not grow wiser
and better by it; nor can any one be said to be a more edifying Pastor or
Teacher than others, whose Flock are not clearer in their Faith, and sounder
and more innocent in their Practices than other Men. But if Men should hear an
Angel from Heaven preach, according to his Nature, nothing but what is Holy and
Divine, and should not be able to give a better account of their Faith, nor
farther correct their Manners after they had heard him, it must be owned, that
even such a Sermon from such a Preacher, is not edifying to the Hearer. If he
does not Preach what is sound and good, I am apt to think no Man in his Senses,
will believe he edifies those he preaches to. Edification, in the subject of
it, is in plain Scripture terms, Growing in Grace and in the Knowledge of Jesus
Christ; where that is wanting, all the rest is but idle talk. An edifying
Preacher will preach to himself first, convince himself, and prove himself a
Christian by his Christian Life and Behavior. The Physician is of no value who
cannot heal himself; nor the Preacher, who has not affected his own Reformation.
St. Paul was but weak in speech, and despicable in person, 2 Cor. 10.10. yet he
built up more Christians by the Purity and Exemplariness of his Life, than all
the popular Orators in the World. Its possible a Man may hit his way who has a
wicked Guide, but he is a great deal more likely to do so, who has one Honest
and Skilful too. Empty Harangues can save none, but sound Faith and good
Practice may. This attentive hearing then, this Faith and this Practice will be
crowned.

3. The Happiness attending such a People
The God of Peace will be with them, their Bosoms shall be quiet and easy, and
the Spirit of Peace shall rest upon them. A quiet Conscience is a Jewel of an
inestimable Value; it is what thousands, when they come on their Deathbeds,
would purchase with a thousand Worlds if they could. A wounded Spirit or
Conscience none can bear; a quiet Spirit makes a cheerful Countenance, and he,
who has nothing to accuse himself within, may laugh at the Malice and Impudence
of all Mankind. We live in a World that is troublesome enough, and the more a Man
studies to do well in it, the more he exposes himself to the Hatred and Revenge
of those who are set on fire of Hell. Our Savior did no Sin, nor could any of
his Adversaries convince him of it, but our Savior, because his Innocence
condemned a wicked World, was hated, persecuted, murdered. The Apostles
preached and practiced, the Primitive Christians believed and practiced the
best, the most heavenly Things. The generality of the World lived in Sin, and
loved those Sins they lived in, therefore they prosecuted those admirable
Persons with indefatigable Rage and Envy, and it will be so to the end of the
World; and he, who dares to be good, will be sure to have all the Sons of
Darkness near him about his Ears; The wicked watches the Righteous, and
seeks to slay him, Psalm. 37.32. that Work is agreeable to his Nature, and the
Righteous must be patient under it. A Son of Belial will belly and slander,
he will quarrel with and prosecute, he will endeavor to raise Enemies, and
encourage them in their Wickedness, against those who endeavor to live
soberly, righteously, and godly in an evil World. Just Men are always doing
good, endeavoring the Peace, and Assistance, and Support of others, the
requital they have is commonly Baseness, Ingratitude, Treachery, and downright
Villainy: Yea, his own familiar Friends, in whom he trusted, which did eat of
his Bread, will presume to lift up their heels against him, as David complains,
Psalm. 41.9. and David's Lord, John 13.18. Its true, such Judas's commonly hang
themselves, and die unpitied, unlamented, yet these Vermin are as troublesome
to good Men, as the Plagues of Flies and Lice to the Egyptians. But how happy,
in the midst of all such Vexations from abroad, are those who have peace with
God, and who, being conscious of no guilt, no dishonesty, no injury done to
any, can Sleep without disturbance, can Smile without dissembling, can Converse
without sullenness, can debate Matters without passion, and address themselves
to God in Prayer without any Fears of a denial. Nay, though the Devil himself,
and all his Emissaries assault a Man of a clear Conscience, let them endeavor
to terrify him with the inexorable Justice of God, with the uselesness and
impertinence of Repentance, with the boasts of his own mighty Power, and the
unpardonableness of his past Crimes, all these Suggestions vanish into Air,
when a Man can, with Hezekiah, plead, I beseech thee remember, O Lord, how I
have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have done that
which was good in thy sight, 2 Kings 20.3. All the Balm in Gilead has not so
healing a Virtue as such Words in a sincere Christians Mouth.

Nor are the influences of the Spirit of Peace of less Efficacy or less
desirable; they are agreeable to the Nature of that Spirit who imparts them,
they are Love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, Faith,
meekness, temperance, Gal. 5.22, 23. Love, that heavenly Grace by which we keep
the Commandments; for Love is the fulfilling of the Law, it is that by which we
love God with all our souls, and our Neighbors as our selves. Joy, that Grace
which bears us up in the midst of all worldly Troubles, so as though the
Figtree should not blossom, neither should fruit be in the Vines; though the
labor of the Olive should fail, and the Fields should yield no increase; tho
the Flock should be cut off from the Fold, and there should be no Herd in the
Stall; yet we may rejoice in the Lord, and joy in the God of our Salvation,
Habak. 3.17, 18. Peace, that whereby we are reconciled to our heavenly Father
in Christ Jesus, whereby we are freed from inward Gripes and Pangs, and from
the danger of outward Temptations, and can live quietly and charitably one
among another. Long-suffering, whereby we are enabled to imitate God's dealing
with us in Transactions among our selves; not to be passionate, fiery,
revengeful, but to bear with one another, and to forgive one another, as God,
for Jesus Christ's sake, has forgiven us. Gentleness, whereby we put off our
fierce and brutal Natures, and show true Humanity improved and perfected by
Grace. Goodness, by which we distribute God's Blessings freely to the Indigent,
Knowledge and Instruction to the Ignorant, and Meat, and Drink, and Clothing to
the poor and naked. Faith, by which our dependence upon God is entire and
undoubting; and our Fidelity and Justice toward Men is unfailing and impartial.
Meekness, whereby we can manage our selves decently with our Brethren, not
being captious, not peevish, not easily provoked, not overweening of our
selves, but ready and desirous to be persuaded in temporal, and instructed in
spiritual Matters. And Temperance, by which we can use all God's Creatures with
Sobriety and Moderation, not ruffle our Minds, nor distemper our Bodies, but
maintain and improve our Constitutions so, as we may at all times be fit for
the Service of God, and the Performance of our Duties toward Men. These are
the Graces which we want, you, and I, and every one; and, if you do those
things which you have learned, and received, and heard, and seen in me, you too
shall be partakers of these Blessings.

And, if there be any such thing as Truth in Mankind, this is what, above my
own Life, or if there is any thing dearer than Life to me, I aim at, and beg of
Heaven for you. It may perhaps seem bold in me to use the Apostle's Words; but
knowing that I have exercised my self herein, to keep a Conscience always void
of offense toward you, and having in all things endeavored to discharge my
Duty to you, so as becomes a Minister of Christ Jesus, I have a right to speak
so. The Words I now speak are the last, in all probability, which I shall speak
to you from hence: Look on me here as your dying Teacher, who had sent for you
to attend his Deathbed, and expiring Words; the very Circumstance might
perhaps make you consider what I say with greater tenderness; but they would be the
same as now, and could not be uttered with more Sincerity or Affection. And as
ever you expect to meet me with Comfort at the great Tribunal, let my words now
sink into your Ears. I will not talk of having the Rule over you; it is plain
enough that I have not; but I Would have you, if possible, always remember him who
has spoken to you the word of God, and follow his Faith, remembering the end of
his Conversation, Jesus Christ the same yesterday, to day and for ever, Hebr.
13.7, 8. That is my End, and that I hope will always be yours, and, that it may
be so, think a little seriously on these things.

1. Consider what Doctrines I have preached; I will not imagine you should
remember all I have said for almost six Years together, but reflect a little on
the general Design of what you have heard, and, I hope, have received. I have
followed no cunningly devised Fables; I have meddled with no nice or impertinent
Questions; I have brought in no new fangled Doctrines, which might confound or
mislead unwary Souls; nor have you ever heard one Word from me, tending to
promote my own Interests. Your Salvation was what I aimed at, what might
conduce to that I preached, and, as I have told you more than once, so now
again, if I have any knowledge of my own Heart, I had rather be an Instrument
to save one Soul, than be advanced to the greatest Dignities in the World. My
Resolution among you ever was to teach you the true and the right Way; and I
never brought any thing to be delivered here, but what I had implored the
Blessing of my God upon before I came hither: I always knew that Paul might
plant, and Apollo might water, but it was God only who could give the increase,
and to him only I looked for it. I have studied among you, not to prove my self
of mighty Learning, but to explain and clear up necessary and important Truths;
and on whatsoever Point I have discoursed to you, I have endeavored to declare
to you the whole Counsel of God in that particular. I have not studied Words so
much as Things, and yet I have sought for acceptable Words too, as concluding
that good Language might consist well enough with the simplicity of
Instruction. I need not mention how great and how constant my Pains have been,
all, who have attended here, can witness that, which I mention, not to boast
of, but to celebrate God's goodness, who has blessed me with Health and Strength
to perform it. I have endeavored to inculcate Truth in the best Methods I
could, that its Impressions might be the deeper. I have Catechized as many of
your Children as, with your leave, I might, that I should have had more of that
Employment, would have been my Delight, and was your Duty: May Almighty God
never lay that great Sin to your Charge, nor avenge it on you or your
Posterity. I have explained the Catechism at large, and have almost gone
through it four times, that those of elder Years might recover the Principles
of their Religion, and remember what is too easily forgotten. I have explained
that admirable Lyturgy, which our Holy Mother has appointed for Public
Worship, that, understanding it thoroughly, you might value it justly, and
praise God for so excellent Assistances in Devotion. I have explained all the
Articles of our Faith, not according to the new ways of Unitarians and
Atheists, but according to the genuine Tenor of Scripture, and the current
Sense of unwrested Antiquity. I have laid before you the meaning of every
Commandment, not in that narrow way which some would confine them to, but in
that full sense of which the best of Preachers has given us a Pattern in his
Sermon on the Mount. I have explained that heavenly Form of Prayer, which the
Son of God taught his own Apostles, a Form perfect in every respect, which he
who uses not with Reverence, can never be a Christian. I have instructed you in
the Nature of both Sacraments, more especially that of the Lord's Supper; and,
though I cannot boast of any extraordinary Success, I have endeavored from time
to time, by Preparatory Sermons, to fit You for that Holy Communion. I have
taken every accidental Opportunity to inculcate seasonable Truths, to which the
Circumstances of Time might best prepare you. And as I have generally done my
Work my self, so if Illness or Necessity has at any time required help of
others, I have provided such as at least were never the Scandal either of the
Gown or Pulpit. Thus have I preached among you, and thus have you received, and
have seemed to receive the Word with gladness; I have kept back nothing that
was profitable to you, but have showed you, and have taught you publicly, and,
as any have desired it, from House to House, I have sown good Seed, God grant
the Ground may be but fruitful!

2. Consider what my Life and Practice has been among you. I don't pretend to
Sinlesness, I know my self and my own Frailties too well: Forgive them all, O
blessed Father, for thy dear Son's sake! Wash them all out for ever, O holy
Jesus, in thy most precious blood! Change me in the renewal of my mind, O
Divine Almighty Spirit! Cleanse me, O my God, from my secret sins, and grant
that presumptuous sins may have no dominion over me! I know my Sins are great
and many, but I have not made you the Witnesses of them; nor can I accuse my
self of having lead you into any by my Example. I Am sure I have defended no
Heretical, no dangerous Opinions among you, to subvert your Faith; but I have
endeavored to keep out all such Notions from among you, and to watch over you,
as one who must give an account of your Souls. If I have served any other God
in my Heart, that is beyond your discovery; but whom have I ever taught to take
God's Name in vain, to Swear, to Curse, to Blaspheme, or to speak any thing
unbecoming their Profession? Whom have I lead into Perjury, or instructed to
break their solemn Vows, or common humane Obligations? If I have taught any to
spend the Lord's Day lazily, wickedly, in Fields, in Taverns, in lewd Company,
or to despise or undervalue that sacred Time: If I have taught them to
Dishonor their Parents, Natural, Civil or Temporal; to entertain rebellious or
murmuring Thoughts, or to speak scandalously or ignorantly of our Superiors: If
I have Prosecuted any with Revenge or Malice upon the most notorious
Provocations; have belyed, defamed or injured any Man knowingly; either in
their Life, Body or Estate: If have knowingly conversed, unless on their sick
and death Beds, with any of ill Fame, or have connived at, or feared to reprove
the Guilty, of what Rank or Quality soever: If I have cheated, overreached,
defrauded any, whatever usage I have met with from Ungrateful Brutes, or
senseless Villains: If I have oppressed or wronged the Poor, or acted unjustly by
the Rich: If I have born false Witness against any, or traduced or slandered
the Innocent, or have shown any griping or covetous Humor: If I set any
pattern of Drunkenness or Intemperance of any sort: If I have knowingly been
Guilty of Breach of Promise, Lying, Falsehood or Treachery: If I have been
Contentious or Quarrelsom with any Man, or have not rather suffered Wrong in
abundance, of which I carry the terrible Scars about me to this day, rather
than Sue or Prosecute the Injurious: If I have been guilty of any of these
things, let all, who know it, witness against me. I stand here before God and
you this day, and challenge the best mettal'd Brow, and the most impudent
Tongue to prove any of these things against me. And if they cannot, look you to
it, if you be Guilty of any of these Sins which I have always preached against
from, hence, and in my Life and Conversation.

3. Consider what my Love has been, and how expressed to you. I may have
preached the Truth, and have practiced agreeably, and both for my own sake; but
it could not be for my own sake, that I quitted my Pretenses to a Certainty, to
come among you, from whom, upon my Acquaintance or Provision made to that
purpose, I could promise my self nothing. The Success was wonderful and
encouraging, till Hell and wicked Men enraged at it, sowed Divisions among us,
and ruined one of the most promising Designs that this Age had known. I could
not but be a looser by it, yet you always found me the same Man, and, however
my Livelihood fell short, you never heard any Murmuring or Repining from me. I
was not quite deprived yet of opportunity to Instruct you; and, that I might do
good to you, I took upon me a task above common strength, I served others that
I might more comfortably serve you, and not be a burden to you. If in any
thing I have failed of my Duty, I heartily beg Pardon both of God and you. I
might have served you farther, but was forbidden, and I hope have not any thing
on that account to answer for. But my Hearts desire, since I first knew you,
has been, and still is for you all, Brethren, that you might be saved. I have
loved my private Friends, I have loved my Family, I have loved my Life, but, I
call God to witness, I have loved the House of God, and you the Inhabitants of
it more than all, and for your good, can as freely lay down all my worldly
Comforts, as I could ever take them up, I have coveted no Man's Silver, nor
Gold, nor Apparel, but have by indefatigable Toils in some measures,
administered to the Necessities of my self, and those about me. I cannot indeed
complain, that all my Affections have been sown on barren Ground; you have been
kind to me according to your Abilities, and, had Trading and Business
flourished more, I make no doubt but that I, among the rest, should have been
sensible of it: May that God, whose Servant I am, requite all your Kindnesses
to me in your own Bosoms: May he Prosper the Works of your hands to you, and
may he pour upon your Heads Blessings, Temporal, Spiritual and Eternal! And now
I am suddenly going into another Country, not knowing the things which may
befall me there, you have my Prayers, let me have yours; I hope our God will
hear us both. I doubt not but on my departure ravening Wolves will endeavor to
make a Prey of you; I see too unhappy presages of it already; may God in mercy
divert my Fear, and may he, of his Goodness, if you maintain this, send a
sober, pious, and exemplary Preacher to take care of you, and to live among
you: I know of no Interests I can serve by these Wishes but yours; and I must
be the most treacherous Enemy of your Souls, if I should not so pray and so
endeavor. When you have one whose Doctrine you may learn and receive, whose
Life you may hear of, and see, and imitate, and yet be holy and underfiled
before God, He, the God of Peace will be with you; but if, unhappily, you
should go otherwise to work, God cannot bless you, nor can Love, or Peace, or
Charity have any long residence among you. For my Family, which, for a few
days, I must leave among you, I recommend them to your Love; Some I Am sure will
have a just respect to them and me in them. I know their Tempers and their
I^^^inations, so that I can entertain no Jealousies of them, and God, I Am sure,
is not unrighteous that he should forget their Works and Labors that proceed
of Love, which Love they have showed to me and mine for his Name's sake. I
would not have any think I ask your Alms, but I desire your Justice, and I Am
sure neither I nor mine have given any just reason for any to deny it. But
enough of this, enough of every thing, tenderness may be apt to overflow its
bounds, but it must be confined. If I have offended any, really I seriously beg
their Pardons: If any have offended me, they have mine, and may the God of
Heaven forgive us all. And now, Brethren, I commend you to God and the Word of
his Grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an Inheritance among
all those who are sanctified. I beseech you, by the name of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that in those things which are truly good, you would all speak the same
thing, and that their be no Divisions among you, but that ye be perfectly
joined together, in the same Mind, and in the same Judgment. I pray God that ye
do no Evil, not that I should appear approved, but that ye should do that which
is excellent, though I should be as a Reprobate. Finally, Brethren, farewell; be
perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind, live in peace, and the God of Love
and Peace shall be with you.

Amen! Amen!

