REMARKS UPON THE Occasional Paper, NUMBER VIII.
In a Letter to the AUTHOR.
SIR,
I Was very much surpised, to find you charge the Author of the Vindication of
the deprived Bishops, so severely as you do, page 3, and 4. of your late
Occasional Paper; he having given you no occasion, that I, or any unprejudiced
Person can see, for those unkind Reflections. Your Paper pretends to show the
Necessity of Christian Discipline; and therefore I cannot but wonder you should
seem so desirous to pick a Quarrel with one who has always been, and is still
ready upon all occasions to second your Design. What he has said and writ in
Defense of the Rights of the Clergy, might, one would have thought, have
secured him from the Pen of a Clergyman; and though he should be found to have
been somewhat mistaken in so generously asserting the Rights of the Church, yet
the Honesty and Sincerity of his Intentions ought to have induced you to have
drawn a Veil over appendant Miscarriages. The Temper of the Laity in this Age
and Nation is such, that few of them appear very forward to defend even the
just Privileges of the Clergy; and therefore when a Layman will write in their
behalf, they ought to be so true to their own Interests, as at least to stand
Neuters the mean while.

But it seems, it is feared, That the Rights of the Church are carried to such a
height, as to give just ground of Suspicion and Jealousy to the Magistrate.
This ought to have been proved, as well as asserted. But I cannot see how that
Power which this Author asserts to the Church, can give any the least Cause of
Jealousy to the Magistrate; since it is a purely Spiritual Power, and such as is
wholly independent of, and has no manner of relation to, and therefore cannot
interfere with that of the State. Nor can it endanger the Safety of any
Government: Because those who have it, are not enabled by it to meddle or
concern themselves at all in Temporal Matters, but only to Feed, Direct, and
Govern that Flock, of which the Church has made them Overseers. Nay, they own,
or ought to do so, That in all Lawful things they are to pay an Active
Obedience to the Civil Magistrate; and where they cannot do this, without
violating their Consciences, that there they must patiently submit, even to his
most unjust Punishments, and utterly disown all manner of Resistance, purely
upon the account of Religion. Men surely that own and maintain such Principles
as these, are not very likely to raise Commotions in a State, or disturb the
Government of the Civil Magistrate.

I don't at all doubt, but that the Government had good Reasons to seize and
suppress the Pamphlet you mention. There were possibly some things in it, which
the Person by whose Order it was suppressed, did not think convenient should be
exposed to Public View. But yet, since there was a Promise from one engaged in
the Controversy, That he would secure whatever should be printed of that kind;
and since after it was seized, and before it was suppressed, there were Offers
made of striking out whatever was offensive, and Printing those Sheets over
again, it seems somewhat hard it should after all be condemned to the lining
Trunks and Paper-Boxes.

You say the Title of this Author's Book is long and obscure: Which is a Charge
as False, as it is Impertinent. To prove it False, I need do no more than
present you with the Title, which runs thus; A DEFENSE of the Vindication of
the Deprived Bishops; wherein The Case of Abiathar is particularly considered,
and the Invalidity of Lay-Deprivations is further proved, from the Doctrines
received under the Old Testament, continued in the First Ages of Christianity,
and from our own Fundamental Laws. Now I appeal to any Man of Sense, whether
this Title be e're a whit too long, or at all obscure. But it seems, Sir, you
thought that the Book being suppressed, and so not likely to come abroad into
the World, you might say any thing of it, no matter whether true or false,
since few or none would be able to contradict you: And therefore the Author is
beholden to you, that you did not fall foul upon the Book it self, but
contented your self to Nibble at the Title Page. But, Good Sir, what matter is
it how long or obscure the Title may be, provided the Arguments thar are in it
be clear and conclusive? I have often known a Glorious Title prefixed to a very
indifferent Book; as on the other hand, an Excellent Book have but an ordinary
Title; this being a matter of so little moment, that it is often left to the
Discretion of the Bookseller or Corrector. And truly I believe no one will
judge of the Goodness or Badness of a Book, by its Title, unless they be such
as look no further than the Title Pages of Books. But it is the way of some
Men, to endeavor to raise Prejudices against some sort of Books, because,
forsooth, the Style, or Title Page, or something else as trifling, which does
not concern the Merits of the Cause, is not to their minds.

I readily grant you, That they do a great Injury to the Church as to its Real
Rights, who pretend to such as are not so. But then, Sir, I must desire you to
grant me, That they do a greater Injury to it, who tamely give up its Real
Rights, and oppose those who would defend them. And as they are no Friends to
the Church, who draw upon it the Jealousy of those in Authority; so they are
Friends to neither Church nor State, who give the latter such a Power over the
former, as cannot be warranted by Scripture, Reason, or the earliest Antiquity.

You profess your self glad, That this Author is neither a Clergyman, nor a
Member of the Established Church. But I am sure all good men are sorry both for
the one and the other; since a Person of his great Piety, and profound
Learning, would be a Support and Ornament to both Church and Clergy.

As for the Measures of the Magistrate's Power over the Church, and whether it
reaches so far, as that he may forbid the Exercise of those Offices in his own
Dominions, which are inseparable from the Episcopal Character, by those who
will not declare themselves his Friends, it is the matter in Debate; and your
saying, That indeed it is hard he should not have such a Power, does not
determine it. I am sure the Primitive Christians of the first Three hundred
Years after Christ, in some Instances would not declare themselves Friends to
the Roman Emperors, in such a manner as they required; and yet even in such a
Case, they did not think that they had a Power of hindering any particular
Bishop from the exercise of his Function in his particular District. If you say
the Case is altered since the Civil Magistrates are become Christians: It is
answered, That a Christian Government has not the least Authority or
Jurisdiction over the Church in purely Spirituals (such as certainly is the
Exercise of a Spiritual Power within a particular District), more than a
Heathen. The Civil Magistrate receives nothing more at his Baptism, than every
ordinary Christian does; and truly there is no reason why he should expect it;
since those Benefits and Advantages which he receives by his Admission into the
Church, are far greater than the Church receives from him by his defending and
securing its Temporal Rights and Privileges. And though we should suppose the
Clergy could be so false to the Trust committed to them by Christ, the
Apostles, and their Successors, as to give up these their unalienable Spiritual
Rights to the Civil Power; yet such a Donation would be a perfect Nullity, the
Magistrate would have no more Right to them by it, than a Man would have to an
Estate which he buys with a cracked Title.

As for the Learned Dr. Hody's share in this Controversy, it is certain he has
said nothing in his long Book, which the most Impartial and Judicious of his
own side can judge to be capable in any tolerable measure either to satisfy the
doubtful, or convince those that are of a contrary Opinion. He argues upon such
a Supposition, as not only quite overturns what he has said concerning the
Reasonableness of submitting to the present Possessor, etc. but also makes that
huge Heap of Instances which he has amassed together, though they were never so
much to his purpose, as some of 'em are far enough from it, to signify nothing
at all.

The Doctor supposes the worst that can be imagined; Pref.
That the Deprivation is not only unjust and uncanonical, but, as he supposes
all Lay Deprivations to be, altogether invalid; i. e. to be perfectly null; yet
notwithstanding all this, the Doctor undertakes to prove, That it is Just,
Reasonable, and agreeable to Antiquity, to submit to the present Possessor; i.
e. to one that is not, nor can be, according to his Hypothesis, a Bishop of
that particular Diocese. For all own that the Nature of an Invalid Act is such,
that it leaves no Effect behind it, produces no Alteration as to matter of
Right, any more than if no such Act had passed. Thus, for instance, if the Pope
should pretend, as they did formerly, to deprive and depose a King of England
from his Power and Dignity; nay, and if he could second such a pretended
Deposition by Armed Force, and drive him out of his Kingdoms; yet no one can
imagine that the Throne would thereby become vacant, but (...) the Prince would
have the same Right he had before, and the Subjects as much obliged as ever, to
adhere to their Banished Sovereign, notwithstanding any other Person the Pope
might intrude upon them. Now if, as the Doctor supposes, such is the Case of
Lay-Deprivations, that they are thus null and invalid, I cannot see how an
Anti-Bishop can be indeed a Bishop at all; (I mean, of that particular
District) since the Sea is not made void by such a Deprivation, and the Bishop
in Possession has notwithstanding all the same Rights which he had before.

And it is in this sense, and upon this Supposition, that the Learned Vindicator
applies that Saying of St. Cyprian, Chap. 1. Sect. 9.
That a second Bishop is no Bishop. The Doctor owns, If a Bishop, put into the
Place of one deprived by the Lay-Power, be indeed no Bishop, that then we cannot
be obliged upon any account to submit to him. Now the Vindicator does not, See
Vind. p. 1. Sect. 16, 17.
as the Doctor misrepresents him, allege that Saying of St. Cyprian to prove,
That a Bishop put into, etc. any otherwise than upon the same Supposition that
the Doctor himself makes; viz. That a Lay-Deprivation is null and invalid,
cannot make the Episcopal Throne become Vacant. And then, to use the Doctor's
Translation of St. Cyprian, Since there cannot be a second Bishop, where
another is already in Possession, Et cum post primum secundus esse non possit;
quisquis post unum, qui solus esse debeat, factus est, non jam secundus ille,
sed nullus est. Ep. 55.
i. e. has a Right to the Possession, whether he be in actual Possession, or
not, (for that is meant here, as every one must own) whosoever is made Bishop
after another, who ought to be alone, the same is not a second, but none.

And if this Reasoning holds, as, for ought I can see, it must, unless the
Doctor will alter his Supposition, What shall we judge of the Second Part of
his Book? What shall we say to the Matters of Fact, those severe Things, as my
Lord Bishop of Sarum is pleased to call them, Vindic. p. 53.
that do not admit of Sophistry? What shall we admire most? The Doctor's great
Skill and Reading in Ecclesiastical History, or his wonderful Judgment in
producing so many Examples, some from the most degenerate Times of
Christianity, to prove only this, That in all Ages since the Empire became
Christian, and the Profession of our Holy Religion was not only Safe, but
Honorable, there have been found some men, who possibly to get or keep
Preferment, have been guilty of unwarrantable Compliances: For such the Doctor
must upon his own Hypothesis own they were, unless the Lay-Deprivations were
backed by a Synodical Sentence, or the deposed Bishops made room for their
Successors by a Voluntary Resignation and Cession.

From hence it appears how necessary it was that the Doctor should first have
showed us how far the Authority of the Civil Power extends, toward the
depriving Bishops of their Spiritualties; because upon the settling of the
Bounds of that, depends the measure of the Peoples Obedience to the present
Possessor. For if the Civil Magistrate, as the Vindicator has endeavored to
prove, have indeed no Power to deprive a Bishop; then those Christians, in the
Instances the Doctor has cited, (which are to his purpose) no doubt acted very
ill, in deserting him who had a Right to their Obedience, and adhering to
another who had none. But the discussing this Point would have led the Doctor
too far out of his Road of Ecclesiastical History, and put him upon a Work to
which neither his Genius, nor the Course of his Studies, nor, it may be, those
Secular Prospects he had at that time, did at all incline him.

But to return: As for that one Gross Error of this Author, in preferring the
Pretended Rights of particular persons before the good of the whole Body, etc.
If instead of that Epithet Pretended, you will put the word Real, every body
will say you must bate me the Gross Error at the beginning of this Paragraph.
And truly, Sir, your calling of them pretended Rights, will not make them such.

But as for the Proof of this, you leave it to some better Pen, if it shall be
thought worth the while. And indeed I wish it may not be thought worth the
while; since a further debating of this Matter is not likely in the present
Posture of Affairs, to get the Church any more of its Just Rights than it is
already possessed of, and may possibly too much expose particular Persons. But
if you should be tempted to write upon this Subject, and you should venture to
endeavor the Confutation of this Learned and Pious Author, I shall take the
boldness to recommend this Piece of Advice to you, That you would treat his
Person with all that Respect which is due to his Extraordinary Merits; in a
word, That you would behave your self to him, as he behaves himself to all
those he happens to differ from, with the greatest Deference, Candor, and
Modesty.

And I am the rather inclined to take the liberty of recommending this to you,
because by your way of writing you seem, I had almost said, Pedantically, to
affect to be thought a Moderate Man. Which made me wonder the more, that you
who had behaved your self with that Caution and Tenderness toward others, even
where a little more Severity would not have been perhaps much amiss, should
unluckily fail of it only there, where it was most due, and best deserved.
Moderation is a Virtue that becomes a Scholar and a Minister better than any;
but yet if it be misplaced, it loses its Name and Nature, and degenerates into
a vicious Lukewarmness and Indifferency. When the Foundations of all Religion
in general, and the Sacred Truths of the Christian in particular, whether they
be such as respect the Faith, or Government and Discipline of the Church, are
not only sapped and undermined, but professedly and openly attacked, by
Atheists, Deists, and Latitudinarians, all that are in earnest with what they
profess, ought presently to take the Alarm, and with a suitable Concern, and a
becoming, discreet Zeal, boldly to defend their Holy Mother the Church, from
these her false Friends, and declared Enemies. We are commanded to contend
earnestly for the Faith, and to rebuke some men sharply; and though the Truth
and Obligation of these Commands is owned by all in Theory; yet, I know not
how, by distinguishing Times, Seasons, and Circumstances, they are so evaded by
most, that they have almost lost all their Force and Energy in Practice.

To what a deplorable State this Indifference in Matters of Religion, together
with a good ample Toleration, will bring any Church in some time, we may judge
from what we see in a Neighbour-State; where there is as great a variety and
medly of Sects, Opinions, and Religions, as there was anciently of Tongues at
Babel; where all Religions are professed, and none believed; where Men alter
their Opinions in these Matters, as they do the Fashion of their Clothes,
according to their own Humor, or the Customs of the Country where they are, or
the Examples of those with whom they converse. For so we are told by an Author,
that has given an account of this Country, Sir W. T. of the Netherlands, p. 207.
That the Appearance of Religion is here like a Piece of Humanity, by which
every one falls most into the Company or Conversation of those, whose Customs
and Humors, whose Talk and Dispositions he likes best. And as in other Places,
it is in every Man's choice with whom he will Eat, or Lodge, with whom go to
Market, or to Court; so it is here with whom he will Pray, or go to Church, or
associate himself in the Service, and Worship of God: Nor is any more notice
taken, or consure passed of what every one chooses in these Cases, than in the
other.

But how much soever such a State, and Face of Religion may advance the Trade,
and Commerce of a Country, which I wish some Men don't prefer before all other
Considerations; yet certainly nothing can be more prejudicial to Men's Eternal
Interest, (which, whatever those Men may think, are infinitely preferable to
the other) than this humor of Indifferency, and such an unlimited Toleration
as is here described. For unless all Religions be alike, and every one shall be
saved by living up to the Precepts of that Sect or Party which he is a Member
of, (which no body that has any Religion will assert) it can be no indifferent
thing with whom we associate our selves in the Service of God: Since among the
many Sects and Parties of Religion, into which any Nation may be divided, it is
certain but one of them can be in the true, and that, by joining with which
alone, in a visible Communion, Men are made capable of being Saved in the
Ordinary way, even upon performing all the other Conditions of Salvation. And
if this be true, I cannot see but all Civil Magistrates are indispensably
obliged, to use all fit means, that the True Religion may be professed by all
those that live within their Dominions, however inconsistent this may be with
Trade, or any other Worldly Advantage.

The Ingenious Author abovementioned has given us a very good Account, how
such an unlimited Toleration came to be settled in the Country I am speaking of.
It was not their being satisfied of the Lawfulness, or even Expediency (in
respect of Religion) of such an extravagant Liberty, that made them permit a
mixture of all Religions among them, but the force of Commerce, and a Trading
Conversation. This same Trade has a wonderful force and energy. We know whom it
made Deny or Dissemble their Christianity in the East Indies. And I wish with
all my heart, that Trade and Commissioners for Trade may have no ill influence
upon the same Religion here in England.

And as our Latitudinarians are thus injurious to Religion; so are They no
less, who are for altering our present Ecclesiastical Constitution, in order to
comprehend a party of Men, who have no mind to come within the Pale of the
Church; because they make their Markets much better by holding their Separate
Conventicles. These are the Men whose common Theme of Discourse are the
Miscarriages of the Two last Reigns, whether in Church or State; who read and
admire the Secret Histories that have come out of late, of what no body besides
the Authors of them, ever heard of. Others of them endeavor to show their
Impartiality and Moderation by owning some things that are charged upon the
Church and Clergy, which are not really true. And this is the reason that I
have known some Men accuse, and condemn themselves, recant, and give the Lie to
their own Sermons, wherein they admirably well asserted and maintained the
Doctrine of Passive Obedience, not above its due height, though perhaps in
contradiction to the Opinions that are current at this time concerning it.

And I wish this be not the Motive which induced you, Sir, P. 31.
to make that Severe Reflection concerning the Management of Church Discipline
in this Nation. For, unless you mean some few Miscarriages of Lay-Chancellors,
I don't think you can give Three Instances of any very great mismanagement of
Church Power, besides what the unhappy Circumstances of the Church Censures,
being directed and governed by our Civil Laws, have necessarily involved those
that inflict them in. So little reason you had to own any Irregularities and
Extravagancies (no milder Terms, it seems, would serve your Turn) of those who
(you are pleased to say) exercise Church Power without regard to the Design, or
Rules of Christianity.

And now, Sir, I have done with my Remarks upon your Paper; which I had not
troubled my self to take so much notice of, if you had not undeservedly spoken
so disrespectfully of the Vindicator of the Deprived Bishops; whom all Men
highly honor, for his great Innocence of Life, concern for Religion, and his
incomparable Learning. Your Design in writing in behalf of Church Discipline,
which is very much wanted in this Nation, and which our Church in her Liturgy
wishes might be restored, is highly commendable. It Is a Subject that well
deserves an able Pen, one that is exactly well acquainted with Primitive
Antiquity, to manage it. And though we be not all capable of saying all that
might be said upon some particular Subjects, yet we ought to endeavor, as much
as we can, to convince Men of those Sacred Truths, which, by the iniquity of
the Times, are most discountenanced, and run down. I am, Sir,

Your, etc.

FINIS.

