Delight and Pastime: OR, Pleasant Diversion FOR Both Sexes.

Consisting of Good History and Morality, Witty Jests, Smart Repartees, and
Pleasant Fancies; free from Obscene and Profane Expressions, too frequent in
other Works of this kind; whereby the Age is corrupted in a great measure, and
Youth inflamed to Loose and Wanton Thoughts.

This Collection may serve to frame their Minds to such Flashes of WIT, as may
be agreeable to Civil and Genteel CONVERSATION.

By G. M.

LONDON: Printed for J. Sprint at the Bell, and G. Conyers at the Gold-Ring in
Little-Britain, over against the Sugar Loaf, 1697. Price, 1 s.

TO The Honorable EDWARD IRBY Esquire (Eldest Son of ANTHONY, and Grandson to the
Most Worthy Knight Sir ANTHONY IRBY, both Deceased) The Heir, and greatest
Hopes of his Illustrious Family, This MISCELLANY Of Wise and Ingenious Sayings,
etc.

Is humbly Dedicated By the Author.

TO THE READER.
THE Design of this MISCELLANY is, both to Instruct and Divert. The Instructive
Part, consisting of Wise and Ingenious Sayings, carries along with it a great
deal of good History and Morality. In which Sayings the ancient Greeks, whilst
Learning flourished amongst them, excelled to admiration.

The Diverting Part (made up of witty Jests, smart Repartees, and pleasant
Fancies, Intermixed with the former, and most of 'em above the strain of popular
Wit) aims at nothing but Innocent Mirth; being free from obscene and profane
Expressions, too frequent in other Works of this kind. Whereby the Age is
corrupted in a great measure, and Youth inflamed to loose and wanton Thoughts.
Whereas this Collection may serve to frame their Minds to such Flashes of Wit
as may be agreeable to civil and genteel Conversation. The Epitaphs I own to be
for the most part extracted out of Cambden's Remains; but so culled and sifted
from the rest, that you have here the choicest only. Some of 'em of a serious,
and others of a merry strain; some Latin, and others English.

Thus you have here Honestum, Utile, and Jucundum, useful Morality, and witty
Diversion. The whole reduced under proper Heads, not huddled up confusedly
together, as are commonly other Works of this nature.

The Contents.
OF Princes, Page 1 Popes, Page 15 Cardinals, Page 18 Bishops, Page 21
Statesmen and Courtiers, Page 26 Magistrates, Page 39 Ladies, Page 43 Love and
Gallantry, Page 47 Roman Priests, Jesuits, and Monks, Page 49 Lawyers, Page 58
Physicians, Page 61 Orators and Philosophers, Page 63 Authors, Page 69 Poets,
Page 74 Painters and Pictures, Page 79 Scholars, Page 81 War, Officers and
Soldiers, Page 83 Tradesmen, and Countrymen, Page 87 Masters, and Servants,
Page 91 Married Men and Women, Page 95 Dying Men and Women, Page 102 Buryings,
Page 107 Epitaphs, Page 110 POSTSCRIPT, Page 135
LICENSED,

March 12. 1693/4. Edward Cook.

MISCELLANEA; OR, Wise and Ingenious Sayings, etc.
Of PRINCES.
I.
GREAT was the Freedom the ancient Greeks took with their Princes, even to the
Reproach of their Vices; and some of these were wise enough not to take it ill:
Witness the Story of a Grecian Lady, and PHILIP King of Macedon. Which King
newly risen from Table, his Head intoxicated with the Liquor he had drunk,
wronged the Lady in a Concern she brought before him. Whereupon she appealed
from his Judgment, To whom? said the King; To Philip, replied she, when Sober.
This made him Recollect himself; and upon due Consideration, finding himself in
the wrong, he altered his Judgment in the Lady's behalf.

II.
The same King, having some Courtiers about him, who endeavored to persuade
him to punish a Man of great Worth, as having spoken ill of him, I must first
examine (says he) whether I have deserved it, or not. At last he found, that
the Party had never received any Favor from him, tho he highly deserved it.
Upon which he sent him great Presents; and 'twas not long before he heard, that
the same Man spoke much to his Praise. You see, then said the King to the same
Courtiers, that I know better than you do how to silence Detraction. To which
he added, that Princes had it in their Power to get the Love of their Subjects
when they pleased; and, if they were not beloved, 'twas their own Fault.

III.
PHILIP contending with an able Musician about an Air, 'Twere great pity (said
the Musician to him) that you should be so Unhappy as to know this better than
I do. A proper Lesson for Men in Dignity, not to affect excelling in some sorts
of Knowledge.

IV.
King Philip's Wife, Mother of Alexander the Great, hearing that her Son called
himself the Son of Jupiter, and was worshipped as a God, did put a shrewd Jeer
upon him, For she sent him word, and prayed him, not to bring her into Trouble
with the Goddess Juno.

V.
ALEXANDER, being at Delphos to consult the Oracle, forced Apollo's Priestess
into the Temple, upon an unlawful Day. She cried out, and made what Resistance
she could, but in vain. At last says she to Alexander, Thou art Invincible.
This Oracle, answered he, will serve my Turn, and so let her go. Thus the
Priestess's Words, extorted by his Violence, passed for an Oracle.

VI.
Darius, King of Persia, having offered his Daughter, with half his Kingdom, to
ALEXANDER, Parmenio his Favorite told him, Were I Alexander, I would accept of
Darius his Offer. So would I, replied Alexander, if I were Parmenio.

VII.
When ALEXANDER lay dying, some of his Courtiers asked him, where he had laid
up his Treasures. You will find them, says he, in my Friends Purses. Whereby he
insinuated, that he had got no Treasures, but what he had freely (as fast as he
had got them) disposed of amongst his Friends; and that he did not question but
they would supply therewith one another, when Occasion served.

VIII.
King ANTIGONVS, having made a strict League with the Athenians, they offered
one of his Servants the Freedom of their City. By no means, said the King, I
will not suffer him to accept of that Honor, lest that being some Day or other
in a Passion, I should be so unhappy as to beat an Athenian.

IX.
King PIRRHVS, having twice overcome the Romans, and finding his Army much
weakened by such Victories, I am undone, says he, if I get a third Victory.

X.
Dionysius, Tyrant of Syracusa, was a Prince who freely ridiculed the
Superstition and Idolatry which reigned in his Time amongst the Greeks. He was
for making use of those Offerings that were made to the Idols, which they had
no Occasion for. The Cloak of Gold which Hieron sent to the Statue of Jupiter
Olympius he took, and gave instead of it one made of Wool, saying, That a Cloak
of Gold was both too cold in Winter, and too warm in Summer. Aesculapius his
Statue had a Beard of Gold, which he clipped off, saying, That it was not decent
for the Son to have a Beard, being his Father Apollo had none.

XI.
Dionysius had a Son, who had violated a Lady of Syracusa. Upon which he asked
him, with an angry Look, whether he had ever heard that in his Youthful Days he
had committed such Actions. You were not, answered he, born a King's Son, as I
am. Thou shall never be a King's Father, replied the Tyrant. And so it proved
in effect. For young Dionysius, being expelled from Syracusa, became of a King
a Schoolmaster in the City of Corinth.

XII.
Then it was that Diogenes, seeing him in that Station, began to sigh before
him. Upon which young Dionysius spoke to him in these Words; Be not troubled,
Diogenes, at my Misfortunes, it is the Fate of humane Affairs. That is not,
answered the Cynick, the Thing which troubles me; for I am vexed, to see thee
still happier than thou deservest.

XIII.
Memorable is HANNIBAL's Answer to King ANTIOCHVS. Who, having set forth unto
him the Magnificence of his Army, asked him, whether he thought it would be
sufficient for the Romans. No doubt of it, answered Hannibal, were the Romans
never so Covetous; Meaning, that it was sufficient to make 'em rich with the
Spoils, but not to overcome them.

XIV.
It Is said of JVLIVS CAESAR, that having took Shipping at Brundusium in Italy
in Pursuit of Pompey, and a Storm arising, which frighted his Pilot from
setting Sail, he undauntedly cried out to the Pilot, Caesarem vehis and
Fortunam ejus, Remember that thou carriest Caesar and his Fortune.

XV.
WILLIAM RUFUS, upon the like Occasion, showed his greatness of Courage much
after the same manner. Who going to take Ship for Normandy, in order to Relieve
Coutancaes then straightly besieged by the French, the Wind then proving contrary
and boisterous, the Mariners told him, it was not safe for him to take Sea. But
the King eager for the Relief of that Town, and having no Time to lose, bad
them hoise up Sail in God's Name, Was it ever heard (says he) that a King was
drowned by Tempest?

XVI.
To this purpose was the Answer of CHARLES V. Emperor, and King of Spain, at
the Battle of Tunis. Who, being advised by the Marquess of Guasto to secure his
Person, when the great Ordnance began to play, Marquess, said he, did you ever
hear, that an Emperor was slain with a great Shot?

XVII.
JVLIVS CAESAR, being gone to Conquer Africa, happened to fall off his Horse.
It Is a good Omen, says he, that I find Africa under me; This is not a Fall, but
Taking of Possession.

XVIII.
Much to the same purpose was that Saying of an Officer of WILLIAM the
Conqueror, whose Foot (upon his Landing in England) chanced to slip, so that
he fell into the Mud, and bemired all his hands over. Which Accident being
looked upon by the said Officer as a lucky Presage, Now (said he to the Duke)
thou have taken Possession, and hold of the Land in thy band, whereof thou
shall be shortly King.

XIX.
A young Grecian favored very much AUGUSTUS; who, inquiring into the Cause of
so great Resemblance, asked the Young Man whether his Mother had ever been at
Rome. No, answered the Young Man, but my Father has several times. Thus, by an
apparent Simplicity which sheltered his Boldness from the Emperor's Anger, he
made him sensible by his own Argument, that the Resemblance proceeded rather
from the Wantonness of the Emperor's Mother than his own Mother's.

XX.
The Trojans having sent Deputies to Compliment AUGUSTUS, upon account of a
Palm Tree that grew on an Altar they had erected unto him, told him, it was a
certain Presage of the Conquests he should make. To me, answered Augustus, it is
rather an Argument how little Fire you Kindle upon the Altar, to consume the
Victims. Apparet quam saepe accendatis.

XXI.
Admirable is that saying of a wise Roman, upon the Death of AUGUSTUS. 'Twere
(says he) to be wished, that either Augustus had never been born, or that he
had never died. By which few Words he gave a just Idea of the whole Life of
that Prince. The Beginning of whose Reign was full of Violence and Cruelty,
whereas the Progress and Conclusion of it was attended with all the Blessings
of Justice, Clemency, and Moderation.

XXII.
When the Trojans sent Ambassadors to TIBERIUS, to condole the Death of his
Father-in-Law Augustus, it was so long after Augustus his Death, that Tiberius
thought it proper to fit them with this Return. And I am, says he, sorry, that
you have lost so valiant a Knight as Hector; who was slain above a thousand
Years before.

XXIII.
SIGISMVND the Emperor, being told by one of his Courtiers, that he wondered at
his Maxim of obliging his Enemies, and putting them in a Condition to hurt him,
when it was in his Power to take away their Lives. Do not I, says he,
sufficiently stay 'em, when by my Benefits I make them of my Foes my Friends.

XXIV.
LEWIS XII, King of France, when he was Duke of Orleans, had been very much
disobliged in the foregoing Reigns by two Persons then in great Favor at
Court. When he came to the Crown, a Confident of his did his utmost to induce
him into a Resentment. By no means, answered King Lewis, it is below a King of
France to revenge the Wrong done to the Duke of Orleans.

XXV.
No less memorable is the generous Answer of JOHN II, Duke of Bourbon, who was
an Hostage in England for King John of France. Whilst he was here, several of
his Subjects taking an advantage of his Absence caballed against him, and
invaded his Rights. One of his Officers took an exact Account of it in writing,
which he presented to the Duke upon his Return, in order to bring the Offenders
under the Lash of the Law. The Duke asked him, whether he had took an Account
of the good Service they had done him formerly. That I have not, said the
Officer. Then, said the Duke, it is not just I should make any Use of this; and
so threw it into the Fire, without any further notice.

XXVI.
HENRY IV, of France, walking one Day, was followed by the Duke of Mayenne, a
burly fat Man, and consequently a bad Walker; who had contended with Henry for
the Crown. And now the King took pleasure in tiring of him. But, after the
Walking was over, Now Cousin (said the King to him) I am satisfied, and you may
assure your self I shall take no further Revenge.

XXVII.
LEWIS XIII, Son and Successor of the foresaid Henry, being addressed unto by a
Deputation from his Protestant Subjects, for the Continuation of their
Privileges, according to the Edicts of his Predecessors Henry III, and Henry
IV, the King made them this Answer. You had, says he, those Privileges granted
you by Henry III, who feared you; and you had them confirmed by my Father, who
loved you; but for my Part, I neither love, nor fear you.

XXVIII.
The late Prince of Conde, making his first Visit to LEWIS XIV, after the
Battle of Seneffe, the King stood at the Top of the Stairs, whilst the Prince
was getting up but slowly, having the Gout upon him. Which made him say to the
King from the middle of the Staircase, Sir, I beg your Majesty's Pardon, if I
make you stay. Cousin, answered the King, take your own Time; a Prince loaded
with Laurels, as you are, cannot move so nimbly.

XXIX.
A petty PRINCE of Italy, being informed, that a Frenchman in his Court had put
some Jokes upon him and his Designs, ordered him to go out of his Dominions in
three Days. It Is too long a Time, answered the French Gentleman, three quarters
of an Hour will serve to obey him. By which Answer he pleasantly reflected upon
the small Extent of the Prince's Dominions.

XXX.
A KING of Spain, unfortunate in War, having lost several Places and Countries
of Consequence, his Courtiers nevertheless gave him the Title of Great. Which
one carping at, his Greatness (says he) is like that of Ditches, which the more
is taken from them, grow the greater.

XXXI.
After the Battles of Fleury and Staffarde, a Minister of the Emperor at the
Court of Portugal insinuating to the KING, that France must yield at last,
being surrounded with Enemies on all Sides. Ay, but (answered the King) she has
newly made two vigorous Sallies; Meaning the aforesaid Battles, in which the
French had the Advantage.

XXXII.
WILLIAM the Conqueror, having created his Half Brother (Bishop of Bayeux)
Earl of Kent, ordered him afterward to be Imprisoned, on some just
Displeasure. For which being quarrelled by the Pope, (the Clergy being then
exempted from the Secular Power) he returned this Answer, That he had committed
the Earl of Kent, not the Bishop of Bayeux.

XXXIII.
WILLIAM RUFUS, the Conquerour's Son and immediate Successor, made commonly as
it were Portsale of the Spiritual Livings. One Day two Monks out-bidding each
other for an Abbey, he asked another of their Company, (whom he spied standing
in a Corner) what he would give to be Abbot? Not one Farthing, said he, for I
renounced the World and Riches, that I might the more sincerely serve my God.
Which Answer did so take with the King, notwithstanding his Covetousness, that
he judged him most worthy to be made Abbot, and accordingly bestowed gratis the
Abbey upon him.

XXXIV.
Philip, the warlike Bishop of Beauvais in France, being taken Prisoner by our
King RICHARD I, the Pope wrote in his behalf to the King, that he would Release
him as a Churchman, and one of his beloved Sons. The King, to vindicate
himself, sent to the Pope the Armor in which the Bishop was taken, with these
words engraven upon it, Vide an haec sit Tunica Filii tui, that is, See whether
this be thy Son's Coat, or not; being the Words which Jacob's Children spoke to
him, when they presented him with the Coat of their Brother Joseph. Which the
Pope viewing, swore, that it was rather the Coat of a Son of Mars, than a Son
of the Church, and so left him wholly at the King's Pleasure.

XXXV.
The said King RICHARD, being told by one Fulke, a Priest in great esteem for
his Holiness, that he kept three Daugh^ers, which if he did not dismiss, they
would procure him God's Wrath; How so? said the King, all the World knows, I
never had a Child. Yea, said the Priest, you have three; and their Names are
Pride, Covetousness, and Lechery. Well, said the King, you shall see me
presently dispose of them. The Knights Templars shall have Pride, the White
Monks Covetousness, and the Clergy Lechery. Thus you have my three Daughters
bestowed amongst you.

POPES.
I.
AN Abbot leaving Rome, unsatisfied that he could not see the Pope all the
while he was there, said, That the Pope was no more the Visible Head of the
Church.

II.
It Is said of Pope Boniface VIII, that he came in like a Fox, reigned like a
Lion, and died like a Dog. He came to the Papal Chair in 1295, and held it
above seven Years. During which he persecuted the Gibelline Faction, to the
utmost of his Power. And they run so much in his head that, when the
Archbishop of Genoua came before him upon Ash Wednesday to receive the Ashes,
according to the Custom of the Roman Church, instead of saying, Memento quod
Cinis es, and in Cinerem reverteris, the Words used in that Ceremony, he
mistook the Point, and told him, Memento quod Gibellinus es, and cum Gibellinis
morieris.

III.
A Discourse being held before a Pope concerning the Plurality of Livings, For
my part (said the Pope) I have but one.

IV.
Pope Alexander VIII, was 79 Years old, when he came to the Papal See, and in
three Weeks time he raised all his Nephews. He desired to know by one of his
familiar Friends what the World said of him; who answered, that his Diligence
in raising his Family was all the Talk of the Town. Oh! Oh! replied he, sono
vinti-tre hoar e mezza, it is half an hour past 23, meaning his Time was near
expired. Now in Italy the Clocks strike 24 Hours, whereas ours go not beyond 12.

V.
A Countryman, who looked upon the Pope as a God on Earth, prayed his Holiness,
that he might have two Crops every Year. You shall have it, said the Pope, but
then every Year must be of Twenty four Months.

VI.
Favoriti, the late Pope's Secretary, reading to his Holiness some Briefs that
he had drawn, and explaining them unto him in Italian, the Pope wept for Joy,
saying, Cosa diranno di noi nella Posterita, quando vederanno cosi bella
Latinita nostra? That is to say, What will Posterity say of us, when they see
this our elegant Latin?

VII.
An Astrologer having foretold Pope Urban VIII, that a Comet should appear
about the middle of his Reign, the Pope fell sick, when the Comet appeared.
But, whereas he flattered himself, by the foresaid Prediction, that his Reign
was but half spent, he unexpectedly died, and so ended both his Life and Reign.

VIII.
Pope Alexander VIII, being wrought upon by the Spanish Ambassador in order to
declare against France, the Ambassador, to induce him to it, told him, that
France was in a sinking Condition, that it was impossible for her to hold out
against so many Powers, and that the King was not able any longer to maintain
his Armies. It Is true, answered the Pope, but he makes 'em subsist at the Cost
and Charge of his Neighbors.

CARDINALS.
I.
THE Cardinal of Retz, being recalled by the French King, went to throw himself
at his Majesty's feet. Who, taking him up by the hand, told his Eminence, that
he wondered to see him with a hoary Head. Sir, replied the Cardinal, Thus it is
to fall under Your Majesty's Displeasure.

This great Man, says my Author, lived like himself in great State; in order to
which he was fain to borrow, but took great care to pay. Before his last Voyage
to Rome, he sent for all his Creditors, cast up his Accounts with them, and
told them he had but such a Sum to pay 'em in some short Time, and that his
Brother then present would stand Security for it. To which his Creditors made
this civil Return, that, far from being come to ask for their Money, they had
some at his Service. A Lady amongst the rest stood up and offered him 5000
Crowns; which she praid him to accept, to supply his Occasions. The Cardinal,
amazed at so great Civility, expressed his Sense of it in a most decent manner.
And turning about to his Hatter, It grieves me, says he, that I must leave this
good Man unpaid, to whom I owe a considerable Sum. It Is true, answered the
Hatter, that I am put to great Straits; but, that your Eminence may see, I will
not come short of any of your Creditors in point of Civility and Respect to
your Person, here are three Hats more, which I beg your Eminence to accept of,
and carry with you to Rome. This excessive Kindness from an ordinary Tradesman,
as it surprised all the Company, so it drew Tears from the Cardinal, with
Thanks to Providence for the good Will of all of them toward him. And, after
his Death, his Brother did so punctually answer the Cardinal's just Meaning,
that none of his Creditors lost any Thing by him.

II.
A Gentleman, who was great with the foresaid Cardinal, went every where with
him, except to Church. Which gave occasion to his Eminence to tell him, he was
his Friend, usque ad Aras.

III.
An Author having dedicated a Latin Book to Cardinal Richelieu, and sent him a
Copy of it; the Cardinal answered his Civility in these three Words only,
Accepi, Legi, Probavi; that is, I have perused the Book you sent me, and do
Approve of it.

IV.
Varillas speaking to one of Cardinal Baronius, Ah! poor Baronius, says he,
with his Twelve great Volumes, it was God's great Mercy, that he did write no
more.

V.
Cardinal Mazarine being told, the Peace he had made was not advantageous to
the People, made this Return, It Is a young Tree, says he, that bears no Fruit
as yet, dabit Fructum suum in tempore.

VI.
Instead of saying, that a certain Bishop was made Cardinal, the usual saying
was, that he was got into the College of Cardinals, it being the first College
he happened to be a Member of.

VII.
A Bishop at Rome came to acquaint Cardinal Pole, that he was going to his
Diocese for a Month. I am glad on it, said the Cardinal, for your sake, you will
suffer so much the less in Purgatory.

BISHOPS.
I.
A Bishop being gone to Rome to make his Court, in order to be made a Cardinal,
the Pope told him one Day, that he was informed of his being a Bastard. To
which he made this Answer, V. S. a fatto tanti altri Cardinali Asini che
potrebbe far un Mulo; That is to say, Your Holiness has made so many Asses
Cardinals, that you may as well raise a Mule to that Dignity.

II.
Another being gone to Rome for the same Purpose, came home re infecta, and
brought a great Cold with him. Which one attributed to his Coming home without
a Cardinal's Cap.

III.
A French Bishop being consecrated in the Sorbonne, in the presence of a great
many Bishops, making a Semicircle in the Dome, a Lady ravished with the sight
of them in such Order said, that she thought her self in Paradise. In Paradise,
replied a Gentleman who stood by her, there are not so many Bishops of our
Church to be seen.

IV.
A Gascoon, bearing a Grudge against the Bishop of Bazas his Diocesan, swore a
great Oath, he would never say Prayers any more in his Diocese. Crossing over a
River, the Boat had a Mischance, which made it leak. The Waterman, seeing his
Boat sinking, warned the Gascoon to commend his Soul to God. Ay but, said he,
are we still in the Bazadois? meaning the foresaid Bishop's Diocese.

V.
Upon ones saying, that a certain Bishop had the Gout; another that stood by
alleged the Canon that says, Si quis dixerit Episcopum podagra laborare,
Anathema sit.

VI.
The Bishop of Grace in France, having preached a Sermon upon Grace, I have
heard (said the Bishop of Bellay, one of his Hearers) a Sermon upon Grace,
delivered with a good grace, by the Bishop of Grace.

VII.
Some Country Bishops, being with the Archbishop of Paris, told him, they were
amazed at one Thing in his Conduct, that he never had any Difference with his
Chapter. It Is my Opinion, answered the Archbishop, that none but
Country-Husbands will fall a cudgelling their Wives.

VIII.
The same Archbishop being made Duke and Peer of France, Now (said one) it
cannot be said that Paris is Peerless.

IX.
A Bishop being often out when he preached, and a Lady happening to see his
Picture somewhere, One would think (says she) that he preaches.

X.
A Bishop of Grenoble in Dauphine, who used to wear a long Beard, had something
fallen upon it, as he was eating. Which a Servant of his taking notice of, told
him, something did stick to his Greatnesses Beard. Why not rather, said one
that sat by, Upon the Greatness of your Beard?

XI.
Another French Bishop, of great Worth, but a professed Enemy to Monks, had
some Difference with a great Cardinal, who then governed the Kingdom of France.
This Cardinal however had him in so great esteem, that he resolved to draw him
into his Party, in order to which he offered him an Abbey. Which the Bishop
refused, saying, that his Conscience would not allow of Plurality of Livings.
The Cardinal, amazed at so unusual a Nicety of Conscience amongst Clergymen,
made him this Return. My Lord, says he, you are a good Man; and I would
Canonize you for a Saint, if you had not writ (as you have) against the Monks.
Would to God, replied the Bishop, that it were in your Power, and that I
deserved it, then we should be both satisfied. Thus he ingeniously checked the
Cardinal's Ambition, by telling him, that, if he Canonized him, they should be
both satisfied. For then the Cardinal must be Pope, and he a Saint, which was
the Thing they aimed at.

XII.
A Bishop, intertaining several Prelates at Dinner, made a great show of his
wonderful Quantity of Gold and Silver Plate, made by the best Workmen that
could be got. The Magnificence whereof being admired by the Company, This I
purchased, said the Bishop, in order to assist the Poor of my Diocese. To which
one of the Company answered ingeniously, My Lord, you might have spared them
the Charge of the Making.

XIII.
A Bishop, in the Reign of Henry VIII, being appointed by the King to go to
King Francis I, with the Character of Ambassador, in a dangerous Juncture, he
represented to the King, that such a threatening Embassy as he charged him with
to so high-spirited a Prince as Francis I, would go near to cost him his Life,
and therefore begged of the King, he would be pleased to dispense him with that
Commission. Fear nothing, said the King to him, if the French King were so bold
as to take away your Life, I should infallibly revenge your Death, by taking
off many Heads for one from the French now in my Power. I am apt to believe it,
replied the Bishop, smiling, but of all those many Heads there is none so fit
for my Shoulders as this Head of mine.

STATESMEN, AND COVRTIERS.
I.
NOLI videri sapiens coram Principe, is a Lesson of wise Solomon, which puts me
in mind of a Portugueze Statesman. Whose Prince, the King of Portugal, being
about to send to the Pope, commanded him to write a Letter, whilst he wrote
another, in order to send that which he should like best of the two. The Lot
fell to the Statesman's Letter, as the best penned. Who therefore fled into
Spain, thinking himself not safe in Portugal, upon the King's Opinion, that he
had outdone him.

II.
When the Wars in Q. Elizabeth's Time were hot between England and Spain, there
were Commissioners on both Sides appointed to Treat of Peace. Dr. Dale, a
Master of Requests, was one named by the Queen for that purpose, and the Place
of Congress a Town of the French King's. Where the Commissioners on both Sides
being met, it was first debated in what Tongue the Negotiation should be
handled. One of the Spanish Commissioners thinking to give ours a shrewd Gird,
proposed the French Tongue (wherein they were best skilled) as most fit. And
for these Gentlemen of England, I suppose (says he) they cannot be Ignorant of
the Language of their Fellow Subjects, their Queen being Queen of France, as
well as of England. Nay in faith, my Masters, (replied Dr. Dale) the French
Tongue is too vulgar for a Business of this Secrecy and Importance, especially
in a French Town. We will therefore rather treat in Hebrew, the Language of
Jerusalem, whereof your Master is King; and I suppose you are therein as well
skilled, as we in the French Tongue.

III.
A Person of Quality going upon an Embassy, had this particular Instruction
from his Prince, that his Conduct should be directly opposite to that of his
Predecessor. To which he answered, Sir, I shall so carry my self, that your
Majesty shall not need to give the like Instruction to any one that shall succeed
me.

IV.
Monsieur de Louvois being ready to set out in order to a Campaign, and
offering to tell what Place he was going for, Don't tell us, says Monsieur de
Roquelaure, where you go, for we shall give no Credit to it.

V.
A Lady speaking to a prime Minister of State about an Affair of Consequence,
and having no Answer from him, Pray, my Lord, said she unto him, show me some
Sign that you understand me.

VI.
To a learned Man one may say, Scire tuum Nihil est, nisi te scire hoc sciat
alter; thy Knowledge signifies nothing, unless it be known to the World. To a
Statesman, on the contrary, one must say, Si sciat hoc alter, scire tuum nihil
est, thy Knowledge avails nothing, unless it be private to thy self. For the
main part of his Learning is to know, how to keep Counsel.

VII.
A Minister of the Emperor, residing before the War at the Court of France,
walked one day with several Courtiers in the Gallery of Versailles. Viewing
some Pictures there, that set forth the greatest Actions of the King, We have
also (says he) wherewithal to set out a great Gallery, by the Emperor's
Conquests. It Is true, answered a Courtier, and the Duke of Lorrain will have a
great Share therein. By which Answer he meant to insinuate, that, whereas the
glorious Actions of King Lewis were performed by himself, or at least in his
Presence, those of the Emperor were only performed by his Proxy the Duke of
Lorrain, and in the Emperor's Absence.

VIII.
An old French Courtier, being grievously afflicted with the Gout, received a
Visit of a Prince of the Royal Blood, of whose Party he had formerly been. That
which grieves me most of all (says he to the Prince) in the Condition I am in,
is, that I have quitted your Service. You ought not to grieve for that,
answered the Prince, now you have the Honor to belong to the King. It Is true,
replied the Courtier, but had I not quitted your Service, I had been long since
free from the Pain I now suffer. Thus he cunningly taxed the Prince with
forsaking of his Friends, after he had involved them in a Rebellion, for which
they had been executed.

IX.
A Venetian Ambassador going to the Court of Rome, passed through Florence,
where he went to pay his Respects to the late Duke of Tuscany. The Duke
complaining to him of the Ambassador the State of Venice had sent him, as a Man
unworthy of his Character; Your Highness, says he, must not wonder at it, for
we have many idle Pates at Venice. So we have, replied the Duke, in Florence,
but we don't send them abroad to treat of public Affairs.

X.
A Prince, jeering one of his Courtiers whom he had employed in several
Embassies, told him he looked like an Ox. I know not, answered he, whom I am
like unto; but this I know, that I have had the honor several times to
Represent your Person. A free and pleasant Repartee, which required a great
Familiarity betwixt the Subject and the Prince to be free from Censure.

IX.
A Roman, having entertained at Dinner Mecenas, Augustus his Favorite, Mecenas
fell entertaining of his Wife with amorous Caresses, whilst her Husband made as
if he had been asleep, to give him the more liberty. In the mean time spying
one of his Slaves, who was stealing of a golden Cup, Thou Rogue (says he) do
not thou see that I sleep only for Mecenas?

XII.
A French Courtier, admired for his courtly Carriage, but especially for his
Art in reviving a drooping Conversation, seeing one day the Court-Ladies stand
mute before the Queen, amongst which was Madame de Guimene, broke silence, and
addressing himself to the Queen, Is not this, Madam, says he, an odd Thing in
Nature, that Madame de Guimene and I being born on the same Day, and at no
further distance of Time than a quarter of an hour, yet she should be so fair,
and I so black?

XIII.
The Duke of Orleans, being in a hot Summer day in the Garden of Luxemburg,
between two Pavilions, where the Reflection of the Sun made the Heat excessive,
one of his Attendants took upon him to tell his R. H. that Princes loved no
Body. That cannot be applied to me, said the Duke, who love my Friends very
well. If Your Higness, said another, does not love 'em boiled, you love 'em
however well roasted.

XIV.
The Dauphin, the Prince of Conty, and the young Admiral of France the Count of
Vermandois, with several other Persons of great Quality, walking one Day along
the Canal of Versailles, one came to the young Admiral. And there being upon
the Canal a Boat within reach, Now, my Lord Admiral, says he, take upon you the
Command of this Vessel, and make a Trial of Skill. But, whilst he excused
himself upon his Want of Experience, a Gentleman stepping amongst them brought
off the Admiral, saying, That he was not a Fresh Water Admiral.

XV.
Henry IV of France being come to Rouen, a President who came to harang him,
fell short of his Speech, and could not conclude it. A Courtier near the King's
Person told His Majesty, Sir, it is no wonder, for the Normans are mighty apt to
fall short of their Word.

XVI.
The same King going into a Lady's Chamber, one of his Courtiers hid himself
under the Bed. A Collation being brought in soon after, the King threw a Box
full of Sweetmeats under the Bed, saying, Every body must live.

XVII.
A French Marquess used to brag every where, that he had writ to the Queen.
Another, who met him by chance in the Palace, cried out to him, Sir, I beg the
favor of you to Remember me to the Queen, next time you write to Her Majesty.

XVIII.
A great Officer in the French King's Court, showing his noble Terrass to the
Prince of Guimene, told him it stood him but in 25000 Livers. The Prince, who
well knew how he came by the Money, made this smart Repartee, I thought, says
he, the King had paid for it.

XIX.
A great Bell being made use of at a Nobleman's House to ring to Dinner, a
Courtier who was to dine with him said, Will the Dinner answer to the Bell?

XX.
An Italian being at Dinner with a Court-Officer, who had spent all his Estate,
and sold a Lordship he had, minded how little he did eat, Your Lordship (says
he) does not eat. No, answered the prodigal Courtier, for it is all eaten.

XXI.
Something to that purpose are these French Verses, made upon one by Monsieur
de Furetiere; Paul vend sa Maison de S. Clou,
A maints Creanciers engagee.
Il dit par tout, qu'il en est sou;
Je le croi, car il l'a mangee.


XXII.
A French Courtier, who made it his Business to be constantly at Court, and to
appear in the King's Presence, to relate afterward in Company what he heard
the King say, telling one day an old Courtier, that he had such an Account the
Night before from the King's Mouth. And I, answered the old Courtier, heard
yesterday Father Bourdaloues Sermon, who preached to me the finest Things that
ever I heard. By which Answer he showed him the Vanity of his Ostentation, in
appropriating to himself alone what the King had said to many more that heard
him.

XXIII.
In the late French King's Reign there was a President called Goussaut, well
known for his weak Parts. A Courtier playing at Picket in a public Place, and
finding he had committed an Error, I am (says he) a mere Goussaut. The
President, who chanced to be there unknown to the Courtier, told him, that he
was a Sot. You say right, replied the Courtier, that is it I meant to say.

XXIV.
Another, intertaining several Gentlemen at Dinner, had but one Page to wait at
Table. Growing warm with the Company, and desiring them to be merry, and drink
cheerfully, Then (said one of them) give us Change for your Page; Meaning, that
he must change his Page into Footmen to serve 'em with Wine, as a piece of Gold
is changed for several Pieces of less Value.

XXV.
A Foreign Lord dancing at a Ball in the Court of France, did it so ungainly,
that he made himself a Laughing Stock. A Friend of his, to excuse the Matter,
said, He fights well, though he dances ill. Then let him Fight, and not Dance,
said one who laughed with the rest.

XXVI.
Another being robbed, going over the Pont-neuf, and relating the Circumstances
of it, I don't care (says he) so much for the Loss of my Money, as for that of
some Love Letters I had received from my Mistress, which the Rogues took along
with it. It Is ten to one, answered one of the Company, but they will find out
whose Hand it was. Whereby he insinuated, as if he had Pick-pockets for his
Rivals.

XXVII.
A Citizen telling a Courtier, that he had just then eased himself of a great
Burden by paying a Debt he owed, and that he could not apprehend how any Man
could sleep that was in Debt; For my part, answered the Courtier, I should
rather wonder how my Creditors can sleep, well knowing that I shall never pay
'em.

XXVIII.
Another Courtier, being a Confident of the Amors of Henry IV of France,
obtained a Grant from the King, for the Dispatch whereof he applied himself to
the Lord High Chancellor. Who finding some Obstacle in it, the Courtier still
insisted upon the Grant, and would not allow of any Impediment. Que chacun se
mele de son Metier, said the Chancellor to him, that is, let every one meddle
with his own Business. The Courtier thinking, that he reflected upon him for
his Confidence, My Employment (said he) is such, that, if the King were but
twenty Years younger, I would not change it for three of yours.

XXIX.
A Marquess, having got out of the Bastille, where he had been imprisoned for a
slight Offense, came to Court, and did his utmost to be taken notice of by the
King. Who, being conscious that he had been too severe upon him, had some check
upon him for it, insomuch that His Majesty did not care to look upon him. The
Marquess perceiving it, made his Address to a Duke, and prayed him to inform
the King, that he freely forgave him, and begged of his Majesty that he would
be pleased afterward to look upon him. The Duke told the King, who being
pleased with it, showed ever since a gracious Countenance to the Marquess.

XXX.
An envious Courtier being one day very melancholy, a Gentleman asked what
Misfortune had befaln him? None at all, answered another, but that the King has
preferred a Man of great Worth.

XXXI.
A rich Partisan of France, who formerly had been a Lackey, going fast in his
Coach through the Streets of Paris, a Lady walking by was bespattered with Dirt
by his Horses. This Man (says she, speaking of the Partisan) is of a revengeful
Spirit, he dirties us, because we have dirtied him.

XXXII.
The same Lady went to Law with another Partisan, who had also been a Lackey;
and being gone to wait upon a Magistrate, who was to be a Judge in the Case, she
staid some time with her Liverymen in his Withdrawing Room, till he came out of
his Chamber. When he came out, he wondered to see a Lady of her Quality with
none but her Footmen; and was very angry with his Servants, for want of their
Information. A shame, says he, to leave here a Lady of your Quality with none
but Lackeys about you. Pray, Sir, replied the Lady, be not concerned at it, I
am very well pleased with my Lackeys, and like them best whilst they keep in
that Station. Thus she cunningly reflected upon her adverse Party.

XXXIII.
Sir Walter Rawleigh asking a Favor of Queen Elizabeth, Sir Walter, said the
Queen, When do you mean to leave off Begging? When your Gracious Majesty, replied
he, leaves off Giving.

MAGISTRATES.
I.
Caius Caesar and Bibulus were Consuls of Rome together. But this Bibulus had
done so little for the Commonwealth, that when this Consulship was quoted,
because two Consuls must be named, the Saying was, In the Consulship of Caius
and Caesar, not of Caius Caesar and Bibulus.

II.
So ambitious were the Romans of the Consulship, that when Maximus died on the
last Day of his, Caninius petitioned, that he might fill up as Consul the
remaining part of that Day. Upon which Tully made this witty Jest, O vigilantem
Consulem, qui toto Consulatus sui tempore somnum Oculos non vidit! O watchful
Consul, who did not shut his Eyes all the time of his Consulship!

III.
Cato the Censor being asked, how it came to pass, that he had no Statue
erected in his Honor, who had so well deserved of the Commonwealth? I had
rather (says he) have this Question asked me, than why I had one erected.

IV.
Fabricius, a Roman Consul, upon the Offer made to him by King Pyrrhus his
Physician, to get him poisoned, sent him back his Physician with these words,
Learn, O thou King, to make a better Choice both of thy Friends and Foes.

V.
Clodius being to be tried for his Life by Roman Judges, whom he had bribed
with Money to get him off, they desired a Guard to secure them, so that the
Trial might be free and undisturbed. But Clodius being acquitted, one Catulus
made this Reflection upon them. What made you, says he, so eager for a Convoy?
Were you afraid to be robbed of the Money you had of Clodius?

VI.
After the Reduction of Paris to Henry IV, a Marshall of France formerly
against the King, was bribed into a Submission to him. The Provost of Merchants
of that City having newly made his Submission in the Name of the City, the said
Marshall told him, that we ought to render unto Caesar the Things that are
Caesar's. My Lord, said the Provost, we must render it, not sell it, reflecting
upon the Marshall, as a Man bought off out of Rebellion into his Allegiance.

VII.
No less Ingenious was the Answer of a Lord Mayor to our King James I. Who
being displeased with the City, for refusing to lend him a Sum of Money he
required, threatened that he would remove his Court, with all the Records of the
Tower, and the Courts of Judicature, to another Place, with farther Expressions
of his Indignation. Your Majesty, answered the Lord Mayor calmly, may do what
you please therein, and your City of London will still prove dutiful; but she
comforts her self with the Thoughts that Your Majesty will leave the Thames
behind you. Whereby he gave the King to understand, that as long as the Thames
should run before the City of London, it could not fail of flourishing by the
Advantage of Trade, whatever Disadvantages it lay under on his Majesty's Side.

VIII.
Witty, but perhaps too Jocose for his Circumstances, was the Answer of Sir
Thomas Moor Lord Chancellor in the Reign of Henry VIII. Who, being committed to
the Tower by the King, would not suffer his Hair or Beard to be cut. And being
asked the Reason of it, The King and I, says he, are at Law about my Head, and
I will be at no Charge to set it off, till I know at whose Disposal it must be.

IX.
The Lord Bacon, before his great Preferment, received a Visit from Queen
Elizabeth in a Country House lately built by him. What made you, said the Queen
to him, build your House so little? Madam, answered he to the Queen, I do not
build it too little, but it is Your Majesty that made me too great for my House.
An ingenious Answer, expressing in few Words both his Modesty and Gratitude.

X.
When the Doge of Genoua came not long since in Person to the French Court,
with Submissions from the Republic little suitable to a Sovereign State, being
at Versailles, and viewing the Magnificence thereof, he was asked by one of the
Court, What he thought in it most worthy his Admiration? To see my self here,
answered the Doge very pat.

LADIES.
I.
A Lady used constantly to wait upon another at the beginning of every Year, to
know what Age they must go for that Year.

II.
A Lady of wonderful Beauty telling another, It was a wonder to see her,
received this handsome Return, And when I see you, Madam, I may say I see a
Miracle.

III.
One that had a Petticoat extravagantly dawbed with Gold and Silver, was
wittily asked, What Goldsmith had made her Peticoat.

IV.
It was the way of the late Q. Christina of Sweden to appear always in a
Justaucor and a Wig. When she came to Fontainebleau, a Country Palace of the
French King, several Court-Ladies come to wait on Her Majesty, stepped to salute
her with a Kiss. The Queen, not liking of it, dropped these words, What Passion
transports these Ladies to kiss me thus? Is it because I look like a young Man?

V.
A Grandee of Spain having a Collar on of the Order of the Golden Fleece,
(which the Prince's Favor, not his own Merit, had procured) took particular
Notice of a sparkling Diamond a Court-Lady wore upon one of her Fingers, and
said he had rather have the Ring than the Lady. But she fitted him as well.
For, having overheard it, she presently made this Return upon him, And I
should rather choose the Halter than the Horse, meaning him by the Horse, and by
the Halter his Collar.

VI.
An Author holding a fair Lady with both his hands, she got it off from 'em.
Upon which a Gentleman that stood by told him, Sir, it is the finest Piece of
Work that ever came out of your hands.

VII.
A Gentleman leading a Lady by the hand, she told him, he held her too fast.
Madam, replied he, I Will lay with your Ladyship that before we part, you will
hold me as fast. She laid to the contrary. And, whilst they were stepping into
a Room, the Gentleman made as if his foot slipped; which made her hold him fast
by the hand, to keep him from falling. And then she owned that she lost the
Wager.

VIII.
A Lady, in company with a Gentleman, fell discoursing about the Influences of
the Month of May, when not only the Earth, but all Creatures living upon it,
find themselves revived by the Sun's Heat. After a pretty long Discourse on
this Subject, I dare trust my Honesty, said she to the Gentleman, all other
Months of the Year, which I dare not in May.

IX.
The Place of a Maid of Honor, said one, is very Ticklish, and difficult to
keep.

X.
A Curtizan of Rome took place in a Church near a virtuous Lady; Who no sooner
knew her, but she removed to another place. The Curtizan observing it, Why
should you, Madam, remove thus for my sake? said she to the Lady, my Infirmity
never proves catching but to such as desire it.

XI.
A Spanish Lady reading in a French Romance a long Conversation betwixt two
Lovers, What a deal of Wit (says the Lady) is here ill bestowed? They were
together, and they were alone.

XII.
A French Lady of great Wit jeering another in a Company where a Friend of this
Lady was, her Friend took her part, and made the best of her. But the first
took her up, and told her, I find, Madam, that you have eaten Garlic. Now it is
well known, that those who have eaten Garlic, are not sensible of the ill
smell of others that have also eaten of the same.

XIII.
A Court-Lady gone to see Versailles in the King's Absence, Is not this, said
one to her, an Enchanted Palace? It Is so, said she, but it wants the
Inchanter, meaning the King.

XIV.
An ancient Lady going to visit a great Man at the point of Death, his Daughter
refused to let her into his Chamber, saying, that her Father was not fit for
Women's Visits. Madam, answered the Lady, there is no Distinction of Sex at my
Age.

Of Love, and Gallantry.
I.
A Gallant, taking his Leave of his dear Mistress, upon a Journey he could not
dispense with, they parted with much ado, and with great Reluctance. At last
she told him, Pray, make all the haste you can, and remember that a Mistress is
a Benefice that requires Residence.

II.
It Is the Way in Savoy, the first time one has his Vein breathed, to be
presented by his Friends. A Young Man of that Country, having received a
Present from his Mistress upon such an Occasion, returned her Thanks for it,
with these Words, You have (says he) considered the Wound of my Arm, but you
forget that of my Heart.

III.
A Gentlewoman who had two Gallants, one of 'em with a wooden Leg, grew big
with Child, and the Question was which of them should father it. He that had
the wooden Leg offered to decide it thus. If the Child, says he, comes into the
World with a wooden Leg, I shall father it; if not, the Child shall be yours.

IV.
A wanton French Gentlewoman, being ordered by the Queen Mother (then Regent)
to go into a Monastery, he that brought her the Queen's Order, told her, the
Queen left her the Liberty to choose what Monastery she pleased. Then, says she,
I will not go to a Nunnery, but to a Monastery of Monks, which she named, and
where she might have Work enough.

V.
Another young Lady was to be sent to a Nunnery of Filles Repenties, or
Converted Maidens. But a Lady opposed it; and being asked the Reason, Because
(says she) she is neither Converted, nor Maiden.

VI.
Another as wanton as the former, blaming her Brother's extravagant Passion for
Gaming, When will you leave off Gaming? said she to him. When you cease to
Love, then I shall cease to Play, answered he. Then, replied the Sister, you
are like to be a Gamester as long as you live.

VII.
A Coldness having continued some time betwixt two Persons that formerly had a
Love for each other, they met accidentally in a Place, where they fell to play.
But, said the Gentleman, What is it we play for? For a Return of Love, said the
Lady.

Of Roman Priests, Jesuits, and Monks; with Passages upon their Preaching, and
the Auricular Confession.
I.
A Roman Priest, being grievously troubled with the Stone, resolved to be Cut.
But, when the Surgeon was ready for the Operation, Will Not it (says he) disable
me from the Act of Generation?

II.
Another being in drink, when a Child was brought him to Church to be Baptized,
could not find out the Ministration of Baptism in the Ritual. At last, having
turned over many a Leaf to little purpose, This Child, says he, is very hand to
Baptize.

III.
A Priest, being asked what Saint was the Patron of his Church, His Name
(answered he) I know not, only I know him by sight.

IV.
At Nola, in the Kingdom of Naples, the Jesuits have a College called d' Arquo,
the Bow; and another in France, at a Town of Anjou, called la Fleche, or the
Arrow. On which one wittily composed this following Distich; Arcum Nola dedit,
dedit illis alma Sagittam
Gallia, quis Funem quem meruere dabit?
In English thus. Nola the Bow, and France the Shaft did bring,
But who shall help them to the hempen String?


V.
There are Monks, said one, that have a strict Rule, and a large Conscience.
The Outside of whose Monasteries is all Peace and Religion, whilst the Devil
and War are within.

VI.
It Is strange, said another, that the Minimes should eat no Flesh, and yet
smell so much as they do of a Shoulder of Mutton.

VII.
A Bernardine Monk having invited a Benedictine to Supper, the first desired
the other to say Grace, or (as they call it) the Benedicite. Benedictus, says
he, benedicat. The other, in answer to it, made this Return, Bernardus
Bernardet.

VIII.
The Thunder fell one day upon the Steeple of the Augustines Church at Paris.
Upon which one said, It was God's great Mercy, he had sacrificed only their
Steeple to his Justice; for, had the Thunder fallen into the Kitchen, it is like
they had all perished.

IX.
A Gentleman, seeing the Monks called Feuillans building according to the
several Orders of Architecture, asked why they did not rather build according
to their Order?

X.
A late French Bishop had no sooner given up the Ghost, but his Room was
presently plundered. A Cordelier, among the rest, having got the Bishop's
Breviar, snatched also a rich Crucifix, saying, Crucifixus etiam pro nobis.

XI.
A Monk being sent from Angers to Paris, to be punished for his lewd Course of
Life amongst Women, was brought before a Judge, who had then two Ladies with
him. It Is for your sakes, Ladies, said the Monk, that I am now brought to this.
Had not you been, replied the Judge, so loose upon Ladies, you would not have
brought these Fetters on your self.

XII.
In a Book printed at Bourdeaux, it is said, that a Carmelite knocking at
Heaven's Door, St. Peter would not let him in, saying, We see none here but
Carmelites, When you can make up a Dozen, you shall be let in, not before.

XIII.
An Abbot who had a mind to make his Abbey secular, told the French King, that
he had the worst Monks in the World, and that they would not say the Exaudiat.
If they be so bad, said the King, I ought not to rely upon their Prayers, and
do freely dispense them with their Exaudiat.

XIV.
Another, who had four Abbeys, three of which he bestowed upon his Nephews,
invited one Day a Friend of his to come and play with him at Picket. I don't
care, answered his Friend, to play with a Man who discarded so many Abbeys.

XV.
Another Abbot, extremely given to Playing, lost 2000 l. at least at one
sitting with a Duke. The Duke pressed him for the Payment, so that the Abbot
was fain to sell all he had, which fell much short of the Sum. An Interposer
prayed the Duke to forgive the rest, in Acknowledgment whereof the Abbot should
make an Ode to his Praise, but the worst he could make. For, says he, when the
World shall know, that you made so great a Present for a wretched Piece, they
will conclude you would have been much more liberal for a good one.

XVI.
It Is said of Father Bourdaloue, that, when he preached at Rouen, the Tradesmen
left their Shops, the Merchants their Business, the Lawyers their Clients, and
the Physicians their Patients, to hear him. But he that preached there the next
Year after settled Things in so a good Posture, that none of them forsook their
Employments.

XVII.
Such a one might be that Preacher, who so tired his Auditory with a Sermon he
made upon Bliss or Happiness, that one told him after Sermon, Sir, you forgot
one part of Happiness, happy are they that did not hear your Sermon.

XVIII.
Another having divided his Text into 22 Heads, one of his Hearers went out of
Church in great haste. And being asked where he went, To fetch my Nightcap,
(says he) for I find we shall lie here to Night.

XIX.
A Preacher, whose Sermons no body cared to hear, entreated a Friend of his to
come to hear him. But he begged his Excuse, saying, that he was loath to disturb
him in his Solitude.

XX.
Another, who had not the luck to please his Auditors, He did better last Year,
said one. How can that be? said another, for he did not preach at all. In that
very Thing he did better, replied the first.

XXI.
Another, preaching at Paris to a few Hearers, gave occasion for one to say,
that he preached sede vacant. Something like unto it is the Saying of one
concerning a Professor, who read his Lectures alone, that he was Vox clamantis
in Deserto.

XXII.
One speaking of a Preacher, whom he heard at a great distance, He spoke (said
he) with his Hand, and I heard him with my Eyes.

XXIII.
Of two Preachers, one had a Faculty of making a great Noise in the Pulpit. Who
passing his Verdict upon himself and the other, He preaches (says he) very
well, and I very loud.

XXIV.
A Learned Man of the Roman Church comparing the Way of Preaching of the
Ancient Fathers of the Church with that of our Modern Preachers, said, The
Ancient Fathers preached with Zeal and Learning, whereas in our Days we admire
most a good Memory and a great Stock of Confidence.

XXV.
A Friar observing from the Pulpit a Woman babbling with another, checked her
openly for it. Being nettled at it, up she starts, and cries to the Friar
again, Marry, Sir, I beshrew his Heart that babbles most of us two; I did but
whisper a Word with my Neighbor here, and thou have babbled there a good large
hour.

XXVI.
During the Tumults in Paris in 1649, the seditious Party were called
Frondeurs, that is, Slingers. These in 52, put Straw upon their Hats, to
distinguish themselves from the opposite Party, who wore Paper. A Canon,
preaching at that time to the Bernardine Monks, had the lucky hit to apply
these Words of Joh to the Straw-Party, In stipulam versi sunt Lapides fundae,
the Sling-stones are converted into Straw.

XXVII.
A Roman Catholic confessing to a Priest, that he had drunk very hard after
Absolution, pulled some Money out of his Pocket, to present his Confessor with.
Who refused it, saying, You had best keep your Money to drink.

XXVIII.
Another so strangely given to Swearing, that he could scarce speak three Words
together without rapping an Oath, confessed, that nothing was more frequent
with him, than to say, The Devil take me. Whereupon the Confessor told him, how
wicked and dangerous such an Expression was; and did so terrify him, that he
broke out into these Words, The Devil take me, if I swear any more.

XXIX.
A beautiful young Lady of Spain being at Confession, the Priest charmed with
her Beauty, and desirous to get her Acquaintance, asked her her Name. But the
Lady, unwilling to satisfy his wanton Curiosity, checked him in these few
Words, Father (said she to him) my Name is not a Sin.

XXX.
A Monk, having quitted his Order, made his Address for Relief to Maurice,
Prince of Orange. The Prince asked him, Cujus causa huc venisti? Religionis,
said the Monk. His Highness asked him again, Religio, cujus Generis? Faeminini,
replied the Monk. Ergo, added the Prince, tu huc venisti propter Genus
faemininum. Which was a hint to the Monk, how sensible Prince Maurice was, that
the Conversion of most Monks is very much liable to suspicion, and that their
turning Protestants does too often proceed from a loose Principle, more than a
true Sense of Religion.

LAWYERS.
I.
AN eminent Counselor at Law, being asked why he took upon him so many bad
Causes, being so good a Lawyer; I have (says he) been cast in so many good
Causes, and got the better in so many bad ones, that I am to seek which to
choose.

II.
Lysias having given his Plea to his adverse Party to peruse, this read it
three times, and gave his Thoughts of it in these Words. The first time (says
he) I read it, I liked it well; the second time, not so well; and the third,
not at all. Then, replied Lysias, it will pass, for the Court will hear it but
once.

III.
A Counselor blind of one Eye, pleading at the Bar with his Spectacles on,
said, he would produce nothing but what was ad Rem, to the Point. Then, said
the adverse Party, you must take out one Glass of your Spectacles, which indeed
was Insignificant.

IV.
Another ill-favored Counselor, who had but half a Nose left, could not read
audibly a Writing that was relating to his Plea. One of the Judges, who had a
well-sized Nose, called for Spectacles to help him to read. Sir, said the
Counselor being nettled at it, I hope, if I get Spectacles, you will lend me
your Nose to clap 'em on.

V.
One, whose way was to read all his Pleas, having done Reading, another stood
up against him. Who was so often interrupted by the first, that he told him at
last, Sir, by your favor, I let you Read a whole hour without Interruption,
pray, let me plead quietly one half Hour.

VI.
An Advocate of Toulouse in France, called Adam, made the President all his
Speeches; except one he ventured to make, in Adam's absence. Which when the
President delivered, he was so puzzled with it, that it made one of the
Assistant Judges cry out, Vbi es Adam? where art thou Adam?

VII.
A Pick-pocket in France, being taken in the Fact at a Court of Judicature, was
immediately brought before the Court, to answer the Charge; and, as the way is
there, had Counsel allowed him, and appointed by the Court, for his Defense.
Whereupon his Counsel took him aside, and asked him, if he had picked any Man's
Pocket? It Is true enough, says he. Hold your tongue, replied the Counsel, and
follow my Advice. Go thy ways, and make thy Escape with full speed. No sooner
said, but done. And, whilst the Delinquent took his Opportunity, his Counsel
came gravely to the Bar again. The Court asked him, what he had to say in his
Client's Defense. Gentlemen, says he, he has freely owned to me the Matter of
Fact. But he being under no Guard, and I appointed his Counsel by the Court, I
thought the best Counsel I could give him was to make his escape; upon which he
vanished away presently. This proved a Subject of Laughter, and nothing amiss
could be fixed upon the Lawyer.

VIII.
A studious Man in the Law took upon him to cut a Partridge at Dinner, but
could never hit the Joint. Sir, said one of the Guests, Were it not better for
you to know less of the Law, and understand Anatomy better?

PHYSICIANS.
I.
TWO Physicians being in Consulsultation about a Patient, they spoke Latin
together, not thinking he understood it. At last one of them talked of a
Remedy, which had not been yet experienced, and said unto the other, Faciamus
periculum in anima vili, let us try it upon this poor Soul. Which the Patient
over-hearing, he got upon his Knees, and said, Vilem Animam appellas, pro qua
Christus non dedignatus est mori?

II.
Seneca used to say of a multitude of Books, Onerat discentem Turba, the great
Number of them is rather burdensome, than useful. But one may better say of
Physicians, Onerat Aegrotum Turba, nothing is more pernicious to a sick Body,
than a Crowd of Physicians. For commonly the ablest of 'em is the most
contradicted, and minded the least of all.

III.
Mercatus, Physician to Ferdinand King of Spain, was so familiar with his
Master, that acting one day the part of a Surgeon in dressing the King's Leg,
which had a Bone out of Joint, he told him, he deserved a thousand Pistols for
this Piece of Service. To which the King made this ingenious Return, Sum
quantum vis, habes Claviculam.

IV.
A facetious Doctor being sent for to a Gentleman, who could take no Rest for a
Rhume he had in one of his Eyes, upon Examination of the Matter, Cheer up, says
he to his Patient, your Case is not desperate; in few Days all will be well, if
you can but See it.

ORATORS, AND PHILOSOPHERS.
I.
WHEN Plato withdrew from the Court of Dionysius, who would fain have had a
famous Philosopher for his Flatterer, they parted in some Unkindness, and
Dionysius bad him not to speak ill of him, when he was returned into Greece.
Plato told him, he had no leisure for it; meaning, that he had better Things to
mind, than to take up his Thoughts with, and talk of the Faults of so bad a
Man, so notoriously known to all the World.

II.
When Men speak ill of thee, said Plato, live so, as no body may believe them.

III.
Phocion was very tart in the Orations he made to the Athenians; whereas
Demosthenes used a quite contrary Method, and soothed them up in his Speeches.
If this People, says Demosthenes to Phocion, do once break loose upon thee,
thou art undone, and they will sacrifice thy Life to their Fury. Thou runnest
the same hazard, replied Phocion to Demosthenes, if ever they come to
themselves.

IV.
Alexander the Great having sent rich Presents to Phocion, he refused them; and
asked his Ambassadors, to what purpose he had sent them to him? Because (said
they) he looks upon you as the most worthy Man of Athens. Then, replied he, all
I desire of him is to leave me such as he takes me to be.

V.
It was a pretty Fancy of Diogenes, when he perceived a tedious Discourse
drawing near to a Conclusion, to express his Joy in these Words, (...), I see
Land.

VI.
The same, being brought before Philip King of Macedon, Philip called him a
Spy. I am so, answered Diogenes, but it is of thy Ambition.

VII.
Being banished out of Sinope, his Birthplace, he ridiculed his Judges in
these Lines he sent them from Athens. You have, says he, banished me from my
Native Place, and I confine you to your Houses. You dwell at Sinope, I at
Athens. Here I converse with the best Men of Greece, whilst you keep company
with the worst of Men.

VIII.
The same Diogenes, seeing a Company of unskilful Archers, none of which could
shoot near the Mark, went and stood just before it. Being warned to stand off,
he refused it, saying, he was in the safest Place.

IX.
Bias, the Philosopher, being in a Ship with a Company of lewd Men that called
upon the Gods in the distress of a Storm, Hold your Tongues, says he to 'em,
that (if possible) the Gods may forget you are here. Thus he pleasantly
reminded them of their Vices, and the Punishment they might expect from the
Gods whom they called upon.

X.
Aristippus being asked what he learnt by Philosophy, I learnt (says he) to live
well with all the World.

XI.
How comes it, said Dionysius the Tyrant to Aristippus, that Philosophers are
often seen to court Princes, and no Prince minds Philosophers? Because,
answered Aristippus, Philosophers know their Wants, and Princes do not know
their own. By which Answer he meant, that,when Philosophers want Necessaries,
they know how to apply to Princes for a Supply; but when Princes are in want of
Virtue, Wisdom, or good Counsel, they are often ignorant of it, which makes 'em
neglect the Means to purchase it. The Truth is, our Philosopher (I mean
Aristippus) was none of those conceited Philosophers, who asserted Riches did
no ways contribute to the Happiness of one's Life, and made it their Business
by a show of Arguments to render Wealth contemptible. But, as he knew the
Conveniences thereof, so he could make shift without it, and frame himself to
all sorts of Conditions.

XII.
The same Philosopher making his Address to the foresaid Tyrant, in the behalf
of a Friend of his, and being denied what he asked, he threw himself at his
feet to obtain it, and did then obtain it. He was blamed by several for making
such a Submission, which they thought below a Philosopher. But he confuted them
by this witty Saying, that Dionysius had his Ears at his Feet; Meaning, that he
heard none but such as humbled themselves before him.

XIII.
A rich Athenian asked him what he would have to instruct his Son. Five hundred
Drachms, said Aristippus. Five hundred, replied the Athenian, I could buy a
Slave for that Money. Buy one, replied Aristippus, and so thou shall have two,
meaning his Son by the other. Thus he gave him to understand, that his Son
would have the Vices of a Slave, if the Father did not bestow what was
convenient upon him to bring him up.

XIV.
Socrates having saluted one who took no notice of it, his Friends were angry
at the Man's Incivility. Why should you be angry, said Socrates, at the Man,
because he is not as civil as I am?

XV.
Timon, so famous for his hatred to the Whole Mankind and therefore called
Misanthropos, being invited to Dinner by one who affected to imitate him in his
Hatred, This is, said the Man to Timon, a pleasant Feast. 'Twould be so,
replied Timon, if thou wast not here.

XVI.
Cicero was very lucky in his Wipes. To a Senator, who was but a Taylor's Son,
he said, Rem acu tetigisti. And to a Lawyer, who was a Cook's Son, Ego quoque
tibi Jure favebo.

XVII.
To one who reflected upon the Meanness of his Birth, he said, The Nobility of
thy Family ends with thee, but the Nobility of mine begins with me.

XVIII.
To another, Metellus by name, who asked him what his Father was, he made this
return, 'Twould be much more difficult, says he, to guess who was thy Father.
Which struck home, Metellus his Mother having a wanton Character.

XIX.
A late Orator got his Hair cut off, in order to wear a Wig; which did so
strangely alter his Countenance, that his nearest Friends could scarce know him
again. Being employed to open a Conference, which he did to admiration, a
Friend of his told him, after the Conference, Sir, I knew you again only by
your Eloquence.

AVTHORS.
I.
CICERO, to express what Advantage he reaped from reading of good Authors, has
these Words, Soleo saepe in aliena Castra transire, non tanquam Profuga, sed
tanquam Explorator.

II.
Pura Impuritas is the Character Lipsius gives of Petronius. Pura, in reference
to the Style; Impuritas, meaning the obscene Discourses that are in it.

III.
An Author making a System of the World, and having spent many whole Days about
it, Remember, says a Friend of his unto him, that, when God created the World,
he rested the seventh Day.

IV.
Isaac Vossius, intertaining one Day Monsieur de Sorbiere at Dinner, pressed
him to drink, telling him, that Sorberius came a Sorbendo.

V.
An Author's House being on fire, whilst he was poring on his Books, he called
to his Wife, and bad her look to it. You know, says he, I don't concern my self
with the Household.

VI.
When Varillas his History of Heresies came out, his very Friends found many
Flaws in it. Which made one of them tell him, between Jest and Earnest, that he
had writ a Book full of Heresies.

VII.
Dr. Heylin, a noted Author amongst us, especially for his Cosmography, happened
to lose his Way, going to Oxford, in the Forest of Whichwood. Being then
attended by one of his Brother's Men, the Man earnestly entreated him to lead
the Way, till he had brought him past the Wood to the open Fields. But the
Doctor telling him, he could not tell which Way to lead him, Strange! said the
Fellow, that you, who made a Book of the whole World, cannot so much as find
your Way out of this Wood.

VIII.
The French Book called Les Origines de la Langue Francoise, and written by
Monsieur Menage, being mentioned to Queen Christina, Menage (says she) is a
Man, who will not only know whence a Word comes, but whether it goes.

IX.
One having writ a Book, in order to publish it, sent it first to a competent
Judge to peruse it, and have his Opinion of it. Who having perused the same,
told him his Opinion was, that he should leave out one Half, and suppress the
other.

X.
Another being come to wait on a Learned Man in the Winter Season, and sitting
with him by the Fire, pulled a Copy out of his Pocket, which he intended for
the Press, and begged of him to cast his Eye upon it. Who having read some
Pages over, but finding little or nothing in it fit for the Public, held the
Book to the Fire; saying, Sir, if you please, we may bring it to Light
presently, and you will find this the best way to gratify the Public.

XI.
A Gentleman telling an Author, that he was reduced to live upon the Muses
Milk; That cannot be, replied the Author, being the Muses are Virgins, and
therefore without Milk, unless you have prostituted them.

XII.
In the Year 1665, the French Academy were very busy in settling the Gender of
a Comet; some being for the Masculine, and others for the Feminine Gender. At
last starts up one of their Members, saying, To what purpose is all this
Debate, when the Comet now to be seen may easily determine the Point? It Is but
looking, adds he, under its Tail.

XIII.
An Author, having found but one Fault of the Printer's in a Book of his
finished at the Press, was in a quandary, whether he should make it Errata or
Erratum. But a Friend of his told him, Let me but peruse the Book, I warrant
you I shall find another Fault, and that will make it Errata.

XIV.
A French Author, in an Epigram of his against a Maker of Anagrams, expresses
thus the Pains he takes to find Words in Words, Evisceratis Verba quaerit in
Verbis.

XV.
Daniel Heinsius loved Drinking, which discomposed him sometimes for his
Lectures. After one of his drinking Bouts, some unlucky Students pasted up
these Words over the Door of his Lecture-Room, Daniel Heinsius non leget hodie,
propter hesternam Crapulam.

XVI.
To one saying, that Tertullian's Style is Dark, it was answered, that it is
like Ebony, full of glorious Darkness.

XVII.
Monsieur Vaugelas having obtained a Pension from the late French King, by the
Mediation of Cardinal Richelieu, the Cardinal told him, I hope, Sir, you will
not forget the word Pension in your Dictionary. No, my Lord, answered Vaugelas,
neither will I forget the Word Gratitude.

XVIII.
A famous Member of the French Academy, being gone to the Academy, took the
Abbot Furetiere's Place, whom he had had no Kindness for. Some time after, he
said, reflecting upon Furetiere, Here Is a Place, Gentlemen, where I am like to
come out with a thousand Impertinencies. Go on, answered Furetiere, there is one
out already.

POETS.
I.
PHiloxenes, a Greek Poet, having been condemned by Dionysius the Tyrant to
work in the Quarries, for not approving some Verses of his making, the Tyrant
released him to show him some new Verses of his. And, as he had a great
Ambition to pass for a good Poet, so he did not doubt but the Releasing of
Philoxenes would induce him to give his Approbation to this his Trial of Skill.
But he was much surprised, when the Poet hearing his new Verses, cried out, Let
me go back again to the Quarry.

II.
Another Poet, who had often presented Augustus with Verses to his Praise, the
Emperor in a jocose humor told him one Day, that it was but just, he should
make him some Return for his Verses, and at the same time presented him with an
Epigram he had made. Which being read by the Poet, he presently pulled a Purse
out of his Pocket, in which were some Pieces of Gold. This he presented to the
Emperor, telling him, that he wished he had a better Present to make him, in
Return of his fine Verses. Thus he cunningly insinuated to the Emperor, that a
Poet ought not to be paid by a Prince in his own Coin; and Augustus was so
pleased with the Fancy, that the Poet fared much the better for it afterward.

III.
Pontanus having made an Enigm upon a Hole, in this following Verse, Dic mihi
quid majus fiat quo pluria demas;
Scriverius answered extempore,
Pontano demas Carmina, major erit.


IV.
When Mary Stuart was Wife to King Francis I, this Verse was made upon her,
Jure Scotos, Gallos Thalamo, Spe possidet Anglos.

V.
An Italian Poet having offered a Copy of Verses of his to the Censure of an
excellent Critic, he made such Corrections and Alterations in it, that it
proved quite another Thing. Tutto se ne andato in limatura? Is all filed away
into Dust? said the Poet, upon sight of it. Which is taken out of Pliny Junior,
who says in one of his Epistles, Ferrum expoliendo non tam splendescit quam
atteritur, Iron wears out more than it grows bright, by polishing.

VI.
A French Poet, having made an Ode to the King, applied himself to Malherbe, as
a competent Judge, in order to improve it. Who, upon the perusal of it, told
him, it wanted but four Words; which the Poet prayed him to write down himself.
Malherbe taking his Pen writ under the Title AV ROI, To the King, these four
Words, Pour torcher son Cul, To wipe his Backside. That done, he folded up the
Paper, and gave it to the Poet; who, suspecting no Sham put upon him, returned
him a thousand Thanks for it.

VII.
One Quinault, a Frenchman, having made a Play, which was going to be acted, he
explained the Drift of it to a Gentleman. The Scene, says he to him, is in
Cappadocia; and, to be a competent Judge of the Piece, one must travel thither,
and understand the Genius of the People. You are in the right, answered the
Gentleman, who had no great liking unto it, and my Opinion is, that Cappadocia
would be the most proper Place for that Play to be acted in.

VIII.
Another Poet presenting the Prince of Conde with Moliere's Epitaph, the Prince
told him, Would to God it were Moliere himself with your Epitaph. Thus that
clear-sighted Prince expressed in a lively manner the great Respect he had for
the deceased Poet, and the slender Esteem he had for the living.

IX.
Bonnefons, a French Poet, who lived in the Reign of Henry III of France, is
much admired to this Day for his Love-Poetry; but especially for one piece of
it, which begins thus, Dic, Acus, mihi, quid meae Puellae, etc. The same he
concludes, bidding the Needle to prick his Mistress's Heart, not her Finger;
which he does in these three admirable Verses.

Quantam hinc referes, Superba, Laudem!
Hac te cuspide vulnerasse Pectus,
Quod nullis potuit Cupido Telis.
X.
Another French Poet of good Fame, being blamed for going always on foot, made
these Extempore Verses; Je voi d'illustres Cavaliers,
Avec Laquais, Carosse, and Pages;
Mais ils doivent leurs Equipages,
Et je ne dois pas mes Souliers.


XI.
This following Epigram was made against Bell-Ringers, as a troublesome sort of
Men in Society; Great Persecutors of the Land,
Who to our Quiet are a Check,
I wish you had about your Neck,
The Rope that you hold in your hand.


XII.
An English Poet, having made an excellent Panegyric of Oliver Cromwell,
undertook to make one of King Charles II, which fell much short of the other.
Being asked the Reason of it, We Poets, said he to the King, have always better
luck in Fictions, than Realities.

PAINTERS, AND PICTVRES.
I.
AN Italian Painter, having drawn S. Peter's Picture bespoken by the Pope, His
Holiness found fault with it, that it was too high-colored. To which the
Painter made this bold Return, that he had represented S. Peter, blushing at
the Lives of his Successors.

II.
A Gentleman, seeing a very good Picture of S. Bruno, the Founder of the
Carthusian Order, and being asked his Opinion of it, Were not it, says he, for
his silent Rule, it would speak.

III.
The Ear only (said one of a good Picture) and not the Eye, can find that it
wants Speech.

IV.
A Gentleman observing, in a carved Piece, Justice and Peace kissing each
other, Do but mind (say he to a Friend of his that stood by) how they embrace
and kiss each other; They are doubtless upon parting, and never will meet again.

V.
A Picture looked upon to be the Masterpiece of the famous le Brun,
representing Darius his Royal Family at the Feet of Alexander, stood between
two Originals, one of Raphael Vrbin, and the other of Paul Veronese. Cardinal
Chigi, a Nephew of Pope Alexander VII, being asked his Opinion about le Brun's
Picture, It Is very fine, says he, but it has two ill Neighbors. By which
Answer he ingeniously gave the preeminency to the two other Pictures, and gave
the French to understand that le Brun's Picture (tho never so good) was not fit
to be exposed near such Originals.

SCHOLARS.
I.
IT was a pat Answer, which a Scholar made to Queen Elizabeth; who asked him in
Latin, how often he had been whipped? His Answer was in these Words of Virgil,
Infandum, Regina, jubes renovare Dolorem.

II.
No less ingenious was that poor Schol-boy, whose Condition the Queen being
informed of, Her Majesty bad him make some Verses upon this, Pauper ubique
jacet; Which he wittily performed thus, In Thalamis, Regina, tuis hac Nocte
jacerem,
Si verum hoc esset, Pauper ubique jacet.


III.
A Scholar riding on Horseback, and finding that whatever he said to the Horse
in English could not make him go fast enough, tried at last what he could do in
Latin. Non ibis, mala Bestia, says he to his Horse, etiam admotis Calcaribus?
That is, Will Not you go neither, you dull Animal, tho I spur thee never so much?

IV.
Another gone a hunting was forewarned to be silent, lest he should fright the
Game away. He happened to see some Rabbets, which made him cry out in Latin, Ecce
Cuniculi. The Rabbets hearing his Voice fled, and he wondered (said he) how they
should come to understand Latin.

V.
An University Scholar being so hot in Discourse at the Hall-Table that the
Fellows could hear him, the Dean sent to him to be quiet, with these words, Vir
sapit qui pauca loquitur. To which he returned this Answer, Vir loquitur qui
pauca sapit.

WAR, OFFICERS, AND SOVLDIERS.
I.
A Great Difference (said one) betwixt Peace and War is this, that in Times of
Peace the Sons bury their Fathers, whereas in Time of War the Fathers bury
their Sons.

II.
Salustius says, the Romans warred with the Gauls pro Salute, for their
Preservation; but with the other Nations pro Gloria, to advance their Glory.

III.
Upon the least Victory got by MARCUS ANTONIUS, there could hardly be found
Beasts enough for Sacrifices. Which made his Friends tell him once, as they
were going to Engage, We are undone, if you get the Victory.

IV.
At the Battle of Newport, the Prince of Orange having the Spanish Army before
him, and the Sea behind him, did thus encourage his Soldiers. If (says he) you
will live, you must either eat the Spaniards before us, or drink the Sea behind
us. They chose the first, and fell upon the Spaniards with such an Appetite,
that they got an entire Victory over them.

V.
When Darius, King of Persia, sent Presents to Epaminondas, that famous Greek
Captain; he spoke thus to those who brought them. If Darius, says he, be
desirous to keep a good Correspondence with the Thebans, he needs not purchase
my Friendship; and, if he thinks otherwise, tell him (as Potent as he is) that
he has not Wealth enough to corrupt me. A noble and generous Answer, showing in
a lively manner both the greatness of his Soul, and the clearness of his
Understanding.

VI.
A valiant Commander, being told that the Enemy did far exceed him in Numbers,
undauntedly made this return. Then (says he) there will be enough for us to
kill, enough to take Prisoners, and enough to run away.

VII.
Le Baron des Adrets, a Ringleader of the Huguenots Party, having took a
Castle from the Roman Catholics, condemned the Garrison to leap down from the
Top of a Tower belonging to the Castle. One of the Soldiers stepped twice
forward to the brink of the Precipice, but frighted with the sight of it stepped
back every time. The Baron bad him leap without any further delay, and
threatened to put him to greater Torments, if he declined it the third time.
Sir, answered the Soldier, if you find the Thing so easy, do you take (if you
please) four Times to do it in. Which Fancy the Baron was so taken with, that
he freely forgave him for it.

VIII.
A French Officer asking an Englishman, when we were forced to quit France,
what Time he thought we should Return thither? When (says he) your Sins are
greater than ours.

IX.
A young Officer, speaking of the Marshall de Turenne, said, that he was a
pretty Man. And you, my Son, said the Father who stood by, are a pretty Sot, to
speak thus of the greatest General in the World.

X.
A Soldier, being in the Trenches, was called to Dinner by his Comrades. But
he answered, He would eat nothing, till he were sure of a good Digestion.

XI.
A Braggadochio chanced, upon an Occasion, to run away with full speed. Which
made one ask him, what was become of his great Courage? It Is run down, says he,
to my Heels.

XII.
In a Sea-sight betwixt the Venetians and the Turks, a Venetian ran into the
Hold, and kept snug there till the Fight was over. When he found the shooting
over, he peeped up, and said, Siam' presi, o aviam preso? Are We, or the Turks,
beaten?

TRADESMEN, AND COVNTRYMEN.
I.
SEveral Tradesmen had great Sums of Money owing them by a Gentleman, who put
them off from Day to Day. One of them coming too close upon him with a pressing
Language, he gave him a box on the Ear. The Tradesman went to a Magistrate, and
complained of it; who advised him to leave his Bills with him, and he would
take care to see them paid. Some time after, the said Magistrate brought the
Bills to the Gentleman, and asked him whether the Tradesman had received any
Thing in part? Yes, Sir, (says he) he had a good Box on the Ear.

II.
A Dier being commanded by the Court to hold up his Hand, it being all black,
the Judge bad him pull off his Glove. My Lord, replied the Dier, You had more
need put on your Spectacles.

III.
A Tradesman that would never work by Candlelight, was asked the reason why?
To save Candles, says he; A Penny saved is a Penny got.

IV.
One admiring the Happiness of Clergymen used to say, I will be a Clergyman
in this World, whatever comes on it in the next.

V.
Another seeing a Wax-taper covered with Lewis D'or, and carried for an
Offering to a Saint, being in a Rapture at the sight of it, cried out, How
glorious and taking are the Church Ceremonies?

VI.
A melting Sermon being preached in a Country-Church, all fell a weeping,
except a Countryman. Who being asked, why he did not weep with the rest?
Because (says he) I am not of this Parish.

VII.
A Countryman admiring the stately Fabric of S. Paul's Cathedral, asked,
Whether it was made in England, or brought from beyond Sea.

VIII.
Another being an Eunuch, was asked by a Gentleman, how he came to have no
Beard? The Countryman, observing he had a Red one, made him this Return; Sir,
says he, when God was pleased to make the Distribution of Beards, I came when
there was none left but Red ones to distribute; and I chose rather to be
without a Beard, than to have a Red one.

IX.
One, finding himself Indisposed, went to consult a Physician. Who advised him
to take a Glister at Night, to be let Blood and take a Glister the next Day,
and Physic the Day after. Being returned home, and considering that he was to
go a Journey, he took all at once; and so set forward, without any prejudice to
his Health.

X.
Another being at the point of Death, his Son was sent to the Priest of the
Parish something late in the Night. The Priest was fast asleep; and the
Countryman, loath to awake him, knocked at his Door as modestly as he could.
Thus he waited three hours at the Door, before he could speak to the Priest, as
he owned it to him. Who, after he had blamed him for not knocking harder,
Friend, says he to him, to be sure your Father is dead by this time, it is too
late for me to go. Don't fear, replied the Countryman, for my Neighbor
Pierrot promised me, that he would keep him in Discourse, till I came back.

XI.
A Woman, whose Husband was gone to the Wars, received Information of her
Husband's being slain in a Battle. Great was her Moan upon it, which drew her
neighboring Gossips about her. One of which told her, for her Comfort, Your
Husband (says she) had so great a Love for you, that, had he lost his Life, as
is reported, you would have had an Account of it from himself.

MASTERS, AND SERVANTS.
I.
A Steward to the late Duke of Guise represented unto him the Necessity he lay
under to lessen his Retinue, and gave him a List of several Servants that he
thought fit to dismiss. The Prince having examined it, It Is true (says he) I
might make shift without them; but did you ask them, if they could make shift
without me? Thus, without disproving his Steward's Argument, he baffled it by a
stronger Reason drawn from his generous Nature, and a Principle of Justice,
requiring all Masters to have a due Regard for such as have been their Servants.

II.
A young Prince having learnt all his Exercises, and made his Course of Study,
one of his Servants was asked wherein he was most skilled? In Riding the great
Horse, said he, for his Horses never flattered him. Whereby he slily
insinuated, that those who had the Care of his Studies stood guilty of Flattery.

III.
A Master speaking of his Servant, I command more (says he) than any Man, for
before my Servant obeys me in one thing, I must command him ten times over.

IV.
A great Newsmonger being one day surrounded with People, to hear what News he
had, he spied out amongst them a Livery-man, whom he bad go his ways. Upon
which he made this Return, It Is my Master (says he) that sent me to keep a
Place for him.

V.
Upon Execution-Days, it was the Way of a Gentleman to send out his Footmen to
see the Execution, and that he called sending them to School.

VI.
A Man of Quality intertaining at Dinner several Persons of his Rank, one of
his principal Servants did something that did not please him; for which he gave
him a Check before all the Company in Words to this purpose, You little know
(says he) how to carry your self, as you ought. Sir, replied the Servant, how
should I know better, that never lived from you?

VII.
A Gentleman being gone to wait upon another, one of his Servants told him,
There was no speaking to his Master, he being in a secret Rapture with his Lady.

VIII.
A diligent Lackey, come all in a muck-sweat to his Master, told him, Sir, I
made all the haste I could. You need say no more, replied his Master, for I
smell it out very well.

IX.
A Gentleman in Company with others said, he knew not an honest Man, and
strenuously maintained his Proposition, which some of the Company took offense
at. Whilst they were hot upon this Debate, a Servant of the Gentleman, in whose
House they were, came to tell his Master, there was an honest Man below who
desired to speak to him. An honest Man, said his Master, how do you know that,
you Rascal? (Upon which words he gave him a blow with his Cane) Do you pretend
to be more knowing than that Gentleman, who says, he knows not so much as one
honest Man? The Blow was given, and the Servant cried out amain. But, to quiet
him, his Master gave him a Crown-piece.

MARRIED MEN AND WOMEN.
I.
A Man looked upon to be Rich, but very much Indebted, courted a good Fortune,
and got her. Some Days before their Marriage, he used this Stratagem, to
smother the Reflections he expected upon the account of his Debts. Being in the
House of his future Mother-in-Law, he walked one day wrapped up with his Cloak, in
a melancholy posture. Upon sight whereof, she fearing he was out of Order,
asked him several times, What was the Matter with him? To which he answered as
often, Nothing. Soon after he was married, his Mother-in-Law, seeing what she
little expected, a Crowd of Creditors with him, Son (says she) you have
deceived me. You may remember, Madam, if you please (replied the Son-in-Law)
how often I answered Nothing, when you asked me, before I married, What was the
Matter with me?

II.
An old rich Counselor, had only one Daughter, courted by a young, proper, and
handsome Gentleman, but sunk in his Fortune. Who, to raise himself in the World,
made it his Business to compass this Lady, with her Father's Consent. But the
Meanness of his Estate, and her Father's Covetousness, must needs be two great
Obstacles. However he found a way, by his Industry, to bring his Design about.
Having got the Lady's good Will, he goes one Day with a good Fee to her Father,
in order to have his Advice. He told him how the Case stood with him, but
concealed the Party. The Counselor, pleased with the Fee, advised him to Marry
the Lady privately, and offered to give him a Note under his Hand to a Parson
of his acquaintance, that should Marry them with all speed and secrecy. The
Business was done accordingly, and the young Couple were married. Which done,
he brought his Wife to ask her Father's Blessing; Who was not a little
surprised, but pleased at last with the Stratagem.

III.
A Lady unmarried, who had two Sisters, the elder married to a Duke, and the
younger going to be married to another Duke, was not a little vexed to see her
self, as she said, between two Stools the Breech on the Ground.

IV.
A virtuous Lady being desired by another, to tell her what Method she took to
preserve her Husband's Affection to her; I make it (says she) my Business to
please him in every Thing, and to bear patiently whatever comes amiss from him.

V.
Another, being asked in a scornful manner what Portion she had brought to her
Husband, What you never had, answered she, and that is Chastity.

VI.
A Man seeing his Wife often whispering in the Ear of a Gentleman, desired to
know what it was. I defy you, answered she, to guess, for we speak good Things
of you.

VII.
A Gentleman having got his Wife (a Beauty) convicted of Adultery, sent her to
a Monastery, and in her place took a Concubine. Which being discoursed of in
Company, one said, If the Gentleman had such a fancy to a Whore, he needed not
to have parted with his Wife.

VIII.
Pisistratus being resolved upon a second Match, his Children asked him whether
it was for any Discontent he had received from them? Far from that, replied he,
for I am so well satisfied with your Carriage to me, that I am willing to have
more Children of so good a Temper.

IX.
A Gentleman being resolved to Marry, because forsooth he wanted Company
anights, and had no body to speak to, a Woman was brought unto him in these
Words, Sir, here is one that will keep you talking.

X.
Another, Married in the Morning, was so little affected with it, that he
forgot it before Night, and was a going to lie at his old Lodging, had not his
Man remembered him of his Spouse.

XI.
A Lady had a Husband very kind and complaisant to her, but that he never
minded the sublime Pleasures of a conjugal Life. She complained of this to her
own Relations, and they to him. But they speaking of it only in general Terms,
he said, he wondered at his Wife's Dissatisfaction; sure he was, that he never
denied her any Thing she desired. Upon this, her Relations were fain to come to
the Point, and to tell him downright the Cause of her Discontent. She is to
blame, answered her Husband, for she never asked me for that she so much wants.
And they replying, that those things are usually granted without asking, he
made this Return, That Thing (says he) is little worth, which is not worth
asking.

XII.
A French Countess being married to one whom she had no Love for, they were
fain at last to part, and live asunder. The Countess after some time changed
her Religion, and being asked the Reason of it, I changed (said she) that I may
not meet my Husband in the next World.

XIII.
A Minister, having married a couple of his Friends, told them afterward in
Merriment, that, if they could not agree, they should come to him again, and he
would unmarry them. It was not long before Dissentions arose between them, and
they went both to the Minister, in order to be divorced. Who asked them, which
of the two had the greatest Desire to leave the other? For (says he) I married
you, till Death does you part; and, before you can be parted, I must dispatch
one of you.

XIV.
If Adam, asked one, were still living, how could he Marry again, all Women
being come from him in a strait Line?

XV.
A married Man, suspected of Impotency, met with another who had often jeered
him about it. Sir, says he unto him, your Jest is spoiled, my Wife is newly
brought to bed. Well, replied the other, your Wife was never looked upon to be
Impotent.

XVI.
Some Ladies speaking of the great Pains they suffered in their Labors, For my
part (said one) it is less Trouble to me, than to swallow the Yolk of an Egg.
Then sure, Madam, replied one of the Company, your Throat us very narrow.

DYING MEN AND WOMEN.
I.
THE ancient Romans were so superstitious, and so apt to flatter their
Emperors, as to Deify them after their Decease. Which made Vespasian, one of
their Emperors, being at the point of Death, express himself in these Words to
his Friends about him, I find, says he, that I become a God, meaning that he
was a dying. Which he said probably, in derision to the Roman Superstition and
Flattery.

II.
A Man condemned to be hanged at Caen in Normandy, being come to the Place of
Execution, protested, that he died Innocent, and summoned the Judge to appear
that Day Twelvemonth before God. To which the Judge answered, I shall be guilty
of Default.

III.
Socrates going to suffer Death, I am sorry, said his Wife to him, that you
should die Innocent. And I, replied Socrates, should be very sorry to die
otherwise.

IV.
Syward, the Martial Earl of Northumberland, finding himself a dying, rose out
of his Bed, and put on his Armor, saying, That it became not a valiant Man to
to die lying, like a Beast, and so gave up the Ghost. As valiantly both spoken
and performed, as it was by Vespasian.

V.
N. Heinsius, Son of Daniel, being upon his Deathbed, charged a Friend of his
with Compliments from him to the Duke of Montausier, Monsieur Bigot, and
several others.

VI.
A Popish Gentleman being at the point of Death, a Confessor was brought unto
him. And being told what he was come for, he looked upon him, and said, I
neither know you, nor you me; and so bidding him farewell, turned his Face from
him.

VII.
A Priest having given the Extreme Unction to another dying Priest, aged 90
Years, Your Turn will come, Brother, said the dying Priest to him, Your Turn
will come.

VIII.
A dying Gentleman advising with another about a Preamble to his Will, he told
him of one he knew of. Where the usual Words, In the Name of the Father, etc.
were followed by these, I shall soon have done, having but little to bequeath.

IX.
One, dictating his Will to some Lawyers, left a great many Legacies, more than
his Estate could bear, and showed his Disposition to leave Something likewise
to the said Lawyers. Who, having writ hitherto very quietly, began now it was
their Concern to ask the Testator out of what these Legacies must be paid? for
upon this, say they, does depend the Validity of the Will. That I know very
well, answered the Testator, and that is the Thing which puzzles me most of all.

X.
Another, well knowing the Steward's way to make Hay while the Sun shines, made
this an Article of his Will, I leave nothing to my Steward, because he has
served me Twenty Years.

XI.
Impious, rather than Witty or Facetious, was that Dean's Will in the Reign of
Henry III; who bequeathed his Estate to the King, his Body to the Earth, and
his Soul to the Devil.

XII.
One who had been always Jocose in his Lifetime, lying upon his Deathbed, his
chief Clerk came, and desired he would leave him a Legacy. Upon which he gave
him a Key, and told him that, in such a Drawer he would find that which would
make him drink. Dying not long after, the Young Man greedily opened the Box,
and found in it but two red Herrings.

XIII.
A Person of Quality, deeply indebted, fell dangerously ill. His Confessor
being sent for, he begged of God, in the presence of his Confessor, that he
would be pleased to prolong his Life, until he had paid his Debts. The
Confessor, putting the best Construction upon his Words, told him, his
Principle was so just, that he hoped God would hear his Prayer. Whereupon the
Person of Quality, turning to one of his Friends, whispered these Words in his
Ear, Should God grant my Request, I should be sure never to die, for I would
never pay my Debts.

BVRYINGS.
I.
UPON one's saying, that the Heart of King Francis I, was buried at
Rambouillet, another said, Then he is all there, because he was all Heart.

II.
John Duke of Bedford, Regent of France, was buried in the Cathedral of Rouen
in Normandy, in a fair plain Monument. King Charles VIII, of France, being
advised by one of his Courtiers to deface it, as a disgraceful Monument to
France, he would not hearken unto it, but made this generous Return; Let him
rest in peace, says he, now he is dead, whom we feared, while he lived.

III.
A Gentleman having sent his Wife to be buried four or five hours after she was
dead, one came and told him, that she was scarce cold yet. No matter, says he,
do as you are bid, she is dead enough for me. He was in the right, she being of
a great age, when he married her: So that it was said of him, that, to help him
to live, he had contracted Society with a dead Body.

IV.
Another being buried by his Order, without a Coffin, in a Capuchin's Habit, a
Widow that had lost her Husband by his means, cried out in the
funeral-Procession, Murderer, thy Disguise will signify nothing, God will find
thee out for all that.

V.
A poor Country-woman in Poitou fell into such a Lethargy, that her Husband and
all about her gave her over for dead. To bury her, they wrapped her up only in a
sheet, as is usual with poor people in those Parts, and so carried her to the
Place of Burial. But the Bearers passing too near a Thorn-bush, she was pricked
alive again out of her Lethargy. Fourteen Years after, she died in good
earnest. Her Husband, fearing another Resurrection, remembered still the
Thorn-bush, in the way to the Churchyard. So that when her Corpse came near it,
he carefully cried out several times, Take heed of the Thorn-bush, and come not
too near the Hedge.

EPITAPHS.
I.
UPON King HENRY I. Who being dead, his Heart and Brains were buried in
Normandy, and his Body in England.

HENRICI, cujus celebrat Vox publica Nomen,
Hoc pro part jacent Membra sepulta Loco.
Quem neque viventem capiebat Terra, nec unus
Defunctum potuit consepelire Locus.
In tria partitus, sua Jura quibusque resignat
Partibus, illustrans sic tria Regna tribus.
Spiritui Coelum, Cordi Cerebroque dicata est
Neustria, quod dederat Anglia Corpus habet.
II.
Another Poet made him this flattering Epitaph; Rex HENRICUS obit, Deus olim,
nunc Dolor Orbis;
Numina flent Numen deperiisse suum.
Mercurius minor Eloquio, vi Mentis Apollo,
Jupiter Imperio, Marsque Vigore gemunt, etc.


III.
MAVD the Empress was Daughter to the foresaid King, Wife to Henry IV Emperor,
and Mother to King Henry II. Happy in her Poet, who in one Distich thus
expressed her Princely Parentage, Match, and Issue.

Magna Ortu, majorque Viro, sed maxima Partu,
Hic jacet HENRICI Filia, Sponsa, Parens,
IV.
Upon King HENRY II, who by his own Right annexed to the Crown of England the
French Provinces of Anjou, Maine, and Touraine; by his Wife, Aquitain; and by
Conquest, Ireland.

Sufficit hic Tumulus, cui non suffecerat Orbis,
Res brevis ampla mihi, cui fuit ampla brevis.
V.
Upon King RICHARD, surnamed Coeur de Lion, renowned for his Conquest of
Cyprus, and great Exploits in the Holy Land.

Hic, RICHARD, jaces. Sed Mors si cederet Armis,
Victa timore tui cederet ipsa tuis.
VI.
This Epitaph was also made upon him.

Istius in Morte perimit Formica Leonem.
Proh dolor! in tanti Funere Mundus obit.
VII.
Queen JANE, who died in Childbirth of King Edward VI, and used for her Device
a Phoenix, being her paternal Crest, had this alluding thereunto for her
Epitaph; Phaenix Jana jacet, nato Phaenice, dolendum
Saecula Phaenices nulla tulisse duos.


VIII.
The said King EDWARD, being snatched away by Death in his Youth, had this
Distich made upon him; Rex, Regis Natus, Regum Decus, unica Regni
Spesque Salusque sui, conditur hoc Tumulo.


IX.
Upon the Removal of Queen ELIZABETH's Body from Richmond (where she died) by
water to Whitehall, there were written these passionate doleful Lines.

The Queen was brought by Water to Whitehall,
At every stroke the Oars Tears let fall,
More clung about the Barge; Fish under water
Wept out their Eyes of Pearl, and swam blind after.
I think the Barge-men might with easier Thighs
Have rowed her thither in her Peoples Eyes;
For howsoe'r, thus much my Thoughts have scanned,
She Would come by Water, had she come by Land.
X.
Upon Prince HENRY, eldest Son of King James I.

Reader, Wonder think it none,
Tho I speak, and am a Stone.
Here is shrin'd celestial Dust,
And I keep it but in trust.
Should I not my Treasure tell,
Wonder then you might as well,
How this Stone could choose but break,
If it had not learnt to speak.
Hence amazed, and ask not me,
Whose these sacred Ashes be.
Purposely it is concealed;
For, if that should be revealed,
All that read would by and by
Melt themselves to tears, and die.
XI.
On Queen ANN, the said Prince's Mother, by King James.

March with his Wind has struck a Cedar tall,
And weeping April mourns the Cedar's Fall,
And May intends no Flowers her Month shall bring,
Since she must lose the Flower of all the Spring.
Thus Marches Wind has caused April showers,
And yet sad May must lose her Flower of Flowers.
XII.
Upon the great GVSTAVVS, King of Sweden, who died Victor in the Field.

Seek not, Reader, here to find
Entombed the Throne of such a Mind
As did the brave GVSTAVVS fill,
Whom neither Time nor Death can kill.
Go, and read all Caesar's Acts,
The Rage of Scythian Cataracts,
What Epire, Greece, and Rome has done,
What Kingdoms Goths and Vandals won.
Read all the World's heroic Story,
It is but half this Hero's Glory.
They got their Victories living,
But our Hero got this dying.
XIII.
This short one also was made upon him.

Upon this Place the great GVSTAVVS died,
While Victory lay weeping by his side.
XIV.
The following Epitaph was made upon Pope LUCIUS, born at Luca; who of Bishop
of Ostia, became Pope of Rome, and died at Verona.

Luca dedit tibi lucem, LUCI, Pontificatum
Ostia, Papatum Roma, Verona mori.
Imo Verona dedit tibi vere vivere, Roma
Exilium, Curas Ostia, Luca mori.
XV.
For Theobald of Bloys, Earl of Champagne, Nephew to our Henry I, Giraldus
Cambrensis made this.

Ille Comes, Comes ille pius Theobaldus eras, quem
Gaudet habere Polus, Terra carere dolet.
Non Hominem possum, non audeo dicere Numen;
Mors probat hunc Hominem, Vita fuisse Deum.
Trans Hominem, citraque Deum; plus hoc, minus illud,
Nescio quis, Neuter, inter Vtrumque fuit.
XVI.
William Earl of Pembroke, and Marshal of England, being buried in the
Temple-Church, had this Epitaph made for him.

Sum quem Saturnum sibi sensit Hibernia, Solemn
Anglia, Mercurium Normannia, Gallia Martem.
XVII.
Something like it was that for Richard de Clare, Earl of Gloucester and
Hartford, who died in 1602.

Hic Pudor Hippoliti, Paridis Gena, Sensus Ulyssis,
Aeneae Pietas, Hectoris Ira jacet.
XVIII.
The Duke of Suffolk and his Brother, Sons of Charles Brandon, who died of the
Sweating Sickness at Bugden, were buried together with this.

Vna Fides vivos conjunxit, Religio una,
Ardor and in studiis unus, and unus Amor.
Abstulit hos simul una Dies, duo Corpora jungit
Vna Vrna, ac Mentes unus Olympus habet.
XIX.
Upon the first Seven Archbishops of Canterbury here is a joint Epitaph, as it
is taken out of Gervasius Dorobernensis.

Septem sunt Anglis Primates and Protopatres,
Septem Rectores, coelo septemque Triones,
Septem Cisternae Vitae, septemque Lucernae,
Septem sunt Stellae, quas haec tenet Area Cellae.
XX.
Upon Stigand Archbishop of Canterbury, this bitter Epitaph was made by some
of his Enemies.

Hic jacet Herodes Herod ferocior, hujus
Inquinat Infernum Spiritus, Ossa Solum.
XXI.
A special Favourer of Thomas Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury, (who was slain
at Christmas, in Christ-Church at Canterbury) made this Epitaph upon him,
expressing the Cause, Time, and Place of his Death.

Pro Christi sponsa, Christi sub Tempore, Christi
In Templo, Christi verus Amator obit.
Quinta Dies natalis erat, Flos Orbis ab Orb
Carpitur, and Fructus incipit esse Poli.
Quis moritur? Praesul. Cur? Pro Grege.
Qualiter? Ense.
Quando? Natali. Quis Locus? Ara Dei.
XXII.
Vitalis, Abbot of Westminster, who died in the Reign of William the Conqueror,
had this Epitaph.

Qui Nomen traxit a Vita, Morte vocante,
Abbas Vitalis transiit, hicque jacet.
XXIII.
One Peter, a Religious Man, had this.

Petra capit Petri Cineres, Animam Petra Christus,
Sic sibi divisit utraque Petra Petrum.
XXIV.
Upon fair Rosamond, King Henry the Second's Concubine, one Mr. Daniel made
this.

Hac jacet in Tumba Rosa Mundi, non Rosamunda;
Non redolet, sed olet, quae redolere solet.
XXV.
The next was made upon Jacobus Triulcio, a restless Man, always in action
while he lived.

Hic Mortuus Requiescit Semel,
Qui-Vivus Requievit Nunquam.
XXVI.
Upon a Gentleman named None, buried at Wimundham, who gave nothing to the
Religious there, this following Epitaph was made.

Hic situs est Nullus, quia Nullo Nullior iste;
Et quia Nullus erat, de Nullo Nil tibi, Christ.
XXVII.
At Geneva there is an Epitaph in these Words; VIXI VT VIVIS,
MORIERIS VT SVM MORTVVS.
SIC VITA TRVDITVR.


XXVIII.
One without Name had this Inscription on his Grave; VIXI, PECCAVI, PAENITVI,
NATVRAE CESSI.


XXIX.
Which is as Christian as that was profane of the Roman, Amici, dum vivimus,
Vivamus.

XXX.
Another did set down for his Epitaph this godly Admonition.

Look Man before thee,
how thy Death hastes;
Look Man behind thee,
how thy Life wastes;
Look on thy right Side,
how Death thee desires;
Look on thy left side,
how Sin thee beguileth;
Look Man above thee,
Joys that ever shall last;
Look Man beneath thee
the Pains without rest.
XXXI.
Diego de Valles made this Inscription for his Tomb at Rome; Certa Dies nulli
est, Mors certa, incerta sequentum
Cura; locet Tumulum qui sapit ante sibi.


XXXII.
Dr. Caius a Learned Physician of Cambridg, and a Cofounder of Gonvil and Caius
College, has only on his Monument there, FVI CAIUS.

XXXIII.
Julius Scaliger, only this; SCALIGERI QVOD RELIQVVM.

XXXIV.
And Cardinal Pool's is as short, but more savouring of Christian Antiquity.
These are the Words, DEPOSITVM POLI CARDINALIS.

XXXV.
Mr. Burbidge, the Tragedian, had one fit for his Profession; EXIT BURBIDGE.

XXXVI.
And Mr. Weymark, a constant Walker in Paul's, was as well fitted with this;
DEFESSVS SVM AMBVLANDO.

XXXVII.
Upon Sir Philip Sidney, I find this; England had his Body, for she it fed;
Netherland his Blood, in her Defense shed;
The Heavens have his Soul,
the Arts have his Fame;
The Soldier the Grief,
the World his good Name.


XXXVIII.
Upon a Young Man of great hope, a Student of Oxford made this; Short was thy
Life,
Yet live thou ever;
Death has her due,
Yet die thou never.


XXXIX.
Upon Sir Francis Vere.

When Vere sought Death, armed with his Sword and Shield,
Death was afraid to meet him in the Field;
But, when his Weapons he had laid aside,
Death, like a Coward, struck him, and he died.
XL.
Here is a short one, but without any stress of Wit, upon an ancient Knight,
Sir..... Jernegan, buried cross-legged at Somerly in Suffolk.

Jesus Christ, both God and Man,
Save thy Servant Jernegan.
XLI.
This following was made for a bad Liver, who was buried in the Night under the
Name of Menalcas, and that without any Ceremony.

Here lies Menalcas, as dead as a Log;
Who lived like a Devil, and died like a Dog.
But I mistake, here he does not ly,
For from this Place he parted by and by;
Making from hence his Descent into Hell,
Without either Book, Candle, or Bell.
XLII.
Pleasant was the Epitaph made upon an ignorant French Abbot, in these words;
Cy git un ignorant Abbe,
Qui ne savoit ni A, ni B.


XLIII.
A drunken Man, Elderton by Name, had this made upon him; Hic situs est
sitiens, atque ebrius Eldertonus,
Quid dico, hic situs est? hic potius sitis est.


XLIV.
Upon an old Miser, Sparges by Name, this was made; Here lies Father Sparges,
That died to save Charges.


XLV.
Upon a capricious Man, this; Here lies Willing Wills,
With his Head full of Wind-mills.


XLVI.
Upon another, who was ever out of humor; Here lies he,
Who with himself could never agree.


XLVII.
On a litigious Man; Here lies he, who in his Life
With every Man had some Strife;
And now he is dead, and in his Grave,
His Bones no quiet Rest can have.
For lay your Ear unto this Stone,
And you shall hear how every Bone
Does crack and beat against each other.
Pray for his Soul's Health, gentle Brother.


XLVIII.
One, who had a Shrew to his Wife, writ upon her this Epitaph; We lived one and
twenty Year,
As Man and Wife together;
I could not stay her longer here,
She Is gone, I know not whither.
But did I know, I do protest,
(I speak it not to flatter)
Of all the Women in the World,
I swear I Would never come at her.
Her Body is bestowed well,
This handsome Grave did hide her:
And sure her Soul is not in Hell,
The Devil could never abide her.
But I suppose she is soared aloft;
For in the late great Thunder,
Methought I heard her roaring Voice,
Rending the Clouds asunder.


XLIX.
He was more happy in a Wife, who wrote this Distich upon her, after her
Decease; Quae pia, quae prudens, quae provida, pulchra fuisti,
Vxor in aeternum, Chara MARIA, vale.


L.
Upon a notorious Liar, basely extracted, yet by reason of his Name claiming
Kindred of a most noble Family, this Epitaph was made.

Here lies M. F. the Son of a Bearward,
Who would needs bear Arms in spite of the Herald;
Which was a Lion as black as a Jeat-stone,
With a Sword in his Paws instead of a Whet-stone.
Five Sons had this Liar, it is worth the revealing;
Two arrant Liars, and three hanged for Stealing.
His Daughters were nine, never free from Sores;
Three crooked Apostles, and six arrant Whores.
LI.
Upon a Dier; He that died so often in sport,
Died at last, no color for it.


LII.
Upon a Puritan Lock-smith.

A Zealous Lock-smith died of late,
And did arrive at Heaven's Gate.
He stood without, and would not knock,
Because he meant to pick the Lock.
LIII.
On a Goldsmiths that Tipped Stone-Jugs with Silver; He that did tip Stone-Jugs
about the Brim,
Met with a black Pot, and the Pot tipped him.


LIVE.
Upon a Wrestler; Death to this Wrestler gave a fine Fall,
That tript up his Heels, and took no hold at all.


LV.
On a Butcher that married a Tanner's Daughter; A sitter Match has never bin,
The Flesh is married to the Skin.


LVI.
Upon Cosier, the Cobbler; Come, gentle Reader, gentle Friend,
Come, and behold poor Cosier's End.
Longer in length his Life had gone,
But that he had no Last so long.
O mighty Death! whose Art can kill
The Man that made Soles at his will.


LVII.
On a Child drowned, catching of an Apple; Disce meo malo, posse carere Malo.

LVIII.
Upon two beautiful Children, Brother and Sister, who wanted each of them an
Eye; Lumine Acon dextro caruit, Leonilla sinistro,
Et potuit Forma vincere uterque Deos.
Parve Puer, Lumen quod habes concede Sorori;
Sic tu caecus AMOR, sic erit illa VENUS.


LIX.
U^^^ troublesome, talkative Woman; Here at la^t does she lie in quiet,
Who whilst ^he lived was ever unquiet.
Her Husband prays, if by her Grave you walk,
You Would gently tread; for, if waked, she will talk.


LX.
I conclude with that Ingenious Epitaph made upon Lot's Wife by Count Emanuel
Thesaurus, in these Words.

Quam stupes muliebrem statuam,
Tanto artificio fictam,
Artifice caruit.
Genita fuit, and sine Scalpello sculpta;
Et, quod impensius mirere,
Olim spirabilis, and loquuta.
Brevi, Foemina fuit.
Dicerem, est;
Nisi prodigium videretur,
Foeminam esse, and tacere.
Sola Mortalium, nec Imaginis egens, nec Sepulchri,
Ipsa suae stupiditatis Imago,
In semita haeret,
Et in sua Statua tumulatur.
Licet igitur intra Metamorphoses numerare
Foeminam ex vera fictam;
Imo nunc veram, quia fictam;
Nam quid in Foeminis videas, nisi fictum?
Itaque mentiri solita, se ipsam mentitur.
Mortua Vivam simulat, vel Viva Mortuam.
Magis mirere,
Quod insulsa salsum migravit in Lapidem;
In sale mortua, quo viva carebat.
Sic solent Foeminae, sapiunt cum percunt.
Ah! fuge hunc salem, si sapis, Viator.
POSTSCRIPT.
I.
AMongst the Articles exhibited to King HENRY VIII. by the Irish against the
Earl of Kildare, the last was, Finally, all Ireland cannot rule the Earl. Then
the Earl shall rule all Ireland, said the King, and so made him his Deputy.

II.
A Person of Quality, traveling through Spain, went to see the Escurial, that
stately Monastery of Monks of St. Jerome's Order. As he was viewing the
Magnificence thereof, the Superior entertained him with the history of its
Foundation; and told him how Philip II. of Spain had erected it in performance
of a Vow made by him when the Battle was fought at S. Quentin in Picardy, if he
should come off Victorious. To which the Travellour replied, admiring still the
Vastness of the Building, Sure (says he) that King was in a great Fright, when
he made so great a Vow. The Malice and Wit of which Answer consists in that it
attributes a good Work to a ridiculous Fear, and that it measures the pretended
Fear of King Philip by the Greatness of the Building.

III.
Monsieur de Bautru, being sent by the French King into Spain, went to see the
famous Library of the foresaid Monastery; where he found so ignorant a
Library Keeper, that he could give no Account of most Books therein. Upon his
Return to Court, the King asked him what he thought of it. It Is a very fine
Library, answered Bautru, but your Majesty should give the Keeper of it the
Keeping of your Exchequer. Why so? said the King of Spain. Because, answered
the other, he never Imbezelled what you have Entrusted him with.

IV.
Another having chosen an Illiterate Man for his Library Keeper, gave Occasion
for an ingenious Lady to say of that Library, That it was a Seraglio, kept by
an Eunuch.

V.
The late Duke of Lorrain being with a Cardinal, his Eminence took care not to
be behind hand with him, and got the Precedence. The Cardinal's Chaplain
attended him, who respectfully stepped back to make way for the Duke. But the
Duke took him by the Arm, and made him go before him. Go on, Sir, says he to
him, loud enough for the Cardinal to hear him, I always give Churchmen the
Precedence. Thus confounding the Cardinal with his Chaplain, he let the
Cardinal know, that he respected all Churchmen as Ministers of Religion, and
that consequently the Chaplain had as much Right as his Master to go before
him, that is, no Right at all.

VI.
An Athenian telling a Lacedemonian, that the Athenians had often repulsed the
Lacedaemonians from before Athens; It Is more than we can say of you, answered the
other, Meaning that the Athenians had never been so bold as to attempt the
Taking of Lacedemon.

VII.
Upon another Athenian's saying, that the Lacedaemonians grew Vicious in foreign
Countries, It Is true, answered a Lacedemonian, but no body contracts Vices at
Lacedemon.

VIII.
John Scot, so famous for his Learning, sitting at Table with a young Gallant,
was by way of Jest, asked by him, what Difference there was between Scot and
Sot. To which he presently replied Mensa tantum, that is, the Table's breadth;
for the other sat just over against him.

IX.
A Papist asked a Protestant, as it is their usual Way, where his Religion was
before Luther. In the Bible, says he, where yours never was.

X.
A pleasant Fancy of an Italian, by name Trivelino. Who falling asleep one Day,
with his Horse's Bridle twisted in his Arm, another came who unbridled his
Horse, and got away. Trivelino being awaked, and missing his Horse, began to
feel himself about, saying; Either I am Trivelino, or not; If I am Trivelino,
my Horse is lost; If not, I got a Bridle, but know not how.

XI.
No less pleasant was the Adventure of two Frenchmen in Florence. Who looking
for one another in the Piazza of the old Palace, could not meet by reason of a
Crowd occasioned by a Show. Till the Agnus being rung for, all the Italians
fell on their Knees, and these two Frenchmen only remained in a standing
Posture; by which means they found one another.

XII.
One being told, that he was all of a piece; Ay, says he, but it is a good Piece.

XIII.
Another speaking of one, He speaks (says he) admirably well. Well he may, said
one that stood by, for he does nothing but speak.

XIV.
An Italian carrying something under his Cloak, a Frenchman asked him what it
was. A Dagger, said the Italian. But the Frenchman, finding 'twas a Bottle of
Wine, took it, and drank it all up. Then returning the Bottle, here is the
Sheath however, says he to him.

XV.
A Man, looking upon the Stars, fell into a Ditch. Which gave Occasion to this
Verse, Qui fuit Astrologus, nunc Geometra fuit.

XVI.
It Is said of one who well remembered what he had lent, but forgot what he had
borrowed, that he had lost one half of his Memory.

XVII.
A Gentleman boasting to another, that he had Killed 300 Men in a Ship, the
other, to be even with him, told him, that to see a fair Lady who kept close in
a Room of his next Neighbor, he had ventured one Day to slip down her Chimney.
Which appearing fabulous to the Gentleman who in his Conceit had made so great
a slaughter, I let you (says he to him) Kill no less than 300 Men at one bout,
why should not you let me for once slip down a Chimney, to see a great Beauty?

XVIII.
Another, being set upon by Robbers at five a Clock in the Morning, Gentlemen,
says he to 'em, you open Shop very early to day.

XIX.
Wise was that saying of Dr. Medcalf, You, Young Men, do think us Old Men to be
Fools; but we Old Men know you to be so.

XX.
Audite Adolescentes Senem (says an Ancient) quem ipsi Senes audivere
Adolescentem; Young Men, hear an Old Man, whom Old Men themselves vouchsafed to
hear in his Youth.

XXI.
Apuleius, seeing a Closet all set round with precious Stones, said, Domus haec
diem suum sibi ipsi facit, this Closet has its Light from it self.

XXII.
An old Man, in a Company speaking of the Eyesight, said these Words; Since I
came to be old, I see more than when I was young, for I see double.

XXIII.
A Gentleman seeing a Nobleman Kneeling at Church without a Cushion, threw his
Muff at his Feet. What do you mean, said the Nobleman, to throw a Cat between my
Legs?

XXIV.
Another being at Mass, one in a genteel Garb came to kneel by him, and soon
after stretched forth his Hand as privately as he could to him, for a Charity.
Sir, said the other, finding what he aimed at, you prevented me, I was just
going to do the same by you.

XXV.
The Creed being sung but madly in a Popish Church, one stood up, and said,
'twas all false. And turning to those about him, Don't think, said he, that I
renounce to the Christian Faith. It Is not the Letter I speak of, but the Music.

XXVI.
A Friend of mine going beyond Sea, and desiring me at parting to take a place
in his Album Amicorum, I writ down this Greek Verse of Homer, (...). That is,
We must make much of a Friend while he is with us, and let him go when he
thinks fit.

XXVII.
A Gentlewoman complaining, that she catched Cold, whenever she went abroad to
buy Things in the Shops, because they lay open and exposed to the Air, an
Acquaintance of hers advised her, Never to go thither but on Sundays and Holy
Days.

XXVIII.
One seeking for a Lodging met with a Friend of his, and asked him whether his
Landlord's House was very lightsom, or not? I have, answered his Friend, lodged
there several Years; but always went out so early, and came home so very late,
that I could never see Daylight in it.

XXIX.
Another being forced to find a Citizen's Security, and at a loss how to get
it, offered instead of it a Security and a she Citizen.

XXX.
It Is said of one who never eat at home, and railed at every one, that he never
opened his Mouth, but at the Cost of others.

XXXI.
A dignified Clergyman, having invited several of his Friends to Dinner upon a
Fish-day, his Purveyor told him, he had been in the Market, and that there was
no Fish left but one Salmon, which was kept for a Judge. Whereupon his Master
gave him a Bag of Money, bad him go back and buy the Salmon and the Judge.

XXXII.
Two Gentlemen being together, one that could not go without a Stick, as the
other could not read without Spectacles, the first seeing the other take up his
Spectacles to read, Rather (says he to him) than make use of Spectacles, I
should choose to forbear Reading. And I, replied the other, rather than go with
a Stick, I should forbear going.

XXXIII.
In Montagne's Book of Expenses, there was this Article amongst others; Item,
for my lazy Temper, 1000 Livers.

XXXIV.
A Man, having dreamt that he was eating of a new-laid Egg, went to an
Interpreter of Dreams, to know the Meaning of it. Who told him, the White of
the Egg signified Silver, and the Yolk Gold, so that he must prepare himself
for a good Chance. And 'twas not long before he had a Windfal, which brought
him both Silver and Gold. He went to thank the Interpreter, and presented him
with a piece of Silver. But the Interpreter, who loved the Yolk better than the
White of an Egg, did not forget to put him in mind of it. Nil ne de Vitello?

XXXV.
A Person of Quality owed a Gentleman a Thousand Pounds. Meeting together in a
fair Road, where both their Coaches went a good rate, the first looking out of
the Coach called to the Gentleman, and begged a thousand Excuses. And I beg,
said the Gentleman presently, a thousand Pounds.

XXXVI.
To one asking, why a lean Person is apter than a fat one to Love? this Reason
was given; Because a lean Person's Heart being nearer, for want of Flesh, is
more easily wrought upon.

XXXVII.
If you ask, why borrowed Books seldom return to their Owners? this is the
Reason one gives for it; Because it is easier to keep 'em, than what is in them.

XXXVIII.
A Gentleman riding an unruly Horse, the Horse capered and kicked; and the
Rider, unwilling to yield, whipped and spurred him as fast. One that stood by bad
him, have more Wit. Another to whom the Fact was related, I know the Story,
says he, but 'twas not to the Rider he spoke, 'twas to the Horse.

XXXIX.
One that had a stinking Breath fell a singing before Company. The Words are
very good, said one of the Company, but the Air is naught.

XL.
A Minister in Languedoc made a Walk of Mulberry-Trees before his Church Door,
and every Year made Money of the Leaves thereof for the use of Silkworms. After
some Years he bestowed the Money upon the Reparations of the Portico, with this
Inscription upon it, MORI LVCRVM.

XLI.
The first time Dr. Casaubon went into the Sorbonne, before it was rebuilt, he
was told concerning the Hall, that it had served four hundred Years for
Disputations. Ay, but (says he) was there ever any Decision made in it?

XLII.
Upon an Eclipse of the Sun which happened some Years since, a Gentleman went to
give a Lady of great Quality a Visit; who asked him, What News abroad? The Sun
(says he) Madam, plays at bopeep.

XLIII.
A Gentleman speaking of the Houses of Paris said, They were so very high, that
they hindered the Prospect of the City.

XLIV.
In the Gallery of Versailles there are long Forms of massy Silver, so that
many Men together cannot lift one up. Upon sight whereof the Ambassadors of Siam
said, it was a very good way to secure them from Thieves.

XLV.
Cardinal du Perron had a Brother, who was an Hermaphrodite. When he was born,
the Midwife explained the Case thus to the Mother. Your Son, says she, is a
Girl, and your Daughter a Boy.

XLVI.
Few People know the Meaning ing of these five Vowels, A, E, I, O, U, thus
placed in the Arch of the Emperor's Palace of Vienna. Where they were put in
(it seems) to signify, Austriacorum Est Imperare Orbi Universo.

XLVII.
A Lacedemonian, being asked by one of the chief of Athens, but a wicked Man,
who was the best Man at Lacedemon, made him this severe Return, He is the best
Man there, says he, that is least like unto thee.

XLVIII.
An Italian Priest, called il Piovano Arlotto, famous for witty Repartees,
being come to Naples, went to pay his Respects to King Alphonso, then reigning.
Who being informed, that he kept a Book of the most noted Errors of the chief
Men of his Time, Sovereign Princes not excepted, asked Messer Piovano, whether
or no he was in his Book. I Will see, answered Piovano; who, by the King's Order,
went and fetched the Book. Being returned, he showed the King the Place of the
Book he was in, with these Words, Error committed by Alphonso King of Naples,
in sending a German belonging to his Court into Germany with 12000 Florins of
Gold, to buy Horses for His Majesty. Upon sight whereof, the King asked him
wherein lay the Error. In trusting the German with such a Sum of Money,
answered Piovano. But, if he comes back with the Horses, replied the King, or
brings me my Money again, what then, Messer Piovano? Then, says he, I Will put
your Name out of my Book, and write the German instead on it. Which Answer the
King was so well pleased with, that he sent home Piovano with Presents, after
he had entertained him for some time at his Court.

XLIX.
A Monk going to Preach some Leagues off, went to Dinner at a poor
Country-Priest's House, who had neither Bread nor Wine good enough for him. The
Monk sent out to buy better, with some other Provisions. And, as he was ready
to sit at Table, he came out with a fine Service of Silver-gilt enamelled.
Which so dazzled the Priest, that he asked the Monk, whether he had made his
Vow of Poverty. Do you question it? said the Monk. Then, replied the Priest,
You and I could make a good honest Monk, for you made the Vow of Poverty, and I
observe it.

L.
The Duke of Ossuna, being Viceroy of Naples, went on a great Holy Day to view
the King of Spain's Galleys, in order to set some Slaves at Liberty, according
to his Privilege. He asked several of them, what Crime had brought them to
their slavish Condition. And all pretended to be Innocent but one, who freely
owned all his Crimes, and confessed that he deserved a much severer Punishment.
Away with this wicked Man, said the Duke, lest he should pervert all those good
Men of his Gang. Thus the Galley-Slave, by his ingenuous Confession, got his
Liberty; whilst the rest were ridiculed, for want of Ingenuity.

LI.
A Grandee of Spain being desirous to have a good Scholar with him to converse
with, a Friend of his presented him one. Whom he asked presently, whether he
could make Verses. You shall judge of it, My Lord, said the Scholar, by what I
have done; and brought him the next day a great Bundle of Spanish Verses of all
sorts. Upon sight whereof, the Grandee told his Friend, that Man was not fit
for him. And his Friend asking the Reason of it, I confess, answered the
Grandee, that I count him Ignorant who can make no manner of Verses, but that
Man sure is a great Fool for having made so many as he showed me. A pleasant
Satyr against all professed Poets, I mean such as make it their whole Business
to make Verses.

LII.
Two Brothers lodging together, who were very like one another, and had the
same Name, a Gentleman desired to speak to one of them. Which of them, said one
of the Servants, The Counselor, said the Gentleman; They are both Counselors,
answered the Servant. He that Squints; They squint both. He that is Married;
That they are both. He that has a handsome Wife; They are both handsome. It Is
then he that is a Cuckold; By my Troth, Sir, I think they are both Cuckolds.
Well then, said the Gentleman, these two Brothers are the most like that ever I
heard of.

LIII.
A Princess of great Wit came in a Province, where the Ladies came t^ pay her
their Respects. Finding little in their Converse that deserved her Attention,
and being howeve^ willing to keep 'em in Discourse, s^^ asked a young Lady of
the Tow^ where she was, how many Children she had. I have three, Madam,
answered the young Lady. Not long after, the Princess, taken up with other
Thoughts, asked her again the same Question. To which the young Lady made this
smart Repartee, I have not, Madam, been brought to Bed, since you first asked
me the Question, and so I have still but three. Which free and pleasant Answer,
as it quickened the Princess's Attention, so she ever since had the greater
esteem and love for the Lady.

FINIS.

