AREOPAGITICA; A SPEECH OF Mr. JOHN MILTON

For the Liberty of VNLICENC'D PRINTING, To the PARLIAMENT of ENGLAND.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Euripid, Hicetid.
This is true Liberty when free born men
Having to advise the public may speak free,
Which he who can, and will, deserv's high praise,
Who neither can nor will, may hold his peace;
What can be juster in a State then this?
Euripid, Hicetid.
LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1644.

For the Liberty of unlicenc'd Printing.
THey who to States and Governors of the Commonwealth direct their Speech,
High Court of Parliament, or wanting such access in a private condition, write
that which they foresee may advance the public good; I suppose them as at the
beginning of no mean endeavor, not a little altered and moved inwardly in
their minds: Some with doubt of what will be the success, others with fear
of what will be the censure; some with hope, others with confidence of what
they have to speak. And me perhaps each of these dispositions, as the subject
was whereon I entered, may have at other times variously affected; and likely
might in these foremost expressions now also disclose which of them swayed most,
but that the very attempt of this address thus made, and the thought of whom
it has recourse to, has got the power within me to a passion, far more
welcome then incidentall to a Preface. Which though I stay not to confess ere
any ask, I shall be blameless, if it be no other, then the joy and
gratulation which it brings to all who wish and promote their Countries
liberty; whereof this whole Discourse proposed will be a certain testimony, if
not a Trophey. For this is not the liberty which we can hope, that no
grievance ever should arise in the Commonwealth, that let no man in this World
expect; but when complaints are freely heard, deeply considered, and speedily
reformed, then is the utmost bound of civil liberty attained, that wise men
look for. To which if I now manifest by the very sound of this which I shall
utter, that we are already in good part arrived, and yet from such a steep
disadvantage of tyranny and superstition grounded into our principles as was
beyond the manhood of a Roman recovery, it will be attributed first, as is
most due, to the strong assistance of God our deliverer, next to your faithful
guidance and undaunted Wisdom, Lords and Commons of England. Neither is it in
Gods esteem the diminution of his glory, when honorable things are spoken of
good men and worthy Magistrates; which if I now first should begin to do,
after so fair a progress of your laudable deeds, and such a l^^^ obligement
upon the whole Realm to your indefatigable vertues^^ might be justly reckn'd
among the tardiest, and the unwillingest of them that praise ye. Nevertheless
there being three principal things, without which all praising is but
Courtship and flattery. First, when that only is praised which is solidly worth
praise: next when greatest likelihoods are brought that such things are truly
and really in those persons to whom they are ascribed, the other, when he who
praises, by showing that such his actual persuasion is of whom he writes, can
demonstrate that he flatters not; the former two of these I have heretofore
endeavored, rescuing the employment from him who went about to impair your
merits with a trivial and malignant Encomium; the latter as belonging chiefly
to mine own acquittall, that whom I so extolled I did not flatter, has been
reserved opportunely to this occasion. For he who freely magnifies what has
been nobly done, and fears not to declare as freely what might be done better,
gives ye the best covenant of his fidelity; and that his loyalest affection and
his hope waits on your proceedings. His highest praising is not flattery, and
his plainest advice is a kind of praising; for though I should affirm and
hold by argument, that it would fare better with truth, with learning, and the
Commonwealth, if one of your published Orders which I should name, were called
in, yet at the same time it could not but much redound to the luster of your
mild and equal Government, when as private persons are hereby animated to
think ye better pleased with public advice, then other statists have been
delighted heretofore with public flattery. And men will then see what
difference there is between the magnanimity of a trienniall Parliament, and that
jealous hautinesse of Prelates and cabin Counselors that usurpt of late, when
as they shall observe ye in the amidst of your Victories and successes more
gently brooking writt'n exceptions against a voted Order, then other Courts,
which had produced nothing worth memory but the weak ostentation of wealth,
would have endured the least signified dislike at any sudden Proclamation. If I
should thus far presume upon the meek demeanor of your civil and gentle
greatness, Lords and Commons, as what your published Order has directly said,
that to gainsay, I might defend my self with ease, if any should accuse me of
being new or insolent, did they but know how much better I find ye esteem it to
imitate the old and elegant humanity of Greece, then the barbarick pride of a
Hunnish and Norwegian statelines. And out of those ages, to whose polite wisdom
and letters we ow that we are not yet Goths and Jutlanders, I could name him
who from his private house wrote that discourse to the Parliament of Athens,
that persuades them to change the form of Democraty which was then established.
Such honor was done in those days to men who professed the study of wisdom and
eloquence, not only in their own Country, but in other Lands, that Cities and
Siniories heard them gladly, and with great respect, if they had ought in
public to admonish the State. Thus did Dion Prusaus a stranger and a private
Orator counsel the Rhodians against a former Edict: and I abound with other
like examples, which to set here would be superfluous. But if from the industry
of a life wholly dedicated to studious labors, and those natural endowments
happily not the worst for two and fifty degrees of northern latitude, so much
must be derogated, as to count me not equal to any of those who had this
privilege, I would obtain to be thought not so inferior, as your selves are
superior to the most of them who received their counsel: and how far you
excel them, be assured, Lords and Commons, there can no greater testimony
appear, then when your prudent spirit acknowledges and obeyes the voice of
reason from what quarter soever it be heard speaking; and renders ye as willing
to repeal any Act of your own setting forth, as any set forth by your
Predecessors.

If ye be thus resolved, as it were injury to think ye were not, I know not
what should withhold me from presenting ye with a fit instance wherein to show
both that love of truth which ye eminently profess, and that uprightness of
your judgment which is not wont to be partial to your selves; by judging over
again that Order which ye have ordained to regulate Printing. That no Book,
pamphlet, or paper shall be henceforth Printed, unless the same be first
approved and licenc't by such, or at least one of such as shall be thereto
appointed. For that part which preserves justly every man's Copy to himself, or
provides for the poor, I touch not, only wish they be not made pretenses to
abuse and persecute honest and painful Men, who offend not in either of these
particulars. But that other clause of Licencing Books, which we thought had
died with his brother quadragesunal and matrimonial when the Prelates expired, I
shall now attend with such a Homily, as shall lay before ye, first the
inventors of it to be those whom ye will be loath to own; next what is to be
thought in general of reading, what ever sort the Books be; and that this
Order avails nothing to the suppressing of scandalous, seditious, and libellous
Books, which were mainly intended to be suppressed. Last, that it will be primely
to the discouragement of all learning, and the stop of Truth, not only by
disexercising and blunting our abilities in what we know already, but by
hindering and cropping the discovery that might be yet further made both in
religious and civil Wisdom.

I deny not, but that it is of greatest concernment in the Church and
Commonwealth, to have a vigilant eye how Books demean themselves as well as
men; and thereafter to confine, imprison, and do sharpest justice on them as
malefactors: For Books are not absolutely dead things, but do contain a
potencie of life in them to be as active as that soul was whose progeny they
are; nay they do preserve as in a violl the purest efficacy and extraction of
that living intellect that bred them. I know they are as lively, and as
vigorously productive, as those fabulous Dragons teeth; and being sown up and
down, may chance to spring up armed men. And yet on the other hand unless
wariness be used, as good almost kill a Man as kill a good Book; who kills a
Man kills a reasonable creature, Gods Image; but he who destroys a good
Book, kills reason it self, kills the Image of God, as it were in the eye.
Many a man lives a burden to the Earth; but a good Book is the precious
lifeblood of a master spirit, imbalm'd and treasured up on purpose to a life
beyond life. It Is true, no age can restore a life, whereof perhaps there is no
great loss; and revolutions of ages do not often recover the loss of a
rejected truth, for the want of which whole Nations fare the worse. We should
be wary therefore what persecution we raise against the living labors of
public men, how we spill that seasoned life of man preserved and stored up in
Books; since we see a kind of homicide may be thus committed, sometimes a
martyrdom, and if it extend to the whole impression, a kind of massacre,
whereof the execution ends not in the slaying of an elementall life, but
strikes at that ethereall and and fist essence, the breath of reason it self,
slaics an immortality rather then a life. But lest I should be condemned of
introducing license, while I oppose Licencing, I refuse not the pains to be so
much Historical, as will serve to show what has been done by ancient and
famous Commonwealths, against this disorder, till the very time that this
project of licencing crept out of the Inquisition, was caught up by our
Prelates, and has caught some of our Presbyters.

In Athens where Books and Wits were ever busier then in any other part of
Greece, I find but only two sorts of writings which the Magistrate cared to
take notice of; those either blasphemous and Atheistical, or Libellous. Thus
the Books of Protagoras were by the Judges of Areopagus commanded to be burnt,
and himself banished the territory for a discourse begun with his confessing
not to know whether there were gods, or whether not: And against defaming, it
was decreed that none should be traduced by name, as was the manner of Vetus
Comoedia, whereby we may guess how they censured libelling: And this course
was quick enough, as Cicero writes, to quell both the desperate wits of other
Atheists, and the open way of defaming, as the event showed. Of other sects and
opinions though tending to voluptuousness, and the denying of divine
providence they took no heed. Therefore we do not read that either Epicurus,
or that libertine school of Cyrene, or what the Cynick impudence uttered, was
ever questioned by the Laws. Neither is it recorded that the writings of those
old Comedians were suppressed, though the acting of them were forbid; and that
Plato commended the reading of Aristophanes the loosest of them all, to his
royal scholar Dionysius, is commonly known, and may be excused, if holy
Chrysostom, as is reported, nightly studied so much the same Author and had
the art to cleanse a scurrilous vehemence into the style of a rousing Sermon.
That other leading City of Greece, Lacedaemon, considering that Lycurgus their
Lawgiver was so addicted to elegant learning, as to have been the first that
brought out of Jonia the scattered works of Homer, and sent the Poet Thales
from Creet to prepare and mollify the Spartan surlinesse with his smooth songs
and odes, the better to plant among them law and civility, it is to be wondered
how musclesse and unbookish they were, minding naught but the feats of War.
There needed no licencing of Books among them for they disliked all, but their
own Laconick Apothegms, and took a slight occasion to chase Archilochus out of
their City, perhaps for composing in a higher strain then their own
souldierly ballats and roundels could reach to: Or if it were for his broad
verses, they were not therein so cautious, but they were as dissolute in their
promiscuous conversing; whence Euripides affirms in Andromache, that their
women were all unchaste, Thus much may give us light after what sort Books
were prohibited among the Greeks. The Romans also for many ages trained up only
to a military roughnes, resembling most the Lacedaemonian guise, knew of
learning little but what their twelve Tables, and the Pontifick College with
their Augurs and Flamins taught them in Religion and Law, so unacquainted with
other learning, that when Carneades and Critolaus, with the Stoic Diogenes
coming Ambassadors to Rome, took thereby occasion to give the City a taste of
their Philosophy, they were suspected for seducers by no less a man then Cato
the Censor, who moved it in the Senate to dismiss them speedily, and to banish
all such Attick bablers out of Italy. But Scipio and others of the noblest
Senators withstood him and his old Sabin austerity; honored and admired the
men; and the Censor himself at last in his old age fell to the study of that
whereof before he was so scrupulous. And yet at the same time Naevius and
Plautus the first Latin comedians had filled the City with all the borrowed
Scenes of Menander and Philemon. Then began to be considered there also what
was to be don to libellous books and Authors; for Naevius was quickly cast into
prison for his unbridl'd pen, and released by the Tribunes upon his
recantation: We read also that lipels were burnt, and the makers punished by
Augustus. The like severity no doubt was used if ought were impiously writt'n
against their esteemed gods. Except in these two points, how the world went in
Books, the Magistrate kept no reckning. And therefore Lucretius without
impeachment versifies his Epicurism to Memmius, and had the honor to be set
forth the second time by Cicero so great a father of the Commonwealth; although
himself disputes against that opinion in his own writings. Nor was the
Satyricall sharpness, or naked plainnes of Lucilius, or Catullus, or Flaccus,
by any order prohibited. And for matters of State, the story of Titus Livius,
though it extolled that part which Pompey held, was not therefore suppressed by
Octavius Caesar of the other Faction. But that Neso was by him banished in his
old age, for the wanton Poems of his youth, was but a mere covert of State over
some secret cause: and besides, the Books were neither banished nor called in.
From hence we shall meet with little else but tyranny in the Roman Empire, that
we may not marvel, if not so often bad, as good Books were silenc't. I shall
therefore deem to have bin large anough in producing what among the ancients
was punishable to write, save only which, all other arguments were free to
treat on.

By this time the Emperors were become Christians, whose discipline in this
point I do not find to have bin more severe then what was formerly in
practice. The Books of those whom they took to be grand Heretics were
examined, refuted, and condemned in the general Councels; and not till then
were prohibited, or burnt by authority of the Emperor. As for the writings of
Heathen authors, unless they were plain invectives against Christianity, as
those of Porphyrius and Proclus, they met with no interdict that can be cited,
till about the year 400. in a Carthaginian Council, wherein Bishops themselves
were forbid to read the Books of Gentiles, but Heresies they might read: while
others long before them on the contrary scrupled more the Books of Heretics,
then of Gentiles. And that the primitive Councels and Bishops were wont only to
declare what Books were not commendable, passing no further, but leaving it to
each ones conscience to read or to lay by, till after the year 800. is
observed already by Padre Paolo the great unmasker of the Trentine Council.
After which time the Popes of Rome engrossing what they pleased of Political
rule into their own hands, extended their dominion over men's eyes, as they had
before over their judgments, burning and prohibiting to be read, what they
fansied not; yet sparing in their censures, and the Books not many which they
so dealt with: till Martin the 5. by his Bull not only prohibited, but was the
first that excommunicated the reading of heretical Books; for about that time
Wicklef and Husse growing terrible, were they who first drove the Papal Court
to a stricter policy of prohibiting. Which course Leo the 10, and his successors
followed, until the Council of Trent, and the Spanish Inquisition engendring
together brought forth, or perfeted those Catalogues, and expurging Indexes
that rake through the entralls of many an old good Author, with a violation
wors then any could be offered to his tomb. Nor did they stay in matters
Heretical, but any subject that was not to their palate, they either condemned
in a prohibition, or had it strait into the new Purgatory of an Index. To fill
up the measure of encroachment, their last invention was to ordain that no
Book, pamphlet, or paper should be Printed (as if S. Peter had bequeathed them
the keys of the Press also out of Paradise) unless it were approved and
licenc't under the hands of 2 or 3 glutton Friars. For example: Let the
Chancellor Cini be pleased to see if in this present work be contained ought
that may withstand the Printing. Vincent Rabatta Vicar of Florence. I have seen
this present work, and find nothing athwart the Catholic faith and good
manners: In witness whereof I have given, etc. Nicolo Cini Chancellor of
Florence. Attending the precedent relation, it is allowed that this present
work of Davanzati may be Printed, Vincent Rabatta, etc. It may be Printed, July
15. Friar Simon Mompei d' Amelia Chancellor of the holy office in Florence.
Sure they have a conceit, if he of the bottomless pit had not long since
broke prison, that this quadruple exorcism would bar him down. I fear their
next design will be to get into their custody the licencing of that which they
say Quo veniam daret flatum crepitumque ventris in convivio emittendi. Sueton,
in Claudio.
Claudius intended, but went not through with. Voutsafe to see another of their
forms the Roman stamp: Imprimatur, If it seem good to the reverend Master of
the holy Palace, Belcastro Vicegerent. Imprimatur Friar Nicolo Rodolphi Master
of the holy Palace.
Sometimes 5 Imprimaturs are seen together dialogue-wise in the Piatza of one
Title page, complementing and ducking each to other with their shav'n
reverences, whether the Author, who stands by in perplexity at the foot of his
Epistle, shall to the Press or to the sponge. These are the pretty
responsories, these are the dear Antiphonies that so bewitched of late our
Prelates, and their Chaplains with the goodly Echo they made; and besotted us
to the gay imitation of a lordly Imprimatur, one from Lambeth house, another
from the West end of Paul's; so apishly Romanizing, that the word of command
still was set down in Latin; as if the learned Grammatical pen that wrote
it, would cast no ink without Latin; or perhaps, as they thought, because no
vulgar tongue was worthy to express the pure conceit of an Imprimatur; but
rather, as I hope, for that our English, the language of men ever famous, and
foremost in the achievements of liberty, will not easily find servile letters
anow to spell such a dictatorie presumption English. And thus ye have the
Inventors and the original of Book-licencing ripped up, and drawn as lineally as
any pedigree. We have it not, that can be heard of, from any ancient State, or
polity, or Church, nor by any Statute left us by our Ancestors elder or later;
nor from the modern custom of any reformed City, or Church abroad; but from
the most Antichristian Council, and the most tyrannous Inquisition that ever
inquired. Till then Books were ever as freely admitted into the World as any
other birth: the issue of the brain was no more stifled then the issue of the
womb: no envious Juno sat cros-leg'd over the nativity of any man's
intellectual off spring; but if it proved a Monster, who denies, but that it
was justly burnt, or sunk into the Sea. But that a Book in wors condition then
a peccant soul, should be to stand before a Jury ere it be borne to the World,
and undergo yet in darkness the judgment of Radamanth and his Colleagues, ere
it can pass the ferry backward into light, was never heard before, till that
mysterious iniquity provokt and troubled at the first entrance of Reformation,
sought out new limbo's and new hells wherein they might include our Books also
within the number of their damned. And this was the rare morsel so officiously
snatched up, and so ilfavourdly imitated by our inquisiturient Bishops, and the
attendant minorites their Chaplains. That ye like not now these most certain
Authors of this licencing order, and that all sinister intention was far
distant from your thoughts, when ye were importuned the passing it, all men who
know the integrity of your actions, and how ye honor Truth, will clear ye
readily.

But some will say, What though the Inventors were bad, the thing for all that
may be good? It may so; yet if that thing be no such deep invention, but
obvious, and easy for any man to light on, and yet best and wisest
Commonwealths through all ages, and occasions have forborne to use it, and
falsest seducers, and oppressors of men were the first who took it up, and to
no other purpose but to obstruct and hinder the first approach of Reformation;
I am of those who believe, it will be a harder alchymy then Lullius ever knew,
to sublimat any good use out of such an invention. Yet this only is what I
request to gain from this reason, that it may be held a dangerous and
suspicious fruit, as certainly it deserves, for the tree that bore it, until I
can dissect one by one the properties it has. But I have first to finish, as
was propounded, what is to be thought in general of reading Books, what ever
sort they be, and whether be more the benefit, or the harm that thence proceeds?

Not to insist upon the examples of Moses, Daniel and Paul, who were skillful
in all the learning of the Egyptians, Caldeans, and Greeks, which could not
probably be without reading their Books of all sorts, in Paul especially, who
thought it no defilement to insert into holy Scripture the sentences of three
Greek Poets, and one of them a Tragedian, the question was, notwithstanding
sometimes controverted among the Primitive Doctors, but with great odds on that
side which affirmed it both lawful and profitable, as was then evidently
perceived, when Julian the Apostat, and suttlest enemy to our faith, made a
decree forbidding Christians the study of heathen learning: for, said he, they
wound us with our own weapons, and with our own arts and sciences they
overcome us. And indeed the Christians were put so to their shifts by this
crafty means, and so much in danger to decline into all ignorance, that the two
Apollinarii were fain as a man may say, to coin all the seven liberal Sciences
out of the Bible, reducing it into diverse forms of Orations, Poems, Dialogues,
even to the calculating of a new Christian Grammar. But says the Historian
Socrates, The providence of God provided better then the industry of
Apollinarius and his son, by taking a way that illiterat law with the life of
him who devised it. So great an injury they then held it to be deprived of
Hellenick learning; and thought it a persecution more undermining, and
secretly decaying the Church, then the open cruelty of Decius or Dioclesian.
And perhaps it was the same politic drift that the Devil whipped St. Jerome in a
lenten dream, for reading Cicero; or else it was a fantasm bred by the fever
which had then seized him. For had an Angel bin his discipliner, unless it
were for dwelling too much upon Ciceronianisms, and had chastised the reading,
not the vanity, it had bin plainly partial; first to correct him for grave
Cicero, and not for scurrill Plautus whom he confesses to have bin reading not
long before; next to correct him only, and let so many more ancient Fathers wax
old in those pleasant and florid studies without the lash of such a tutoring
apparition; insomuch that Basil teaches how some good use may be made of
Margites a sportfull Poem, not now extant, writ by Homer; and why not then of
Morgante an Italian Romanze much to the same purpose. But if it be agreed we
shall be tried by visions, there is vision recorded by Eusebius far ancienter
then this tale of Jerome to the Nun Eustochium, and besides has nothing of a
feavor in it. Dionysius Alexandrinus was about the year 240, a person of great
name in the Church for piety and learning, who had wont to avail himself much
against heretics by being conversant in their Books; until a certain
Presbyter laid it scrupulously to his conscience, how he durst venture himself
among those defiling volumes. The worthy man loath to give offense fell into a
new debate with himself what was to be thought; when suddenly a vision sent
from God, it is his own Epistle that so averrs it, confirmed him in these
words: Read any books what ever come to thy hands, for thou art sufficient both
to judge aright, and to examine each matter. To this revelation he assented the
sooner, as he confesses, because it was answerable to that of the Apostle to
the Thessalonians, Prove all things, hold fast that which is good. And he might
have added another remarkable saying of the same Author: To the pure all things
are pure, not only meats and drinks, but all kind of knowledge whether of good
or evil; the knowledge cannot defile, nor consequently the books, if the will
and conscience be not defiled. For books are as meats and viands are; some of
good, some of evil substance; and yet God in that unapocryphall vision, said
without exception, Rise Peter, kill and eat, leaving the choice to each man's
discretion. Wholesome meats to a vitiated stomach differ little or nothing from
unwholesome; and best books to a naughty mind are not unappliable to occasions
of evil. Bad meats will scarce breed good nourishment in the healthiest
concoction; but herein the difference is of bad books, that they to a discreet
and judicious Reader serve in many respects to discover, to confute, to
forewarn, and to illustrate. Whereof what better witness can ye expect I should
produce, then one of your own now sitting in Parliament, the chief of learned
men reputed in this Land, Mr. Seldom, whose volume of natural and national
laws proves, not only by great autorities brought together, but by exquisite
reasons and theorems almost mathematically demostrative, that all opinions, yea
errors, known, read, and collated, are of main service and assistance toward
the speedy attainment of what is truest. I conceive therefore, that when God
did enlarge the universal diet of man's body, saving ever the rules of
temperance, he then also, as before, left arbitrary the dyeting and repasting
of our minds; as wherein every mature man might have to exercise his own
leading capacity. How great a virtue is temperance, how much of moment through
the whole life of man? yet God committs the managing so great a trust, without
particular Law or prescription, wholly to the demeanor of every grown man. And
therefore when he himself tabl'd the Jews from heaven, that Omer which was
every man's daily portion of (...)mputed to have bin more then might have well
sufficed (...)eder thrice as many meals. For those actions which (...)there then
issue out of him, and therefore defile not, (...)captivat under a perpetual
childhood of prescripti^^ (...) with the gift of reason to be his own chooser;
there (...)e work left for preaching, if law and compulsion should (...)things
which hertofore were governed only (...) Solomon informs us that much reading
is a wearines to t^ut neither he, nor other inspired author tells us that such,
or ^^^^^^eading is unlawful: yet certainly had God thought good to limit us
herein, it had bin much more expedient to have told us what was unlawful, then
what was wearisome. As for the burning of those Ephesian books by St. Paul's
converts, it is replied the books were magic, the Syriack so renders them. It
was a private act, a voluntary act, and leaves us to a voluntary imitation: the
men in remorse burnt those books which were their own; the Magistrate by this
example is not appointed: these men practiced the books, another might perhaps
have read them in some sort usefully. Good and evil we know in the field of
this World grow up together almost inseparably; and the knowledge of good is so
involved and interwoven with the knowledge of evil, and in so many cunning
resemblances hardly to be discerned, that those confused seeds which were
imposed on Psyche as an incessant labor to cull out, and sort asunder, were
not more intermixed. It was from out the rind of one apple tasted, that the
knowledge of good and evil as two twins cleaving together leapt forth into the
World. And perhaps this is that doom which Adam fell into of knowing good and
evil, that is to say of knowing good by evil. As therefore the state of man
now is; what wisdom can there be to choose, what continence to forbear
without the knowledge of evil? He that can apprehend and consider vice with
all her baits and seeming pleasures, and yet abstain, and yet distinguish, and
yet prefer that which is truly better, he is the true wayfaring Christian. I
cannot praise a fugitive and cloistered virtue, unexercis'd and unbreath'd,
that never sollies out and sees her adversary, but slinks out of the race,
where that immortal garland is to be run for, notwithout dust and heat.
Assuredly we bring not innocence into the world, we bring impurity much rather:
that which purifies us is trial, and trial is by what is contrary. That
virtue therefore which is but a youngling in the contemplation of evil, and
knows not the utmost that vice promises to her followers, and rejects (...)
tue, not a pure; her whiteness is but an (...); Which was the reason why our
sage and serious Poet Spencer, whom I dare be known to think a better teacher
then Scotus or Aquinas, describing true temperance under the person of Guion,
brings him in with his palmer through the cave of Mammon, and the bowr of
earthly bliss that he might see and know, and yet abstain. Since therefore the
knowledge and survay of vice is in this world so necessary to the constituting
of human virtue, and the scanning of error to the confirmation of truth, how
can we more safely, and with less danger scout into the regions of sin and
falsity then by reading all manner of tractats, and hearing all manner of
reason? And this is the benefit which may be had of books promiscuously read.
But of the harm that may result hence three kinds are usually reckn'd. First,
is feared the infection that may spread; but then all human learning and
controversy in religious points must remove out of the world, yea the Bible it
self; for that oftimes relates blasphemy not nicely, it describes the carnal
sense of wicked men not unelegantly, it brings in holiest men passionately
murmuring against providence through all the arguments of Epicurus: in other
great disputes it answers dubiously and darkly to the common reader: And ask a
Talmudist what ails the modesty of his marginall Keri, that Moses and all the
Prophets cannot persuade him to pronounce the textuall Chetiv. For these causes
we all know the Bible it self put by the Papist into the first rank of
prohibited books. The ancientest Father must be next removed, as Clement of
Alexandria, and that Eusebian book of Evangelick preparation, transmitting our
ears through a hoard of heathenish obscenities to receive the Gospel. Who finds
not that Irenaeus, Epiphanius, Jerome, and others discover more heresies then
they well confute, and that often for heresy which is the truer opinion. Nor
boots it to say for these, and all the heathen Writers of greatest infection,
if it must be thought so, with whom is bound up the life of human learning,
that they writ in an unknown tongue, so long as we are sure those languages are
known as well to the worst of men, who are both most able, and most diligent to
instill the poison they suck, first into the Courts of Princes, acquainting
them with the choicest delights, and criticisms of sin. As perhaps did that
Petronius whom Nero called his Arbiter, the Master of his revels; and that
notorious ribald of Arezzo, dreaded, and yet dear to the Italian Courtiers. I
name not him for posterities sake, whom Harry the 8, named in merriment his
Vicar of hell. By which compendious way all the contagion that foreine books
can infuse, will find a passage to the people far easier and shorter then an
Indian voyage, though it could be sailed either by the North of Cataio
Eastward, or of Canada Westward, while our Spanish licencing gags the English
Press never so severely. But on the other side that infection which is from
books of controversy in Religion, is more doubtful and dangerous to the
learned, then to the ignorant; and yet those books must be permitted untoucht
by the licencer. It will be hard to instance where any ignorant man has bin
ever seduc't by Papisticall book in English, unless it were commended and
expounded to him by some of the Clergy: and indeed all such tractats whether
false or true are as the Prophecy of Isaiah was to the Ennuch, not to be
understood without a guide. But of our Priests and Doctors how many have bin
corrupted by studying the comments of Jesuits and Sorbonists, and how fast they
could transfuse that corruption into the people, our experience is both late
and sad. It is not forgot, since the acute and distinct Arminius was perverted
merely by the perusing of a namelesse discourse writt'n at Delf, which at first
he took in hand to confute. Seeing therefore that those books, and those in
great abundance which are likeliest to taint both life and doctrine, cannot be
suppressed without the fall of learning, and of all ability in disputation, and
that these books of either sort are most and soonest catching to the learned,
from whom to the common people what ever is heretical of dissolute may quickly
be conveyed, and that evil manners are as perfectly learnt without books a
thousand other ways which cannot be stopped, and evil doctrine not with books
can propagate, except a teacher guide, which he might also do without writing,
and so beyond prohibiting, I am not able to unfold, how this cautelous
enterprise of licencing can be exempted from the number of vain and impossible
attempts. And he who were pleasantly disposed, could not well avoid to lik'n it
to the exploit of that gallant man who thought to pound up the crows by
shutting his Parkgate. Besides another inconvenience, if learned men be the
first receivers out of books, and dispredders both of vice and error, how shall
the licencers themselves be confided in, unless we can conferr upon them, or
they assume to themselves above all others in the Land, the grace of
infallibility, and uncorruptednesse? And again if it be true, that a wise man
like a good refiner can gather gold out of the drossiest volume, and that a
fool will be a fool with the best book, yea or without book, there is no reason
that we should deprive a wise man of any advantage to his wisdom, while we
seek to restrain from a fool, that which being restrained will be no hindrance
to his folly. For it there should be so much exactness always used to keep
that from him which is unfit for his reading, we should in the judgment of
Aristotle not only, but of Solomon, and of our Savior, not voutsafe him good
precepts, and by consequence not willingly admit him to good books; as being
certain that a wise man will make better use of an idle pamphlet, then a fool
will do of sacred Scripture. It Is next alleged we must not expose our selves to
temptations without necessity, and next to that, not employ our time in vain
things. To both these objections one answer will serve, out of the grounds
already laid, that to all men such books are not temptations, not vanities; but
useful drugs and materials wherewith to temper and compose effective and
strong med'cins, which man's life cannot want. The rest, as children and
childish men, who have not the art to qualify and prepare these working
mineralls, well may be exhorted to forbear, but hindered forcibly they cannot
be by all the licencing that Sainted Inquisition could ever yet contrive; which
is what I promised to deliver next, That this order of licencing conduces
nothing to the end for which it was framed; and has almost prevented me by
being clear already while thus much has bin explaining. See the ingenuity of
Truth, who when she gets a free and willing hand, opens her self faster, then
the pace of method and discourse can overtake her. It was the task which I began
with, To show that no Nation, or well instituted State, if they valued books at
all, did ever use this way of licencing; and it might be answered, that this is
a piece of prudence lately discovered. To which I return, that as it was a
thing slight and obvious to think on, so if it had bin difficult to find out,
there wanted not among them long since, who suggested such a course; which they
not following, leave us a pattern of their judgment, that it was not the not
knowing, but the not approving, which was the cause of their not using it.
Plato, a man of high authority indeed, but least of all for his Commonwealth, in
the book of his laws, which no City ever yet received, fed his fancy with
making many edicts to his ayrie Burgomasters, which they who otherwise admire
him, wish had bin rather buried and excused in the genial cups of an Academick
night-satting. By which laws he seems to tolerat no kind of learning, but by
unalterable decree, consisting most of practical traditions, to the attainment
whereof a Library of smaller bulk then his own dialogues would be abundant. And
there also enacts that no Poet should so much as read to any private man, what
he had writt'n, until the Judges and Law-keepers had seen it, and allowed it:
But that Plato meant this Law peculiarly to that Commonwealth which he had
imagined, and to no other, is evident. Why was he not else a Lawgiver to
himself, but a transgressor, and to be expelled by his own Magistrates; both for
the wanton epigrams and dialogues which he made, and his perpetual reading of
Sophron Mimus, and Aristophanes, books of grossest infamy, and also for
commending the latter of them though he were the malicious libeller of his
chief friends, to be read by the Tyrant Dionysius, who had little need of such
trash to spend his time on? But that he knew this licencing of Poems had
reference and dependence to many other proviso's there set down in his fancied
republic, which in this world could have no place: and so neither he himself,
nor any Magistrate, or City ever imitated that course, which taken apart from
those other collateral injunctions must needs be vain and fruitless. For if
they fell upon one kind of strictness, unless their care were equal to
regulat all other things of like aptnes to corrupt the mind, that single
endeavor they knew would be but a fond labor; to shut and fortify one gate
against corruption, and be necessitated to leave others round about wide open.
If we think to regulat Printing, thereby to rectify manners, we must regulat
all recreations and pastimes, all that is delightful to man. No music must be
heard, no song be set or sung, but what is grave and Dorick. There must be
licencing dancers, that no gesture, motion, or deportment be taught our youth
but what by their allowance shall be thought honest; for such Plato was
provided of; It will ask more then the work of twenty licencers to examine all
the lutes, the violins, and the ghittarrs in every house; they must not be
suffered to prattle as they do, but must be licensed what they may say. And
who shall silence all the airs and madrigalls, that whisper softnes in
chambers? The Windows also, and the Balcone's must be thought on, there are
shrewd books, with dangerous Frontispices set to sale; who shall prohibit them,
shall twenty licencers? The villages also must have their visitors to enquire
what lectures the bagpipe and the rebbeck reads even to the ballatry, and the
gammuth of every municipal sidler, for these are the Countrymans Arcadia's and
his Monte Mayors. Next, what more National corruption, for which England hears
ill abroad, then household gluttony; who shall be the rectors of our daily
rioting? and what shall be done to inhibit the multitudes that frequent those
houses where drunk'nes is sold and harbored? Our garments also should be
referred to the licencing of some more sober work-masters to see them cut into
a less wanton garb. Who shall regulat all the mixed conversation of our youth,
male and female together, as is the fashion of this Country, who shall still
appoint what shall be discoursed, what presumed, and no further? Lastly, who
shall forbid and separat all idle resort, all evil company? These things will
be, and must be; but how they shall be lest hurtful, how lest enticing, herein
consists the grave and governing wisdom of a State. To sequester out of the
world into Atlantic and Eutopian politics, which never can be drawn into use,
will not mend our condition; but to ordain wisely as in this world of evil, in
the amidst whereof God has placed us unavoidably. Nor is it Plato's licencing
of books will do this, which necessarily pulls along with it so many other
kinds of licencing, as will make us all both ridiculous and weary, and yet
frustrat; but those unwritt'n, or at least unconstraining laws of virtuous
education, religious and civil nurture, which Plato there mentions, as the
bonds and ligaments of the Commonwealth, the pillars and the sustainers of
every writt'n Statute; these they be which will bear chief sway in such matters
as these, when all licencing will be easily eluded. Impunity and remissenes,
for certain are the bane of a Commonwealth, but here the great art lies to
discern in what the law is to bid restraint and punishment, and in what things
persuasion only is to work. If every action which is good, or evil in man at
ripe years, were to be under pittance, and prescription, and compulsion, what
were virtue but a name, what praise could be then due to well-doing, what
grammercy to be sober, just or continent? many there be that complain of divin
Providence for suffering Adam to transgress, foolish tongues! when God gave
him reason, he gave him freedom to choose, for reason is but choosing; he had
bin else a mere artificial Adam, such an Adam as he is in the motions. We our
selves esteem not of that obedience, or love, or gift, which is of force: God
therefore left him free, set before him a provoking object, ever almost in his
eyes herein consisted his merit, herein in the right of his reward, the praise
of his abstinence. Wherefore did he creat passions within us, pleasures round
about us, but that these rightly tempered are the very ingredients of virtue?
They are not skillful considerers of human things, who imagine to remove sin by
removing the matter of sin; for, besides that it is a huge heap increasing
under the very act of diminishing though some part of it may for a time be
withdrawn from some persons, it cannot from all, in such a universal thing as
books are; and when this is done, yet the sin remains entire. Though ye take
from a covetous man all his treasure, he has yet one jewel left, ye cannot
bereave him of his covetousness. Banish all objects of lust, shut up all youth
into the severest discipline that can be exercised in any hermitage, ye cannot
make them chaste, that came not thither so: such great care and wisdom is
required to the right managing of this point. Suppose we could expel sin by
this means; look how much we thus expel of sin, so much we expel of virtue:
for the matter of them both is the same; remove that, and ye remove them both
alike. This justifies the high providence of God, who though he command us
temperance, justice, continence, yet powrs out before us even to a prosusenes
all desirable things, and gives us minds that can wander beyond all limit and
satiety. Why should we then affect a rigor contrary to the manner of God and of
nature, by abridging or scanting those means, which books freely permitted are,
both to the trial of virtue, and the exercise of truth. It would be better
done to learn that the law must needs be frivolous which goes to restrain
things, uncertainly and yet equally working to good, and to evil. And were I
the chooser, a dram of well-doing should be preferred before many times as much
the forcible hindrance of evill-doing. For God sure esteems the growth and
completing of one virtuous person, more then the restraint often vicious. And
albeit what ever thing we hear or see, sitting, walking, traveling, or
conversing may be fitly called our book, and is of the same effect that
writings are, yet grant the thing to be prohibited were only books, it appears
that this order hitherto is far insufficient to the end which it intends. Do we
not see, not once or oftener, but weekly that continued Court-libell against the
Parliament and City, Printed, as the wet sheets can witness, and dispers't among
us, for all that licencing can do? yet this is the prime service a man would
think, wherein this order should give proof of it self. If it were executed,
you will say. But certain, if execution be remiss or blindfold now, and in this
particular, what will it be hereafter, and in other books. If then the order
shall not be vain and frustrat, behold a new labor, Lords and Commons, ye must
repeal and proscribe all scandalous and unlicenc't books already printed and
divulged; after ye have drawn them up into a list, that all may know which are
condemned, and which not; and ordain that no foreign books be delivered out of
custody, till they have bin read over. This office will require the whole time
of not a few overseers, and those no vulgar men. There be also books which are
partly useful and excellent, partly culpable and pernicious; this work will
ask as many more officials, to make expurgations, and expunctions, that the
Commonwealth of learning be not damnify'd. In fine, when the multitude of books
increase upon their hands, ye must be fain to catalogue all those Printers who
are found frequently offending, and forbidd the importation of their whole
suspected typography. In a word, that this your order may be exact, and not
desicient, ye must reform it perfectly according to the model of Trent and
Sevil, which I know ye abhor to do. Yet though ye should condescend to this,
which God forbid, the order still would be but fruitless and defective to that
end whereto ye meant it. If to prevent sects and schisms, who is so unread or
so uncatechis'd in story, that has not heard of many sects refusing books as a
hindrance, and preserving their doctrine unmixt for many ages, only by
unwritt'n traditions. The Christian faith, for that was once a schism, is not
unknown to have spread all over Asia, ere any Gospel or Epistle was seen in
writing. If the amendment of manners be aimed at, look into Italy and Spain,
whether those places be one scruple the better, the honester, the wiser, the
chaster, since all the inquisitionall rigor that has bin executed upon books.

Another reason, whereby to make it plain that this order will miss the end it
seeks, consider by the quality which ought to be in every licencer. It cannot
be denied but that he who is made judge to sit upon the birth, or death of
books whether they may be wafted into this world, or not, had need to be a man
above the common measure, both studious, learned, and judicious; there may be
else no mean mistakes in the censure of what is passable or not; which is also
no mean injury. If he be of such worth as behoovs him, here cannot be a more
tedious and unpleasing Journey-work, a greater loss of time levied upon his
head, then to be made the perpetual reader of unchosen books and pamphlets,
oftimes huge volumes. There is no book that is acceptable unless at certain
seasons; but to be enjoined the reading of that at all times, and in a hand
scars legible, whereof three pages would not down at any time in the fairest
Print, is an imposition which I cannot believe how he that values time, and his
own studies, or is but of a sensible nostrill should be able to endure. In this
one thing I crave leave of the present licencers to be pardoned for so
thinking: who doublesse took this office up, looking on it through their
obedience to the Parliament, whose command perhaps made all things seem easy
and unlaborious to them; but that this short trial has wearied them out
already, their own expressions and excuses to them who make so many journeys to
solicit their license, are testimony anough. Seeing therefore those who now
possess the employment, by all evident signs wish themselves well ridd of it,
and that no man of worth, none that is not a plain unthrift of his own hours is
ever likely to succeed them, except he mean to put him'elf to the salary of a
Presse-corrector, we may easily foresee what kind of licencers we are to expect
hereafter, either ignorant, imperious, and remiss, or basely pecuniary. This
is what I had to show wherein this order cannot conduce to that end, whereof it
bears the intention.

I lastly proceed from the no good it can do, to the manifest hurt it causes,
in being first the greatest discouragement and affront, that can be offered to
learning and to learned men. It was the complaint and lamentation of Prelates,
upon every least breath of a motion to remove pluralities, and distribute more
equally Church revennu's, that then all learning would be for ever dashed and
discouraged. But as for that opinion, I never found cause to think that the
tenth part of learning stood or fell with the Clergy: nor could I ever but hold
it for a sordid and unworthy speech of any Churchman who had a competency left
him. If therefore ye be loath to dishearten utterly and discontent, not the
mercenary crew of false pretenders to learning, but the free and ingenuous sort
of such as evidently were born to study, and love lerning for it self, not for
lucre, or any other end, but the service of God and of truth, and perhaps that
lasting fame and perpetuity of praise which God and good men have consented
shall be the reward of those whose published labors advance the good of
mankind, then know, that so far to distrust the judgment and the honesty of
one who has but a common repute in learning, and never yet offended, as not to
count him fit to print his mind without a tutor and examiner, lest he should
drop a scism, or something of corruption, is the greatest displeasure and
indignity to a free and knowing spirit that can be put upon him. What advantage
is it to be a man over it is to be a boy at school, if we have only escaped the
ferular, to come under the fescu of an Imprimatur, if serious and elaborat
writings, as if they were no more then the theme of a Grammar lad under his
Pedagogue must not be uttered without the cursory eyes of a temporizing and
extemporizing licencer. He who is not trusted with his own actions, his drift
not being known to be evil, and standing to the hazard of law and penalty, has
no great argument to think himself reputed in the Commonwealth wherein he was
born, for other then a fool or a foreiner. When a man writes to the world, he
summons up all his reason and deliberation to assist him; he searches,
meditats, is industrious, and likely consults and conferrs with his judicious
friends; after all which done he takes himself to be informed in what he
writes, as well as any that writ before him; if in this the most consummat act
of his fidelity and ripeness, no years, no industry, no former proof of his
abilities can bring him to that state of maturity, as not to be still
mistrusted and suspected, unless he carry all his considerat diligence, all
his midnight watchings, and expense of Palladian oil, to the hasty view of an
unleasur'd licencer, perhaps much his younger, perhaps far his inferior in
judgment, perhaps one who never knew the labor of book-writing, and if he be
not repulst, or slighted, must appear in Print like a punic with his guardian,
and his censors hand on the back of his title to be his bayl and surety, that
he is no idiot, or seducer, it cannot be but a dishonor and derogation to the
author, to the book, to the privilege and dignity of Learning. And what if the
author shall be one so copious of fancy, as to have many things well worth the
adding, come into his mind after licencing, while the book is yet under the
Press, which not seldom happ'ns to the best and diligentest writers; and that
perhaps a dozen times in one book. The Printer dares not go beyond his licenc't
copy; so often then must the author trudge to his leav-giver, that those his
new insertions may be viewd; and many a jaunt will be made, ere that licencer,
for it must be the same man, can either be found, or found at leisure; mean
while either the Press must stand still, which is no small damage, or the
author loose his accuratest thoughts, and send the book forth wors then he had
made it, which to a diligent writer is the greatest melancholy and vexation
that can befall. And how can a man teach with authority, which is the life of
teaching, how can he be a Doctor in his book as he ought to be, or else had
better be silent, whenas all he teaches, all he delivers, is but under the
tuition, under the correction of his patriarchal licencer to blot or alter what
precisely accords not with the hidebound humor which he calls his judgment.
When every acute reader upon the first sight of a pedantick license, will be
ready with these like words to ding the book a coits distance from him, I hate
a pupil teacher, I endure not an instructor that comes to me under the wardship
of an overseeing sist. I know nothing of the licencer, but that I have his own
hand here for his arrogance; who shall warrant me his judgment? The State Sir,
replies the Stationer, but has a quick return, The State shall be my
governors, but not my critics; they may be mistak'n in the choice of a
licencer, as easily as this licencer may be mistak'n in an author: This is some
common stuff: and he might add from Sir Francis Bacon, That such authorized
books are but the language of the times. For though a licencer should happ'n to
be judicious more then ordnary, which will be a great jeopardy of the next
succession, yet his very office, and his commission enjoins him to let pass
nothing but what is vulgarly received already. Nay, which is more lamentable,
if the work of any deceased author, though never so famous in his life time,
and even to this day, come to their hands for license to be Printed, or
Reprinted, if there be found in his book one sentence of a ventrous edge,
uttered in the height of zeal, and who knows whether it might not be the dictat
of a divine Spirit, yet not suiting with every low decrepit humor of their own,
though it were Knox himself, the Reformer of a Kingdom that spoke it, they will
not pardon him their dash: the sense of that great man shall to all posterity
be lost, for the fearfulness, or the presumptuous rashness of a perfunctory
licencer. And to what an author this violence has bin lately done, and in what
book of greatest consequence to be faithfully published, I could now instance,
but shall forbear till a more convenient season. Yet if these things be not
resented seriously and timely by them who have the remedy in their power, but
that such iron moulds as these shall have authority to know out the choicest
periods of exquisitest books, and to commit such a treacherous fraud against
the orphan remainders of worthiest men after death, the more sorrow will belong
to that haples race of men, whose misfortune it is to have understanding.
Henceforth let no man care to learn, or care to be more then worldly wise; for
certainly in higher matters to be ignorant and slothful, to be a common
steadfast dunce will be the only pleasant life, and only in request.

And as it is a particular disesteem of every knowing person alive, and most
injurious to the writt'n labors and monuments of the dead, so to me it seems
an undervaluing and vilifying of the whole Nation. I cannot set so light by all
the invention, the art, the wit, the grave and solid judgment which is in
England, as that it can be comprehended in any twenty capacities how good
soever, much less that it should not pass except their superintendence be
over it, except it be sifted and strained with their strainers, that it should
be uncurrant without their manual stamp. Truth and understanding are not such
wares as to be monopoliz'd and traded in by tickets and statutes, and
standards. We must not think to make a staple commodity of all the knowledge in
the Land, to mark and license it like our broad cloth, and our wool packs.
What is it but a servitude like that imposed by the Philistims, not to be
allowed the sharpning of our own axes and coulters, but we must repair from all
quarters to twenty licencing forges. Had any one writt'n and divulged erroneous
things and scandalous to honest life, misusing and forfeiting the esteem had of
his reason among men, if after conviction this only censure were adjudg'd him,
that he should never henceforth write, but what were first examined by an
appointed officer, whose hand should be annexed to pass his credit for him,
that now he might be safely read, it could not be apprehended less then a
disgraceful punishment. Whence to include the whole Nation, and those that
never yet thus offended, under such a diffident and suspectfull prohibition,
may plainly be understood what a disparagement it is. So much the more, when as
dettors and delinquents may walk abroad without a keeper, but unoffensive books
must not stir forth without a visible jailer in their title. Nor is it to the
common people less then a reproach; for if we be so jealous over them, as that
we dare not trust them with an English pamphlet, what do we but censure them
for a giddy, vicious, and ungrounded people; in such a sick and weak estate of
faith and discretion, as to be able to take nothing down but through the pipe
of a licencer. That this is care or love of them, we cannot pretend, whenas in
those Popish places where the Laity are most hated and dispis'd the same
strictnes is used over them. Wisdom we cannot call it, because it stops but one
breach of license, nor that neither; whenas those corruptions which it seeks to
prevent, break in faster at other doors which cannot be shut.

And in conclusion it reslects to the disrepute of our Ministers also, of whose
labors we should hope better, and of the proficiencie which their flock reaps
by them, then that after all this light of the Gospel which is, and is to be,
and all this continual preaching, they should be still frequented with such an
unprincipl'd, unedify'd, and laick rabble, as that the whiffe of every new
pamphlet should stagger them out of their catechism, and Christian walking. This
may have much reason to discourage the Ministers when such a low conceit is had
of all their exhortations, and the benefiting of their hearers, as that they
are not thought fit to be turned loose to three sheets of paper without a
licencer, that all the Sermons, all the Lectures preached, printed, vented in
such numbers, and such volumes, as have now well-nigh made all other books
unsalable, should not be armor anough against one single enchiridion, without
the castle St. Angelo of an Imprimatur.

And lest some should persuade ye, Lords and Commons, that these arguments of
learned men's discouragement at this your order, are mere flourishes, and not
real, I could recount what I have seen and heard in other Countries, where
this kind of inquisition tyrannizes; when I have sat among their learned men,
for that honor I had, and bin counted happy to be born in such a place of as
they supposed England was, while themselves did nothing but bemoan the servil
condition into which lerning amongst them was brought; that this was it which
had dampt the glory of Italian wits: that nothing had bin there writt'n now
these many years but flattery and lustian. There it was that I found and
visited the famous Galileo grown old, a prisner to the Inquisition, for
thinking in Astronomy otherwise then the Franciscan and Dominican licencers
thought. And though I knew that England then was groaning loudest under the
Prelaticall yoke, nevertheless I took it as a pledge of future happiness, that
other Nations were so persuaded of her liberty. Yet was it beyond my hope that
those Worthies were then breathing in her air, who should be her leaders to
such a deliverance, as shall never be forgott'n by any revolution of time that
this world has to finish. When that was once begun, it was as little in my
sear, that what words of complaint I heard among learned men of other parts
uttered against the Inquisition, the same I should hear by as learned men at
home utterd in time of Parliament against an order of licencing; and that so
generally, that when I had disclosed my self a companion of their discontent, I
might say, if without envy, that he whom an honest questorship had indear'd to
the Sicilians, was not more by them importuned against Verres, then the
favorable opinion which I had among many who honor ye, and are known and
respected by ye, loaded me with entreaties and persuasions; that I would not
despair to lay together that which just reason should bring into my mind,
toward the removal of an undeserved thraldom upon lerning. That this is not
therefore the disburdning of a particular fancy, but the common grievance of
all those who had prepared their minds and studies above the vulgar pitch to
advance truth in others, and from others to entertain it, thus much may
satisfy. And in their name I shall for neither friend nor foe conceal what the
general murmur is; that if it come to inquisitioning again, and licencing, and
that we are so timorous of our selves, and so suspicious of all men, as to fear
each book, and the shaking of every leaf, before we know what the contents are,
if some who but of late were little better then silenc't from preaching, shall
come now to silence us from reading, except what they please, it cannot be
guest what is intended by some but a second tyranny over learning: and will soon
put it out of controversy that Bishops and Presbyters are the same to us both
name and thing. That those evils of Prelaty which before from five or six and
twenty Sees were distributivly charged upon the whole people, will now light
wholly upon learning, is not obscure to us: whenas now the Pastor of a small
unlearned Parish, on the sudden shall be exalted Archbishop over a large dioces
of books, and yet not remove, but keep his other cure too, a mystical
pluralist. He who but of late cried down the sole ordination of every novice
Bachelor of Art, and denied sole jurisdiction over the simplest Parishioner,
shall now at home in his private chair assume both these over worthiest and
excellentest books and ablest authors that write them. This is not, Ye
Covnants and Protestations that we have made, this is not to put down Prelaty,
this is but to chop an Episcopacy, this is but to translate the Palace
Metropolitan from one kind of dominion into another, this is but an old
canonical flight of commuting our penance. To startle thus betimes at a mere
unlicenc't pamphlet will after a while be afraid of every conventicle, and a
while after will make a conventicle of every Christian meeting. But I am
certain that a State governed by the rules of justice and fortitude, or a
Church built and founded upon the rock of faith and true knowledge, cannot be
so pusillanimous. While things are yet not constituted in Religion, that
freedom of writing should be restrained by a discipline imitated from the
Prelates, and learnt by them from the Inquisition to shut us up all again into
the breast of a licencer, must needs give cause of doubt and discouragement to
all learned and religious men. Who cannot but discern the finenes of this
politic drift, and who are the contrivers; that while Bishops were to be baited
down, then all Presses might be open; it was the peoples birthright and
privilege in time of Parliament, it was the breaking forth of light. But now
the Bishops abrogated and voided out of the Church, as if our Reformation
sought no more, but to make room for others into their seats under another
name, the Episcopal arts begin to bud again, the cruse of truth must run no
more oil, liberty of Printing must be enthralled again under a Prelaticall
commission of twenty, the privilege of the people nullify'd, and which is wors,
the freedom of learning must groan again, and to her old fetters; all this the
Parliament yet sitting. Although their own late arguments and defenses against
the Prelates might remember them that this obstructing violence meets for the
most part with an event utterly opposite to the end which it drives at: instead
of suppressing sects and schisms, it raises them and invests them with a
reputation: The punishing of wits enhaunces their authority, says the Vicount
St. Albans, and a forbidd'n writing is thought to be a certain spark of truth
that flies up in the faces of them who seek to tread it out. This order
therefore may prove a nursing mother to sects, but I shall easily show how it
will be a step-dame to Truth: and first by disinabling us to the maintenance of
what is known already.

Well knows he who uses to consider, that our faith and knowledge thrives by
exercise, as well as our limbs and complexion. Truth is compared in Scripture
to a streaming fountain; if her waters flow not in a perpetual progression,
they sick'n into a muddy pool of conformity and tradition. A man may be a
heretic in the truth; and if he believe things only because his Pastor says
so, or the Assembly so determins, without knowing other reason, though his
belief be true, yet the very truth he holds, becomes his heresy. There is not
any burden that some would gladlier post off to another, then the charge and
care of their Religion. There be, who knows not that there be of Protestants
and professors who live and dye in as arrant an implicit faith, as any lay
Papist of Loretto. A wealthy man addicted to his pleasure and to his profits,
finds Religion to be a traffic so entangl'd, and of so many piddling accounts,
that of all mysteries he cannot skill to keep a stock going upon that trade.
What should he do? fain he would have the name to be religious, fain he would
bear up with his neighbors in that. What does he therefore, but resolvs to
give over toyling, and to find himself out some factor, to whose care and credit
he may commit the whole managing of his religious affairs; some Divine of note
and estimation that must be. To him he adheres, resigns the whole warehouse of
his religion, with all the locks and keys into his custody; and indeed makes
the very person of that man his religion; esteems his associating with him a
sufficient evidence and commendatory of his own piety. So that a man may say
his religion is now no more within himself, but is become a dividuall movable,
and goes and comes near him, according as that good man frequents the house. He
entertains him, gives him gifts, feasts him, lodges him; his religion comes
home at night, prays, is liberally supt, and sumptuously laid to sleep, rises,
is saluted, and after the malmsey, or some well spic't bruage, and better
breakfasted then he whose morning appetite would have gladly fed on green figs
between Bethany and Jerusalem, his Religion walks abroad at eight, and leaves
his kind entertainer in the shop trading all day without his religion.

Another sort there be who when they hear that all things shall be ordered, all
things regulated and settled; nothing writt'n but what passes through the
custom-house of certain Publicans that have the tunaging and the poundaging of
all free spok'n truth, will strait give themselves up into your hands, mak'em
and cut'em out what religion ye please; there be delights, there be recreations
and jolly pastimes that will fetch the day about from sun to sun, and rock the
tedious year as in a delightful dream. What need they torture their heads with
that which others have taken so strictly, and so unalterably into their own
pourveying. These are the fruits which a dull ease and cessation of our
knowledge will bring forth among the people. How goodly, and how to be wished
were such an obedient unanimity as this, what a fine conformity would it starch
us all into? doubtless a stanch and solid piece of frame-work, as any January
could freeze together.

Nor much better will be the consequence even among the Clergy themselves; it is
no new thing never heard of before, for a parochial Minister, who has his
reward, and is at his Hercules pillars in a warm benefice, to be easily
inclinable, if he have nothing else that may rouse up his studies, to finish
his circuit in an English concordance and a topic folio, the gatherings and
savings of a sober graduatship, a Harmony and a Catena, treading the constant
round of certain common doctrinall heads, attended with their uses, motives,
marks and means, out of which as out of an alphabet or sol fa by forming and
transforming, joining and dis-joyning variously a little book-craft, and two
hours meditation might furnish him unspeakably to the performance of more then
a weekly charge of sermoning: not to reck'n up the infinite helps of
interlinearies, breviaries, synopses, and other loitering gear. But as for the
multitude of Sermons ready printed and pil'd up, on every text that is not
difficult, our London trading St. Thomas in his vestry, and add to boot St.
Martin, and St. Hugh, have not within their hallowed limits more vendible ware
of all sorts ready made: so that penury he never need fear of Pulpit provision,
having where so plenteously to refresh his magazin. But if his rear and flanks
be not impaled, if his back door be not secured by the rigid licencer, but that
a bold book may now and then issue forth, and give the assault to some of his
old collections in their trenches, it will concern him then to keep waking, to
stand in watch, to set good guards and sentinells about his received opinions,
to walk the round and counter-round with his fellow inspectors, fearing lest
any of his flock be seduc't, who also then would be better instructed, better
exercised and disciplined. And God send that the fear of this diligence which
must then be used, do not make us affect the lazines of a licencing Church.

For if we be sure we are in the right, and do not hold the truth guiltily,
which becomes not, if we our selves condemn not our own weak and frivolous
teaching, and the people for an untaught and irreligious gadding rout, what can
be more fair, then when a man judicious, learned, and of a conscience, for
ought we know, as good as theirs that taught us what we know, shall not privily
from house to house, which is more dangerous, but openly by writing publish to
the world what his opinion is, what his reasons, and wherefore that which is
now thought cannot be found. Christ urged it as wherewith to justify himself,
that he preached in public; yet writing is more public then preaching; and
more easy to refutation, if need be, there being so many whose business and
profession merely it is, to be the champions of Truth; which if they neglect,
what can be imputed but their sloth, or unability?

Thus much we are hindered and dis-inur'd by this course of licencing toward the
true knowledge of what we seem to know. For how much it hurts and hinders the
licencers themselves in the calling of their Ministry, more then any secular
employment, if they will discharge that office as they ought, so that of
necessity they must neglect either the one duty or the other, I insist not,
because it is a particular, but leave it to their own conscience, how they will
decide it there.

There is yet behind of what I purposed to lay open, the incredible loss, and
detriment that this plot of licencing puts us to, more then if some enemy at sea
should stop up all our hav'ns and ports, and creeks, it hinders and retards the
importation of our richest Merchandise, Truth: nay it was first established and
put in practice by Antichristian malice and mystery on set purpose to
extinguish, if it were possible, the light of Reformation, and to settle
falsehood; little differing from that policy wherewith the Turk upholds his
Alcoran, by the prohibition of Printing. It Is not denied, but gladly confessed,
we are to send our thanks and vows to heaven, louder then most of Nations, for
that great measure of truth which we enjoy, especially in those main points
between us and the Pope, with his appertinences the Prelates: but he who thinks
we are to pitch our tent here, and have attained the utmost prospect of
reformation, that the mortal glass wherein we contemplate, can show us, till
we come to beatisic vision, that man by this very opinion declares, that he is
yet far short of Truth.

Truth indeed came once into the world with her divine Master, and was a
perfect shape most glorious to look on: but when he ascended, and his Apostles
after him were laid asleep, then strait arose a wicked race of deceivers, who
as that story goes of the Egyptian Typhon with his conspirators, how they
dealt with the good Osiris, took the virgin Truth, hewd her lovely form into a
thousand pieces, and scattered them to the four winds. From that time ever
since, the sad friends of Truth, such as durst appear, imitating the careful
search that Isis made for the mangled body of Osiris, went up and down
gathering up limb by limb still as they could find them. We have not yet found
them all, Lords and Commons, nor ever shall do, till her Masters second
coming; he shall bring together every joint and member, and shall mould them
into an immortal feature of lovelines and perfection. Suffer not these
licencing prohibitions to stand at every place of opportunity forbidding and
disturbing them that continue seeking, that continue to do our obsequies to the
torn body of our martyred Saint. We boast our light; but if we look not wisely
on the Sun it self, it smites us into darkness. Who can discern those planets
that are often Combust, and those stars of brightest magnitude that rise and set
with the Sun, until the opposite motion of their orbs bring them to such a
place in the firmament, where they may be seen evning or morning. The light
which we have gained, was given us, not to be ever staring on, but by it to
discover onward things more remote from our knowledge It is not the unfrocking
of a Priest, the unmitring of a Bishop, and the removing him from off the
Presbyterian shoulders that will make us a happy Nation, no, if other things as
great in the Church, and in the rule of life both economicall and political be
not looked into and reformed, we have looked so long upon the blaze that
Zuinglius and Calvin has beacon'd up to us, that we are stark blind. There be
who perpetually complain of schisms and sects, and make it such a calamity that
any man dissents from their maxims. It Is their own pride and ignorance which
causes the disturbing, who neither will hear with meeknes, nor can convince,
yet all must be suppressed which is not found in their Syntagma. They are the
troublers, they are the dividers of unity, who neglect and permit not others to
unite those dissever'd pieces which are yet wanting to the body of Truth. To be
still searching what we know not, by what we know, still closing up truth to
truth as we find it (for all her body is homogeneal, and proportional) this is
the golden rule in Theology as well as in Arithmetic, and makes up the best
harmony in a Church; not the forced and outward union of cold, and neutrall,
and inwardly divided minds.

Lords and Commons of England, consider what Nation it is whereof ye are, and
whereof ye are the governors: a Nation not slow and dull, but of a quick,
ingenious, and piercing spirit, acute to invent, subtle and sinewy to discourse,
not beneath the reach of any point the highest that human capacity can soar to.
Therefore the studies of learning in her deepest Sciences have bin so ancient,
and so eminent among us, that Writers of good antiquity, and ablest judgment
have bin persuaded that even the school of Pythagoras, and the Persian wisdom
took beginning from the old Philosophy of this Island. And that wise and civil
Roman, Julius Agricola, who governed once here for Caesar, preferred the
natural wits of Britain, before the labored studies of the French. Nor is it
for nothing that the grave and frugal Transilvanian sends out yearly from as
far as the mountanous borders of Russia, and beyond the Hercynian wilderness,
not their youth, but their stayed men, to learn our language, and our theologic
arts. Yet that which is above all this, the favor and the love of heaven we
have great argument to think in a peculiar manner propitious and propending
toward us. Why else was this Nation chos'n before any other, that out of her
as out of Sion should be proclaimed and sounded forth the first tidings and
trumpet of Reformation to all Europ. And had it not bin the obstinat perverseness
of our Prelates against the divine and admirable spirit of Wicklef, to suppress
him as a schismatic and innovator, perhaps neither the Bohemian Husse and
Jerome, no nor the name of Luther, or of Calvin had bin ever known; the glory of
reforming all our neighbors had bin completely ours. But now, as our obdurat
Clergy have with violence demeaned the matter, we are become hitherto the
latest and the backwardest Scholars, of whom God offered to have made us the
teachers. Now once again by all concurrence of signs, and by the general
instinct of holy and devout men, as they daily and solemnly express their
thoughts, God is decreeing to begin some new and great period in his Church,
even to the reforming of Reformation it self: what does he then but reveal
Himself to his servants, and as his manner is, first to his Englishmen; I say
as his manner is, first to us, though we mark not the method of his counsels,
and are unworthy. Behold now this vast City; a City of refuge, the mansion
house of liberty, encompast and surrounded with his protection; the shop of
war has not there more anvils and hammers waking, to fashion out the plates
and instruments of armed Justice in defense of beleaguered Truth, then there be
pens and heads there, sitting by their studious lamps, musing, searching,
revolving new nations and idea's wherewith to present, as with their homage and
their fealty the approaching Reformation: others as fast reading, trying all
things, assenting to the force of reason and convincement. What could a man
require more from a Nation so pliant and so prone to seek after knowledge. What
wants there to such a towardly and pregnant soil, but wise and faithful
laborers, to make a knowing people, a Nation of Prophets, of Sages, and of
Worthies. We reck'n more then five months yet to harvest; there need not be
five weeks, had we but eyes to lift up, the fields are white already. Where
there is much desire to learn, there of necessity will be much arguing, much
writing, many opinions; for opinion in good men is but knowledge in the making.
Under these fantastic terrors of sect and schism, we wrong the earnest and
zealous thirst after knowledge and understanding which God has stirred up in
this City. What some lament of, we rather should rejoice at, should rather
praise this pious forwardnes among men, to reassume the ill deputed care of
their Religion into their own hands again. A little generous prudence, a little
forbearance of one another, and some grain of charity might win all these
diligences to join, and unite into one general and brotherly search after
Truth; could we but forgo this Prelaticall tradition of crowding free
consciences and Christian liberties into canons and precepts of men. I doubt
not, if some great and worthy stranger should come among us, wise to discern
the mould and temper of a people, and how to govern it, observing the high
hopes and aims, the diligent alacrity of our extended thoughts and reasonings
in the pursuance of truth and freedom, but that he would cry out as Pirrhus
did, admiring the Roman docility and courage, if such were my Epirots, I would
not despair the greatest design that could be attempted to make a Church or
Kingdom happy. Yet these are the men cried out against for schismatics and
sectaries; as if, while the Temple of the Lord was building, some cutting, some
squaring the marble, others hewing the cedars, there should be a sort of
irrational men who could not consider there must be many schisms and many
dissections made in the quarry and in the timber, ere the house of God can be
built. And when every stone is laid artfully together, it cannot be united into
a continuity, it can but be contiguous in this world; neither can every piece
of the building be of one form; nay rather the perfection consists in this,
that out of many moderat varieties and brotherly dissimilitudes that are not
vastly disproportionall arises the goodly and the graceful symmetry that
commends the whole pile and structure. Let us therefore be more considerat
builders, more wise in spiritual architecture, when great reformation is
expected. For now the time seems come, wherein Moses the great Prophet may sit
in heaven rejoicing to see that memorable and glorious wish of his fulfilled,
when not only our sev'nty Elders, but all the Lords people are become Prophets.
No marvel then though some men, and some good men too perhaps, but young in
goodness, as Joshua then was, envy them. They fret, and out of their own
weakness are in agony, lest these divisions and subdivisions will undo us. The
adversary again applauds, and waits the hour, when they have brancht
themselves out, says he, small anough into parties and partitions, then will
be our time. Fool! he sees not the firm root, out of which we all grow, though
into branches: nor will beware until he see our small divided maniples cutting
through at every angle of his ill united and unweildy brigade. And that we are
to hope better of all those supposed sects and schisms, and that we shall not
need that solicitude honest perhaps though over timorous of them that vex in
this behalf, but shall laugh in the end, at those malicious applauders of our
differences, I have these reasons to persuade me.

First, when a City shall be as it were besieged and blockt about, her
navigable river infested, inrodes and incursions round, defiance and battle
often rumor'd to be marching up even to her walls, and suburb trenches, that then
the people, or the greater part, more then at other times, wholly taken up with
the study of highest and most important matters to be reformed, should be
disputing, reasoning, reading, inventing, discoursing, even to a rarity, and
admiration, things not before discourst or writt'n of, argues first a singular
good will, contentedness and confidence in your prudent foresight, and safe
government, Lords and Commons; and from thence derives it self to a gallant
bravery and well grounded contempt of their enemies, as if there were no small
number of as great spirits among us, as his was, who when Rome was nigh
besieged by Hanibal, being in the City, bought that piece of ground at no cheap
rate, whereon Hanibal himself encampt his own regiment. Next it is a lively and
cherfull presage of our happy success and victory. For as in a body, when the
blood is fresh, the spirits pure and vigorous, not only to vital, but to
rational faculties, and those in the acutest, and the pertest operations of
wit and suttlety, it argues in what good plight and constitution the body is,
so when the cherfulnesse of the people is so sprightly up, as that it has, not
only wherewith to guard well its own freedom and safety, but to spare, and to
bestow upon the solidest and sublimest points of controversy, and new
invention, it betok'ns us not degenerated, nor drooping to a fatal decay, but
casting off the old and wrincl'd skin of corruption to outlive these pangs and
wax young again, entering the glorious ways of Truth and prosperous virtue
destined to become come great and honorable in these latter ages. Methinks I
see in my mind a noble and puissant Nation rousing herself like a strong man
after sleep, and shaking her invincible locks: Methinks I see her as an Eagle
muing her mighty youth, and kindling her undazl'd eyes at the full midday beam;
purging and unscaling her long abused sight at the fountain it self of heavenly
radiance; while the whole noise of timorous and flocking birds, with those also
that love the twilight, flutter about, amazed at what she means, and in their
envious gabble would prognosticat a year of sects and schisms.

What should ye do then, should ye suppress all this flowery crop of knowledge
and new light sprung up and yet springing daily in this City, should ye set an
Oligarchy of twenty ingrossers over it, to bring a famine upon our minds again,
when we shall know nothing but what is measured to us by their bushel? Believe
it, Lord and Commons, they who counsel ye to such a suppressing, do as good
as bid ye suppress your selves; and I will soon show how. If it be desired to
know the immediate cause of all this free writing and free speaking, there
cannot be assing'd a truer then your own mild, and free, and human government;
it is the liberty, Lords and Commons, which your own valorous and happy
counsels have purchased us, liberty which is the nurse of all great wits; this
is that which has ratified and enlightn'd our spirits like the influence of
heaven; this is that which has enfranchised, enlarged and lifted up our
apprehensions degrees above themselves. Ye cannot make us now less capable,
less knowing, less eagarly pursuing of the truth, unless ye first make your
selves, that made us so, less the lovers, less the founders of our true
liberty. We can grow ignorant again, brutish, formal, and slavish, as ye found
us; but you then must first become that which ye cannot be, oppressive,
arbitrary, and tyrannous, as they were from whom ye have freed us. That our
hearts are now more capacious, our thoughts more erected to the search and
expectation of greatest and exactest things, is the issue of your own virtue
propagated in us; ye cannot suppress that unless ye reinforce an abrogated
and merciless law, that fathers may dispatch at will their own children. And
who shall then stick closest to ye, and excite others? not he who takes up
arms for cote and conduct, and his four nobles of Danegelt. Although I
dispraise not the defense of just immunities, yet love my peace better, if that
were all. Give me the liberty to know, to utter, and to argue freely according
to conscience, above all liberties.

What would be best advised then, if it be found so hurtful and so unequal to
suppress opinions for the newness or the unsutablenes to a customary
acceptance, will not be my task to say; I only shall repeat what I have learnt
from one of your own honorable number, a right noble and pious Lord, who had
he not sacrificed his life and fortunes to the Church and Commonwealth, we had
not now mist and bewayl'd a worthy and undoubted patron of this argument. Ye
know him I am sure; yet I for honors sake, and may it be eternal to him,
shall name him, the Lord Brook. He writing of Episcopacy, and by the way
treating of sects and schisms, left Ye his vote, or rather now the last words
of his dying charge, which I know will ever be of dear and honored regard with
Ye, so full of meeknes and breathing charity, that next to his last testament,
who bequeathed love and peace to his Disciples, I cannot call to mind where I
have read or heard words more mild and peaceful. He there exhorts us to hear
with patience and humility those however they be miscalled, that desire to live
purely, in such a use of Gods Ordinances, as the best guidance of their
conscience gives them, and to tolerat them, though in some disconformity to
ourselves. The book it self will tell us more at large being publish to the
world, and dedicated to the Parliament by him who both for his life and for his
death deserve, that what advice he left be not laid by without perusal.

And now the time in special is, by privilege to write and speak what may
help to the further discussing of matters in agitation. The Temple of Janus with
his two controversal faces might now not unsignificantly be set open. And
though all the winds of doctrine were let loose to play upon the earth, so
Truth be in the field, we do injuriously by licencing and prohibiting to
misdoubt her strength. Let her and Falsehood grapple; who ever knew Truth put to
the wors, in a free and open encounter. Her confuting is the best and surest
suppressing. He who hears what praying there is for light and clear knowledge
to be sent down among us, would think of other matters to be constituted beyond
the discipline of Geneva, framed and fabric't already to our hands. Yet when
the new light which we beg for shines in upon us, there be who envy, and
oppose, if it come not first in at their casements. What a collusion is this,
whenas we are exhorted by the wise man to use diligence, to seek for wisdom as
for hidd'n treasures early and late, that another order shall enjoin us to know
nothing but by statute. When a man has bin laboring the hardest labor in the
deep mines of knowledge, has furnished out his findings in all their equipage,
drawn forth his reasons as it were a battle raung'd, scattered and defeated
all objections in his way, calls out his adversary into the plain, offers him
the advantage of wind and sun, if he please; only that he may try the matter by
dint of argument, for his opponets then to sculk, to lay ambushments, to keep a
narrow bridge of licencing where the challenger should pass, though it be
valor anough in shouldiership, is but weakness and cowardice in the wars of
Truth. For who knows not that Truth is strong next to the Almighty; she needs
no policies, nor stratagems, nor licencings to make her victorious, those are
the shifts and the defenses that error uses against her power: give her but
room, and do not bind her when she sleeps, for then she speaks not true, as the
old Proteus did, who spoke oracles only when he was caught and bound, but then
rather she turns herself into all shapes, except her own, and perhaps tunes her
voice according to the time, as Micaiah did before Ahab, until she be adjur'd
into her own likeness. Yet is it not impossible that she may have more shapes
then one. What else is all that rank of things indifferent, wherein Truth may
be on this side, or on the other, without being unlike her self. What but a
vain shadow else is the abolition of those ordinances, that hand writing nayl'd
to the cross, what great purchase is this Christian liberty which Paul so
often boasts of. His doctrine is, that he who eats or eats not, regards a day,
or regards it not, may do either to the Lord. How many other things might be
tolerated in peace, and left to conscience, had we but charity, and were it not
the chiefstrong hold of our hypocrisy to be ever judging one another. I fear
yet this iron yoke of outward conformity has left a slavish print upon our
necks: the ghost of a linen decency yet haunts us. We stumble and are
impatient at the least dividing of one visible congregation from another,
though it be not in fundamentalls; and through our forwardnes to suppress, and
our backwardnes to recover any enthralled piece of truth out of the gripe of
custom, we care not to keep truth separated from truth, which is the fiercest
rent and disunion of all. We do not see that while we still affect by all
means a rigid external formality, we may as soon fall again into a gross
conforming stupidity, a stark and dead congealment of wood and hay and stubble
forced and frozen together, which is more to the sudden degenerating of a
Church then many subdichotomies of petty schisms. Not that I can think well of
every light separation, or that all in a Church is to be expected gold and
silver and presious stones: it is not possible for man to sever the wheat from
the tares, the good fish from the other fry; that must be the Angels Ministry
at the end of mortal things. Yet if all cannot be of one mind, as who looks
they should be? this doubtless is more wholesome, more prudent, and more
Christian that many be tolerated, rather then all compelled, I mean not
tolerated Popery, and open superstition, which as it extirpats all religions
and civil supremacies, so it self should be extirpat, provided first that all
charitable and compassionat means be used to win and regain the weak and the
misled: that also which is impious or evil absolutely either against faith or
manners no law can possibly permit, that intends not to unlaw it self: but those
neighboring differences, or rather indifference, are what I speak of, whether
in some point of doctrine or of discipline, which though they may be many, yet
need not interrupt the unity of Spirit, if we could but find among us the bond
of peace. In the mean while if any one would write, and bring his helpful hand
to the slow-moving Reformation which we labor under, if Truth have spok'n to
him before others, or but seemed at least to speak, who has so bejesuited us
that we should trouble that man with asking license to do so worthy a deed?
and not consider this, that if it come to prohibiting, there is not ought more
likely to be prohibited then truth it self; whose first appearance to our eyes
bleat'd and dimmed with prejudice and custom, is more unsightly and unplausible
then many errors, even as the person is of many a great man slight and
contemptible to see to. And what do they tell us vainly of new opinions, when
this very opinion of theirs, that none must be heard, but whom they like, is
the worst and newest opinion of all others; and is the chief cause why sects
and schisms do so much abound, and true knowledge is kept at distance from us;
besides yet a greater danger which is in it. For when God shakes a Kingdom
with strong and healthful commotions to a general reforming, it is not untrue
that many sectaries and false teachers are then busiest in seducing; but yet
more true it is, that God then raises to his own work men of rare abilities,
and more then common industry not only to look back and revise what has bin
taught heretofore, but to gain further and go on, some new enlightn'd steps in
the discovery of truth. For such is the order of Gods enlightening his Church,
to dispense and deal out by degrees his beam, so as our earthly eyes may best
sustain it. Neither is God appointed and confined, where and out of what place
these his chosen shall be first heard to speak; for he sees not as man sees,
chooses not as man chooses, lest we should devote our selves again to set
places, and assemblies, and outward callings of men; planting our faith one
while in the old Convocation house, and another while in the Chapel at
Westminster; when all the faith and religion that shall be there canonized, is
not sustient without plain convincement, and the charity of patient instruction
to supple the least bruise of conscience, to edify the meanest Christian, who
desires to walk in the Spirit, and not in the letter of human trust, for all
the number of voices that can be there made; no though Harry the 7. himself
there, with all his liege tombs about him, should lend them voices from the
dead, to swell their number. And if the men be erroneous who appear to be the
leading schismatics, what witholds us but our sloth, our self-will, and
distrust in the right cause, that we do not give them gentle meetings and
gentle dismissions, that we debate not and examine the matter thoroughly with
liberal and frequent audience; if not for their sakes, yet for our own? seeing
no man who has tasted learning, but will confess the many ways of profiting
by those who not contented with stale receipts are able to manage, and set forth
new positions to the world. And were they but as the dust and cinders of our
feet, so long as in that notion they may yet serve to polish and brighten the
armoury of Truth, even for that respect they were not utterly to be cast a way.
But if they be of those whom God has fitted for the special use of these
times, with eminent and ample gifts, and those perhaps neither among the
Priests, nor among the Pharisees, and we in the have of a precipitant zeal
shall make no distinction, but resolve to stop their mouths, because we fear
they come with new and dangerous opinions, as we commonly forejudge them ere we
understand them, no less then woe to us, while thinking thus to defend the
Gospel, we are found the persecutors.

There have bin not a few since the beginning of this Parliament, both of the
Presbytery and others who by their unlicen't books to the contempt of an
Imprimatur first broke that triple ice clung about our hearts, and taught the
people to see day: I hope that none of those were the perswaders to renew upon
us this bondage which they themselves have wrought so much good by contemning.
But if neither the check that Moses gave to young Joshua, nor the countermand
which our Savior gave to young John, who was so ready to prohibit those whom
he thought unlicenc't, be not anough to admonish our Elders how unacceptable to
God their testy mood of prohibiting is, if neither their own remembrance what
evil has abounded in the Church by this let of licencing, and what good they
themselves have begun by transgressing it, be not anough, but that they will
persuade, and execute the most Deminican part of the Inquisition over us, and
are already with one foot in the stirrup so active at suppressing, it would be
no unequal distribution in the first place to suppress the suppressors
themselves; whom the change of their condition has puffed up, more then their
late experience of harder times has made wise.

And as for regulating the Press, let no man think to have the honor of
advising ye better then your selves have done in that Order published next
before this, that no book be Printed, unless the Printers and the Authors
name, or at least the Printers be registered. Those which otherwise come forth,
if they be found mischievous and libellous, the fire and the executioner will
be the timeliest and the most effectual remedy, that man's prevention can use.
For this authentic Spanish policy of licencing books, if I have said ought,
will prove the most unlicenc't book it self within a short while; and was the
immediate image of a Star Chamber decree to that purpose made in those very
times when that Court did the rest of those her pious works, for which she is
now fallen from the Stars with Lucifer. Where by ye may guess what kind of
State prudence, what love of the people, what care of Religion, or good manners
there was at the contriving, although with singular hypocrisy it pretended to
bind books to their good behavior. And how it got the upper hand of your
precedent Order so well constituted before, if we may believe those men whose
profession gives them cause to enquire most, it may be doubted there was in it
the fraud of some old patentees and monopolizers in the trade of book-selling;
who under pretense of the poor in their Company not to be defrauded, and the
just retaining of each man his several copy, which God forbid should be
gainsaid, brought diverse glosing colors to the House, which were indeed but
colors, and serving to no end except it be to exercise a superiority over
their neighbors, men who do not therefore labor in an honest profession to
which learning is indetted, that they should be made other men's vassalls.
Another end is thought was aimed at by some of them in procuring by petition
this Order, that having power in their hand, malignant books might the easier
escape abroad, as the event shows. But of these Sophisms and Elenchs of
merchandise I skill not: This I know, that errors in a good government and in a
bad are equally almost incident; for what Magistrate may not be mis-inform'd,
and much the sooner, if liberty of Printing be reduced into the power of a few;
but to redress willingly and speedily what has bin erred, and in highest
authority to esteem a plain advertisement more then others have done a sumptuous
bribe, is a virtue (honored Lords and Commons) answerable to Your highest
actions, and whereof none can participat but greatest and wisest men.

The End.

