THE Midwife Unmasked: OR, The POPISH DESIGN OF Mrs Cellier's MEAL-TUB plainly
made known; Being a Second ANSWER to her Scandalous LIBEL, in short Remarques
upon the same.
For the Satisfaction of the PEOPLE, and the Vindication of the Justice of the
NATION, and of several Persons of Honor by her most vilely abused.

THere have been so many strange and unparalleled Narratives Published in this
Age, and so contradictory one to the other, that many people who judge things
by outward appearance only, know not well how to comprehend the Truth, or what
to think of the right and justness of Affairs, clouded with so many several
Vizard-Masques that are put upon them. But of all that I have yet seen or met
with, this of Mrs Cellier's seems to be the boldest and most confident piece of
Stuff; strangely hudled and shuffled together, and in which she rants and
scratches like another Pucel d'Orleans, or Joan of Arque; handling her Pen for
the Papistical Cause, as the other did her Lance; and it is pity she has not
likewise the glory of her Martyrdom.

How it has now crept abroad, I cannot tell, having received a Cheque by
Authority, as her self acknowledges in her Postscript, p. 43. which has
suppressed it till now: But of a sudden their hopes seem to revive, and their
endeavors are renewed; and now out comes a new Narrative of the Female
Champion of the Cause, all for the same end, to invalidate the PLOT, to make
themselves innocent, and to fling all the PLOT and Guilt on the Presbyterians.
These are the strenuous endeavors of these Papal Goliaths not of Gath, but of
Jesus, who having been so often foiled and laid on their backs, fight behind
the Buckler of a stout Virago, who having been Imprisoned for the Cause, and
escaped the Law, now with bold and audacious Effronteries publishes her
Adventures. It were labor lost to waste much Paper in answering all her
impertinent Libels; and those particularly concerned, will no question be able
to justify themselves from her bold accusations: but I shall only make some
few Remarks for public Information.

First I say, Since these sort of people, who have been either Plotters against
His Sacred Majesty, the Laws and Religion of the Land, or abettors and
well-wishers to the same, and having lived to see their PLOT defeated, and some
of their Party justly punished for their evil deeds; all their chief endeavors
and main ends are now to make some of their innocent Party, and many of the
credulous, peaceable, and easily deluded of the adverse Party believe, that
there was no PLOT, or at best but one of the Presbyterians making and
inventing: and one of their great Instruments was this she-Champion, and
Midwife, Mrs Cellier, a bold and very confident Bigot in the Romish Cause; and
now being cleared by the Law, Hectors and rants at any rate in this her Book,
and by this means hopes more than ever to clear the point, and to render
herself as great an innocent, as those she uses to bring into the world.

She boldly acknowledges her self a Papist, p. 1. though of Protestant Parents;
and she became one, because they had been oppressed by the Disloyal Party; a good
reason: and because she never heard any of that Church preach to her any thing
of Disloyalty, therefore none of them ever made or contrived a PLOT against the
King and Government; another like Argument. But as to the reality of the PLOT,
notwithstanding their many false Blinds, there is scarce one of any Judgment
and Reason, but is convinced of it; and to deny i^, we^e to give the Lie to the
greatest Authority in Earth, both the King and People: To the King, in
contradicting his several Proclamations; to the People, in making false the
several unanimous Votes of their Representatives in Parliament; who have
declared it to be an horrid POPISH PLOT, not a Presbyterian one; and by
believing the Judges of the Land to be blind, and all the Courts of Judicature
to be strangely mistaken. And yet these people, Jesuits and Jesuitical
Instruments, boldly insinuate there is no PLOT; and therefore, as their
chiefest Card they have to play, they so often endeavor to invalidate the
Kings Witnesses, and to make them of no worth: and this is the whole scope of
this Book of Mrs Cellier's, called her Malice Defeated, but rather is Malice
Repeated.

For p. 2. she tells us, The chief sticklers for the PLOT were the Sons of
those who acted the principal parts in the last Tragedy: and therefore to
intail on them the sins of their Fathers, she doubted the whole, that there was
no other PLOT, but what they were going to act over again, that is, to cut off
the Kings Head, and to Convert this Land to a Republic. If there could be
greater malice than this invented, let the world judge; and how far from Truth,
daily more and more appears. God be thanked, His Majesty is not apt to be
jealous, but this were enough to stir up a suspicious Prince to be Cruel and
Tyrannick. But this provokes the Good-womans Charity, and she diligently
searches the Prisons for the objects thereof; but it seems, for all her fine
stories, 'twas to find out a fit subject for her Designs and Intrigues; which
proving false and recreant, having served his own turn, if not hers, and who
having given her a divellish blow on the Mouth, struck out most of her Teeth,
so that she cannot bite; she opens her mouth, and with bloody gums, mumbles and
touses the poor fellow with his heaps of Crimes, so that she thinks she has
sufficiently made a fool of the PLOT, and turned it into nothing. But what is
all this? Dangerfield while her servant, though he had committed all these
Crimes, was stanch enough, a very good man, one to be trusted to get in her
Husbands Debts, and pay his Scores; introduced to the Company of the Lady
Powis, and a fit Companion for the Lords in the Tower: but after this
Instrument broke between her Hands, see what a Scoundrel she has made of him,
for turning Cat in the Pan. What he has been I know not; he surely could not
have been very good, that was picked out of the Goal; and had he been any
better, she could never have thought to have put him upon those Employs he
sufficiently swore she did; and it seems was cunning enough in that Case, to
invalidate his Testimony, as no legal witness; however, it is but her nay
against his yea; he has affirmatively sworn it, against which no Negative can
prevail: and whatever the Evidence may be at Common Law, I doubt it will
signify something to the Consciences and Information of many, and that with as
much Judgment and Reason, as the assertion of Mrs Cellier in her own defense;
in which she is not to be blamed, having dexterously played her Cards. And the
Narrative of Willoughby, what e're he has been, may speak Truth in matter of
Fact, as well as Mrs Cellier's, and may be justly and as soon believed.

But this is not enough; for although this may do her business, and save her
Bacon, yet it will not clear the PLOT, therefore she must fall foul also of the
other Witnesses, Bedlow, Oats, and the rest: never a Barrel better Herring,
they are all alike, and must be recriminated; therefore she gives you Bedlows
Character, p. 2, and 3. and from Dr. Oats his own hand: well, if all this, or
most of it be false, is not Mrs Cellier a malicious woman, and those who set
her a work wicked Instruments? but if this were true, all was before, and
whilst employed in their Service; and what better could be expected for Treason
and Murder? But since, we find not any thing objected against them, not only
as to the evils of Life and Conversation, but as to the Truth and agreement of
their Depositions. Those who are alive may answer in this respect for
themselves, and Mr. Bedlow's last Exit has very much strengthened and confirmed
the Truth of the PLOT, and the wickedness of the Plotters. But however, all
those Witnesses Mrs Cellier rails against, are sufficiently backed by others,
against whom none of them could have such cause of scandal and reproach; so
that the foundation of the PLOT stands not upon the only props of Dr. Oats,
Bedlow, and Dangerfield, but on many more, sound, and strong enough in their
Reputation.

The next thing I observe, is, That she not only endeavors to invalidate the
Testimony of the Kings Witnesses by Reproach, Scandal, and by bringing their
Crimes upon the stage, whether true or false; but she also endeavors, as in p.
3. to cause them not to be believed by the people, by insinuating that they
were horridly abused in prison, Wracked and Tortured, Boulted and Chained,
Starved and Beaten; of which she tells odd stories, making something like a
Minister to be either a promoter, or evidence of the same; it looking like one
of the Spanish Inquisition, and he the Priest Examiner, being translated from
the Inquisition-Prison to Newgate. But we are apt to believe they are forged,
and to which Captain Richardson is able to give satisfaction; Mr. Prance the
man she would make the world believe to be the person Tormented, to extort
false Evidence, having in his Narrative sufficiently cleared that suspicion,
and justified to the contrary, whatever Mrs Cellier may invent to cause the
contrary to be thought.

But besides the Witnesses, we must have others to carry on a Secret PLOT, to
hide and cloud the Real one: It is no matter who they are, but it seems they
are no mean ones, being Dukes and Earls; for such she brings into Newgate, p.
4. to beat and abuse the Examinants, or those committed thither under pretense
of the Plot; and in person to offer them Gold and Silver, to Confess what they
did not know. Still Inquisition-method; Cunning and Tyranny. This Duke and
Lord, who ever they were, would not be accounted any great Politicians, to do
their business no better, but to appear in person: but all this is still to
make the world imagine strange things, and that those Innocents were beaten and
tormented, and tempted to confess what they never knew of.

This Duke and Earl are incognito, and we cannot get knowledge of them: but my
Lord of Shaftesbury is more beholding to her, for she names him in several
places, with his Servants, and goes about to show his Arts and Policies, to
frame a PLOT; and would insinuate to the people, as if it came, or had a birth
out of his Brain and with his Intrigues with Bedlow and Stroud, would raise up
what never was; and that therefore he was making Instruments for that purpose,
by illegal means, feeding them privately with Money, and getting them Pardons,
giving them encouragement and assistance. And thus the wicked woman, though
newly escaped the lash of the Law, if she cannot Murder or take away the Life
of the Earl of Shaftesbury, yet stabs his Honor and Reputation. But there is a
Statute of Scandalum Magnatum, upon which she may chance to be Tried, and may
prove more unfortunate to her, than that of Edward the Third, upon which she
was last Indicted.

But this Woman ascends in her bold aspersions; and having gone thus far for
the Cause, assaults the Council and the King himself, his Justice and his Laws:
For p. 44. she makes bold to say, with a Forhead brazen enough, That though
Treasonable Practices have been Sworn against Dangerfield, by Justice Foster,
Justice Harvie, Mr. Thomas Hill, and her self; yet the Gentleman walks abroad
undisturbed, and daily consults with his Confederates, how to act new
Villainies. Then by and by, Whenever his Majesty shall please to make it safe
and honorable to speak Truth, as it has been gainful and meritorious to do
the contrary, there will not want Witnesses, etc. I think the like bold and
scandalous Assertion was scarce so bare-fac'dly owned before; as if his Majesty
and his Privy Council did encourage Perjury, or that it was a dangerous thing
to own or speak the Truth before them.

It is not good dallying thus with Thunder: Methinks, though other persons
could not escape the venom of their lying Tongues, yet that Sacred Majesty, and
the Justice of a Nation should have been above the reach of their empoysoned
darts: But to what height will not the Zeal, or rather blind Fury and Rage of
their Religion carry them! Thus also she terms the Examinations of the
Committee of Lords, before whom she was brought, Trepanning Questions, page 29.
to ensnare her: A fit expression for the Peers of the Realm; as if they had so
little Honor or Honesty, as to betray the Life of a poor silly woman. But she
is full of such scurrillous abuses thorough the whole Book; and it were too
much labor to trace her throughout.

She may have leave granted her to abuse persons of a meaner Rank, when she has
so boldly struck at those of the highest; and I think, of all the Railing she
has used against Sir Will. Waller, which might in some sort be pardoned, he
being so active a man against her and her Fellow-Plotters; that which she uses
page 23, is very wicked, and highly malicious; which is, that showing him the
Book called The black Tribunal, wherein the Trials of the late King's Judges
were set down, told him withal, That that was the Game he would now be at;
which (says she) he denied after such a manner, as made it visible even to the
meanest capacity, that he did not think it a Crime. Is not this most horrid
Judgment, to accuse a man of Treasonable thoughts in her own Breast, and then
to pronounce Judgment on him as Guilty? But Sir William Waller is of Age to
answer for himself, and no doubt knows how to clear himself from such horrid
Aspersions.

She pretends to reveal the Mystery of the Meal-Tub; but she has made so flight
and poor a thing of it, that it is not so much as the true History of it. She
thought otherwise of that Discovery, when she wrung her hands and cried, She
was undone, at the first finding of that black List, which was under the white
Meal, that gave sufficient Proof and Light of the most abominable PLOT that
ever was Invented. But Mrs. Cellier has undergone the Trial of the Law, and is
Acquitted for want of clear Proof against her; but if she proceeds, as she has
begun in this her Book, to forge and publish Lies, and to abuse and defame
persons of Honor, and the Justice of the Nation, and to invalidate the King's
Evidence, and endeavor to turn the PLOT into a Romance or Fiction, she may
chance at last to find, she may not always have the good fortune to escape
Justice: and it is not to be doubted, notwithstanding the endeavors of these
Champions for the Cause, but that ere long the whole Mystery of this
Long-depending PLOT will be laid open, and that Justice will at last flow like
a stream without opposition in the Land; And we shall know the guilty Heads, as
well as the defiled and wicked Members and Instruments. In the mean time, that
such may not bark in the ears of the people so unchequ'd and uncontrould, we
have only in few words let you plainly see, the repeated Malice of Mrs.
Celier's Malice Defeated, and what the true end of all the Endeavors of that
Party is, To make the world believe that there is no Plot or Design against
his Majesty's Life, and against the established Laws and Religion of the Land,
but what is now hatching by the Presbyterians and Republicans; whilst by this
Blind they still hope to carry on their foul and wicked Designs.

But the Triumph of the wicked is short, and the Joy of the Hypocrite but for a
moment. Though his head reach the Clouds, he shall perish in his own Dung,

Job 20.5, 6, 7. Let the Wickedness of the wicked come to an end; behold he
travelleth with Iniquity, and has conceived Mischief, and brought forth
falsehood. He has made a pit, and dug it, and is fallen into the ditch he
has made. His mischief shall return upon his own head. For the Sin of their
Mouth, and the words of their Lips, let them be taken in their Pride: And for
the Cursing and Lying which they speak,

Psalm. 7.9, 14, 15, 16. and Psalm. 59.12.
LONDON: Printed for T. Davies. 1680.


