A LETTER TO A. H. Esquire Concerning the STAGE.

LONDON, Printed for A. Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick Lane, School.

TO A. H. Esquire etc.
SIR,
FOrgive me if I think it Ill Nature in you to leave the Town, at a Time when
it wants your Company, and seems to beg your Assistance: How can you propose to
live at Ease in the Country, when so many of your Friends, the Wits, are
engaged here in open War? Let Mr. Collier say what he pleases of Mr. Dryden, I
begin to think 'twas his prophetic Genius moved him to declaim against
Priests; and there is great reason to complain of their being the Incendiaries
of the People, when they set the World on fire by Preaching, which they were
only sent to warm. But what can Mr. Collier mean by exposing the Stage so? he
would not surely have it silenced: That would be a little too barbarous, and
too much like Cant to be entertained by Men of Thought or Ingenuity. I would
rather suppose he designed a Reformation; and that is so reasonable, I wonder
any Man should put his Face in disorder, or study a Revenge for the Attempt.
But it may be asked, Could he not have done that without exposing so many great
Genius's? Had it not been better to have let Mr. Durfey alone? Though even this
Method would not have pleased every body; for whatever Effect it has had on Mr.
Vanbroug and Congreve; Motteux and Guildon resent it to the last degree. Is
their nothing in their Works Illustrious, or That could merit Censure? Indeed
some People are not to be reclaimed by Ridicule; and Mr. Collier knowing their
Virtues, with how much Compos'dness and Resignation they can bear a Hiss, out
of Compassion, took Example by the Town and neglected both.

It is the Observation of some, That wherever the State flourishes, the
Theater has never failed of Encouragement; and that it is hardly possible the
State should suffer without the others sinking in its Reputation. It is Pity
that England should be the only Exception, and since we have some of our
Nobility, who have a Taste of Eloquence, and all those Virtues which adorn the
Stage, that It should want their Assistance by whom it was at first raised, and
since maintained: If it has fallen from its Purity, or never arrived to what
they fully liked, let it not want their Countenance, without whom it is
impossible to be any thing at all, and by whom it may become all that we can
wish. They alone can free it from Contempt and Censure, by maintaining such an
Awe, that the least Glymps of Profaneness and Immorality should not dare to
appear on the Stage; and this may be done by encouraging none but those who
write well: for when a good Poet takes on him to instruct, we need fear no
Immodesty; for it is impossible in a Regular Play, he should find room for an
Indecency. I know you will ask, Why should I appear so zealous in desiring the
Favor of the Nobility for what is denied to be lawful; and that I ought not to
wish an Encouragement of the Stage, when it is affirmed that from Thence we
derive our Corruption of Manners. Mr. Collier has endeavored to prove this
from the Looseness of some of our Plays, and then has brought the Opinion of
the Fathers to condemn the Theater in general.

As to the First Objection, That the Debauchery of the Town is to be attributed
to the Looseness of our Plays and Stage.

If this were true, it is an Objection only against the present Corruption of
the Theater; and is of no force against a regulated Stage; for that admits of
nothing Immodest or Immoral.

As to the Second Objection brought from Councils and Fathers, if what is
quoted were really designed by them against the Theater in general, yet it can
have but little effect with the People, I mean the Men of Probity and Learning;
for they are not to be moved by the Opinions of others no longer than those
Opinions are agreeable to Reason: No Man ought to pay such a Respect either to
Councils or Fathers, as to submit his Judgment contrary to his Reason. Their
saying so in this Case ought to have no more effect with us than if they had at
the same time given us their Opinion of the Truth of Transubstantiation.

I think the Matter ought to be disputed by it self; for the Opinion of the
Fathers cannot alter the Nature of the Thing. Sir, give me leave to make this
Digression: It Is my Opinion, even in Matters of Religion, the preaching up the
Fathers so much has been of fatal Consequence. If we run out of our selves to
search for Truth, we are exposed to be deceived; and relying too much upon
another's Judgment, may be the occasion of an Error in our own. A false
Quotation or Interpretation by a Man of some Figure, to an easy Credulous
Bigot, has been the Conversion of a great many, and of excellent Service in the
Church of Rome: They cannot attack any without a Father or Council, and that to
a Person who knows nothing of the matter, is as good as a Demonstration. The
Fathers were but Men, and as capable to be deceived as others: And I do not
know why the Bishop of Worcester may not deserve an equal Esteem; he
understands the Languages, and has as much Sincerity as any of them; and why
then should he not be able to give the Sense of the Scripture as well.

I have a Veneration for them as good Men, and where their Opinion is a
Consequent of true Reason, it ought to be embraced; but where it is not, I need
not say it ought to be rejected; and I think any Man may be allowed to dispute
whether it be so or no. The Bishop of Worcester cannot publish a Book, but
you will have an Answer to it. It would indeed be of Reputation to the Councils
and Fathers, some of them at least, if what were objected against them were of
no more force. His Philosophy is too rational to be weak'ned by Sophistry; his
Divinity too solid to be shook by Heresy: He seems to have been predestined
to Glory, and the appointed Instrument to deliver us from Popery, Atheism,
Deism, and Socinianism, with all those spurious Sectaries which have been
spawned into the World: What can resist the Power of his Arguments? And who is
able to abide his Force. But to return, I think the Controversy, in short, is
this:

Whether the Allowance of a Theater in a Christian Country, is consisting with
the Christian Religion.

The Answer to this Question may be this:

That whatever is approved by lawful Authority, and is not against any positive
revealed Law of God, is consisting with the Christian Religion.

Now it lies upon the Adversaries of the Stage to prove, That the Theater is
against Law or Scripture.

It Is unfair to take the advantage of the present Corruptions, and cry down the
Stage, because Men make an ill use of it. The Priests will not allow this Argument
in another Case; and I think an ill Poet is no more an Objection against the
Stage, than a Clergyman's being a Blockhead, is to the Pulpit. It Is our
Misfortune to have too many in both Vocations; though, as bad as the Stage is, I
don't doubt but the World has received a great many Advantages from it. I shall
name you some, and the first may be the reclaiming the Manners of the Clergy.

It Is certain, since the Stage has used the Gown freely, and the Laity have not
been afraid to look into their Faults, that they are more humble, and less
publicly vicious: They know if Tom D'urfey can light upon a frail Priest, he
will not scruple to expose his Infirmities, though he is not the only Whipping Tom
of the Stage; if they had not others to fear, they would soon grow too many for
him. I believe they would be angry, if they thought the People gave the Honor
of their Reformation to the Stage; though you cannot believe otherwise, if you
consider the difference of the former and present Clergy, what a strange
alteration there is where the Knowledge of Plays have come (I would be
understood only of those who needed a Reformation) There are now, and have
always been, Men among them able and sit to give Laws, and from whom the World
was glad to receive them, who appeared as burning and shining Lights in their
Generation; and it was from them we learnt the difference; it was their Light
which exposed the other, and the Stage only took their evil Deeds, to show them
truly the Evils of them. But besides their Reforming of Manners, the Stage has
taught them to speak English, and preach more like Ambassadors of their great
Master. It has taught them to argue rationally, and at once mended their Style,
and Form of their Sermons. How did Religion labor under heavy Language, and
how many People rather absented the Church, than come to hear the Word of God
Burlesqu'd? In what a ridiculous Dress did Religion appear? When to spin out
the time in old Proverbs, and wretched Puns, a Fellow would run it up to Six
and thirtiethly, before he came to his Use and Applications. In short, the
Drunkenness, Whoring, Insolence, and Dullness that has appeared under a Black
Coat on the Stage, have made the Men of the same Color of it keep within
Bounds: And that a Man might not teize them with the Representation, they have
endeavored to appear in as differing a Form as possible.

If what Mr. Collier says was true, That when a Clergyman is brought on the
Stage, it is with a design to ridicule the Function, it would be abominable,
and as bad as the Town is, would be hissed off the Stage. I dare say, whatever
the Intention of the Poet is, it is not received so by the Audience. For at this
rate, every foolish Peer who is brought on the Stage, must be supposed to
intend a Reflection on all the Men of Condition; and an Alderman, who is a
Cuckold, must be looked on as the Representative of his Brethren. It Is absurd
to make no distinction; as if a particular Vice in a particular Man, could not
be exposed without a designed Reflection on all who belong to him. It ought to
touch no body but whom it concerns; and it has its end, if it reclaims where it
was designed, and prevents others, by showing the Danger: And this is the
Design of Comedy. But the Question is, Whether our Poets have managed it as
they ought? Whether they have not picked out a particular Person, and exposed
the Character in general, under the Notion of one Man? I answer to this, That
whatever the Design of the Poet has been, it has not had the effect with the
People: For who disbelieves the Authority of their Function, or thinks the
worse of Good, Learned, and Ingenious Men among them? Are not the Religious
very much reverenced? Has any Body thought the worse of Stillingfleet,
Tillotson, and Burnet, upon this Account? Who can believe, that when Mr.
Vanbroug disguises a Parson, that he thought of these Men, or any who lives
soberly, and makes Religion their Business, and at the same time, don't make it
inconsistent with good Manners? The Good among them know the People love them,
and that nothing but their own mis-behaviour draws them into Contempt. Any
Minister, though he was but of mean Understanding, yet if he had other good
Qualities, if he lived soberly, and did his Duty religiously, that ever such a
Man was picked out to be the Scandal of his Neighbors, or a Ridicule of the
Stage. Whence is it then, that the Clergy are so angry? If you hook but one of
them, all the rest are upon your Back, and you cannot expose his Vices without
being an Enemy to the Church: And in this, Priests of all Religions are the
same.

But after all, why should Mr. Collier blame Mr. Dryden for making Dorax
exclaim against the Mohammedan Priest? Or how can that be a Prejudice to the
Character of the Christian Clergy? Is it not natural for such a one as Dorax to
say as much, and especially against such a one as the Mufti in the Play? And
does Mr. Collier blame Mr. Dryden for writing naturally? I think it is a Fault
throughout Mr. Collier's Book, that in his Criticisms of the Plays, he never
considers the Person who speaks; that is, Whether it is not natural for a Man of
such a Character, to say such a thing? It would have been of more Service to
have proved, That no Person is to be brought on the Stage to say an ill thing,
and then he had thrown away all the Profaneness, which is so much an Offense,
at once. But if such Persons are to be represented, there is not so much Reason
against any of our present Plays, as is urged by Mr. Callier; for you must
allow a Coquett to talk like her self, a Lover to vent his Passion in Raptures,
and a Rake to speak the Language of the Town.

I have already told you, That I am far from vindicating the present Stage. I
don't know a regular Play, or that ought to be represented on a regular Stage;
yet I know a great many Plays that I would not loose for want of that
Regularity. Who would not have Sir G. Etheridge, Mr. Wicherly, and even some of
Mr. Dryden's Plays? Who would reject the Orphan, because Mr. Collier objects
against a loose Speech in it.

But Mr. Collier has laid other things to the Poet's Charge besides the Abuse
of the Clergy; and that the profane Characters in the Play, has had an ill
Effect on the Age, by promoting of Immorality and Vice. This I very much
question; for I cannot apprehend so much danger even in the present Stage as Mr.
Collier would suggest. The greatest Faults of our Plays are their being
generally, in one part or other, unnatural: That which is regular in any of
them can never be an Offense; and where that Monster appears, it rather
frightens than allures; so that we are not in so much danger, even from our
very bad Plays: For the more monstrous, the less Power it has to please; and
whatever looses the Power, can never do much damage. So that if Mr. Collier
should make a Collection of D'urfey's Works, who is there that would become a
Convert? And who would turn Parson to be drunk and beat the Watch? Or who would
be proud of an Imitation of any of his Heroes? Has any Body brought themselves
under his Character, in hopes to recommend them to the World? It would be happy
if the World had learnt no more Irreligion from the Pulpit than it has from the
Stage; at least, the Consequence of the first has been more fatal. What dismal
Effect has the holy Cant had upon the Multitude: What Rebellion, Bloodshed and
Mischief have been encouraged under the Name of Sanctity, Religion, and the
Good old Cause. Whoever learnt to cut a King's Throat by seeing of Plays? But
by going to Church, the People were instructed to bind the King in Chains, and
his Nobles in Fetters of Iron, That the Kingdom ought to be taken away, and
given to the Saints; And who would not be a Saint for such an Inheritance? Who
could refuse resisting of Authority, when instead of Damnation, it was coming
forth to the Help of the Lord against the Mighty? But this is but one Mischief
of the Pulpit; this is only putting a Kingdom in Civil Broils, intestine Wars,
and unnatural Murders. But when Men of debauched Principles shall become the
Teachers of the Nation, what may we not expect from their Industry and Sedition.

After all, my Lord Foppington was never designed to teach People to speak or
act like him; nor was it intended that the Ladies should be biased by the
Example of Berinthia to turn Coquetts. These and the like Characters in other
Plays, are not proposed as a Direction for the Gallant Man, or the Virtuous
Lady; but that seeing how such Persons behave themselves on the Stage, that
they may not make the like Figure in the World: but if any body should rather
be in love than terrified by these Examples, it is their Fault, and not the
Poets, since the best things are liable to Corruptions. But it may be objected,
That our Poets don't make Persons speak like themselves. That indeed is a
Fault, and I cannot say any thing to excuse it but this; That they who have the
Judgment to know when a Poet speaks improperly, ought to have so much Judgment,
as not to be by assed by his Irregularities: The People who don't understand
it, generally suppose, that what is Virtuous is to be imitated, and what is
Vicious is to be avoided. That this is the general Observation of those who
frequent Plays, may justly be inferred from the Practice of the Town: For I
challenge any Man to prove, That any one Vice, now in being, took its Rise from
the Stage. The Stage takes Examples from the Town. The Scene must be really
acted in the World before it comes to be exposed: So that whatever appears
Vicious or Ridiculous, is owing to the Wickedness of the Times, and not to the
Theater. It may be objected, That what is generally acted on the Stage, if it
was done before, yet it was done in private; but the Stage publishes it. To
this I answer, That it does not intend to license it, only to set it in a true
Light, that it may be exposed and shunned.

As to those Objections, That the Actors are generally debauched, and of lewd
Conversation; and that no Person who is a known Adulterer, or Profane, ought to
be encouraged: That the Playhouse is a Resort of vicious Persons, and gives
Opportunity to such who have wicked Inclinations. All these would fall upon the
advancement of a regular Stage; but as it is, the Objections are not levelled
Right; for the State is chargeable with the Immoralities. There are Laws for
the Punishment of Vice; and if the Magistrate neglect his Duty, he must answer
for it. I don't know that any body is obliged to a Conversation with the
Players; and their Lives can influence only their Associates; and such they
would find, whether they are Players or not. When they are on the Stage they
are confined to the Poets Language: And if we should see Mr. Powel acting a
Brave, Generous and Honest Part; or Mrs. Knight, a very Modest and Chaste one,
it ought not to give us Offense; because we are not to consider what they are
off the Stage, but whom they represent: We are to do by them as in Religion we
do by the Priest, mind what they say, and not what they do. Though the Stage is
not so abandoned but that there are some Honest and Virtuous, for any thing the
Town can say to the contrary. And I would leave it to themselves, whether they
don't find their Account in it; whether the Town is not more favorable on any
Occasion; so that it ought to be an Encouragement to persist in their Virtue.

The Objection against the Playhouse it self, because it gives Opportunities
for Wickedness, is so trifling, it is hardly worth answering; for they who are
viciously inclined will find an Opportunity; and as long as the Toleration-Act
is in force, there is never a Meeting in Town but will afford extraordinary
Hints of that kind; the Morning and Evening Lectures are precious Seasons; Mr.
Doelittle may thresh his Heart out, there will be Tares among the Wheat; and
those Houses are haunted with a sort of Spirits that are not to be cast out
with Prayer and Fasting.

I think from the little I have said, it is certain the Town has not been
debauched by the Stage, and that it is much easier to demonstrate the Good, than
prove the Evil Effect even of our bad Plays. I have showed that there has been
a Virtue in them; and we might very well pardon them if it were only for that
one Benefit, of being so serviceable to the reclaiming of the Clergy. If they
can give me an Instance of any Play whose Vices have had so ill Effect with the
People as to counter-balance the Good it has wrought in them, I should set my
self against the Stage too; but then as to other Advantages which we have
received from the Plays of the first Rank, we are certainly very much in debt
to them. The Refinement of our Tongue is principally owing to them; Good
Manners and good Conversation is owing to our Comedy; and I don't doubt but
some of our Tragedies have fired some with a Greatness of Spirit, and taught to
act the Hero with Prudence, Virtue and Courage.

I shall conclude this part of my Letter with this Observation, that if the
present Stage has not been so terrible an Enemy to Christianity, but on the
contrary, has afforded a great deal of good to the World; that a Regulated
Stage would be of infinite Service to the Nation.

I have proposed it as an Argument in Defense of a Regular Stage, that it lies
on its Adversaries to prove it against Law or Scripture, and so might leave it
justified till some Person or other make the Discovery to the World: But
because it is my Opinion it is utterly impossible, I shall give you some Reasons
why I think it not only lawful in it self, but very necessary in this populous
City. And, First, if we consider the Matter that ought to be represented,
whether it be Tragedy or Comedy; there is nothing in either that can offend
Religion or Good Manners.

Tragedy is a Representation of an Action by some Great Man, teaching us to
regulate our Passions with exactness, and by showing the strange and differing
Accidents of Life, to which the most important Persons are subject; proving to
us that Vice never goes unpunished; and that true Happiness does not chiefly
consist in the Enjoyment of this World.

Comedy is a Representation of common Conversation; and its Design is to
represent things Natural; to show the Faults of Particular Men in order to
correct the Faults of the Public, and to amend the People through a fear of
being exposed, with this Observation, That the Ridiculous of the Stage is to be
only a Copy of the Ridiculous found in Nature.

In short, it is the Property both of Tragedy and Comedy to instruct: The
Characters in both are to be Natural; and the Persons concerned in the whole
Action, are to be such whose Virtues ought to provoke us to an Emulation, or
whose Vices ought to deter us from imitating their Example. The Language and
Sentiments are to be suitable to each Character: A Wise, Good, and Great Man is
to say nothing but what is natural for such a one to say: The Gallant Man is to
appear with all the Qualities of a Man of Honor: and the Fool in his proper
colored Coat. The Vices of the Wicked are not to be represented so nicely, as
punished severely; that is, a Vicious Person is not to be allowed to plead in
favor of his Vices, or to represent his Villainy so calmly as to tempt any Man
to try Practices in another Place. Vice is only to be brought there to be
condemned; and the reason of this is, that our Terror may be excited, and all
our Passions vent themselves with Strength and Reason. Our Pity is not to be
extended in a wrong place. In short, The Disposition of the Play is to be such
that all the Characters have a proper Effect with us. Our Fear, Love, and Anger
are to be exerted with Justice; and we are to learn from a just Fable how to
behave our selves in earnest. Thus may we exercise our Souls by examining our
reasonable Faculties, and try how we can love to extremity, and yet without a
Fault; to be angry and sin not; to be just without partiality, and rejoice with
them that rejoice. We are there instructed to Love, Hate, and Fear within
measure, how we may be Men without dedebasing our Souls; and all this by moving
Examples, which in spite of Stubbornness, will force its Impressions; and it is
our own Fault if they are not lasting. This certainly must recommend the Stage
to the Virtuous; and Piety cannot be offended at the decent reproving of Vice,
and the insinuating recommendation of Virtue. Here we find Morality urged by
Precept and Example, and the Stage reprehending those Follies which the Pulpit
would blush to correct; for though the Church is the Place to declaim against
Sin, yet there are some sorts of Wickedness which cannot be so decently reproved
there; so that the Stage is serviceable on this account, to supply the Defects
of the Pulpit. In short, whatever may be objected against the present
management of the Stage, is of no force against such Proceedings as these.
Religion and Morality can receive no Damage here; for as long as these Rules
are observed, they strictly include both.

It was the Opinion of a great Master of Reason, that Tragedy conduces more to
the Instruction of Manking, than even Philosophy it self, because it teaches
the Mind by Sense, and rectifies the Passions by the Passions themselves. And
there is this further Advantage, that we have always the Example of great Men
before us, and are generally inclinable to take our Manners from them. There
has indeed Authorities been produced against the Stage, though there don't want
as ancient Advocates for it; and some of the Fathers themselves writ Plays,
however Mr. Collier came to forget it.

If the Theater is capable to give us such Advantage, it will easily be proved
of what necessity there is for its encouragement in this Populous City: If
there were no Politic Reasons, yet the Good to Religion that may be done by
it, is a convincing Argument at once for its Lawfulness and Use. I know the
Gravity of some cannot dispense with so much time to be spent in Diversion; though
I cannot think this a reasonable Objection where so much Profit may attend our
Delight. If it be lawful to recreate our selves at all, it can never be amiss
to frequent such a Diversion, that only takes up our Time to make us wiser. I
would to God all of them were directed to the same End. No Man is to employ
himself so as to exclude the Duties of Religion; and there is as much danger in
minding too much the Business of the World, as the Pleasures of it; both of
them are to be kept within bounds, and both subservient to Religion. The
Passions of Men are active and restless; and it is the Prudence of every State
to encourage some public Exercise to keep them at quiet. If the Theater was
down, the Churches would not be the fuller for it. Or if they should, Religion
is not always the design of them who come there; so that I cannot see that any
thing can be allowed for the public Diversion with so much Innocence and so
much Advantage. I Am only afraid that such a Regularity would be too Virtuous
for the Age; and I don't doubt but the Beaux and Poetasters would be full of
Exclamation: For it would be a dreadful Time if the Ladies should regard the
Play more than their Beaux Airs; and how would Vanbroug be able to pass a
Comedy on them, if they should once be so nice in their Taste as to disgust
Obscenity; this indeed would be a Vexation, and such a Delicacy which Mr.
Congreve could not be pleased with: And if the Town should be so refined to
admit of nothing but what is Natural, we cannot expect that ever he will
gratify us with another Tragedy. Durfey and Motteux would write no more
Farces; Guildon and Tom. Brown, etc. would be the Saints with wry Mouths and
scrue'd Faces: Mr. Guildon indeed has Philosophy enough to support himself
under such a Calamity, and knows a Method to prevent starving; for who can
think that he who writ Blunt's Life can be at a loss for a decent dispatch of
his own? It Is a deplorable Case, indeed, and I pity a Man who cannot get Bread
by Writing, and yet must beg or starve without it.

The Prince of Conti believed the French Stage would not have been so bad if
the Priests had begun sooner to declaim against it: It is possible that some of
our Defects may be owing to such a Negligence. However it is never too late to
mend; and since Mr. Collier has took up the Cudgels, I wish the rest of the
same Coat would so far as is just and reasonable, stand his Second: He has his
Faults, but they are such as I would not have lost his Book for. I know there
are some violent Wits, who will not allow him either Wit or Style, but, in
plain terms, to be a Fool. I hope none of them will go about to prove it. I
confess he has kept ill Company of late; but surely they don't ground a
Conjecture upon that, especially when a Man only converses to convince. The
naming Mr. Durfey, or examining his Works, is not so contagious as to stain a
Man's Reputation. We are indeed to answer for evil Communication; and though I
cannot justify a Man who would read Mr. Durfey with too much Delight, because
we must not set our Affection on things below, yet I would pardon any who would
read him only to forewarm others of the Danger.

It Is a Misfortune to have good Poets stand in need of Assistance; but it is
very much aggravated when they are denied it. A Man who is obliged to write for
his Bread, is forced to be very hasty to prevent starving; And every Man's
Genius is not so sharp as his Appetite. This may be one Reason we have so many
things appear Abortive. Some Poets have not so much as to save their longing;
and if their Muse miscarry, or come with an ugly Mark into the World, are
rather to be pitied than condemned. In what Pangs have I seen some poor
Creatures to be delivered, when at the same time they have feared the Poverty
of their Brats, and that the World would discover they were very sick in the
breeding. A good Poet ought never to want a worthy Patron; and our Nobility and
Gentry ought to be Industrious in the Advancement of Letters. They might do it
with great ease and little Expense; for the Number is not so great who deserve
their Countenance. In vain we complain of the Irregularity of the Stage, if
they who could support its Honor, want support themselves: So that one great
Step to advance the Theater, is to take care, that they who write for the
Stage, do not want for Encouragement.

You see, Sir, I have given my Thoughts freely: I wish they may receive your
Approbation; because I would never think but to please you. I dare not now
think of excusing any thing I have writ; for I was resolved to tie my self to
no Method, but to think as much as I could for the advantage of the Stage,
which I must believe very lawful, for any thing I have yet met to the contrary.
Nor can I be persuaded, that our Plays have had so ill effect as some would
imagine. The best of our Plays have nothing in them that is so scandalous; and
for the worst, I would not allow them the Credit, nor the Authors the Vanity to
think they could influence any one Man. The evil Conversation of some of them
would frighten a Man from being vicious; so that they are serviceable against
their Wills, and do the World a Kindness through mistake. I dare not stay any
longer with you, though I have a great Inclination to beg you would exeuse the
roughness of my Style: But you know I have been busy in Virgil; and that they
say, at Will's, is enough to spoil it: But if I had begged a more important
thing, and asked you to forgive the length of my Letter, I might assure my felf
you would oblige,

Your Humble Servant.

FINIS.

