THE PRESENT STATE OF DENMARK.

By GVY MIEGE, Author of the New Cosmography, or Survey of the whole World.

LONDON, Printed for Tho. Basset, at the George in Fleetstreet, near St.
Dunstan's Church. 1683.

To His Royal Highness, THE MOST ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE GEORGE, THE KING of
Denmark's only Brother.
May it please Your Royal Highness,
THE Liberty I take to offer You this Work is not out of Presumption. It is a
Debt I come to pay, an Homage I come to render to Your ROYAL HIGHNESS. It Is
Your R.H. has occasioned it, upon the News of your happy Marriage with the
Princess. Which has diffused so great a Joy through the whole Nation, that it
had certainly broke out into Extraordinary and Public Demonstrations, at any
other Conjuncture. However, it has created a Desire to know the estate of a
Kingdom, which has given us so Illustrious a Prince by his Birth, so famous for
his Courage, and so Amiable by that Sweetness of Disposition which has already
gained him so many Hearts in this Realm. Therefore, to satisfy the Public, I
have undertaken this short Description of the State of Denmark; in writing of
which, I had the advantage of speaking well of Denmark, without having need to
flatter. And I am persuaded, it will be so much the more Acceptable to Your
ROYAL HIGHNESS, and the Public. If it shall have the Fortune to please, 'twill
be no small Satisfaction to me, and I should think my self very happy to have
done Something that had the Honor to be approved by so great a Prince. For
whom my Prayers to Heaven shall be, to pour down its most benign Influences
upon Your ROYAL HIGHNESS, to crown your Marriage with a glorious Offspring,
that this happy Alliance may prove an eternal Bond of Amity between the two
Kingdoms of England and Denmark, and that Your ROYAL HIGHNESS may all the days
of your Life be the Delight of your Friends and Terror of your Enemies. I
humbly beg of Y. R. H. to accept of these Marks of the Zeal I have for your
Service, and to believe that none can be with more Veneration than I am

YOUR ROYAL HIGHNESSE'S Most humbly devoted Servant, GVY MIEGE

READER,
HERE you have a Short, but Comprehensive, Description of the State of Denmark,
which may be called Multum in Parvo. The Occasion for Writing of it is easy to
guess at. Before the late Marriage of GEORGE, Prince of Denmark, with the Lady
ANN, the English had no other Interest in that Country but that of a Northern
Trade. And the Truth is, few People minded it, but such as traded that Way. But
now these two Crowns are come to a closer Union, it is worth our while to look
back, and to consider the State of that Monarchy, wherein the English Nation
has so great an Interest in the Prince's Person. A Monarchy which has been in
former times most formidable both to France and England; and which has to this
day the Command of the Baltic, in a far better manner than the Venetians can
pretend it of their Gulf. A Monarchy of great Latitude, if we consider all the
accessory Estates to the Crown of Denmark, as the Kingdom of Norway, with the
Isles of Schetland, Feroe, and Iseland; besides the Coast of Groenland in Terra
Polaris Arctica, and New-Denmark in the Northern America. In Germany, West of
the Duchy of Bremen, the King of Denmark has got of late years the fruitful
Counties of Oldenburg and Delmenhorst. In Africa he has Frederixburg, upon the
Coast of Guinea; besides some Holds in Asia. As for the Kingdom of Denmark it
self, which is the main Thing of all, I have had the advantage of knowing the
Country; not only by reading Authors upon that Subject, but also by my own
Experience, when I was there an Attendant on the Right Honorable the Earl of
Carlisle in his Northern Embassy's. What material Changes have happened there
since, I got out of my Memoires. So that you have really, in this small Tract,
the State of Denmark both Ancient and Modern. Wherein you will find not only
Geography, but a great deal of History both Civil and Natural.

POSTSCRIPT. Upon the finishing of this Book at the Press, I was not a little
surprised to see another get the start of it; being of this very size, upon the
same Subject, and bearing the same Title. The Style whereof might have been
more polite, the Matter better digested, the Impression much neater, and the
Faults less numerous, had not the Book (as I am informed) been hurried into the
World, for the preventing of This. But some People will run, though they make
more Haste than good Speed.

ERRATA.
PAge 7. l. 2. for was read has. p. 10. l. 12. for upon r. of. p. 17. l. 13.
and 14. r. most part. p. 31. l. 16. blot out formerly. p. 108. l. 23. r. 64th.
p. 111. last line, r. to drive. p. 127. l. 10. r. to the Czar.

THE PRESENT STATE OF DENMARK.
A Prefatory Discourse of the Rise and Progress of this Monarchy.

THE State of Denmark, the Description whereof I take in hand, has been in
former Ages a great and formidable State. Gotricus, or Godfrey, was the first
King of Note that took upon him the Danish Government. Which happened in the Year
of our Lord 797. And 'twas about this time that the Danes first began to infest
the Coasts of England, that they invaded Frizeland with a Fleet of 200 Sail,
and would have endangered the great Monarchy of France, if the Death of
Godfrey, and the Quarrels that arose about the Succession after his Decease,
had not kept them off.

At last, their Affairs at home being composed again, they employed their whole
Forces against England, as the weaker Enemy. This happened in the beginning of
the ninth Century, that is, in the time of Egbert, the last King of the
West Saxons, and the first of England. Which being now reduced from a State of
Heptarchy into that of a Monarchy, was unhappily disturbed by these new Guests.
Who, having filled up the void Rooms of the Juites and Angles in Jutland,
(formerly called the Cimbrick Chersonese) thought it convenient to follow them
into Britain also. So that, next to the Saxons, the Danes were the most
considerable Actors in the Stage of England. Where they continued about 225
years, during which time they first erected many small Sovereignties. Till,
after several Checks given them by King Alfred, his Son Edward, and Athelstan
Edward's Son, they were at last brought by King Edred under the English
Government, and compelled by him to be christened. So that they lived with the
English, mixed in Marriages and Alliance, and incorporated with them.

But, toward the latter end of the tenth Century, in the Reign of King
Ethelred, a weak Prince, the Danes began again to grow upon the English.
Insomuch that the King was sain to buy his Peace of them at the yearly Tribute
of ten thousand Pounds, inhanced soon after to forty thousand. A vast Sum in
those Times, which was raised upon the Subjects by the name of Danegelt. Till
at last King Ethelred, weary of these Exactions, and willing to shake them off,
plotted with his Subjects to kill all the Danes, as they slept in their Beds.
Which Plot took effect, according to expectation, on St. Brice's night, Nov.
12. Anno 1012.

Sueno was then King of Denmark, to which Crown he added Norway by Conquest.
He, being a right Valiant Prince, heard no sooner of the Nocturnal Exploit of
the English, but he prepared a mighty Fleet, in order to revenge so great an
Outrage and Dishonor done to his Nation. He came over himself with his Fleet
unto England, and the dreadful noise of his Approach compelled King Ethelred to
fly. Away he goes into Normandy, leaving his poor Subjects to the Mercy of a
cruel Invader, who breathed nothing but Revenge.

The Danes, having thus, by the Valor and good fortune of Sueno their King,
recovered their Power in England, obtained at last the Kingdom, in the Person
of his younger Son Canute. A Temperate Prince, and who did really deserve the
Title of Great. Besides the Crown of England, he got the Kingdoms of Denmark
and Norway upon the Decease of his Brother Olaus, and conquered that of Sweden.
Thus he was King of England, Denmark, Norway, and Sweden.

But, unhappily for his Posterity, he opened a way to their Exclusion from the
Crown of England, when he sent back his Danish Forces into their Country. A
very Impolitick Act, as if a Kingdom got by Force could be held by Favor.

It Is true he reigned twenty Years, and at his Death left the Crown of England
to Harold his base Son. But then the Danes Interest here grew so weak, that in
less than seven years this Crown returned to the Saxon Line.

For King Harold reigned but four years, and died without Issue. To whom
succeeded his Brother Hardy Canute, King of Denmark, who reigned here but about
two Years, and was the last King of the Danish Race in England.

Thus the Danes had here in all but three Kings of their Nation; viz. Canute
the Great, and his two Sons Harold and Hardy Canute, who reigned here all three
but about 26 years.

To Hardy Canute succeeded his half Brother Edward, surnamed the Confessor, the
seventh Son of Ethelred by Emma his Queen, Goodwine Earl of Kent being the main
Instrument in setting him up. The Saxon Line being thus re-inthroned, we must
now follow the Danes into Denmark, and take a view of their Transactions in the
North.

Canute the Second aforesaid had a Sisters Son called Sueno, who was his next
Successor but one in Denmark. This Sueno restored the Kingdom of Norway to the
Norvegians.

But it was again united to Denmark in the Reign of Aquin King of Norway, by
his Marriage with Margaret, Daughter of Waldemar the Third, King of Denmark;
that is above three hundred Years ago. In which State it has continued ever
since.

Aquin being dead, his Widow, Queen Margaret, took up the Reins of the
Government. And, not being contented with two Crowns, she ventured them to get
that of Sweden, as a Crown that had gone away from her Ancestors, and that by
course should have fallen to the share of her Husband.

Albert of Mecklemburg was then King of Sweden. This Semiramis of the North
challenges him as an Usurper, raises an Army against him, fights him, routs his
Army, and takes the King Prisoner. So that Albert was fain to resign his Crown
to Margaret as her due.

This brave Queen, having thus united the three Kingdoms under her Command,
caused an Act of State to be passed in Calmar, one of the chief Towns in
Sweden, for the Perpetuation of this Union unto her Successors, the Law and
Privileges of each Kingdom continuing as before they were.

Her immediate Successor was Eric Duke of Pomeren, her own Sisters Son. Him she
adopted for her next Heir, and he was accordingly chosen in her life time King
of the three Kingdoms, into which he succeeded actually after her Decease Anno
1422. Having reigned about 27 years, he resigned his Kingdoms, Anno 1439.

This Resignation was followed by an Anarchy, which lasted six years. At last,
viz. Anno 1445, Christopher, Count Palatine of the Rhine, and Nephew of Eric
(being the Son of Margaret, his Sister) was chosen by the joint Consent of all
the States of these Kingdoms. He reigned but three years, and died without
Issue. Whereupon the Swedes grown weary of the Danish Government, broke the
foresaid Agreement made at Calmar, and chose a King of their own.

The Danes on the other side, considering the great Advantage they had got by
the Addition of Norway, pitched upon Adolph Duke of Sleswick and Earl of
Holstein, for the next Successor; that they might get in those Estates to their
Kingdoms. But he excused himself by reason of his Age and want of Children, and
commended to them Christiern Earl of Oldenburg, his Nephew and next Heir, who
was accordingly chosen, An. 1448. Adolph dying some years after, King
Christiern succeeded him in the Estates of Holstein and Sleswick, continuing
ever since united unto that Crown. And from this Christiern the Succession was
hitherto continued in his Line.

As for the Crown of Sweden, it is true the Danes recovered it in the time of
the said Christiern. For Charles Canute King of Sweden, whom the Swedes had
chosen on the Death of Christopher King of Denmark and Sweden, being upon
discontent fled to Dantzick where he ended his days, Christiern was called in
by a Party of the Swedes, and crowned King of Sweden. But he was outed again,
under color that he had not kept Conditions with them.

Christiern dying Anno 1482. his Son John succeeded him; and the Swedes, then
overpowred by the Moscovites, received him as their King. But, their turn being
served, they expelled him also.

To John succeeded Anno 1513. his Son Christiern the Second, the Nero of the
North, who recovered once more the Crown of Sweden. But he used his Subjects so
insolently at home, and his Victory in Sweden so cruelly, that he was driven
out of Denmark by his Uncle Frederick, and out of Sweden by Gustave Eric,
descended from the ancient Kings of Sweden.

Thus the Danes recovered no less than three times the Crown of Sweden, till
they were utterly dispossessed of it by the foresaid Eric, Anno 1523; in whose
House it has continued ever since.

And such is the Vicissitude of humane Affairs, that, whereas in former Ages
the Crown of Sweden was subject to Denmark, in this our Age that of Denmark was
twice reduced to such straits by the Swedes, that the whole Kingdom of Denmark
was in a manner confined within the Walls of Copenhagen, and then in the
greatest Distress imaginable. All which happened within the compass of four
years, viz. in the years 1657. 1658. 1659. 1660, under the late Reigns of
Charles the Ninth King of Sweden, and of Frederic the Third, King of Denmark
The History of which Wars you will find accurately written by Sir Roger Manley.
A prodigious History, and scarce to be parallelled by any. Where you will find
those two Kings fighting hand to hand for no less than a Crown, the King of
Sweden with a wonderful Resolution and continued Successes, the King of Denmark
with an undaunted Courage and indefatigable Endeavors to beat back so swift an
Invader, and stop him in his Career.

Whereupon a Treaty, by the Mediation of England, was concluded at Roschild, in
the Month of February 1658. By which Treaty the King of Sweden was to restore
the Places he had taken from the Danes, and were then possessed by him. And the
King of Denmark, in consideration of the said Restitution, as also for a
Recompense of the Damages caused by this War, did give and grant to his Majesty
of Sweden, and his Heirs for ever, the Country of Schonen, with the incorporate
Provinces of Halland and Bleking; besides the Island of Bornholm, together with
the Castles, Towns, and Territories of Bahuys and Drontheim in Norway, the
Secular and Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction which the King of Denmark had over some
Places in the Isle of Rugen, and all Places whatsoever taken from the Swedes
during this War. Those were Bremerford, a good place in the Duchy of Bremen;
the Bellemore Sconce, lying upon the Elb; and the Leher Sconce, commanding the
Weser. The taking of which, whilst the Swedes were deeply engaged in Poland,
was the Occasion of this unhappy War to the Crown of Denmark.

To which I shall only add this material Article granted by King Frederick to
King Charles by the said Treaty, viz. That all Swedish Ships whatsoever in the
Sound and Belt are by virtue of the said Treaty to be free and exempted from
all Customs, Inquisitions, Visitation, Arrest, or any other Molestation
whatsoever, producing only a right Sea-pass in the King of Denmarks
Custom-Houses of Elsineur and Newburg.

By this Treaty it is plain that King Frederick was a great Loser, and yet a
great Saver, considering the desperate Posture of his Affairs in that Juncture
of time, His Crown was clipped, but still he had a Crown. And it is observable,
that the two Kings upon this Treaty had a friendly Interview, with plain
dealing, and little or nothing of Royal Formality. The Relation of which I
shall have occasion to give you in another Place.

And yet soon after this the War broke out again. For King Charles, pretending
that King Frederick had not performed his Articles, prepared for a second
Invasion upon Denmark; and did it with so much Prudence and Secrecy, that
(whilst some thought him gone toward Prussia, others toward Pomeren, but none
toward Denmark) he came from Wismar to Oldeslo, then to Kiel in Holstein, from
thence by Sea to Corsoer in Seland, and so straight before Copenhagen, in
August 1658.

My Design is not to give you the particulars of this famous Siege, which is
already so well done in the forementioned History. Only I shall tell you in
general, that the Pate of Denmark depended now (if ever) on the invincible
Courage and Conduct of King Frederick. Who, upon the sight of these unexpected
Invaders, being prompted to make a timely Retreat into Norway or Holland,
declared with a Royal Magnanimity, that he would live and die in his Nest, and
not survive the Fate and Glory of his Country.

In short, this War continued as long as King Charles lived. And, though a
Treaty was on foot to be influenced by the Mediation and Sea-Forces of England
and Holland; yet the Business was so carried on, that no Treaty was made till
after the Death of King Charles. Who dying in the Year 1660. of a malignant
Fever, at Gottenburg in Sweden, left his Crown and Conquests to Charles his
Son, the present King of Sweden.

Soon after his Death, the Treaty of Peace was concluded, much upon the Basis
of the Roschild Treaty. But the Government of Drontheim in Norway was by this
Treaty restored to King Frederick. Who died February the 9th. in the Year 1670,
being 61 years old.

Since that time there has been another Rupture betwixt these two Northen
Crowns, in the late Wars which have imbrued Europe in so much Blood. Where both
the present King of Denmark Christiern V. and the Illustrious Prince George his
only Brother, have given such proofs of their Personal Valor as becomes the
Royal Issue of so magnanimous a Prince as King Frederick. 'Twas in this War,
that the Swedes were routed out of Germany. Pomeren they lost to the Elector of
Brandenburg, Wismar in Mecklemburg and several Places in Schonen to the King of
Denmark. Where the Danes overpowred them frequently in Field-Fights and in
Sieges, neither did they come off less triumphantly at Sea. And, though the
most Christian King forced the Danes at last, as well as Brandenburg, to a
Restitution; yet they had the satisfaction of having revenged in some measure
their former Quarrel with the Swedes. So true it is, that of all humane Things,
none is more subject to Vicissitude than the Issues of War.

Thus having brought this Monarchy from the first Rise thereof to its present
State, through a continued Series of the most material Changes; I shall now,
with all the clearness and brevity I can, prosecute my main Design. In order to
which I must in the first place give an Account of Denmark, then of Norway, and
lastly of some other Estates and Dominions belonging to this Crown.

Of DENMARK, in general.
THE Kingdom of DENMARK lies East from Scotland and the North of England, at
least 300 miles by Sea the nearest Parts. The same is called Denmark, or
Danemark, i. e. the Country of the Danes, whose Original you shall hear of
afterward.

The best and greatest Part of it is the Peninsule called Jutland, otherwise
the Cimbrick Chersonese from its ancient Name Cimbrica Chersonesus. The rest
does consist of Islands, the principal of which are Seland and Funen.

As to the Country of Schonen, formerly part of Denmark; 'twas by the Roschild
Treaty transferred to the Crown of Sweden, and incorporated with it. So that it
does not belong to my Subject.

The whole Country is almost surrounded with the Sea, nothing but the South
Parts of the Peninsule bordering upon any Land. The Peninsule lies Westward,
and the Islands Eastward. The Ocean goes round about that, as far as the little
Belt, which parts it from Funen. Situate it is betwixt the fifty fourth and
fifty ninth Degrees of Northern Latitude, and consequently altogether in the
Northern Temperate Zone; the Skau, or Skagen (which is the most Northern Point
of Denmark) being no less than eight Degrees and a half distant from the
Arctick Circle, where begins the Frigid Zone. Accordingly there the longest day
is somewhat above 18 hours; and at Altena, near Hamburg in the South Parts of
the Chersonese, not quite 17. In short, this Country lies parallel to all that
Tract of Ground which is from Hull in Yorkshire to Dornock in the furthest
Parts of Scotland. At 20 Leagues, or 60 miles a Degree, the whole Length in a
direct Line comes to about 80 Leagues, or 240 miles.

As the Ocean parts Denmark from England and Scotland, so the Baltic parts it
from Sweden. This is the Sinus Codanus of the Ancients, otherwise called Mare
Suevicum, and now Mare Balticum, from the name of Baltic, whereby we now call
it. The Dutch call it Die Belt, or else Oost Zee, that is the East-Sea.

There are three several Passages into it from the Ocean, all of them under the
Command of the King of Denmark. The general, safest, and most usual Passage is
the famous Straight called the Sound, betwixt the East parts of Seland and the
West of Schonen in Swethland. Which is so great a Passage, that there comes
often 200, sometimes 300 Sail of Ships, in one day. The same is hardly four
miles over, where it is narrowest. The second Passage, or Inlet, lies West of
that, betwixt the Isles of Seland and Funen. This is some sixteen miles over,
from Korsoer to Newburg. And it is called Beltsound, or the Great Belt, to
distinguish it from Middlefare (or the lesser) Belt. Which is the most Western
and narrowest Passage, lying betwixt Funen and Jutland, not above two miles
over.

From these three Streights, lying East and West, the Baltic Sea widens it
self, and runs a good way East-Northward, till it divides it self into two long
Gulfs, one running North, and the other East. The first of which is called
Bothn-Zee, or the Gulf of Bothnia, from a Province of that name in Sweden; and
the other Finnich-Zee, or Finland-Gulf, from another Province of that Name
belonging likewise to Sweden, which Province separates those Gulfs from one
another.

Northward, this Sea runs all along Sweden. Southward it washes part of
Denmark, the North Parts of Mecklemburg and Pomeren in Germany, Curland in
Poland, Livonia and Ingria both belonging to Sweden. So that it may be called
the Mediterranean of the North. This Sea has no visible Tide, and swarms in
many Places (especially toward the Sea Coasts) with Islets, Shelves, and
Rocks, which make the Navigation in those Parts very hazardous. Most commonly
in Wintertime it is so frozen up, that the Ships are Ice-bound in their
Harbors.

About the latter end of January, Anno 1658, the Cold was so intense, and so
very violent beyond the memory of Man, that the Sea became a solid Bridge of
Ice. Insomuch that King Charles of Sweden, who looked upon it as a singular
Providence that made way to his Greatness, resolved to march out of Jutland
into Funen over the Frozen Sea, against the sense of his chief Officers. A
prodigious, but yet successful Attempt.

Not a Night passed, says my Historian, wherein he did not send his Spies into
the Island, and his Scouts to discover the firmness of the Waters. Hist. of the
late Wars in Denm. p. 6.
Which being at length reported to be strong enough, save only a small but long
Rent of scarce five Foot broad, he gave orders to March. But first he commanded
a great quantity of Planks, Posts, Hurds, and the like Materials to be brought
thither and laid, to make a Bridge over the said Breach. The Ice breaking, two
Troops of Waldecks Regiment fell in, and several other single Troopers were
drowned. Which forced the Army to rush on with more vigor, being too far
engaged to retire, and the Danger behind them being greater than that in their
Front. In short, they got to Funen, the Inhabitants whereof being thus
strangely surprised made little or no Resistance.

This great Success of King Charles prepared him for a second March over Sea,
and the very sight of the Ice inflamed his Courage. To Seland he must go to
surprise Copenhagen. And, though the nearest Way was over the great Belt, the
Island Spro besides lying about half way; yet he thought fit to take another
Course. He went from Funen to Langland, and so through Laland and Falster to
Seland. By which means he secured all those Islands in his way, and surprised
Seland at Warimburg, where no body dreamt of his Coming. From Warimburg, with
an Army not consisting of above 7000. Horse and Foot, he made have toward
Copenhagen. Where I leave him, to proceed in my Description.

By what is said, you may guess of the sharpness of the Air in Denmark. The
Country being but narrow, and the several Parts of it severed from one another
by the Interposition of the Sea, you cannot expect to hear of any great Rivers.
The chief of them you may have an account of in the particular Descriptions we
shall make. Mountains of any note I cannot find, in a Country for the part most
plain, and little swelled with Mountains. In North-Jutland indeed there is a
very high Mountain called Alberg, in which (as the Inhabitants believe, and
report accordingly) are found some Marks and Remainders of the ancient Giants.

In short, Denmark in general is a wholesome, brave, and fertile Country. It
produces great plenty of Corn, and has such Pasture-Grounds for the feeding of
Oxen, that (according to diverse Authors) there are sent every year from hence
into Germany above fifty thousand Oxen. On the other side, the green Forests
and Woods feed innumerable Herds of Swine; where they eat their fill of Mast
and Acorns, falling from the great Oaks and Beech-trees in abundance. But,
besides this vile sort of Cattle, here is likewise a prodigious number of
Horses and wild Deer, and especially Stags and Elks. Fish cannot be wanted in a
Country sufficiently irrigated with Rivers, and so surrounded as it is with the
Sea. But it is observable that in South-Jutland the Fields there do
interchangeably yield both Fish and Corn. For once in three or four years the
Natives let the Pools overflow the Land, for the Fish to eat up the Grass, and
the Mud which is left behind to enrich the Soil. And then you may think they
catch plenty of Fish.

Of DENMARK in particular.
And first of Jutland.
AS this famous Peninsule was formerly called Cimbrica Chersonesus, from the
Cimbri, the then Inhabitants of it; so it has since took the name of Jutland
from the Juites, who peopled it next to the Cimbri. These were the People, who
(together with the neighboring Saxons) made a Conquest of the best part of
Britain.

At this time Jutland is divided into North and South Jutland. The first is
subdivided into the four Dioceses (or Districts) of Alburg, Wiburg, Arhusen,
and Ripen; and South-Jutland, into the Dukedoms of Sleswick and Holstein.

The Diocese of Alburg takes up the most Northern Parts of this Peninsule, and
is so called from Alburg the chief Place hereof; seated on the South Side of
the Bay of Limfort, that Bay which opening Eastward crosses almost all the
Peninsule, and makes in its way a good large Island called Mors. On the West of
which Island is the Tract of Land called the Ty, or Tyland, as those Parts
which lie North of the said Bay go by the name of Winsissel.

The Diocese of Wiburg lies South of that; and is so called from Wiburg, the
Episcopal See, situate on a River which runs Northward into the Bay of Limfort.

South of that lies the District of Arhusen, so called from Arhusen, the chief
place hereof. Situate East-Southward from Wiburg by the Sea side, and being a
Port of good note, few miles above the lesser Belt. Opposite to which is
Rinkoping on the West Side of the Peninsule, thirteen Leagues distant from
Arhusen Westward, and ten from Ripen Northward. This is a noted Sea Port on the
German Ocean.

The Diocese of Ripen is the most Southern, and the largest of all. The same is
so denominated from Ripen, the Episcopal See, seated on the West Side of the
Peninsule, near the German Ocean, and fortified with a Castle. Under this
Diocese there are no less than thirty Herets or Perfectures, 282 Parishes,
seven walled Towns, and ten Royal Castles.

Amongst these Towns I cannot but take a particular notice of Fredericks-Ode.
The taking of which by the Swedes (Nov. 4. Anno 1657.) under the Conduct of
Marshal Wrangel, did not only give them the Plunder and Contribution of most
part of Jutland, but also traced them the way for their further Conquests. This
was a new Town, seated on the lesser Belt, endowed with many Privileges to
invite Inhabitants, and fortified on the Landside. The Seaside, being
pallisadoed from the adjoining Bulwarks as sar as deep Water, was counted
strong enough. But the Swedes, under favor of the Darkness, and some false
Alarms, broke down that wooden Fence; and, rushing in up to the Saddle-skirts
in Water, took the Town by Storm. Where, besides 2000 slain, they made above
2000 Prisoners, whereof near 200 Officers. There they found no less than 33
Colors, and 80 Pieces of Canon, with other Store of Ammunition and Plunder.

But the Swedes kept it little above a twelve Month in their hands. For, about
the latter end of the following Year, the Emperor, the King of Poland, and the
Elector of Brandenburg, being confederated together against the Swedes, in
their own and the Danes behalf, they put the Swedish Forces in Jutland so hard
to it, that they were fain to quit all their Holds there. Upon their quitting
of this Place the Confederates resolved, but in vain, to pursue the Swedes into
the Isle of Funen. Where they were so warmly received by the Defendants, that
they were fain to retire before they could reach the shore. Here is also in
this Diocese the Seaport of Colding, not above six miles South-west of
Fredericks-Ode. The same is fortified with a Castle, called Arnsburg; and here
is paid the Toll for the Horses and Oxen which pass this way for Holstein and
Germany. This Town was taken from the Swedes, some time before Fredericks-Ode,
by Czernesky, who commanded the Polish Forces. Having forced the Kings Palace,
he put the whole Garrison to the Sword, reserving only the Governor and his
Lieutenant to publish his Victory and their own Misfortune.

I proceed now to South-Jutland, which (as I said before) comprehends the
Dukedoms of Sleswick and Holstein. Though there are those, I confess, who look
upon Holstein as no part (or Member) of Jutland, but as a Country of it self.

The first is so called from Sleswick, the chief Place of it. Seated toward
the end of a large Bay or Inlet of the Baltic, which runs half way the
Peninsule Westward, and gives to Sleswick a fair and commodious Haven. The
Dukedom was first erected by King Eric of Denmark, who gave it to Waldemar,
great Grandchild of Abel a former King, Anno 1280, to be held by him under the
Right and Sovereignty of the Kings thereof, But, the Male Issue failing, it
returned to the Crown, and was by Margaret Queen of Denmark conferred on Gerard
Earl of Holstein, Anno 1386. Afterward repenting of that Act, she extorted it
out of the hands of his Widow; but it was again recovered by the Valor and
good Fortune of his Son Adolphus. After whose Death, it fell together with
Holstein to Christiern of Oldenburg King of Denmark, by whom it was
incorporated with that Crown.

Next to Sleswick there are other Places of good note in this Dukedom. As
Gottorp, near Sleswick, a strong Castle, and the usual Residence of the Dukes
of Holstein Gottorp, of the Royal Family of Denmark. Frederickstad, on the
River Eyder, some fourteen miles West of Gottorp. Tonningen, a strong Fortress,
not above eight miles from that to the Westward, and seated also on the River
Eyder not far from its Influx in to the German Sea; but lately dismantled by
the King of Denmark.

The River Eyder is the chief of this Peninsule, and was the ancient Boundary
betwixt the Saxons and the Danes. It rises above Rensburg, and parts all the
way it runs the Dukedoms of Sleswick and Holstein. It Is from this River that
the said Duke of Holstein's Country, from Tonningen as far as Husum, is called
Eyderstede.

Now Husum lies almost full North of Tonningen, commodiously seated on a Bay of
the German Sea, and fortified with a Castle. Both this Place and Tonningen, as
well as Frederickstad, did lately belong to the Duke of that Name.

North-East from Husum you will find Flensburg, a noted Town with a Castle on a
Bay of the Baltic Sea, called Hever Bay. There is a Port so deep, so safe, and
so commodious, that the very Ships come up close to the Houses almost every
where. Further North is Apenrade, likewise on the Baltic Sea. Six or seven
miles further you will find Hadersleben, a Town of good note, near the Baltic,
and over against the Island of Funen; beautified with the fair Castle of
Hansburg, begun to be built by John, the eldest Son of King Christiern I. then
Duke of Holstein, but finished by Frederick II. King of Denmark. This Town and
Castle was in the forementioned Wars twice taken by the Swedes, but at last
restored with the rest. There is one Town more in these Parts I thought fit to
take notice of; and that is Tondern, near the German Sea, almost opposite to
Apenrade aforesaid on the Baltic.

Betwixt Sleswick and Flensburg is a Territory that goes by the Name of Anglen.
From whence England has got its denomination, ever since King Egbert (whose
Ancestors perhaps were born in this Tract of Land) caused this Kingdom to be
called Engel-lond (afterward turned into England) in a Parliament held at
Winchester, Anno 814. So that the English Nation is not only originally
descended from the Saxons and Danes, but the very Name of England has its
original from thence. And, if there ought to be any Ties of natural Friendship
betwixt two Nations sprung up from the same Root, it must be betwixt these
Nations; especially, considering the Uniformity of Manners, the Congruity of
Religion as to the main Points, and the stricter Union of both Crowns by such
Royal Matches on both sides as makes the same Blood run in the Veins of both
the Royal Families.

I said before, that the River Eyder was the ancient Boundary betwixt the
Saxons and the Danes. But it is observable besides, that in Imitation of the
Picts Wall in England, there was within few miles South of Sleswick a long
Trench and Wall from the one Sea to the other; so broad, that a Chariot or two
Horsemen a breast might ride upon it. The same was first built by Gotricus (or
Godfrey) King of Denmark, in the time of Charles the Great; either to stop the
Current of his Victories, or to hinder the daily Incursions of the Saxons. The
Tract thereof, still very easy to be seen, is called Danewark to this day.

South of the Dukedom of Sleswick lies that of Holstein. A woody Country,
called Holstein, from the Dutch word Holt, which signifies a Wood or Forest.
The River Eyder divides it Northward from Sleswick. Westward it is bounded
partly with the Elb, and Eastward with the Baltic. The River Elb, one of the
five great Rivers of Germany, divides it from the Dukedom of Bremen, and
further Southward it is bounded with the Dukedom of Saxen Lawemburg.

This Country is divided into four principal Parts, viz. Dithmarsen
North-westward, Holstein properly so called, Stormaren Southward, and Wageren
North-castward.

First Holstein specially so called (together with Stormaren) was made an
Earldom by the Emperor Lotharius, Anno 1134. in the Person of Adolph Earl of
Schomburg, who had deserved well of him in his Wars. And, when Christiern Earl
of Oldenburg was called to the Crown of Denmark, Anno 1448, he having gotten
Dithmarsen of the Emperor Frederick the Third, prevailed so far as to have the
whole Estate erected into a Dukedom, to be held by him and his Successors of
the sacred Empire.

The famous Hanse-Towns of Hamburg and Lubeck, that on the Elb and this on the
Trave, both on the Borders of Holstein and Germany, are reckoned as Towns of
Holstein; though neither of them subject to the King of Denmark, nor to the
Dukes of Holstein.

Hamburg is of that part of Holstein which is called Stormaren, about sixteen
German miles from Bremen in Germany, six East of Staden, and eight West of
Lubeck. It is built at the Influx of the Alster into the Elb, in a large Plain,
with fat and rich Pastures round about it, the Ships coming up to it a great
way with the Tide. This is an ancient City, great, populous, beautiful, and
rich, and a Place of vast Trading. There is the old and new Town, both
surrounded with good Walls, and well fortified. The Buildings for the most part
are of Brick, the Streets somewhat narrow, but the public Structures very
fair; especially the Council-house, adorned with the Statues of the nine
Worthies, carved with very great Art; then the Exchange or Meeting Place for
Merchants; and amongst the Churches S. Nicolas and S. Catharines Church, this
last having a marble Chair with Figures of Alabaster, and Ornaments of Gold
most delicately wrought. It is observed, (says Heylin) that there were in this
Town at one time 177 Brewers, when there was but forty Bakers, one Lawyer, and
one Physician. The Reason of which Disproportion was, that a Cup of Nimis was
their usual Physic; that Bread was counted a Binder, and so not to be used but
in case of Necessity; and that their Differences were sooner ended over a Can
than by course of Law. This formerly was the Staple Town for English Cloth,
from whence on some Discontents it was removed to Stade, and at last to Holland.

Anciently Hamburg was an Archbishops See, founded by Charles the Great; but
transferred to Bremen, Anno 850, with the Consent of Lewis the then Emperor.
Moreri says, that Hamburg was sometime subject to the Archbishops of Bremen,
that afterward the Hamburgers were under particular Lords of their own, and at
last came to be under the Dukes of Holstein. But Heylin, having told us that
this City was repaired by Charles the Great, and walled by the Emperor Henry
the Fourth, says further, that it was accounted since that time an Imperial
City, and made one of the Hanse, upon the first Incorporating of those Towns.
Which notwithstanding, upon a Controversy arising about that time betwixt the
Earl of Holstein and the People of Hamburg, this Town was adjudged to belong to
the Earls of Holstein, and that Determination ratified by Charles the Fourth,
Anno 1374. In pursuance whereof, the Hamburgers took the Oath of Allegiance to
Christiern Earl of Oldenburg (the first King of Denmark of that House) as Earl
of Holstein, acknowledging him and his Successors for their lawful Lords. But
since that time they have slipped their Necks out of the Collar, and having took
upon themselves to live as a free State, they only pay some small Duty to the
King of Denmark as Duke of Holstein; and that rather by way of a Toll upon the
account of Gluckstad that lies betwixt Hamburg and the Mouth of the River Elb,
than on any other account. However, the King of Denmark seems to have a just
Claim to Hamburg; and he never draws near it with any Forces, but the
Hamburghers, jealous of their Liberty, and perhaps conscious of their Guilt,
put themselves into a Posture of Defense. In order to which, besides their
constant Garrison, and the promised Assistance of the rest of the Hanse-Towns
upon all occasions, they can raise about fifteen thousand Citizens in Arms to
stand for their Liberty.

Lubeck, the chief of all the Hanse Towns, was at first but a goodly Borough,
which Adolphus Earl of Holstein built Anno 1143. in the time of the Emperor
Conrade III. But it was so well privileged by the said Earl and his next
Successors, that in a short time it bid defiance to its Founders, and was made
a Dukedom of it self. By the Emperor Frederick I. it was united to the Empire,
but after his Death they chose themselves another Duke. Who, having governed
them five Years, was subdued by the Danes, and the City made subject to that
Kingdom. In which Condition they remained, till delivered by the Emperor
Frederick II, by whom being infranchised again, it became Imperial, and was
afterward listed amongst the Hanse Towns. Anno 1500. John, King of Denmark,
attempted to reduce this City under his Obedience; which War broke out again in
the year 1509, and then the Swedes espoused the Lubeckers Quarrel. Anno 1547,
in Charles the fifth's time, they sent their Deputy's to the Emperor, to get a
Continuation of their Privileges, for which they presented his Imperial Majesty
with 100000 Crowns. Anno 1562. they engaged in a War with Eric King of Sweden,
which War continued till the year 1570. Ever since this City has been in a
flourishing Condition. And, though it has been burnt down several times,
particularly in the year 1238, yet it raised it self always out of its Ashes.

It Is built upon all the sides of a rising Hill, on the top whereof stands the
Church of St. Mary, whence is a descent to all the Gates of the City, affording
to the eye a most pleasing Prospect. The Buildings are very beautiful, and all
of Brick, the Streets strait and even, the Churches (Ten in number) in good
repair, adorned with excellent Imagery, and much admired even by skilful
Workmen. From the public Conduit a pipe of Water is conveyed to every House;
according to the Pattern whereof the Conduits were first made in London, and
other Places. In a word, says Heylin, there is not any City of Germany, or the
more Northern Country's, which can equalize it, either for the Beauty and
Uniformity of the Houses, the pleasant Gardens, fair Streets, and delightful
Walks without the Walls; or for the Citizens themselves, who are much commended
for their Civility to Strangers, and strict execution of Justice without
Partiality. To which purpose I shall here subjoyn the clear Testimony of
Lindebergius and another Poet. The first speaks of it thus.

Gens humana, Situs, Commercia, Littora, Mores,
Mars, Toga, Divitiae, Curia, Religio,
Arctoas inter claras Virtutibus Vrbes
Efficient tollat tanta Lubeca Caput;
Et Decus Europae, and lumen sit totius Ansae,
Et sit Vandalici pulcra Corona Soli.
The other thus.

Traverna leni descendimus amne Lubecum,
Vrbis post paucas Munimina cernimus horas.
Ingressi vero Portas miramur and Aedes,
Art laboratas omnes, Cultumque Domorum
Eximium, Merces, amplissima Strata Viarum.
Denique long alias omnes quas vidimus Vrbes
Haec superat, etc.
The same is seated on the borders of Holstein, Lawemburg, and Mecklemburg, and
particularly in that part of Holstein which is called Wageren, not above two
German miles distant from the Baltic. The River Trave, which runs through the
midst of it, carries Ships of the greatest burden; and such is the Trade of
this Place, that it is thought above 600 Ships of all sorts (some of a thousand
Tun and upwards) belong to it. Near the Rivers Mouth is the Fort called
Travemund. Anno 1162, the Bishops See of Oldenburg was formerly transferred to
this Place; the present Bishop being of the Duke of Holstein Gottorp's Branch.
To conclude, Lubeck lives in the form of a Commonwealth, and has made a strict
Alliance with the States General of the United Provinces; who included this
Town in the seventy second Article of their Treaty with Spain, Anno 1648.

Next to Hamburg and Lubeck, the most noted Places in Holstein, and first in
Wageren, are Segeberg, near the head of the River Trave, four German Miles from
Lubeck; Oldislo, on the same River, betwixt Segeberg and Lubeck; Newstat, on
the Baltic; Oldenburg, North of that; and Ploen upon a Lake, fortified with a
Castle, and belonging to a Prince of the House of Holstein, from hence called
the Duke of Holstein Ploen.

Secondly, in Stormaren, Pinnemberg, two leagues North of Hamburg; Crempen, on
a little River of that name, which falls not far off from hence into the Stoer,
and both together not much further into the Elb. A Town well fortified by King
Christiern the Fourth, and reckoned one of the Keys of that Kingdom. Gluckstad,
on the River Elb; which Place was likewise repaired and fortified by Christiern
the Fourth, to command the Passage up the Elb.

Thirdly, in Ditmarsen, Meldorp, on the Ocean; the Inhabitants of which are so
wealthy, that many of them cover their Houses with Copper; Brunsbuttel, at the
Mouth of the River Elb; Heide, five miles North of Meldorp; and Lunden, further
North, on the bank of the Eyder.

Fourthly, in Holstein specially so called, Rensburg, a Place well fortified.
Kiel, four leagues East of Rensburg, situate on a Bay of the Baltic, and
having a capacious Haven, seldom without good store of Shipping from Germany,
Sweden, and Denmark. This Town belongs to the Duke of Holstein. It Is fortified
with a Castle, and here the Duke keeps his Courts of Judicature. It suffered
much by the Wars of Sweden and Denmark, in the late Kings Reign. Bordesholm, on
the North end of a Lake; not much observable, but for a Monastery, in which
Henry, one of the Earls hereof (of a younger House) turned Monk, and died Anno
1241. Itzehoe, on the River Stoer, bordering upon Stormaren.

Amongst all the aforesaid Towns, Kiel, Lunden, Heide, Oldenburg, Ploen,
Bordesholm, and a few others of less Note, belong to the Dukes of Holstein.

But 'twill not be improper to take notice that Wageren took its name from the
Wagrii, a Tribe (or Nation) of the Sclaves, who possessed this Tract;
Stormaren, from the River Stoer and the Marsi, once the Inhabitants hereof; and
Ditmarsen, from a Mixture of the Dutch and the Marsi. These last, being
naturally of the Saxon Race, retain much of the Stomach and Animosity of the
ancient Saxons; and never were brought under the Command of the Earls of
Holstein, (as Wageren and Stormaren were) till Holstein it self was joined to
the Crown of Denmark. And, though it was aliened from the Empire by Frederick
the Third, and given in fee to Christiern Earl of Oldemburg the first King of
that House, Anno 1414; yet would they not submit unto his Authority, but held
it out against him, and some of his Successors, whom in the year 1500. they
vanquished in the open Field. But they were at last subdued by the Valor of
King Frederick the Second, Anno 1550.

To conclude, Holstein came to be subject to the King of Denmark in the Person
of Christiern I. Who, being Earl of Oldemburg, was elected to that Crown; and,
after the Death of Adolph Earl of Holstein, his Uncle by the Mothers side, (who
died without Issue) Holstein came into his hands.

But then Otho, Earl of Schomborg, pretended a Right unto it, as the next Heir
Male, according to the Constitutions of the Empire, of which it was holden. On
the other side Gerard, the Brother of Christiern, put in for his Share,
according to the ill Custom of Germany, of which it was then counted part. So
that King Christiern was fain to compound with both. To Otho he paid 43000
Florens, and left him withal such Places as were the ancient Possessions of
the Earl of Schomborg. And to his Brother Gerard he gave 50000 marks, besides
his whole Interest in the Earldom of Oldenburg, only reserving the Title,
according to the fashion in Germany.

By this means Holstein was united to the Crown of Denmark. Which being
afterward enlarged with the Addition of Ditmarsen, it was erected into a
Dukedom, by the Emperor Frederick III. Anno 1474. After which the Kings of
Denmark, (as Dukes of Holstein) were counted Princes of the Empire. Though they
neither send to the Imperial Diets, nor contribute any thing at all to the
Public Taxes, nor acknowledge any kind of Subjection to it more than merely
Titular. Only it was ordained, at the request of the Subjects, when first they
were incorporated into that Kingdom, that in case of any Grievance or unjust
Sentence in the ordinary Courts of Justice, wherein they found no remedy in the
Supreme Council of the Province, it might be lawful for them to appeal to the
Imperial Chamber, as they had done formerly. Which Grant has been so seldom
made use of, that it is in a manner worn out of memory.

But, since this Uniting of these two Estates, the Title of Duke of Holstein
and a good Part of the Country was in a manner dismembered from the Crown, and
given to Adolph, Brother of Christiern III, who governed it interchangeably
with the King. Afterward another part of this Country was bestowed upon John,
younger Brother to Frederick II. Of which two Dukes, and their Successors, you
shall have a further Account in its proper place.

Of the Islands of DENMARK.
And first of Seland and Funen.
SEland, the principal Island of Denmark, and the greatest of the Baltic Sea,
lies opposite to Schonen in Sweden, and is parted from it by the Sund, as it is
from Funen Westward by the great Belt. The same (being the Codanonia of the
Ancients) is a most pleasant and fruitful Island, extending from North to
South, sixteen German miles, and from East to West about twelve. Now a German
Mile is at the least as much as four English.

The chief Place of this Island is Copenhagen, (Lat. Hafnia, Dan. Kiobenhaven)
the Metropolis and usual Residence of the Kings of Denmark. A brave City, grown
up from a small beginning. Hues (or Huido) Archbishop of Lunden and Bishop of
Roschild, was the first who laid the Foundations of it in the Year 1165; when
in the same place where now stands Copenhagen he caused a Fortress to be built
against the Pirates that roved over this Sea, which Fortress was called by his
Name Axel Hues. About which afterward some Fishermen built themselves
Cottages, and in process of time the richest sort of them erected not only
Storehouses, but Dwelling-Houses, fit to receive the Merchants in who came to
buy their Fish. This Commerce drew thither many more Inhabitants, to whom James
Bishop of Roschild granted several Privileges and Immunities in the year 1254.
Thus in succession of time this City, which at first was but a few Fishermens
Cottages, grew to that greatness, that it is now one of the most noble Cities
of the North. To which several Kings of Denmark have greatly contributed by
their Public Buildings, and granting the Citizens many great Privileges; but
especially Christiern the Fourth, the present Kings Grandfather, whose Memory
is still cherished by the Inhabitants.

Copenhagen, you must know, is seated upon the East Side of the Island, under
the fifty sixth degree of Northern Latitude. Christiern the Fourth, having laid
the Foundation of a new City in the little Isle of Amag (or Amager) joined it
to the old by a Bridge, and called it by the name of Christierns Haven. He
built also a goodly Magazine-house, and strengthened the City on the Island-side
with Walls and Bulwarks. Thus Copenhagen is properly divided into two Parts, by
that Inlet or Arm of the Sea which parts the old Town from the new. In the new
Town, the less of the two, is the Royal Castle (a Fabric of ancient Structure)
with large Ditches and high Walls about it. There is also the Mint, the
Exchange, and the Arsenal, one of the finest in Europe. Wherein is seen that
wonderful Celestial Globe, that has no less than six foot of diameter, the work
of Tycho Brache the great Danish Astronomer. From this new Town there is a
Passage to the old over several Bridges. Here the Streets are broad, and every
where furnished with Storehouses. The principal Churches are S. Nicolas, the
Holy Ghost, and S. Mary's Church; in which last is performed the Coronation of
the Kings of Denmark. On this side also is seen the fine Port, the Citadel,
the Customhouse, and the University. First founded by Eric (or Henry) the
ninth, but perfected by King Christiern the first, and the succeeding Princes,
by whom it was liberally endowed.

The Island of Amag, which lies on the East Side of the Town, makes a very safe
Road for all kinds of Shipping. So that the Haven is not only capacious, but
most commodious and safe against all Winds of the Baltic Sea. The excellency
whereof, as much as any thing else, has improved this City to that degree, that
when the late King of Sweden came first before it in the year 57, he fell in
love with her, and said she was a fair Bride worth dancing for.

This City, as other great Towns, has not only been oppressed by Strangers, but
has been also under the hard Circumstances of Civil Dissensions. For, taking
part with Christiern II. against his Uncle Frederick, it was taken by
Frederick, Anno 1522. And in the year 1536, after a years Siege, and the
Calamity of War and Famine, it was forced to surrender it self to Christiern
III. After that it enjoyed the Comforts of Peace for a long Series of Years,
until Charles Gustave King of Sweden made War upon it. And, had he won this
fair Bride, (as he sportingly used to call her) what a brave Dower had she
brought him? But he was frustrated of his Expectations, as well by the great
Courage and vigorous Resistance of King Frederick, as by the concurrent (but
stinted) Assistance of such as were self-concerned in the Conservation of his
Crown.

Next to Copenhagen Roschild is a Place of good note; situate about the middle
of the Island, four Leagues West of Copenhagen. 'Twas formerly a See Episcopal,
the Bishops whereof had the honor of Crowning the Kings of Denmark. In the
Cathedral Church are to be seen the Tombs of many of the Danish Kings, some of
them very fair and sumptuous. This City is famous besides for the Treaty of
Peace made here in the Year 1658. betwixt the Kings of Sweden and Denmark, upon
the first Invasion of this Country by the Swedes.

South and by West from Roschild, almost four Leagues off, lies Sora, another
Town of Seland. Of old times beautified with a goodly Monastery, the Revenues
whereof, at the Change of Religion, were converted to the Maintenance of a
Free School, built here by Frederick I. But in the year 1623. Christiern IV.
adding hereunto the Revenues of two other dissolved Monasteries, the one in the
Isle of Laland and the other in Jutland, founded here a new University for the
better Supply of Learned Men both for Church and State.

Northward from Copenhagen you will find Elsinor or Elsineur (Dan. Helsingor) a
noted Sea-Town, with a good Harbor to it. It lies about three Leagues North of
Copenhagen, and not above a mile from the Sund.

At the very Entrance of which Straight, and over against the Castle of
Elsinburg in Schonen, is the famous Castle and Palace of Cronenburg, the
strongest and most considerable Fortress of Denmark. Built with incredible
Charge and Pains by King Frederick II, who laid the Foundations of it within
the Sea. Into the bottom of which there was sunk a great number of huge Stones
and Flints, locked together with great Oaken Piles, and those fastened with such
Skill and Artifice, that no Storm or Tempest, (how violent soever) can shake
it. From this Castle, which is in a manner the Key of the Baltic Sea, one may
easily discern each Ship which sails through the Sund into or out of the
Baltic. And here it is that all foreign Ships pay the Toll to the King of
Denmark; except the Swedes, who got themselves off by the Treaty of Roschild.
In short, such is the Strength of this Castle, and the narrowness of the
Straight, that the first seems impregnable, and that by the addition of a few
Ships the King of Denmark may keep the greatest Fleet that is from passing by
him.

But yet this very Castle was taken by the Swedes in the late Kings time; and
this famous Structure, the Product of eight years Labor and vast Expense, fell
in the space of three Weeks into the hands of Field-Marshal Wrangel. Which was
principally effected by a Stratagem then used by the Swedes. Who, to increase
the Terror of the Besieged, gave it out that Copenhagen was taken, and
celebrated this pretended Conquest with the discharges of all their great and
small Shot, with the Noises of their Drums and Trumpets, with Bonfires, and all
other Demonstrations of Joy. Whereupon the Garrison was summoned, and threatened
with all sorts of extremities, if they alone should be so confident as to
continue to oppose their victorious Armies. The Governors, who were then no
less than three (a stout Triumvirate) upon the sordid Suggestions of Fear, and
a rash Credulity, surrendered this strong Place, Sept. 6. 1658. And yet they
wanted neither Soldiers, nor Provisions, nor Ammunition; but instead of those
they wanted indeed Courage, Discretion, and Fidelity. They were afterward,
says my Historian, condemned by a Council of War at Copenhagen to lose their
Heads; but pardoned by the Kings Clemency, and the Intercession of the
Mediators for Peace. Tho the truth is, the loss of that Place was like to have
lost Copenhagen, then closely besieged as it was, and consequently the whole
Kingdom. So great and universal a Terror did the News of this unhappy Surrender
strike in the Inhabitants, that now they looked upon themselves as
irrecoverably ruined, and there was scarce any amongst them so resolute but was
shaken at this fatal Truth. The Swedes on the other side were not little
heightened with this Victory; whereby they found a great quantity of Gunpowder
which they much wanted, and great Provision of Cannon and other Instruments of
War. Neither did they doubt in the least but that Copenhagen would now quickly
follow, being resolved now they were secure behind to attack it with their
united Forces. But the Besieged reassumed their wonted Courage, and kept still
the Swedes out of doors.

About three leagues West of Cronenburg you will find Fredericksburg, a Royal
and stately Palace, pleasantly seated on the North side of a Lake, among Woods
of Beech. There was anciently a Castle, known by the name of Ebelholt, and an
Abbey dedicated to the holy Ghost. King Frederick II. was the Founder of this
Palace. It has a little Park about it, and therein (amongst other foreign
Beasts) some fallow Deer, transported hither out of England in the Twenty
fourth year of Queen Elizabeth. Afterward the Palace was beautified by
Christiern the Fourth with fine Statues and Pictures, and other pieces of rare
Workmanship.

But there is nothing that recommends this Place so much to the Memory of Man as
the solemn Interview that happened here betwixt the late Kings of Sweden and
Denmark, upon the Conclusion and Ratification of the Roschild Treaty. Thither
both Kings went, says Sir Roger Manley; and, which is remarkable, without any
previous Stipulation concerning Gards or Number of Followers (a Thing usually
practiced upon such Occasions;) but with a frank and Northern simplicity,
either not mistrusting or unwilling to mistrust each other. King Frederick met
his new Guest, coming from Roskild, about two miles from his House. Both Kings,
being at a competent distance, alighted out of their Coaches at the same time;
and, approaching on foot, saluted each other by joining their right hands with
all the respect and obliging demonstrations of Kindness imaginable. And now, as
if their late Enmity had been entirely forgot, they both entered the same Coach;
Which being King Frederick's Coach, the King of Sweden stepped in first. There
went with them Mr. Meadow the English Mediator, and the Duke of Holstein
Sunderburg. The Intertainment at Frederixburg was as splendid and magnificent
as the Place and Winterseason could afford. At Table the Queen of Denmark sat
at the Boards end, the King of Sweden on the side at her right hand, as being
the Guest, and next below him on the same side the King of Denmark. The
Provision was sumptuous, the Order exact, and the Solemnity rare, to see two
Kings at one Table, who had so little before been in Arms one against the
other. It could not be but very pleasant to hear now those Trumpets and
Kettle-drums loudly proclaim Healths, which so lately denounced Death. In
short, the Solemnity continued from Thursday to Saturday, both Kings lodging
two nights under the same Roof. At parting they exchanged Horses, and other
Presents; and those Officers of the Danish Court, who were particularly
appointed to attend the Swedish King, were nobly regalled by him. On Saturday
he took his leave, and went to Elsinor, the King of Denmark accompanying him
part of the way. From thence he passed the Sound, through the noise and smoke
of the Canon of the two Castles of Cronenburg and Elsinburg, to take possession
of his Purchase in Schonen.

On the West side of the Island is Corsoer, situate on the great Belt over
against Nyburg in Funen, and fortifyed with a Castle. Here August 8. Anno 1658.
King Charles of Sweden landed his Army from Kiel in Holstein, in his second
Expedition against Denmark, but five months after the aforesaid Interview of
the two Kings at Frederixburg. And, though this Army was far greater in
reputation than numbers, yet it met with little or no resistance. Those few
Gards that were on the Coasts fled at first sight of the Fleet; and the
Townsmen, dissembling what they durst not seem to fear, were fain to receive
their Invaders as Friends. It Is true the Swedes endeavored to make them
believe, that they intended no hostility, but were come to assist the King of
Denmark against the Designs of some of his rebellious Nobles. And therefore
King Charles his chief care upon his Landing was to keep his Soldiers from
plundering, and by quick sending out of Parties of Horse to suppress the Danish
Troops which were quartered up and down the Island, or at least to hinder their
Retreat into Copenhagen. Count Tott, Lieutenant General of the Horse, led the
Van; but the King himself did not stir till the day following. And, though his
main hopes of Victory consisted in the quickness of his Motion, yet he marched
but slowly. So that the noise of this Invasion fled to Copenhagen before him,
and by his slow march he gave the Citizens time enough to recollect themselves
from their sudden terror, and take up Arms in their own defense.

Sixteen miles North of Corsoer stands another goodly Town by the Seaside,
which is called Calemburg. In the South Parts of the Island you will find
Schelsoer, Newsted, and Warburg or Warimburg, in which last King Charles set
his first Footing in Seland in his first Expedition. There is also Koge, a
fortified Place by the Seaside, about Ten miles South-west of Copenhagen.
Lastly, they reckon in this Island no less than 340 Villages.

Funen or Fuinen (Lat. Fionia) is the next Island, both for bigness and
goodness; and much like that, of an orbicular form. It lies between Seland and
Jutland, parted from that by the great Belt, and from this by the little Belt.
It is about Ten German miles long, and Eight broad, every where Pleasant and
Fruitful. There are in it several good Towns, four Royal Castles, and 264
Villages, besides Gentlemen's Houses.

The principal Town of all is Odensee, seated in the very midst of the Island,
half way betwixt Nyburg on the East and Middelfare on the West. Built by King
Harald, and so named from Otho I. Emperor of Germany. 'Twas near this Place
that Count Guldenlew, the late King of Denmarks natural Son (now Viceroy of
Norway) was overtaken, being sick in his Coach, by Charles King of Sweden, in
his first Expedition in these Parts. And in the Town it self he surprised five
Danish Senators, and several other Fugitives. Which brought the whole Island
into such a Consternation, that he became presently the absolute Master of this
wealthy Province, and the whole Power of the Enemy in it. Which consisted of
well nigh 5000 Soldiers and Armed Boors, 60 pieces of Cannon, and great
Magazines of all sort of Military Provisions.

The next Town of note is Nyburg, or Newburg, upon the great Belt, opposite to
Corsoer in Seland; which is the usual Passage from the one Island to the other.
Nybourg is furnished with a good capacious Port, and fortified with a Castle.

Here is besides Cartemund, Bouvens, Middelfare, Assens, Vobourg, and Swenburg,
all of them seated on some Haven, or convenient Creek. Amongst which
Middelfare, which lies on the little Belt opposite to Nybourg on the great
Belt, is a Place of good note; from whence the little Belt is also called the
Middelfare Belt.

Besides the Royal Castle of Nybourg, there are three other Castles; viz. of
Hagenschow, Hinsgagel, and Escheburg. Not far from the first of these Castles
is the Mountain of Ossenberg, where John Rantzovius Anno 1530. defeated the
great Army of Christopher, the Brother of Anthony Earl of Oldenburg, coming in
those unsettled times to invade the Kingdom, under color of restoring
Christiern II. formerly deposed. In which Fight the Earls of Hoye and
Tecklemburg were both slain in the place, and the Kingdom after that in quiet
from the like Pretenders.

Of the lesser Islands of DENMARK, viz. Moan, Falster, Laland, Langeland,
Alsen, Femeren, Bornholm, and others of less note, in the Baltic.
IN the time of Pomponius Mela, says Heylin, most of the chief Islands of
Denmark were by one general Name called the Hemodes, reckoned to be seven.
Whereas Cluverius and Sanson are of Opinion, that the Ancients meant by the
Hemodes the Isles of Schetland, some Leagues North of Scotland, and about the
same Latitude as Bergen in Norway.

But, to wave that, let us now take a Survey of the lesser Islands of Denmark.
Moan, Faster, and Laland, lie pretty close together South of Seland, from which
parted by a narrow Straight called Grone-sund. And, as Falster is bigger than
Moan, so Laland is bigger than Falster.

Moan, or Meun, is an Island about twelve miles long, and six broad, the chief
Place whereof is Stekoe. The Swedish Forces that attempted it in April 1659,
while the Siege laid before Copenhagen, found here greater Resistance than in
any of the other Islands.

Falster lies South-west from Moan, and is a plentiful Island. Nicoping is the
chief Town herein, which for the neatness of the Place and pleasantness of the
Situation, is called the Naples of Denmark. But this Island in the time of the
Swedish War, run the same fortune with the rest, and was by the Swedes taken
from the right Owner.

Laland, the largest and fruitfullest of all these Islands, lies South-west of
Falster. The chief Place thereof is Naskow, a Town well fortified; which held
out most stoutly against the Swedes, when they entered this Island in April
1659. But at last wanting Powder, and hopeless of Relief, the Garrison was
forced to surrender.

Langeland is a long, but narrow Island, that lies within few miles
East-Southward of Funen. It reaches in length from North to South almost seven
German miles, and not above two in breadth from East to West. Here is the Town
Rudcoping, and the Castle of Traneker. The Swedes took this Island in the Month
of March 1659. under the Conduct of Field-Marshal Wrangel, and here they began
that year the Conquest of these Islands. Which, being the Granary's and
Storehouses of Copenhagen, afforded still fresh Supplies to it. And therefore
King Charles, seeing no way of conquering Copenhagen but by the Conquest of
these Isles, resolved to attempt them. Which he did successfully.

Alsen is situate near the Eastern Coast of Sleswick in Jutland. An Isle well
stored with Beasts for Profit, and Game for Pleasure. Here is the Castle of
Norburg in the North Parts of the Island, and the stately Castle of Sunderburg
Southward. Which last gives the Name to a Branch of the Royal Family of
Denmark, the Duke of Holstein Sunderburg. This Island was taken by Wrangel next
to Langland. At last, having landed his Men, he took the Castle of Norburg by
Storm; but he assaulted Sunderburg thrice in vain. Therefore he quitted the
Island again, and having pillaged the Coasts of Sleswick in his way, returned
with his Prisoners and Prey to Funen.

Femeren is another of these fruitful Islands, and the most Southern of all,
being situate near the Coast of Holstein. Here is Borg and Stubern.

Bornholm is a considerable Island, and the last of all the Baltic which
belong to Denmark. The same is situate more Eastward, toward the farthest
Parts of Bleking in Schonen. An Isle of excellent Pasturage, breeding plenty of
Cattle. Here is a goodly Town called Nex, and a strong Castle named Sandhamer.
This Island was formerly pawned to the Lubeckers, who had it in their
Possession about fifty years; but King Frederick II. redeemed it. By the Treaty
of Roschild it was left to the Swedes. But the King of Denmark has recovered it
since, by giving an Equivalent of Royal Demeans in Schonen.

Besides the foresaid Islands, which are the most considerable next to Seland
and Funen, and as many Jewels to the Crown of Denmark, there are many others of
less note and bigness.

About Seland there is first Amag or Amager, lying on the South-east side of
Copenhagen, and containing that Part of it which is called the New Town. The
Island is about six English miles long, and four broad, and may be called the
City's Storehouse. For it furnishes its Markets abundantly with Meat, Butter,
Cheese, Hares, domestic Fowl, and all sorts of Kitchen Herbs. There are in it
several Villages, inhabited partly by Danes, and partly by Dutch. The latter
planted here above 150 years since, by the Procurement of King Christiern II.
who got them hither out of North-Holland, to make Butter and Cheese, as being
most skilful in that mystery.

When the Swedes lay before Copenhagen in their last Expedition, these
Islanders got leave of King Frederick to live at their own Houses with their
Provisions and Cattle, upon their Promises to guard the Avenues of the Island,
and Assurance that they could not be so surprised but they should have time
enough to retire, and send their Cattle and Provisions (with their Wives and
Children) beforehand into the Town. This my Historian calls an unseasonable
Indulgence of the King, and it proved accordingly. For the Swedes came upon the
Islanders before they were aware, so that they had scarce time to save their
Persons and their Cattle.

But the Swedes Stay in the Island was not long. For King Charles, having
received certain Intelligence that the Dutch Fleet was coming for the Relief of
Denmark, quitted his present Design, with a Resolution to oppose the Advance of
these Succors. Whereupon, lest the Danes should overmuch rejoice at his
Departure, he commanded all the Villages and Houses to be pillaged and burnt. A
sad Spectacle for the Danes, who beheld it from their Walls and Towers with
much Regret. But the King knowing Bewailings were fruitless, resolved to
revenge this Violence. The Opportunity was fair, the Swedes being at that time
dispersed through the Island, and intent only upon their Plunderings. Therefore
the King himself marched out with his own Guards, besides 250 Horse, a few
Dragoons, and a good Troop for the Reserve; some of the nimblest Foot having
got up behind the Troopers. There marched out likewise four light Fieldpieces,
drawn each of them by single Horses. The Senators who were present would have
dissuaded the King from hazarding his Person, in whose Safety their All did
consist. But his Majesty knowing of what moment the Presence of Princes is in
such Encounters, and hearing besides that the King of Sweden was in the Isle in
Person, presently clapped Spurs to his Horse, and continued his way.

The Swedes, being alarmed with this Appearance, drew into a Body near a
Village called the Hollands Dorp, and were not in all above 400 Men, that is
300 Horse and 100 Foot. The Danes, finding them in this Posture, charged them
bravely, and after some Resistance broke and routed them. Nay, Sir Roger Manley
does not stick to say, that, if they had pursued them closely, they had in
probability taken or slain King Charles himself. Who, together with the Prince
of Sulzbach and Wrangel, were forced to a hasty Retreat, leaving above 100 of
their Men behind them upon the Place. But the Danes, content with this Victory,
and loath to endanger the losing on it by pursuing it, returned in Triumph into
the Town, their Slain and Wounded not exceeding thirty.

This Passage of the Wars I thought fit to insert, as much to exalt the
personal Valor of King Frederick, as because it is so rare to see one King
thus in chase of another.

North of Amag, toward Elsinor, there is a little Island called Ween, not
above three miles long and one broad. Remarkable only for the Studies of that
famous Astronomer Tycho Brahe. To whom Frederick II. gave this Island; that,
living in a private and solitary Place, removed from all Company but his own
Family only, he might with more convenience attend his Books. At this day most
observable for the Castle of Vraniborg, where the greatest part of his
Mathematical Instruments are safely preserved.

Turning westward, about Seland, you will find a parcel of little Islands,
called Haselo, Siroo, Musholm, etc. of which nothing memorable. Spro lies half
way betwixt Seland and Funen. South of Funen, toward Langeland, there are
indeed two goodly Islands, the one called Tassing, and the other Aroe. More to
the Westward you will find Hellenis, Barso, Aroe the lesser, Boko, and Brandso.

North-east of Funen is Rompso. Further Northward Samsoo, a pretty large
Island, then Endelo, Lillo; and toward the Scau, Lesso.

Lastly, in the Ocean you have Heiligeland, Nortstrand, Fora, Sylt, Rom, and
Fanoe, six pretty large Islands, if compared with these intermixed, viz.
Suderong, Hoge, Amrom, Mandoe, etc.

Of the DANES.
And first of their Origin, Complexion, Language, Manners, and Religion.
SOme Men are so fond of Antiquity, that they care not how fabulous they make
their Pedigree, if it be but far-fetched. Accordingly some Danes have
endeavored to make the World believe, that they were so called from Dan, a
supposed King who reigned in these Parts above 1000 years before the Birth of
our Savior. And who should this King Dan come from, but from Dan the Son of
Jacob? For my part, I should rather think it more probable, that the Danes took
their Name from Sinus Codanus, the ancient name of the Baltic, their
neighboring Sea.

However they were so called, certain it is that the first Inhabitants of
Denmark, and chiefly of Jutland, were the Cimbri, from whom that Peninsule was
called Cimbrica Chersonesus. Which Cimbri, says Heylin, were originally
descended from Gomer, the Son of Japhet; thence called Gomerii and Cimmerii, by
Contraction Cimbri. Leaving the Plains of Phrygia, as too narrow for them, they
sought out new Dwellings; and are said to have first dwelt on the Banks of
Palus Maeotis, where they gave name to the Bosphorus Cimmerius. Being overcome
by the Scythians, they removed their Seats more Northward, and came at last to
this Peninsule. Where being grown perhaps too populous for so small a Country,
they resolved to seek for another, with the Sword in their hands. Receiving, as
they did, as many as would join with them, they swelled to such a number, that
Plutarch says their Army consisted of 300 thousand fighting Men, besides Women
and Children, which exceeded that number. They forced their way through Germany
and France, to pass over into Italy. The Romans sent Armies to prevent their
coming, which were beaten by the Cimbri. Manlius, Sillanus, and Caepio, all
Roman Consuls, perished by them. And actum esset, says Florus, de Imperio
Romano, nisi illi saeculo Marius contigisset, there had been an end of the
Roman Empire if Marius had not stood for it. Who, not willing to venture on the
Enemy united, and lately fleshed in the Overthrow of Manlius and Caepio,
permitted them quietly to pass by his Camp. So that the Barbarians, who imputed
it to fear or cowardice, scornfully asked his Soldiers, What Service they
would command them to Rome. But Marius soon after stopped them in their Career,
when for their easier Passage over the Alps, they had divided themselves into
three several Bodies. Then, falling upon them severally, he destroyed them all.
They were a People of extraordinary big Stature, having blew and red Eyes, and
living so upon Theft that for their sakes the Germans called all Thieves
Cimbers.

These Cimbri having left their Peninsule, the Saxons, Jutes, and Angles, took
Possession of it. And, upon the Removal of these into Britain, the greatest
part of it was peopled by the Danes, who dwelt in the Islands.

The Danes in general are of a good Stature, clear of Complexion, well
colored, for the most part healthful, and long lived. Their Language is but a
Dialect of the German Tongue. From which it does however so differ, that the
Danes and Germans cannot understand one another, unless they do first converse
some time together. As to their Inclinations, they do not vary much therein
from the Swedes and Germans. Only they are looked upon to be more crafty than
the latter, and more ambitious than the former. The Women are fair, courteous,
and good Houswives, fruitful in bearing of Children, and yet delivered of them
with great difficulty.

For Men of Learning they have had Tyche Brahe, that renowned Astronomer;
Hemingius, a well known Divine; Bartholinus, a Physician and Philosopher of
very good esteem; John Cluverus, the Historian, etc. For great Captains,
Gotricus or Godfrey, who settled the Government of this Kingdom, and endangered
the great Monarchy of France; Sueno and Canute, the fortunate Conquerours of
England; Waldemar III. a right valiant Prince, but unsuccessful in his Wars
against the Hanse-Towns; Christiern II. a great Commander, but a cruel Prince;
Christiern IV. little inferior to many of his Predecessors. Amongst whom we
may list Queen Margaret, the Semiramis of these Northern Countries; a Lady of a
Masculine Spirit, no less fortunate than daring in her Enterprises.

This Nation was converted to the Christian Faith in the time of King Harold,
about 650 years ago. Till then it cannot be said that the Christian Religion
was rooted here, though I read of some Christian Kings before this, as Eric and
Froto, both living in the ninth Century. Neither was the Gospel so well fixed
in Harold's time, but that the Danes relapsed still for the most part to their
ancient Heathenism; till they were finally regained by Pope Adrian the Fourth,
an Englishman. In process of time the Popes of Rome would needs pretend some
Power and Jurisdiction over them. Which when they began to exercise with too
much Authority, King Waldemar III. (the Father of Queen Margaret) is said to
have returned this Answer, Naturam habemus a Deo, Regnum a Subditis, Divitias a
Parentibus, Religionem a Romana Ecclesia; quam si nobis invides, renuntiamus
per Praesentes. That is to say, We hold our Life from God, our Crown from our
Subjects, our Riches from our Ancestors, our Religion from the Church of Rome;
which Religion, if you envy us, we do here remit it by these Presents. But this
Renunciation, though then threatened, was not made till afterward. King
Frederick I. was he that abolished the whole Mass of Popery, using therein the
Ministry of Bugenhage, a Divine of Pomeren, by whom the Danes were reformed
according to the Doctrine of the Lutheran Churches. And ever since they have
continued in that state of Reformation, wherein the Church of Denmark differs
not much from the Church of England. For, as they have rejected several Errors
and Abuses of the Church of Rome, so they have still retained a settled and
prescribed Liturgy for all their Churches, most of the Holy Days observed in
the former Ages, the Cross in Baptism, Kneeling at the Communion, and many
other practicable Ceremonies transmitted to us from the Primitive Church.

The main Point, wherein they differ as Lutherans from all other Protestants,
is the Article of Consubstantiation, whereby they believe that in the Sacrament
of the Lords Supper the Elements of Bread and Wine remain in Substance with the
real Body and Blood of our Savior after the Consecration.

Of the Danish Government.
THis Kingdom has been till of late Elective, and not Hereditary, whatever
Heylin pretends to the contrary. It Is true the Danes have usually preferred the
Royal Family, and set the eldest Son on the Throne of his Father. But, because
the House of Austria (for example) has hitherto enjoyed the Imperial Crown
above 240 years successively, I hope it does not follow therefore that the
Empire is not Elective. It Is well known that in Denmark, after the death of
Christopher, the Crown was transferred to the House of Oldenburg, who held it
on no other ground but by that of Election. And about 160 years ago was not
King Christiern II. outed of his Estate, and Frederick advanced unto it? But
Dr. Heylin eludes that, by saying that such things have happened in Estates that
were clearly Hereditary, and ought to make no Precedent, and that Acts of
Violence and Force are only justified by the false Topic of Success. When all
is done, it is undeniable that the Crown of Denmark was formerly Elective, if we
consider that it was made in due form Hereditary no longer ago than the year
1660, in the Person of King Frederick. Which happened thus, soon after the Treaty
concluded that very year betwixt his Majesty and the now King of Sweden.

The Clergy and Commonalty had been always jealous of the great Power of the
Nobility, and more particularly during the War with Sweden. They therefore
being now armed, especially the People, and consequently capable of all things,
secretly combined together, as well out of hate to the Nobles, as out of
gratitude to the King, for his Fortitude in preserving of them, to make him
Hereditary Monarch of their Crown. Their declared Reasons were, that being his
Majesty had undergone in his War with Sweden all imaginable Dangers, and that
he had with admirable Constancy and Magnanimmity demonstrated his affection and
willingness in Conservation of his People and Kingdom, they were of opinion
that so great Benefits ought not to be let pass without the demonstration and
some extraordinary Marks of their Gratitude. Which could not be better
expressed, than by presenting the Crown to his Majesty's Line by Succession.
Wherein they were the more encouraged by the Example of a neighboring Kingdom
(meaning that of Sweden) where the same Thing had been done with good Success,
and notable Advantage to the People.

This Resolution being taken, these two States appointed Deputy's to inform the
Senators of their design, and desired them to communicate it to the Nobles,
whom they acknowledged to be the first and most conspicuous Part of the Whole.
They farther wished them to cooperate in persuading them to a Compliance in
this Point, that they might all jointly agree in so reasonable and plausible an
Undertaking.

After great Deliberation they were answered, that the Proposition was not so
new but that several Discourses had been had about it heretofore, and that very
important Reasons had been produced Pro and Con in the matter. But that the
Nobility could not forbear complaining of the Informality used herein, namely,
that a Business of so great weight should not only come abroad so secretly and
without the least Communication, but also positively be agreed on and
concluded. In short, it was desired on their part, that the Senators and
Nobility should not be further pressed herein, and that they might at least
have time allowed them orderly to deliberate hereof amongst themselves. But the
other two Bodies, declining with civil Excuses the point of Informality,
insisted upon an Answer to the principal Matter, and the Conformity of the
Nobles with the other two Members.

In the mean time, finding them dilatory, and that their Answer would prove
none or nothing to the purpose, they resolved to persist, and jointly present
their Proposition to his Majesty; which rendered it as to them unalterable. The
King behaved himself in such a manner as if he neither had nor did desire it;
but so that he would not decline or refuse it, if it were presented to him
formally and by the three States. The Clergy and People made new Instances. So
that the Nobles, seeing no other Remedy, seemed to yield, ut praeveniant, ne
quod faciunt fecisse videantur inviti.

During these Traverses the Gates were shut at Copenhagen, the Watch doubled,
the Citizens upon their Guard, and all Courts locked up. The Nobility, lest it
might be done without them, conformed at last with the other two Bodies. Thus
going jointly to the Castle, they presented the King, first with the Crown
hereditarily by Succession, ad Progeniem masculinam. But, perceiving that the
Clause was not pleasing to his Majesty, it was by a new Resolve offered and
accepted sine discrimine Sexus.

Monsieur Trolle Viceroy of Norway, by reason of the Indisposition of Gesdorph
the Ricks Hoff-master, congratulated their Majesty's and Princes in the name of
the Nobility, with Expressions that the Senate and Nobles could have wished
that these Proceedings had been carried with mutual Communication and better
Order, that Body being no less inclinable to gratify his Majesty and his
Posterity than the others. The Bishop of Copenhagen harangued in the name of
the rest, closing his Speech with the Blessing of Amen, which was repeated by
all that were present.

On Wednesday the 27th. of October the Solemnity of the Inauguration was
performed with as much State as the Time would permit. The Trumpets and
Kettle-Drums had summoned the Horse and Foot to assist at the Ceremony. Three
Troops were drawn up by the Tennis Court, seven Colors of Foot being ranged by
them. Four Companies were also placed behind the Stage or Theater erected on
purpose, and seven Companies more over against the Castle, by the Bridge going
to the Island. About ten a Clock the Burgers in twelve Companies marched, and
placed themselves from the Castle-Bridge to the Theater, garding the Passage on
both sides with their Militia. The Stage was eight or ten Steps high, and
forward four Steps higher were placed two Chairs of State, covered with purple
Velvet, over which was a rich Canopy. Further, on the Kings side, were two
Stools for the two Princes; and on the Queens, three more for the three
Princesses. There were likewise Benches on each side the Theater, covered with
Scarlet; the right side being for the Senators, and the left for the Queens
Ladies.

About Noon the Court descended from the Castle, the Senators or great
Counselors leading the Van. Four whereof carried the Regalia, to wit, the
Crown, the Scepter, the Apple or Globe, and the Sword; which were laid upon a
Buffet or Table placed before the Kings Chair, and covered with a purple Velvet
Carpet. The King followed next alone, then the Queen and her Children, all
under a Canopy of Crimson Satin, born by eight principal Men, for they had
then no titular Lords. The King, Queen, and Princes being seated, were
environed with the Senate, Nobles, and Courtiers, who stood below on the Stage.
And, after some usual Ceremonies (under which Kneeling was not omitted) the
Oath of Allegiance was read by the Chancellor, containing a Promise of
Fidelity to the King, Queen, and Royal Family, as Hereditary King of Denmark.
This was first taken by the Senators, then by the Nobility, then the Courtiers,
Deputies of the Clergy and Corporations, and lastly by the Boors of Amag, who
being of Dutch Extraction and free, depend solely on the King. The Oath was in
these Words;

Most Gracious King, I A. B. do promise and declare, that I will be true and
faithful to your Royal Majesty, as my most gracious Hereditary King and Lord,
as also to your Royal Family; That I will endeavor and further your Majesty's
Interest in all things, and to the best of my Power defend You from all Dangers
and Harm; and that I will faithfully serve your Majesty, as a Man of Honor and
an Hereditary Subject ought to do. So help me God, and his holy Gospel. The
Oath being thus taken, their Majesty's were humbly congratulated by all (except
the Boors) mounting in order up the four steps, and after their profound
Abaisance returning each to his Station. So that the Ceremony lasted till near
three a Clock; at which time the Court returned in the same Order they came,
and the Gates thereupon were opened.

Thus King Frederick was a greater Gainer than Loser by the Swedish Wars; the
Crown being now intailed to his House, from which it might have gone by way of
Election.

Since this Change there has been seven Colleges erected. The first is the
College of State, the second that of the Treasury, the third is the Chancery,
the fourth of the Militia, the fifth of Justice, the sixth of the Admiralty's,
the seventh of Commerce. There followed also many notable Changes in the chief
Offices of the Kingdom, as in that of Riicks Hoosmaster changed to that of
Riicks Drost, of no less Eminency and Authority.

The Kings yearly Revenue does chiefly consist in the Toll laid upon all Ships
which pass through the Sound. The greatness of which Revenue may be guessed at
by the multitude of Ships which of Necessity must pass by it in the Trade of
the Baltic. Though I confess the number of them was much greater before the
English removed the Trade of Narva to Archangel in Moscovy, upon their
Discovery of the North-east Passage. Besides that this Revenue is much
lessened, since the Swedes, both by the Roschild Treaty, and that in the year
1660, have freed themselves from that Toll. Nay, there have been several
Projects on foot, which (if they took) would curtail it much more. As the
Design of joining the Baltic to the Elb by the Lake of Swerin in Mecklemburg,
the transporting of Merchandises by Land from Hamburg to Lubeck, and the
Malrase Canal in Brandenburg in order to convey the Merchandises of Poland and
Silesia from the River Oder through the Spree upon the Elb. But, till these
Projects take better than they have hitherto done, the Sound is safe enough,
and not like to be given over.

Besides this important Revenue of the King from the Sound, there is a great
yearly Toll made of the Cattle which pass into Germany, as also of the Fish
transported into other Countries. Now Fish and Cattle being the two main Things
that are exported out of Denmark, the first by Sea, and the last by Land over
into Germany, the Incomes of Custom-houses, as to other Commodities, are not
exceeding great. But on the other side, the Accession of the Crown Lands is not
inconsiderable.

In short, the Kings Revenues are such, that he keeps a handsome Court, and
maintains a good Fleet, with several Garrisons he has in his numerous Forts and
Frontire-Places. As to the Forces which he is able to raise, that may best be
seen by some of his Royal Predecessors particular Undertakings. As of
Christiern II; who at the Request of Henry II. of France, sent a Fleet of a
hundred Sail into Scotland, and therein no fewer than 10000 Soldiers; And of
Frederick his Uncle, then Duke of Holstein, who in his Wars against this
Christiern (whose Removal from the Crown he had projected) brought 50000 Men
into the Field to make good his Quarrel. In short, considering the many Ports
and Islands this Crown is Master of, both within the Baltic and without, it
cannot be but the King may suddenly raise a strong Power at Sea. And then,
considering that each of the Nobility, which are here numerous enough, is bound
to find a certain number of Horse upon all Occasions, as are those also who
hold Lands of the King (which the Danes call Verlehninge) there is no doubt but
he is able to make good Levies for a sudden Service, especially in defense of
his Dominions.

For State Affairs, the King has his Council of State, with whose Advice he
determines either of Peace or War, enters into new Leagues or Confederacies,
and imposes Taxes upon his Subjects as occasion requires. In this Juncture of
time this Court seems engaged with France with an Eye upon Sweden, in order
perhaps to recover from that Crown, by the Assistance of France, what has been
formerly extorted from the Crown of Denmark by the Treaty of Roschild. Schonen
is a fine Country East of Seland, which, till that Treaty, belonged to Denmark;
and, if the King of Denmark should attempt to recover it by such means as God
has put into his hands, 'twere but repelling Force by Force, and endeavoring
to regain that by Force of Arms which Charles Gustave, by the terror of his
Arms, extorted from Frederick. I pass by the Act of Calmar, whereby the Swedes
bound themselves to a perpetual Union with Denmark, under the lawful Successors
of Queen Margaret. Which Act was afterward confirmed, upon the Coronation of
Eric, her immediate Successor.

For all Causes and Controversies, such is the Constitution of this Crown, that
they are first to be decided in the Herets (or Prefectures) where they first
arise. From whence it is lawful to appeal to the Judge of the Province, from
him to the Chancellor of the Kingdom, and finally to the King and Council.

Having said thus much as to the Government of Denmark, and of the King as
Supreme thereof, I shall now present you with the Chronological Succession of
the Kings of Denmark, with an Historical Abstract of those Kings Lives that
have any thing worth taking notice of. The Danish Authors make a great
Catalogue of fabulous Kings since King Dan, which (being unwilling to impose
upon the Public) I shall freely pass over. I could begin, as Heylin, with
Gotricus, whom he looks upon as the first Legislator of the Danes, and the
Establisher of their Kingdom. But I shall content my self to begin with Harold,
the first Christian King of Denmark, that settled the Christian Religion in
those Parts, and who began his Reign about the Year 927.

The Chronological Succession of the Christian Kings of Denmark, since the Year
927.
Anno Chr. Reigned 927 HArold I. 48 Years. 975 Sueno I. 35. Years. 1010 Olaus.
10. Years. 1020 Canute I. 21. Years. 1036 Canute II. 9. Years. 1045 Magnus. 4.
Years. 1049 Sueno II. 27. Years. 1074 Harold II. 2. Years. 1076 Canute III. 9.
Years. 1085 Olaus. 10. Years. 1095 Eric I. 7. Years. 1102 Harold III. or
Nicolas. 33. Years. 1135 Eric II. 4. Years. 1139 Eric III. 8. Years. 1147
Canute IV. 8. Years. 1155 Sueno III. 2. Years. 1157 Waldemar I. 28. Years. 1185
Canute V. 18. Years. 1202 Waldemar II. 40. Years. 1241 Eric IV. 9. Years. 1250
Abel. 2. Years. Anno Chr. Reigned 1252 Christopher I. 7 Years. 1259 Eric V. 28.
Years. 1286 Eric VI. 35. Years. 1321 Christopher II. 12. Years. 1333 Waldemar
III. 42. Years. 1376 Margaret with Aquin 36. Years. 1412 Eric VII. 27. Years.
1445 Christopher III. 3. Years. 1448 Christiern I. 34. Years. 1482 John 32.
Years. 1513 Christiern II. 10. Years. 1523 Frederick I. 11. Years. 1534
Christiern III. 24. Years. 1559 Frederick II. 29. Years. 1588 Christiern IV.
60. Years. 1648 Frederick III. 22. Years. 1670 Christiern V. the present King.

Harold I. (according to our Account) was converted to the Christian Faith,
seeing (for a Proof of it) a Clergyman carry a burning hot Iron in his hands,
without any hurt. Whereupon he became the Apostle of the North, and prudently
governed his Dominions. His Son, being still a Heathen, waged War with him, and
slew him in a Battle Sept. 1. Anno 980.

That Son was Sueno I. (otherwise called Swain) his immediate Successor. At
first a great Enemy of the Gospel, as well as an Usurper of the Throne in his
Father lifetime, and a great Scourge unto the English. Being outed of his
Estate by Eric King of Sweden, he received the Gospel, regained his Kingdom,
and re-established Christianity in it, his War on England still continuing. He
was King of Denmark by Birth, and of Norway by Conquest. Which last he
conquered from Olaus, then King of Norway.

After Sueno's Death, both Denmark and Norway fell to the share of his eldest
Son Olaus, whilst his younger Son Canute fixed in England. Olaus having reigned
Ten years in the North, and dying without Issue, left his two Crowns to his
Brother Canute I. surnamed the Great, but the second Canute in the general
Account. His Father Sueno being dead, he went on in his Conquests against King
Edmund, surnamed Iron-side, who succeeded Ethelred. After some Disadvantages,
he at last came off victorious in a field-Fight. Then he challenged his Rival
to a single Combat, which made them Friends; but he obliged him to divide his
Kingdom with him. Not long after which, Edmund having been basely murdered by
Edward (surnamed the Outlaw) his eldest Son, King Canute brought the Murderers
to a condign Punishment, and took upon himself the Government of the whole
Kingdom. After that he conquered Sweden, and brought the Crown of Scotland to a
state of Vassalage. He married Emma the Widow of Ethelred, and Daughter of
Richard Duke of Normandy. In the year 1027 he went in Pilgrimage to Rome, and
died eight years after, leaving the Northern Crowns to Canute, and England to
Harold his base Son. He had a Daughter called Elfgine, who was married to the
Emperor Henry III.

Canute II, second Son of Canute I, was first of all King of Denmark, and
afterward of England, upon the death of his elder Brother Harold, who died not
long after his Coronation, Anno 1040. He was kindly received by the English,
but he proved very unkind to 'em. For he caused several of the chief Men of the
Kingdom to be put to death, and he oppressed the People with heavy Taxes. To
avenge the Injuries done to his Mother Emma by Harold, he caused him to be
dug out of his Grave, and his head to be cast into the Thames. Two years
after his coming to the Crown, he went to a Wedding in Lambeth, where he fell
off his Chair, and died. Some thought he had been poisoned. However, he being
dead, the English took up Arms, and made a riddance of the Danes. This is that
King Canute, which was commonly called Hardy Canute.

To him succeeded King Magnus in Denmark, who governed that Kingdom the space
of four years. He was Son of Olaus King of Norway.

Sueno II, was Sisters Son of Canute I, (according to our account) by Ulso an
English Duke. 'Twas he that restored the Kingdom of Norway to the Norwegians.

Harold II, was Son of that Sueno. There is nothing memorable of him that I can
find at present, but that he was surnamed the Idle.

Canute III, was Brother of that Harold. He attempting to recover England, was
murdered at the Altar in the Church of St. Albans, Anno 1081, and after that
ranked among the Martyrs. A Son of his, called by his Name, did likewise suffer
Martyrdom, and was canonized a Saint, Anno 1164, by Pope Alexander IV. The
Church of Rome celebrates his Day on the 19th of January. I suppose this is
that Canute, who was murderin the Church of Odensee in Funen, whom Heylin
mistakes for his Father.

As for Olaus, I find nothing of him that is memorable.

Eric I, surnamed the Good, was Brother of Canute the Saint. He, being a
Religious Prince, took a Voyage to Rome, and afterward to the Holy Land, with
his Queen Bochilde; and he died in Cyprus.

Harold III, was base Son of Eric. It Is said he was murdered by his own Brother.

Eric II, called the Bastard, a cruel and passionate Prince, was also
assassinated.

Eric III, Son of Anna Sister of Eric II, succeeded him. He was surnamed the
Lamb, because of his sweet Nature. But he had no Fortune in his Wars with the
Swedes. At last he retired into a Monastery, and there died.

Canute IV. was slain at a Feast by his Successor,

Sueno III, who was likewise murdered by his Successor.

Waldemar I, Son of Canute, the lawful Son of Eric I, by whose means the
Rugians and Vandals embraced the Gospel. He was the first that reduced the Laws
into a set form and Writing. And by his Laws the Bishops were to sit with the
Council of State in all Causes of moment. But they were discharged from that
Employment by King Christiern III.

Canute V. was the Son of Waldemar, and of Sophia Sister to Canute the Fourth.
Having reigned some time with his Father, he at last succeeded him. He made War
to the Pomeranians, and is said to have been married to Mathildis Daughter of
Henry the Lion Duke of Saxony.

Waldemar II, Brother of Canute the Fifth, was Duke of Sleswick before his
coming to the Crown.

Eric IV, Son of Waldemar the Second, was married to Agnes, the then Marquess
of Brandenburgh's Daughter. He showed a great deal of good Conduct in his
Government. But he was murdered by his Brother

Abel, the second Son of Waldemar the Second, Who did not long enjoy his
Usurpation. For two years after he came to the Crown (by an Act, more Cain than
Abel-like) he was killed himself by the Boors in the Friseland War. And it is
said, that the Place, where he was inhumed, swarmed with Spirits and strange
Apparitions.

Christopher I, the youngest Brother of the foresaid Abel and Eric, was no
Admirer of Prelates. He reigned with a various Fortune, and at last was taken
Prisoner in his War against the Earls of Holstein. Some Authors are of opinion,
that he did not die before the year 1268.

Eric V, surnamed the Old, was Christopher his Son. His Reign of twenty eight
years was blessed with Peace and Plenty, but he was slain by the Practices and
Treason of his Officers. Mathildis, Daughter of Albert, called the Great Duke
of Brunswick, was his Queen. By whom he had, amongst other Children, his Son
and Successor,

Eric VI, surnamed the Young, who supplanted Christopher, his Elder Brother. He
began his Reign with a severe Punishment of his Father's Murderers. He took
Rostock (now a Hanse Town) in Mecklemburg, and some other Places; and he
married with the Sister of Birger King of Sweden, by whom he left no Issue.

Christopher II, elder Brother of Eric, added the Island of Rugen to the Crown
of Denmark, and gave Rostock in fief to the Dukes of Mecklemburg. The Earls of
Holstein beat him out of his Kingdom, and he was twice restored to it.

Waldemar III, was Son of Christopher. A stout Prince, but unfortunate in his
Wars with the Hanse Towns; which confederated against him, and vanquished him
in many Battles.

Margaret, Daughter of Waldemar the Third, gave her self in Marriage to Aquin
King of Norway, and so united the Kingdoms. They had a Son named Olaus, a
hopeful Prince, but he died young. Aquin her Husband, and Olaus her Son, being
dead, she stood still at the Helm; and, not contented with two Crowns, she put
in for a third. In short, she attempted by force of Arms to recover the Crown
of Sweden. She raised a fine Army, and appeared at the head of it. Albert, Duke
of Mecklemburg, was then King of Sweden. He was Son of Euphemia, the Sister of
Magnus IV. of Sweden, and got that Crown, to the prejudice of Aquin the Husband
of Margaret. For you must know, that Magnus IV. King both of Sweden and Norway,
had two Sons, Eric and Aquin aforesaid. Eric, his eldest Son, was his designed
Successor in the Crown of Sweden, whilst in his Lifetime he bestowed the Crown
of Norway upon Aquin. Eric dies before his Father, and after his death the
Father himself was outed of his Kingdom by the practice of Albert, his Nephew
aforesaid. Queen Margaret therefore, having raised a good Army, undertook to do
her self Justice, and to dispossess Albert of his Inchroachments. By that time
Albert was grown a worse Tyrant than his Predecessor; which made the Nobility,
that had raised him up to the Throne, seek the means to unthrone him. So that
all things seemed to concur for the Success of Queen Margarets Design. And
indeed such was her Valor and the Fortune of her Arms, that she gave the
Swedes Battle in the Year 1387, defeated their Army, and took their King
Prisoner. A bloody Battle it was, says my Author. Albert was kept Prisoner for
the space of seven years. To get his Liberty, he freely resigned his Kingdom to
Margaret, and so went to his own Country, where he died. Upon his Resignation,
Anno 1394, she caused an Act of State to be passed in Calmar, for the
Perpetuation of this Union unto her Successors. In short, this was a Princess
of a Temper so far beyond her Sex, that all Historians cry her up as the Wonder
of her Age, and a second Semiramis.

Before she died, she was sollicitous to find a worthy Successor. Ingelburgis,
her Sister, offered her one, namely Eric her Son, whom she got by Vratislaus
Duke of Pomeren. Margaret accepted of him, and got him crowned in her
Lifetime, Anno 1396, with the Concurrence of the States of the three Kingdoms.
The Archbishop of Upsal performed the Ceremony, and thereupon a Law was made
that the three Kingdoms should never be separated. This Eric (the seventh in
our Account) begun his Reign in the year 1412, and was Knight of the Garter.
His Cruelties rendered him so odious to his Subjects, that they rose up in Arms
every where against him. Anno 1424 he went to the Holy Land. And in the Year
1439, weary of swaying the Scepter, he retired into Pomeren, where he lived
twenty years longer. So that he was no less than 77 Years old, when he died.
During that Retirement, it is supposed by some, that he writ the History of
Denmark, which begins thus, Dani, ut testantur veteres Historiographi.

Eric having thus resigned his Kingdoms to live a private Life, there was an
Interregnum for the space of six years, till Christopher III. came in by
Election. He was Duke of Bavaria (but in Title only) Son of John Count Palatine
of the Rhine, and of Margaret Sister of Eric. Though he was very mild in his
Government, yet his Subjects were disgusted at him for bestowing the great
Places of Trust upon Germans, which he had promised to confer upon the Natives.
He married Dorothy of Brandenburg; and, after a Reign of three Years, died
without Issue. Whereby he made way to the Crown for the House of Oldenburg, the
present Royal Family of Denmark. And then the Swedes, weary of the Danish
Government, chose a King of their own, Charles Canute, without any regard to
the Act of Calmar.

Christiern I, Earl of Oldenburg, was Son of Theodorick Earl of Oldenburg, and
of his Wife Hedwige, Sister of Adolph Earl of Sleswick and Holstein. Which
Earl, being offered the Crown of Denmark, declined it by reason of his Age and
want of Children; but he recommended in his stead Christiern his Nephew and
next Heir; who thereupon was chosen King of Denmark. After his Uncles Decease,
he succeeded him in the Estates of Holstein and Sleswick, continuing since
united unto that Crown. And, by the Assistance of the Bishop of Upsal, he
recovered the Crown of Sweden. But he lost it again; and after that Sweden was
governed for a time by Marshals.

According to Moreri, 'twas by this King Christiern that the chief Order of
Knighthood in Denmark, called the Order of the Elephant, was instituted, and
that at the Wedding of his Son John.

John, the Son of Christiern the First, was crowned King of Sweden, the next
Year after his coming to the Crown of Denmark. But, not keeping Conditions with
the Swedes, they turned him out, and returned to their former Government under
Marshals. King John upon that raised an Army of 50000 Men, in order to recover
that Crown. But his Endeavors proved fruitless. Christina, his Queen, was
Daughter of Ernest, Elector of Saxony. By whom he had, amongst other Children,
his Son and Successor

Christiern II, surnamed the Cruel, or the Tyrant. Few Years after he was set
upon the Throne of his Father, (that is, in the Year 1518.) He raised an Army
against Sweden, and went by Sea to besiege Stockholm. But he was forced at last
to raise the Siege. They had at that time in Sweden a Triumvirate of Marshals,
who governed the Kingdom. Two of them died natural Deaths, and the last being
by Christiern II. slain in Battle, this Kingdom was again possessed by the
Danes. And then King Christiern promised his new Subjects all manner of
Clemency and Lenity on his part. But he could not forbear gratifying his
barbarous Inclinations. In order to which he invited the chief Men of the
Kingdom, both Spiritual and Temporal, and in the midst of the Feast he caused
them to be put to Death. Which Inhumanity was so highly resented by the Swedes,
that they rose up in Arms, under the Conduct of Gustave Eric, and drove once
more the Danes out of Sweden. On the merit of which Action, Gustave Eric,
descended from the ancient Race of the Kings of Sweden, was chosen King of
Sweden; and in his House that Crown still continues. Christiern, being returned
to Denmark, where he continued his Crimes, was likewise expelled from thence;
and then Frederick, his Uncle, succeeded him. Whereupon Christiern fled into
the Low Countries, with Elizabeth his Wfe, Sister of Charles the Fifth and
Ferdinand, both Emperors. After ten Years Exile, he attempted, with the
Hollanders Assistance, to regain the Crown he had lost, to whom therefore he
promised vast Privileges upon the Baltic. But he was taken Prisoner, and
after twenty seven Years Confinement in Prison, he died, in the year 1559, aged
about seventy eight years.

Frederick I, surnamed the Pacifick, was Brother of John and Uncle of
Christiern the Second. He was chosen King of Denmark and Norway, upon the
Abdication of his Nephew; and took up the Crown upon such Terms as made him
little more than a titular King. 'Twas he however that brought in the Reformed
Religion in both Kingdoms, according to the Confession of Augsburg. Anno 1532.
he clapped his Nephew, Christiern the Second, in Prison; and not long after he
departed this Life, leaving four Sons that he got by Ann of Brandenburg. The
eldest whereof was his immediate Successor.

Christiern III, the eldest Son of Frederick the first, suppressed with great
Trouble the Party formed against him in behalf of Christiern the second. He
perfected the Reformation begun in the time of his Father. And as he was a
Lover of Learning, so he proved a great Benefactor to the University of
Copenhagen. Dorothy, his Queen, was Daughter of Magnus Duke of Saxony. He got
by her three Sons and two Daughters. His Sons were Frederick, his Successor;
Magnus, who was Bishop of Hapsel in Livonia; and John. Of his two Daughters,
the Lady Ann was married to Augustus, Elector of Saxony; and the Lady Dorothy,
to Henry Duke of Luneburg.

As the Emperor Charles V. prohibited and enacted, that no Ecclesiastical
Person should buy any immovable Goods without the Princes Consent; so this
King Christiern ordained, that the Clergy should sell no Church Lands without
leave of the King.

Frederick II, Son of Christiern the Third, subdued Ditmarsen, a part of
Holstein, till then unconquered by the Danes, or Earls of Holstein. He warred
against Lubeck, and Eric King of Sweden. When Pope Pius IV. desired him by a
Nuncio to send some body from him to the Council of Trent, he declined it,
saying, that he would have no Commerce with Popes. He very much improved the
University of Copenhagen, and was a great Admirer of the Learned, but
especially of Tycho Brahe. Sophia his Queen was Daughter of Ulric Duke of
Mecklemburg. He got by her three Sons, and four Daughters. His eldest Son
Christiern succeeded him, but Ulric and John died young and without Issue. His
eldest Daughter Elizabeth was second Wise to Henry-Julius Duke of Brunswick;
Ann was given in Marriage to James King of Great Britain; Hedwige, to
Christiern the Second, Elector of Saxony; and Augusta, to John Adolph Duke of
Holstein.

Christiern IV, Son of Frederick the Second, Brother of Ann Queen of Great
Britain and Knight of the Garter, succeeded his Father at the Age of twelve
Years. Four Counselors were appointed to be Regents during his Minority, and
he was not crowned till the year 1596.

In the Month of July, Anno 1606, he came over into England, to visit the King
and Queen. He had been long expected, when at last News were brought to Court,
that he was come with eight Ships into the River of Thames, and that he
anchored before Gravesend. This happened on the seventeenth of July; and the next
day King James, with Prince Henry, and diverse of the Lords, went by Barge to
meet this Royal Guest, and bring him up to London. Where he stayed about four
Weeks, being entertained all that while with all the Magnificence that could be
imagined. Both Kings did ride in great state through the City, there being
Pageants erected in many Places. He was showed the chief Places about the Town,
as the Royal Exchange, the Tower, the Monuments at Westminster; and, that he
might have a full Prospect of the City and Suburbs, he went to the top of
Paul's. No manner of Pastime was omitted to divert so welcome a Guest, and the
Earl of Salisbury feasted him at Theobalds four days together. At last on the
twelfth of August, being conducted by the King, the Queen, and Prince, with
many other great Lords, he departed to his Ships, and arrived in eight days at
home.

In July 1614. he came the second time into England, but Incognito, and with a
small Company. The Queen was surprised to see him arrived at Somerset House,
before she knew any thing of his Coming. King James was then in Progress in
Bedfordshire, who heard no sooner of it but he came back. He admired his
Frankness as well as his Affection, and thanked him heartily for both. In
return whereof, he regalled him with all the possible Marks of Kindness and
Gratitude. And King Christiern returned, Aug. 1, extremely satisfied with his
Entertainment. A rare thing to see Princes converse together with so much
Freedom, and not kept asunder with Jealousies of State.

Anno 1610. King Christiern made War against Sweden. In the year 1625. the
Protestants of Germany made him Head of the League against the Emperor
Ferdinand the Second, for the Restoration of Count Palatine of the Rhine to
his Estates. But he was suddenly beat out of all Jutland by the prevailing
Imperialists, till he compounded the Business upon very good Terms, and was
restored to all his own. Afterward he turned his Arms against the Swedes, in
the year 1644, who got several Places from him; but the Peace put a stop to
their Conquests. He reigned sixty years, and died at 70 years of age.

Ann Catharine, his Queen, was Daughter of Joachim Frederick Elector of
Brandenburg. He got by her, amongst other Children, Christiern and Frederick.
Christiern was chosen King of Denmark, in his Fathers lifetime. He was a very
hopeful Prince, but unhealthy; so that he died before his Royal Father, going
to drink some Waters in Saxony. His Death made room for

Frederick III, second Son of Christiern the Fourth. He was Archbishop of
Bremen in Saxony, before he came to the Crown, upon the Death of his Royal
Father, and not long after the decease of Christiern his elder Brother, who (as
I said before) was King elect. This is that magnanimous Prince, who by his
invincible Constancy has not long since redeemed this Crown from the hands of
the Swedes. This is that Frederick, whose late Calamities served only to set
off the greatness of his Courage. And, as if the same Rules of Providence were
appointed for the Royal Families of England and Denmark, whilst King Frederick
was struggling for his Crown with the Swedes, the late Usurpers here kept the
Crown from King Charles. And, as it was their fortune to suffer both together,
so they had the Comfort to be both the same Year restored to their Dominions.
It Is true King Frederick was fain to part with some of the best Jewels of his
Crown. But that Loss, whatever it is, is not Irrecoverable; and has already
been sufficiently made up on the part of his Subjects, by their deep sense of
Gratitude in making his Crown Hereditary, which formerly was but Elective. On
the 18th of October 1643, some years before he came to the Crown, he married
with the Lady Sophia Aemilia of Luneburg, by whom he got, 1.

Christiern V, now King of Denmark, a Prince of a warlike and generous Temper.
He was born Apr. 18. 1646, and has got Issue by Queen Charlotte his Royal
Consort, a Princess of the most Ancient and Illustrious House of Hassia Cassel
in Germany.

2. Prince George, born in the year 1653. Whose Royal Birth and Princely
Qualifications, as well as other Regards, have made him in our King's Judgment
a proper Match for the Lady Ann. The Solemnity of which Marriage is at hand. 3.
Anna Sophia, married to John George, Elector of Saxony. 4. Frederica Aemilia,
married in the Year 1667. to Christiern Albert Duke of Holstein Gottorp. 5.
Guilliemetta-Ernestina, married in the Year 1671. to Count Palatine of the
Rhine. 6. Vlrica-Eleonora-Sabina, married to the present King of Sweden,
Charles XI.
The Titles of the King of Denmark run thus. Christiern the Fifth, by the Grace
of God, King of Denmark and Norway, of the Vandals and Goths, Duke of Sleswick,
Holstein, Stormaren, and Dithmarsen, Count of Oldenburg and Delmenhorst, etc.

His Arms are Quarterly. 1. Or, three Lions passant Vert, crowned of the first,
for the Kingdom of Denmark; 2. Gules, a Lion rampant Or, crowned and armed of
the first, in his paws a Dansk Hatchet Argent, for the Kingdom of Norway. What
Arms belong to him, as Duke of Holstein and Sleswick, and Earl of Oldenburg, I
am as yet to seek.

Lastly, to omit nothing that may be essential to this our present Subject, I
must give some Account of the Dukes of Holstein, as being of the Blood Royal of
Denmark, and accordingly holding several Estates of that Crown in Holstein.

The House of Holstein is generally divided into three principal Branches. The
King of Denmark is the Head of the first Branch, and the standing Protector of
the Princes of the House of Holstein. The other two Branches are that of
Holstein Gottorp, and that of Holstein Sunderburg.

The Branch of Holstein Gottorp (so called from Gottorp, a Castle near Sleswick
in Holstein) began with

Adolph, second Son of Frederick I. and Brother of Christiern III. Kings of
Denmark. He came into the World Anno 1526, was made Knight of the Garter by
Queen Elizabeth Anno 1560, and dying in the year 1586 left his Estate to John
Adolph, his Son, who married with Augusta, Daughter of Frederick II. King of
Denmark, and died in the year 1620. He left his Estate and Title to his Son
Frederick, born in Dec. Anno 1597. This is that Duke of Holstein, who in the
year 1633, sent those two chargeable Embassies to Moscovy and Persia, whereof
Olearius has made an ample Relation. The end of which Embassies was to settle a
Commerce of Silk in his Dominions, in order to which he caused Frederickstad on
the Eyder to be built. He died in the year 1659, leaving his Estate to his Son
Christiern Albert, the present Duke of Holstein Gottorp, born in Febr. 1641.
Married, as I said before, to Frederica-Aemilia, one of the King of Denmark's
Sisters.
To the Duke of Holstein Gottorp there is but one collateral Branch, viz. of
Ottin, or Ottingen. Which begun with John of Ottin, younger Brother to
Frederick Duke of Holstein Gottorp, born March 19th Anno 1606. He was
Administrator of the Bishopric of Lubeck, and an eminent Scholar. He died
Febr. 18. 1655, and left a Son called John Augustus, born August 3. in the Year
1647.

The Branch of Holstein Sunderburg (so called from Sunderburg, a Castle in the
Isle of Alsen, near the East-Coast of Sleswick, began with John, second Son of
Christiern III. King of Denmark, born March 25th Anno 1545. He died Nov. 9th
1621, and left four Sons, who made so many Branches. Alexander, his eldest Son,
Duke of Holstein Sunderburg, was born Anno 1573, and died March 13. in the year
1627. His next Heir and Successor was his Son John Christiern, born April 26.
1607. Who dying Anno 1653, or 54, left his Title and Estate to his Son
Christiern Adolph, the present Duke of Holstein Sunderburg.


The three younger Branches are, 1. Of Holstein Norburg, 2. of Holstein
Gluksburg, 3. of Holstein Ploen, or Arnsberg.

Thus I have unravelled the Pedigree of the Dukes of Holstein, who are now
increased to a great number, and some of them of no great Fortunes. The Duke of
Holstein Gottorp is the most considerable; and yet he was much greater, before
he lost the King of Denmark, his Brother-in-Law's, favor; by engaging too far
with Sweden, to the prejudice of his Blood. Whereby he lost to the King his
Rights of Sovereignty over the Dukedom of Sleswick, and has little or nothing
left there besides his Castle of Gottorp. Which Rights were formerly extorted
from the late King Frederick by the Roschild Treaty. In Holstein his Subjects
are set under Contribution, whilst his Highness resides at Hamburg, his Place
of Refuge, where he has in vain protested against the King's Proceedings. This
Prince has a Brother, Augustus Frederick, born Anno 1646.

Of the Nobility, Clergy, and Commonalty of Denmark, in relation to Government;
As also of the chief Order of Knighthood, called of the Elephant.
IN all Governments the Inhabitants are distinguished, and divided into several
Orders and Degrees, commonly called States. In England we have but King, Lords,
and Commons. But in Denmark they reckon five Orders, or States; viz. the
Blood Royal, the Nobility or Gentry, the Clergy, Burgesses or Merchants, and
Contrymen.

In our foregoing Discourse we have spoke at large of the Blood Royal. I come
now to the next Order, which is the Nobility. A Bridle to Kings in all Elective
Kingdoms, but on the contrary a Support of Crowns Hereditary.

Before the Crown of Denmark was made Hereditary, there was no Titular Lords.
But he only was counted a Nobleman, that could show his Nobility by a long
Descent. They bore their Arms simple, and thought it a disgrace to change, or
add to them. Here is still the Noble Family of the Wrens, whose Ancestors were
present at the Treaty made on the River Eyder, between Charles the Great and
Hening King of Denmark, which is almost 900 years since; As also that of the
Whitfelds, of which the English Whitfields are an Offspring, who bear the same
Arms with the Whitfelds in Denmark, and whose Ancestors came over with King
Canute.

To proceed, the Nobility or Gentry of Denmark (for it is the same thing there)
enjoy their Estates with high and low Jurisdiction, and have (as the German
Counts) the liberty of Hunting, hair with hair, and feather with feather. Their
Patrimonial Estates are not held in fief, but in free tenure. All Castles,
Lands, and Goods, as well moveable as immovable, left to them by their
Parents, are equally divided amongst the Brothers. In case of Sisters, the
Brother has two shares, and the Sister but one. The Mansion Houses and Castles
are kept by the Heirmales, but many Lordships are equally divided. Noblemen,
that are so well qualified as to merit the King's special favor, may come to
great Preferment and Riches. It Is out of the Nobility that is chosen the
Council of State, the Senators whereof must not exceed the number of 38. The
Crown allows each of them a Competency, with some fair Castle in the Country
for his Retirements, whilst he is of that Body.

The Chief Men of this Council are the Ricks Drost, and the Lords Marshal,
Admiral, Chancellor, and Treasurer. The Ricks Drost is, as it were, the King's
Lieutenant, that manages, resolves, and dispatches the King's Affairs. The Lord
Marshal takes care both in Peace and War of all Military Concerns; and the
Admiral sees to Maritime Affairs. The Chancellor judges of Civil Causes, and
the Treasurer receives the King's Revenues.

The third Order or Degree, is the Clergy. The Body of which does consist of
Ministers, otherwise called the Inferior Clergy. And out of these are chosen
the Superintendents or Bishops, for the Church Government. These are the
Overseers, Inspectors, and Heads of the Clergy. Over which there is a general
Superintendent, and that is the Bishop (or Archbishop, if you will) of
Copenhagen. These Governors of the Church have indeed a Priority both of Place
and Power before other Ministers, together with some liberal Maintenance in
proportion to it. They have a Power of Presidence in all Church- Assemblies;
but so, that they are to take along with them the Advice of other Ministers.
From whom they do not otherwise differ, either in Order, Habit, or Title of
Dignity. All of them in general, and in particular, are accountable to the
Supreme Ecclesiastical Consistory, as in former times to the Provincial or
National Synod. Which Consistory is made up of Counselors of State, and the
Heads of the Clergy. In short, both the Revenues and the Power of these
Prelates are much Inferior to what it was formerly before the Reformation; so
that a Bishop here is little better than Primus inter Pares.

The fourth Order or Degree consists of Townsmen, Burgesses and Merchants, who
have their Privileges peculiar to themselves. Out of these, and from the
Husbandmens Children, are chosen the Bishops, Canons, Ministers, and
Magistrates of Towns, Clarks of Castles and Fortresses, Ship-Officers, Tollmen,
etc. These Magistrates judge the least Causes, but for the most part they have
a President out of the Gentry.

But, of all the Corporations within this Kingdom, none has such Privileges,
and truly none deserves such, as the City of Copenhagen. Privileges as to the
Freedom of the City and the Increase of Trade. Privileges whereby the City has
a Vote in all those Deliberations which concern the public Good. To which add
their Privileges in purchasing any Lands and Lordships whatsoever, and enjoying
them with the same Rights as the Nobles; In not being burdened with any
Impositions the Nobles do not bear, and not that but by public Consent; in
being free from all Contributions or Inquarterings whatsoever in times of
Peace; and lastly, in that the Citizens Children, whether Ecclesiastic or
Civil, are admitted to Honors and public Offices equally with Noblemens
Children, provided they be sit and capable for them. All which Privileges, and
several others, the late King Frederick granted this City, when besieged by
Charles Gustave of Sweden; that having the more to lose, they might have most
reason to defend themselves, as they did effectually.

The fifth Order or Degree is that of the Countrymen. Which are of two Sorts,
the one called Freibunden, that is Freeholders. These enjoy their Living by
Inheritance, but give some small matter yearly. They trade also, and have the
Liberty of Fishing. They are not taxed with Servitude or Bondage; neither pay
they any Contribution, without the Consent of the Senators and Counselors of
the Kingdom. The other Sort is of such who have not any Land but what they farm
of the King, Gentry, or Clergy; and are bound to do Homage for the same, as
they make their Conditions.

The chief Order of Knighthood in Denmark is that of the Elephant. Instituted
(as some say) Anno 1478. by King Christiern I, at the Wedding of John his Son
and Successor. The Badge of these Knights is a Collar powdered with Elephants
towred, supporting the Kings Arms, and having at the end the Picture of the
Virgin Mary.

OF THE King of DENMARK'S Foreign Estates.
And first of NORWAY.
BEsides the Crown of Denmark, the King has several Estates in Foreign Parts,
both Continent and Islands. In the Continent he has NORWAY, a Kingdom that lies
North and North-cast from Denmark, from which parted by the Ocean. And it is
from its Northern Situation that it is so denominated, Norway quasi Tractus
(seu Via) Septentrionalis.

And indeed it is the most Northern Country of all Europe, part of it lying in
the frigid Zone, I mean the North-cast Parts. Where you will find the
North-Cape in the seventy second degree of Latitude, that is about five degrees
within the Arctick Circle. So that there is no Night in Summer for about three
Months together, and consequently no day in Wintertime during the same space
of time.

This Country runs, as I said before, North and North-east from Denmark; which
way it extends it self about 1000 miles. But the Breadth of it is not
proportionable, the Southwest Parts (where it is broadest) not exceeding 300
miles in breadth from East to West. From whence Northward it grows much
narrower. Westward it is bounded with the Northern Ocean; and Eastward with
Sweden. Which, together with Norway, makes up that large and famous Peninsule
by the Ancients called Scandia or Scandinavia.

But, before we proceed to the description of Norway, let us take a View of the
Northern Ocean, otherwise called the Frozen Sea, as being commonly clogged with
Ice in Wintertime. In which Sense Pliny called it Mare Amalchium; Tacitus,
Mare Pigrum; and the Cimbrians of old, Marimorusa. Illuc usque tantum Natura,
here is the end of Nature, says Tacitus speaking of this Sea. Till the English
found the way to Archangel in Moscovy, this Sea was commonly looked upon as
Unnavigable. Now this North-east Passage was discovered in King Edward the
Sixth's time, Anno 1553, under the Conduct of Richard Chancellor. For which
Adventure three Ships were fitted out; but two of them perished with Cold, and
all their Men were the next Year found frozen to death in their Ships.

Along the Coast of Norway, the Sea runs much into Creeks and long Bays, and
there is a World of Islands. But it is most remarkable, for that great and
famous Gulf or Whirl-pool, called Maelstroom, or Moskestroom, which lies
between two Islands near the Coast of Norway.

A Whirl-pool is a Collection of Waters turning swiftly about, and drawing to
it self whatever comes within some distance of it, and having whirled the same
to the bottom, casts it up again after a certain time. The fury of which
Stream, being so great, has a long time deterred Men from venturing themselves
over it. So that Whirl-pools were concluded to be unfadomable Abysses of Water.
Nay, some would have 'em to be the origininal Cause of the Flux and Reflux;
wherein when the Water runs, it is Ebb, and when it runs out, Flood.

Kircherus in his Tabula Geogr. Hydrogr. is of opinion, that the Sea runs down
this Whirlpool under the Land of Norway, and out again at another Whirl-pool
within the Gulf of Bothnia, part of the Baltic Sea. And, to strengthen this
his Opinion, he says there is a high Rock in the midst of the Stream, and under
that Rock an Abyss, through which the Water is swallowed. So that there should
be first a Vortex or Whirl-pol, and within it a Vorago or Gulf, that should
have its way under Norway, and its outlet within the Gulf of Bothnia.

But Lucas Jacobson Debes, a Danish Writer, thinks otherwise of it. He says,
that where this Whir-pool lies the bottom of the Sea arises, and does not
descend in deep Cavities; That the Whirl-pool proceeds from round Grounds with
Channels or Conduits in them; That if there were any deep Ground to make a
swallowing Gulf the Water should not run about (as it does) in such turbulent
and boisterous a manner as to be heard some Leagues off at Sea. And his Reason
is, because the stillest Waters have the deepest Bottom: But he says that great
Noise is occasioned by the narrowness of the Passage for the large Ocean to run
through with the Tide to the Continent, and to fall back again into the main
Sea. Besides the round Grounds and Channels under Water, where the huge beating
and running about of the Sea must needs make a terrible Noise.

As to what Peter Clauson writes, that what whole Trees that Stream draws in
come out again rugged with torn Roots and Branches; it is probable enough that
happens by reason of those high, round, and sharp Grounds, between which the
Trees are whirled about by the strong Stream, so as to beat and wear off the
Roots, Branches, Bark, and the uppermost of the Trunk thereof. Of which sort of
Trees, says my Author, there comes many ashore to Feroe and Greenland; Which
would not be, if there were any pervious Gulf. For then the Hole would be
large, and the Water run still round about; and, when any thing came to the
Gulf, it would quickly run through it without any damage. Moreover, it is
observable, that the Inhabitants who dwell on the Islands and the Continent
about this Whirl-pool row out upon it when the Weather is good, and the Stream
slow in its reflux, and that they catch there abundance of Fish called Sey.
Which they would not venture to do, if there were such a thing as a devouring
Vorago.

And yet there may be too a Receptacle, or deep Hole, near the high Rock which
is in the midst of the Stream; to receive and keep what the Stream draws in
from time to time, and restore it when it runs out again. As for the Rock, it
stands in the midst of the Stream, as a Beacon for Seamen, that they should
not come into danger.

The Northern Ocean being exceeding deep, and therefore a fit Habitation for
Whales; the Shores of Norway are not a little troubled with those great
Leviathans. Against whose violence and fury the Mariners and People of the
Seacoast have found a Remedy; that is Castoreum, or the Oil of Castor, the
smell whereof forces them to retire immediately. Otherwise there were no
Fishing on these Coasts, which is one of the greatest staple Commodities that
the Country yields.

Castoreum, or the Oil of Castor, has the Virtue to drive the dead Foetus out
of its Mothers Womb; and so it has to drive down a Whale, which no sooner
smells it but it sinks to the bottom. The Whale has an acute Scent, and
doubtless there is a great Antipathy between the Whale and the Castoreum, for
this to sink so monstrous a Creature, as soon as that comes within the reach of
it is Smell. And therefore the Norway Fishermen do seldom go a fishing without
it.

But, besides Castoreum, there is a way to drive Whales with Juniper-wood,
whereof the Fishermen cut Chips, and cast them toward the Whale. Which makes
it presently retire into the Deep. Now it is well known, that the Oil of Juniper
has the same virtue as the Castoreum to drive out the Foetus; and by the same
reason it may also be, that Juniper Wood (whereof the Oil is prepared) drives
down the Whale. From whence some Authors conclude, that all other Medicaments,
and their Ingredients expelling the dead Foetus, may have also the virtue to
drive down the Whale. Such as Assa foetida, Myrrha, Galbanum, Scammony,
Brimstone, Mace, Cinnamon, Rue, Mother-wort, and several others.

And, as it has been proved by Experience, that a Person who could swim well
was drowned, having Castoreum about him, whilst others that were in the Boat,
and could not swim, saved their Lives; so it is possible that the aforesaid
Species have the same virtue for the depression of a Man. And, of so many Men
that have suddenly lost their Lives in the Waters, it is possible some of them
were drowned by the virtue of some of those Things aforesaid, (especially Mace
and Cinnamon) which perhaps they had about them.

But, to come home from my Digression, Norway is a Country for the most part
Rocky, and Mountainous. And here is a vast Ridge of Hills, called Sevo, the
Alps of the North. They serve for the most part as a Boundary to Norway and
Sweden, and are called in Norway Daare-field; but in some Parts of it, as in
the Government of Dronthem, Skarsfield, Rund-field, Dofre-field; and betwixt
Berghen and Aggerhuis, Fille-field, and Houckle-field. There are in this
Country a great many Lakes; but scarce any great Rivers, except in the South
Parts.

As the Country is Rocky and Mountainous, so it is barren, woody, extreme cold,
and but ill inhabited. In the best Parts thereof it affords little Corn; and in
the most Northern, none at all. So that the common sort of People are fain to
use dried Fish, that which we commonly call Stock Fish, instead of Bread; but
the better sort buy Corn of such Merchants as come to traffic with them. Their
chief Commodities are Stock Fish, Furs, Train-Oyl, Pitch, Tackling for Ships,
and Timber for Building. Which the Inhabitants exchange for Corn, Wine, Brandy,
Beer, and other Necessaries.

Mercator, and Heylin after him, tells us, that this Country is exceedingly
troubled with certain little Beasts, which they call Lemmers. They are about
the bigness of a Field-mouse, and are thought by the Inhabitants to drop out of
the Clouds in stormy Weather. They, like the Locusts, devour every green thing
on the Earth, and at a certain time die all in heaps together. The Stench
whereof does so poison the Air, that the poor People are long after troubled
with the Jaundice, and with a Giddiness in the Head. Here is also abundance of
Bears and Wolves, and amongst them some white Bears of a prodigious Bigness.

The Towns here are exceeding thin, and in them the Houses for the most part
very poor and miserable.

The Country in general is distributed into five Governments, according to the
number of the Castles which command the same. Those are the Governments of
Bahuis, Aggerhuis, Bergenhuis, Dronthemhuis, and Wardhuis.

The Government of Bahuys is the most Southern of all, and lies opposite to the
North Parts of Jutland in Denmark. The same is so called from Bahuis, a strong
Castle in this Province, in a small Island which the River Trolhetta makes,
that comes from the great Lake called Wener. It Is within three Leagues of the
Sea, and two North of Gottenburg. The same was built Anno 1309, by Aquin II,
King of Norway. And this is the Prefecture, or Government, which was yielded to
the Swedes by the Roschild Treaty, Anno 1658.

Aggerhuis, the Castle, is situate about twenty Leagues full North from Scagen,
the most Northern point of Jutland. This Castle has under its Command, amongst
other Towns, Opslo, a Bishops See, and of most esteem for the Courts of
Judicature which are kept here. In the year 1646. a Gold Mine was found near
this Town, but it fell short of People's expectations.

Bergenhuis, another of these Castles, is so called from Bergen, the principal
Town of the Country, an Episcopal See under the Archbishop of Dronthem, and the
ordinary Residence of the Viceroy. This Town is situate amongst high Mountains,
at the bottom of a deep Creek, or Arm of the Sea, called Carmesund; all which
makes Bergen to be a very good Port, and accordingly much resorted to by
Merchants. Ninety miles South of Bergen, and under its Jurisdiction, you will
find Stafanger, a Sea-Town with a good Port, near which is the Fort called
Doeswick.

Dronthemhuis is so called from Drontheim, a Town seated upon a long Arm of the
Sea, which reaches a great way into the Continent. The same is furnished with a
safe and capacious Port, but of difficult access. Once a famous Place, when it
was the Seat of the Norvegian Kings, and an Archbishops See; but now reduced
to a Borough, since the Subjection of this Country to the Danes. For it has
no Walls about it, but lies open on all sides. It Is true, it has been destroyed
several times by fire, and there is still to be seen some Remains of one of the
most stately Churches in the North. But this Place could never recover it self
to any thing of its ancient Greatness or Splendor, since the Danish Viceroys
kept their Residence at Berghen, as a more convenient Place, and to be sure not
so extreme cold as the other. For, whereas Drontheim is situate in the 24th
degree of Northern Latitude (a cold Seat for a King, or a Viceroy) Bergen is
at least two degrees more Southerly. To be short, Drontheim is that Place which
the Latins called Nidrosia, as the Italians call it still to this day. And
they termed it Nidrosia from Nider, a River which runs before it. There is a
Castle to defend it, but none of the strongest.

And yet it is the largest Prefecture, or Government, reaching from South to
North, no less than 500 miles; and from the Ocean Westward to the Kingdom of
Sweden Eastward, at least 100 miles. It Is true, this Government, by reason of
its great Extent, is subdivided into the Prefecture of Drontheim properly so
called, which takes up the Southern Parts; and the Prefecture of Salt, which
takes up the North Parts. The Whole, by the Roschild Treaty, was granted to the
Swedes; but afterward restored to the Danes, by the next Treaty of the year
1660.

East of Drontheim lies the Country of Jempterland, formerly part of Norway,
and as such belonging to the Crown of Denmark. But, by the Treaty of Bromsbroo,
Anno 1645, it was yielded to the Swedes, to whom it has been subject ever since.

At last we come to Wardhuis, a Government in the sarthest Parts Northward. So
called from the Town of Wardhuys, as that is from the Isle Ward (about 120
miles South-East of the North-cape) in which it is seated. This Place, which
was but formerly mean and poor, is something improved since the North-East
Passage to Archangel was found out by the English, it lying in the way for the
English and Dutch to touch at, as they go to Moscovy. But, by reason of the
extremity of the Cold, and long absence of the Sun for some Months together, it
is hardly habitable, and consequently the Sea not navigable. In the Summer time
the Governor makes shift to reside in it, but past that Season he shifts to a
warmer Place. The Castle was strongly fortified by King Frederick the Second,
as well to command the Natives, as to awe the neighboring Laplanders. For
Eastward this part of Norway borders upon the Moscovian; Southward, upon the
Swedish Lapland. And truly this Government, at least the East part of it
(otherwise known by the name of Finmark) may be called the Danish Lapland. Here
is the great Lake Enarak, which parts a great way this Region from the
Moscovian Lapland.

The Norvegians were formerly so warlike a People, that they became terrible to
the more Southern Nations. By whom they were called Normans, q.d. Northmen,
being at that time a mixture of several Nations of the North, as of Norvegians
and Swedes, amongst whom perhaps the Danes did come in. In short, it is from
them that the fair Province of Normandy in France took that name. For, as the
Romans had been routed there by the French, so the French afterward were
routed by the Normans. Who, about the year 800, began their Irruptions out of
their Northern Countries; and did so ransack and plague the Maritime Towns of
France and the Netherlands, that it was inserted in the Litany, From Plague,
Pestilence, and the Fury of the Normans, good Lord deliver us. Charles the
simple, to quiet them, and to secure himself, gave them a part of Neustria
(from them since called Normannia, or Normandy) together with the Sovereignty
of Britanny, enjoyed by them and their Posterity for many Ages. Their first
Duke was Rollo, Anno 912, from whom, in a direct Line, the sixth was William
called the Conqueror, and crowned King of England, Anno 1067.

But, since the Norvegians became subject to the Crown of Denmark, their Fury
is so much abated, and their Spirits have been so quelled, that they are grown
as cold as their Climate. Instead of Invading Nations, they are given to
Hospitality; and, far from turning Pirates, they are become great Abhorrers of
Theft. In short, they have now the repute of being a sort of good harmless
People, without any fraud or deceit. For which they are indebted to the Danes;
who, by keeping them low, have not only took away their Strength, but their
Courage. And yet it is said, some of them are much given to Witchcraft; and
that they are so expert in it, as to be able, by keeping good Correspondence
with the Prince of the Air, drive a Trade of Winds.

As to Christianity, the Norvegians did not embrace the Gospel till the Reign
of Olaus, Son of Sueno, King of Denmark and Norway, that is about the Year
1055. The English assisted in the Work; and the good King Olaus was so zealous
in it, that he was canonized for a Saint, after his decease. The Reformation
was wrought here at the same time, and in the same manner, as it was in Denmark.

I said from the beginning, that the Norvegians were first conquered by Sueno
King of Denmark. In whose Line that Crown continued, till Sueno II restored it
to the Norvegians. But afterward, being reunited to the Crown of Denmark, by
the Marriage of Aquin King of Norway, and of Margaret eldest Daughter of
Waldemar III, King of Denmark, it has ever since continued subject to this
Crown. And, though Olaus, the only Son of Aquin, died without Issue; yet the
Norvegians liked the Danes so well, that they never offered to assert their
Liberties. But, if their stomachs served them now to stir against the Danes,
where is their strength to do it? They are poor, and only fit to live (as they
do) in an entire submission to their Prince, the King of Denmark; and under
Him, to his Viceroy, the Lord Guldenlew.

Of the Earldoms of Oldenburg and Delmenhorst, in Germany.
IN Germany the King of Denmark possesses the Earldom of Oldenburg, and under
it That of Delmenhorst.

The Earldom of Oldenburg is a fine Estate in the North-Parts of Westphaly; so
called from Oldemburg, the chief Place of it, and the Head of this Earldom. It
lies betwixt the German Ocean Northward, and the Bishopric of Munster,
Southward; the Dukedom of Bremen, Eastward; and East-Friseland, Westward.

The Soil hereof is exceeding rich, but in Pastures especially. Which breed
infinite Herds of Cattle, and furnish not this Country only, but some of their
German Neighbors, and many of the more Northern Nations, with Horses, Beeves,
Sheep, Swine, Butter, and Cheese. Here is also good store of Pulse, Barley, and
Oats, plenty of Fruits, and Trees of all sorts; large Woods, well stored with
Venison, and yielding unto the Gentry the Delights of Hunting. But the Air is
pretty cold in Winter, and foggy nigh the Sea. And this is the general
Character Mercator and Heylin give us of this Country.

Eastward it is watered with the River Weser, which parts it from the Duchy of
Bremen, and is one of the chief Rivers of all Germany. Some miles to the
Westward you will find the Jade, a River which at first was but a Brook scarce
worth the naming. It springs out of a Pool or Lake, called the great Mere, and
by the way parting (as it were) the Fields from one another, it swelled with
the Waters that ran into it, and so fell into the Meers. At last the Banks
breaking, through the violence of the Storms, it drowned all the lower Grounds,
and made a great Collection of Waters at the Rivers Mouth, which makes it look
more like a Gulf than a River. On this Shore are still to be seen the sad
Remainders of seven or eight Parishes, that perished in this Flood.

The chief Towns hereof are Oldenburg, and Delmenhorst. The first is scated on
the River Hont, twenty five miles West of Bremen, and forty East of Embden;
which River falls into the Weser, about twelve miles from Oldenburg Eastward.
The Town it self is of no great State, or Beauty. But the Castle, where the
Earls of Oldenburg dwelt, is still a very good Castle, built of well-hewn
Stones, of an orbicular form, with deep Ditches of Water about it. This is the
Castle which Walpert, the first Earl of Oldenburg, built about the Year 850,
calling it (from his Wife Alteburg) Alteburgum, which by the Germans was turned
into Oldemburg.

Delmenhorst is so called from the River Delme, on which it is situate, about
three Leagues to the Westward of Bremen. It Is a strong Place, and of great
Importance, built in the Year 1247. by Otho, Brother of Earl Christian the
Second. But in the time of Gerard Earl hereof (a Prince of an unquiet Spirit,
always in Wars and always worsted) this Place was lost to the Bishop of
Munster. Having continued in Possession of the Bishops of Munster about sixty
four Years, it was suddenly surprised on Palm Sunday morning by Anthony Earl of
Oldenburg, Anno 1547; and ever since that time Delmenhorst has continued part
of this Estate.

Here is also, going from South to North, the Towns of Wardenburg, Ovelgune,
Essensham, and Beckeren. And, upon a great Sand that lies betwixt the Mouths of
the Jade and the Weser, stood formerly Mellum, a strong Castle, that commanded
both the said Rivers. Built for that purpose by an Earl of Oldenburg, but at
last lost in the Sea.

Adjoining to this Province is the Earldom of Jevern; so called from Jevern the
chief Place hereof. This Earldom formerly belonged to the Princes of East
Friseland, and to this day most Geographers do still reckon it as part of that
Country; where it lies Easterly, toward the Sea. The same was bequeathed by
the last Will and Testament of the Lady Mary, Countess of Jevern, to John the
last Earl but one of Oldenburg. So that upon the Death of Anthony (the last
Earl) dying without Issue, the King of Denmark, as being the next Heir, did
inherit the Patrimonial Estate. But the Earldom of Jevern fell to the share of
Anthony's Sister's Children, the Princess of Zerbst.

Now, to go farther than we have done yet into the Pedigree of the present
Royal Family of Denmark, let us take a view of the Earls of Oldenburg, from
whom it is descended. The House of Oldemburg fetches its Pedigree as far as
Walpert, a Nephew of Wittikind. Now Wittikind was the last King of the Saxons;
who being vanquished by Charles the Great of France, Anno 785, was by him made
of a King a Duke of Saxony. But the Male Issue of Walpert his Nephew failing in
Frederick, the seventh Earl, the Estate came to one Elimar, a Cousin German of
his by the Fathers side. From whom in a direct Line descended

Theodorick, surnamed the Fortunate, the first Earl of Delmenhorst of this
Line. He had two Wives, the first called Adelais, Heiress of Delmenhorst; and
the second, Hedwige, Daughter of Gerard and Sister of Adolph of Scawemburg,
Earl of Holstein and Duke of South Jutland, etc. the Widow of Balthazar Duke of
Mecklemburg. He died Anno 1440, leaving three Sons, viz. Christiern, Maurice,
and Gerard.

1440. Christiern, Son of Theodorick by his second Wife Hedwige, Sister and
Heir of Gerard and Adolph Dukes of Sleswick and Earls of Holstein, succeeded
his Father in this Estate, and enjoyed it till the Year 1448. When, upon the
Recommendation of Adolph his Uncle, being elected King of Denmark, he left his
Estate in this Earldom (but still reserving the Title) to his Brother Gerard,
the better to take him off from his Pretensions to the Dukedom of Sleswick and
the Earldom of Holstem, in which he pretended a Share. Maurice, Batchelour of
the Sorbonne and Canon of Bremen, married in the Year 1458, and died Anno 1464,
having had three Children, who all died in their Infancy.

1448. Gerard, the third Son of Earl Theodorick, was surnamed the Valiant; and
might as well have been called, in opposition to his Father, the Unfortunate,
for the Reasons abovesaid. Anno 1453. he married with Adelais Countess of
Tecklemburg, by whom he got five Sons and as many Daughters. Those were Gerard,
Dieterick, Adolph, Otho, and John. Gerard, the Father, died in Exile, Anno 1500.

1500. John, who succeeded him, married in the Year 1498. to Ann a Princess of
the House of Anhalt. By whom he got three Sons, George, Christopher, Anthony,
and one Daughter called Ann, married to Enno the Second, Earl of East
Friseland. John repaired the Ruins of his Estate, and settled the Distractions
of it in the time of his Father, being then in Exile.

1526. Anthony, the third Son, was by the Consent of his Brothers preferred to
the Earldom. He married Sophia, Duchess of Saxen Lawemburg; by whom he got two
Sons, John and Anthony, and three Daughters, Ann, Catharine, and Claire. This
is the Earl, who by a sudden Surprise recovered Delmenhorst from the Bishop of
Munster, Anno 1547, which he strongly fortified.

1573. John, Son of Anthony, married with Elizabeth, Daughter of Count
Schwartzburg, by whom he got two Sons, and four Daughters. His Sons were John
Frederick, who died in his Infancy, Anno 1580, and Anthony-Gontier. His
Daughters were 1. Catharine, married to Augustus Duke of Saxony; 2. Anna
Sophia; 3. Mary-Elizabeth; 4. Magdalen, the Wife of Rodolph of Anhalt Prince of
Zerbst. This is the Earl to whom the Countess of Jevern in East Friseland
bequeathed that Country.

Anthony Gontier, second Son of Earl John, was his Successor. He was born in
Nov. Anno 1583, married in June 1634 or 35. Sophia Catharina, Daughter of
Alexander Duke of Holstein Sunderburg, and died without Issue in the Year 1667.
At which time Frederick, the late King of Denmark, took Possession of
Oldenburg, as next Heir to it.

Having said thus much of Oldenburg, let us now steer our Course Northward, and
see what Dominions the King of Denmark has there, besides the Kingdom of Norway.

Of the Isles of Schetland, and of Feroe.
BEfore I come to a Description of these Isles, it will not be improper to take
notice in our way of the Orcades, which formerly belonged to the Kings of
Norway and Denmark. They were called Orcades by the Ancients, which we call now
the Orkney Islands. Situate North of Scotland, not far from Cathness, the most
Northern Country of all that Kingdom; and separate from one another by some
narrow Streights. They are in number thirty two, but those of chief note eleven.

The Kings of Notway held these Isles till the Year 1266; when Magnus, King of
Norway, surrendered them up to Alexander III. King of Scotland. Which Surrender
some of the succeeding Kings did afterward ratify. But the Claim was finally
relinquished by Christiern I, King of Denmark and Norway, on the Marriage of
his Daughter Margaret with King James III, Anno 1474. And then some Money was
added to make good the Contract, without which the Danes would not give up
their Claim to these Islands.

Further Northward, about sixty miles, lie the Islands of Schetland and of
Feroe, all of them still subject to the Crown of Norway, and consequently to
the King of Denmark.

The Isles of Schetland lie North-east of the Orcades; and the Isles of Feroe,
Northwest. But the Situation of these last is something further Northward.

Those are under the 61 and 62 degrees of Northern Latitude, about 60 Leagues
West of Bergen in Norway, and forty North of Scotland. By Cluverius, Sanson,
and other Geographers, they are supposed to be the Hemodes of the Ancients.

One with another they are reckoned to be about twenty six. But they are most
of them little rocky Islands, uninhabited.

The main Island, and that which is worth all the rest, is Schetland, otherwise
Hetland, which gives its Name to the whole Cluster. But it goes also, like the
chief of the Orcades, by the Name of Mainland. It Is a long, but narrow Island;
reaching from South to North about sixty miles, and sixteen where broadest.
This Island is not much inhabited but by the Seaside, because of Fishing,
which is the main Thing here. Southward there are high Hills, and Northward
there is another, called Renisfelt, on the top of which is kept a great Light
for the use of Mariners.

As the Inhabitants are not very industrious, so they are not much inclined to
Vices. It Is seldom they drink any strong Liquors to excess; and, when they do,
it is as rare to see one of them mad-drunk. For Quarrelling does not attend
their Drinking. And perhaps this their Temperancy, as much as the wholsomness
of the Air, or the nature of the Country, makes them to live so long as they
do. Mercator makes mention of one Laurentius, a Native of this Island, who
lived in his time. This Man, says he, being above 100 years of Age, was yet so
vigorous that he married a Wife; and, when he was 140 years old, still he went
with his Boat a fishing in a most unruly, tempestuous, and turbulent Sea.

The great Dispute amongst the Learned is, whether Schetland or Iseland is the
Thule of the Ancients. Thule which the Poets do so often speak of; as Virgil,
Tibi serviat ultima Thule, and Seneca, Nec sit Terris ultima Thule. Thule,
which the Ancients did report such strange things of, and some of them beyond
all belief. Nulla per bruman dies, says Pliny, here is no day for all the
Winter; with whom agree Solinus, and many others, as to that particular.
Another says more than that, nullum ultra eam diem esse, that beyond this Isle
there was no day in any Place, as if here had been the end of the World and
Nature. But Pytheas in Polybius go's beyond them all, when he says that in this
Isle there was no distinction of the Elements; but a confused Mixture of all
together, like the Primitive Chaos of the Poets.

According to these Authors, it is neither Schetland nor Iseland that can be the
Thule of the Ancients; and 'twere a hard matter to find out such a Place in any
part of the known World. But it is no new thing for remote Places to be
strangely represented.

When all is done, I am apt to be of Dr. Heylins Opinion, who takes Schetland
to be the Thule, for these Reasons following. First Ptolomy places Thule in the
63 degree of Northern Latitude, who differs therein but in one Degree (or there
abouts) from the best of our modern Maps. Whereas Iseland is so much further
North, that a good part of it is within the Arctick Circle. Pomponius Mela
places Thule opposite to Bergen in Norway; which Situation agrees with that of
Schetland, but not Iseland. Multae sunt, says Solinus, circa Britanniam
Insulae, e quibus Thule ultima, there are many Islands about Britain, of which
Thule is the last, or farthest off. So that in his Judgment Thule must be one
of the British Isles, which cannot be said of Iseland. Insulas quas Orcadas
vocant domuit, despecta est Thule, says Tacitus speaking of Agricola, he
subdued the Island called Orcades, and made sleight of Thule. Now Iseland is so
far from being kenned by any one of the Orcades, that it is almost 5 degrees
distant from the nearest of them. And the truth is, Iseland was so far from
being known unto the Ancients, that it was hardly known unto those of Norway
till about the ninth Century. To which add Gasper Peucerus his Observation,
that Schetland is by some Mariners called Thylensel, which includes the name of
Thule.

After all these Arguments, who can almost doubt but that Schetland (not
Iseland) is really the Thule of the Ancients.

But, besides Schetland (or Mainland) there are two other Islands
North-Eastward, of a pretty bigness; viz. Zell, and Wust, by some called Yell
and Vnst.

These Islands and the rest being much of the same nature and constitution as
those of Feroe, I shall not stay to give you a particular Account of those of
Schetland, but proceed to those of Feroe. Which, as wild as they are, will find
us more diversion and variety than far better Countries. And therefore I intend
to dwell here a while, under the principal guidance and conduct of a Danish
Author, Lucas Jacobson Debes, Master of Arts, and Provost of the Churches
there. A Man of Learning, and in all likelihood of as great Integrity.

The Islands of Feroe lie Westward from those of Schetland, and something more
Northward. The height of the Pole or Latitude thereof is at the South end 61
degrees 15 minutes, and at the North end 62 degrees 10 minutes. So that there
is but little night in Summer. Neither are the Winter nights so tedious long as
one might imagine, because the Crepusculum and Diluculum are something longer
here than elsewhere, which takes off much from the night. For in the midst of
Winter one may perceive something of the day at eight a clock in the Morning,
and at four a clock at Night.

The name of Feroe, by which these Islands are called, is probably derived from
a Danish Word which answers to our Ferry. Now Feroe consisting of many Islands,
where one must cross with Boats and Ferries, it is likely enough that from
thence this Land might be called Feroe.

When Grimar Camban, a famous Pirate or Sea-robber, came first to these
Islands, he found them uninhabited. And the truth is in those times, when
Piracy was honorable, the very Orcades, as well as the Isles of Schetland,
were but the Mansions of Robbers and Pirates. But in the Reign of Pulcricomus,
King of Norway, many considerable Men, with their Wives and Children, Goods and
Movables, took their Habitation in the Feroe Islands, which Name was then
known in Norway.

They are in number 17 inhabited Islands, besides several Holmes, or Islets.
Amongst which these are the largest, viz. Stromoe and Osteroe Northward, then
Suderoe Southward. Next to which in bigness you will find North-Eastward,
Calsoe, Cunoe, Bordoe, Videroe, Suinoe, Fuloe; then West of Stromoe, Waagoe;
and betwixt Stromoe and Suderoe, Sandoe.

The Whole extends it self from North to South about 60 miles; and from East to
west 40.

The Inhabitants talk of a Floating Island, that their Ancestors and themselves
have seen during some Hours, on the North of these Islands. Where they
discerned Hills and Dales on it, and running Rivers gliding through the green
Valleys. Perhaps it might be the same which Paul Badsted, a Skipper, discovered
in April Anno 1611, about eleven Leagues South-east of Feroe Islands. Who,
together with two Clergymen that came along with him to Feroe, related how
being by stormy Weather driven out of their course to the South thereof,
perceived an Island; and how being come near it they saw it perfectly, green
with Grass toward the Seaside, with Rocks and Clifts near the Land. They saw
Rivers running through the Island with high Hills and Promontories, not unlike
in all Circumstances to the Islands of Feroe. But, perceiving no other Islands
by it, they found themselves to be deceived, and so made to the North. The
Island of Enckhupson found by the Hollanders under the 65 degree of Northern
Latitude, 45 Leagues North-west of Feroe, seems to confirm that Opinion, since
it is no more to be found.

My Author leaves it modestly to every one's Judgment, whether such a mass of
hard Rocks could float. If they were, says he, of the nature of a Pumice stone,
it might be so; but then it would ever float. The Ancients indeed did believe
Delos a floating Island, till such time as it gave Birth to Diana and to
Apollo. As for floating Islands in fresh Water, grown together with Roots, and
covered with loose Earth, decked with Grass, it is a Thing not to be denied.
There was such a one upon a Lake near Mosco, when I was there an Attendant on
the Right Honorable the Earl of Carlisle, in his Embassy from the King to Czar
of Moscovy.

Suinoe, one of the second Rate Islands, is believed by the Inhabitants to have
been a floating Island; and they are of opinion, that if one could come to the
Island that has been so often seen, and cast a piece of Steel upon it, the
Island would remain fast. Which agrees with the Diver's superstitious Practice,
who lay steel upon what they find at the bottom of the Sea, that Spirits may
not remove it.

My Author is a little Incredulous as to the point of floating Islands, and
takes it for a mere Illusion of the Devil. But, if a little Castoreum has the
virtue to drive down a great Whale into the bottom of the Sea, why cannot there
be some secret Thing in Nature to bear up an Island floating?

But, to come home to our Feroe Islands, they are in themselves but high Rocks,
rising out of the Sea, and strangely divided from each other by deep and rapid
streams of Water. It Is true the Valleys and the sides of the Hills are almost
every where covered about two foot thick of Earth; which produces abundance of
Grass, and not a little Corn.

In Summer the Air is temperatly warm, not very hot at any time; neither is the
Winter very cold, considering the Climate. It seldom freezes there a month
together, neither is the Frost then so hard as to produce Ice in the open
Inlets. Wherefore all Horse and Sheep keep the Fields during the whole Winter,
and seldom come under shelter.

The cause of such mild Air is the Sea. Which, being warm both by its saltness
and perpetual motion, does ever produce warm Vapors that temper the Air, and
take away the rigor of its coldness.

But then the Air being moist, and the Clouds watery, from thence proceed such
strange Storms and terrible Winds, as if the Hills would be torn to pieces.
Winds that sometimes tear up the Stones from the ground, turn up the earthen
Crust from the Rocks, and roll it together as one might a piece of Lead. Which
stormy Winds are very variable, and come in terribly by Gusts, according as the
Gaps are between the Tops of the Hills, where the Winds gather and throng
themselves through with a wonderful Force. And yet sometimes, during such a
Storm, (a Thing almost Incredible) those that live in the Valleys under those
Mountains are in so still a condition, that you may go from one House to
another with a Light burning. But it is observable, that, before the said
impetuous Wind comes to blow at that furious rate, the Houses crack and make a
noise, as if they would fall down. Tho afterward they are not much moved, even
in the stress of Weather.

In short, there is no Place more subject to Whirlwinds than these Islands.
Which consisting of Hills so high that the Wind cannot blow straight forwards,
but now hits against one corner, then against another, and so against a third,
it happens that those stormy Winds meeting one another, struggle (as it were)
for Passage, and fight together. Thus having a long time stormed about between
the Hills, it comes down over the Inlets, where they whirl round about a great
way into the Sea. In which case a Boat must presently let fall its Sails, or
else it is overturned. And Ships sometimes have been lost through those Gusts
from the Mountains.

It Is observed now and then on Land, that, when it is pretty good Weather, one
of those Whirlwinds will come on a sudden so furious as to beat a Man down from
his Horse, sometimes Man and Horse, and strike down those that go on foot. But
such as are used to the Country can easily perceive its coming, by the terrible
Bustle it makes amongst the Clifts, while it is still Weather below. Then the
Rider alights from his Horse, and lays himself on the Ground.

This is that sort of Whirlwind which the Greeks called Eenephias, that is a
Storm breaking out of the Clouds. Which happens often at the Cape of Good Hope.
Where the People do no sooner perceive a little Cloud over the Table-Mount (a
certain Presage of a terrible Whirlwind) but they run amain to their Ships, and
drive 'em off from the Land, so to preserve themselves and their Shipping.

The Story of Anderson, a Priest of Suderoe (one of the chief Islands of Feroe)
is so prodigious a Story, that it is almost past belief. Traveling to Sumboe,
one of his Parishes, he came to Sumboe Horse, a Clift above 200 fathoms high.
This Clift has several points, by reason of which (besides the height of the
Hill) whether the Wind blows to or from the Land, there may be caused a strong
Whirlwind. The Priest being come near the edge of the Promontory, there came a
strong Whirlwind, that took and carried away both Him and his Horse. But a
stronger Whirlwind, coming directly against it, threw him again on the Land,
without any hurt.

Here is also the Hurricane (or Whirlwind) so common in the West Indies, and
called in Greek Typhon. This is formed in the Clouds, from whence it strikes
down with such a sudden and mighty Whirl, that it tears all to pieces.
Sometimes out of the Land it takes up Trees, Bushes, Stones, Flesh, and what
else it meets with; as out of the Sea, it draws up such an incredible quantity
of Water, as to make deep Cavity's in the Sea, till it runs together again. And
what Fishes are then in that Water are drawn up by such a Whirlwind, and let
fall in another place. Thus it comes to pass sometimes, that it rains Stones,
Flesh, Mice, and in Norway their Lemmers. In Kolter, a small Island on the West
side of Stromoe, there is a Hill at least 200 Fathoms high; on the highest top
of which a World of Herrings were found spread along. These, without doubt,
were carried by a Whirlwind thither; the Sea (when most boisterous) seldom
casting any Fish on land. For, as in stormy Weather Birds hide themselves in
Trees, Holes, and Nests; so the small Fishes, when the Sea grows too strong for
them, float on the Deep, to save themselves there as long as the Storm lasts.

The Winds that naturally blow here are West and Southwest, especially in the
Spring and Summer. And it frequently happens, that on the side of the Land
where the Wind blows, there is Rain and bad Weather, whilst on the other side
it is fair and clear. The Reason of which is the great height of the Land.

Here is no Thunder in Summer, says my Author, but the other Seasons are not
free from it.

In short, the Air of Feroe is very wholesome, free from Pestilence, Infection,
and contagious Diseases. And how can it be otherwise where there is so much
Wind and Thunder to purify the Air? Besides that a running Stream flows almost
by every Man's House, washing away all Impurities that might infect the Air. To
which add the salt Vapors of the Sea, which keep the Air from Corruption, as
Salt it self keeps Bodies from Putrefaction.

From the Air I proceed now to the Water. And the first that offers it self to
our Consideration is the Sea, which surrounds these Islands on every side, and
is sometimes a Terror to them; as you may guess by the following Exemples.
Kolter, the little Island aforesaid, is exposed on the West side to the open
Sea, and there is toward the Main a Promontory thirty Fathoms high. Yet the
Sea does almost every Winter break over it with a Western Wind, and that in
such Quantity, that the Inhabitants are sometimes in danger of being drowned.
On a corner of the same Promontory there lay formerly a large Stone six foot
long, and four foot thick and broad. Which Stone the proud Sea tumbled about,
and threw some Paces off from the place where it lay before. This my Author
urges for a perfect Truth; a thing more to be wondered at than easy to conceive.

After a great Storm, when the Fishers row out to fishing, the Sea is still so
agitated inwardly, that the Fishers sometimes can see no Land.

The Tides are the same here as in other Places, where it ebbs six hours and
flows the like space of time. Yet their Course is different, according as they
beat against the Rocks and Points of Land, and as the Ground is under them.
Eastward the Water rises but three Fathoms, but Westward it rises seven, though
the distance be but forty miles that way. And one may easily perceive the Sea
to rise higher at West of Suderoe than at East; though the Land, where it is
broadest, be not above eight miles broad.

Between these Islands there run also many strong Currents; and that in several
manners, according as the Necks or Points of Land meet against the Streams, and
according to the Situation of the said Land. Which causes especially in Winter,
(when there is a Storm, and the Wind blows against the Tide) a terrible and
turbulent Sea. For then the Sea does raise and tumble it self about, and breaks
so strongly against the Land, that no Ship hardly can get safe over, even where
it is deep enough. Now these Grounds, with breaking Waves, are called Buffs in
the Language of Feroe.

And it is observable, that in bad Weather the Sea breaks three or seven times
together, without ceasing, and then rests some time. Therefore, when the
Inhabitants come to a breaking Place, and must needs over it, they lie still
till the Buff has broken, and then get over it speedily with their Boat.

But the Sea breaks also in still Weather, when it is very warm, or when there
will be Frost or Snow. Also, when a Boat goes over too near the Land.

Which strange Motion of the Sea has given occasion to the Inhabitants to
think, that the Sea is sensible, and that those Breaking Places cannot endure
the Iron of a Boat. But let us see in short our Danish Writers Philosophical
Reflections upon it.

As to the Seas breaking up a certain number of times, he looks upon it as an
Arcanum Naturae; and only says that happens by the Providence of God, who has
created all things according to Weight, Measure, and Number. And for the
breaking of them against warm Weather, or against a North Wind, and Snow, thus
he states the Case. All Motion, says he, that happens between the Elements and
other Beings that have neither Sense nor Life, does happen by a magnetical
Sympathy or Antipathy. And this he proves by the Lodestone, by Antidotes,
Metals, and Minerals. At last he concludes thus. Though the Elements, says he,
are in their Nature so contrary to one another; yet the one will not (nor can)
be without the other, suffering each other by a Temperature. And, when this is
wanting, so that there be either excess or defect, then Nature suffers, and is
moved by Antipathy. By which Reason this unexpected Motion does happen in the
Water over those Grounds called Buffs.

For it is seen in Feroe, that in still Weather, when the Air is warm, so that
there arises a Fog from the Sea rendering the Air dusky, not only the Currents
run much swifter and stronger than at other times, but also the Sea grows
stormy, and the Buffs break. Which happens, because of that Antipathy that is
between Water and Warmth in its Excess, whereby Water suffers in its Nature.

So, when in Winter there will come a strong Frost and Snow, the Currents grow
stronger, the Sea beats, and the Buffs arise, though it be never so still
Weather. The Reason is, because cold Weather alters the temper of the Water,
and takes off from its natural warmth. So that it cannot keep its innate
fluidity; but must, contrary to its own nature, let it self be changed to a
standing rigid matter, called Ice. Which Change this Element perceives
beforehand, and accordingly moves it self by the virtue of its magnetical
Antipathy.

But for the Buffs to break, when there comes a Boat over them, this perhaps
has a far more hidden Cause. Though it may happen by a magnetical virtue of
these Grounds about which they break. So that, the Loadstone by its sympathy
attending the Iron of the Boat, the shallow Water not being able to endure it,
rises it self upon it.

As nature has wonderfully framed the Shell of a Snail, so she forms the like
figures in the Air for Whirlwinds, and in the Ground for Whirl-pools.

Feroe, a Land of Prodigies, has no less than three Whirl-pools. The one,
between these three North-East Islands, Videroe, Suinoe, and Bordoe, not very
dangerous. The other South of Sandoe, dangerous when there is a Storm, or a
strong Stream. The third, at South of Suderoe, running about Sumboe Munk, very
terrible and dangerous of it self, especially when there is a Storm and a
strong Current. For then it draws to it self, and swallows up whatever comes
near it. Neither can a Ship avoid it, if she approaches it too near; as I might
bring Instances of it. And yet, when it is still Weather, a mild Sea, and the
reflux of the Stream, folks will venture themselves to fish thereon.

John Jonason of Suderoe is said to be the first that durst undertake to row
over this Whirlpool, and to fadom it. According to his Relation, there are four
several round Circles of Ground about it; with Channels between, and a deep
hole in the middle. The uppermost Ground is from eight to twelve fathom deep;
and the lowermost, from eighty to ninety.

On the East Side, where the Ground begins, there is a Gulf where the stream
runs in as through a Sluice. And on the South Side of the Hole there arises out
of the Water a Rock ten fathoms high, called Sumboe-Munk. with six lesser Rocks
North of that which rise a little above the Water. On these Rocks the Compass
turns round, even as the Whirlpool; and is so spoiled, that afterward it is of
no use. To this purpose my Author makes mention of a Ship, which coming too
near Sumboe-Munk, all the Compasses in the Ship were spoiled. And so had been
the Voyage too, had not a Sea man of the Ship by chance had a Loadstone,
wherewith he touched the Compasses a new.

As for fresh Water, it is a wonderful thing to see a Cluster of such small
Islands as these in the midst of the Ocean so well furnished as they are with
well-tasted and wholesome Water. So that there is scarce a Cottage but there runs
along a Spring Water, a Rivulet or Brook; whose Water is generally colder in
Summer than in Winter. And yet there is but one healing Spring, viz. in
Osteroe, the Water whereof is much warmer in Winter than other Water, and will
keep a whole Year without Corruption. But the Inhabitants have no great
occasion for it, neither is it easy to come at. In the Island Suderoe there is
a little Lake pretty high on the Mountain, that ebbs and flows with the Sea.

Thus having done both with the Air and Water of Feroe, let us now take a
prospect of the Land. I said before, that these Islands in themselves are only
some high Rocks arising out of the Sea, and covered with a thin portion of
Earth, that is usually not above two foot thick. Which portion of Earth does
not only produce a great plenty of Grass, but of Corn.

And indeed in several Places Grass is found so plentiful, and withal so juicy,
that Oxen feed thereon all the year round, and grow extremely fat. As for the
Corn, could the Land be tilled every where, as in other Places, it would go
beyond other Countries of the same bigness. But here a Countryman cannot sow
above one or two Tuns of Corn. Now for one Tun of Seed, in many places, they
reap again twenty or thirty Tuns, especially in the South Islands. Here is
nothing sowed but Barley, for other Seeds will not come to maturity; and there
being but little of that sowed, there is the more ground for Pastures.

It Is very remarkable, that the North and North-east Parts are the most
fruitful, and produce the finest Pastures; as if the cold North or North-East
Winds could cause more fertility than the South, or South-West, which are warm
and moist, as having more the Sun's assistance. And, whereas the old Grecians
called the West-wind Zephirus, as that which caused Life in Plants, here (as in
Greenland) we find the contrary in Pastures. Which may be attributed to the
Saltpeter there is in North-East Rain and Snow. For Salt is a main Ingredient
to make the Earth fertile; and it is well known that Dunghils, where the Urine
of Cattle remains and rots, are best for dunging. In Feroe they usually take
Sea-weeds from the shore, and lay them on heaps to rot, therewith to dung their
Ground, which then bears abundance of Corn.

One would think, that in these Northern Islands those Parts where the Sun
shines most should be the most fruitful. But it proves otherwise, those Places
that lie less open to the Sun being the most fertile. And indeed the
fruitfulness of the Earth does not so much depend upon its being near the Sun,
as from its own Constitution and natural warmth, by virtue whereof the Plants
have their growing motion. The Sun's warming of the Earth in the Daytime would
prove but fatal to Plants, if the Night did not cool and moisten what the Sun
has dried in the day. And in the Torrid Zone nothing could grow for the heat of
the Sun, if the Night there, being almost as long as the Day, did not by its
Cooling and Dew qualify the Day's scorching Heat. And it is observable, that
here in the midst of Summer, when in two Months time there is almost no Night,
Corn grows but very little though it rains, or Herbs though they be watered in
dry weather. But, when the Nights begin to be longer, both Corn and Herbs grow
more in a Night and Day, than otherwise in fourteen.

As Denmark is praised for its Scurvy Grass, Norway for its Gentiane and
Chamaemorus, and Iseland for its Angelica; so Feroe ought to bear the Prize for
its Rhodian Root. Whose Water being distilled, is found in odor and taste to
be most like Rose Water. Here grows also abundance of Tormentill, Scurvy Grass,
and Angelica. The first is made use of by these Islanders to tan their Hides
with, they having no Bark of Trees.

For here grow no Trees, but some Junipershrubs, and Willow-bushes. Fruit Trees
will not thrive here, because perhaps of the Saline damps of the Sea. But for
Fuel, this Country is provided with abundance of Turf. Which is so rare good
in some Places, that Smiths use it instead of Sea-coals to work their Iron with.

As for Metals and Minerals, it is likely there might be found some Copper and
Iron Mines, by reason of some small Rivulets running down the Hills in Summer,
which are found to grow as green as Verdigreace in dry weather. In the North
Islands there is Talk, but in very little quantity.

On the Sand, near the Seaside, there are found in some Places little
transparent Stones, so hard that with them one may write upon Glass. They are
generally white, or of a bluish white Color; and so polished, that they serve
to put in Rings. They grow in the Clifts, and the Sea washes 'em off. Here is
also to be found some Crystal, but brittle, and not to be wrought.

The Fairies Kidney (which some call a Stone, and others a West India Bean) is
also frequently seen here. It Is shaped like a Heart, or Kidney; and it has been
the Opinion of some People, that being kept long it brings forth another Stone.
According to my Author, it has a hard outward Shell of a Chestnut color, with a
sweet Kernel within, and is brought hither by the Stream from such Places where
it falls off its stalk into the Sea.

The Cattle of Feroe is for the most part little, but fat, according to the
Ground it feeds on. The Horses, as little as they be, are incredibly strong,
sure, and swift, though without horse-shooes. They feed abroad both Winter and
Summer, without ever coming under shelter. The Cows likewise go often out to
Grass the whole Winter, provided there fall not too much Snow. But the Sheep
feed abroad all the Winter over.

It Is true that in a hard Winter, when there falls a hasty and lasting Snow,
they suffer incredible hardship, especially if the Shepherd be not present to
drive them into the Snowshelter; Which is a Place in the open fields (like a
Fold) enclosed with fences of Earth and Turf against the North, that Sheep may
shelter themselves there. For then they gather themselves close together in the
open field, where a great Snow soon covers them. So that sometimes they are not
to be found, and remain a whole Month under the Snow. Where they are fain to
eat the grass by the roots, and the Wool off of one another. The wild ones,
that go often upon the edge of the Clifts over the Sea, run also a great hazard
after a great Snow. For sometimes the Snow tumbles down into the Sea, and they
along with it, hundreds at once. Such Accidents as these fall heavy upon the
Owners, considering that the Riches of these People does most consist in their
Sheep.

Which being half wild, and in some places quite wild, cannot casily be driven
into a Pound, but must be taken with Dogs. Now these Dogs are so taught, that
when the Shepherd will have but one Lamb of the Flock for some occasion, he
goes into the fields with his Dog; and what Lamb he only points at, the Dog
takes the same presently without hurting it. These Dogs are long and small, not
unlike Greyhounds; which being well taught, are much valued, because of this
Sheeps hunting. The Horses also are so well skilled in it, that, when a Horse
overtakes a Sheep, he grasps it between his forelegs, till the Man takes it up.

As wild as these Sheep are, they seldom go from their Owner's Ground into
another Man's, but keep close together every flock by it self, and that too in
the same Close, where it is usual to have several Flocks. Northward they are
generally white, Southward black and colored. A white Sheep set on Lille-Dimen
(an Islet East of Suderoe) changes its color, and grows black in process of
time; first about the Legs, then on the Thighs, after that under the Belly, and
finally all over. The Cause whereof is perhaps in the Earth, there being found
much Brimstone and Saltpeter.

Here is also great Plenty both of Land and Sea-Fowls, some profitable, and
others damageable; some not unlike ours in England, others we are strangers to.
But I shall not insist upon them.

As for Venomous Beasts, such as Serpents and Snakes, there is none to be found
here; the nature of the Earth being such, that it cannot bear them.

Fish they have in great plenty, such as Whiting, Flounders, a kind of
Pilchards they call Murt, and Cods. They take also in Winter time a world of
Sea^^^^gs in their Vaults or Caves under the Clifts near the Sea, whither they
retire themselves in September, to bring forth their young ones.

To take them, first the Islanders have a peculiar sort of small Boats for to
go into those Caves with, and they usually go thither with two Boats. Whilst
the one goes in, the other stays without at the entrance of the Cave. Between
the Boats there is a long Tow, of about eighty fathoms, that if the Boat which
goes in should be filled with Water (as it sometimes happens) the other may
pull it out with the People in it. The Cave being narrow, they have a pointed
stake on each side, wherewith they thrust themselves in. And, that they may see
to kill the Seals in so dark a place, they carry with them two Candles, as
thick as a man's Arm. These Candles they hide in the Boat, till they be ready
for execution. Being come so far in the Cave as to feel ground (which they try
with their pointed slaves) first one man leaps out from the Boat into the water
as deep as he can wade, with a Club in his hand, to fell the Seal-dog. Then
leaps the second man after him, holding the Candles in his hands as high as he
can, that the water may not put them out. After them comes the third Man, with
his felling Club. An old Seal, especially if it be a He, will not flee from a
Man, but stands it out stoutly. A she is not so fierce, and flees from the Man,
if she can. The young ones ly all still, and never take notice of men nor
light, till they come and kill them.

They all lie on dry ground, for they are Amphibious. And, when the old ones
begin to see the Light and the Men coming at them, they rise on their Paws,
with their Jaws open, to meet the Blow with, or to do mischief if they can.
Thus standing in their own defense, the first man comes on with his Club. And,
whilst the Seal-dog snatches his Club from his hands, and casts it away,
another man strikes him with his Club over the Neck. If he hits him right, the
Seal falls down in a Swoon, and presently the Men cut his Throat. When they
have done with the old, they come to the young ones, that lie all still far
enough from the Water. The Slaughter being over, they hale the dead Seals to
the Waterside, and tie them fast to the Rope, wherewith those in the Boat pull
them out of the Cave. That being done, the Men get out with their Boat; or, if
the Waves be great, the Boat and Men are also haled out.

In this manner they get sometimes half a hundred Seals in one Cave, the old
ones being twice as big as a Masty Dog. They use their Skins for Shoes, melt
the Fat into Train-Oyl, and eat the Flesh of them.

They have also a peculiar way to take Whales, especially the small sort of
them called Grind-Whales. Which sometimes come in great Flocks under the Land
in foggy Weather, or with the Tide in a dark Night, and running on the Lands ly
dry when it is low Water. So that, when Folks come out in the Morning, all
their Business is to seize upon and hale them away.

But the best Sport is, when the Inhabitants must drive them into their Creeks
or Inlets to catch them. For then the Country to be sure must run, and be up in
Arms. Presently they bring as many Boats together as they can, and their
Whale-spears with them. They drive the Whale-flock before them, with great
noise, and casting of Stones. And, if there be occasion, the Boats divide
themselves into two Squadrons, the one lying below in the form of a half moon,
to meet any Whale that would flee during the Slaughter; the other advancing
into the midst of the Flock, and thrusting their Whales-spears into their
Bodies. On the Land side there are Folks lying in an Ambush, till the Whales
are come on Ground. Then they wade as deep as they can, and kill them with
their Weapons. Which is done with such Fury on both sides, that the Water takes
the Tincture of Blood; and that does so blind the Whale, that she cannot see to
make her escape. These Creatures, as strong as they are, make little or no
Resistance; but only plunge as well as they can before the Boats and People,
till Death comes upon them. And then indeed they strike so terribly about with
their Tails, that sometimes they beat the Boats to pieces, and the men are in
great danger. Some of these Whales get again loose from the Sands, and carry
the Boats a great way with them on their Backs, striking them full of Water,
and sometimes overturning them. But the Rear-Squadron of Boats drives them in
again, unless they do plunge and dive so long away under Water, that they must
let them go.

Here is also another sort of Whales, called Doglings, which is taken after an
incredible manner. But the Inhabitants dare not venture upon the great Whales,
such as the Roar and Witch-Whale.

In the Year 1664. there appeared, says my Author, a Whale-Dog, that is a Sea
Monster every way like a Dog, which swum about the Whales, between them and the
Land. It was, says he, of a gray color, hairy, and had long Ears like an
English rough Spaniel. And in the Year 1670. there was seen West of Suderoe a
Mermaid close by the Land, during two hours and a half. She stood upright above
the Water, having long Hair on her Head spread on the Water, and holding a Fish
in her hand, with the Head downwards.

As for the People of Feroe, they live along the Seaside, and dwell where it
is lowest and most convenient for them to get to Sea with their Boats, and ply
their Fishing. Which Places are scarce enough, there being almost every where
high Promontory's, whence no Body can come down. Their Houses are low built,
and on all sides well defended with thick Walls, made of green Turf and Stones.
They have a great many Creeks, Inlets, and good Havens; and amongst these
Thorse-haven in Stromoe is the most considerable.

The Air being pretty wholesome, and the Inhabitants using always one Diet, here
are usually found Folks that live to a great Age, as 80, or 90, some 100 years
and above. My Author makes mention of one Erasmus, who lived in Harold Sound in
the Northern Islands. This Man, having got no Issue by his first Wife, and
desiring to leave an Heir of his Body, married again, he being then about
ninety Years old. He married a young Woman, by whom he got five Children, and
he was 103 years old when he got the last. Neither is the thing liable to
Suspicion, considering his Wife was a Woman of very good Repute, and that would
not impose upon him. At last he died, 110 years old.

Though this Country lies all upon the Sea, yet it is so far from being
troubled with Agues, that some who had it, and could not be quit of it in other
Places, lost it by coming hither, without using any Medicine. Neither are
Children troubled here with the Small Pox, except it be brought hither from
Foreign Parts. It Is true this Country, as well as others, has its particular
Discases.

In the Spring and after Harvest, they are generally affected with a strong
Rhume, that makes them cough and spit, and causes such an Headache and pain in
the Limbs, that many are bedrid with it, and some dye of it. Against this
Sickness, which doubtless proceeds from a cold and moist Air, they drink sour
Whey as hot as they can suffer it. This Sickness, when they come off well, does
them a great deal of good; purging (as it does) the Body of all Impurity,
contracted by the cold moisture of the Air, which might cause otherwise more
dangerous Discases.

They are also sometimes troubled with a Hot Sickness, causing acute Pains in
the Head and Distractions, with Flux of the Belly, which carries off a great
many People.

The Scurvey is a Discase this People is also subject to, who cure themselves
usually with new Milk boiled with Scurvy Grass, and sometimes with new Milk
alone.

But Leprosy, the next Kin to Scurvey, is the worst and nastiest of all their
Diseases. Now Physicians reckon three sorts of Leprosy, viz. Tyria, Alopecia,
and Elephantiasis. In the first the Patients Skin is soft, with many Spots and
white Warts thereon, and sometimes it falls off in Shells. Those that are
infected with the second have a red Face, and their Beards and Eyebrows fall
off. The third sort is that which the People of Feroe are troubled with.

And this is called Elephantiasis, from the Elephant, to whom they grow like in
their Skin. The Face and Limbs of almost all the Infected are full of blew
Knobs, that break out sometimes as boils, which deforms them strangely. They
are hoarse besides, and speak through their Noses. This Sickness takes them
most in the Spring and Fall, and then many dye of it. The same is caused as the
Scurvy, by the Rawness of the Air; but especially by the wretched Diet of the
poorer sort of People, who eat Flesh and Fish half rotten, and fresh Fish
without any Salt. Whereby the Blood being corrupted, the Sickness gnaws it self
a great while through the Body, till at last it breaks out. So that many People
are infected with this contagious Disease long before they seem to be so; and
many do marry together, thinking to be clean on both sides, when afterward one
of them is found to be infected. But it is very remarkable, that this Disease
(which is commonly so catching in Conversation) is not so amongst married
People, where one would think it should be most contagious. Nay, it has been
frequently seen, that the Children of leprous Women, or of healthful Women
married to leprous Husbands, have been free from that Uncleanness. Which is the
Reason why these People in their Wooing take no great care whether the Parents
have been clear or no.

Flannel is the common Wear here. And, instead of Beds, they lie on nothing but
Hay, with a piece of Flannel spread over it.

They are pretty laborious and industrious withal, not inclined either to idle
Pastimes or scandalous Plays. In their Weddings indeed, and at Christmas, they
divertise themselves with Dancing, and singing of some old Champions Ballad.
And at their vacant Hours they love to play at Chess; wherein many, both Men
and Women, are very expert. They are by Nature something inclined to Astronomy,
and will not easily be weaned from their old Customs, good or bad. Their
Language is that of Norway, but mixed with many Danish Words.

As their Predecessors, together with those of Iseland, Schetland, and the
Orcades, used to swear Allegiance to the Kings of Norway, so they have done the
like to the Kings of Denmark, since they got the Crown of Norway. They have no
particular Laws, as in Iscland, but govern themselves after the Law of Norway.
And, as they got their Laws from Norway, so from thence they got their
Religion. For here they are Lutherans, as in Norway.

There are in all but thirty nine Parish-Churches, and those but little
Churches neither, commonly built with Norway-deals, and without covered with
Stones. As their Congregations lie very much scattered from each other, so
their Ministers have a great deal of Pains, and undergo great Dangers in
Winter. The Churches that are far remote on the little Islands cannot always be
attended, because of Storms and bad Weather. So that the Parsons of those
Places visit their Congregations but once in five or six Weeks, as the Season
of the Year will give them leave. The Parson of great Dimen goes thither but in
the Summer; and, when he comes there, such is the nature of the Island all
surrounded with Clifts, that he must be drawn up and let down with a Rope.

Of Iseland, Greenland, New Denmark, etc.
THese three Countries, all of them acknowledging the King of Denmark for their
Sovereign, lie toward the North Pole. The first, within the Arctick Circle, is
counted in Europe; the second, in Terra Polaris Arctica; the third, in the
Northern America.

Iseland is a great Island, about 60 Leagues North-west of the Isles of Feroe,
and 180 West of Norway. The Arctick Circle runs almost through the very middle.
It is called Iseland, quasi Iceland, from the abundance of Ice in it and about
it, as being continually frozen for the space of eight months. And indeed, it
is so vehemently chilled with the Northern Winds, that it yields neither Corn,
nor Trees, except Juniper. Yet there is Grass in such abundance, especially
along the Seacoast, that the People sometimes keep their Cartel from feeding,
for fear of a Surfeit. Whereas the Inland Parts are but hilly, and batren.

The Length of the Island from East to West is 130 Leagues; and its Breadth
from North to South, 60. It is divided, according to the Quarters of the World,
into four Parts; viz. North, South, East, and West Iseland.

Here are Horses, Sheep, and Oxen; but the Oxen and Cows without Horns. Here is
also a fine breed of little Dogs, known amongst us by the name of Iseland Dogs,
and much like those of Maltha, the delight of Ladies. This Country is likewise
noted for its white Falcons and white Ravens, Eagles with white Tails, Hares
and Bears of the same color. Fish is the Staple commodity of the Country, of
which here is great plenty, and that of the best sort; a piece of Iseland Ling
being counted with us a Noble Dish.

Notwithstanding the cold Condition of this Island, yet it burns within in some
places, and is full of Fire under ground. For there are three Mountains, whose
Tops are always covered with Snow, and yet continually burning. The principal
whereof is Hecla. Which (like the Sicilian Aetna) does vomit out dreadful
flames; then black Ashes and Pumice-stones, in so great abundance, that it
darkneth the Sun, and makes the Country for six miles round about it to be
uninhabited. And, as the gross Papists take Mount Aetna to be the Place of
Purgatory, so the Superstitious amongst the People of Iseland fancy Hell to be
under their flaming Mountain. Whereas to Judicious men the natural Reason of
these Flames are plain and obvious, being occasioned by those Veins of
Brimstone, on which the foundation of the Hill is laid.

And indeed here is found so much of that Mineral, that a vast quantity thereof
is exported from thence into Foreign Parts. Here are also many Baths and
Fountains of hot Water, which have Sulphur swimming at the top. And Moreri
tells us of a Lake besides, that petrifies whatever is cast in it.

This Island has been generally conceived to be that Thule, which the Poets so
often speak of. But I should rather conceive it to be Schetland, for the
Reasons I brought (page 113.) when I spoke of that Island.

At the first Planting of Iseland, the People did not trouble themselves with
building Towns; but every one seated himself where he thought convenient,
dwelling in Cells and Caverns dug in the bottom of the Rocks, near the Sea,
for the convenience of fishing. And to this very day the Inland Parts have not
many Houses. Whereas the Seacoasts are grown pretty Populous, since the coming
of so many Strangers. But especially about the Havens of Hanefiord and
Keplawick, whereto the Danes, English, and Dutch, do commonly resort with their
Commodities. The Buildings are for the most part of Timber, roofed with Flags,
Turfs, or Skins, and having on the sides of the Roof a Hole to let in the
Light. Some Houses they make of Fish bones.

Besides the convenience of Fishing and of Trade, they live near the Seaside,
because there comes frequently great Flakes of Ice, that float hither from
other Countries of the North, and bring them Wood and other Commodities.

They live much (as in the Golden Age) on that which Nature gives them, without
any great help of Art. Only they make Cheese and Butter, and the common Sort
cat Bread made of Flower of dried Fish. They use neither Physic nor
Physicians, and live perhaps the longer for it. For many of them attain to the
Age of 150 years, and more. The Women are handsome; but their Dress differs so
little from that of the other Sex, that it is hard to discern the one from the
other.

Some say this Island was discovered by Gasper, a Swede; others, by one Eric, a
Norvegian; but when, it is not agreed. Heylin says, it was so far from being
known unto the Ancients, that it was hardly known to those of Norway till the
Year 874. At which time King Harold I, suppressing those petty Kings that were
then in Norway, forced many of them to seek new Dwellings. Of which some
arrived here, where they found room enough to plant in, and no great loss (if
any) by the change of their Dwelling. Upon their Invitation, they were followed
afterward by many of their Friends and Countrymen, till at last the Fishing
Trade drew thither a great many Strangers, especially from Denmark, England,
Holland, and the Hanse-Towns.

Hola in the North, and Scalholt in the South, both Bishops Sees, are the two
chief Places of this Island. Bestede is a Castle, where the Governor makes his
Residence.

Those two Episcopal Sees were founded by the persuasion and procurement of
Adelbert, Archbishop of Bremen, by whose means the People of this Island were
first converted to the Christian Faith, Anno 1070. And to those two Bishops
Sees were added, in tract of time, eight Religious Houses. But since this
Island was brought under the Crown of Norway, that is in the Year 1260, it
followed the Fortunes of it, in all Changes both of Church and State. It was
made subject with it to the Kings of Denmark, and reformed together with it in
Matters of Religion, according to the Confession of Augsburg. Then the Bishops
were reformed into Superintendents, and the Revenues of Monasteries converted
into other Uses, according to the Will and Pleasure of their Lords of Denmark.

North and West of Iseland lies Groenland, in Terra Polaris Arctica. A vast
Tract of Land, at least the Seacoasts thereof. Which being all that is
discovered of it hitherto, leaves us in doubt whether it is an Island or
Continent. It is called Groenland, or Greenland, from the Greenness of it in
Summertime, that is in June, July, and August. During which time, the
Inhabitants in the most Northern Parts of it have no Night at all. And yet they
scarce feel any heat; which makes them go in Furs and Skins all the year round.

This Country was first discovered, says Baudrand, by one Eric the Red-haired,
a Norvegian, Anno 982. Who having thus made way for his Countrymen, they and
the Danes followed him thither. So that this Country (at least the Seacoasts
thereof) became Tributary to the Crown of Denmark.

The most Southern Parts of it were afterward discovered by Forbisher, Davis,
and Baffin. But as yet we have no account of the Inland Parts. So that all I
have to say farther of this Unknown Land is, that Whalefishing has made it more
famous than any thing else. To which purpose this Country is much frequented by
the two greatest Seafaring Nations in the World, the English and Hollanders.

New Denmark is a Country that lies in the North-west Parts of the Northern
America; and that was discovered by Munk a Dane, in the Reign of Christiern the
Fourth. Its Discovery, Name, and Situation is all that I can hear of.

In Africa, upon the Coast of Guinea, the King of Denmark has a Place called
Frederixburg, fortified with a Castle. It lies near Cabo Corso, and S. Georgio
della Mina. In Asia likewise the Danes have their Colonies; and, before the
late Troubles of Bantam in Java, there they had a Factory.

FINIS.

