IMPRIMATUR,

Liber cui Titulus [A Short Defense of the Orders of the Church of England,
etc.]

H. Maurice Rmo in Xto P.D. Willielmo Archep. Cant. a Sacris.
Oct. 24. 1687.
A Short Defense OF THE ORDERS OF THE Church of England, As by Law Established:
Against some scattered Objections of Mr. Webster of Linne.

By a Presbyter of the Diocese of Norwich.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by Randal Tailor, near Stationers' Hall.
MDCLXXXVIII.

The Objection against our Ordination in the Church of England, as established
by Law, according to my best Apprehension, is this.
THat whereas our first Liturgies after the Reformation, in the Form prescribed
for the Ordination of Bishops, Priests and Deacons, appointed not the Bishop
ordaining to signify in the words of Ordination, for the sake of what Office
the Persons ordained were to receive the Holy Ghost; that Particular being
since added, as it seems to acknowledge a former Omission, so it leaves a large
Chasme between those Rightly and Canonically ordained, and those who were not
so, to the utter Nullity of our Orders; that Addition made to our late Rituals
not being sufficient to repair the former defect. For Instance; Tho Archbishop
Cranmer might be Canonically ordained himself, and so might rightly ordain
others; yet those so ordained by him, or his fellow Bishops ordaining Dr.
Matthew Parker only by the defective Reformed Service Book, Parker was really
no Bishop, and so those afterward ordained by him were no true Bishops,
Priests or Deacons. Because none can confer that power on another, which he
never had really in himself; which, if true, the whole English Hierarchy falls
to the ground.

Answer.
THis Objection looks somewhat plausibly at first, and had it any thing of real
Weight in it, would be much more pertinent than the so often alleged and
baffled Romance of the Nags-head Ordination; but if duly considered, has
nothing of Solidity in it: For

1. It takes for granted what we deny, and what those of the Roman Church upon
their own Principles can never prove, viz. That Orders are a Sacrament: Three
things, says Merbesius, a late and well approved Writer of that Communion,
ought to concur to the Being of a true Sacrament; Tria ad very Sacramenti
essentiam concurrere debent, 1. Nempe Promissio Gratiae ex eo derivandae. 2.
Signum aliquod sensibile cum praescripta verborum forma, quod veluti Medium seu
Organum ad applicandum Promissionem adhibeatur. 3. Denique Divinum Mandatum,
quo Christus hujusmodi Sacramentum, fidelibus vel omnibus vel aliquibus
administrari jusserit. Ben. Merhes. Sum. Christ. p. 3. q. 4.
First, a Promise of Grace to be derived from it: Secondly, some sensible Sign,
with a prescribed form of Words, which should be made use of as a Mean or
Instrument whereby to apply the Promise; and Thirdly, some Divine Command, by
which Christ has enjoined the administration of such a Sacrament, either to the
whole Body, or some particular member of the Faithful. Now it will be extreme
difficult to discover all these Circumstances in that which they call the
Sacrament of Orders: For should we grant, that by them Grace is derived to the
Person Ordained, or should we own a Command of Christ for the Collation of
Orders, yet where is that set Form of words appointed by Christ himself for the
Administration of this Sacrament. In Baptism we have the words of Institution
indeed, and those retained throughout the Universal Church, without any
considerable Variation; In the Eucharist we have the same general Agreement:
But here we have a vast unaccountable difference between the Greeks and those
of the Roman Church, and again between the Ancient and Modern Church of Rome:
Where yet we may reasonably suppose, they could not have differed so much, had
our Savior left any particular form of words for that Solemnity: If there were
no form of words prescribed, then, according to the Rule before-cited, Orders
can be no Sacrament, and the Church of England is as much at liberty to depart
from the present Example of the Roman Church, as that was to quit its own
Ancient Rituals, or to vary from the Eastern, or any other Christian Churches.

Besides, That Indelible Character, which is said to be given in Orders, is a
principal proof of their being a Sacrament; but it would be a very hard task to
reconcile that Decree of Gregory the Seventh Bishop of Rome of that name, with
this notion of an Indelible Character. We following the steps of the holy
Fathers, Ordinationes iliorum qui ab Excommunicatis sunt ordinati, Sanctorum
Patrum sequentes vestigia, irritas fieri censemus. Conc. Romans 4. A. 1078. Lab.
and Coss. T. 10. p. 370.
declare the Orders of those who are ordained by Excommunicate Persons to be
void and of no effect. For if the Character of Orders be indelible,
Excommunication cannot obliterate it, nor make Orders conferred by the
Excommunicate invalid. Nor will that forementioned Character agree very well
with that Rule of Pope Coelestine the First, given to the Bishops of Vienne and
Narbonne; Let no mere Layman, no Man that has been twice Married, Nullus ex
Laicis, nullus Bigamus, nullus qui sit viduae maritus aut fuerit, ordinetur;
and siquae factae sint ordinationes illicitae, removeantur, quonium stare non
possunt. Council. genesis T. 2. p. 1621.
none who is or has been the Husband of a Widow be put into holy Orders; or if
any such unlawful Ordinations have been made, let them be taken away as such
which cannot stand good. Here again it is plain enough, That if the Character be
as, supposed, Marrying twice, or marrying a Widow, which can scarcely be
proved Sins, cannot possibly expunge it; to which I might add the Answer of Leo
the First to the Enquiries of Rusticus Bishop of Narbonne, concerning such as
only pretended to be Bishops, and those ordained by them: Only this I conclude,
That if the Judgment of a Bishop of Rome be so August and Sacred as some would
persuade us, Orders imprint no Indelible Character upon the Soul, and
consequently are no Sacrament. Signa, quum ad res divinas pertinent, Sacramenta
appellantur. Aug. Ep. 138. ad Marcellinum 2. Edit. Par. 1679.
For should the Assertors of this Sacrament fly to that trite Saying of St.
Augustine, That Signs, when they are applied to Sacred Rites, are called
Sacraments; that would weaken, not secure their Cause. But if Orders must be a
Sacrament in the strictest sense, I desire that passage of Aquinas may be
remembered, That since the Matter of Sacraments, in the sensible parts or
outward signs of Sacraments are determined, Cum determinata sit Sacramentorum
materia, determinatae scilicet sensibiles res, multo magis determinata esse
debet verborum in Sacramentis forma. Aquin. Sum. p. 3. q. 60. a. 7.

Si mutatio materiae aut Formae Essentialis seu Substantialis sit, nullum
efficitur Sacramentum. Suar. p. 3. T. 3. D. 2. s. 4.


much more ought the Form of words in Sacraments to be determined: And that of
Suarez, If there be any change of the Matter, or of the Essential and
Substantial Form, there is really no Sacrament. Which Passages, how they will
agree to those things hereafter to be mentioned, may be left to every ordinary
Considerer.

2. It cannot be imagined reasonable, that those Persons who dispute so much
among themselves concerning the Essence of Orders, should Cavil against our
Church, as wanting any thing Essential in them; for common Sense teaches those,
who will engage in Controversy with others, first to agree among themselves
what the Subject of the Controversy shall be. Now it is to be considered, That
whereas the Ancient Ordinals of the Church of Rome, required only Imposition of
the hands of Bishops and Presbyters in Ordination; later years have added the
Ceremony of exposing the Chalice with Wine, and the Patten with an Host upon
is, to the touch of him who is consecrated Priest, with these words, Receive
thou Power to offer Sacrifices to God, and to celebrate Masses both for the
living and the dead, Accipe Potestatem offerre Sacrificium Deo, and Missas
celebrare tam pro vivis quam pro mortuis, in nomine Domini, Amen.
in the name of God, Amen. And this last has almost justled the more ancient
Ceremony out of doors; being grown into so great a Reputation, that Aquinas
plainly concludes, That since the principal Action of the Priest is to
Consecrate the Body and Blood of Christ, Cum Principalis Actus Sacerdotis sit
Corpus and Sanguinem Christi consecrare, recte in ipsa Calicis datione sub
certa verborum Forma imprimitur Sacerdotalis character. Aq. Suppl. q. 37. a. 5.
the Sacerdotal Character is truly imprinted in the delivery of the Chalice
with a particular form of words: Which Conclusion of his he proves by this
Argument, Ejusdem est Formam aliquam inducere, and Materiam de proximo
praeparare ad Formam; unde Episcopus in Collatione Ordinum duo facit, Praeparat
enim Ordinandos ad Ordinis susceptionem, and Ordinis potestatem tradit;
Praeparat quidem in instruendo eos de proprio officio, and aliquid circa eos
operando, ut idonei sint ad potestatem accipiendam: quae quidem praeparatio in
tribus consistit, scilicet Benedictione, manus Impositione and Unctione; per
Benedictionem Divinis obsequiis mancipantur, and ideo benedictio omnibus datur;
sed per manus Impositionem datur plenitudo gratiae, per quam ad magna officia
sunt idonei, and ideo solis Diaconibus and Sacerdotibus fit manus Impositio,
quia eis competit Dispensatio Sacramentorum, quamvis uni sicut principali, and
alteri sicut Ministro; sed Unctione ad aliquod Sacramentum tractandum
consecrantur, and ideo Unctio solis Sacerdotibus fit, qui propriis manibus
Corpus Christi tangunt; sicut etiam calix inungitur qui continet Sanguinem and
Patena quae continet Corpus, sed potestatis collatio fit per hoc, quod datur
eis aliquid quod ad proprium actum pertinet: Ibid.
That it belongs to the same Person to induce the Form, and to prepare the
Matter immediately for that Form. Whence in conferring Orders the Bishop does
two things; for he first prepares those to be ordained for the susception of
Orders, and in the next place gives the Power belonging to the Order: He
prepares them, both by instructing them concerning their proper offices, and by
doing somewhat about them, whereby they may be fitted for the Reception of
Power; which Preparation consists in three things, viz. In the Benediction, in
Imposition of hands, and in Unction: By the Benediction they are obliged to
Divine Obedience, and therefore that is given to those of all Orders; by
Imposition of hands is given the fullness of Grace, by which they are fitted for
great Offices, and therefore only Deacons and Priests have hands imposed upon
them, (He might have added Bishops; but here our Dissenters agree with the
Parasites of Rome, that Bishops are neither a distinct Order, nor of Divine
Right) because to them belongs the Dispensation of Sacraments, tho to Priests
as Principal, to the other but as Ministers; but by Unction they are
Consecrated to handling the Sacrament, and therefore it is given only to
Priests, who touch the Body of Christ with their own hands, and both the
Chalice which contains the Blood, and the Patten which holds the Body, are
Anointed; but the Collation of their Power and Authority, consists in
delivering something to them which belongs to their proper work. And whereas
it is his second Argument or Objection against this Conclusion, That our Lord
gave his Disciples the Sacerdotal Power when he said, Dominus dedit Discipulis
Potestatem Sacerdotalem quando dixit, Accipite Spiritum Sanctum, quorum
remiseritis peccata, etc. Joan. 20. Sed Spiritus Sanctus datur per Manus
Impositionem, ergo and in ipsa Manus Impositione imprimitur Character Ordinis
-- Respondit, Dominus Discipulis dedit Sacerdotalem potestatem, quantum ad
Principalem actum, ante passionem in Coena, quando dixit, Accipite and
Manducate, unde subjunxit, Hoc facite in meam Commemorationem, sed post
Resurrectionem dedit eis Potestatem Sacerdotalem, quantum ad actum secundarium,
qui est ligare and solvere. Ibid.
Receive ye the Holy Ghost; whose Sins ye remit they are remitted, etc. John
20. and the Holy Ghost is given by laying on of hands, that therefore the
Character of Orders is impressed by that Imposition of hands: He endeavors to
answer it, but with absurdity enough, That our Lord gave his Disciples
Sacerdotal Power; as to its Principal Act, before his Passion in his Supper,
when he said, Take and Eat; and therefore he subjoined, Do this in Remembrance
of me: But after his Resurrection, he bestowed upon them Priestly power, only
as to its Secondary or inferior Act, i. e. as to the Power of binding and
loosing, which was given, (as alleged in the Objection,) by Imposition of
hands. In which answer he perverts the sense of our Saviors words, Take and
Eat, by restraining them to the Apostles alone, whereas they were intended to
all Believers: And he mistakes the Evangelical story; For tho St. John tells us
of that Power of binding and loosing, as given after the Resurrection, in the
Chapter by him cited, v. 22, 23. Yet he might have found the same Commission
given to all the Apostles, even before the Institution of that Supper, Matthew.
18.18.

But to pass by such ordinary mistakes; The Determination of Pope Eugenius the
Fourth, in that famous Council of Florence, is very positive in the case; for
enumerating the Sacraments received by the Roman Church, and giving some
account of their Nature, for the Instruction of Armenians, he tells them, That
the sixth Sacrament is that of Orders, whose Matter that is, by the touching of
which the Order is conferred; Sextum Sacramentum est Ordinis, cujus Materia est
illud per cujus traditionem confertur Ordo; sicut Presbyteratus traditur per
Calicis cum vino and patenae cum pane porrectionem; Forma Sacerdotii talis est,
accipe potestatem offerendi, etc. Council. g. T. 13. p. 538.
as the Order of Priesthood is given by offering the Chalice with Wine, and the
Patten with Bread, to be touched by the person ordained; and the Form of
Priesthood is that, Receive thou Power to offer Sacrifice, etc. To which
Passage the formerly-cited Merbesius gives a very trifling Answer, That the
Council of Florence (forsooth) did not determine this Conciliariter, or as a
Matter of Faith and Dogmatically, but only at the rate of Common discourse,
without telling whether the Patten or Chalice were the Essential, or only the
Accidental matter of Orders; which is wholly Impertinent, and no way
reconcilable to what follows in the Conclusion of that Decree, viz. These
things being thus explicated, the Armenian Orators, in their own name, His
omnibus explicatis Armenorum Oratores nomine suo and sui Patriarchae and omnium
Armenorum hoc saluberrimum Synodale Decretum, cum omnibus suis Capitulis,
declarationibus, definitionibus, traditionibus, praeceptis and statutis, omnem
que Doctrinam in ipsa descriptam; nec non quicquid tenet and docet Sancta seeds
Apostolica and Romana Ecclesi, cum omnia devotione and obedientia acceptant,
suscipiunt and amplectuntur. P. 540.
and in the name of their Patriarch, and of all the Armenians, do with all
Devotion and Obedience, submit to, and embrace this most wholesome Synodical
Decree, with all its Canons, Declarations, Definitions, Traditions, Precepts
and Appointments, with all that Doctrine laid down in it; and whatsoever else
that holy Apostolic See, and the Roman Church maintains and teaches. And to
the same purpose, and almost in the same words speaks Cardinal Pool, Council. T.
14. p. 1740.
our Countryman, in his Decree concerning the Reduction of England to the
Roman Communion. But notwithstanding the Expressiveness of three such very
considerable Authorities, others of the same Communion have presumed to think
otherwise, and to fix the Essence of Ordination only in Laying on of hands,
without regard to any Form of Words whatsoever; declaring Laying on of hands
and Prayer to be the only Ancient and Catholic Ceremonies, in the conferring
of Holy Orders: So Durandus, giving an account of what constitutes a Priest,
assures us, That, according to Canonical Tradition, when a Priest is ordained,
the Bishop giving him his Blessing, Secundum Canonicam traditionem, Presbyter
cum Ordinatur, Episcopo cum benedicente and manum benedictoriam supra caput
ejus tenente, and omnes Presbyteri qui adsunt, manus suas juxta manus Episcopi
teneant, supra Caput illius Spiritum Sanctum invocantes, quae Manus impositio
operum Sancti Spiritus exercitationem significat. Durand. Rational. l. 2. c. 10.
and holding that hand with which he gave the Blessing upon his head; all those
Priests who are present, lay their hands upon his head too, by the hands of the
Bishop, invoking the influences of the Holy Ghost upon him; which Imposition of
hands signifies the power of exercising the gifts of the Holy Ghost. In which
words, since he agrees so exactly with, as to transcribe the third Canon of the
fourth Council of Carthage, I need not repeat that again: It Is true, he
mentions afterward the Ceremony of touching the Chalice and Patten, but of
that only as additional or accidental, not Essential. And Casalius in his Book
concerning Ancient Christian Rites, tho he plainly determine Orders to be one
of the seven Sacraments of the new Law, yet never mentions the touching the
Vessels, but only Imposition of hands; which, Ordo est Signaculum quoddam
Ecclesiae, quo Spiritualis potestas traditur Ordinato -- Impositio autem manuum
confert gratiam and cum effectu consistit. Casal. de vet. Christ. Rit. c. 26.
as he proves from Scripture, confers Grace, and has its due effects; and yet
he gives us Aquinas his Definition of that pretended Sacrament. The first
Council held at Cologne in the year 1536. asserts the same Doctrine, That the
Episcopal Office consists chiefly in two things, the first of which is the
laying on of hands, Episcopi munus in ducibus po^^ssimum consistit, 1. In
Imposi^i^ne manuum quae est Ordinum Ecclesiasti little collatio, and Institutio
Ministrorum -- Postea vero -- Impositio manuum est Ost^um per quod Intrant, qui
Ecclesiarum gubernaculis admoventur. Conc. T. 14. p. ^. 3.
which is the Collation of Ecclesiastical Orders, and the Institution of
Ministers. And afterward, Imposition of hands is that Door by which those are
admitted, who are raised to the Government of the Church. So the Council at
Mentz, Anno 1549. Let the Parish Priests teach their People, In collatione
Ordinum quae cum Impositione manuum velut visibili signo traditur, doceant
Parochi, rite ordinatis gratiam divinitus conferri, qua ad Ecclesiastica
munera, rite and utiliter exercenda, apti and idonei efficiantur, and qua rata
sint and efficacia, quae a rite ordinatis in Ecclesia, juxta Christi and
Ecclesiae Institutionem geruntur. Hanc vero gratiam esse Ordinis and Muneris,
non Hominum aut personarum, nec ad cujusquam privatam, sed ad Communem totius
Ecclesiae utilitatem accomodari. Ideoque in rite ordinatis, sive boni sive mali
sint, efficacem esse, atque ita inter dispares Ministros Domini nostri dona
semper aequalia semper bona and sacra permanere. Council. T. 14. p. 679.
That in the Collation of Orders, which are given by the Imposition of hands,
as the visible sign, That Grace is conferred by Heaven upon those who are
regularly ordained, by which they are made apt and fit to exercise Offices in
the Church duly and profitably, and by virtue of which those Church Matters,
which are managed by Men ordained according to the Institution of Christ and
his Church, are rarefied and made efficacious: That this Grace belongs not to
the Person, but to the Office, and is accommodated, not to any Man's private,
but to the public benefit of the Church, and therefore is effectual in those
rightly ordained, be they good or bad; and therefore the gifts of our Lord, tho
given to Ministers very differently qualified, are still the same, always good
and always holy. Which Doctrine perhaps even in some other particulars, is not
very agreeable to those opinions espoused by diverse of the Roman Communion. I
need not add here the Sentiments of Habertus and Goar, the learned Editors of
the Greek Pontifical and Euchology, intending to take notice of them
afterward: But I cannot well pass by the Judgment of Bonus Merbesius in the
Case, who tho he take a great deal of pains to appear Neuter in it, yet
apparently enough inclines to this, That the Essence of Orders consists in this
Imposition of hands, for which he refers us to several Texts of Scripture,
several determinations of Councils and sayings of the Greek Fathers; but
there is nothing more remarkable than what he alleges out of that learned
Jesuit Maldonate, who plainly, and without any hesitancy determines, That in
conferring Orders, Imposition of hands is not to be looked on as an unnecessary
Ceremony, Impositio manuum non est habenda tanquam Caeremonia non necessaria,
sed tanquam pars essentialis Sacramenti, idque tenendum videtur fide Catholica.

1. Quia in Scriptura ubicunque fit mentio de ordinatione, declaratur per
manuum Impositionem, and videtur mihi esse temerarium Scripturam deserere and
consectari Chimaeias, i. e. rations naturales.

2. Quia veterem Ecclesiam nunquam ordinasse sine Impositione manuum, ex
omnibus Authoribus antiquis perspicuum est, de Traditione autem Calicis, and
Hostiae nulla est apud eos mentio.

3. Quia videtur nimis durum esse, Caeremoniam, quam nobis perspicue tradent
Apostoli, excludere a natura Sacramenti, and inducere illam de qua nulla mentio
fit in Scriptura.

4. Quia hoc est labefacere totum Sacramentum and victoriam concedere
Haereticis; nam si Impositio manuum non est essentialis Caeremonia; per quam
hoc Sacramentum exhiberi debeat, non potest probari ex Scripturis Ordinem esse
Sacramentum. Merb. Sum. Christ. de Sacram. Ord. Disp. 6.


but as an Essential part of that Sacrament, and that to him this seems a
necessary point of the Catholic Faith; for which he gives these Reasons,

1. Because wherever Scripture mentions Ordination, it expresses it by Laying
on of Hands, and it seemed to him a Rash thing to Desert Scripture, and pursue
Chimera's, i. e. mere Natural Reasons.

2. Because it is evident by all Ancient Writers, that the Primitive Church
Ordained none but by Imposition of Hands; but there is no mention at all made
by any of them of touching the Chalice and Patten.

3. Because it seems very absurd, to exclude that Ceremony which was
unquestionably delivered down to us by the Apostles from the Essence of the
Sacrament, and to introduce another never so much as mentioned in Scripture.

4. Because this were to ruin the whole Sacrament, and to give up the Victory
to Heretics; for if Imposition of Hands be not the Essential Ceremony whereby
this Sacrament is to be exhibited, Orders can never be proved a Sacrament by
Scripture: For whereas he seems to take it for granted, That the matter of
every Sacrament ought to be determined in Scripture; He urges it well enough,
That the Chalice and Patten not being taken notice of there, that Ordinance, to
which such unscriptural Circumstances are Essential, can be no Sacrament.

And this Merbesius takes to be more Ancient and Catholic, though he
acknowledges the other at present to be the more Common and Prevailing Opinion.
Habertus makes Dominicus a Soto, a Spaniard, Confessor to Charles the 5th. and
present at the Council of Trent, to be the first Inventer of it, but without
Reason, since, as I have proved before, both Aquinas and the Florentine Council
espoused the same Absurdity long before: Against it Merbesius urges this
Argument, If the Sacerdotal Grace be given by Imposition of Hands, Si per
manuum Impositionem, datur gratia Sacerdotalis, illa ipsa Manuum Impositio
Presbyteratus essentiam proculdubio constituit; Atqui per manuum Impositionem
datur; Ergo.
then certainly that Imposition of Hands must constitute the Essence of the
Sacerdotal Order; but the first is true, therefore the last. This he proves
from that of the Apostle to Timothy, Ep. 2. c. 1. v. 6. and from the discourses
of Moring to that purpose; from the general silence of all Ancient Ritualists,
and from the particular silence of some of latter date, who indeed mention that
Adjectitious Ceremony, but yet only as Accidental, and not Essential to
Ordination: Nay, he draws in the Council of Trent it self as an Abettour of his
Opinion, by that passage concerning Extreme Unction, where they tell us, That
Bishops or Priests Regularly Ordained by them, with the Imposition of the Hands
of the Presbytery, Legitimi istius Sacramenti Ministri sunt, aut Episcopi, aut
Sacerdotes ab ipsis rite ordinati per Impositionem Manuum Presbyterii. Sess.
14. c. 3.
are the only lawful Ministers of that Sacrament. Thus we see the Division of
those of the Roman Church among themselves concerning this Matter; by which,
according to their own Writers, they reduce themselves to this Dilemma, Either
to determine the touch of the Vessels to be the Essence of Orders, and
consequently Orders no Sacrament, or else to allow it is Essence to be
Imposition of Hands; which Imposition of Hands the Church of England, according
to the Custom of the Ancient Universal Church, has ever used since the
Reformation, though not believing Holy Orders so conferred to be a Sacrament.

I might here take notice of that Conceit of some of their Parasitical
Canonists, That the Bishop of Rome has that Plerophory of Power in himself,
that his bare word can make a complete Priest or Bishop without any Ceremony at
all; which is fairly exposed by the learned Archbishop of Spalato, as which,
Spalat. de Republ. Eccles. l. 2. c. 4. s. 19.
among other things sufficiently proves Orders no Sacrament, unless we can have
a Sacrament without either Matter or Form. To proceed then,

3. Seeing our Ordination is thus far Regular, we are to consider, Whether
those words made use of in our eldest Reformed Rituals are not significant
enough; Or, Whether that Form of conferring Orders, was not sufficient to
impart Sacerdotal Power to the Persons Ordained: Now, that it may not be left
undetermined by the Ordainers, what particular Offices any Persons are Ordained
to, the Archdeacon, as in the case of Deacons, so in that of Priests, speaks
thus openly to the Bishop, Reverend Father in God, I present to You these
Persons to be admitted to the Order of Priesthood; After several Intercurrent
Questions, the Bishop declares to the People, Good People, these be they whom
we purpose, God willing, to receive this day to the Holy Office of Priesthood,
etc. After which words, methinks there needs no plainer a designation to any
Ecclesiastical Employ; Public notice is given likewise in the Ordination of a
Bishop, that all there present may know what Character he is to bear. After
these things and some particular Questions proposed to the Parties, and some
Prayers put up to God; For a Priest, the Bishop with the Priests then present,
lay their hands upon every particular Man's Head, The Bishop using these words,
Receive thou the Holy Ghost, whose sins thou do remit they are remitted, and
whose sins thou do retain they are retained, and be thou a Faithful Dispencer
of the word of God, and of his holy Sacraments, in the Name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. As for a Bishop, the words whereby Matthew
Parker in particular was ordained, Vide Registrum Cantuar ad calcem operum
Bramhalli Ep. Armach. ex Autographo publicatum.
were these; Take the Holy Ghost, and remember that Thou stir up the Grace of
God, which is in thee, by Imposition of hands, for God has not given us the
Spirit of Fear, but of Power, and Love, and Soberness. If now an Imitation of
the Apostles be valid, nothing can come nearer, to what Scripture tell us of
them, than those words in the Consecration of a Bishop: Nor any thing more
agreeable to the Pattern of our Lord, in the Commission he gave his Disciples,
than those used in the Consecration of a Priest. And where so public an
Advertisement is given to the Congregation, of what Office those Consecrated
are appointed to, tho words to the same purpose may be repeated again, as in
our later Books of Ordination, tho they may serve to illustrate the matter in
hand more fully, yet there can be no such necessity of them, as that the want
of them should invalidate the whole Ordinance: And as we have no Account in
Antiquity, of any particular form of words appointed by our Savior for the
conferring of Orders; so we are assured that according to the most Ancient
Methods and Ordinals of the Church of Rome it self, it is not the Words but the
Imposition of hands that is essential to Ordination.

Besides, If the Church of Rome, in the Collation of Orders according to their
latest Pontificals, do no more than we do, it must seem very unreasonable to
condemn us as Defective. What they do then in the Ordination of Priests, which
I shall only Instance in at present is this, The Archdeacon presents those to
be Ordained to the Bishop with these words, Most Reverend Father, our Holy
Mother the Catholic Church, requires that You ordain these Deacons, here
present, to the Burden of Priesthood, Archdiaconus praesentat Ordinandos
Pontifici, dicens -- Reverendissime Pater, postulat sancta matter Ecclesia
Catholica, ut hos praesentes Diaconos ad onus Presbyterii ordinetis -- Quorum
meritis Archdiacono testimonium exhibento, Pontifex annunciat Clero and populo
dicens -- Quoniam fratres Charissimi, etc. -- and postea -- Horum siquidem
Diaconorum in Presbyteros ordinandorum auxiliante Domino, etc.

Post haec surgunt omnes, and ordinandis coram Pontifice binis and binis
successive genu flectionibus, Pontifex stans ante Faldistorium suum cum Mitra
and nulla oratione, nulloque cantu premissis, imponit simul utramque manum
super caput cujuslibet ordinandi successive, nihil dicens, idemque faciunt post
eum omnes Sacerdotes qui adsunt.

Quo facto tam Pontifex quam Sacerdotes tenent manus dexteras extensas super
illos, and Pontifex stans dicit, Oremus fratres Charissimi, etc. -- and postea
precatur Exaudi nos quaesumus Domine Deus noster, etc. -- Ut super hos famulos
suos quos ad Presbyterii manus elegit coelestia dona multiplicet, etc.

Tum Pontifex claudit and inungit manus cuilibet successive, quas sic
consecratas aliquis Ministrorum Pontificis albo panniculo lineo simul, viz.
dextram super sinistram alligat. Omnium manibus unctis and consecratis
Pontifex, tradit cuilibet successive calicem cum vino and aqua and Patenam
superpositam cum Hostia and ipsi illam accipiunt inter indices and medios
Digitos and Cappam Calicis and patenam simul tangunt, Pontifice singulis
dicente, Accipe Potestatem, etc.

Quo finito Pontifex cum Mitra sedens super Faldistorium ante medium altaris,
imponit ambas manus super capita singulorum coram eo genu flectentium, dicens
cuilibet, Accipe Spiritum Sanctum, quorum remiseris peccata remittuntur and
quorum retinueris retenta sunt. Pontif. Romans in Ordin. Presb.


after the Archdeacons attestation to their Merits, the Bishop at large
declares to the People his design to promote those Deacons so presented, to the
Office of Priesthood, requiring their testimony to their Conversation, etc.
Then having given an Exhortation to the Persons to be Ordained, when it is done,
all stand up, and those designed for Ordination kneel down successively by two
and two, before the Bishop. The Bishop standing before his Faldstool with his
Mitre on, without any Prayer or Anthem premised, puts, both his hands
successively upon the head of every one, not speaking a word: After him all the
Priests who are present do the same; which being done, the Bishop and Priests
together lay hands on them; and the Bishop standing, exhorts the people to pray
to God to send his manifold gifts upon those whom he has now called to the
Priestly Office, (which very expression intimates the Sacerdotal Character
already imprinted) and the Prayer to that purpose follows. After several other
Ceremonies and Prayers, the Bishop having anointed their hands, and one of his
Attendants having tied them together with a Linen Fillet, he reaches out to
them the Chalice with some Wine and Water in it, and the Patten with an Host
upon it, which they take between their fore and middle fingers, touching the
Bolle of the Chalice and Patten at the same time, when the Bishop uses those
words, Receive thou power, etc. And here Mass being celebrated, the Ordained
Communicate, but only in one kind, and standing before the Altar, make a
Confession of their Faith in the words of the Apostles Creed; which when they
have done, the Bishop sitting upon his Faldstool, with his Mitre on, before the
middle of the Altar, and they kneeling down before him, he puts his hands upon
every one of their heads, saying to every one distinctly, Receive the Holy
Ghost, whose sins, etc. These are the most considerable Circumstances in
ordaining a Priest of the Church of Rome, in all which if Imposition of Hands
only Impress the Sacerdotal Character, and the touching of the Vessels be only
Novel and Adventitious, then it plainly follows, That the Bishops of that
Church in giving Holy Orders, do no more declare what particular Office that
Imposition of hands relates to, than the Church of England in her eldest
Rituals since the Reformation.

But if we examine things farther, we shall find them much more defective; for
whereas by the Roman Rubric, the Bishop lays hands on the Ordained three
several times, and the first time uses no words at all; it is the conclusion of
the formerly-cited Merbesius (and he pretends to good company in it) that That
first Imposition of Hands that is in silence, confers the Priestly Character;
which he proves by 1 Timothy 4.14. Stir up the Gift which is in thee, and which
was given thee by Prophecy, and by the Laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery; where the Apostle resolves Orders into that particular Action. Then
telling us how general his Opinion is, he concludes, Therefore it is the first
Imposition of Hands, by which they are made Priests; Ista igitur prima Manuum
Impositio, ea est per quam Sacerdotes efficiuntur, cum neque per secundam
Manuum Impositionem fiant Presbyteri ut vidimus, nec per tertiam cum illa in
fine ordinationis factitari solet. Merb. de Sacr. Ord. D. 6. g. 52.
since it is certain, they are neither made so by the second laying on of Hands
(the Exhortation annexed to which, as I observed before, supposes the Priestly
power already given) nor yet by the third, which is only used in the Conclusion
of Ordination. From all which it seems very probable, That let our Ordination
be never so Imperfect, since we really use some Words at the instant of
Imposition of hands, and those very pertinent and authentic, that Ordinance is
at least more complete in our Church than in theirs, who lay on hands indeed,
but declare nothing at all, either of their Reason for it, or their Meaning in
it.

4. The greatest Bigots of the Roman Communion never charge the Greeks (tho
they account them Schismatics for the most part) with want of a lawful
Priesthood; yet their Rituals are certainly, by Roman rules, as defective as
ours can be imagined. In that Church, He who was a Deacon before, and now to be
ordained Priest, being brought according to prescription before the Bishop or
Patriarch, (...), etc. Pontific. Gr. de Consecr. Presbyt.
the Patriarch makes the sign of the Cross three times upon his Head, when he
fixing his eyes upon the Holy Table, and kneeling on both knees on the step,
the Chancellor calls aloud, Silence. Then the Patriarch holding his right hand
upon his Head, speaks aloud, so that all may hear, The Divine Grace which
always makes sound those things that are weak, and compleats what is imperfect,
promotes N. N. the most reverend Deacon to be a Priest: Let us therefore pray
for him, that the grace of the All-Holy Spirit may descend upon him. Then again
signing him three times, and laying his hand upon his head; when the Deacon has
said, Let us pray, the Patriarch repeats that Prayer softly, O God who art
without beginning and without end etc. After this follow the general
Intercessions, which when they are ended, or while they are repeating, the
Patriarch laying his hand again upon his head as before, Prays to God to fill
him with the gifts of his Holy Spirit, that He may be capable of doing all
things belonging to his Function. I need not insist upon other Ceremonies, the
Person ordained having received his Character before: Where it is observable,
that as the Greek Church assigns the Office no otherwise but as the Church of
England does, viz. by giving notice to the People, what Order the Person is
Consecrated to; so the Greek Church differs much from that of R^me, in the form
of the Words used, which argues their opinion of the no necessity of such a set
Form, and consequently that Orders are no Sacrament, as that word Sacrament is
understood in the strictest Sense by Ecclesiastical Writers: Yet Habertus is so
far from supposing any deficiency in the Greek Church, that in Effect He
charges the Church of Rome with Innovation; for he tells us, Traditionis potius
quam Scriptorum Authoritate constat. Pont. Gr. obs. Hab. 1.
That the words used upon touching the Vessels, are rather built upon Oral
Tradition, than upon the Authority of any good Writers. He refers us to several
Testimonies of the Greek Fathers, of greatest Reputation, given to this Form,
Originally used in their Church. He observes, that the Church of Rome objected
nothing to the Greek Rituals in the Florentine Council: He shows, that
Ordination and Laying on of hands, when applied to Men, set apart for the
Service of the Church, are the same thing: That therefore in their
Ecclesiastical Writers, (...), and (...), all signifying Laying on of hands,
are all indifferently used for Ordination. He alleges that of the Writer De
Ecclesiastica Hierarchia, That the Imposition of the Bishops hands, (...). c. 5.
gives both the Character and Authority of a Priest; and gives us withal such
an Instance of the Indulgence of the Roman See to those of the Greek Communion
in Italy, as must either prove their full satisfaction with the Grecian
Priesthood, or else that the Roman Bishops have very little care of their good.
It Is the Decree of Urban the Eighth, Let the Protector of the Greek Nation
provide, that some Eastern Bishop, consecrated after the Greek manner, reside
at Rome to perform Divine Offices, Caret Protector, ut Graecus aliquis ex
Orient ritu Graeco consecratus Episcopus Romae sit, ad Divina Officia atque
Ordinationes ritu Graeco peragendas, qui quae ad Caeremonias and ritus
Orientalis Ecclesiae faciunt, docere alumnos possit, and ipse per omnia fervet;
Jurent queque Italo Graeci statum Ecclesiasticum ac sacros Ordines usque ad
Presbyteratum ritu Graeco suscepturos, quandoque and ubi Superioribus visum
fuerit. Ibid.
and to Ordain according to the Grecian Rites, who may be able to teach
Novices those things which belong to the Rites and Ceremonies of the Eastern
Church, and may observe them exactly himself; and let the Greeks living in
Italy, give Oath to take the Ecclesiastical Life, and Holy as Orders upon them,
according to the manner of the Greeks, as far as the Order of Priesthood, when
and where their Superiors shall think fit: Which is not only a fair
attestation to the validity of the Grecian Orders, but seems to imply the
Greeks dissatisfaction with the Roman Hierarchy, and a strange kind of
Condescension in the Universal Bishop, to recede from his own Rights, and to
give leave to a supposed Schismatical Clergy, to increase and thrive within his
Jurisdiction. And Romanists have sufficient reason to acquiesce in this Liberty
of theirs, if what Father Goar, in his Notes upon the Euchology informs us be
true, That Imposition of Hands is not only an Adjunct of Holy Orders, Neque
enim Comes est solum and adventitia, non Integrans tantum and ex decentia
requisita, sed intrinseca omnino necessaria and essentialis Materia; qua
adhibita sicut olim Apostoli, prout in eorum Actis and Scriptis legimus
Diaconos Presbyteros and Episcopos crearunt, absque illa pariter nullum in
sublimiores Hierarchiae Ecclesiasticae gradus successores Episcopi possunt
evehere. Goar. in Euch. p. 256.
or merely adventitious, not only an Integral part, or a thing required for
Decencies sake; but that it is wholly the Intrinsical necessary and Essential
Matter of them; by which as the Apostles of old created Deacons, Presbyters and
Bishops, as appears by their Writings, and the History of their Acts; so
without that, the Bishops who succeed them, can raise no Man to Superior Orders
in the Sacred Hierarchy. And as he tells us afterward, If we examine the
Euchology never so strictly, we shall find no other matter of Orders so much as
once mentioned, Cum in Universa Ecclesia unam Sacramentorum administrandorum
rationem essentialem (materiam nimirum and formam) statuere necesse est, nec in
Graeca illius portione, alia quam manus Impositio queat assignari; Indubie
sequitur, in Latina eandem quoque essentialem esse reputandam. ibid.
but Imposition of Hands; and his Inference from all is very remarkable, and
much against the now prevailing Tenet of the Roman Church, That since it is
necessary there should be some one Essential Rule or Method of dispensing Holy
Orders in the Universal Church, and that there can be no other Matter of Orders
assigned in the Eastern parts of that Church, but only Imposition of Hands; it
must follow without Dispute, that even in the Latin Church, the same exclusive
of all other Ceremonies, is Essential to them: And to this Opinion of his,
methinks that of St. Chrysostom agrees very well, who tells us in plain terms,
This is Ordination, The Hand is laid upon the Man, but God Operates the whole,
(...). Chrysostom. in Act. Ap. Hom: 14.
and it is Gods Hand which touches the Head of the Person Ordained, if he be
Ordained Regularly. If then all this be true, if we have indeed the concurrence
of so large a part of the Catholic Church as the Greek is, and that the Form
of words used by them, is no more Demonstrative of the Order to be conferred,
than ours in the Church of England was at the beginning of the Reformation; we
can be no more denied, to have a Regular Succession of Church Officers than
they. And we may suppose, such Considerations moved St. Clara, P. Walsh, and
others of the Roman Communion, to allow our Orders as full and valid to all
intents and purposes: But that we want a Power to offer other Sacrifices, than
those of Praise and Thanksgiving, is a Want no more intolerable in our Priests
or Presbyters, than it was in the Apostles themselves. And I have not yet heard
of any Catholic Tradition, that either our Savior used those words, Receive
thou Power to offer Sacrifices, etc. to any Apostle; or that the Apostles used
it to any of those whom they afterward Commissioned to Preach the Gospel.

5. Our Orders then being valid, as to to their Essentials, notwithstanding
that great Pretended defect; it will follow, that all that Charge laid upon our
Church of Heresy and Schism, can no way render them imperfect or ineffectual:
And if the Roman Doctrine of the Indelible Character be true, those who assert
that must for their own sake defend our Church, especially since it is
apprehended by some, as we observed before, that a denial of the Indelible
Character would irrecoverably ruin the Sacrament. And such indeed was the
Doctrine of the Ancient Church, in which the Heretics and Schismatics are
with all Severity prohibited to ordain any, or to Administer Sacraments; yet if
they would still without fear of Ecclesiastical Censure presume to do such
things, their Actions were good, and in full force; Antiquity so concurring
with that Common Law Maxim, Quod fieri non debet factum valet; That which of
it self, or so and so circumstatiated, ought not to be done; yet when it is
once done, stands good and irreversible. I wonder not indeed that Baptism, tho
given by Heretics, should be approved in the Church of Rome, since they allow
Laymen, Women, Persons unbaptiz'd, nay, Jews or Turks to baptize in cases of
necessity: But in so doing, they seem much to forget a standing Rule of their
own, That none can give that to another, which he never had himself: For, as I
remember, they tell us, That Baptism is one of those Sacraments which imprint
an indelible Character. Yet such is the Doctrine of their great Aquinas. They
deny indeed, that any can give Holy Orders, except Bishops; but He who is once
made a Bishop, must continue so to his life's end; nor can the Irregularity of
his Conversation, nor any Schism created by him in the Church, nor any Heresy
invested or propagated by him, take away that Episcopal Power personally
invested in him, howsoever the Exercise of that Power, may be restrained by
Civil or Ecclesiastical Constitutions; and consequently those capable of
Orders, who are consecrated by such Bishops, are really Deacons, Priests, or
Bishops, according to the particular Character impressed on them: So we may
find Arrian Bishops Ordaining others of equally Heretical Sentiments with
themselves; which Persons so Ordained, if at any time they abjured their
Heretical Pravity, were received into the Orthodox Church, and admitted to
exercise the same Offices, they were formerly assigned to, without
Reordination: To this purpose we read in the Answers to the Orthodox,
published among the works of Justin Martyr, That the Crime of an Heretic
returning to the true Faith, if it had been only some false Opinion, (...).
Resp. ad Orthod. 14.
was to be rectified by a change of Judgment, if it were an Error in Baptism,
by Confirmation, if in Orders, by laying on of Hands; which laying on of Hands
was no Reordination, but only a particular Ceremony, whereby the lapsed in time
of Persecution, as well as those who had fallen into Heresy, Laymen as well as
Clergy Men, were readmitted into Catholic Communion: So Dionysius of
Alexandria, in Eusebius, tells us, That it was an Ancient Custom, (...). Eusebius.
Hist. Eccl. l. 7. c. 2.
that such should be received into the Church by Prayer, with laying on of
hands; and Aurelius Bishop of Carthage, determining concerning the Schismatical
Dotanists, orders, That seeing it was not lawful to iterate that, which was to
be given but once, (...). Conc. genesis T. 2. p. 1083.
if they heartily renounced that Error, they may be received into that one
Church, the Mother of all Christians, by laying on of hands: And the same care
is taken in the Eighth Canon of the first Council of Nice, which is plain it
self, and so interpreted by Balsamon, Zonaras and Aristenus, and farther
illustrated by our Learned Beverege. The same is attested on the part of the
Latin Church, August. cont. Epist. Par. l. 2. c. 13. Anastasii 2. Epistola ad
Anast. Imp. de Acacio and Acacianis. Conc. genesis T. 4. c. 7. 8.
by St. Austin, in his answer to the Epistle of Parmenian the Donatist, and by
Anastasius, the Second of that Name, Bishop of Rome, in an Epistle to
Anastasius, Emperor of Constantinople. The care taken was only this; That the
persons should be qualified according to the Canons of the Church, in that case
provided, and that the Persons ordaining should be really Bishops; which things
being secured, the Ordained upon Readmission to Catholic Communion, retained
their Offices and Powers still.

To conclude this then, If Orders be no Sacrament in a strict sense; if the
Essence of them consist only in Imposition of the hands of Bishops; if the
Greek and Ancient Latin Church, and the most learned persons of the Latin
Communion, now agree in that Doctrine; if the Church of England in her first
reformed Rituals, gave as clear an Assignation to his particular Office to the
Person ordained, as either the Greek or Roman Church do at present; and
finally, if real Heresy or Schism, cannot annihilate Episcopal Sacerdotal
power: The consequence of all must be, That our Orders are still good and
valid, and the Established Church of England, so far at least a true and sound
Member of the Catholic Church of Christ.

And now it were no difficult Matter, to retort the Objection against our
Adversaries, and prove the invalidity of their Orders, upon the Principles and
Practices of their own Church. For,

1. They tell us, That it is the Intention of the Priest, not the Form or Matter
of Institution, that makes the Sacrament: So that tho a Man be ordained a
Priest or a Bishop with all the Ceremonies of the Pontifical, and by a Bishop
with those very words now made use of in the Exhibition of the Vessels; yet if
the Bishop minds not what he is about, or intend not to do what the Church
intends, the Ordained remains still without either Character or Power, by which
means if one Bishop has but once failed in the Collation of Orders, they run
down, for ought they know, in infinitum, without any due Consecration; and
since humane Frailties are so many, and the Artifices of Hell so incessant and
prevailing, as we must needs have a great many Doubts naturally grow upon us,
concerning the Intentions of those whole lives we see Extravagant and Impious;
so from thence we necessarily deduce an Infinity of Uncertaintys. If this
Conceit were only the Caprice of some wild Head, it were the less
considerable: But it is the determination of their oraculous Council of Trent,
Si quis dixerit, in Ministris, dum Sacramenta conficiunt and conferunt, non
requiri intentionem saltem faciendi quod facit Ecclesia, Anathema sit. Sessio.
7. Can. 11.
that If any shall say there is not required in Ministers, while they
Consecrate and dispense the Sacraments, an Intention at least of doing what the
Church does, Let that Person so saying be accursed: And the Annotators upon the
Plantin Edition of that Council, refers us to the Decrees of Eugenius the 4th.
in the Florentine Council, where we are taught, That the Sacraments are
perfected by three things; By outward Signs, Omnia Sacramenta tribus
persiciuntur, videlicet, Rebus tanquam Materia, Verbis tanquam Forma, and
Persona Ministri conferentis Sacramentum, cum intention faciendi quod facit
Ecclesia; quorum si aliquod desit, non perficit Sacramentum. Instruct. ad
Armenos. Conc. genesis T. 13. p. 535.
as the Matter, by Words, as the Form; and by the Person of the Minister
dispensing the Sacrament, with an intention of doing that which the Church
does; of which three things, if any one be wanting, there can be no Sacrament.
It were an easy work to confute this Opinion, as being both Unscriptural and
Irrational; Sacramenta ministrari possunt a bonis and a malis, a fidelibus and
infidelibus, infra Ecclesiam and extra; quia si dispensari possint tantum a
bonis, nullus esset certus de susceptione Sacramenti, cum nullus fit certus de
bonitate Ministri, sicut nec de propria, and ita oporteret semper iterari, and
malitia unius praejudicaret alienae saluti. Lindwood. Constit. prove. l. 1. tit.
7. gl. pro quibus citat B. Thom. Edit. Oxon. 1679. Intra Catholicam Ecclesiam,
in Mysterio Corporis and Sanguinis Domini, nihil a bono majus, nihil a malo
minus perficitur Sacerdote, quia non in merito Consecratis, sed in verbo
perficitur Creatoris and virtute Spiritus Sancti. Decreti p. 2. c. 1. Qu. 1.
citat. ex Augustino contra Epist. Parmen. l. 2.
and how it thwarts the Doctrine of some great Men of your own, may be seen by
those Passages in the Margin; but as they assert it, it is Argumentum ad
Homines; the consequence of which we know well enough, the Truth we shall leave
them to make good as well as they can. But, if we look upon Consecration to
Church Offices only as an Holy Ordinance, but no Sacrament: We may then
challenge the Church of Rome as introducing a Nullity in their Orders, by so
notorious a deviation from the Examples of Christ and his Apostles, from the
Methods of the Ancient Universal Church, and from their own Authentic
Constitutions; to prove which Crime of theirs, we may recur to those
Authorities before insisted on: From which we learn, That Imposition of Hands
was the only Essence of Orders; that their modern Ceremonies are mere
Innovations, and, as by them used, shameful Corruptions of the first
Institution: For though we allow that Power to the Governors of every true
Christian Church, to add some significant Ceremonies to a Divine Ordinance
(provided they are neither Indecent, Superstitious nor Troublesome, and
therefore might pass by that addition of touching the Consecrated Vessels among
other little Fooleries of that Church;) Yet since they have fixed the Essence of
that Ordinance, in that touching of those Vessels, and have made Imposition of
Hands, rather an impertinent Formality, than a matter of Necessity, as may
appear from that of Gregory the Ninth, In fragmentis Decretalium; we cannot but
conclude, that they have gone beyond all bounds of Just Ecclesiastical
Authority. For in that Decree. as it is plain, that Imposition of Hands is made
a mere non-essential Circumstance; so it infers a Power in persons Ordained, to
execute their Functions in all parts, Presbyter and Diaconus cum ordinantur
Manus impositionem tactu corporali, ^itu ab Apostolis introducto, recipient;
Quod si omissum fuerit, non est aliquatenus iterandum, sed statuto tempore ad
hujusmodi Ordines conferendos, caute supplendum quod per errorem extitit
praetermissum. Council. general. T. 11. p. 384. c. 52. Epist. ad Archiepiesc.
Land. In margin vero decretalium melius legitur, Lugdunensem.
as occasion requires, without it; for it lays no prohibition on them, and yet
orders the supplying of all defects only at Canonical times, the Interstices of
which, are long enough to admit various exertions of Diaconal or Sacerdotal
Power. Nor does the Gloss upon this part of the Canon Law help the matter at
all, though it be clogged with a Superfaetation of Notes: For though the first be,
That a Deacon and Presbyter ought to be Ordained by Imposition of Hands; the
second, that that manner of Ordination is deduced from Apostolical example;
Nota 1. Quod Presbyter and Diaconus per manus Impositionem debet Ordinari. Item
Nota. Quod Ordinatio Sacerdotis and Diaconi, introducta est exemplo
Apostolorum. Item nota, quod idem est in part quod in toto. Item, Quod duo
imperfecta faciunt unum perfectum. Decretal. Greg. l. 1. Tit. 16. c. 3. gl. p.
282. Edit. Lugd. 1671.
yet sure it is concluded, that there is the same virtue in a Semi-Ordination, as
in our Completed, and that two Imperfects makes one Perfect. We cannot deduce
any thing from the whole, but That an Ordinance unquestionably sacred, and of
Divine Original, is so far perverted by those of the Roman Church, as to have
lost its Nature; which conclusion we may be the more confirmed in, if we
observe that Assertion of some Modern Casuists, That where by any Mistake it
has so happened, that the Person to be Ordained, did not touch both the Patten
and Chalice with that exactness required by the Roman Rubric; Bonacina. D. 8.
q. 2. puncto 3.
or where it is rationally doubted, whether they did touch them or not, there
they ought to be Ordained again, the former Ceremonies being wholly
Insignificant: Which strange Sleight of Apostolical Practice, and weight laid
upon this new Invention, I can no way reconcile to that Position of Alexander
Alensis, Those things which are ordered by Men, may be altered by Men; but
those which are instituted by God, Quae ab homine Ordinata sunt, ab homine
possunt mutari, quae autem a Deo instituta sunt, non nisi dictante Deo debent
mutari. Alonsis Sum. p. 4. q. 9. Memb. 1. and 2. art. 2.
may not be changed but by the Command of the same God. Besides, as to
Sacraments they tell us, They must be administered In Forma Ecclesiae, Decret.
p. 2. c. 1. q. 1. c. 51. Hi qui c. 52. Si quis.
or that otherwise they are ineffectual. What Church then must that be,
according to whose Form Orders must be conferred? Must it be the Ancient or
Modern Church of Rome? The Question is Reasonable, since they have varied from
themselves so much; for we can find no Western Ritual mentioning the Touch of
the Vessels, for the first Nine hundred years after Christ: If at last the
Ordination of Pastors in the Church of God, be instituted by Christ and his
Apostles; and if the manner how those first Church-Governors collated Holy
Orders, be expressed on Sacred Writ: Then those who have varied so much from
their Prescriptions, and yet pretend to confer the same Divine Grace still,
have to the utmost of their Power evacuated both the Diaconal and Sacerdotal
Offices within their own Church; and if urged severely with their own
Principles, must appear at best but an Embryo, an unshaped and incomplete
Church, their Priesthood, Sacraments and Government, falling at once to the
ground.

2. It Is obvious to any to object to them, That Laying on of hands, without
using any Words at all, whereby the meaning of that action should be guest at,
is a Ceremony of no Consequence at all: Yet the very Essence of Orders,
according to their Schoolmen before cited, consists in such a mute Imposition
of hands; by which it appears, That the Sacrament of Orders, as they call it,
is of a very different Nature from all the rest: For should the Priest Anoint a
Man with Oil, tho in a Dying State, and say nothing; who would call it Extreme
Unction? Who would dream that the Priest Baptized every Man whom he should
Sprinkle Water on, unless he used the words of Institution? And we conclude,
That those of the Roman Communion, would scarce believe the Bread and Wine
Transubstantiated into the Body and Blood of Christ, by the bare Contact of the
Priests Hand, without those powerful Words Hoc enim est Corpus meum; the words
being as Essential to the Sacrament, as the Elements, or the particular action
of the Priest. Now if a Bishop lay his hand upon my Head, and say nothing, who
knows whether it be to give me his Blessing, to confirm me after Baptism, to
Consecrate me to some sacred Employ; or whether it were not an action purely
accidental, or a mark of some personal kindness to me? For a Bishop, as a
Bishop, may intend by such an action any one of these things, as well as
Ordination: It Is true, they have some circumstantials and appendages in their
present Rituals demonstrative enough, but those may be omitted, and a perfectly
mute Imposition of hands be made use of alone, as being only Essential to the
thing designed; for if the Essentials of an Ordinance be used, the
Circumstances can add nothing to its Perfection or Imperfection: So the Roman
Church allows Baptism of Infants a complete Sacrament, when administered by such
persons who have no Authority to Consecrate the Elements, or by Priests in such
streights of time, as render their Consecration impracticable. If we should
grant what some would fain persuade us, That Imposition of hands, and touching
the Vessels, are both Essential to Ordination: Notwithstanding this, As when
they allow Bread and Wine both as Essentials to the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, yet they esteem it enough, to administer that Sacrament in one kind to
all Communicants; so it may upon the same grounds be determined sufficient, to
give Orders only by one Mean, the virtue of the other Essential being supposed
to be in that one by Concomitancy: But a Ceremony wholly silent, is so very
unintelligible to the vulgar, that though they could be brought to apprehend
its general meaning, yet unless there were so many different Modes of laying on
of Hands, it were impossible for them to distinguish between Bishops, Priests
and Deacons, to the great trouble and dissatisfaction of those, who among a
thousand Doubts and Uncertainties, must partake of the Ordinances of God by
their hands: And this defect themselves are so sensible of, that though
Imposition of hands be only a dumb Circumstance, yet when the Vessels are
exhibited, in which Action they now generally fix the Essence of Orders, the
Bishop ordaining uses a particular Form expressive of the Office then
conferred. But it is

3. Such a Form, as if well examined, would leave us more at a loss for the
validity of their Priesthood, than all their precedent silence, Take thou
Power, etc. where it would give us very great satisfaction, if they would
inform us, what kind of Sacrifices their Priests offer, Whether Typical, and so
Carnal and Sensible, Or else Spiritual: If Spiritual, we know of none such
relating to their public Duties, but Prayers and Praises, in their largest
extent Spiritual Sacrifices indeed, acceptable to God through Jesus Christ: 1
Pet. 2.5.
We know of none concerning them in private, but such as all Christians may
offer as well as Priests, Presenting their Bodies a living Sacrifice, holy and
acceptable to God, Romans 12.1.
which is their reasonable Service. If their Sacrifices are Typical, by whom
were they Instituted? Or what are they Types of? If of the Messiah to come,
their Priesthood must be either Judaic or Pagan, whose various Sacrifices,
either more expressly, as commanded by God, or more darkly, as taken up from
Arguments of Gratitude, or from Imitation, were their great expressions of
their Hope of a Messiah to come, or of some extraordinary Provisions of Immense
Goodness, for the Worlds Redemption from that prodigious Corruption it was
immerst in: If their Priesthood be such, they must no more pretend to be an
Evangelical, much less the one Holy Catholic Church. If their Sacrifices be
Types of the Messiah already come, they are the Prophesies of things long since
past, and just as good Sense. If they instance in the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, we believe that to be in Eucharistical Commemorative Sacrifice, of
which as often as we partake worthily, we present a just Offering of Thankfulness
to God for the infinitely meritorious Death and Passion of our Savior; and
this Sacrifice is still purely Spiritual. But if they would persuade us, That
in that Eucharist, the real, natural and substantial Body of the incarnate Son
of God is broken as upon the Cross: that the same Blood which then ran in his
veins, is actually shed as by the Nails and Spear: That every Priest as often as
He consecrates the Elements, does so break his Body and shed his Blood, and
then offer them in Sacrifice to God the Father: We believe no such Sacrifice
can be now offered. The Jewish Sacrifices grew needless, when Christ had
offered himself, not as they had been useless before, but as they had relation
to him: As their Sacrifices were no longer required, so no Priests were needful
to attend them: And this is the Argument used by the Author of the Epistle to
the Hebrews, when having asserted the Imperfection of Judaic Sacrifices, the
impossibility that the Blood of Bulls and Goats should take away sin; he shows
us how Jesus Christ (to whom he applies those words of David, Sacrifices and
Burnt Offerings thou would not, etc.) takes away the use of those Sacrifices,
that he may evidence the absolute necessity and validity of his own, by which
be satisfied and accomplished the will of God. By which will we are Sanctified,
through the offering of the Body of Jesus Christ once for all: Heb. 10.10, 12,
14, 18.
Again, This Man after He had offered one Sacrifice for Sins, He sat down for
ever on the Right Hand of God. And, By one offering he has perfected for ever
them that are sanctified. Now Christians generally relieve, T^^t Christ by this
one offering of himself, obtained remission of sins for all them that Believe;
and then the Apostles consequence is very natural, Where remission of these is,
there is no more offering for sin, if no more offering for sins, then none at
all, and then no need of such sacrificing Priests. Nor has Estius at all proved
the necessity of the Continuance of such propitiatory Sacrifices,
notwithstanding that great one of our Savior upon the Cross, who indeed was
the only acceptable High Priest, who had power to offer so perfect a Sacrifice.
It might be added, That the (...), the Incruentum Sacrificium of the Ancients
agrees very ill with this Transubstantiated Corporeal Sacrifice, but well
enough with the notion of a Commemorative and Spiritual one. We might urge that
of the learned Oughtram, concerning the Essential difference between that of
Aaron and the Evangelical Priesthood. That Aarons office as a Sacrificing
Priest, was to manage the affairs of Men with God, according to that of the
Author to the Hebrews, Every High Priest taken from among Men is ordained for
Men in things appertaining to God, Heb. 5.1.
that he may offer both gifts and Sacrifices for men: Whereas the business of
the Apostles and their Successors in the Ministry of the Gospel, is to manage
the business of God with Men, according to that of St. Paul to the Corinthians,
1 Cor. 5.20.
We are Ambassadors of Christ, as tho God did beseech you by us, we pray in
Christ's stead that you would be reconciled unto God: St. Paul speaks of himself
as a real Sacrificing Priest, upon account of his offering up the Gentiles to
God, who were acceptable because Sanctified by the Holy Ghost; Romans 15.16, 17.
but in the same place he calls himself not the Minister of the Gentiles to
Christ, but the Minister of Christ to the Gentiles; and therefore it is
observable, That Evangelical Ministers are no where in Scripture called (...)
or (...), Oughtram. de Sacris. l. 1. c. 19.
with relation to any such Corporeal Sacrifices as the Jews offered, it not
being the Ministry of the Apostles, but the Priesthood of Jesus Christ, that
succeeded in the room of Aarons. But the prosecution of these things would
carry us too far beyond the bounds of the present Controversy; only from the
whole it will follow, That the Sacrificing Priests of the Roman Church, by
deserting the Commission given by Christ to his Apostles, are indeed relapsed
into Judaism, or worse: By which means their boasted Succession is quite broken
off, to the ruin of their Churches Catholicism; if, as they tell us, a
Succession of Christian Priests and Bishops be one necessary mark of such a
Church.

And now we have reason to admire the Goodness of Almighty God, who, as He made
the Jews the bitterest Enemies of our Savior, the preservers of those Sacred
Oracles which confirmed his Messiahship, and by them, as Instruments, delivered
down those Holy writings to us Gentiles, to our Conviction, tho they had no
such effects upon that Obdurate People; so he has made the Church of Rome, the
Conveyancer of a Truly Apostolical Hierarchy down to us, tho they have almost
lost it among themselves: They continue still the Imposition of Hands, though
only as a Collateral and non-essential Ceremony, which we hope may have other
Effect upon them, than what is agreeable to their own Mistaken Principles: But
since their abuse or contempt of it, cannot alter the Nature of the thing it
self, We, deducing that Practice of Imposition of Hands from them, as they from
the Apostles, and laying its due weight upon that Apostolical Institution,
without Additions or Alterations: We enjoy that Ordinance full and complete
among our selves, and enjoy that Succession really, which they have so long
Impertinently boasted and valued themselves upon.

FINIS.

