The Originals of Rebellion: Or, the Ends of Separation.

A SERMON PREACHED On the Thirtieth of January, 1682. IN THE PARISH CHURCH OF
GREAT-YARMOVTH.

By Luke Milbourne, Curate there.

LONDON: Printed by J. Wallis, for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishop's-Head in S.
Paul's Churchyard. 1683.

For the Right Honorable ROBERT Earl of Yarmouth, Lord Lieutenant of His
Majesty's County of Norfolk.
Right Honorable,
IT IS not the Excellence of the Discourse but its Honest Design that emboldens
the Author to Prefix Your Name to it. The Death of Charles the First (of ever
blessed memory) was too Cruel a Blow to these Nations not to be seriously
Lamented. The Doctrines in those days Preached, and now Revived to encourage
Schism, Faction and Rebellion, too Hellish not to be opposed by all who have
any sense of Christianity, to Condole the one, and to stay the Progress of the
other, this Sermon was Preached: what its success may be I know not, but if it
serve to undeceive any who have been seduced from their Duties to their Prince,
or their Church Governors, my good Intentions will be highly recompensed. Your
Honor who is so Eminent an Assertor of Majesty, and the Religion of the Church
of England as by Law Established, has obliged your self, in some measure, to
Protect the meanest Person who sincerely intends the same thing, Among whom I
hope Your Honors Charity will place me, and on that Account favorably
Patronize the mean endeavor of

My Lord, Your Honors most obliged, most Humble and most Faithful Servant, L.
M.

ACTS xxix. Verse. 8. While he Answered for himself, neither against the Law of
the Jews, neither against the Temple, nor yet against Caesar, have I offended
any thing at all.


ST. Paul, after some years absence, returning again into his Native Country,
found the malice of the Jews, who neither would embrace the Gospel themselves,
nor suffer the Gentiles to be partakers of it, strong and active as possible to
his Ruin: his turning his Back upon them in so public a manner, Acts xiii. 46.
And his care to deliver to all Churches of the Gentiles, the Decrees of the
Council of Jerusalem, Acts xvi. 4. had filled 'em with so inveterate prejudices
against him, that although in Compliance with them, he himself submitted at his
return to the Ceremonies in the most solemn way, yet they surprise him in that
very Action, and in the Temple it self with such Clamor and Violence, that had
not the chief Captain of the Roman Garrison, then in Jerusalem, interposed and
with his Soldiers over-awed 'em, they had soon dispatched their formidable
Enemy. He, the faithful servant of Almighty God, found more favor and justice
from the hands of Claudius Lysias an inferior Commander, from Covetous Felix,
and too Popular Festus, though strangers to true Religion, than he could from his
own Contrymen, Gods peculiar People, who boasted themselves of their Zeal
for the Name and Commands of the same Divinity he Preached, the Jews prosecuted
him with their virulent and improbable slanders, and their desperate and bloody
Associations, while Heathens, persons of a very Moderate Virtue, gave him
Protection and Security. Nor could all St. Paul's sacred Eloquence, the
dictates of the everlasting Spirit, quell their Fanatic Rage; nor his baffling
their absurd Accusations, in spite of their Mercenary Orator's Assistance,
allay their Malice; though he could prevail upon King Agrippa so far as to
persuade him almost to be a Christian, and upon Festus the Roman Goverour to
pronounce him Innocent, and not to have merited any restraint but for his
Appeal to Caesar, Acts xxvi. 28.31, 32.

Festus indeed gave the Jews all the advantage imaginable against St. Paul, had
they had any proof of what they Accuse him for: he invited the ablest of 'em to
go down with him from Jerusalem to Caesarea, where the Apostle was Prisoner,
and there to Accuse him if there were any Wickedness in him, verse. 5. of this
Chapter, he makes no long delays, but, after a short time, sits in the judgment
Seat, and commands Paul to be brought to the face of his Accusers; who standing
round about him, strove to render him as black as they could: they laid many
and grievous Complaints against him, but, alas! they were clogged with an
unhappy circumstance, for of all the Crimes they impeached him, they could not
prove one, v. 6, 7. And Paul Answered their Charge with a more probable Plea
for himself, That neither against the Law of the Jews, nor against the Temple,
nor yet against Caesar had he offended any thing at all, that is, That he had
neither transgressed those settled Laws whereby the Government of their Nation
was regulated in temporal Affairs, nor had he slighted, vilified or made any
Schism in their Religion, nor had he despised or profaned that magnificent
Temple, built and dedicated among them to the Worship and Honor of the true
God; neither yet had he entered into any Plots, Confederacies, or Associations
against the Person or Government of the Roman Emperor; their then Lawful and
Undoubted Sovereign, nor refused Obedience to his Laws, nor Rebelled against
him.

This Apology which S. Paul makes for himself, seems little agreeable to the
Practice of those blood-thirsty Saints, whose Barbarous Piety broke the Church
of England to pieces, profaned all the Houses of God in the Land, overturned
all Laws of God and Man; and dipped their cruel hands in the Sacred Blood of
their Lawful Prince, the Lords Anointed: A Crime of so horrid a Complexion, as
(tho too true some few years since) was beyond all the Ideas of Impiety in the
former, and will be almost too great to obtain Credit in all future Ages. If I
be an Offender, if I have really contracted that Guilt which the Jews pretend
only to prosecute in me with so much zeal and eagerness, if I have committed
any thing worthy of Death (and Sins against just Laws, pure Religion, and
Lawfully acquired Sovereignty are truly such) if I have done any such thing,
says our great Apostle, I refuse not to dye. Death is justly due to such
Criminals; and though perhaps Humane Justice may oversee some of the foulest
actions, Divine Vengeance is guided by an Allseeing Eye, and sooner or later
will give them their just Reward: So far was he from excusing, and much farther
from glorying in such cursed Actions. Nay, he was willing in his case to Appeal
to the Justice of Caesar, where the Murderer of his Father would scarce have
expected Pardon, from whose Presence our great Patriots labored to fly as far
as they could.

From the Accusation of the Jews, (which of what nature it was we may
conjecture from the Speech of Tertullus chapter 24. and from St. Paul's Defense,)
we may learn what are the Beginnings, what the Increase, and what the End of
Troubles and Disorders in a Church or State. The Jews had a great Veneration
for the Temple of God and those Laws by which the Worship of God in that Temple
were Regulated, those Rites and Ceremonies which attended their Religious
Constitutions, they justly condemn St. Paul, had he been guilty, of profaning
their Temple, preaching down their Ceremonies, and breaking those Rules
delivered to them by God himself: He answers for himself that against their
Temple, against their Religion he had committed no offense. They accuse him as
a Pestilent fellow, a mover of Sedition among all the Jews throughout the
world, so a breaker of their Country Statutes, and their Politics, having had
the Sanction of Almighty God himself (for what Nation was there so great, who
had God so nigh unto them, and what so great that had Statutes and Judgments so
Righteous, as that Law which Moses in the Name of God set before them, Deuteronomy.
4.7, 8.) if it were true, they had reason for their Impeaching him, Impunity
giving the greatest encouragement to Factious Spirits. He replies that he had
not offended against the Law of the Jews; His enemies taking the two former
Articles for granted, make their Third a necessary and rational Inference from
them, that he was an Enemy to Caesar, and so whosoever was a mover of Sedition
or Division among his Subjects must unavoidably be. But the Apostle by taking
his Innocence in the former respects to be evident and granted, there being no
tolerable Proof offered to the Contrary from thence (yet more justly) concludes
that neither against Caesar had he offended any thing at all. The Jewish
Accusation then amounts to this, Where Ecclesiastical Injunctions are broken,
there the breach of Laws Temporal is a present Protection, and Rebellion
against the Lawmakers the Sovereign, supposed a more lasting security; and this
Politic Axiom they apply to the Prisoner. St. Paul acknowledges the truth of
that Proposition, but denies the Application, though they had asserted what was
true in it self; yet their Assertion could not reach him, though he insinuates at
the same time that nothing but an Universal Innocence, could be a sufficient
Defense against such an Accusation, having such a President as this, I shall
endeavor from hence to evidence that indissoluble Connection there is between
these Crimes, which St. Paul so industriously in the Text and elsewhere
Vindicates himself from, or that a Contempt and breach of Laws Ecclesiastical,
introduces consequentially the Contempt and breach of Laws Temporal, and that
Rebellion against the Lawful Supreme Powers, which what success it may
sometimes have, this days sad Solemnity sufficiently informs us; and

1. Let us duly consider the Trespasses committed against the orders of a true
Church, those Canons and Rules appointed for its better Government, which
Trespasses soon break out into endless Schisms and Separations.

That there is indeed some such thing necessary as Ecclesiastical Polity for
the Government of the whole Body of Religious Professors within such or such a
district, is acknowledged by the express Consent or open Practice of all
Churches whatsoever; and the end prescribed to all Religion whether true or
false being the Honor of the Supreme Being, and the securing a perfect and
substantial Happiness to Man, all Ecclesiastical Constitutions, according to
the various Capacities of Men's understandings are adapted to that end, all
concurring as much as possible with that Apostolical Canon, that all things
should be done to Edifying, 1 Cor. 14.26. that is, that all Particulars or
Circumstances whatsoever may be so contrived, all Laws so framed, as to confirm
and strengthen as well as instruct the Professors of such a Religion, in those
principles which the first Advancers of that Religion endeavor to inculcate
into their Followers as most directly tending, according to their best
apprehensions, to those great ends before named. Thus whatsoever God prescribed
in the Government of the Judaic Church, all those Ceremonial Appendages of it
aimed at this, to make the Natural Jews or those Proselyted to them, to have a
due respect and Honor to that Religion he had settled among them, to
acknowledge the infinite wisdom, goodness and absolute Dominion of God to and
over them; that so they, sensible of the difference between God's wisdom and
their own, and of his favor to them in condescending to be their Lawmakers and
Counselor, might acquiesce in his Commands, and study to act and live
accordingly. In the same manner that infamous Impostor Mahomet, contriving a
motley Religion, such a Hotchpotch of Fooleries as best might suit to the
variable tempers of Men, for the more sure irradicating it into their minds,
gave such Laws to his deluded Disciples, that a due Obedience to them must of
necessity make their Errors the more inveterate, and possess them with an
invincible Bigottry for that Religion by which alone they hoped to attain to
their truly ridiculous Paradise.

If we take a view of the Church of Rome and that adulterated Religion it holds
forth, we find its Canons and Constitutions very numerous and always increasing
considerably with those new Superstitions invented and entertained by it. And
as that Church lays a great deal of weight upon that straw and stubble which
they have raised upon the more excellent and solid foundation of the Gospel, as
it recommends all its Superstitious and Idolatrous Innovations to its Members
as the best and most ready means for the gaining everlasting Salvation; so that
prodigious heap of Ceremonies, with which its Divine Worship is encumbred, far
more than ever the Jewish Church was before, are employed to make their
Novelties the more valuable, and that large Body of the Canon Law there
received as the standard of Ecclesiastical government, obliges all Persons in
that Communion to such a method of Practice, as cannot but agree with, and
gradually instill, such Principles into their minds, as may make them exactly
conformable to even the grossest Errors which may be imposed upon them, under
the notion of assistances to Heaven.

Let us but consider the Case of those great disturbers of the Peace of the
Church of England in the Days of Queen Elizabeth, when they had picked what
faults they could with the public and Authentic Constitution of its
Government, when they called aloud for greater Purity in Religious Ordinances,
and a more thorough Reformation, to that end they were very active to contrive
a form of Discipline, which they called the Discipline of Jesus Christ, which
all who were true Professors were to submit themselves to: which Discipline was
of such a Nature, as that the deeper impression it made upon the minds of Men,
the more violent prejudices would it fill them with against the Orders of our
Church as by Law established, the more inflexible would it make them to all
motions to quietness and submission, the more closely would it knit and unite
them in one society, and all under the plausible pretense of pleasing God and
securing their own Happiness the better.

And the wretched Successors of that unhappy ancestry, in the times of our late
Troubles, when they had by their treacherous practices Confounded all things
Sacred and Civil, and had settled themselves in the Supreme Power among us, for
the support and desence of themselves were necessitated to make a Directory for
the worship of God, and to endeavor the settlement of a Classical Presbytery,
for the due Execution of such Laws as should be necessary for the establishment
of their Confused Church; and the Independents or Congregational Men where they
bear the Sway, as in New England, are forced to settle certain rules of
government in their Churches, nay the Quakers themselves are not without some
Methods of Policy in their Conventicles. All these, agreeing as far as possible
with those fond and Skeptical principles the several Factions have studied to
advance; and to do thus, in the sense of all those I have instanced in, is to
do what tends in their several ways to Edification: and indeed this course
seems agreeable to Natural Prudence though we had no Divine Command for it.

This then being a Method so universally agreed to, it seems very obvious, that
a breach made upon it, must necessarily tend to the dissolution of that Society
wheresoever it is admitted; and yet a nicety or tenderness of Conscience, as it
is abusively called, is as good a Plea for allowance of such a breach in one
Church or Religious Society, as in another. He who has scruples against the
Jewish Church-Laws, may have scruples too against Mahometism, against Popery,
against Presbytery, Independency, nay, against all the Religion in the World,
if a pretense to such a tenderness and scrupulosity be enough to loose every
Bond, and to break every Yoke; and it must needs procure Contempt to the best
and purest Religion, if it be not thought worth the while to oblige men by all
just ways to those Laws whereby it is guided and established. When Sects and
Heresies were permitted among the Jews notwithstanding the Fundamental
Constitutions of their Church, the solid Doctrines of Truth delivered to them
by the Divinely inspired Prophets, dwindled away into nice and useless
Speculations, obscure glosses and uncertain and Heretical Traditions: Sincere
Piety gave place to the transitory flashes of Hypocrisy, and Intestine Broils
and Divisions, in the Heat of which God's Honor was forgotten, contributed
largely to the utter ruin and subversion of their Nation; which was indeed no
wonder, Vengeance commonly taking place where Faith is banished; and so low was
that grown among them, that a poor Proselyted Centurion expressed more of Faith
to our Savior than he could find in Israel, Matthew. 8.10. And since the time
that the Followers of Mahomet gave way to new Prophets and Expositors of the
Originals of their Profession, their zeal is extremely abated, and much of that
debauchery and irreligion, which the very Alcoran forbad, has gotten ground and
favor among them, and the Papacy has lost as much almost of its power and
Interest in these parts of the World by the relaxation of its Discipline and
Indulgence to Contradictory Doctrines and Practices, as it has gained by all
its Legendary Miracles and newfangled Arts and Stratagems, assisted with the
extraordinary activity of its most zealous Agents and Emissaries.

Thus Puritanism in our Forefathers days, through its ineffectual attempts to
settle the Holy Discipline, prepared the way to Brownism and separation; a
little loosening the Golden Reins of Government in the Church of England, gave
entrance and increase to super-Puritanical Presbytery; and that, not being
sufficiently guarded by Directories and Ordinances, introduced Independency,
Quakerism, Familism, Libertinism, and all the Sects and Heresies, and more than
ever the Christian World had been acquainted with before.

When Humane Politiques first took place, and men united themselves into
regular Bodies, it was presently found that the wisest and most rational Laws
could not restrain the extravagancies of the multitude, unless some penalties
were annexed and a Power settled in some particular persons to execute those
penalties upon offenders; the same was proved true in Religious affairs also;
for though the ground and reason of all commanded or forbidden was never so
plain and notorious, yet Corrupt Man was ungovernable by pure Reason and
wisdom; so that some punishments were as necessary among Ecclesiastical as
among Civil Criminals; and this necessity has always made a necessary Connection
between the Temporal and Spiritual Laws, that one might be Assistant to the
other; that Religion might oblige men obedience to the Civil Powers, and
Corporal punishments compel them to submission to the Church. Thus God himself
in the Jewish Government joins the Judge and the Priest together, Deuteronomy. 17.8,
-- 13. If there arise a matter too hard for thee in judgment, between blood and
blood, between plea and plea, being matters of Controversy within the gates,
then thou shall arise and get thee up into the place which the Lord thy God
shall choose, and thou shall come unto the Priests the Levites and unto the
Judge that shall be in those days, and enquire, and they shall show thee the
sentence of judgment and the Man that will do presumptuously and will not
hearken unto the Priest, that stands to minister there before the Lord thy
God, or unto the Judge, even that man shall dye and thou shall put away the
evil from Israel, and when the Law was completed by Moses, we are told that he
wrote this Law and delivered it unto the Priests, the Sons of Levi, which bare
the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord, and to all the Elders, i. e. the Princes
and Civil governors of Israel, Deuteronomy. 31.9. so making the Priests and the
Princes joint Commissioners in the encouraging moral virtue and devotion, and
in repressing irregularity and disobedience, and though the sentence of
Excommunication denounced only by the Pastors and Governors of the Church be
really the most dreadful of all others, yet so much quicker generally is Man's
sense of bodily than of spiritual pain or danger, that the Temporal Magistrate
is frequently forced, for the keeping Men in the better aw, to make the
Execution of National Laws, the best evidence of the inconveniences attending
of the Anathema's of the Church; those who are willing enough to quit for ever
God's service, being very loath to lose the smallest temporal Revenue or
Privelege.

This mutual Assistance which Civil and Ecclesiastical Laws give to one
another, has at all times been found of so good effect for the keeping Men in
due bounds of sobriety and obedience, that so soon as there were any Christian
Princes, they presently set the Seal of their Authority to the Canons and Rules
made by Church Governors for the use of Christians: So the Imperial
constitutions gave security to Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, that men might know
there was a Coersive Authority invested in their spiritual Superiors, and that
such a one, as from which there could lie no advantageous appeal; and on the
other Hand Church Censures gave a strong confirmation to Imperial Sanctions,
evidencing the Consistency of Supreme Dominion and the power of Sword with the
fundamentals of Christianity, from which to the great satisfaction of temporal
Princes, it must notoriously appear that no Insurrection, Conspiracy,
Rebellion, or the like, could be commenced for Conscience Sake, but that
Conscience indeed under the Conduct of the Divine Law, would oblige men to
fidelity and subjection to their Rulers, not only to the good and gentle but
also to the froward, and hence it is that though there be a power inherent in the
Fathers of this Church of ours and that derived from Christ himself, by which
they may Anathematize Sinners and suspend unworthy persons from Church
Communion, or admit Converts to it; yet their Government is made the more easy
and successful, by having the favor of our National Statutes the Common Laws
of the Realm; by which while they meddle only with such things as are under
their Cognizance, they are protected from the malice and Revenge of Atheistical
and unreasonable men.

Had the Apostles been blessed with the same Assistance, it is no doubt but the
Gospel might have made at least more seeming Converts to it; the power of
working Miracles, the striking of guilty persons dead with a word, as in the
case of Ananias and Sapphira, did indeed in some measure supply that want and
yet even then, much more in the time of the next Successors, whosoever thought
himself not honored according to his merit, could make a defection from the
Church and contrive and propagate Heresies to ruin that Church, if possible,
which had rejected them; of which Simon Magus was a remarkable instance, or if
any were excommunicated for the foulest Crimes, they could but turn Heathens
again, and in revenge use their interest to raise a persecution against or to
blaspheme Christianity, and all this without any fear of being punished by the
Civil Magistrate. But though men had then those ways of evading punishment for
the present, that subtilty was no alleviation but an aggravation of their Sin:
and though upon a Church-Censure denounced against them, they flew in the face
of their Censurers in confidence of their impunity, those first and
Masterbuilders of the Church were not so frighted from their duties, well
knowing that though they escaped here, they would find the dreadful weight of a
justly inflicted Anathema hereafter.

But from a transgression of these Rules of Church Polity innumerable Sins take
their original, the precepts of Christianity are severe and mortifying, and
corrupt men are loath to be compelled to take such pains for Heaven, which
makes them oppose and vilify such Sanctions with the utmost vigor, and resolve
frequently never to submit to them unless upon their own terms, which gives
ground for separation. So the brutish Gnostics of old, cavill'd at the
imperfection and impunity of Church Discipline even in the Apostles time, and
under pretense of greater Holiness and knowledge, receded from the faithful
Believers; and what seminaries of filth and impiety their Conventicles proved
upon it, Church History sufficiently informs us. Upon the same reasons have all
those Schisms in the several Ages of the Church been made; when the severity of
Discipline pinched them, they have cried out for want of it, and under that
pretext have made a shift to live without any at all. Nor can we in this
present Age upon the strickest Enquiry, find more looseness, falsehood,
selfishness, or uncharitableness among any people whatsoever, than among those,
who upon pretense of Conscience, make fractures in the Church of God; nor can
that pretense extenuate the Sin of Separation* unless one Sin, be the best
Argument to excuse another by, or an Error in Opinion the best plea for an
Error in Practice; and the Doctrine and Discipline of our Church being both
built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, Jesus Christ himself
being the chief Cornerstone, it can appear strange to none, if they respect
one another, and concur to the building up and confirming men in their most
holy Faith; nor can any wonder at our Churches censuring those persons, who can
no way prove any Divine Command evacuated by her Laws, nor show any thing
derogatory in its Constitution from the Honor of God, and that reverence due
to his Sacred Word, nor find any impediment in its tendries to that Spirit and
Truth required in the worship of God, and yet with an empty cry against it of
Popery and Superstition, to which It of all other Churches is the most
irreconcilable Enemy, divide themselves from its Communion, labor night and
day to enlarge that division, encourage obstinacy in that practice from the
Pulpit and from the Press by the blackest Calumnies the Devil can suggest
against its Members, Pastors and Governors, as if it were of the essence of
true Protestant Religion, as well as that of the Jesuits, to lie stoutly, that
somewhat may stick to their purpose. St. Paul's practice was not such, the
Jewish worship and Doctrine was Corrupted indeed, and he endeavored to reform
them according to the appointment of the Savior: but he represents them not
worse than they were, by fictitious Stories, he sowed no divisions among them;
nay, we find not that among them he endeavored to persuade any to reject the
Ceremonial Law of Moses, though he would not admit of it among the Converted
Gentiles; nor against their Temple did he commit any offense whatsoever; and if
it be alleged that he preached against their Commands and in private, the
Objection answers it self; they would not give way to Christ's Doctrine,
therefore Paul and the rest of the Apostles must preach, or the World must
still have continued in Darkness: but we preach Christ and him Crucified as
well as the Objectors, we hope to be saved by his Merits and Mediation as well
as they, we forbid them not to speak in the name of Christ when they are
lawfully called to it; but we forbid them to Preach up their own fancies and
ill-grounded opinions, to fill men's heads with useless, idle and confounding
scruples, to instill a Pharisaical pride and uncharitableness in the minds of
weak, but well meaning Christians; and here the Civil Power strikes in with the
Prohibition, and they incur the Penalties of the National Laws, who employ
themselves so: those are to us, as the Rabbis say the Masorah is to the Mosaic
Law, the Hedge and sense of our Church power; which keep the wild Boars, the
Wolves and Foxes from breaking in upon us, and happy sure are we to whom God
has given such Nursing Fathers and Nursing Mothers, who have that care to
protect from growing and encroaching Enemies. But Hinc illae Lacrymae, hence
all those tears, those sad complaints of persecution, were but the Cherubins
and flaming Sword the Government and Laws removed from the gates of our
Paradise. How soon would our Enthusiastic and Tender-Conscienced Saints rush
into all places of Power and Profit, seize the Tree of Life it self, and once
more glut themselves with the Blood of the Slain. But now, alas! the edge of
that fatal Sword is turned upon them every way, the Garden of God is not to be
rooted up by them; other Arts therefore must be tried, embroil the State and
Church disorders shall escape unpunishment; and this hint brings me to the next
degree of wickedness, which the Apostle in the Text purges himself from, i.e.

. From any offense committed against the Law of the Jews, those Politics
whereby their State was governed, the natural Consequence of troubling and
dividing the Church; the Gnostics the Spawn of Simon Magus, were the first
Heretics that Broke the peace of the Church, and the first pretenders to
Christianity that appeared in opposition to the Caesarean Laws, engaging even
in Rebellions contrary to that Doctrine they professed to own. Nor did those
zealots among the Jews who thought the rest of their own Nation too impure for
their Society, transgress less when they sent for the Edomites to assist them
in ruining their Native Country and oppressing those who were better than
themselves, and how frequently the Edicts of Christian Emperors were slighted
by the Arrians, Eutychians, Donatists, and other Heretics and Schismatics, we
may learn from the most Authentic writers of Church History, and indeed this
Crime seems inevitable where the former is admitted; since those who separate
from others on account of purer administrations, and so make a Schism in the
Church, must of necessity hold meetings of their own Associates, to make a show
of Divine worship and so break the Edicts of the State.

It is plain that Unity in the Church and State, both carrying on the same good
design, must needs be the most happy and desirable thing in the World; but if
every one be permitted to act according to this own apprehension in the one, it
must unquestionably produce confusion and have a fatal influence on the other.
Thus if a man be permitted to separate from the Church of God, and to enjoy his
own way quietly in that state of separation, if he believe the end of Church
Discipline and Laws generally to be the good of his Soul, his better part, he
may reasonably conclude he may as well and upon as good grounds withdraw his
obedience from the Laws temporal, which only concern his Body, his meaner part,
or his estate and Fortunes; and this principle once entertained, what the
Consequences of it may be, a very ordinary Capacity will soon discover. So we
see it has been questioned by Anabaptists, Socinians, and others, whether it be
lawful for a Christian to exercise the Authority of a Magistrate, or to assume
to himself, though enabled by never so many humane Laws, the power of Life and
Death; now what trouble such Sectaries and Heretics have given to the Churches
of Christendom we all know: but may they not as justly question whether it be
lawful for a Christian to submit to any such Authority as he concludes unlawful
and an usurpation; and if they may not submit to Laws, and if they may not be
compelled by punishments, extending to Life and Limb, to that submission, the
Legislative power must be of small value, it being a mere Scarecrow at which
none but Fools can tremble.

I am ready as any Man to Believe, that were all men as sincerely Religious as
they ought to be, Laws without penalties or bare directions from their
Superiors, would be enough to govern them by: but the World is acquainted with
no such perfection, and therefore that burden which men by Sins have brought
upon themselves, they must submit to; and as self-preservation will engage a
man who has several enemies to secure himself from their attempts by all means
imaginable, the same reason obliges Princes and other Public persons, who are
the constant objects of Envious and Ambitious Spirits, to fortify themselves by
the best Laws and those by the best Alliances they can find out. Now though
Heathen Princes, out of a distrust of that Religion, with whose Principles they
were utterly unacquainted, were afraid to expect security from their own
Christian Subjects, and therefore rather chose foreign Confederacies and
Leagues whereby they might be able to depress those whom they always suspected
(though unjustly) ready for a Rebellion; Yet Christian Princes have insisted on
contrary Methods, and have endeavored, by Unity and mutual Confidence in their
Subjects, to secure themselves against Foreigners, for which end they have
advanced uniformity in sacred Worship as well knowing, that Nothing can create
a more complete Love and Union among men than a close agreement in the
weightiest actions of this life: and this agreement at home once well settled, a
Confederacy abroad against their own Subjects, if they be Christians indeed, is
altogether needless. But this Uniformity must be established and imposed by
Law: for we sind sew Subjects so submissive to their Rulers, as for their bare
desire to agree to any such thing; and by this means it comes to pass that
Church Uniformity cannot be interrupted, but Civil Constitutions must be broken
at the same time; that a Schism cannot commence in the Church, but it will
produce a faction in the State; every one concluding it their Interest to cry
up those of their own opinion, and they, if in power, making a retribution of
encouragement and protection. While the Constituent Members of the Church and
State are but Men Subject to mistakes and Errors, it can be no hard matter, for
malicious Wits to find several imperfections in both. The most pious and wise
among Church Governors and State-Politicians may take wrong measures of
things, and ordain sometimes such things, as, though Lawful, may upon trial be
found inconvenient, or though their Ordinances may be proper for the present
Juncture of Affairs, yet they may be impracticable afterward: So the Canons of
the Apostles concerning abstinence from things strangled and from blood, though
absolutely necessary to prevent giving Scandal to the Believing Jews at that
time, and though Dictated by the Holy Ghost, yet when the reason of that Canon
ceased, was soon antiquated and laid aside by the Churches in General: So we in
this Kingdom have had several Statutes made only upon probation for a term of
years, which expired, as they were found profitable or otherwise, they were
renewed or repealed: now this argues an acknowledgment of imperfection on both
sides, but is no reason for the disobedience of private persons on either. It
is the Apostles command, Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have the rule over you, and
submit your selves, for they watch for your Souls, as they that must give
Account, that they may do it with Joy and not with grief; and it is a command
backed with the same authority, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14, 15. Submit your selves to
every Ordinance of Man for the Lord's sake, Whether it be to the King as
Supreme, or to Governors as those that are sent by him, for the punishment of
evil doers, but for the praise of them that do well, for so is the will of God,
that with well doing we may put to silence the Ignorance of foolish Men. Now
these commands being of the same Authority and force, being both absolute and
illimited, and respecting both our Temporal and Spiritual Governors, he that
can dispense with his respect for one, may as warrantably absolve himself from
the obedience due to the other: nor can it be imprudence in any Prince to
believe with Constantius the Father of Constantine the Great, that those who
are undutiful to their God, can never be faithful Subjects to their Sovereign.

The Author of the Life of Julian the Apostate, has had the Impudence to tell
the World, That the Christians summitted to the Heathen Emperors of old,
merely because they were unable by reason of their small numbers to resist,
which contradicts the opinion of Tertullian, who even in persecuting times
assures us, that the Christians were so numerous that a bare quitting the Roman
territories had been revenge enough against their persecutors (In Apologet.)
it is strange he did not give them the same reason of Christ's yielding himself
to that infamous Death of the Cross; but it happens unfortunately, that our
blessed Savior, the Captain of our Salvation, tells Peter, that he could pray
to his Father, and he should presently give him more than twelve Legions of
Angels, Matt. 26.53. Assistants enough to baffle the utmost force of the Jews,
and it seems as Cross to his Assertion, that St. Peter himself tells us, that,
if we do well, if for Conscience Sake toward God we suffer though wrongfully,
and suffer patiently, not because we cannot help it, this is acceptable with
God, For even hereunto were we called, because Christ also, who did no sin,
neither was guile found in his mouth; who when he was reviled, reviled not
again, when he suffered, threatened not; he suffered for us, leaving us an
Example that we should follow his steps. 1 Pet. ii. 19, 23. And St. Paul
commands Every Soul to be subject to the higher Powers, not because they were
too weak to rebel, but because those that resisted, resisted the Ordinance of
God, which no strength or multitude could justify, and they that resisted
should receive to themselves damnation, Romans xiii. 1. Now he who could think a
Rebellion against a Lawful but persecuting Prince consistent enough with
Christian Patience and Meekness, if there were but Force enough to carry it on,
would never scruple if his tender conscience were disturbed by Canonical
Impositions, to revenge himself on that Government as soon as possible, which
should dare to Countenance the Imposers, of which Truth this day has given us a
dreadful instance.

But since the Power of the Civil Magistrate, is the defense of Church
Government, and that the same Civil Magistrate is obliged, by long settled Laws
and Statutes, to the protection of it, the best means as yet found out to help
this Grievance has been to get those Laws Repealed by which Sectaries and
Schismatics suffer. Now when we consider that even the most Arbitrary Monarchs
have their Counselors, of whose Advice they make use in all difficulties, and
by whose Advice the standing Laws are framed, and that the same Power which
Enacts Laws is required for their Repeal; the design of discontented persons
is, to procure the advancement of men like-minded with themselves to the
Cabinet Counsels of Princes, that so, by their Assistance, they may procure the
disanulling or at least the suspension of Pinching Statutes. Or if, as in this
Nation, the Prince calls together the Representatives of his People, chosen by
their own Suffrages, to consult de arduis regni negotiis, about the most
weighty Affairs of the Kingdom, by whose Authority, enlivened by the accession
of the Royal Consent, Acts are composed and made public, whereby such or such
a party of men are restrained from that Liberty they imagine themselves born
to, it is the employment of the same Malcontents, by fair and plausible
pretenses, and sometimes unjustifiable subtilties, to make the Votes of the
populace concur with their own desires in the Election of such persons for the
great Council of the Nation, who have nothing less than the Good of the Nation
in their thoughts, who only serve the Interest of that Party who chose them, by
restless endeavors to enervate established Laws, or wholly to lay them aside:
of this the Late Times give us too plain Examples.

The Puritans as they were then styled, that busy and indefatigable Party,
while they were but few in number, and so not likely to prevail in a public
Choice, endeavored by their Admonitions and Advices to the Members of
Parliament as already chosen, to allure or to affright them into an Agreement
with that Holy Discipline they then labored Night and Day to set up: but when
they found those worthy Patriots more Prudent, and Resolute than to take any
notice of their Flatteries or of their Threats, that their Paper pellets could
make no impression on them, they strait pursued another Method; they tried all
ways possible to curry favor with Men capable of serving in that Great Senate,
they courted the good opinion of the Multitude by exclaiming against the Vices
of the Age, especially against those of the Court, and of the best affected to
the Established Government, by declaiming loudly against the Excesses committed
under the Protection of Episcopal Government, by professing the greatest
aversation possible to the Usurpations, the Superstitious and Idolatrous
Doctrins and Practices of the Church of Rome, the Commonalty apprehending
nothing more Terrible than that Bloody Inquisition necessarily (as they
supposed) admitted with the Romish Religion, they ripped up all the Immoralities
of the Conformable Clergy, and added their own Fables to the Tale, showing
themselves in the mean time very precise and demure in public. By these and
other Artifices their Strength increased, several openly owning them, and great
numbers encouraging and favoring them privately: Nay many very sober and
conformable persons were so far deceived by a gay outside, as to conclude it
impossible for men of so much seeming Innocence and Holiness to carry on any
Ill Designs, on which account not giving them so vigorous an opposition at
first as was needful, they easily gained and made so considerable a Party in
the Great Council of the Land, as first was able to give Check to their Prince,
afterward to embroyl him in several Wars, and at last to deny him all Supplies
for the carrying those Wars on, unless at the Price of breaking his Coronation
Oath, quitting the Protection of the True Church of God, reversing those Laws
which under God secured the Crown on his own Head, Dethroning himself, and
putting the Reins of Government into the hands of a few Arbitrary and
Domineering Demagogues. And this is the short and true Scheme of those Hellish
Politics by which Three Kingdoms were almost brought to Desolation.

And who can wonder at that dismal event of things? from those who enter into
courses of Separation out of Spleen or Revenge, every one knows what is to be
expected; and as for those who follow them from motives which they imagine to
proceed from Conscience, their Zeal is commonly so hot and furious, that being
Confident of the Divine Obligation and nature of those Rules they walk by, and
of the desperate and damnable Errors which those who agree not with them in all
things run themselves into, they conclude the utter Extirpation of all such to
be the doing the work of the Lord heartily: they think no means too violent to
propagate their Opinions, nor that any kind of Cruelty which compells men
whether they will or not to go to Heaven. If such imagine the Established Church
to be that Babylon so much condemned in Scripture, 'twill not be enough for
them the People of God, to come out of her, but the Daughter of Babylon being
destined to destruction, Happy shall he be that takes and dashes her little
ones against the stones; according to the Psalmists expression, Ps. 137.8, 9.
Nay what can it be accounted but the most complete Charity for me, when I am
sure I am in the way to Happiness my self, to do the utmost to bring all others
into the same Blissful Condition?

About 600 Years after the building of Rome, some tell us that the Institutes
of Numa Pompilius, the second King of Rome were found, which being inspected by
the Quindecemviri appointed for such purposes, and found to contain a far
different Scheme of Religion from what was then used among the Romans, the
Senate ordered them to be burnt ( Lactan l. 1. c. 22.) so fearful were that
People of Creating general disorders by permitting Innovations in the Sacred
Rites. But that Religion they so carefully defended being false and Idolatrous,
How much more reason have Christian Princes and Governors to secure theirs,
which is founded upon the Infallible word of God, from the encroaching
Impertinencies of froward Schismatics; that Law which forbids Conventicles of
Separatists, is grounded upon that reason that in those Meetings Seditions and
Treasons had frequently been, and at any time might be contrived; the reason is
good and true, and in Venner's Case was proved, and where Men can have the
confidence to break the Statute by meeting in unlawful Assemblies, it is mere
Cavilling to question whether they could not with as good a Conscience make
Good the reason of it. Some from Scotland in the Days of Queen Elizabeth,
endeavored to commend the newfangled Reformation, as no Enemy to Government;
and yet even in that very discourse Penned for the purpose, They charge the
Judges and Lawyers, a Company of Godless Men, as they call them, with having
made it a Common and long practice, to make of the Statutes ordained for the
maintenance of Religion and Common quietness, a Pit wherein to catch the
peaceable of the Lord, (See Bancroft' s English Scottizing, p. 54.) and this
when they acted justly according to Law and the true meaning of it, by which
words they plainly express their hatred to the common Laws, which yet they own
at the same time to be the bonds of peace and quietness. But Authority sleeps
not all this while, the Sword is often and justly drawn to quell these dividing
and seditious Spirits. Kings cannot see Religion ruined and their Laws trampled
upon without a deep resentment; which the most factious persons are very
sensible of, but that Consideration is so far from quieting their turbulent
Humors, that it rather drives them on to more desperate and impious actions.
If they may not separate from the Church without disturbance, nor break the
Laws of the Nation without punishment, the next Blow shall be at the Lawgivers
Head, the very foundations of the Government shall be overturned, and that by
the

3d. Thing St. Paul clears himself in the Text from, viz. by treachery and
Rebellion, by flying in the face of Caesar himself, the best security a
Dilinquent in the former respects pretends to. It was doubtless a very happy
time, in the opinion of such, among the Israelites, when there was no King in
Israel, but every man did that which was right in his own eyes, Judge. 21.25.
and yet some, and upon very good grounds, have imagined that that very
circumstance, the want of a King or Supreme Governor, was the cause of such
deeds, as never had been seen, from the day that the Children of Israel came up
out of Egypt, to that time, Judge. 19.30. and had almost procured the utter
excision of one of their Tribes, chapter 21.3. But this is not always a security
sufficient for a Malefactor. Cain, when he had murdered his Brother, feared no
Superiors animadverting upon him; and yet that guilt which lay upon his mind
told him, that every one that found him should slay him, and when the Jews by
slighting their own Religion and by breaking God's Laws, had provoked him to
bring the Chaldean army to scourge them, they hoping that the Egyptian power
would secure them, the Chaldeans having already raised their siege that was
laid against. Jerusalem, the Prophet Jeremiah assures them, That though they
had smitten the whole army of the Chaldeans, so that there should remain none
but wounded men among them, even those wounded men should rise up every one in
his Tent and burn Jerusalem with fire, Jer. 37.10. from both which instances it
appears that even where there are no higher powers to call Men to an Account
for Crimes, their very equals, or it may be their Inferiors will be their
punishers.

But though this be indeed true, yet the way of opposing the higher powers in a
covert or open manner, by Treachery or Rebellion, is the best help guilty
persons can find out. By so doing they stand upon their guard, and challenge
Justice if it dare to attacque them. But that is not enough, such men as have
outlawed themselves by their disobedience, are too distrustful to keep
themselves only in a defensive posture; a single person seldom is a Rebel; if
there be Confederates, there must be some rule of maintaining that Confederacy;
and those who have transgressed just and justly imposed Laws, may as readily,
upon a fair opportunity offered, break those unjust articles, by which
Conspiracies are holden together. So Sheba the Son of Bichri, the Ringleader
of the Rebellion against David, had his Head thrown over the Walls of Abel by
his own party, when that Sacrifice might divert a storm from their Heads.
Therefore such persons are generally the Aggressors in a Civil War, hoping by
activity and a full employment, to engage all their Party so far in the
displeasure of their Superiors, that mere despair of Pardon shall make them
saithful and resolute in their perfidious undertakings. To this purpose it was
subtly enough advised by Achitophel in the Rebellion of Absalom, That Absalom
should go in to his Fathers Concubines, one of the foulest actions he could
possibly be guilty of; the reason of which he gives, all Israel shall hear that
thou art abhorred of thy Father, then shall the hands of all that are with thee
be strong, 2 Samuel 16.21. for when the People had once seen Absalom's resolution
by that unpardonable Villainy, and made themselves his Accomplices by being
Spectators and Approvers of it, it was not questioned but that they would
rather dye valiantly fighting in the defense of their Leader, than submit to
the barbarous usage of a common Executioner. Now a concurrence in wickedness
being the only bond in such associations, it proves sufficiently the wickedness
of that end aimed at by them.

But if the hopes of impunity be so great an incentive to an open Rebellion in
Common temporary cases, what shall we imagine of such persons, who when they
rebel think they do God good service, who think they have an extraordinary call
from Heaven to bind their Kings in chains and their Nobles in links of Iron,
that so the Kingdom of Jesus Christ may be advanced in this World? Other
Malefactors own the Execution of Laws, but the Execution of Justice; and did
they not reach their lives, would possibly endeavor to appease their incensed
Governors, by a quick submission and promises of amendment: but these act upon
other principles, they tell us of the Phanatick suggestions of a melancholic
Demon within them, which they Nickname Conscience, which assures them they
are then in the most excellent way, when they tread in Contrary paths to all
the Powers of this world, whether Christian or Heathen; that all those Laws
whereby their designs are crossed are wicked and Antichristian, whosoever was the
Author of them; that Christian Princes are bound to favor and encourage them,
in setting Jesus the everlasting King upon the holy hill of Sion, though they
be never so much dissatisfied in the Methods pursued to that purpose; that by
persecuting and rebelling against Princes, who impede them in their attempts,
and forcing them to lay their Crowns at the footstool of Christ's throne, they
acquire the Crown of Martyrdom to themselves, if they fail, and of Saints
Triumphant if they accomplish their Intentions. While this Frenzy and these gay
hopes predominate in the heads and minds of men, all their undertakings must
consequently be violent in extremity: it is hard to make them listen to the
words of truth and soberness, the zeal of God's house eats up their very
Intellectuals, and makes them like insensible Machines, move either by
prescription or not at all.

Of this Humor the Scribes and Pharisees in our Savior's time seem to have
been; their Religion altogether vain and superstitious, yet they so persuaded
of its perfection, and so bewitched into an inordinate Love of it, that their
Savior the everlasting Jesus, who came to rectify their misapprehensions, to
turn the Hearts of the disobedient to the wisdom of the Just; was looked upon
but as an inconsiderable Fellow, a mere cheat and Impostor? they built so much
upon misinterpreted Prophecies and the Infallibility of their own Judgments,
that though their Forces were weak, their Interest contemptible and their Case
desperate, they ventured to provoke the Roman power, till they had indeed made
good their own Imprecation, and brought the Innocent blood of the Son of God
upon themselves and upon their Children. It Is this Conceit of themselves, which
makes the Turks to this day expose their Lives so prodigally to the Christian
Swords, not doubting either of Conquest, or if they dye, but that they shall
be, with open Arms, received by their great Prophet Mahomet into the joys of
his sensual Paradise: It Is this opinion which gives the Jesuited Proselytes of
the Church of Rome courage enough to traverse unknown Countries by Sea and
Land, as the Pharisees of old, to make one Proselyte, though they have little
reason to hope for Life among those barbarous strangers; and the same makes
them so ready to contrive and to engage in Treasons, Insurrections and
Assassinations, hoping that by such adventures they should either enlarge the
bounds of their Idolatrous Religion, or exalt themselves beyond the danger of a
terrible Purgatory: and those who remember the ordinary applications, of Curse
ye Meroz, etc. in former times, or have taken notice of Mr. Baxter 's Calender
of Saints in the first Editions of his Saints everlasting Rest, may have reason
to believe, that some in our own Nation have been intoxicated with the same
damnable opinions, by which they have been hurried on to folly and wickedness
beyond expression or conception.

I never yet heard an Instance of the good settlement of Religion by the Sword,
nor can I believe an attempt to that purpose consistent with the Spirit of
Christianity; Nor do the Ringleaders of Heresy or Schism believe any such
thing themselves. Ambition and Pride are the Beginners of them, though
sometimes very Sober and mortified Men may be deluded so far as to carry them
on; Had Valentinus or Marcion been made Bishops it is possible they had never
been Heretics, but when their expectations of that kind failed, as Julius
Caesar thought it more honorable to be the first Man in a little Village, than
to be the second in Rome, so they thought it better to be the Heads of a
miserable Party of seduced Wretches, than to manage an inferior office in the
Church of God: Hence they bad defiance to the truths of the Gospel, making good
thereby the assertion of St. James 4.1. that Wars and fightings, Heresies and
dissentions, arise from men's lusts that war in their Members. Now the Leaders,
though they regard not the Dictates of Conscience, or act not according to
their knowledge, they strive by false notions of Conscience instilled into the
minds of others, to make them believe they act so, even when they run into the
greatest Errors in Religion, and the greatest dangers in their worldly
concerns: but how easy is the work from this false ground laid, to make even
wise Men mad? What, is not life and liberty dear to us, will we not run the
extremest hazards for their preservation, are not our temporary priveleges of
the highest value, and will we not keep them at the expense of our estates? is
not our Country the object of our most passionate Love, and will not we expose
our Lives themselves for its defense? but what are our Priveleges, our Lives,
our Liberties, or our Country to our Religion; our Priveleges may be lost and
we yet thrive and prosper; our Liberties may be retrenched and we yet have
diversion in a Prison; our Country may be Conquered and yet our Concerns
secured; our Liveslost, and yet eternal Happiness gained; but when our Religion
goes, Prosperity here, and the hopes of Happiness hereafter are for ever lost.
It Is true, Religion is indeed of greater worth than any thing we can enjoy here
below, but must we therefore do evil that good may come of it? must we forfeit
one part of our Religion for the maintaining the other, advance the service of
God by rebelling against his Substitutes? God forbid! it is a part of our
Religion that we should Believe in God and serve him through Jesus Christ our
Lord; and rather than quit this belief we should suffer the Gibbet, Ax, Wheel
or Rack, or whatsoever inventive Malice can make use of to our Terror; but it
is withal a part of our Religion, to be subject to the higher Powers, not only
for wrath, but for Conscience Sake, and rather to bear the Effects of all those
suspicions Jealous heads can entertain of their designs against our Profession,
than to lift up rebellious Swords against the Gods of the Earth our Lawful
Superiors.

It is generally supposed that Princes and Governors have a severe eye upon all
Innovators, and that they cannot contentedly endure those who are of a
different Religion from themselves, but that one time or other they will
revenge that affront put upon them by dissenters. This supposition is laid hold
on by Ill men, Enemies to the Church and State; for first they study to draw
others off, under a pretense of some great deficiency, from the public
National Profession; then they encourage to a perseverance in their separation;
then persuade them they have by so doing exasperated the Civil Magistrate
beyond hopes of reconciliation; and last, to add Sin to Sin, teach them to rise
against their Lords, and to extort that liberty of Conscience they cry out for,
from their Superiors by force of Arms; and whereas well meaning persons may
possibly scruple to lift up their Hands against the Lords Anointed, Knox, and
Buchanan and others of that Leven, have given out a relaxing Doctrine, That
Princes for just causes may be deposed. That the People have the same power
over the King, the highest Governor, that the King has over any one Man. That
the Commons of any Kingdom may lawfully require of their King to have true
Preachers, of which the same Commons must be the ultimate Judges: and if he be
negligent, then they, the Commons, themselves may justly provide them, maintain
them, defend them against all that persecute them, and may detain the profits
of Church Livings from those Preachers whom they approve not of, all Laws,
Ordinances, Statutes, to the contrary notwithstanding. And now where these or
the like Doctrines obtain credit, where so much power is put into the hands of
the People, what Church can be at Unity long within it self, what Laws of any
effect or Validity, what Governors can be secure from the violence of the
giddy-headed, changeable and easily deluded Populace?

Had the Apostles and other the first Preachers of the Gospel advanced such
odious Doctrines as these, they would soon have brought the World about their
Ears, and Pliny would have found something else to have informed the Emperor
Trajan about than their Honest mutual Engagements, their early Prayers and
inordinate Superstition, nor would Providence have been concerned in defense of
an armed Gospel; such discoveries were reserved to the news lights of our
times, who else would have had nothing to have recommended themselves to the
World by. One main reason of St. Paul's speaking so much against divisions and
breaches in the Church of Christ was, that by unity and peace among themselves
Christians might become the less obnoxious to the State: For, since it pleased
God sometimes, even under Heathen Kings and Emperors, to give the Churches
peace on every side, and the uninterrupted protection of the Laws, he would not
have them by Schisms among themselves drive one another to a necessity of
trespassing upon those Laws they were Protected by, nor to exasperate the
higher Powers so far as to reduce themselves to the sad choice of Perfecution
or Rebellion. He had given them a better example by his own Carriage toward the
Jews, when he could truly plead for himself against them, that neither against
the Law of the Jews, nor against the Temple, nor against Caesar, had he offended
any thing at all; and happy had we in this Nation been, had those great
pretenders to Holiness and Reformation, who caused all our woes and miseries
some years since, followed this great Apostle's pattern, but the Act of
Parliament for the observation of this Day, informs us of the impossibility of
such a thing; It tells us They were a party of wretched Men desperately wicked
and hardened in their impiety, who having first plotted and contrived the ruin
of this Excellent Monarchy, and with it of the true Reformed Religion, which
had been long protected by it, and flourished under it.; found it necessary in
order to the Carrying on their traitorous and pernicious Designs, to throw down
all the bulwarks and fences of Law, and to subvert the very Being and
Constitution of Parliament, that so they might at last make their way open for
any farther Attempts upon the sacred Person of his Majesty himself, they then
began at the destruction of the Church, proceeded to subversion of the Laws,
ended in an Horrid Rebellion and the Barbarous murder of their Sovereign. Many
perhaps in those black days had no prospect of those damnable Consequences;
learn from thence then the folly of those who dare engage themselves in
separating and Schismatical Courses, how God in them punishes one sin by
another commonly, till their damnation is irremediable; but who could have
suspected such Cruel Wolves under their Sheeps clothing, who could have
believed such plausible pretenses had veiled such devilish Treachery and
Hypocrisy? or indeed who could but suspect them if their first motions were
but rationally balanced? This Nation, nor any of its Neighbors were ever
blessed with a Prince of more Prudence, Goodness, or Exemplary Piety, than
Charles the first of glorious Memory; No Church since the time of our Savior
and his Apostles themselves, was ever reformed to a higher or more Apostolical
Purity in Doctrine or Discipline: No greater or more faithful Lights shone in
the whole Christian world at that time, than the Fathers of our Church the
Priests attending at God's sacred Altar: Our National felicity, our plenty,
riches, prosperity were the Envy and Wonder of all the Nations round about us.
Now when men begin to cry out for Reformation in such a juncture of Affairs as
this, it looks like earnest seeking for a reason of Quarrelling; it argues a
Capricious and discontented Humor to complain without cause, and a foul
Stomach to nauseate the descending Manna the food of blessed Angels. When the
Malicious Heads of the Age had Caball'd together, to render the Government as
obnoxious as possible, when they had made all the bitter reflections imaginable
upon the Prelates of the Church, the Counselors of the State and the King
himself their Head, when they had searched the very Cabinet of their Prince and
exposed his most reserved Secrets to the View of the World, even then all their
Charges were proved by the clearest reasons to be, nothing but Slanders,
Calumnies, Lies, and the most gross absurdities that united Hell could ever
invent; How often then were the traitorous Swords of his sworn Subjects lifted
up against the sacred life of their gracious Sovereign, and yet at that very
time, In what charming terms did that Gentle Prince woe his stubborn and
obdurate Rebels but seriously to weigh and examine the truth of things before
it was too late! in how pathetic terms did he set before them the dangers they
exposed themselves to both in this and the future World by setting themselves
against the ordinance of God! How did his tender Soul relent for those unhappy
Wretches whose zealous Ignorance hurried them to death in so cursed a Cause!
but alas, the hardest Rocks, the very Walls that held him a Prisoner to his
Rebels, were not more insensible than those remorseless Villains, who by
Treasons had got the greater power, and were resolved to abuse it to his
destruction, for whose sacred life millions of such Hellish Souls had been but
too mean a Sacrifice: Our Savior once told Pilate, that, If his Kingdom had
been of this world, then his servants would have fought that he should not have
been delivered to the Jews, John 18.36. The Case was altered now, our
Saint-like Rebels thought the Kingdom of Charles the First, not to be of this
World, else would they never have been so unnatural to have fought against, to
have condemned, to have murdered him. Jews indeed they were in wickedness, and
labored hard to copy out Jewish treachery and cruelty to their Messiah the
ever blessed Jesus, in their false and bloody Dealing with his Vicegerent the
Anointed of the Lord. It was an ill sight in the judgment of Solomon, to see
Servants on Horseback and Princes like Servants walking upon the Earth, Eccl.
10.7. but how much more dismal was the sight to see, a great Monarch led by a
company of brutish Guards, as his Savior had been before, as a Sheep to the
slaughter; to see awful Majesly appear by compulsion before those persons his
pretended Judges, whose Fathers he would have disdained to have set with the
Dogs of his flock; Who were children of fools, yea, children of base men who
were viler than the earth, as Job 30.1.8. expresses it; there to hear himself
vilified and belyed by the impudence of a Mercenary Wretch; to hear the
sentence of Death pronounced upon him by those who owed their own lives to the
protection of his Laws, even then when they broke them desperately to his
ruin! But what Adamantine Heart but would bleed, to see that Sacred Head
struck off by an execrable Villain, and showed to the Astonished Multitude
under the scandalous Name of the Head of a Traitor! Such as this surely was a
thoroughly reforming Practice, well becoming those Blood-thirsty Saints, whose
Devilish achievements we this day sadly Commemorate. Thus Jesuitism and
Separation go hand in hand, both hold Princes responsible to their Subjects as
Superiors; both hold them liable as well as others to Excommunication; both
hold the Subjects absolved from their sworn Allegiance to that Prince, whom
they judge an Enemy to God; both hold it lawful to oppose him by force of Arms;
and both conclude in Murder: and I make no question but the same Heaven which
received St. Garnet, St. Fawx, St. Clement, St. Ravilliac, and their Followers,
may equally contain St. Cromwell, Bradshaw, Corbet, Peter's, and the rest of
that Hellish fraternity, who all dyed impenitent in the same damnable faith, if
their own Friends belly them not.

But the Sun is risen again, God has visited us in Mercy beyond our deserts,
and we see the Gracious Son of Charles the Martyr seated on the throne of his
Father: May his Reign be prosperous and his Days many; ready has this
incorrigible Nation been to run headlong again into its former woes;
Antimonarchical Doctrines walk abroad again in open day; Suspicions and
Jealousies are reentertain'd; the busy Separatists active to buoy up their
Party, and to make an Interest once more great enough to reverse those Laws
which justly take notice of them as Hypocritical and Seditious, rather than
true Protestants: The old Steps had been so far traced again, that had not
Almighty God inspired his Vicegerent among us with wisdom from above to crush
those Basilisks in their early motions, the Kingdom, in all probability, had
e're this been made an Acel-dama a field of Blood. But thanks be to God at last
the Snare is broken and we in some measure delivered; God of his mercy direct
our Sovereign still, and confound the subtle and incessant Devices of his
Enemies; God grant that we may know in this our day the things that belong to
our Peace, that we may sincerely pray for and obey our Prince, that we may
contend earnestly for that Faith which was once delivered to the Saints; that
laying aside all Malice and Hypocrisy, we may serve the Lord our Defender and
the Restorer of our breaches, with fear, and rejoice before him with reverence,
that his blessing may ever rest upon us and upon our King, for Jesus Christ's
sake; To whom with the Father and the Holy Spirit, etc.

FINIS.

