THE Miraculous Fasting OF THE NAKED-MAN; Being a Strange and True Account how
Mr. Joseph Wright, (who, for Ten or Twelve Years last past, went Naked through
the Streets of the City and Suburbs of London) has Lived in the
Poultery-Compter Thirty Five Days without Eating or Drinking, notwithstanding
he had lost Twelve Ounces of Blood the day before his Confinement.
IT is not unknown to most of the Inhabitants in and about the City of London,
how Mr. Joseph Wright has for Reasons (best known to himself) gone Naked, from
the Waste upwards, and exposed himself to the tharpest and keenest Frosts, that
have happened in so many Years, not regarding the Admonitions and Persuasions
of his Friends to the contrary, who are known to be Persons of good Worth; so
that it is believed his Obstinacy proceeded from a Resolution as unaccountable
and irrevocable, as this which he has taken up of late, being resolved not to
Eat nor Drink during his Confinement.

About five Weeks ago, he being a little out of order, was Blooded, and there
was taken from him Twelve Ounces of Blood; the next day walking Abroad, he was
Arrested by a Sergeant, and carried to a Spunging-House in Grocers-Alley, where
he seemed very much dissatisfied at the wrong they had done him, he being (as
he said) a perfect Stranger to the Persons that caused his Arrest, insomuch
that he would suffer no Company to come near him, except one Woman. The
Landlady of the Spunging-House not caring for such a Guest as would neither Eat
nor Drink, (he having vowed not to Eat nor Drink till he was at Liberty) sent
him to the Poultry-Compter, where he took a Chamber, and immediately Locked
himself up, not suffering any one willingly to come near him, except to make
his Bed, and bring him an Apple in a Day, to chew on, and Spit out again; not
allowing himself any other Sustenance to support Nature; Insomuch that he is
worn to an Anotomy in his Body, yet his Face looks tollerably well. There have
been several Persons to dissuade him from so Obstinate a Humor, and not to be
guilty of his own Death; but all of them are repulsed by his sharp Repartees,
bidding them mind their own Welfare, and not molest him; he being continually
peevish, not caring to be asked any Questions. He has fasted Thirty-five Days,
which can be testified upon Oath, by several in the Poultry-Cimpter, if
required, and particularly by a Sober Woman that attends him. It is miraculous
thar Flesh and Blood can subsist so long without Sustenance, and it is sapposed
by his Appearance and hearty Speaking, he may live sometime longer; so great a
Wonder has not been known, especially by one who designs more to affront the
Deity by self-Murder, than out of any Zeal or good Intent. He not seeming
otherwise Disturbed, or Distracted in Mind, but able to return a Rational
Answer to those, to whom he will vouchsafe to speak.

POSTSCRIPT.
If any seem Diffident of this Wonderful Relation, they may be fully satisfied
of the Truth thereof, by the Master Turnkey, and all the Prisoners in the
Compter, where they may likewise see Mr. Wright himself, who still continues as
Prisoner there.

Poultery-Compter London, October. 8. 1700.
Licensed according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for J. H. in Fleet Street, 1700.


