A View of the COURT OF St. GERMAIN, From the Year 1690, to 95, With an Account
of the Entertainment PROTESTANTS meet with there.

Directed to the MALCONTENTS PROTESTANTS OF ENGLAND.

LONDON, Printed for R. Baldwin, near Oxford-Arms-Inn in Warwick Lane, MDCXCVI.

The PREFACE.
THE Ages to come, will hardly believe, that in England their should be found
one single Protestant Jacobite, at this time of Day: And the Reformed Nations
abroad are at a loss what to make of that unaccountable Species of Men.

When most of the Roman Catholic Princes have heartily embraced the late
Revolution in Britain, as the last Effort for the Common Liberty of Europe, and
have entered into the strictest Alliance, with those of an opposite Religion to
Support it. It looks like a Dream, to meet with any English Protestant in an
Interest contradi^ory to, not only the Public Liberty of their Country, but to
the Religion they profess.

It was indeed no great wonder that the late King made all the Steps possible
toward the Change of the Religion, in his Opinion, Heretical; at a time when
he was upon the Throne, and backed with all the promising Supports of Regal
Power, yet even then he thought himself obliged to keep some Measures with his
Protestant Subjects, and in stead of a total Rupture with them, endeavored to
lull them asleep under the Specious Pretense of Liberty of Conscience, till all
his Engines were ready to give the fatal Blow.

But now, that he has fallen under Circumstances, which one would think should
much more then ever oblige him to assume anew, at least keep on the old Mask:
Upon the quite contrary since he went to France; he has taken all pains
imaginable to let the World know, his inveterate aversion to all those of the
Reformed Religion, though never so much his Friends; and at the same time has
given us the most Authentic Demonstration of his firm design, never to allow
any there of his Favor, nor owe his Restoration to any but Roman Catholics.
All which will appear by the following account of his Carriage toward those
few Protestants that have followed his sinking Fortunes, the length of St.
Germains.

A View of the COURT OF St. Germain; Directed to the Malcontents Protestants
of ENGLAND.
THERE being already so many Volumes to show the Lawfulness of the late
Revolution, it is Superfluous, it seems, to make any further attempt on the
same Subject: for if you have shut your Eyes against the strong Arguments and
convincing Proofs made use of in those Books, who can flatter himself to cure
you of that wilful Blindness? However, I hope, this plain account I make bold
to direct to you, will not prove altogether useless, for when I consider your
Party, I think I may reasonably believe that it is made up of some good and
Honest Men, though misguided by a tender Conscience, and of some self-interested
Persons, who being not able to obtain the Preferments they expected, have
turned Jacobites in hopes to advance their Fortune by a Second Revolution. But
give me leave to tell you further, that after an impartial enquiry into the
Life and Conversation of your Party, I have all the reasons in the World to
conclude that the number of the Conscientious Jacobites, I have spoken of, must
be very little, and that the greatest number among you are hurried away by the
imaginary hopes I have hinted at; therefore if I can convince you, that you
have no reason to flatter your selves, to obtain any reward or preferments
under King James, no, not when he should be restored by your means, I hope some
of you will open their Eyes to their own Interest, and forsake a Prince from
whom you cannot expect any grateful Return.

I will not recall to your Minds his Behavior while he was on the Throne of
England, I suppose no body has forgot that no Protestants were welcome to him,
but such as would promise to betray the Liberties of their Country to Popery,
and Arbitrary Power; neither shall I mention how severely he used the
Protestants of Ireland in 1689; you would be apt to say that being in Popish
hands, he could not avoid it, but I intend only to give you a short view of his
Court at St. Germain, and an account of the Entertainment the Protestants of
your Party have met there: For if a Prince in his Circumstances, whose interest
it ought to be to court Protestants, cannot conceal for a time the Hatred he
has for them, what treatment can you expect from him, when he is re-inthroned,
and Supported by the Power of France?

King James retiring into France after his defeat at the Boyn, left the
Administration of his Affairs in Ireland to my Lord Tyrconnel, and in Scotland
to the Colonels Buchan and Cannon; and the French King having appointed St.
Germain in Lay for his reception, he there began to form a Court in the Year
1690, and his Household was constituted as follows, The Duke of Powis Lord
Chamberlain. Colonel Porter, Vice-Chamberlain. Colonel Skeleton, Comptroller.
The Earls of Dumbarton and Abercome, Lords of the Bedchamber. Captains,
Macdonald, Beadles, Stafford, and Trevanian, Groom of the Bedchamber. The two
Sheldons, Esquires. Fergus Graham, Privy Purse. Sir John Sparrow, Board of
Green Cloth, and Mr. Strickland, Vice Chamberlain to the Queen.


The Officers of State were as follows,

Mr. Brown (Brother to my Lord Montague Brown, and sometime Commissioner of the
Custom) Secretary of State for England. Father Jnnes, President of the Scots
College at Paris, Secretary of State for Scotland, Sir Richard Neagle,
Secretary of State for Ireland.
To these were added as a Juncto, Mr. Carril the Queens Secretary, and Mr.
Stafford, formerly Envoy at the Court of Spain, whom the King called together
as a Privy Council to advise with upon all Emergencies: The Earl of Melford
Prime Minister of State being sent to Rome sometime before, partly to Negociate
King James's Affairs at the Pope's Court, and partly to remove him from the
Jealousies of the Irish, who at that time wholly Monopolized this Prince's Ear
and Favor.

Thus things continued for a while, but Ireland being reduced sometime after,
and the Scottish Highlanders Submitting, the Court of St. Germain was every day
thronged with Gentlemen from those Kingdoms, as well as from England; and then
a Protestant Party began to distinguish themselves, and endeavor to make an
appearance at that Court.

The first considerable step they made, was to desire a Chapel from King
James, for the exercise of their Worship according to the Church of England,
and proposed Dr. Granvile, Brother to the Earl of Bath, formerly Dean of
Durham, as a fit Person to be their Chaplain; they urged the great
Encouragement, such a Toleration would give to his Adherents in England, and
what satisfaction it would be to such Protestants as followed him; but though
common Policy, and his Circumstances made every Body believe that this Request
would be easily granted, yet it was positively denied, and Dr. Granvile obliged
not only to retire from Court, but also from the Town of St. Germain to avoid
the daily Insults of the Priests, and the dreaded Consequences of the
Jealousies with which they possest't King James's Court against him. Dr.
Gordon, a Bishop of Scotland, the only Protestant Divine that then was there,
met with a worse Treatment still than Dr. Granvile, and was reduced to the
necessity of abjuring his Religion for want of Bread, with which he could not
be Supplied, but upon those hard terms. However K. James being sensible that
such an usage would prejudice his Interest in Britain, resolved to prevent the
coming of any Protestant Divine there, and therefore sent Mr. Macqueen in
Company of Major Scot into England, who brought Letters from him to his
Friends, in which he required them to trouble him no more with Divines, as
Messengers.

This bad Success did not altogether discourage the Protestant Party, they made
a second effort upon the Constitution of the beforementioned Council of Five,
to have one of the number at least a Protestant: They insisted upon the
Advantages which might thence redound to his Majesty's Affairs in Britain, and
for that end did earnestly recomend my Lord Chief Justice Herbert as a Person
both well qualified to give Advice in English Affairs, and of an unspoted
reputation in his Country. Those reasons where so convincing, that the Irish
fearing they would obtain their demand; an Information was trumped up against
the chief Justice by Mr. Comptroller Skeleton, and Sir William Sharp, of having
said that King James's violent Temper would ruin himself and all that followed
him. My Lord owned the Words, but made so ingenious an Explanation of his
meaning, which was in relation to the Act of Settlement in Ireland; that King
James was satisfied. The Irish having missed their Aim, formed a short time
after another Plot against him, and charged him of corresponding with the
English, and mis-representing the Transactions of that Court, whereupon he and
a worthy Lady, with whom he boarded, were confined, and Broomfield the Quaker
committed to the Bastile. And thus was this Lord Chief Justice for no other
reason, but his adhering to a Protestant Interest, excluded from all share of
management of Affairs in King James's Court tho his Capacity and Sufferings
were sufficient in the Eyes of all reasonable Men, to have entitled him to a
share in that Prince's Favor and Secret. If my Lord Chief Justice Herbert was
so used, I would fain know upon what ground any of our Jacobites should flatter
himself of a better Treatment.

Mr. Cockburn of Lanton in the Kingdom of Scotland, was the next Protestant
that had Merit and Favor enough to pretend to a share in the management of
King James's Affairs. This Gentleman having followed him in Ireland, was taken
at Sea, after the Battle of the Boyn, and brought Pisoner to London; but a
Proposal being made of Exchanging him for Captain St. Lo, then Prisoner in
France, he was enlarged, and during his abode here, did so ingratiate himself
with the most considerable of the disaffected Protestants, that he was
recommended by them to King James, as a Person fit to serve him in the Affairs
of greatest Trust. He was no sooner arived at St. Germain, that he told that
Prince, his Friends in England thought that my Lord Melford, who was then
returned from Rome, was a great Grievance, and ought to be laid aside, and that
the only way for the King to procure the good Opinion of his Subjects in
Britain, and reconcile them to him, was to put the management of his Affairs in
Protestants Hands. This prudent Advice of the disaffected Protestants of
England, or of Mr. Cockburn, had an effect quite contrary to what they
expected; King James took it so ill, that in few days after, an Order was
procured from the French Court, commanding him to depart France under severe
Penalties, being too much a Friend to the English Interest; Mr. Cockburn was
forced to obey, and has lived as an Exile in Holland and Hamburg ever since.

But the Submission of the Scotch Highlanders afford us still some more
convincing Proofs of King James's hatred for the Protestant Religion, and of
his Ingratitude toward such who had made a Sacrifice of all that can be dear
to Men, to Support his sinking Fortune in Scotland. The Lords Dumferling,
Dundee, Dunkel, Colonels Cannon, Graham, and several others Protestants, having
forfeited their Estates and Families, retired into France, as also did the
Colonels Buchan, Maxwell, Wauchop, and some other Popish Gentlemen; but when
they came to St. Germain, the Papists were immediately preferred to considerable
Posts, both in the French and Irish Armies, while the Protestants, tho their
Merit was greater, were exposed to all imaginable hardship, and contempts: My
Lord Dumferling and Colonel Cannon are too Illustrious Examples of King James's
Ungratitude, to be here past by. The Earl through a mistaken notion of Loyalty
and Honor, had Sacrificed his Honorable Family, and a plentiful Estate, to
follow that Prince in his misfortune; and it must be granted that such a Proof
of Loyalty, deserved some kind Returns, yet happening to Quarrel at St.
Germain, with one Captain Brown a Papist, about a Trifle, the Captain was
encouraged and countenanced in his quarrel by the Court, and made Commander of
a Company of Scots, Reformed Officers in Catalonia, whilst this Noble Lord was
despised, for his adhering to his Religion: This ill Treatment broke his Heart,
and he sunk under the Weight of his hard Fate, at St. Germain. His misfortune
lasted longer than his Life, for notwithstanding his Merits, Sufferings, and
the Interest made by his Friends, he could not obtain a Christian Burial; and
his Corpse was hid in a Chamber, till an opportunity was found of Digging a hole
in the Fields, in the Night, where they Thrust him in.

Nor was Colonel Cannon better used, than my Lord Dumferling: This Gentleman
Commanded as General over King James's Army in Scotland, and served him with so
much faithfulness, that every body thought he would be preferred to a great
Command, upon his arrival at St. Germain; but he positively refusing to abandon
the little Religion he had, which was Protestant, was reduced to the Scandalous
Allowance of half a Crown a day, whilst Papists who had served under him, were
advanced to good Posts. This unhappy Gentleman finding himself thus neglected,
fell sick through Grief, and Want, and died; having taken the Sacrament from
the Hands of Dr. Granvile, three days before his Death; but the Priest who were
always buzing about him, took the oppertunity of his being Speechless, to
Thrust a Wafer down his Throat, and gave out that he was dead a Papist, and by
this means got him the Favor of Burial, which his Corpse had else been excluded
from, as well as my Lord Dumferling's. If the Sufferings, and great Merits of
these two Gentlemen, have not been able to Molify King James's Heart, and to
obtain from him any generous Returns, I would fain know upon what Foundation
are grounded the great hopes of our Grumblers, seeing the most part of them
have not had Courage enough to follow that Prince, and have, for ought we see,
no other Qualifications to recommend them, but their bare Jacobitism.

However, if the Examples I have already exposed to your view, are not
sufficient, to convince you, that as long as you are Protestants, and English
Men, you are to expect no share in King James's Favor; I Will produce some
others, which I am sure, will open your Eyes, unless you are bound by an Oath
to continue always Blind, and I Will begin with Sir James Mountgomerie.

This Gentleman left no Stone unturned to reestablish King James in Scotland,
by the same Parliament, that declared him to have Forfeited his Right: He was
afterward, for several Years, his most Active Minister in England, Penned and
Published Declarations for him, at the time of his designed Descent from La
Hogue, and after the Miscarriage of that, wrote his Britain's just Complaints:
Was his weekly News sender, and Project Drawer; yet this very Sir James
Mountgomerie, who had done such great things, and run such hazards for him,
being obliged to fly to France, after making his escape from the Messengers
House, could not obtain, by reason of his being a Protestant, any share into
that Prince's Favor; was brow-beaten from the Court by Priests, daily
upbraided with having been once in the Prince of Orange's Interest, and at last
Obliged to retire to Paris, where he dyed with the Melancholy Reflections of
the miserable State he brought himself into.

The Earl of Lauderdale, tho a Papist, met with no better Fate than Sir James:
His Lady being a Protestant, and he an enemy to the violent Measures of the
Court; was judged to be a sufficient Reason to exclude him from any share in
the Government; so natural it is for all Bigots to hate every body that will
not go to their height of Violence. This Gentleman heartily advised King James
to put his Affairs into Protestants Hands, and recommended the Earl of Cl -- n,
and the Nonjuring Bishops in England, and the Lord Home, Southerk, and Sinclair
in Scotland, as the fittest Persons to serve him, but his Advice was so ill
taken, that he had his Lady sent to England, not to return any more; was
himself forbid the Court, and reduced to a Pension of one Hundred Pistols per
Annum: He retired to Paris, and seeing no Probability of his Masters changing
his Measures, died of Grief. One would have thought that his Brother, Mr.
Alexander Maitland, who on several Occasions had behaved himself very bravely,
in that Prince's Service, should have been Preferred by him, yet he met with
such an Entertainment, that wanting Bread there, he was very glad to come to
England, and make his Peace with the Government, whose Service he had Deserted,
having once had a Command in the Scots Guards, under King William.

Sir Andrew Forrester, is another great Instance of King James's aversion to
Protestants: This Gentleman served with all imaginable Zeal, that Prince's
Interests when a Subject, and was the devoted Creature of his most Arbitrary
Commands, when a King; he suffered Imprisonment in the Tower for him, at the
time of his designed Descent, and yet notwithstanding all this, and the great
Experience he had in Scottish Affairs, he could never obtain any share in that
Prince's Confidence: When he came to St. Germain, all his Merits, Sufferings,
and the good Character he had in both Kingdoms, were not enough to
Counter-ballance, the Objection of being a Protestant, and therefore by no
means to be Entrusted; so that after some times Attendance, as a Cipher, he was
rewarded with a Pass to return to England, for they had there no occasion for
him.

Sir Theophilus Oglethorp, who by his Capacity as well as Services, was
encouraged to go over, and offer his Assistance, met with Sir Andrew
Forrester's Fate upon account of his Religion; and was so unkindly used, that
he was very glad to get home to Old England again, where, it is expected, he
will Plot no more.

Mr. Fergus Graham was the only Protestant Gentleman in King James's Family,
but as soon as they saw that my Lord Preston, and Colonel Graham his Brothers,
who ventured so much for that Prince, could do them no more Service in England,
he was discharged for no other Reason, but that they thought a Protestant a
Blemish in their Household.

Nor was Sir William Sharp better used, although he pretended to come over upon
the Act of Parliament in Scotland, to save his Estate, for the Entertainment he
had at St. Germain before he came away, is very well known. The Pension he had
whilst King James's Army in Scotland kept up, was taken from him, and he fell
under distrusts, with Melford and Jnnes, and contempt at Court, which will
appear to all Reasonable Men a Sufficient motive for his coming away.

But the usage of Dr. Cockburn a Scottish Divine, is beyond any thing that can
be imagined. This Gentleman was Banished Scotland for his Practices against the
Government, and afterward being obliged to leave England, for writing of
Pamphlets, thought himself secure of a Sanctuary at St. Germain, if not, of a
Reward for his Services; but instead of that he met with the daily
importunities of Priests, to make him abandon his Religion, and their
endeavors proving vain, they then represented him as a dangerous Person, and
got him sent from France. He lives now an Exile in Holland, both from Britain
and France.

Mrs. Ashton, Widow to Mr. Ashton, who was Executed for his being concerned in
my Lord Preston's Affairs, went to the Court of St. Germain, after her
Husband's Death, as thinking that she had some Merit to plead for a kind
Reception, but she was as much deceived as any of those I have already
mentioned. Few days after her arrival, Priests were sent to tell her, that
nothing but being a Roman Catholic could recommend a Woman to the Queen's
Service, which the Poor Gentlewoman declining to comply with, was neglected,
and dying soon after, was refused Burial, till her Father Mr. Rigby of
Covent Garden, as a mighty Favor, and at great Charges, obtained leave from
the Court of St. Germain, to have her body brought over into England; and
Buried her in Covent Garden Church.

If these Examples are not sufficient to convince our Jacobites, or if they
question the Truth of them, for really I must own, that they are almost
incredible; I desire them to consult the Young Lord Henmore, Mr. Louthian,
Captains Murray, Dalyel, Macgil, Maclean, Fielding, Mr. Charles Kinnaird, and
several hundreds more, now in and about London, who are lately come from St.
Germain, and they will tell you, that the only Reason why they left that Court,
was, because they could not have Bread, except they would change their
Religion, and therefore did choose rather to run the hazard of Imprisonment, by
returning to England, than stay and Starve in France.

Many Instances more might be given, to show King James's hatred to every
thing, that bears the name of Protestant; but if what has already been said, is
not sufficient, sure I am, that the rest should be to no purpose: What
Protestant has he ever so much as seemed to Trust, since he lives in France? I
know that my Lord Middleton must be excepted, for indeed King James has a
seeming Trust in him. There is no Man that has been at St. Germain, but must
needs perceive, that he is not chief Minister, as Melford was, nor manages
Affairs betwixt Versailles and St. Germain, that being done by Innes and
Porter: He is but seldom called to the Council, and the French Court has never
depended upon his Corrispondence, since the disappointment they receive by our
Fleets going into the Streights.

I hope, these Instances will convince all good Men, that have any Sense of
Liberty, Religion, and Honor, how unreasonable it is to be a Jacobite, and to
think that the Present Misfortunes of King James, will Frighten him from
Invading our Laws and Liberties in time to come, seeing, that neither the
abandoning of Wives, Children, and Estates, nor the hazarding, nay, loss of
Life in his Service, can render him Just and Favorable to such Protestants,
who have made a Sacrifice of all those things to follow him: And if it be so,
as certainly it is, what must those Protestant Nations expect, (if ever he
re-obtains the Government, who have renounced him, and set another Prince upon
his Throne?

If these, who have followed him into France, are denied the Exercise of their
Religion, when his Circumstances make it his Interest to grant it, what must we
expect if ever he be again in Possession of the Crown?

My Lord chief Justice Herbert, and the other Gentlemen before-named, who
firmly adhered to his Interests, even in his greatest Misfortunes, were
contemned, despised, and suffered to Starve, because they were Protestants; how
can we, or any Protestant Jacobites, who have none of those Merits, pretend to
be better used? If the loss of Honors and Estates, has not been sufficient to
obtain from him Christian Burial; upon what Ground can our Jacobites, who have
done nothing for him, flatter themselves with the hopes of great Preferments,
if he is reinthroned? In short, if the Example he had of his Father's
Misfortunes, and his Brothers Exile, wherein he himself was a sharer, together
with the Sense of his own Misfortunes, have not been able to work a Reformation
upon him, as appears by the above-written Account; can we expect that he ever
will be made more Pliable?

The Education of his Prince of Wales, whom no body doubts he designs his
Successor, is is another Instance of his irreconciliable Antipathy to the
Protestant Religion, and English Liberties: One would have thought that
Interest, as well as Policy, would have made him educate his Child a
Protestant, or at least oblige him to put Protestants about him, of
unquestioned Reputation, to instruct him in the ways of pleasing the People,
but instead of that, Dr. Beeson, a famous and violent Papist, was made his
Preceptor, and none but Popish Servants are allowed to be about him, so that he
can imbibe nothing but what is for the Interest of Rome, and Destruction of
England.

Can People be so mad as to expect good terms from a Prince, who not only thus
Treats his Protestant Subjects, who have followed him in his Misfortune, but
also whose Religion lays him under a Necessity of doing it? Could greater
Obligations be laid upon any Prince, than were upon him, by the Church of
England, when a Subject? Her Interest Saved him from being prosecuted for the
Popish Plot, excluded from the Succession to the English Throne, and afterward
dethroned by the Duke of Monmouth, yet all those Obligations were no more than
his Coronation Oath, could not hinder him from invading the Protestant Religion
in general, but more particularly the Liberties of the Church of England.

But perhaps some will Object against what I have said, that from the
Entertainment Protestants meet with at St. Germain, it is not reasonnable to
conclude, that King James bears still such an aversion to our Religion and
Liberties: For being himself but a Refugee in France, and having nothing to
live upon but the Pension the French King allows him, it is not in his Power to
reward those Protestants who have followed him, even not to caress them; and
therefore we ought rather to Peruse the Declarations he has put out since his
being in France, for therein we shall find undeniable Proofs, that his
Misfortunes have much altered his Mind. Read (will our Jacobites say) the
Declaration he Published upon his intended Descent from La Hogue, and Observe
what promises he makes, both in relation to our Religion and our Liberties, the
Sincerity whereof, you have no manner of pretense to Question, for then,
thinking himself sure of his Game, nothing could oblige him to disguise the
true Sentiments of his Heart.

This is somewhat indeed, Gentlemen, and were the thing as you say, I would
agree with you, but give me leave to tell you, that it is a great Question,
whether the Declaration you speak of, which was Printed here, did really
contain King James's Sentiments; but whether it was his own Declaration, or Sir
James Mountgomerie's, it does not matter a Pin, for his late Majesty did
Publicly disown it in a Memorial to the Pope, upon his return to Paris; and it
has been acknowledged in a Jacobite Pamphlet, called, An Answer to Dr.
Wellwood's Answer, to King James 's Declaration; That the same was formed
without his Knowledge, and against his Inclination.

I have told you, in the beginning of this Discourse, that I believe that there
are among you some Conscientious Men, and to those I shall say nothing at this
time, but to such that are Angry with the Government, (as I know many amongst
you are) merely because they cannot have any Employment under it, and who think
without any further Examination to better their Condition, by a Second
Revolution: I Will say, that they ought to consider, that King James's Popish
Friends, must be all provided for first of all, and pray what will remain then
for you? For as to Pensions, I think you are not so mad as to flatter your
selves with such imaginary hopes, for the French Army that brings King James
over must be paid, and their vast Charges for the Irish War, and the
Maintenance of King James re-imbursed, before your beloved Prince be in a
condition to express his Favor to you: perhaps you will say, that the French
King is too much a Gentleman, to demand any such thing, but I don't know what
has given you that Noble Idea of his Generosity; but supposing his Temper to be
such, this War will so much drain his Exchequer, that Necessity will force him
to demand what is so justly owing to him, and who shall be able to dispute his
Bill of Charges? Nay, will King James be able to satisfy him? I don't know, but
this I am sure of, that as long as you profess the Protestant Religion, you
cannot expect to be more Favorably Treated then his present Followers.

Some others amongst you are disaffected, because, as they say, without the
Restoration of King James, a Protestant War will be entailed on the Nation, and
because our Treasure is exhausted by Taxes, and our Blood expended beyond Sea,
which the Nation cannot long bear.

To these Gentlemen, I must answer, that they are much mistaken, for the
bringing in of King James, which they think will put an end to these Troubles,
would infallibly bring the Seat of War from Flanders into England: For it is
unreasonable to Suppose, that so many Noblemen and Gentlemen as are engaged in
King William's Cause, would tamely Submit, or that his Majesty, whose Interest
in Europe is so very great, would either ingloriously abandon his Throne, or
want Foreign Assistance to Support him in it.

2. King James and the French King are both Old, and upon a change of a
Governor in France, we may reasonably expect change of Measures; for as to the
Prince of Wales, his Interest stands or fall, with that of his Supposed Father;
but after all, is it reasonable to believe that the French or any other Nation,
will live in perpetual War with us, merely for the sake of a Prince, who
pretends to be deprived of his Rights? There are very few Knights-Errants in
this Age, or at least, sure I am; that no Nation ^n general is Acted by their
Principles, and we see the French offer already to forsake him.

3. I Grant that our Taxes are greater then ever our Nation paid, but yet they
are not so heavy but that we can hold it out, many Years at this Rate. In
short, whatever they be, I believe there is no good Man but will rather hazard
his Person to keep the Enemy abroad, than see a French and Irish Army in the
Bowels of our own Country, destroying our Substance, burning our Habitations,
and committing the Barbarities which they committed in the Palatinate: For
certainly by one Months Ravage of this Nature, we should lose more Blood and
Treasure, than can probably be spent to bring the War to an Honorable and
happy Conclusion.

That happy Moment is not perhaps so far as some People imagine; for whosoever
will cast his Eyes on the present Posturs of Affairs in Europe, must needs
conclude that the French cannot hold it out much longer.

FINIS.
BOOKS Sold by Richard Baldwin.
BIbliotheca Politica: Or an Enquiry into the Ancient Constitution of the
English Government; with respect both to the just Extent of Regal Power, and to
the Rights and Liberties of the Subject: Wherein all the chief Arguments, as
well against as for the late Revolution, are impartially represented and
considered. In XIII. Dialogues. Collected out of the best Authors both Ancient
and Modern. To which is added an Alphabetical Index to the whole Work.

The Works of F. Rabelais, M. D. in five Books; or the Lives, Heroic Deeds and
Sayings of the good Gargantua and Pantagruel, and his Voyage to the Oracle of
the Bottle. As also his Historical Letters. To which is added the Author's
Life, and Explanatory Remarks. By Mr. Motteux. Never before Printed in English.

The World Bewitched containing an Examination of the common Opinions
concerning Spirits, their Nature, Power, Administration, and Operations; as
also the Effects Men are able to produce by their Communication. Divided into
four Parts. By Belthazer Bekker, D. D. and Pastor at Amsterdam. Vol. I.
Translated from a French Copy, approved of, and subscribed by the Author's own
Hand.

A Collection of Speeches of the Right Honorable Henry late Earl of
Warrington, viz. I. His Speech upon his being swore Mayor of Chester, in
November 1691. II. His Speech to the Grand Jury at Chester, April 13, 1692.
III. His Charge to the Grand Jury at the Quarter Sessions held for the County
of Chester, on the 11th of October, 1692. IV. His Charge to the Grand Jury at
the Quarter Sessions held for the County of Chester, on the 25th of April, 1693.

Letters of State, written by Mr. John Milton, to most of the Sovereign Princes
and Republics of Europe, from the Year 1649, to the Year 1659. To which is
added, an Account of his Life. Together with several of his Poems; and a
Catalogue of his Works, never before Printed.

An Answer to a Paper written by Count d' Avaux, the French King's Ambassador
in Sweden, concerning the Proposals of Peace made by France to the Confederates.


