A SUPPLEMENT TO DR. DU MOULIN, TREATING Of the likeliest Means to Remove
HIRELINGS OUT OF THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND. With a brief VINDICATION of MR RICH.
BAXTER.

By I. M.

LONDON, Printed in the Year MDCLXXX.

A SUPPLEMENT TO DR DU MOULIN, TREATING, Of the likeliest means to remove
Hirelings out of the CHURCH.
TWo things has ever wrought much mischief to the Church of God, and the
advancement of Truth; Force on the one side restraining, and Hire on the other
side corrupting the Teachers thereof. The latter of these is by much the more
dangerous; for under force, though no thank to the Forcers; True Religion
oft-times best thrives and flowrishes; but the corruptions of Teachers, most
commonly the effect or hire, is the very bean of truth in them who are so
corrupted. Of force not to be used in matters of Religion I have already
spoken; and so stated matters of Conscience and Religion in Faith and Divine
Worship and so severed them from Blasphemy and Heresy; the one being properly
as is dispiteful, the other such as stands not to the Rule of Scripture, and so
both of them not matters of Religion, but rather against it, that to them who
willyet use force, this only choice can be left; whether they will force them
to believe, to whom it is not given from above, being not forced thereto by any
Principle of the Gospel, which now is the only Dispensation of God to all men,
or whether being Protestants, they will punish in those things wherein the
Protestant Religion denies them to be Judges, either in themselves infallible,
or to the Consciences of other Men; or whether lastly, they think fit to punish
Error supposing they can be in^allible that it is so, being not wilful, but
conscientious, and according to the best light of him who errs, grounded on
Scripture: which kind of error all Men religious, or but only reasonable, have
thought worthier of pardon; and take growth thereof to be prevented by
spiritual means and Church Discipline, not by civil laws and outward force;
since it is God only who gives as well to believe aright, as to believe at all;
and by those means which he ordained sufficiently in his Church to the full
execution of his divine purpose in the Gospel. It remains now to speak of Hire,
the other evil so mischievous in Religion; whereof I promised then to speak
further, when I should find God disposing me, and opportunity inviting.
Opportunity I find now inviting, and apprehend therein the concurrence of God
disposing, since the maintenance of Church-Ministers; a thing not properly
belonging to the Magistrate, and yet with such importunity called for, and
expected from him, is at present under public debate. Wherein least any thing
may happen to be determined, and established prejudicial to the right and
freedom of Church, or advantageous to such as may be found hirelings therein,
it will be now most seasonable, and in these matters wherein every Christian
has his free suffrage; no way misbecoming Christian Meekness to offer freely,
without disparagement to the wisest; such advice as God shall incline him to
propound. Since heretofore in Commonwealths of most Fame for Government, Civil
Laws were not established till they had been first for certain days published
to the view of all Men, that who so pleased might spoke freely his opinion
thereof, and give his exceptions, ere the Law could pass to a full
Establishment. And where ought this Equity to have more place, than in the
liberty which is unseparable from Christain Religion? This I am not ignorant
will be a work unpleasing to some: But what truth is not hateful to some or
other; as this in likelihood, will be to none but Hirelings. And if there be
among them, who hold it their Duty to speak Impartial Truth, as the work of
their Ministry, though not performed without money; let them not envy others,
who think the same no less their Duty by the general office of Christianity, to
speak truth, as in all reason may be thought, more impartially and
unsuspectedly without money.

Hire of it self is neither a thing unlawful, nor a word of any evil Note,
signifying no more than a due recompenee or reward; as when our Savior says,
The Labourer is worthy of his hire. That which makes it so dangerous in the
Church, and properly makes the Hireling, a word always of evil signification;
is either the excess thereof, or the undue manner of giving and taking it. What
harm the excess thereof brought to the Church; perhaps was not found by
experience till the days of Constantine; who out of his zeal, thinking he could
be never too liberally a nursing Father of the Church; might be not unfitly
said to have either overlaid it or choked it in the nursing.

Which was foretold, as is Recorded in Ecclesiastical Tradition; by a Voice
heard from Heaven, on the very day that those great Donations and Church
Revenues were given, crying aloud. This day is poison poured into the Church.
Which the event soon after verified, as appears by another no less ancient
observation, That Religion brought forth Wealth, and the Daughter devoured the
Mother. But long ere wealth came into the Church, so soon as any gain appeared
in Religion, Hirelings were apparent; drawn in long before by the very sent
thereof. Judas therefore, the first Hireling, for want of present hire
answerable to his covering, from the small number of the meanness of such as
then were the Religious, sold the Religion it self with the Founder thereof;
his Master Simon Magus the next, in hope only that Preaching and the Gifts of
the Holy Ghost would prove gainful, offered beforehand a sum of money to obtain
them. Not long after, as the Apostle foretold; Hirelings like Wolves came in by
Herds, Acts 20. 29. For, I know this, that after my departing, shall grievous
Wolves enter in among you, not sparing the Flock. Tit. 1. 11. Teaching things
which they ought not, for Lucres sake. 2. Pet. 2. 3. And through covetousness
make merchandise of you. Yet they taught not false Doctrine only, but seeming
Piety; 1 Timothy 6. 5. supposing that gain is Godliness. Neither came they in of
themselves only, but invite oft-times by a great audience; 2 Timothy, 4. 3. For the
time will come, when they will not endure sound Doctrine, but after their own
Lusts they will heap to themselves Teachers, having itching ears: And they on
the other side, as fast heaping to themselves Disciples, Acts. 20. 30.
doubtless had as itching palms^ 2 Pet. 2. 15. Following the way of Balaam, the
son of Bosor, who loved the wages of unrighteousness. Jude 11. They ran
greedily after the Error of Balaam for reward. Thus we see, that not only the
excess of Hire in welthiest times, but also the undue and vicious taking or
giving it; though but small or mean, as in the primitive times, gave to
Hirelings occasion, though not intended, yet sufficient, to creep at first into
the Church. Which argues also the difficulty, or rather the impossibility, to
remove them quite; unless every Minister were, as St. Paul, contented to teach
gratis; but few such are to be found. As therefore we cannot justly take away
all Hire in the Church, because we cannot otherwise quite remove all Hirelings;
so are we not for the impossibility of removing them all; to use therefore no
endeavor that few may come in, but rather in regard the evil, do what we can,
will always be incumbent and unavoidable; to use our utmost diligence, how it
may be left dangerous. Which will be likeliest effected, if we consider, first,
what recompense God has ordained should be given to Ministers of the Church;
(for that a recompense ought to be given them, and may by them justly be
received, our Savior himself from the very light of reason and of equity has
declared: Luke 10. 7. The Labourer is worthy of his Hire) next, by whom; and
lastly, in what manner.

What recompense ought to be given to Church Ministers; God has answerably
ordained according to that difference which he has manifestly put between
those his two great Dispensations, the Law and the Gospel. Under the Law he
gave them Tithes; under the Gospel; having left all things in his Church to
Charity and Christian freedom, he has given them only what is justly given
them. That, as well under the Gospel as under the Law, say our English Divines;
and they only of all Protestants), is Tithes; and they say true, if any man be
so minded to give them of his own tenth or twentieth but that the Law therefore
of Tithes, is in force under the Gospel; all other Protestant Divines, though
equally concerned, yet constantly deny. For though Hire to the Labourer be of
moral and perpetual right; yet that special kind of Hire, the tenth, can be of
no right or necessity, but to that special Labor for which God ordained it.
That special Labor, was the Levitical and Ceremonial Service of the
Tabernacle, Numb. 18. 21. 31. which is now abolished: the right therefore of
that special Hire must needs be withal abolished, as being also ceremonial, is
plain; not being given to the Levites, till they had bin first offered a
Heave Offering to the Lord, ver. 24. 28. He then, who by that Law brings Tithes
into the Gospel, of necessity brings in withal a Sacrifice, and an Altar;
without which Tithes by that Law were unsanctifi'd and polluted, ver. 32. and
therefore never thought on in the first Christain times, till Ceremonies,
Altars and Oblations, by an ancienter corruption were brought back long before.
And yet the Jews ever since their Tample was destroyed, though they have
Rabbis and Teachers of their Law, yet pay no Tithes, as having no Levites to
whom, no Temple where to pay them; no Altar whereon to hallow them; which
argues that the Jews themselves never thought Tithes moral, but ceremonial
only. That Christians therefore should take them up, when Jews have laid them
down, must needs be very absurd and preposterous. Next, it is as clear in the
same Chapter, that the Priests and Levites had not their Tithes for their
Labor only in the Tabernacle; but in regard they were to have no other part
nor inheritance in the Land, ver. 20, 24. and by that means for a tenth lost a
twelfth. But our Levites undergoing no such Law of Deprievement, can have no
right to any such compensation; nay, if by this Law they will have Tithes, can
have no Inheritance of Land, but forfeit what they have: Beside, this, Tithes
were of two sorts, those of every year, and those of every third year: of the
former, every one that brought his Tithes, was to eat his share. Deuteronomy 14. 23.
Thou shall eat before the Lord thy God, in the place which he shall choose to
place his name there; the Tithe of thy Corn, of thy Wine, and of thine Oil,
etc. Nay, though he could not bring his Tithe in kind, by reason of his distant
dwelling from the Tabernacle or Temple, but was thereby forced to turn it into
money, he was to bestow that money on whatsoever pleased him, Oxen, Sheep, Wine
or strong Drink; and to eat and drink thereof there before the Lord, both he
and his Household, ver. 24, 25, 26. As for the Tithes of every third year, they
were not only given to the Levite, but to the Stranger, the Fatherless and the
Widow, ver. 28. 29. and Chap. 26, 12, 13. So that ours, if they will have
Tithes, must admit of these sharers with them. Nay, these Tithes were not paid
in at all to the Levite. but the Levite himself was to come with those his
fellow-guests, and eat his share of them only at his house, who provided them;
and this not in regard, of his Ministerial Office, but because he had no part
nor Inheritance in the Land. Lastly, the Priests and Levites, a Tribe, were of
a different constitution from this of our Ministers under the Gospel. In them
were Orders and Degrees, both by Family, Dignity and Office, mainly
distinguished; the High Priest, his Brethren and his Sons, to whom the Levites
themselves paid Tithes, and of the best, were eminently superior, Number. 18. 28,
29. No Protestant, I suppose, will liken one of our Ministers to a High Priest,
but rather to a Common Levite. Unless then, to keep their Tithes, they mean to
bring back again Bishops, Archbishops and the whole Gang of Prelatry, to whom
will they themselves pay Tithes, as by that Law it was sin to them, if they did
not, ver. 32? Certainly, this must needs put them to a deep demurre, while the
desire of holding fast their Tithes without sin, may tempt them to bring back
again Bishops as the likeness of that Hierarchy that should receive Tithes from
them, and the desire to pay none, may advise them to keep out of the Church all
Orders above them. But if we have to do at present, as I suppose we have, with
True Reformed Protestants, not with Papists or Prelates; It will not be denied
that in the Gospel there be but two Minesterial Degrees, Presbyters and Deacons
which if they contend to have any Succession, Reference or Conformity with
those two Degrees under the Law, Priests and Levites; it must needs be such,
whereby our Ministers may be answerable to Priests, and our Deacons to Levites;
by which Ru^e of Proportion it will follow, that we must pay our Tithes to the
Deacons only, and they only to their Ministers. But if it truer yet, that the
Priesthood of Aaron Typifi'd a better Reality, 1 Pet. 2. 5. Signifying the
Christian True and Holy Priesthood, to offer up Spiritual Sacrifice It follow
hence, that we are now justly exempt from paying Tithes, to any who claim from
Aaron, since that Preisthood is in us now Real, which in him was but a shadow.
Seeing th^^ by all this which has been shown, that the Law of Tithes is partly
Ceremonial, as the work was for the which they were given, partly judicial, not
of common, but of particular right to the Tribe of Levi, nor to them alone, but
to the Owner also and his Household, at the time of their Offering, and every
third year* to the Stranger, the Fatherless and the Widow, their appointed
Sharers, and that they were a Tribe of Priests and Deacons improperly compared
to the constitution of our Ministry, and the Tithes given by that People to
those Deacons only: It follows that our Ministers at this day, being neither
Priests nor Levites, are not filthy answering to either of them; can have no
just Title or pretense to Tithes, by any consequence drawn from the Law of
Moses. But they think they have a better Plea in the Example of Melchisedec,
who took Tithes of Abram ere the Law was given; whence they would infer them to
be of moral right. But they ought to know, or to remember, that not Examples,
but express Commands oblige our Obedince to God or Man. Next, that whatsoever
was done in Religion before the Law written, is not presently to be counted
moral; when as so many things were then done, both Ceremonial and Judaically
Judicial, that we need not doubt to conclude all times before Christ, more or
less under the Ceremonial Law. To what end served else those Altars and
Sacrifices, that distinction of clean and unclean entering into the Ark,
Circumcision and the raising up of Seed to the Elder Brother, Genesis 38, 8? If
these things be not moral, though before the Law, how are Tithes, though in the
example of Abram and Melchisedec?. But this Instance is so far from being the
just ground of a Law, that after all Circumstances duly weighed, both from Genesis
14. and Heb. 7. it will not be allowed them so much as an example. Melchisedec,
besides his Priestly Benediction, brought with him Bread and Wine sufficient to
refresh Abram and his whole Army; incited to do so, first, by the secret
Providence of God, intending him for a Type of Christ and his Priesthood; next
by his due thankfulness and honor to Abram; who had freed his Borders of Salem
from a Potent Enemy: Abram on the other side, honors him with the tenth of
all, that is to say (for he took not sure his whole Estate with him to that
War.) of the Spoils, Heb. 7. 4. Incited also by the same secret Providence, to
signify as Grandfather of Levi, that the Levitical Priesthood was excelled by
the Priesthood of Christ. For the giving of a tenth declared it seems in those
Countries and times, him the greater who received it. That which next incited
him, was partly his Gratitude to requi^e the Present, partly his Reverence to
the Person and his Benediction to his Person, as a King and Priest also, but
not a King. And who unhir'd will be so hardy as to say, that Abram at any other
time ever paid him Tithes, either before or after; or had then, but for this
accidental Meeting and Obligement? or that else Melchisedec had demanded or
exacted them, or took them otherwise, than as the voluntary Gift of Abram? But
our Ministers, though neither Priests nor Kings more than any other Christian,
greater in their own esteem than Abrams and all his Seed, for the Verbal Labor
of a Seventh days Preachment, not bringing like Melchisedec, Bread or Wine at
their own cost; would not take only at the willing hand of Liberality or
Gratitude, but require and exact as due the tenth, not of Spoils, but of our
whole Estates and Labors; nor once, but yearly. We then it seems by the
example of Abram must pay Tithes to these Melchisedecs; but what if the Person
of Abram can either no way represent us, or will oblige the Minister to pay
Tithes no less than other Men? Abram had not only a Priest in his Loins, but
was himself a Priest; and gave Tithes to Melchisedeck, either as Grandfather of
Levi, or as Father of the Faithful: If as Grandfather (though he understood it
not) of Levi, he obliged not us but Levi only, the Inferior Priest, by that
homage (as the Apostle to the Hebrews clearly enough explains) to acknowledge
the greater. And they who by Melchisedec claim from Abram as Levi's
Grandfather, have none to seek their Tithes of but the Levites, where they can
find them. If Abram as Father of the Faithful paid Tithes to Melchisedec, then
certainly the Ministers also, if they be of that number, paid in him equally
with the rest. Which may induce us to believe, that as both Abram and
Melchisedec, so Tithes also in that action Typical and Ceremonial, signified
nothing else but that subjection, which all the Faithful, both Ministers and
People owe to Christ, our High Priest and King. In any literal sense from this
example they never will be able to extort, that the People in those days paid
Tithes to Priests; but this only, that one Priest once in his life, of Spoils
only, and in requi^al partly of a liberal Present, partly of a Benediction,
gave voluntary Tithes, not to a greater Priest than himself, as far as Abram
could then understand, but rather to a Priest and King joined in one Person.
They will reply, perhaps, that if one Priest paid Tithes to another, it must
needs be understood, that the People did no less to the Priest. But I shall
easily remove that necessity, by remembering them that in those days was no
Priest, but the Father, or the first born of every Family; and by consequence,
no People to pay him Tithes, but his own Children and Servants, who had not
wherewithal to pay him, but of his own. Yet grant that the People then paid
Tithes; there will not be the like reason to enjoin us: they being then under
Ceremonies, a mere Laity; we now under Christ, a Royal Priesthood, 1 Pet 2. 9.
as we are Coheirs, Kings and Priests with him, a Priest for ever after the
Order or manner of Melchisedec. As therefore Abram paid Tithes to Melchisedec
because Levi was in him; so we ought to pay none because the true Melchisedec
is in us, and we in him: who can pay to none greater, and has freed us by our
union with himself, from all compulsive Tributes and Taxes in his Church.
Neither does the collateral place, Heb. 7, make other use of this Story, than
to prove Christ personated by Melchisedec, a greater Priest than Aaron* ver. 4.
Now consider how great this man was, etc. and proves not in the least manner,
that Tithes be of any right to Ministers, but the contrary: First, the Levites
had a commandment to take Tithes of the People according to the Law, that is of
their Brethren, though they come out of the Loins of Abram, ver. 5. The
Commandment then was, it seems, to take Tithes of the Jews only, and according
to the Law. That Law changing of necessity with the Priesthood, no other sort
of Ministers, as they must needs be no other sort, under another Priesthood,
can receive that tribute of Tithes which sell with that Law, unless renewed by
any other express command, and according to no other Law: no such Law is
extant. Next, Melchisedec not as a Minister, but as Christ himself in person
blessed Abraham, who had the Promises, ver. 6. and in him blessed all, both
Ministers and People; both of the Law and the Gospel; that Blessing declared
him greater and better than whom he blessed, ver. 7. receiving Tithes of them
all, not as maintenance, which Melchisedec needed not, but as a sign of homage
to their King and Priest: whereas Ministers bear not the Person of Christ in
his Priesthood or Kingship, bless not as he blesses, are not by their Blessing
greater than Abraham, and all the Faithful with themselves included in him;
cannot both give and take Tithes in Abram; cannot claim to themselves that sign
of our Allegiance due only to our Eternal King and Priest, cannot therefore
derive Tithes from Melchisedec. Lastly, the eighth verse has thus: Here men
that die receive Tithes: there he received them, of whom it is witnessed that
he lived. Which words intimate that as he suffered himself once for us, so he
received once of us in Abraham; and in that place the Typical acknowledgment of
our Redemption: which had it been a perpetual Annuitie to Christ, by him
claimed as his due, Levi must have paid it yearly, as well as then, ver. 9. and
our Ministers ought still to some Melchisiedec or other, as well now as they
did in Abraham. But that Christ never claimed any such tenth as his Annual due,
much less resigned it to the Ministers, his so officious receivers without
express commission or assignment, will yet be clearer as we proceed. Thus much
may at length assure us, that this example of Abraham and Melchisedec, though I
see of late they build most upon it, can so little be the ground of any Law to
us, that it will not so much avail them as to the authority of an example. Of
like Impertinence is that example of Jacob, Genesis 28. 22. who of his free
choice, not enjoined by any Law, vowed the tenth of all that God should give
him: which for ought appears to the contrary, he vowed as a thing no less
indifferent before his vow, than the foregoing part thereof; that the Stone
which he had set there for a Pillar should be God's House. And to whom vowed he
his tenth, but to God; not to any Priest; for we read of none to him greater
than himself: and to God, no doubt, but he paid what vowed; both in building of
that Bethel with other Altars elsewhere, and the expense of his continual
Sacrifices, which none but he had right to offer. However therefore he paid his
tenth, it could in no likelihood, unless by such an occasion as befell his
Grandfather, be to any Priest. But, say they. All the Tithe of the Land,
whether of the Seed of the Land, or of the fruit of the Tree, is the Lords,
holy unto the Lord; Levit, 27. 30. And this before it was given to the Levites;
therefore since they ceased. No Question; for the whole earth is the Lords, and
the fullness thereof, Psalm. 24. 1. and the light of nature shows us no less; but
that the tenth is his, more than the rest, how know I, but as he so declares
it? He declares it so here of the Land of Canaan only, as by all circumstances
appears; and passes, by deed of Gift, this tenth to the Levite; yet so as
offered to him first a Heave Offering, and confecrated on his Altar, Numb. 18.
all which I had as little known, but by that Evidence. The Levites are ceased,
the Gift returns to the Giver. How then can we know that he has given it to
any other, or how can these men presume to take it unoffered first to God,
unconsecrated, without an other cllear and express donation; whereof they show
no evidence or writing^^. Besides he has now alienated that Holy Land; who can
warrantably affirm that he has since hallowed the tenth of this Land; which
none but God has power to do or can warrant? Their last Proof they cite out of
the Gospel, which makes as little for them; Matthew. 23. 23. where our Savior
denouncing ^^oe to the Scribes and Pharisees, who paid Tithe so exactly, and
omitted weightier matters, tells them, that these they ought to have done that
is, to have paid Tithes. For our Savior spoke then to those who observed the
Law of Moses, which was yet not fully abrogated, till the destruction of the
Temple. And by the way here we may observe out of their own Proof, that the
Scribes and Pharisees though then chief Teachers of the People, such at last as
were not Levites, did not take Tithes, but paid them so; so much less were the
Scribes and Pharisees in those worst times than ours at this day. This is so
apparent to the reformed Divines of other Countries, that when any one of ours
has attempted in Latin to maintain this argument of Tithes, though a man
would think they might suffer him without opposition in a point equally tending
to the advantage of all Ministers, yet they forbear not to oppose him, as in a
Doctrine not fit to pass unoppos'd under the Gospel. Which shows the modesty,
the contentedness of those Foreign Pastors with the maintenance given them;
their s^ncerity also in the truth, though less gainful, and the avarice of
ours; who through the Love of their old Papistical Tithes, consider not the
weak arguments, or rather conjectures and ^urmises which they bring to defend
them. On the other side, although it be sufficient to have proved in general,
the abolishing of Tithes, as part of the Judaical or Ceremonial Law, which is
abolished, all, as well as that before as that after Moses; yet I shall further
prove them abrogated, by an express Ordinance of the Gospel, founded not on any
Type, or that Municipal Law of Moses, but on moral and general Equity, given us
instead, 1 Cor. 9. 13, 14. Know you not that they who minister about holy
things, live of the things of the Temple; and they which wait at the Altar, are
partakers with the Altar? So also the Lord has ordained; that they who preach
the Gospel, should live of the Gospel. He says not, should live on things
which were of the Temple or of the Altar, of which were Tithes, for that had
given them a clear Title; but abrogating that former Law of Moses, which
determined what and how much by a latter Ordinance of Christ, which leaves the
what and how much indefinite and free, so it be sufficient to live on; he
says, The Lord has so ordained; that they who preath the Gospel, should live
of the Gospel, which has neither Temple, Altar* nor Sacrifice. Heb. 7. 13. For
be of whom these things are spoken, pertains to another Tribe, of which no
man give attendance at the Altar. his Ministers therefore cannot thence have
Tithes. And where the Lord, has so ordained, we may find easily in more than
one Evangelist. Luke. 16* 7, 8. In the some House remain eating and drinking
such things as they give: for the Labourer is worthy of his Hire, etc. And into
what City soever you enter, and they receive you; eat such things as are set
before you. To which Ordinance of Christ it may seem likeliest, that the
Apostle refers us, both here and 1 Timothy 5. 18. where he cites this, as the
saying of our Savior, That the Labourer is worthy of his Hire: and both by
this place of Luke, and that of Mar. 10. 9, 10, 11. it evidently appears, that
our Savior ordained no certain maintenance for his Apostles or Ministers,
publicly or privately in house or City received, but that what ever it were,
which might suffice to live on; and this not commanded or proportioned by
Abram, or by Moses, whom he might easily have here cited, as his manner was;
but declared only by a rule of common equity which proportions the hire as well
to the ability of him who gives, as to the labor of him who receives; and
recommends him only as worthy, not invests him with a Legal right. And mark
whereon he grounds this ordinance; not on a perpetual right of Tithes from
Melchisedec, as Hirelings pretend, which he never claimed either for himself,
or for his Ministers, but one the plain and common equity of rewarding the
Labourer; worthy sometimes of single, sometimes of double honor, not
proportionable by Tithes. And the Apostle in this forecited chapter to the
Corinthians, ver. 11, affirms it to be no great recompense, if carnal things be
reaped for spiritual sown; but to mention Tithes, neglects here the fittest
occasion, that could be offered him, and leaves the rest free and undermined.
Certainly if Christ or his Apostles had approved of Tithes, they would have
either by writing or tradition recommended them to the Church; and that soon
would have appeared in practice of those Primitive and the next Ages: But for
the first three hundred years and more, in all the Ecclesiastical Story, I find
no such Doctrine or example; though error by that time had brought back again
Priests, Altar, and Oblations; and in many other points of Religion had
miserably Judaiz'd the Church. So that the defenders of Tithes, after a long
pomp and tedious preparation out of Heathen Authors, telling us that Tithes
were paid to Hercules and Apollo, which perhaps was imitated from the Jews, and
as it were be speaking our expectation, that they will bound much more with
autorities out of Christian Story ^ have nothing of general approbation to
begin with, from the first three or four Ages, but that which abundantly serves
to the confutation of their Tithes, while they confess that Churchmen in those
Ages lived merely upon Free Will Offerings. Neither can they say, that Tithes
were not then paid for want, of Civil Magistrates to ordainthem; for Christians
had then also Lands, and might give out of them what they pleased; and yet of
Tithes then given we find no mention. And the first Christian Emperors, who
did all things as Bishops advised them; supplied what was wanting to the
Clergy, not out of Tithes which were never motioned, but out of their own
Imperial Revenues, as is manifest in Eusebius, Theodoret and Sozomen, from
Constantine to Arcadius. Hence those ancientest reformed Churches of the
WALDENSES, if they rather continued not pure, since the Apostle denied that
Tithes were to be given, or that they were even given in the Primitive Church;
as appears by an ancient Tractate inserted in the Bohemian History. Thus far
has the Church been always, whether in her Prime, or in her ancientest
Reformation, from the approving of Tithes; nor without reason, for they might
easily perceive, that Tithes were fited to the Jews only; a National Church of
many incomplete Synagogues uniting the accomplishment of Divine Worship in one.
Temple; and the Levites there had their Tithes paid-where they did their Bodily
work; to which a particular Tribe was set apart by divine appointment, not by
the Peoples Election; but the Christian Church is universal* not ti'd to
Nation, Diocese or Parish, but consisting of many particular Churches complete
in themselves; gathered not by compulsion; or the accident of dwelling nigh
together; but by free consent, choosing both their particular Church and their
Church Officers. Whereas if Tithes be set up, all these Christian Privileges
will be disturbed and soon lost; and with them Christian Liberty. The first
Authority which our Adversaries bring, after, those Fabulous Apostolio Canons,
which they dare not insist upon, is a Provincial Council held a^ Cu^^en where
they voted Tithes to be Gods R^^t, in the year three hundred and fifty six; at
the same time perhaps when, the three Kings reigned there, and of like
authority. For to what purpose do they bring these trivial Testimonies, by which
they might as well prove Altars, Candles at noon, and the greatest part of
those Superstitions fetched from Paganism or Iud^ism, which the Papists
inveigled by this fond Argument of Antiquity, retain to this day? To what
purpose those Decrees of I know not what Bishops, to a Parliament and People
who have thrown out both Bishops and Altars, and promised all Reformation by
the word of God? And that Altars brought Tithes hither, as one corruption begot
another, is evident by one of those Questions, which the Monk A^^tin propounded
to the Pope, concerning those things which by Offerings of the Faithful came to
the Altars as Beda writes, l. ^ ^ 27. If then by these Testimonies we must have
Tithes continued; we must again have Altars. Of Fathers, by Custom so called,
they quote Ambrose, Augustine, and some other Ceremonial Doctors of the same
Leaven, whose assertion without pertinent Scripture, no reformed Church can
admit; and what they vouch, is founded on the Law of Moses, with which every
where pitifully mistaken, they again incorporate the Gospel; as did the rest
also of those Titular Fathers, perhaps an Age or two before them, by many
Rights and Ceremonies, both Jewish and Heathenish introdu^^d; whereby thinking
to gain all, they lost all; and instead of winning Jews and Pagans to be
Christians, by too much condescending they turend Christians into Jews and
Pagans. To heap such unconvincing Citations as these in Religion, whereof the
Scripture only is our Rule, argues not much learning nor judgment; but the lost
labor of much unprofitable reading; and yet a late ^ot Querist for Tithes,
whom he may know by his wits lying ever beside him in the Margent, to be ever
besides his wits in the Text; a fierce Reformer once, now ranckl'd with a
contrary heat, would send us back very reformedly indeed, to learn Reformation
from Tyndarus and Rebuffus, two Canonical Promoters. They produce next, the
ancient stitutions of this Land, Saxon Laws, Edicts of Kings, and their
Councels from Athelstan in the year nine hundred twenty eight, that Tithes by
t^te were paid; and might produce from Ina above two hundred years before; that
Romescot or Peters-penny, was by as good Statute Law paid to the Pope from
seven hundred twenty five, and almost as long continued. And who knows not,
that this Law of Tithes was enacted by those Kings and Barons, upon the Opinion
they had of their Divine Right, as the very words import of Edward the
Confessor, in the close of that Law: for so Blessed Austin preached and taught;
meaning the Monk, who first brought the Romish Religion into England, from
Gregory the Pope. And by the way, I add, that by these Laws, imitating the Laws
of Moses; the third part of Tithes only was the Priests due; the other two were
appointed for the Poor and to adorn or repair Churches, as the Canons of
Echbert and Elphric witness: Council. Brit. If then these Laws were founded upon
the Opinion of Divine Authority, and that Authority be found mistaken, and
erroneous, as hach been fully manifested; it follows, that these Laws fall of
themselves with their False Foundation. But with what face or conscience can
they allege Moses, or these Laws for Tithes, as they now enjoy; whereof Moses
ordains the Owner, as we heard before, the Stranger, the Fatherless and the
Widow partakers with with the Levite; and these Fathers which they cite; and
these though Romish rather than English Laws, allotted both to Priest and
Bishop the third part only. But these our Protestant, these our new reformed
English Presbyterian Divines, against their own cited Authors, and to the shame
of their pretended Reformation, would engross to themselves all Tithes by
Statute, and supported more by their wilful obstinacy and desire of filthy
Lucre, than by these both insufficient and impertinent Autorities, would
persuade a Christian Magistracy and Parliament, whom we trust God has restored
for a happier Reformation, to impose upon us a Judaical Ceremonial Law, and yet
from that Law to be more irregular and unwarrantable, more complying with a
covetous Clergy, than any of those Popish Kings and Parliaments alleged.
Another shift they have to plead that Tithes may be Moral as well as the
Sabbath, a tenth of fruits as well as a seventh of days. I answer, that the
Prelates who urge this Argument, have least reason to use it; denying morality
in the Sabbath, and therein better agreeing with reformed Churches abroad, than
the rest of our Divines. As therefore the Seventh day is not moral, but a
convenient recourse of worship in fit season; whether seventh or other number:
so neither is the tenth of our goods, but only a convenient subsistence morally
due to Ministers, The last and lowest sort of their Arguments, that men
purchased not their Tithe with their Land and such like Pertiforggery, I omit,
as refuted suffoiently by others: I omit also their violent and irreligious
exactions, related no less credibly: their seizing of Pots and Pans from the
Poor, who have as good Right to Tithes as they; fromsome, the very Beds; their
sueing and imprisoning, worse than when the Canon Law was in force; worse than
when those Sons of Eli were Priests, whose manner was thus to seize their
pretended Priestly due by force, 1 Samuel 2. 12, etc. Whereby men abhorred the
offering of the Lord* and it may be feared that many will as much abhor the
Gospel, if such violence as this be suffered in her Ministers, and in that
which they also pretend to be the offering of the Lord. For those sons of
Belial within some limits made seizure of what they knew was their own by an
undoubted Law: but these, from whom there is no Sanctuary, seize out of men's
grounds, out of men's houses their other goods of double, sometimes of treble
value, for that, which did not Covetousness and Rapine blind them, they know to
be not their own by the Gospel which they preach. Of some more tolerable than
these, thus severely God has spoken; Isa 46. 10. etc. They are greedy Dogs;
they all look to their own way, every one for his gain, from his quarter. With
what anger then will he judge them who stand not looking, but under color of a
Divine Right, fetch by force that which is not their own, taking his name not
in vain, but in violence? Nor content as Gehazi was to make a cunning, but a
constrained advantage of what their Master bids them give freely* How can they
but return smitten, worse than that sharking Minister, vvitha Spiritual
Leprosy? And yet they cry out Sacrilege, that men will not be gulled and
hassl'd the Tenth of their Estates by giving credit to frivolous pretenses of
Divine Right. Where did God ever clearly declare to all Nations, or in all
Lands (and none but Fools, part with their Estates, without elearest of
evidence, on bare supposals and presumptions of them who are the gainers
thereby) that he required the tenth due to him or his son perpetually and in
all places? Where did he demand it, that we might certainly know, as in all
claims of temporal right, what is just and reasonable? or if demanded, where
did he design it; or by what evident, conveyance to Ministers^ Unless they can
demonstrate this, by more than conjectures; their Title can be no better to
Tithes, than the Titles of Gohazi was to those things which by abusing his
Masters name he rooked from Neemen. Much less, where did he command that Tithes
should be fetched by for^e, where: left not under the Gospel whatever his right
was, to the Free Will offerings of men? Which is the greater Sacrilege, to
belie Divine Authority, to make the name of Christ accessory to violence; and
robbing him of the very Honor which he aimed at, in bestowing freely the
Gospel, to commit Simonie and Rapine, both Secular and Ecclesiastical, or on
the other side not to give the tenth of civil right and propriety to the tricks
and impostures of Clergymen; contrived with all the art and argument that
their bellies can invent or suggest, yet so ridiculous and presuming on the
Peoples dullness or superstition, as to think they prove the divine right of
their maintenance by Abram, paying Tithes to Melchisedec, when as Melchisedec
in that passage rather gave maintenance to Abram; in whom all, both Priests and
Ministers, as well as Laymen, paid Tithes, not received them. And because I
affirm both; beginning this first part of my Discourse, that God has given to
Ministers of the Gospel that maintenance only which is justly given them; let
us see a little what has been thought of that other maintenance besides
Tithes, which of all Protestants, our English Divines, either only or most
apparently both require and take. Those are Fees for Christnings, Marriages,
and Burials, which though who so will, may give freely, yet being not of right,
but of free gift if they be exacted or established; they become unjust to them
who are otherwise maintained; and of such evil note, that even the Council of
Trent, l. 2. p. 240. makes them liable to the Laws against Simonie who take or
demand fees for the administering of any Sacrament; Che la sinodo volendo levare
oli abusi vntrodotti, etc. And in the next Page with like se^erity condemns the
giving or taking for a Benefice, and the celebrating of Marriages, Christnings
and Burials, for Fees exacted or demanded; nor counts it less Simonie to sell
the ground or place of Burial. And in a State-Assembly at Orleans, 1561, it was
decreed, Che non si potesse essiger co^^ alcuna, etc. P. 4^ 9. That nothing
should be exacted for the administering of sacrament^ Burials, or any other
Spiritual Function. Thus much that Coun^^l of all others the most Popish, and
this Assembly of Papists; though, by their own Principles, in, Bondage to the
Clergy, were induced, either by their own reason and shame, or by the light of
Reformation then shining in upon them; or rather by the known Canons of many
Councels and Synods long before, to condemn of Simbnie Spiritual Fees demanded.
For it the Minister be maintained for his whole Ministry; why should he be
twice paid for any part thereof? Why should he, like a Servant seek above his
wages? As for Christnings, either they themselves call Men to Baptism? of Men
of themselves come: If Ministers invite, how ill had it becomed John the
Baptist to demand Fees for his Baptising, or Christ for his Christnings? Far
less becomes it these now; with a greediness lower than that of Tradesmen,
calling Passengers to their Shop, and yet paid before hand, to ask again, for
doing that which those their Founders did did freely. If Men of themselves come
to Baptized, they are either brought by such as already pay the Minister, or
come to be one of his Disciples and (...); of whom to ask a Fee as it were for
entrance, is a piece of paultry Craft or Caution, befitting none but beggarly
Artists. Burials and Ma^^lages are so (...) to be any part of their gain, that
they who consider well, I may find them to be no part of their Function. At
Burials their Attendance they allege on the Corpse; all the Guests do as much
unhir'd; but their prayers as the Grave superst^idusly required: yet if
required, their last performance to the deceased of their own Fl^ck. But the
Funeral Sermon, at their Choice, or if not, an occasion offered them to preach
out of season, which is one part of their office. But something must be spoken
in praise* if due, their Duty; if undue, their Corruption: a peculiar Simonie
of our Divines in England only. But the ground is broken, and especially their
unrighteous possession of the Channel To sell that; will not only raise up in
judgment the Council of T^ent against them, but will loose them the rest
Champion of Tithes, their zealous Antiquary, Sir Hen. Spelman; who in a Book
written to that purpose, by many cited Canons, and some even of times
corruptest in the Church, proves that Fees exacted or demanded for Sacraments,
Marriages, Burials, and especially for interring, are wicked, accursed,
Simoniacal and abominable. Yet thus is the Church, for all this noise of
Reformation, left still unreformed, by the censure of their own Synods, a Den
of Thieves and Robbers. As for Marriages that Ministers should not meddle with
them, as not sanctif^^d or legitimate without their Celebration, I find no
ground in Scripture, either of precept or example. Likeliest it is; (which our
Seldom has well observed, l. 2. c. 28. ux. Eb.) That in imitation of Heathen
Priests, who were wont at Nuptials to use many Rites and Ceremonies, and
especially judging it would be profitable, and the increase of their Authority,
not to be Spectators only in busineses of such concernment to the Life of Man;
they insmuated that Marriage was not holy without their Benediction, and for
the better color, made it a Sacrament; being of it self a civil Ordinance, a
Household contract, a thing indifferent and free to the whole Race of Mankind,
not as religious, but as men; best indeed, undertaken to religious ends; and as
the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 7. In the Lord. Yet not therefore invalid or unholy,
without a Minister and his pretended necessary hallowing, more than any other
Act, Enterprise or Contract of Civil Life; which ought all to be done in the
Lord and to his glory. All which; ho less than Marriage, were by the cunning of
Priests heretofore, as material to their profit, transacted at the Altar. Our
Divines deny it to be a Sacrament, yet retained the Celebration, till
prudently a late Parliament recovered the civil liberty of Marriage from their
inchroachment; and transferred the ratifying and registring thereof, from
Canonical Shop to the proper Cognizance of Civil Magistrates. Seeing then, that
God has given to Ministers under the Gospel, that only which is Justly given
them, that is to say, a due and moderate Livelihood; the hire of their Labor;
and that the Heave Offering of Tithes is abolished with the Altar, yea though
not abolished, yet lawless, they enjoy them; their M^lchised^cian Right also
trivial and groundless; and both Tithes and Fees, if exacted or established,
unjust or scandalous, we may hope, with them removed, to removed Hirelings in
some good measure, whom these tempting Baits by Law especially to be recovered,
allure into the Church.

The next thing to be considered in the maintenance of Ministers, is by whom
it shall be given? Wherein though the l^ght of Reason might sufficiently inform
us; it will be best to consult the Scripture: Gal. 6. 6. Lt him that is taught
in the word, communicate to him that teaches in all good things; that is to
say, in all manner of Gratitude, to his ability. 1 Cor. 8. 11. If we have sown
unto you spiritual things, (...) it a great matter if we reap your carnal
things? To whom therefore has not been sown, from him wherefore should be
reaped? Tim. 5. 17. Let the Elders that rule well be counted worthy of double
Honor; especially they who labor in the Word and Doctrine. By these places we
see, was given either by every one in particular who had been instructed, or by
all them in common, brought into the Church-Treasurie and distributed to the
Ministers according to their several Labors; and that was judged either by
some extraordinary Person, as Timothy, who by the Apostle was then left at
Eph^sus, 2 Timothy 4 5. or by some to whom the Church deputed that care. This is
so agreeable to Reason and so clear* that any one may perceive what iniqiuity
and violence has prevailed sin^^ in the Church, whereby it has been so
ordered, that they also shall be to recompense the Parochial Minister, who
neither chose him for their Teacher, nor have received instruction from him, as
being either insufficient, or not resident, or inferior to whom they follow;
wherein to bar their cho^^ is to violate Christian Liberty. Our Law Books
testify; that before the Council of L^teran in the year 1179. and the fifth of
our Henry 2 or rather before a Decretal Epistle of Pope Innoc^nt the third,
about 1200. and the first of King John, any man might have his Tithes to what
spiritual Person he would: and, as the L. Coke notes on that place, Instit.
part. 2. That this Decretal bound not the Subjects of this Realm, but as it
seemed just and reasonable. The Pope took his reason rightly from the above
cited place, 1 Cor. 9. 11. But falsely supposed every one to be instructed by
his Parish Priest. Whether this were then first so decreed, or rather long
before; as may seem by the Laws of Edgar and Canute, that Tithes where to be
paid, not to whom he would that paid them, but to the Cathedral Church or the
Parish Priest. It imports not, since the reason which they themselves bring,
built on a false Supposition, becomes infirm and absurd, that he should reap
from me, who sows not to me; be the cause either his defect or my free choice.
But here it will be readily objected; what if they who are to be instructed be
not able to maintain a Minister, as in many Villages? I answer, that the
Scriptures show in many places what ought to be done herein. First, I offer it
to the Reason of any Man, whether he think the Knowledge of Christian Religion
harder than any other Art or Science to attain. I suppose he will grant that it
is far easier, both of it self, and in regard of Gods assisting Spirit; not
particularly promised us to the attainment of any other Knowledge, but of this
only: since it was preached as well to the Shepherds of Bethleem by Angels; as
to the Eastern Wife Men by that Star: and our Savior declares himself anointed
to preach the Gospel to the Poor, Luke. 4. 18. then surely to their capacity.
They who after him first taught it, were otherwise unlearned Men. They who
before Hus and Luther first reformed it, were for the meaness of their
condition, called the poor men of Lions: and in Flanders, at this day, les
gueus, which is to say Beggars. Therefore are the Scriptures translated into
every vulgar Tongue; as being held in main matters of Belief and Salvation,
plain and easy to the poorest; and such no less than their Teachers have the
Spirit to guide them in all Truth, Ioh. 14. 26. and 16. 13. Hence we may
conclude, if Men be not all their Life time under a Teacher to learn Logic,
Natural Philosophy, Ethics or Mathematics, which are more difficult; that
certainly it is not necessary to the attainment of Christian Knowledge, that Men
should sit all their Life long at the feet of a Pulpited Divine; while he a
Lollard indeed over his Elbow-Cushion, in almost the seventh part of 40. or
50. years, teaches them scarce half the Principles of Religion, and his Sheep
oft-times sit the while to as little purpose of Benefitting, as the Sheep in
their Pues at Smithfield; and for the most part by some Simonie or other,
bought and sold like them: or if this comparison be too low, like these women,
1 Timothy 3. 7 ever learning and never attaining; yet not so much through their
won fault, as through the unskilful and immethodical Teaching of their Pastor;
teaching here and there at random, out of this or that Text, as his ease or
fancy, and oft-times as his stealth guides him. Seeing that Christian Religion
may be so easily attained, and by meanest capacitles; it cannot be much
difficult to find ways, both how the Poor, yea all men may be soon taught what
is to be known of Christianity, and they who teach them, recompensed, First if,
Ministers of their own accord, who pretend that they are called and sent to
preach the Gospel, those especially who have no particular flock, would imitate
our Savior and his Disciples, who went preaching through the Villages, not
only through the Cities, Mat. 9. 35. Mark 6. 6. Luke ^3. 22. Acts 8. 25. and
there preached to the Poor as well as to the Rich, looking for no recompense
but in Heaven, John 4. 35, 36. Look on the Fields, for they are white already
to Harvest; and he that reapeth receives wages, and gathers Fruit unto Life
Eternal. This was their wages. But they will soon reply, we our selves have net
wherewithal; who shall bear the charges of our journey? To whom it may as soon
be answered, that in likelihood they are not poorer, than they who did thus;
and if they have not the same faith, which those Disciples had to trust in God
and the promise of Christ for their maintenance as they did, and yet intrude
into the Ministry without any livelihood of their own, they cast themselves
into a miserable hazard or temptation, and oft-times into a miserable
necessity, either to starve or please their Master rather than God; and give
men just cause to suspect, that they came neither called nor sent from above to
preach the word, but from below, by the instinct of their own hunger, to feed
upon the Church. Yet grant it needful to allow them both the charges of their
journey, and the hires of their labor: it belong next unto the charity of
richer Congregations, where most commonly they abound with Teachers, to s^nd
some of their number to the Villages round, as the Apostle from Jerusalem sent
Peter and John to the City and Villages of Samaria, Acts. 8. 14 25. or as the
Church at Jerusalem sent Barnabas to Antioch, chap. 11. 22. and other Churches
jonyning, sent Luke to travel with Paul, ^ Cor. 8. 19. though whether they had
their charges born by the Church or no, it be not recorded. If it be objected,
that this Itinerary Preaching will not serve to plant the Gospel in those
places, unless they who are sent, abide there ^^me competent time; I answer
that if they stay there a year or two, which was the longest time usually staid
by the Apostles in one place, it may (...) to teach them, who will attend and
learn all the points of Religion necessary to Salvation; then sorting them into
several Congregations of a moderate number, out of the ablest and zealousest
among them to create Elders; who exercising and requiring from themselves what
they have learned, (for no learning is retaind without constant exercise and
methodical repetition) may teach and govern the rest; and so exhorted to
continue faithful and steadfast, they may securely be committed to the
providence of God, and the guidance of his Holy Spirit, till God may offer some
opportunity to them again, and to confirm them: which when they have done, they
have done as much as the Apostles were wont to do in propogating the Gospel,
Acts 14 v. 3. And when they had ordained them Elders in every Church, and
prayed with fasting, they commended them to the Lord, on whom they believed.
And in the same chapter, ver. 21. 22. When they had preached the Gospel to that
City, and had taught many; they returned again to Lystra, and to I^onium and
Antioch, confirming the Souls of the Disciples, and exhorting them to continue
in the Faith. and Chap. 15. 36. Let us go again and visit our Brethren. And
ver. 41. He went through Syria and Cilicia, confirming the Churches. To these I
might add other helps, which we enjoy now, to make more easy the attainment of
Christian Religion by the meanest: the Entire Scripture translated into
English; with plenty of Notes; and some where or other, I trust may be found
some wholesome Body of Divinity, as they call it, without School-Terms and
Metaphysical Notions, which have obscured, rather than explained our Religion,
and made it seem difficult without cause. Thus taught once for all; and thus
now and then visited and confirmed, in the most destitute and poorest places of
the Land, under the Government of their own Elders, performing all Ministerial
offices among them, they may be trusted to meet and edify one another; whether
in Church or Chapel, or to save them the trudging of many Miles thither,
nearer home, though in a Houseor Ba^r. For notwithstanding the gaudy
superstition of some devoted still ignorantly to Temple, we may be well
assured, that he who disdained not to be laid in a Ma^ger, disdains not to be
preached in a Barn; and that by such Meetings as these being indeed most
Apostolical and Primitive; they will in a short time advance more in
Christian-Knowledge and Reformation of Life, than by the many years preaching
of such an Incumbent, I may say such an Incubus oft-times, as will be meanly
hired to abide long in those places. They have this left perhaps to object
further, that to send thus and to maintain, though but for a year or two,
Ministers and Teachers in several places, would prove chargeable, to the
Churches, though in Towns and Cities round about. To whom again I answer, that
it was not thought so by them, who first thus propagated the Gospel, though but
few in number to us, and much less able to sustain the expense. Yet this
expense would be much less, then to hire Incumbents, or rather Encumbrances for
a Lifetime; and a great means (which is the Subject of this Discourse) to
diminish Hirelings. But be the expense less or more, if it be found burdensome
to the Churches, they have in this Land an easy remedy in their Recourse to
the Civil Magistrate, who has in his hands the disposal of no small Revenues
left, perhaps, anciently to Superstitious, but meant undoubtedly to good and
best uses; and therefore once made public, appliable by the present
Magistrate, to such uses as the Church or solid Reason from whomsoever shall
convince him to think best. And those uses may be, no doubt, much rather than
as Glebes and Augmentations are now bestowed, to grant such requests as these
of the Churches, or to erect in greater number all over the Land, Schools, and
competent Libraries to those Schools; where Languages and Arts may be taught
free together, without the needless, unprofitable and inconvenient removing to
another place. So all the Land would soon be better civili'zd, and they who are
taught freely at the public cost, might have their education given them on
this condition; that therewith content, they should not gad for Preferment out
of their own Country, but continue there thankful for what they have received
freely, bestowing it as freely on their Country, without soaring above the
meanness wherein they were born. But how they shall live when they are thus
bred and dismis'd, will be still the sluggish objection. To which is answered,
that those Public Foundations may be so instituted, as therein may be at once
brought up to a competence of Learning, and to an honest Trade; and the Hours
of Teaching so ordered, as their Study may be no hindrance to their Labor or
other Calling; this was the Breeding of St. Paul, though born of no mean
Parents, a Free Citizen of the Roman Empire: so little did his Trade debase
him, that it rather enabled him to use that Magnanimity of preaching the
Gospel, through Asia and Europe at his own charges. Thus those Preachers among
the Poor WALDENSES, the Ancient Stock of our Reformation; without these helps
which I speak of; bred up themselves in Trades, (and especially in Physic and
Surgery, as well as in the Study of Scripture (which is the only True Theology)
that they might be no burden to the Church; and by the Example of Christ, might
cure both Soul and Body; through Industry joining that to their Ministry,
which, he joined to his by Gift of the Spirit. Thus relates Peter Giles in his
History of the WALDENSES in Piedmont. But our Ministers think scorn to use a
Trade, and count it the Reproach of this Age, that Tradesmen preach the
Gospel. It were to be wished they were all Tradesmen; they could not then so
many of them, for want of another Trade, make a Trade of their Preaching; and
yet they clamor that Tradesmen Preach, and yet they Preach while they
themselves are the worst Tradesmen of all. As for Church-Endowments and
Possessions; I meet with none considerable before Constantine, but the Houses
and Gardens where they met, and their places of Burial: and I persuade me, that
from them the Ancient WALDENSES, whom deservedly I cite so often, held, that to
endow Churches, is an evil thing; and that the Church then fell off, and turned
Whore, sitting on that Beast in the Revelation, when under Pope Sylvester she
received those Temporal Donations: So the forecited Tractate of their Doctrine
testifies. This also their own Traditions of that Heavenly Voice witnes'd, and
some of the Ancient Fathers then Living, foresaw and deplored. And indeed, how
could these Endowments thrive better with the Church, being unjustly taken by
those Emperors without Suffrage of the People, out of the Tributes and Public
Lands of each City whereby the People became liable to be oppressed with other
Taxes? Being therefore given for the most part by Kings and other public
Persons, and so likeliest out of the Public; and if without the Peoples
consent, unjustly, however to public ends of much concernment to the good or
evil of a Commonwealth; and in that regard made public though given by private
Persons; or which is worse, given, as the Clergy then persuaded Men, for their
Soul's health, a pious Gift; but as the truth was, oft-times a Bribe to God or
Christ for Absolution, as they were then taught, from Murders, Adulteries, and
other heinous Crimes: what shall be found heretofore given by Kings or Princes
out of the public, may justly by the Magistrate be recalled and reappropriated
to the Civil Revenue; what by private or public Persons out of their own, the
Price for Blood or Lust, or to such Purgatorious and Superstitious Uses, not
only may but ought to be taken off from Christ, as a foul dishonor laid upon
him, or not impiously given, nor in particular to any one, but in general to
the Churches good, may be converted to that use, which shall be judged tending
more to that end Thus did the Princes and Cities of Germany in the first
Reformation; and defended their so doing by many Reasons, which are set down at
large, in Sleidan l. 6. an. 1526, and l. 11. an. 1537. and l. 13. an 1540. But
that the Magistrate, either out of that Church-Revenue, which remains yet in
his hand, or establishing any other Maintenance instead of Tithe, should take
into his own power the Stipendiary Maintenance instead of Church Ministers, or
compel it by Law; can stand neither with the People Right nor with Christian
Liberty, but would suspend the Church wholly upon the State, and turn her
Ministers into State Pentioners. And for the Magistrate in Person of a Nursing
Father to make the Church his mere Ward, as always in Minority, the Church to
whom he ought as Magistrate, Esa. 49. 23. To bow down his face toward the
Earth, and lick up the dust of her feet; her to subject to his Political
Drifts, or conceived Opinions by mastering her Revenue, and so by his Examinant
Committees, as send her free Election of Ministers, is neither just nor pious;
no honor done to the Church, but a plain dishonor; and upon her, whose only
head is in Heaven, yea upon him, who is her only Head, sets another in effect,
and which is most monstrous, a Human on Heavenly, a Carnal on a Spiritual; a
Political Head on an Ecclesiastical Body; which at last by such Heterogeneal,
such Incestuous Conjunction, transforms her oft-times into a Beast of many
Heads and many Horns. For if the Church be of all Societies the Honest on
earth; and so to be revenged by the Magistrate; not to trust her with her own
belief and integrity, and therefore not with the keeping, a least with the
disposing of what Revenue shall be found justly and lawfully her own, is to
count the Church not a holy Congregation, but a Pack of giddy or dishonest
Persons, to be ruled by civil Power in sacred Affairs. But to proceed further
in the truth yet more freely, seeing the Christian Church is not National, but
consisting of many particular Congregations, subject to many changes, as well
through civil Accidents as through Schism and various Opinions, not to be
decided by any outward Judge, being matters of Conscience, whereby these
pretended Church-Revenues, as they have been ever, so are like to continue
endless matter of dis^ention both between the Church and Magistrate, and the
Churches among themselves. There will be found no better remedy to these evils,
otherwise incurable, than by the incorruptest Council of those Waldenses, our
first Reformers, to remove them as a Pest, an Apple of Discord in the Church,
(for what else can be the effect of Riches and the snare of money in Religion?)
and to convert them to those more profitable uses above expressed or other such
as shall be judged most necessary; considering that the Church of Christ was
founded in poverty rather than in revenues, stood purest and prospered best
without them, received them unlawfully from them who both erroneously and
unjustly, sometimes impiously, gave them, and so justly was ensuared and
corrupted by them. And least it be thought that these revenues withdrawn and
better employed, the Magistrate ought instead to settle by statute some
maintenance of Ministers, let this be considered first, that it concerns every
man's Conscience to what Religion he contributes: and that the Civil Magistrate
is entrusted with Civil Rights only, not with Conscience, which can have no
Deputy or Representer of it self, but one of the same mind: next, that what
each man gives to the Minister, he gives either as to God, or as to his
Teacher; if as to God, no Civil Power can justly consecrate to religious uses
any part either of Civil revenue, which is the Peoples; and must save them from
other Taxes; or of any man's Propriety, but God by special Command, as he did by
Moses, or the owner himself by voluntary Intention, and the persuasion of his
giving it to God. Forced Consecrations out of another man's Estate, are no
better than forced vows, f^ateful to God, who loves a cheerful Giver, but more
hateful, wrung out o men's purses to maintain a disapproved Ministry against
their Conscience; however unholy, infamous and dishonorable to his Ministers
and the free Gospel, maintained in such unworthy manner as by violence and
extortion: if he give it as to his Teacher, what justice or equity compels him
to pay for learning that Religion which leaves freely to his choice, whether he
will learn it or no, whether of this Teacher or another, and especially to pay
for what he never learned, or approves not; whereby besides the wound of his
conscience, he becomes the less able to recompense his true Teacher? Thus far
has been enquired by whom Church-Ministers ought to be maintained, and has
been proved most natural, most equal and agreeable with Scripture, to be by
them who receive their teaching; and by whom, if they be unable. Which ways
well observed, can discourage none but Hirelings, and will much lessen their
number in the Church.

It remains lastly to consider in what manner God has ordained that recompense
be given to Ministers of the Gospel: And by all Scripture it will appear that
he has given it them not by Civil Law and Freehold, as they claim, but by the
benevolence and free gratitude of such as receive them: Luke 10. 7, 8. Eating
and drinking such things as they give you. If they receive you, eat such things
as are set before you, Mat. 10^ 7, 8. As ye go, preach, saying, The Kingdom of
God is at hand, etc. Freely ye have received, freely give. If God have ordained
Ministers to preach freely, whether they receive recompense or not, then
certainly he has forbid both them to compel it for them. But freely given to
himself: Phil. 4. 16, 17, 18. Ye sent once and again to my necessity. Not
because I desire a gift; but I desire fruit that may abound to your Account.
Having received of Epaphroditus the things which were sent from you, an odor
of sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable, well pleasing to God. Which cannot be
from force or unwillingness. The same is said of Alms, Heb. 13. 16. To do good
and to communicate, forget not: for with such sacrifices God is well pleased.
Whence the primitive Church thought it no shame to receive all their
Maintenance as the Alms of their Auditors. Which they who defend Tithes, as if
it made for their Cause, when as it utterly confutes them, omit not to set down
at large; proving to our hands out of Origin, Tertullian, Cyprian, and others,
that the Clergy lived at first upon the mere benevolence of their hearers: who
gave what they gave, not to the Clergy, but to the Church; out of which the
Clergy had their portions given them in baskets; and were thence called
Sportularii, Basket-Clerks: that their portion was a very mean allowance, only
for a bare livelihood; according to those precepts of our Savior, Mat. 10. 7,
etc. the rest was distributed to the poor. They cite also out of Prosper, the
Disciple of St. Austin, that such of the Clergy as had means of their own,
might not without sin partake of Church-maintenance; not receiving thereby food
which they abound with, but feeding on the sins of other men: that the holy
Ghost says of such Clergymen, they eat the sins of my people: and that a
Council at Antioch, in the year 340, suffered not either Priest or Bishop to
live on Church-maintenance without necessity. Thus far Tithers themselves have
contributed to their own confutation, by confessing that the Church lived
primitively on Alms. And I add, that about the year 359, Constantius the
Emperor having summoned a general Council of Bishops to Ariminum in Italy, and
provided for their subsistence there, the British and French Bishops judging it
not decent to live on the public, chose rather to be at their own charges.
Three only out of Britain constrained through want, yet refusing offered
assistance from the rest, accepted the Emperors provision; judging it more
convenient to subsist by public than by private sustenance. Whence we may
conclude, that Bishops then in this Island had their Livelihood only from
Benevolence; in which regard this Relater Sulpitius Severus, a good Author of
the same time, highly praises them. And the WALDENSES, our first Reformers,
both from the Scripture and these Primitive Examples, maintained those among
them who bore the Office of Ministers, by Alms only. Take their very words from
the History written of them in French, Part. 3. l. 2. c. 2. La nourriture and
ce de quoy nous sommes converts, etc. Our Food and Clothing is sufficiently
administered and given to us by way of Gratitude and Alms, by the good People
whom we teach. If then by Alms and Benevolence, not by Legal Force, not by
Tenure of Freehold or Copyhold: for Alms, though just, cannot be compelled;
and Benevolence forced is Malevolence rather, violent and inconsistent with the
Gospel; and declares him no true Minister thereof, but a rapacious Hireling
rather, who by force receiving it, eats the bread of violence and exaction, no
holy or just livelihood, no not civilly counted honest: much less beseeming
such a Spiritual Ministry. But, say they, our maintenance is our due, Tithes
the Right of Christ, unseparable from the Priest, no where repealed* if then,
not otherwise to be had, by Law to be recovered: for though Paul were pleased
to foregoe his due, and not to use his power, 1 Cor. 9. 12. yet he had a power,
v. 4 and bound not others. I answer first, because I see them still so loath to
unlearn their decimal Arithmetic and still grasp their Tithes as inseparable
from a Priest, that Ministers of the Gospel are not Priests: and therefore
separated from Tithes by their own exclusion: being neither called Priests in
the new Testament, nor of any Order known in Scripture: not of Melchisedec,
proper to Christ only; not of Aaron, as they themselves will confess: and the
third Priesthood only remaining, is common to all the faithful. But they are
Ministers of our high Priest. True; but not of his Priesthood, as the Levites
were to Aaron: for he performs that whole Office himself incommunicably. Yet
Tithes remain, say they, still unreleased, the due of Christ: and to whom
payable, but to his Ministers? I say again, that no man can so understand them,
unless Christ in some place or other so claim them. That example of Abram
argues nothing but his voluntary Act: Honor once only done, but on what
consideration, whether to a Priest or to a King, whether due the honor,
arbitrary that kind of honor or not, will after all contending be left still in
mere Conjecture: which must not be permitted in the claim of such a needy and
subtle spiritual corporation pretending by Divine Right to the Tenth of all
other men's Estates: nor can it be allowed by wise men or the Verdit of Common
Law. And the Tenth part, though once declared holy, is declared now to be no
holier than the other Nine, by that Command to Peter, Act. 10. 15, 28: whereby
all distinction of holy and unholy is removed from all things. Tithes therefore
though claimed, and holy under the Law, yet are now released and quitted both
by that Command to Peter, and by this to all Ministers, abovecited, Luke 10;
eating and drinking such things as are given in reference to this Command:
which he calls not holy things or things of the Gospel, as if the Gospel had
any consecrated things in answer to things of the Temple, v. 13, but he calls
them your carnal things, v. 11. without changing their property. And what power
had he? not the power of force but of Conscience only, whereby he might
lawfully and without scruple live on the Gospel: receiving what was given him,
as the recompense of his labor. For if Christ the Master has professed his
Kingdom to be not of this World, it suits not with that profession either in
him or his Ministers to claim Temporal Right from spiritual respects. He who
refused to be the divider of an inheritance between two Brethren, cannot
approve his Ministers by pretended right from him to be dividers of Tenths and
Freeholds out of other men's possessions, making thereby the Gospel but a Cloak
of carnal interest, and, to the contradiction of their Master, turning his
heavenly Kingdom into a Kingdom of this world, a Kingdom of force and rapin. To
whom it will be one day thundered more terribly than to Gehazi, for thus
dishonouring a far greater Master and his Gospel, is this a time to receive
money and to receive Garments and Olive-yards and Vineyards and Sheep and Oxen?
The leprosy of Naaman linked with that Apostolic Curse of perishing
imprecated on Simon Magus, may be feared will cleave to such and to their seed
for ever. So that when all is done, and Belly has used in vain all her cunning
shifts, I doubt not but all true Ministers, considering the Demonstration of
what has been here proved, will be wise, and think it much more tolerable to
hear, that no maintenance of Ministers, whether Tithes or any other, can be
settled by Statute: but must be given by them who receive Instruction, and
freely given, as God has ordained. And indeed what can be a more honorable
maintenance to them, than such, whether Alms or willing Oblations as these,
which being accounted both alike as given to God, the only acceptable
sacrifices now remaining, must needs represent him who receives them, much in
the care of God and nearly relating to him, when not by worldly force and
constraint, but with Religious Awe and Reverence, what is given to God, is
given to him, and what to him, accounted as given to God? This would* be well
enough, say they; but how many will so give? I answer as many, doubtless, as
shall be well taught; as many as God shall so move. Why are ye so distrastful,
both of your own Doctrine and of Gods Promises, fulfilled in the experience of
those Disciples first sent: Luke. 22. 35. When I sent you without Purse and
Scrip and Shoes; Lacked ye any thing? and they said, nothing. How then came
ours, or who sent them thus destitute, thus poor and empty, both of Purse and
Faith? Who style themselves Ambassadors of Jesus Christ; and seem to be his
Tithe-gatherers: though an Office of their own setting up to his Dishonor; his
Exacters, his Publicans rather, not trusting that he will maintain them in
their Embassy, unless they bind him to his Promise by a Statute Law that we
shall maintain them. Lay down for shame that Magnify Title, while ye seek
maintenance from the People. It is not the manner of Ambassadors to ask
maintenance of them to whom they are sent. But he who is Lord of all things,
has so ordained; trust him then; he doubtless will command the People to make
good his Promise of maintenance more honorably unasked, unracked for. This
they know, this they preach, yet believe not; but think it as impossible
without a Statute Law to live of the Gospel, as if by those words they were bid
go eat their Bibles, as Ezekiel and John did their Books; and such Doctrines as
these are as bitter to their Bellies; but will serve so much the better to
discover Hirelings, who can have nothing, though but in apperance, just and
solid to answer for themselves against what has been here spoken; unless
perhaps this one remaining pretense, which we shall see either to be false or
uningenuous. They pretend that their Education, either at School or Universitie
has been very chargeable; and therefore ought to be repaired in future by a
plentiful maintenance: whenas it is well known, that the better half of them;
and oft-times poor and pitiful Boys of no merit or promising hopes that might
entitle them to the public Provision, but their poverty and unjust favor of
Friends, have had most of their Breeding both at School and Universitie by
Schollarships, Exhibitions and Fellowships at the public cost, which might
engage them the rather to give freely, as they have freely received: or if they
have missed of these helps at the latter place, they have after two or three
years left the course of their Studies there, if they ever well began them, and
undertaken, (though furnished with little else, but Ignorance, Boldness and
Ambition, if with no worse vices;) a Chaplainship in some Gentleman's House, to
the frequent imbasing of his Sons illiterate and narrow Principles. Or if they
have lived there upon their own, who knows not that seven years charge of
living there, to them who fly not from the Government of Parents to the License
of a Universitie, but come seriously to study, is no more than man be defrai'd
and reimburs'd by one years Revenue of an ordinary good Benefice? if they had
then means of Breeding from their Parents, it is likely they have more now; and
if they have, it needs must be Mechanic and Uningenuous in them to bring a
Bill of charges for learning of those Liberal Arts and Sciences, which they
have learned (if they have indeed learned them, as they seldom have) to their
own benefit and accomplishment. But they will say, we had betaken us to some
other Trade or Profession, had we not expected to find a better Livelihood by
the Ministry. This is that which I looked for, to discover them openly,
neither true Lovers of Learning, and so very guilty of it, nor true Ministers
of the Gospel. So long ago out of date is that old true saying, 1 Timothy 3. 1.
If a man desires a Bishopric, he desires a good work: for now commonly he who
desires to be a Minister, looks not at the work but at the wages; and by that
Lute or Lowbel may be told from Parish to Parish all the Town over. But what
can be plainer Simonie, than thus to be at charges before hand, to no other end
than to make Ministry double or trebly Beneficial? to whom it might be said as
justly as to that Simon, thy money perish with thee; because thou have thought
the Gift of God may be purchased with money: thou have neither part nor lot in
this matter. Next, it is a fond Error though too much believed among us, to
think that the Universitie makes a Minister of the Gospel; what it may conduce
to other Arts and Sciences, I dispute not now: But that which makes fit a
Minister, the Scripture can best inform us to be only from above; whence also
we are bid to seek them, Mat. 9. 38. Pray ye therefore to the Lord of the
Harvest, that he will send forth Laborers into his Harvest. Acts 20. 28. The
Flock, over which the Holy Ghost has made you Over-Se^rs. Romans 10. 15. How
shall they preach, unl^ss they be sent? by whom sent? by the Universitie, or
the Magistrate, or their Belly? no surely; but sent from God only, and that God
who is not their Belly. And whether he be sent from God, or from Simon Magus,
the inward sense of his Calling and Spiritual Ability will sufficiently tell
him; and that strong Obligation felt within him, which was felt by the Apostle,
will often express from him the same words, 1 Cor. 9. 16 Necessity is laid
upon me; yea, woe is me if I preach not the Gospel. Not a beggarly necessity,
and the woe feared otherwife of perpetual want, but such a necessity as made
him willing to preach the Gospel gratis, and to embrace poverty rather than as
a woe to fear it, 1 Cor. 12 28. God has set some in the Church, first
Apostles, etc. Ephesians. 4. 11. etc. He gave some Apostles, etc. For the perfecting
of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of
Christ, till we all come to the unity of the Faith, as he has made them at
the first, so he makes them still, and to the worlds end. 2. Cor. 3. 6. Who
has also made us fit or able Ministers of the New Testament. 1 Timothy 4. 14. The
Gift that is in thee, which was given thee by prophecy and the laying on of
the hands of the Presbytery. These are all the means which we read of required
in Scripture to the making of a Minister. All this is granted, you will say:
but yet, that it is also requisite he should be trained in other Learning*
which can be no where better had than at Universities. I answer, that what
Learning, either Human or Divine, can be necessary to a Minister, may as easily
and less chargeably be had in any private House. How deficient else and to how
little purpose, are all those Piles of Sermons, Notes and Comments on all parts
of the Bible, Bodies and Marrow of Divinity, besides all other Sciences in our
English Tongue; many of the same Books, which in Latin they read at the
Universitie? And the small necessity of going thither to learn Divinity, I
prove first from the most part of themselves, who seldom continue there till
they have well got through Logic, their first Rudiments; though to say truth,
Logic also may much better be wanting in Disputes of Divinity, than in the
subtle Debates of Lawyers and Statesmen, who yet seldom or never deal with
Syllogisms. And those Theological Disputations there held by Professors; and
Graduates, are such as tend least of all to the Edification or capacity of the
People; but rather leaven pure Doctrine with Scholastical Trash, than enable a
Minister to the Preaching of the Gospel. Whence we may also compute, since they
come to recknings, the charges of his needful Library: which though some shame
not to value at 600^. may be competently furnished for 60. If any man for his
own curiosity or delight be in Books further expensive, that is not to be
reckoned as necessary to his Ministerial, either Breeding or Function. But
Papists and other Adversaries cannot be confuted without Fathers and Councels,
immense Volumes and of vast charges. I will show them therefore a shorter and a
better way of confutation, Tit. 1. 9. Holding fast the faithful word as he has
been taught, that he may be able by sound Doctrine, both to exhort and to
convince Gainsayers; who are confuted as soon as heard, bringing that which is
either not in Scripture or against it. To pursue them further through the
obscure and entangled Word of Antiquity; Fathers and Councels fighting one
against another; is needless, endless, not requisite in a Minister, and refused
by the first Reformers of our Religion. And yet we may be confident, if these
things are thought needful; let the State but erect in public, good Store of
Libraries and there will not want Men in the Church, who of their own
inclinations will become able in this kind against Papist or any other
Adversary. I have thus at large examined the usual pretenses of Hirelings,
colored over most commonly with the cause of Learning and Universities; as if
with Divines, Learning stood and fell; wherein for the most part their pittance
is so small* and to speak freely, it were much better, there were not one
Divine in the Universitie; no School-Divinitie known, the Idle Sophastry of
Monks, the Canker of Religion; and that they who intended to be Ministers, were
trained up in the Church only, by the Scripture and in the Original Languages
thereof at School; without fetching the compass of other Arts and Sciences,
more than what they can well learn at Secondary Leisure and at home. Neither
speak I this in contempt of Learning or the Ministry, but hating the common
cheats of both; hating that they who have preached out Bishops, Prelates and
Canonists, should, in what serves their own ends, retain their false Opinions,
their Pharasaical Leaven, their Avarice and closely their Ambition, their
Pluralities, their Nonresidences, their odious Fees, and use their Legal and
Popish Arguments for Tithes: that Independents should take that Name, as they
may justly from the true Freedom of Christian Doctrine and Church Discipline,
subject to no Superior Judge but God only, and seek to be Dependents on the
Magistrate for their maintenance, which two things, Independence and State-Hire
in Religion, can never consist long or certainly together. For Magistrates at
one time or other; not like these at present our Patrons of Christian Liberty,
will pay none but such whom by their Committees of Examination, they find
conformable to their Interest and Opinions, and Hirelings will soon frame
themselves to that Interest and those Opinions, which they see best pleasing to
their Pay-masters; and to seem right themselves, will force others as to the
truth. But most of all they are to be reviled and shamed, who cry out with a
distinct voice of Notorious Hirelings, that if ye settle not our maintenance by
Law, farewell the Gospel; then which nothing can be uttered more false, more
ignominious, and I may say, more blasphemous against our Savior; who has
promised without this condition, both his holy Spirit, and his own presence
with his Church to the worlds end: nothing more false (unless with their own
mouths they condemn themselves for the unworthiest and most mercenary of all
other Ministers) by the experience of 300 years after Christ, and the Churches
at this day, in France, Austria Polonia, and other places witnessing the
contrary, under an adverse Magistrate, not a favorable, nothing more
ignominious, levelling or rather undervaluing Christ beneath Mahomet. For if it
be thus, how can any Christian object it to a Turk, that his Religion stands by
force only; and not justly fear from him this reply, yours both by force and
money in the judgment of your own Preachers. This is that which make Atheists
sin in the Land; whom they so much complain of; not the want of maintenance or
Preachers, as they allege, but the many Hirelings, and Cheaters that have the
Gospel in their hands, hands that still crave, and are never satisfied. Likely
Ministers indeed, to proclaim the Faith, or to exhort our trust in God, when
they themselves will not trust him to provide for them in the message whereon,
they say, he sent them, but threa^en for want of temporal means to desert it;
calling that want of means, which is nothing else but the want of their own
faith: and would force us to pay the hire of building our faith to their
covetuous incredulity. Doubtless, if God only be he who gives Ministers to his
Church till the worlds end, and through the whole Gospel never sent us for
Ministers to the Schools of Philosophy, but rather bids us beware of such vain
deceit Col. 2. 8. (which the Primitive Church, after two or three Ages not
remembering, brought her self quickly to confusion) if all the Faithful be now 4
Holy and Royal Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2. 5, 9. not excluded from the Dispensation
of things Holiest, after free Election of the Church and imposition of hands,
there will not want Ministers, elected out of all sorts and orders of men, for
the Gospel makes no difference from the Magistrate himself to the meanest
Artificer, if God evidently favor him with Spiritual Gifts, as he can easily
and often has done; while those Bachelor Divines, and Doctors of the Tippet
have been passed by: Heretofore in the first Evangelick times (it were happy
for Christendom if it were so again) Ministers of the Gospel were by nothing
else distinguished from other Christians but by their Knowledge and Sanctity
of Life; for which the Church elected them to be her Teachers and Overseers,
though not thereby to separate them from what ever calling she then found them
following besides, as the example of St. Paul declares, and the first time of
Christianity. When once they affected to be called a Clergy, and became as it
were a peculiar Tribe of Levites, a Party, a dictinct order in the
Commonwealth; bred up for Divines in babbling Schools and fed at the public
cost; good for nothing else, but what was good for nothing, they soon grew
idle; that Idleness with fullness of Bread begat pride and perpetual contention
with their Feeders, the despised Laity, through all Ages ever since; to the
perverting of Religion, and the disturbance of all Christendom. And we may
considently conclude, it never will be otherwise, while they are thus upheld
undepending on the Church, on which alone they anciently depended, and are by
they Magistrate publicly maintained a numerous Faction of indigent Persons,
crept for the most part out of extreme want and bad nature, claiming by divine
Right and Freehold the tenth of our Estates, to monopolize the Ministry as
their peculiar, which is free and open to all able Christians, elected by any
Church. Under this pretense exempt from all other employment, and enriching
themselves from the public, they last of all prove common Incendiaries, and
exalt their horns against the Magistrate himself that maintains them; as the
Priest or Rome did soon after against his Benefactor the Emperor, and the late
Presbyters in Scotland. Of which Hireling- Crew, together with all the
Mischiefs, Dissentions, Troubles, Wars merely of their kindling, Christendom
might soon rid her self and be happy, if Christians would but know their own
Dignity, their Liberty, their Adoption; and let it not be wondered, if I say
their Spiritual Priesthood, whereby they have all equally access to any
Ministerial Function whenever called by their own abilities and the Church;
though they never came near Commencement or Universitie. But while Protestants,
to avoid the due Labor of undertaking their own Religion, are o^tent to lodge
it in the Breast, or rather in the Books of a Clergyman, and to take it thence
by Scraps and Mammocks, as he dispences it in his Sundays ^dole; they will be
always learning and never knowing, always Infants, always either his Vassals,
as Lay-Papists are to their Priests, or at odds with him. Reformed Principles
give them some light to be not wholly conformable, whence infinite disturbances
in the State, as they do, must needs follow. Thus much I had to say, and I
suppose, what may be enough to them who are not ava^^ciously bent otherwise,
touching the likeliest means to remove Hirelings out of the Church, than which
nothing can more conduce to truth, to peace and all happiness both in Church
and State. If I be not heard nor believed, the event will bear me witness to
have spoken truth: and I in the mean while have born my witness not out of
season to the Church and to my Country.

FINIS.

