A NARRATIVE OF THE SIEGE OF Londonderry: Or, the late Memorable Transactions
OF THAT CITY.

Faithfully Represented, To Rectify the Mistakes, and supply the Omissions of
Mr. Walker's Account.

By JOHN MACKENZIE, Chaplain to a Regiment there during the Siege.

The most Material Passages relating to other Parts of Ulster and Sligo are
also inserted from the Memoirs of such as were chiefly concerned in them.

With Allowance.

LONDON, Printed for the Author, and are to be Sold by Richard Baldwin, in the
Old Baily. 1690.

THE PREFACE.
THE small City of Londonderry having been the last Year the Scene of so great
and remarkable Actions, it is hoped that an impartial Account of 'em will not be
unacceptable to the public. Gratitude to Almighty God obliges us to record so
many signal Instances of his Power and Goodness in the preservation of that
People. And it is no more than Justice to those who either lost or eminently
hazarded their Lives in that Cause, to transmit the Memory of those Services by
which they have so generously expressed their Zeal for the Protestant Religion,
and their affection to the present Government: It Is true indeed, an Account of
the Siege has been published several Months ago; and had there not been besides
several material Mistakes in it, many Passages entirely omitted that were of
great Importance to set those Affairs in their true and native light; or had
those faults of that account been since fairly corrected instead of being
vindicated, it would have superseded my labor in preparing this Narrative for
the public view; in the writing whereof I am so far from being conscious to my
self of being biased by any affection to a Party, that I have been sparing in
representing some matters of fact with all the Advantage they were capable of,
least they should have that aspect.

I have in this Narrative of Derry inserted the most material passages in other
parts of Ulster (except Inniskillin, of which a distinct Account has been given
by another hand) and of Sligo, from the Memoirs of some Persons of Quality, and
others that were Actors in 'em; A piece of Justice due to the Nobility and
Gentry in those parts, who with so great expense of their Fortunes, and some of
'em with no less hazard of their Lives endeavored the preservation of their
Country: For by this Account the Reader may see, they did all that could be
expected from them, and the chief Causes to which their ill success must be
ascribed, were their too great confidence in Colonel Lundy's Promises and
Conduct, and their too early expectations of Relief from England. And the
behavior of those of them that stayed in Derry, and made up almost the whole
of that Garrison, is sufficient to put that reproach of Cowardice out of
Countenance, which some (out of design to exclude them from being employed in
the Reduction of Ireland) have been so industrious to load them with: I have
added in the end his Majesty's Letters and Instructions, because they so fully
manifest his Royal Care and Concern for the preservation, not only of Derry,
but of the whole Kingdom.

In the Account of the Siege it self, I have not only compared others Diaries
with what I was an eyewitness of, but for fuller satisfaction offered this
part of the Narrative to be reviewed by such of the Officers of Derry as are
now in Town; several of whom, as Colonel Crofton, Colonel Murray, Lieutenant
Colonel Blair, Captain Alexander Sanderson, etc. having heard it read in the
presence of Sir Arthur Rawden, Sir Arthur Langford, Colonel Upton and several
other Gentlemen, and being desired upon every material paragraph to object
against any thing either misrepresented or omitted in the relation, freely
professed their assent to it: and Dr. Walker was acquainted with the Design of
publishing it some time before he left the Town.

I foresee indeed that some who are concerned may be offended with several
Passages that seem to reflect on some particular Persons, especially Coll. L
--, Dr. W --, and M. G. K --; to which I need only say, That as I have
mentioned nothing relating to 'em but Matters of Fact, that are capable of all
the Demonstration that can be reasonably expected, so this Narrative would have
been palpably imperfect and defective without 'em. What is said of Coll. L --,
is no more than what was necessary to vindicate the Forces at Clady from the
imputation of Cowardice, with which he endeavored to palliate his own Conduct,
to give the true Reason why the chief Officers left the place, and to justify
the Multitude in casting off his Authority, when they saw him resolved on
giving up the Town to K. James. I may allege the same as to Dr. W --; it was
necessary to take Notice of the Articles against him, because they occasioned
that material Change in the Government by the establishment of the Council of
14. And the other Passages were no more than requisite to disabuse the World
that had been so grossly imposed on in the ridiculous Attempts used to make not
only a chief Governor in the Garrison, but a mighty Hero of that Gentleman,
not only in the Account published in his own Name, but in the Papers of others
who wrote their Panegyricks upon him. I shall only produce one Instance of this
kind out of the Observations printed on Mr. W -- 's Account; for among other
Links in the Author's Chain of Miracles (as he calls it) this is the sixth: The
unanimous Suffrage of the People in electing and constituting Mr. George Walker
their Commander in chief, than whom they could not have pitched on a Person
more completely adapted to so capricious an Employment, being a Man of
exquisite Parts, having a neat dexterity in accommodating the humor of the
Rabble, a discreet temper in moderating the diversity of Persuasions, a prudent
Managery of the Common Provisions, a vigilant Care in the Order of Guards,
Watches and Exercise, and an undaunted Courage in leading 'em on to the most
dangerous Enterprises. A very eloquent Paragraph, that gives us the true Idea
of a complete Governor; only the Author had done better to bestow it on Dr. W
-- in some part of the World where he is not yet so well known; for if all the
other links in his Chain of Miracles were like this, I am afraid that even in
London as well as at Derry it would be mistaken for a small Legend: For he does
not seem so much in this Character to have considered what was true, as what
would represent his imaginary Governor and General as great and extraordinary.
But since Governor Baker has been thus injuriously pilfer'd of several of his
deserved Plumes, and Dr. W -- adorned with 'em, it was but common Justice to
restore 'em to the right owner. For what M. G. K -- did after the Siege, it
could not be omitted without disappointing the just expectations of the Reader,
to know what treatment the greatest part of that deserving People met with from
him, especially when so very different from his Majesty's declared sense of
their Services: And the rather because his Carriage since to the Gentry, and
other Inhabitants of the North of Ireland, has been but too agreeable to it.
And I may justly add, that I have been so far from aggravating these matters
beyond just bounds, that I have omitted several things relating to these three
Gentlemen, that were not inconsiderable, because not so necessary or pertinent
to this Narrative.

Least any should think there is on the other hand too much said of some
particular Persons, who were active in the Siege, I shall so far prevent that
Objection, as to assure the Reader that as there is nothing mentioned
concerning 'em, but what they really did, so several things have not been taken
notice of, tho to their Advantage, because less considerable than what is here
related.

One defect indeed I must acknowledge in this account, viz. That several
especially of the Inferior Officers and common Soldiers, did excellent
Service, and showed great Courage in the Sallies, whose Names and particular
Actions it was impossible for me to recover. But what I could learn, that was
most remarkable, I have represented with all the Impartialty I could, having
been rather sparing than lavish in the few Characters given of such as were
most useful.

Having said, thus much to Obviate any Cavils against the ensuing Relation, I
shall conclude this Preface with a few Reflections on the Contents of it.

1. The first Attempts of Derry for it is own Preservation, were very
justifiable.

There were but too strong grounds to suspect a general Design of the Irish
Papists against the British Protestants, and particularly of the Ultogh's who
had given the earliest Demonstrations of their cruel Disposition in the
Rebellion of 41. and engraven it in the most bloody Characters; Of what sort of
Men the Earl of Antrim's Regiment (designed to Garrison there) was made up, the
Narrative gives a short but true Account. And as these Presumptions of their
extraordinary danger, were the only Argument that induc't a few youths at first
to shut the Gates, and the Graver Citizens soon after to concur with them for
there own Defense; So the Argument carries that weight and strength with it,
that will sufficiently clear 'em from any Imputation of Disloyalty or Sedition,
in the Judgment of all that are not Bigots for Unlimited Non-resistance. To
assert, that in these Circumstances, they might not justly deny Entrance to the
Irish Soldiers, till they had remonstrated their danger to the Government, is
in effect to say, they should have taken no measures to prevent their own
imminent ruin, but such as were sure to come too late. And perhaps if those
Gentlemen that have so freely censured 'em, had been in their Case, their fears
would for once have brought 'em into their wits; For whatever passion they seem
to have for a Notion they have so long valued themselves upon, as their
Shibboleth; I do not see that they are more fond of Slavery and Destruction
than other Men, when themselves are in any danger of it. For what they did
afterward in Proclaiming K. William and Q. Mary, and consequently in opposing
King James' Army, the Example of England, and the dependence that Ireland has
on it, sets those Actions above the need of any Apology for 'em.

2. It Is not very easy to find a parallel Instance in History, where so great
Issues depended on the Defense or Surrender of so small a place.

Had Derry been Surrendered, the whole Kingdom of Ireland had been entirely
lost, and particularly that brave people of Iniskillin (whose resolute
Opposition did not a little Contribute to the Preservation of Derry,) had been
unavoidably exposed as a Sacrifice to the Fury of the Irish. K. James might
have poured so considerable a Force into Scotland, as would not only have
embroiled that Kingdom, (for that was done by a few) but in all human
probability either overrun it, or at least turned it into a Field of Blood; And
how difficult a Task it would have been in those Circumstances to have secured
the peace of England, where there were so many dangerous Symptoms of
Disaffection among too many, and a strange ferment among all, is too easy to
imagine. But the Defense of that place, as it obviated all these dismal Evils,
so it has in a great measure blasted all the other designs of the Popish
Faction against Britain, and Facilitated the Reduction of Ireland, the very
Flower of K. James's Army having Perished, and the Courage of such as Survived
Sunk before those Walls.

3. And yet scarce ever did a People Defend so weak a Place with so invincible
Resolution, under greater Discouragements.

The English Forces sent for their Assistance upon Colonel Lundy's
Representing the condition of the Town as desperate, returned, and all their
principal Officers perceiving how Affairs were managed, came with them. After
which Colonel Lundy and his Council were only Sollicitors to make the best
Terms they could for themselves: When their Authority was broke by the Threats
of those whom they called the Rabble, there was scarce a Man left of any
considerable Reputation for Experience or Conduct in Military Affairs. They had
too great reason given 'em to fear some Treacherous Friends within, as well as
a powerful Enemy without their Gates. They could scarce reasonably expect any
assistance from England, when those sent before, had left the place as
hopeless: The Ships that came afterward under the Command of M. G. K. never
made any Attempt to come up, when they had no Obstacle but what the Castle of
Culmore could give them, and had all the Advantages of Wind and Tide to favor
them. (Nor did they make any Essay, till the time we were relieved;
notwithstanding the frequent signs we made to them of our Distressed
Condition:) And some weeks after their appearance in the Lough, most of them
were gone out of our sight, so that we had little hope of Relief by them. And
yet tho Sickness and Famine then daily swept off great numbers (for it is
thought no less than ten thousand dyed during the Siege, besides those that
dyed soon after,) we would not hear of Surrendering, while there was any
possibility for the Garrison to Subsist.

4. The Conduct of Divine Providence, in the preservation of that City deserves
our admiration, and thankful acknowledgments.

Besides what has been already suggested, or is more fully observed in the
Relation it self, I may add, That those few Youths should first shut the Gates
against the Earl of Antrims Regiment, when not one person of Note in the Town
durst openly concur with them: That the Multitude should obstruct the Surrender
of it when signed by Colonel Lundy and his Council, after the principal
Officers had left it, and resolutely adventure on the defense of it, under so
many and great disadvantages, looks like the effect of some extraordinary
impulse on their minds. To what can we ascribe it, that in so many Sallies, we
should lose so very few men, (not above 80 in all,) and kill so considerable
numbers of the Enemy, many more of whom are also reckoned to have died of their
Wounds than fell in the Field, and it is supposed betwixt 8 and 9000 in all
perished during the Siege: That so many Bombs thrown into the Town should do no
more mischief, (nay some of them by tearing open the Ground, discovered some
concealed Provisions, which put us on searching for more with good success:)
That so many thousand Protestants, whom the Enemy had driven to the Walls,
should be so soon dismissed again, and the shot we made at them, while at a
distance and unknown, only single out their Enemies: To what can we attribute
this, but the immediate care and protection of Heaven. And that when we were
reduced to such desperate Necessities, those two Ships should so boldly
attempt, and so successfully (even though the Wind failed them,) effect our
releif after the Enemy had made the utmost preparation to oppose them, looks as
if the Almighty chose our extemity, and the very difficulties of our
deliverance, to enhance the glory of his power in it. The French cruelty in
driving so many of our Friends before the Town, confirmed instead of weakening
our resolution to maintain it: Those many Protestants that at the beginning of
the Siege left the City, and took protection, and even the great numbers that
died the last six weeks of the Siege, made those Provisions last the longer,
which had they failed sooner, necessity would have forced us to submit to an
enraged Enemy, whose Treaties we had so little ground to rely on, and from whom
we could expect so little mercy after so obstinate an opposition.

5. How disingenuous, as well as foolish, have the attempts of some been, to
engross the honor of those Actions to a Party. Especially when this was done
with so gross partiality, as to monopolize it to that party, which tho about
equal to the other, in the number of Field Officers, yet was far exceeded by
the other in the number of inferior Officers, and could not (according to the
exactest Computation we could make,) claim above one in 15 of the common
Soldiers. I should not have taken the least notice of this, if the palpable
misrepresentation in the Ded. Epistle of the former Account renewed in the
Vindication of it, had not obliged me to do it.

6. The Treatment that people met with from M. G. K. seems very hard and
unaccountable: But on this and the former Remark, it is needless to enlarge: For
where things so plainly speak themselves, it is but officious impertinence to
make any tedious comments upon them.

Several circumstances have concurred to delay the publication of this
Narrative; I saw not Dr. W's Account till December, and could not come hither
before the end of January, and have since spent same time in waiting for
Papers, and consulting such as were capable of giving me any further
information.

If I have omitted the mentioning of any persons Names, who might have merited
well in the Garrison; I declare it is not done of design, but for want of just
information.

THE CONTENTS.
THe Transactions of the City of Derry, from the shutting of the Gates, till
the Descent of the Irish Army, from page 1. to page 10.

The affairs of the other parts of Ulster, and of Sligo, from p. 10. to p. 21.

What passed at Derry, from the Retreat of the British Forces, from Colerain
thither, till the time that King James's Army appeared before the Town, from p.
21. to p. 27.

The change of the Government in Derry, from p. 27. to p. 31.

The Siege, from p. 31. to p. 46.

The New-Establishment, by Major General Kirk, p. 46, 47.

The Papers referred to in the Narrative, from p. 47. to the end.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THe Vindication of Mr. Alexander Osborn from the Aspersions cast upon him in
Mr. Walker 's Account of the Siege of Derry: written by Mr. J. Boyse, and Sold
by J. Lawrence, and J. Dunton, in the Poultry.

THE LATE Memorable Transactions OF THE CITY OF Londonderry, etc.
THe noise of the Prince of Orange's intended descent into England in Autumn,
1688. and the Preparations made in Holland for that purpose, extremely alarmed
the late K. James: He to strengthen himself the more effectually against this
expected Invasion, commanded over from Ireland several Regiments of the
standing Forces there, who were by that time so modeled, that they consisted
almost entirely of Irish Papists, and on these he seemed to rely as his surest
Friends; a fatal Mistake in his Politiques, though all of a piece with those
other Measures which his own Inclinations as well as the great Zeal of his
Priest-ridden Cabal suggested to him; for his Army here could not bear it, to
see themselves out-rivall'd by a Crew of Scullogues in their Prince's Favor,
and he could not have brought any Guests into the English Nation more unwelcome
to it than Irish Cutthroats. To supply the room of these Regiments in Ireland,
the Earl of Tyrconnel, then Lord Deputy, issued out Commissions for levying
four New Regiments in the four Provinces of that Kingdom: Of that to be raised
in Ulster, the Earl of Antrim (an eminent Papist in the North) was made
Colonel; which Regiment (as 'twas commonly reported) he was ordered to have
complete and ready about the 20th. of November then ensuing. The Lord
Mountjoy's Regiment of Foot (a well-disciplin'd Battallion) was then Garrisoned
in and about Londonderry, and their Colonel, several of the Officers, and
some of the Soldiers being Protestants, the Inhabitants of that City looked on
their being there as a great security to 'em, and dreaded the thoughts of their
removal: But the Lord Tyrconnel, either out of design to secure himself the
better at Dublin, or (as was said) with an intent to send that Regiment over to
England, ordered them to March up from Derry toward Dublin by the 23d. of
November. It was expected the Lord of Antrim's Regiment would by that time be
in a readiness to succeed them, and Garrison in their stead, but it fell out
very happily, that they were not completely raised, 'till above a fortnight
after the Lord Mountjoy's left that City. Some ascribe this delay, partly to a
Report then current among the Irish, that the new levied Soldiers were to be
all transported for England, to which few of them had any great stomach; (their
Contrymen having never made any lucky expeditions thither, and seldom
returned back with a whole skin) and therefore they came in but slowly: partly
to the curiosity of the Government, in appointing a standard for the Stature of
their new levied Soldiers, who were to be all near six foot high; it is
probable, out of design of having their Army the more uniform, and formidable
for their bulk, whatever they were for their Courage.

But whatever occasioned that delay, it cannot but be owned as a remarkable
Providence, that a vacancy so seldom known before, should so strangely happen
there in this Juncture. The Lord Mountjoy's Regiment being gone, the care of
the City was committed to John Buchanan Deputy Mayor to the Irish Corporation,
(a Person of no good Reputation in the Town) who modeled the Town Guards as he
thought fit: But the News of this new Regiment of the E. of Antrim's, being
intended to quarter there, was very unwelcome to the Inhabitants. They had a
certain Account that they were all of them entirely Papists, and many, both of
the Officers and Soldiers, the offspring, or near Relations of those who in
the Rebellion of 1641. had so deeply embrued their hands in British and
Protestant blood: And they had too just reason to believe that these Rake-hells
(who were the very scum of the Country) had the hereditary inclinations, as
well as the Blood of their Ancestors running in their veins: And their
particular aversion to this Regiment was heightened by the apprehensions which
they generally had of some mischievous Project hatching among the Irish
Papists, against the whole Body of British Protestants. And these fears did not
want very probable Grounds to support them; some of which it will not be
improper to suggest. Many of their Priests at their ordinary Masses had
declared publicly to their People, That they had some great design in hand,
which would highly concern them and all their Nation, whereof they should have
particular notice, as soon as it was convenient; that 'twas their indispensible
duty at the Peril of their Salvation, to do whatever their Priests should
direct and enjoin them, requiring 'em in the mean time to buy and furnish
themselves with the best Weapons they could. And the stories of this kind told
by some of the Irish themselves, gained the more Credit, when it was observed,
that generally through the whole Kingdom, not only the Men, but the Women and
Boys too began to furnish themselves with skeanes, and half-pikes; it being the
great business of the Irish Smiths in the Country to make this sort of Arms
for them: These were afterward called Rapparee's, a sort of Irish Vultures
that follow their Armies to prey on the spoil. I shall not mention the many
bold and threatening Discourses that often dropped from many of 'em, especially
when good Liquor had a little warmed their Blood, or upon occasional quarrels:
But I must not omit, that as several Consultations of the Irish Clergy were
discovered, particularly in the County of Donegal, not far from Derry, where
the great Debates were said to arise betwixt the Priests and Friars, about the
execution of some great Design; so a particular Sermon preached by a certain
Friar in Derry it self to the Popish part of the Garrison in the open
Market-house, October 1688. did not a little allarm the Protestants there, some
of whom were out of curiosity his hearers. The main subject of his Discourse
was about Readiness destroying the Amalekites, where he showed how dangerous it
was to spare one of those whom God had devoted to destruction, God having
deserted Saul, taken the Kingdom from him, and ruined both him and his Family,
for that very reason, as he certainly would all that were guilty of the like
disobedience: And that they were obliged always (as then from Samuel) to take
their directions from their Clergy as from God, and punctually observe the same
at the Peril of their Souls.

The Application was thought very easy and obvious.

Some of their Clergy also were observed to buy up Firearms, and procured
several Chain-bridles to be made, some whereof were accidentally found and
seized by George Phillips, Esquire And tho the News of the Prince of Orange's
landing in England, Nov. 5th. gave the Protestants a reviving Prospect of the
happy change of the Government of that Kingdom: Yet it rather increas't their
fears of their present Danger, because they concluded, if the Irish should make
any Attempt while England was in a Combustion, they could expect little relief
from thence. But that which made the deepest Impression on 'em was a a Letter
dropped at Cumber, December. 3d, in the County of Down, where the E. of
Mount-Alexander then resided: The superscription thus -- To my Lord, This
deliver with have and care. The Letter was as follows.

December. 3d. 1688 Good my Lord,
I Have written to you, to let you know, that all our Irish men through Ireland
is sworn, That on the ninth day of this Month, they are all to fall on to Kill
and Murder, Man, Wife, and Child: And I desire your Lordship to take care of
your self, and all others that are judged by our men to be Heads, for whosoever
of 'em can kill any of you, they are to have a Captains place: so my desire to
your Honor is, to look to your self, and give other Noblemen warning, and go
not out either night or day without a good Guard with you, and let no Irish man
come near you, whatsoever he be: So this is all from him who was your Fathers
Friend, and is your Friend, and will be, tho I dare not be known, as yet, for
fear of my Life.


There was no Subscription, and the ill writing, as well as the style, seemed
to argue 'twas penned by one of the meaner sort of the Natives. There were
Letters written to others to the same purpose, as Mr. Brown of Lisburn, and Mr.
Maitland of Hillsborough, besides diverse Informations. Whether the first Letter
was really intended by some well-meaning Irish man, as a warning, or was a
Contrivance, I shall not dispute: But the next day after this Letter was dropped,
Sir W. Franklin, Arthur Upton, Esquire W. Conningham, Esquire and Mr. Tho. Knox, sent
an Express to Dublin with Copies of it, not only to alarm the Protestants in
that City, but to give 'em the opportunity of communicating the notice of it to
all other parts of the Kingdom: (Letters were also dispersed to the Dissenting
Ministers of the adjacent Counties to allarm the Country.) And accordingly the
Copies of it thus spread through the several parts of the Kingdom, (added to the
strong presumptions that the forementioned passages gave of such a Design,)
frighted a great number of Protestants out of it, especially about Dublin, and
other parts that were more entirely under the power of the Irish. The Memory of
the miseries of 41 was fresh, and they were loath to trust themselves in the
same hands that seemed to have now more power, and better pretense to act those
barbarities over again. The Copy of this Letter was sent by Will. Cunningham,
Esquire from Belfast, enclosed in a Letter of his own to George Canning, Esquire
(desiring him to send this to Derry with all expedition.) Mr. Canning sent to
Alderman Tomkins, a Gentleman meeting with this Messenger, was informed of it,
and sent his Information to George Phillips, Esquire of Newton Limavad^^, on the
6th of December. on which Day a great part of the new Irish Regiment came to
Quarter in that Village. Mr. Phillips late that Night sent a Messenger to the
City with what account he had heard of the forementioned letter, and to
acquaint them withal, what untoward Guests they were like to have the day
following: There being instead of 6 or 8 Companies (as they were called) of
Irish and Highlanders above double the number, besides a huge number of Women,
and Boys, and what is remarkable, the Messenger came into the Town the next
morning, being the 7th of December. about the same time that Alderman Tomkins
communicated to the City the Copy of the Letter to the Lord Mount-Alexander.
This morning early Mr. Phillips sent another Messenger expressing his sense of
their danger from so ill a Crew, and advising 'em to take care of their own
safety. The Messenger also told 'em that he had left some of the foremost
Companies within two miles of the Town, the rest being on their way: These
Circumstances concurring, struck a mighty Terror and Consternation into the
Protestant Inhabitants: Several Caballs are held in the streets; all were
persuaded there was such a design as the forementioned Letter suggests, and
they looked on these new levied Men as the most likely Tools for the execution
of it. Alderman Tomkins, who brought the Copy of the forementioned Letter,
consulted Mr. Gordon a Nonconformist Minister what was expedient to be done,
who not only advised to the shutting of the Gates, but wrote that day to
several Neighboring Parishes, to put themselves into a Posture for assisting
the City, if there should be occasion for it. There was some muttering among
the Mobile about shutting the Gates, which Alderman Tomkins at first privately
encouraged: But when he with Alderman Norman, and some others had consulted the
Bishop, and found him altogether averse to it, they were unwilling to be
concerned: And indeed however diverse of those who made some Figure in the Town,
wished the thing were done, yet none of them thought fit to be themselves active
in it: But in the little Caballs which several of the City Youth had, when they
put it to the Question, Whether they should shut the Gates, most of them were
inclined to it, so much the rather, because Mr. Gordon had encouraged and
incited several of them thereto. By this time about three Companies of the
forementioned Regiment were come to the Waterside, with 2 Officers, a
Lieutenant, and Ensign. The Officers leaving the men, ferryed over, and came to
the Deputy Mayor, and Sheriffs, with their Potent: One of the Sheriffs (Mr.
Kennedy) suspected the design of these Youths, and intending to quarter the
Soldiers that night on the other side the Water, had given 'em a secret hint
to be prepared next morning, if they intended to prevent their coming in. But
whilst they were about consulting their strength, the Irish Soldiers, having
(as is supposed) some intimation of their design, made all the have they could
over, and came to the Landing-place, about 300 yards from Ferry-Gate. The Youth
observing this, about 8 or 9 of 'em, ( viz. Mr. Henry Campsie, Mr. Will.
Crookshanks, Mr. Robert Sherrard, Mr. Dan. Sherrard, Mr. Alexander Irwin, Mr.
James Steward, Mr. Robeet Morison, Mr. Alexander Cunningham, Mr. Sam. Hunt,
with whom soon joined Mr. James Spike, Mr. John Conningham, Mr. William Cairns,
Mr. Samuel Harvy, and several others,) drew their Swords, ran to the main
Guard, seized the Keys without any great opposition, and came with 'em to the
Ferry-Gate, drew up the Bridge, and locked the Gate, the Irish Soldiers being
advanced within 60 yards of it. From thence they went to secure the other 3
Gates, and having placed Guards at each of them, met in the Market: So happily
did these resolute Youths nick the very minute of their design, and upon so
seemingly rash and desperate action, did the preservation of that Important
place out of the hands of the Irish depend. The greatest events in the Chain of
Providence being often so contrived by exquisite Wisdom, as to hang upon the
slenderest Links in it. This sudden turn extremely surpised the Graver
Citizens of the Town, who tho loath enough the Irish Soldiers should enter in,
yet dreaded the Consequences of shutting 'em out: But the Deputy Mayor, the
Sheriffs, the 2 Irish Officers, with other Papists, and some Protestants
accompanying 'em, came to the Marketplace, and both by Promises and by threats
endeavored to prevail on the Mobile to desist from so rash an enterprise, but
all in vain. They had in the mean time sent some to secure the Magazine, which
the Mobile perceiving sent a party to seize it; one of whom (viz. Mr. Campsie,)
being shot by the Sentinel, one Linegar, a reputed Papist, Linegar was seized
and sent to Gaol, and the noise of Campsie's being wounded increased both the
Number and the Resolution of the Mob. In the mean time the Bishop of Derry,
with others came to the Marketplace, and made a speech to the multitude to
dissuade them from so inconsiderate an undertaking, wherein he represented to
them both the danger of it to themselves, and the unwarrantableness of it, as
it was a Disobedience to their Sovereign: But the dangers they saw at present
made greater impression on 'em than any feared for the future: And their dull
heads could not comprehend how it could be so great a Crime to shut the Gates
against those whom they believed sent thither to cut their throats; and they
were too much concerned to make good what they had now done, to hear any long
harangues about it: The Deputy Mayor also attempted once more to dissuade them,
but to no purpose. The Irish Soldiers in the mean time stood at the Gate,
fretting at their present disappoi^ment, that they should be forced to wait
like Scoundrels, where they hoped to Domineer as Lords, till one Mr. James
Morrison a Citizen having in vain warned 'em to be gone, called out aloud,
Bring about a Great Gun here^; the very Name whereof sent 'em packing in great
have and fright to their fellows on the other side the Water. Hitherto the
Multitude acted without the least public Countenance from any of considerable
Note, or Figure in the Town, till that Afternoon came in David Cairns Esquire who
having received a full account of what was done, and their inducements
thereunto, declared openly his Approbation of it, commending their Courage, and
assuring them of his utmost assistance; and thereupon went round the Walls, and
to the Gates, encouraging their Guards and Sentinels, and returned to the main
Guard again, to show his concurrence with them: He endeavored also to possess
others of Note in the Town, with a just sense of the necessity of taking this
course to secure themselves at that dangerous juncture, and several began to
appear more openly in the matter, as entertaining the same apprehensions, so as
that Night he, Mr. Norman, Mr. Jemmet, Mr. Thomas Moncreiff, Mr. James Lennox,
and several others, being come into the Guard-house, upon some discourse there
of their inability to defend themselves, without considerable Assistance, wrote
to several Gentlemen in the Country, to acquaint 'em with what was done, to
represent their common hazard, and the necessity of their Concurrence for their
common Defense and Safety: To which Letters they received various Returns, some
approving the Action, and promising their Assistance: Others discouraging what
they thought so bold an enterprise. Besides these, one Letter came afterward,
directed to Mr. Cairns, from a Nonconformist Minister in Iniskilling, which
because it shows how early the Inhabitants of that Town agreed with those of
Derry, both in their Resolutions, and the Reasons of 'em, I shall here insert.

Inniskillin, December. 15. 1688. SIR,
AFter an Allarm of an intended Massacre, there are two Foot-Companies sent to
be quartered in this small place, and though we be deserted by our Magistrates,
yet we intend to repulse 'em: You are therefore entreated in this common Cause
to look on our Condition, and if we come to be made a leading-Card, sit not
still and see us sink. The bearer can more fully inform you of our Condition.
The Lord direct and preserve you and us, who intend hurt to none, but sinless
self-preservation:

This from, Yours, etc. Robert Kelso.


About the same time, the principal Inhabitants of Inniskillin wrote a Letter
to the same purpose to their Friends at Derry: (Which see at the end.) Others
in the Town wrote to the Government to excuse themselves, and lay the blame on
the Mobile. I should add here, that the Potent being more narrowly inspected,
was found defective; for 'twas in the body of it to provide Quarters for the
Captains hereafter named, and their men, whereas there was no Capt. named at
all.

And thus ended this remarkable 7th. of December.

Good Guards are kept within and without the Walls that night. And the next
day, the 8th. of December, since they wanted both Arms and Ammunition, they
broke open the Magazine, and took out thence about 150 Muskets, with some
quantity of Match, and one Barrel of Powder, and Bullets proportionable. There
was in the Magazine at that time but about 8 or 9 Barrels of Powder in all, and
about 2 more in the Town; (2 or 3 of those in the Magazine were not fit for
use.) There were but few Arms fixed, and those designed for the Irish Regiment,
the rest being about a thousand more were much out of order. The Bishop that
day left the Town, and went to Rapho: But the sight of several from the
neighboring Parts of the Country, whom the fear of an intended Massacre drove
thither for security; the rumor of a design among the Papists in Town to fire
the City; and the rude Carriage of some of the Irish Soldiers in their
quarters over the Water, drew many more of the Town to join with the Mob, for
their common Preservation. And yet I must add, that when toward the better
settling of their Guards, they took an exact Account of all within the Walls
able to bear Arms, they did not in all amount to 300, so depopulated was the
Town at that time; the Suburbs were not numbered, but it was believed they could
not make near so many more. This day the City was cleared of the greatest part
of the Papists in it, and a Convent of Dominican Friars packed off. The Earl of
Antrim lodged that Night at Newton Limavady, with Mr. Philips, whom he carried
with him next day in his Coach toward Derry, (being the 9th. the fatal day for
the expected Massacre.) The Post-Letters that Morning brought the News of the
Prince of Denmark, and the Duke of Ormond's, etc. going over to the Prince of
Orange, which gave us no small encouragement; and Alderman Tomkins, by the
assistance of Mr. Gordon's influence on his People, sent in a considerable
number into Town, under the Command of young Mr. Tomkins, as their Captain. For
joy of their good News from England, the Gunner was ordered to discharge two of
their best Guns, which he accordingly did; this put the Irish Soldiers on the
other side of the Water into no small Consternation; about the same time one
George Cook, a Butcher, drew up 50 or 60 Boys on the shore at the R^rry-Key,
whom the Irish took for Laganeers, (famous for the Victories they obtained over
the Rebels in 1641.) soon after Mr. Tomkins and Mr. Gordon appear on a Hill
near 'em with about 30 or 40 Horse, having no design of disturbing 'em. But all
these Circumstances so unluckily concurring to heighten their fears of some
sudden destruction coming on 'em, put 'em on so hasty a flight, that many of
their Officers left their Boots, and Soldiers their Coats behind them: Their
Colonel, the Earl of Antrim, accompanied by Mr. Philips, met 'em about a Mile
off the Town, and having heard from his men a very frightful story, thought fit
to send Mr. Philips into Town before him, to bring him word whether they would
admit himself, and who commanded the Town? Mr. Philips as coming from the Enemy
was with some difficulty admitted, under a Guard, but finding he was no way
disaffected to the Design, but rather inclined to join with 'em in their own
defense, the Guard was taken off; yet upon his desire to Mr. Cairns, who then
commanded in Town, that some color of force might be put upon him in what he
did, he was publicly threatened with Confinement if he did not concur with
'em: He was permitted to acquaint the Earl with his being detained there, whom
in his Letter he discouraged from coming thither; upon receipt thereof the Earl
went back to Colerain, where he endeavored to rally his scattered Regiment.
And the City considering their own Circumstances, to encourage the Gentlemen in
the Country, whose aid they expected, and to engage Mr. Philips the more to
their Interest, with Mr. Cairns his concurrence, bestowed on him the Title of
their Governor, which he accepted.

In the mean time it was thought expedient to write up to the Lord Mountjoy
then at Dublin, (in whose friendship they had great Confidence) some account of
what had past, that he might interpose with the Lord Tyrconnel on their behalf,
and do his utmost to allay his resentments; and accordingly they sent his
Lordship a Letter, (which because it confirms the foregoing Relation, I have
annexed at the end) expecting that he would communicate it to the Lord Deputy.

On the 10th. Captain Forward, and Mr. William Stewart brought about 2 or 300
Horse into the City, and Mr. John Cowan of St. John's Town a Company of Foot,
which they offered to our Service. But finding the need not only of more Men,
but chiefly of Arms and Ammunition, the City unanimously chose David Cairns,
Esquire to send over as their Agent to England, giving him a large Letter of
Credence, and full Instructions under the hands and seals of the chief then in
Town. He had with him also a Letter to the Society in London, which I have in
the end inserted; a private Key was also contrived to hold Correspondence with
'em.

This day the Townsmen were formed into six Companies of Foot, under the
Command of I. Captain Samuel Norman. Lieutenant William Crooksbanks. Ensign
Alexander Irwin.
II. Captain Alexander Leckey. Lieutenant James Lennox. Ensign John Harvey.
III. Captain Matthew Cacken. Lieutenant Henry L^ng. Ensign Francis Hunt.
IV. Capain Warham Jemmet. Lieutenant Robert Morison. Ensign Daniel Sherrard.
V. Captain John Tomkins. Lieutenant James Spaight. Ensign Alexander Coningham.
VI. Capt. Thomas Moncreiff. Lieutenant James Morison. Ensign William Mackee.



December the 11th. Mr. Cairns went for London The same day Governor Philips
went to Newtown, and in a few days returned with about 3 or 400 Horse: William
Hamilton of Moyagh brought near 200 more, which they tendered to our service.

Soon after Letters from Dublin inform us that the Lord Tyrconnel had ordered
the Lord Mountjoy and Lieutenant Colonel Lundy with six Companys of their
Regiment to come down and reduce this City to its former Obedience: But our
Friends there cautioned us against the receiving of 'em, and the City was
generally averse to it, and yet that their actions might not be
mis-interpreted, they endeavored to represent the reasons of 'em in a
Declaration, which they Published about this time. -- See in the end.

When the Lord Mountjoy came to Omagh, he sent Captain Mac-Caustand with a
Message to this City, desiring two or three of their Number to meet him at
Rapho, upon which Captain Norman, and Mr. John Mogredg were sent to hear his
Proposals, who at their return gave assurance of his Lordships being fully
empowered to Capitulate, and that he would on the surrender of the Garrison,
with our Arms, procure a Free and General Pardon for what was passed, (these
Terms our two Envoys did earnestly solicit us to accept, tho in vain.) But
because these two had no power to Conclude any thing, his Lordship desired
there might be Commissioners with full power to treat with him at Mount-Gavelin.

Accordingly the Governor George Phillips Esquire Captain Alexander Tomkins,
Horace Kennedy Esquire Lieutenant William Crookshanks, and Lieutenant James Lennox,
were empowered by the City to treat and conclude, who after a full hearing of
his Lordships Proposals, would comply on no other Terms than the getting a
Protestant Garrison, and liberty to keep their Watches and Arms as formerly, as
also a free and General Pardon under the Great Seal, which his Lordship
declared he could not grant, and so they parted without any Conclusion, his
Lordship then saying, he would next Morning come to the Gates and demand
Entrance. They returning with the report of these passages, we began to examine
again the Stores of Ammunition, and found only six Barrels of Powder, a few Arms
unfix'd, and most of the Guns unmounted for want of Carriages. Soon after his
Lordship appears at the Bishops-Gate, where for some time he was made to stand,
(upon a warm debate within, whether he should be admitted.) At length out of
respect to his Lordship, he was suffered to enter, who being very importunate
for an Accommodation; there were Eleven persons of the City and Country
appointed to treat with him, viz. George Phillips Governor, Horace Kennedy Esquire
Captain Alexander Lecky, Captain Warham Jemmet, Captain John Forward, Captain
George Canning, Lieutenant Henry Long, Lieutenant James Lennox, William
Coningham, Esquire and James Steward: His Lordship after some debate, that he might
prevent any more Forces coming down upon us, was at last prevailed on to agree
to such Articles as the City proposed, which Articles are annexed in the end.

Upon the Perfection of these Articles, his Lordship for our better
Satisfaction ordered Leiutenant Colonel Lundy to repair to Strabane, there to
stop his six Companies, till the full Moiety being Papists were turned off, and
some Officers of the City were sent to see it done, and Protestants inlisted in
their stead. Yet there were but two Companies (all Protestants,) under Command
of Leiutenant Colonel Lundy, and Captain Stewart, received at first into the
City. The other four consisting of one half Papists, were ordered to quarter at
Strabane, Newton, Stewart and Rapho, till thoroughly reformed; Which so fully
satisfied us, that the Protestant Interest would be much strengthened, by the
interposition of the Lord Mountjoy, that our Governor freely resigned his
charge to him, and we all resolved to follow his orders and directions.
Accordingly his Lordship heartily Concurred with the Citizens, advised 'em to
repair the Carriages of the Guns, fix the old Arms that lay in the Stores, and
every thing else that might be found necessary for the preservation of the
City. Whereupon there was a meeting in the Guild Hall, of all the Inhabitants
in orto the Levying of Moneys for that purpose. And a voluntary Subscription
being there made (about 100 l.) a select number was chosen to dispose thereof,
as also to regulate the Concerns of the City, viz. Samuel Norman Alderman,
Alexander Lecky Alderman, Matthew Cocken Alderman, Horace Kennedy Sheriff, Mr.
Francis Nevill, Mr. Frederick Coningham, and Mr. James Lennox, to whom Mr. John
Mogredg was Secretary, The Lord Massareene also some time after freely
Contributed a considerable sum of Money toward the defense of the place. They
studied all possible means for the preservation and safety of the City and
Country; and since they still apprehended a Desscent of the Irish, they kept
up a good Correspondence with the Neighboring Counties in what concerned their
Common Interest. And that our Friends in the Country might be encouraged with a
speedy supply of Powder and Arms; Money was freely advanced (by Horace Kennedy
Esquire Edw. ard Brooks Esquire Lieutenant Henry Long, Will. Crook shanks Ensign,
William Mackee Ensign, John Harvey Ensign, Francis Hunt, Alexander Gordon, Hugh
Davey, and William Maxwell, Merchants,) and sent with James Hamilton Merchant
to Scotland to buy Powder and Arms. He could procure no more than 42 Barrels of
Powder, which (except 10 left in the County of Down,) happily came and was
secured in the Magazine: Being also informed that a small Bark which was sent
from Dublin, with 30 Barrels of Powder for the Earl of Antrim, lay Wind-bound
at Killagh in the County of Down, there were persons appointed to seize and
bring the same about for our use; who did so, and leaving a share in some
trusty hands for the Countries Service, brought the remainder being about 20
Barrels to this City. But all being too small a quantity, pressing Letters were
dispatched to our Agent at London, to solicit their Majesty's for Succors.

The Lord Mountjoy is sent for to Dublin, by the Lord Tyrconnell: His Friends
here all dissuade him from going up. But the advice of some in Dublin prevailed
more upon him: Upon his Coming there, it was proposed to him by the Lord
Tyrconnell that he should go with Lord Chief Baron Rice, on a Message to King
James in France to desire leave of Treating with England for that Kingdom: upon
which he procured the following Articles on our behalf to be perfected, a Copy
of which he sent down to the North, with the ensuing Letter, which I shall here
add, because it discovers how miserably he, as well as many other well meaning
Gentlemen were imposed upon by Tyrconnel; who tho he was sufficiently afraid of
the Issue of things, yet was doing all he could by the increase of his new
Levies to defend King James his interest there, even while he pretended to
others, that he was ready to surrender the Sword to any Commissioned to receive
it. And this Intreigue of sending to King James is said to be the Contrivance
of Rice and Neagle, to amuse and divert others of the Popish Party in the
Council, whose fears inclined 'em to an earlier submission.

January 10th. 1688/9.
Until his Majesty's pleasure be further known, it is humbly proposed to your
Excellency,
1st. That no more Levies be made in this Kingdom; no more Arms given out, nor
no Commissions signed.

2d. That all the new raised Forces be kept in their present Quarters, (if no
Enemy lands here, and that the Kingdom is quiet,) and that no more Troops be
commanded into Ulster than are at present there.

3d. That no Nobleman, Gentleman, Officer, or common Man in the Kingdom, shall
be imprisoned, seized, or in any wise molested for any tumultuous Meetings,
arming of Men, forming of Troops, or attempting any thing that may be called
Riotous or Rebellious before this present day.

4th. That no private Gentleman's House shall be made a Garrison, or Soldiers
quartered in it.

Dublin, January 10th. 88/9.
YOu have had an Account how long I stopped on the way after I left you, and the
Reasons which made me since come forward, and whatever my Jealousies were at my
first Arrival, I am now fully satisfied with my coming, and with Gods Blessing
hope it will come to good to us all. As soon as I saw my Lord Deputy, he told
me he intended to send me to the King, jointly with the Lord Chief Baron, to
lay before him the State of the Kingdom, and to tell him, If he pleased he
would ruin it for him, and make it a heap of Rubbish; but it was impossible to
preserve and make it of use to him; and therefore to desire his leave to Treat
for it. The Objections I made to this were two, My being not so well qualified
for this, as another Roman Catholic, one to whom in all likelihood the King
would sooner give Credit, and the Improbability of being able to persuade the
King, who is now in the French hands, to a thing that is so plainly against
their Interest. To the first of these I was answered what is not fit for me to
repeat; and the other was so well answered, that all the most knowing English
men here are satisfied with it, and have desired me to undertake this matter,
which I have done this Afteenoon: My Lord Deputy having first promised me upon
his Word and Honor to perform the four particulars in the enclosed Paper. Now
because a thing of this nature, cannot be done without being censured by some,
who perhaps would be sorry to have their Wishes by quiet means, and by others
who think that all that Statesmen do are tricks, and that there is no sincerity
among them; I would have such consider that it is more probable, I, and the
most intelligent men in this place, without whose advice I do nothing, should
judge righter of this, than they who are at a greater distance, and it is not
likely we should be fooled: So I hope they will not believe we design to betray
them, our selves, and our Nation. I am Morally assured, this must do our work
without Blood, or the misery of the Kingdom: I am sure it is the way proposed
in England, who depend so on it, that no Forces are appointed to come hither;
and I am sure what I do, is not only what will be approved of in England, but
what has its beginning from thence: I do therefore conjure you to give your
Friends and mine this Account, and for the love of God keep them from any
Disorder or Mischief, if any had such a Design, which I hope they had not, I
shall write to this effect to some other parts, and I desire you would let such
in your County as you think fit, see this; let the People fall to their Labor,
and think themselves in less Danger than they believed.

His Lordship went soon after together with Chief Baron Rice to France, where
instead of obtaining an Order for the Irish to lay down their Arms, he was made
a Prisoner in the Bastile.

The Lord Tyrconnel designing to muster up all his strength against us, orders
Lieutenant Colonel Lundy to send up the four Companies which were not brought
into the City, as well as the other two: But rather than lose so many good
Arms, we were induced to receive 'em; and having well purged 'em of Papists, we
unanimously concur and keep our joynt-Guards by detachments out of these 6
Companies, and our own 6 Town-Companies; which the Lord Tyrconnel being
advertised of, issues a Proclamation to all parts of the North, discharging the
British therein from assembling together, by way of Troops and Companies, etc.
But the Protestants were too sensible of the necessity of defending themselves,
to pay any great Deference to such a Proclamation: And particularly at Derry,
they went on with their preparations for their own Safety, having been early
encouraged thereto by the Nobility and Gentry of the Counties of Down and
Antrim, (who by a Message sent 'em by Will. Conningham, Esquire declared their
Approbation of what they had done, and assured 'em of their utmost Assistance:)
But they were not altogether pleased with Lundy's management of Affairs. He had
against the mind of the Committee for the City, chose Mr. Norman Lieutenant
Colonel, and one Hill Major to his Regiment. He soon after discharged the City
Companies from keeping their Guards, and refused 'em Ammunition: And when upon
complaint made, he restored 'em, he would but allow one City Officer to the
Guards, and endeavored to bring 'em under the Command of his own Officers.
These things disgusted the City, but they thought it not a fit time to Contend
about 'em.

Having given this brief Account of what passed at Derry, from the first
shutting the Gates, till the Descent of the Irish Army; it will not be improper
to give some Relation of the most material passages that happened in other
parts of Ulster, before they approached those Walls.

The News of the Prince of Orange's landing, was very acceptable to the
Generality of the Protestants of Ireland, whose success they hoped would soon
alter the scene of Affairs in that Kingdom. The Presbyterian Ministers in the
Province of Ulster, with several Gentlemen of good Note there, were the first
that agreed to send an Address to the Prince: To this end they empowered Mr.
Osborn, and Mr. Hamilton, being then at Dublin, to fix on the Person, who sent
Dr. Cummin, December. 8th. the purport of the Address (wherein they desired
nothing in particular for themselves,) was, To Congratulate his Arrival and
Success hitherto in so glorious an Undertaking: To represent the Deplorable
Condition of the Protestants in that Kingdom, and particularly in that
Province, and beg some speedy Relief, assuring him of their readiness to serve
his Interest to the utmost of their Power. All the Mininisters afterward in
behalf of themselves, and their Congregations sent another Congratulatory
Address, dated January 22d. by two of their number, Mr. Patrick Adair, and Mr.
John Abernethy. The Nobility and Gentry of that Province were universally
sensible of the Dangers that then threatened 'em: For besides those mentioned
before, they observed that the Lord Tyrconnel was daily issuing out vast
numbers of Commissions for levying of Men: That the Colonels were empowered to
make up as many Companies as they could: That the Captains were to maintain
their own Companies for 3 Months at their own Charge, who were most of 'em so
unable to support themselves, that the Lord Tyrconnel ordered they should have
their Commissions without paying any fees; and many of 'em were forced to leave
'em in pawn, for what they had already run on the score. They soon saw how such
a necessitous Crew were designed to subsist. While they were only Rapparee's,
they were well versed in the Arts of Thefts and Rapine: And being now listed in
the Army, they thought they might practice 'em with some kind of Authority: So
that in a Month or two there was scarce a Protestant in most Counties (where
the British were not upon their own Defense) that had either any Stock left on
their Land, or any Horses in their Stables. And all Complaints of these
Villainies met with so little Countenance or redress, that the Lord Deputy
seemed to have raised so many swarms of Banditti and Robbers, rather than
Soldiers under Discipline, and Commissioned 'em to plunder and ruinate the
Country, rather than secure and defend it.

All this Alarmed the Protestants of the North, who saw their numbers were
their only Security against the same Violences being as generally practiced
among them. They therefore Consulted their own Safety, and ordered strong
Guards to be kept: The first Project they fell upon, was the disarming Sir Tho.
Newcomen's Regiment, quartered at Belfast, and Lisburn, in order to their
making themselves Masters of Carickfergus. Sir Arthur Rawden discoursed and
prevailed on several of the Protestant Officers in the Regiment, to concur
with 'em in this Design. He had ordered also a considerable party to be ready
at the same time for surprising the Irish Garrison at the Newry. The 4th of
January was the day for putting it in Execution, the Protestant Guards were
advertised of it: Sir Athur Rawden, and Sir John Mac Gill, marched from Moyra
at the hour they had appointed, with 500 Horse and Foot: Lieutenants Tubman and
Berry took the Guard at Lisburn, Tubman put all the Papists Arms under the
Protestant Guard. Captain Obrey of Lisburn, had a small party of Horse ready,
and actually seized 25 of the Soldiers Muskets: But when all things were thus
ready, and the Execution of this Design, was as they thought, so easy and
secure, Sir Arthur Rawden, and Sir John Mac Gill, were met within three miles
of Lisburn, by Mr. Hamilton of Tillimore, who came to acquaint 'em that the
Gentlemen at Belfast could not do what was desired from 'em; they said they had
not notice early enough, (Mr. Hamilton not coming thither before 9 a clock that
Night, when the Soldiers were in their Quarters:) They objected the ill
consequences might ensue from the doing of it to the Town of Belfast, if they
should afterward fail of securing Carickfergus; and therefore urged the
delaying it till they had more fully concerted their measures, and put the
Country into a better posture of Defense: Upon this Sir Arthur Rawden, and Sir
John Mac Gill, were forced to disperse their men, tho not without great
reluctance and regrett at the disappointment. Mr. Ham. of Tillimore, upon his
Return thought fit to try Sir Tho. Newcomen (who professed himself a
Protestant) to engage him to join with him in their common defense: which
discourse so alarmed his suspution, that he put himself on his Guard,
barricadoed the streets of Lisburn, sent to the Garrison of Carickfergus to
take care of themselves, who upon this Warning sent for the Earl of Antrim's
Regiment, and part of Cormack Oneil's to strengthen the Garrison. But several
of the Protestant Officers in Sir Tho. Newcomens Regiment, with 120 Soldiers
deserted, and the Officers sent their Commissions to their Colonel. Sir Tho.
Newcomen soon after took his opportunity when most of the Gentlemen in that
part of the Country were at Mount Alexander, to march off with his Regiment
toward Dublin, and he narrowly escaped being disarmed by the Rabble
themselves. The Protestant Nobility and Gentry could not but foresee these
proceedings would incense the Government, and draw down an Army on 'em as soon
as the Lord Tyrconnel could be ready with his new levies: And therefore to be
better prepared for what they expected, they agreed to enter into Associations
in the several Counties for self-defence against these illegal Outrages. (See
in the end.) The Counties of Down and Antrim nominated the Lord Mount
Alexander, (and the latter added Mr. Skeffington,) for their Commander in
Chief, as those of Ardmagh, and Monagham, did the Lord Blany: Those of Derry,
Donegal, and Tyrone, Colonel Lundy, and Major Gustavus Hamilton: They chose
Councils or Committees for every County, and appointed a General Council of
Union, at Hillsborough, for all the associated Counties of Ulster. These
Councils or Committees chose the Field Officers, and applied themselves to
those Ministers that had the greatest influence on the People for raising their
Men. Some of the Gentlemen that raised Regiments, having no public Fund, armed
and maintained 'em at their own Charge. The Consult ordered the following
Regiments to be raised in Down and Antrim.

A Regiment of Horse, consisting of twelve Troops, out of both these Counties,
the Earl of Mount Alexander Colonel.

A Regiment of Dragoons, out of the County of Down, Sir Arthur Rawden Colonel.

A Regiment of Dragoons out of the County of Antrim, Mr. Clotworthy Skeffington
Colonel: But this Regiment was not raised, but a Regiment of Foot instead of
it.

Four Regiments of Foot, out of each of the said Counties: in the County of
Antrim, Sir William Franklin, Mr. Upton, Mr. Lesley, and Mr. Adair raised each
of them a Regiment: There was another in and about Lisburn, designed for
Captain Leighton, and 300 Foot were raised by Mr. Edmonston. In the County of
Down, Sir John Mac Gill, Sir Robert Colvil, James Hamilton of Tillimore, and
James Hamilton of Bangor, Esquires, raised each a Regiment, and Capt. Francis
Annesley raised some Horse and Foot.

The rest of the Counties of Ulster, were equally forward in their levies.

It was resolved alfo in the General Consult, to send a Gentleman into England
with an Address to the then Prince of Orange, and Captain Baldwin Leighton was
chosen, who accordingly sailed from Belfast, January the 10th.

The frontier Garrisons of Down, (being but inconsiderable and unwalled
Villages,) were at first maintained by Sir Arthur Rawden, (his Lieutenant
Colonel Mr. Hawkins concurring with him) but afterward the Country
contributed to the Expense.

The Consult had ordered the surprizal of Carickfergus; some Protestants in the
Town were acquainted with it, and the design laid, Febr. 21. in the night, 1000
foot march from Belfast toward it, under the Command of Lieutenant Colonel
Bremicham, and Major Baker; but the Weather being bad, and the way tedious, it
was clear day before they reached the Town; when they were within a mile of it,
Bremicham stopped 'em, on pretense of two passages in a Letter he had from the
Lord Mount Alexander, Sir William Franklin, and Mr. Hamilton of Tillimore: The
one was, That he should do nothing in Carickfergus, without Mr. Henry Davis's
Advice, (who was then in the Town.) The other that they would be with him at
the hour of Action. The Garrison through this delay, had so much notice of their
approach, as enabled 'em to put themselves in some posture of Defense. The Earl
of Mount Alexander, Sir Arthur Rawden, and other Gentlemen, came with 4 or 500
Horse, not doubting the success of the Foot, but found the foremost party of
'em, and those on the Walls firing at one another. Mark Talbot, Lieutenant
Colonel to the Earl of Antrim, came out to know the reason of this Attempt. He
was told the stores of Carickfergus had been always under a Protestant
Governor: That being now in other hands, they came to demand it for the Prince
of Orange, especially to prevent the Insolences and Robberies of the
Soldiers: They also offered terms to the Garrison, which Talbot promised to
acquaint the Earl of Antrim with: Upon his return it was agreed, That Colonel
Cormack Oneal, who had then his Regiment in Town, should disband it, and lay
down his Commission; and he and they having Protections to return to their
several dwellings: That the Garrison should be kept by a few of the Earl of
Antrim's Regiment, who should never have above a weeks Provisions at once: That
the Protestants in Town should have a Guard as well as the Papists, of equal
number, without any disturbance from the Castle: That the value of what had
been plundered, should be restored: That all Letters from the Papists to
Dublin, should be sent open to the Consult at Hillsborough, and particularly
such a Letter sent from the Earl of Antrim, and Cormack O Neal, by one of their
number, to give the Lord Tyrconnel an Account of that Affair as he Protestants
should approve of. A Letter was accordingly sent, signed by both sides, but
Friar O Haggerty was (upon Mr. Randal Brice's Recommendation) suffered to be
the Bearer, who understood as much as any in the Garrison could dictate to him,
and gave the Lord Tyrconnel the following (too true). Account of the Condition
of the North, viz. [ That they were untrain'd, and had few experienced
Officers: That the most part were without Arms, and such as had 'em, their Arms
were unfixt and unfit for service. They were very much scattered, and their
number not near what had been written, and was confidently reported in Dublin,
that they wanted all Ammunition, and necessary Provisions for appearing in the
Field.] The Lord Tyrconnel (who had deferred for 20 days to send down his Army,
after it had been first agreed on in Council) upon this Information resolved to
dispatch the most Considerable and best trained part of it, under the Command
of Lieutenant General Hamilton.

From the 23d. of February, to the 11th. of March, several Skirmishes happened
between the Irish Garrison at Newry, or the Rapparees, and the Frontier
Garrisons of the North. The latter being frequently employed to rescue Preys of
Cattle which those Ravenous Beasts seized and endeavored to carry away.

Two Letters from Dublin, one of the 22d. the other of the 25th. of February,
arrived in the North, one giving an account of the preparations making against
'em at Dublin, the other relating the disarming the Protestants there. But
their confident expectation of Succors from England, and their conceit of
Tyrconnels fears, made them too slow in their measures. They did indeed send to
C. Lundy at Derry, to bring down what he could spare of the Forces of Derry,
Tyrone, and Donnegal to their assistance, and offered him the Command of their
whole Army. C. Lundy promised to bring with him 1000 men well appointed out of
each of the three Counties, with a train of Artillery, and to be with 'em on a
certain day, which was about a Fortnight before the Descent of the Irish Army.
Upon which the Consult ordered Hillsbrough to be stockt with all necessary
provisions for an Army: But C. Lundy failed their expectations in this, as he
did in every thing else afterward, that concerned their common safety.

The 9th. of March, Captain Leighton returned with a Letter, [see in the end]
from his Majesty to the Earl of Mount Alexander, to be communicated to the rest
of the Nobility and Gentry, approving their endeavors for their own defense,
etc. He brought over also Commissions for all the Regiments in the Counties of
Antrim, Down, Ardmagh and Monaghan, except two that were not raised when
Captain Leighton left the North, and assured 'em of speedy relief, telling them
some of the Cannon and Ammunition were shipped, and 15000 men ready at the
Waterside, etc. Upon his coming King William and Queen Mary were Proclaimed in
the Towns that were in the North-East part of Ulster, (with all the expressions
of Duty and Affection, which became their high obligations to their Majesty's,
as well as their hopes from 'em,) and in some before his Arrival.

The same day Mr. Osborn arrived at Hillsborough with a Message which the Lord
Tyrconnel had permitted him to deliver. But the real design of his coming was
to prevent their being surprised with the descent of the Irish Army, to give
'em the best information and advice in order to their defense, to which he
earnestly urged 'em; a fuller account whereof the Reader may see in his
Vindication.

11th. of March, the Irish Army came to Newry, Sir Arthur Rawden being then at
Loch-bricklan, sent to the Consult for more Forces to defend that place: But
being that Night informed that the whole Irish Army would be there next
Morning, and the Consult acquainting him that they had no Forces ready to be
sent, and advising him to retire to Dromore, he ordered the inhabitants that
Night to pack up their Goods, sent his Foot to Guard them, and with his Horse
secured their retreat. The Inhabitants went on to Belfast and the Sea Coasts.

12th. of March, the Garrison at Rathfryland, with the Inhabitants abandoned
the place, and came to Dromore, and that Night the Irish Army came to
Loch-bricklan. This day Cap. Hugh Mac-Gill brought his Troop of 80 Dragoons
from the Ardes to Dromore; Sir Arthur Rawden sent to Hillsbrough for an 100
good Musketeers, but they came not, nor the other Forces expected from other
parts.

13th. of March, the Irish Army Marched toward Dromore. This Night Major Baker
brought four Companies of Foot to Dromore, but very ill Armed: The Officers put
what Horse and Foot they had into the best posture they could, and sent to
Hillsbrough for Powder and Arms.

14th. of March, the Express returned with some Powder, but the Bullets were
unsuitable to their unsizable Arms. The Express also brought Sir Arthur Rawden
order to retire next Night with his Men to Hillsbrough. Upon which they
resolved to quit the Town, expecting that the rest of the Forces of Down and
Antrim would be that Night at Lisburn, and advance from thence the next day to
Hillsbrough.

The same day the Presbiterian Ministers appeared before the Consult with the
Proposals mentioned in Mr. Osborns Vindication, and the Country was summoned to
appear the 19th, at Blarismore.

One of the Scouts acquaints the Officers at Dromore, that about two Troops of
Irish Horse were marching toward the Town, upon which the Horse and Dragoons
were drawn up in the Street; the four Companies of Foot were also drawn up at
the entry of the Town. The Horse and Dragoons went on and faced a party of the
Enemy, till they discovered the whole Body of the Irish Army coming on them,
and having no strength capable to oppose them, their Foot went off, and their
Horse endeavored to make good their retreat: Some few of the Horse and
Dragoons, and some of the Country people that were carrying off their Goods,
were killed.

The same day the Lord Mount Alexander, Colonel Upton, and Mr. Hamilton of
Tillimore, upon advice hereof, got together what Horse they could at
Hillsbrough, (which were not many,) and were marching out of Town to assist
those of Dromore, when they met their foremost party on their retreat, they
rallied as many as they could of that flying party, sent to Lisburn for the
Forces that were there to the number of near 4000. Sir Arthur Rawden Rode
thither to hasten them up, but the precipitant motion of the Irish Army struck
such a Terror into the people who were but ill armed, that few would stay at
Hillsbrough, so that they were forced to leave it to the Irish, who seized the
Provisions and the little Ammunition laid up there, besides the Papers of the
Consult. Most of the Forces also at Lisburn shrunk and stole away; their
Leaders in this confusion could not agree on any post thereabouts which they
were able to defend against a well appointed Army; their hopes of speedy
assistance from the other Counties, as well as from England were frustrated,
and so they resolved upon shifting for themselves. All the Gentlemen of the
Lower parts of the County of Down, (except Captain Hugh Mac-Gill and his
Brother,) endeavored to transport themselves. Others resolved to stay and
defend their Country to the last extremity, as Sir Arthur Rawden and most of
his Regiment; part of Sir John Mac-Gills Regiment, under the Command of
Lieutenant Colonel Whitney: Part of Sir William Franklins, under the Command
of Major Tubman: Colonel Arthur Upton with part of his Regiment, Colonel
Adairs Regiment, under the Command of Colonel Edmonston, Major Stroud with his
own Troop, Captain Clotworthy Upton with his Troop, being one of the Earl of
Mount Alexander's Regiment: One Troop of Belfast, Commanded by Captain White.
All these Forces being about 4000 in number, marched to Colerain, the rest
either removed into England, or took Protections from the Irish, but all the
Colonels went either to Derry, or out of the Kingdom, except Colonel Lesley,
who chose rather to take Protection; and helped to Victual the Irish Camp before
Derry.

Of the Garrison of Dungannon, I need give only this short Relation: Dungannon
in the County of Tyrone, being in great danger from the Irish Garrison in
Charlemont, (that had above 30 Companies in it,) the defense of it by a good
Garrison was thought very necessary. And accordingly the Counties of Tyrone,
Derry, and Donegall, sent in several Troops and Companies by turns, which were
maintained partly by the Country, partly by their Officers. About the 11th. of
February, the Irish gathered together in great Numbers near Stewarts Town and
Gleno. Colonel Stewart Commanded a detach't party of our men (about 24. some
of Captain Stewart of Killemonts Troop, and some Foot) to go and view them, who
killed some of the Irish, and took 13 or 14 Prisoners. Soon after, a
considerable party of the Forces of Charlemont, joined with othey Irish of the
Country near Benburb: A party of our men both Foot and Horse, beat them off,
and took a prey of Cattle from them, as they did several afterward. Colonel
Lundy about the 14th. of March, sent his Orders to Colonel Stewart to quit the
Town, which accordingly he did, tho against the opinion of most of the
Officers. Nor was there any care taken to carry off that great quantity of
Provisions, which the Country about had sent in, so that they fell into the
Enemies hands. About the 16th. or 17th. of March, some of the Garrison marched
toward Colerain, others toward Derry, as Mr. Walker and his Company, etc. The
11th. a party of our men beat off a party of the Irish, who had taken up the
pass at Toam.

Of the Forces raised by the Lord Blaney, I shall give the Reader a brief
account out of a Memoir of his own.

Being chosen by the Counties of Armagh, and Monaghan, to Command all the
Forces raised, and to be raised for the Protestant Service there, after the
disarming the Irish Dragoons at Armagh, I posted my self there, and at a
general Rendezvous of the Inhabitants of the County, found their number to be
about 1800 men, indifferently well armed.

There was at this time at the Fort of Charlemont, which is within 5 Miles of
the Town, near 3000 of the Enemy, who were very insolent, upon the account they
received of an Armies being sent from Dublin, to reduce the Northern Rebels (as
they called us) to Obedience.

This made them for a forthnight together attempt the Plundering all the
Protestants Houses near the Town, and being obliged to defend 'em, several
Skirmishes happened between our Parties, the Protestants always prevailing;
insomuch that considerable numbers of the Enemy were every day killed, and we
only suffered the loss of one Man.

Thus it continued 'till Wednesday the 13th. of March, at which time I heard
that my own House at Mona^^an was taken by the Irish, that all the Forces of
the County were retreated to Glasslough, and besieged there by the Enemy: Sir
Nicholas Atchison came the same day from the North, and informed me that Sir
Arthur Rawden had quitted Lough Brickland, and that the Irish Army under the
Conduct of Lieutenant General Hamilton had possessed themselves of that place. A
Council of War was then called of all the Officers in the Town, where it was
resolved that we should the next day March toward the relief of those which
were besieged at Glasslough, and if we could bring off the Protestant Party
there, we should March through Dungannon to Toam, and so to Antrim, to join
with our Friends there. The same day a Party of the Enemy were beat off by the
Protestants at Tonragee, and several of 'em killed.

Of the Affair of Glasslough, I shall beg leave to insert the following
Relation from another hand.

Those of Glasslough having Orders from my Lord Blaney to March toward Antrim,
Notice was given to the Country to be there that Night or the next Morning: The
Irish having intelligence of it, beset the Roads to Rob 'em; upon which Capt.
Ancktall mounted 20 of his Horse, and Capt. Richardson with 7 Files of Foot
went out and fell on the Robbers, they killed 6, the rest flying to the Woods
and Boggs. Capt. Cole with his Troop of Horse, and 2 Foot Companies, came
hither, and it was concluded to March that day: But we were immediately alarmed
with the Account of a Body of Irish Foot coming toward us: It was agreed to go
out and fight 'em: the Enemy had possessed themselves of an old Danish Fort,
within less than half a Mile of the Town. We detached 100 Firelocks, and all
the Horse of 2 Troops fit for service: The Enemy who had fired at us while at a
great distance, upon our nearer approach, sallied out and fired a Volly at our
Men: But Captain Ancktall with his Horse came so suddenly on them, and pursued
'em so close, as they were retreating into the Fort, that the Enemy within
seeing several killed, and others trod under the Horses Feet, threw down their
Arms, and betook themselves to their heels: They were about five to one in
number, and yet there were (as Mr. Anthony who stayed in the Country told us)
180 of 'em killed, among whom was Colonel Mackennah, 4 Captains, 6
Lieutenants, and 6 Ensigns: We only lost that brave Man Capt. Ancktall, who
after the Enemy was routed, was unfortunately shot by a Fellow that lay in a
Bush. More of the Enemy had been cut off, if they had not had a Bogg to retreat
to: But after this encounter, we had only so much Ammunition left us, as served
to Charge our Arms on our March. --

On Friday the 15th. I heard that the Forces of the Counties of Down and Antrim
were broken, and retired to Colerain, upon which Advice I marched thither with
300 Horse and as many Foot, being all that were left me of the 1800 I mentioned
before, the others having taken Protection from the Enemy. On the Road between
Dungannon and Monimore, I met at Artrea 1000 of the Enemy, who attacqued us,
but we were so successful as to beat them, and kill 140 of them; all the
Country People thereabouts generally fled to Colerain with the Army, except a
few. The Gentlemen in the Country in other parts were very active, particularly
Sir Francis Hamilton, and Captain Robert Sanderson, in the County of Cavan, who
were 2 of the 10 excepted from Pardon in the Lord Tyrconnel's Proclamation.

Of the Forces raised by the Lord Kingston, I had the following relation from
his Lordship.

On the 4th. of January, 1688. the Gentlemen of the County of Sligo met and
associated themselves, and chose the right honorable Robert Lord Baron of
Kingston, and the honorable Capt. Chidley Coot, their chief Commanders, and
promised Obedience to both or either of them, and then formed themselves into
Troops and Companies, and furnished their Men with Horses, Arms, Ammunition and
Provisions, and ordered frontier Garrisons to be kept, as Grange in the way to
Ballyshanny, to hold Correspondence with Derry and the Places adjacent:
Garrisons were also put into New-Town and Manor Hamilton, to keep
Correspondence with Inniskillin, my Lord Bellimont's House at Killoona, Dr.
Leslie's and Mr. Cooper's at Mercury, was the Frontier Garrisons toward the
Boil and Ballymoat, to prevent the Incursions of the Irish from those parts.
There was also a Garrison at Cottlestown, in the farthest part of the County of
Sligo, to observe the Motions of the newrais'd Army in the County of Mayo,
which was very numerous. Soon after the Bishop of Killalla had quitted his
House, there was one Tremble, a Servant to Sir Arthur Gore barbarously
Murdered by Capt. Walter Bourk and his Soldiers.

Coll. Mackdonnel being Garrisoned at Boil, and not permitting any of the
Protestants to pass with their Goods and Provisions toward the Garrison of
Sligo, but ordering all such Goods and Provisions to be seized: -- It was
thought fit he should be writ to, desiring him to let the Protestants have free
Passage to Sligo, as all the Papists had from thence to Boil, Athlone, and
other Places, to their Irish Friends, without any molestation from the Garrison
of Sligo; but he not performing what was desired, it was resolved that the Lord
Kingston, and Captain Chidley Coote, should with a Party of Horse and Foot
March to Boil, and demand a free Passage for the Protestants, which the Coll.
readily granted, but never performed, though we looked on him as one of the
fairest Reputation among the Irish in those parts. It is to be observed, that
the Colonel upon the approach of our Party, drew all his Horse, Foot and
Dragoons, within the Walls of the Lord Kingston's House and Gardens, though
with his old Troops and Rapparees he had at least five to one in and about the
place.

About 5 of our Horse, Commanded by Captain Arthur Cooper, went to view what
the Irish designed at Ballimont, then Garrisoned by a Company of Foot, under
the Command of Capt. Terence Mac Donogh, he drew 'em up to face our Men; but
they firing on 'em, and with the shot of one Blunderbuss killing one, and
wounding five more, the Irish threw down their Arms and run to the Castle, our
Men pursuing and beating 'em to the Drawbridge.

About 5 or 600 showed themselves before Ballintober, Dr. Lesley's House, upon
which he drew out about 30 Horse and 40 Foot, upon which the Irish fled to the
Boggs.

During the stay of the Forces at Sligo, frequent Correspondence was kept with
Derry, sometimes with Colonel Lundy, and sometimes with the Committee; and at
Inniskillin with the Governor of that place, Coll. Gustavus Hamilton. Many
Letters came to Sligo, from Coll. Lundy and the Committee, to March the Forces
to Derry; it being alleged by them, that if the Northern Forces were
conquered, that must fall of course. By this time the Stone-Fort at Sligo was
finished, and the Sodd-fort new made up, at the Cost of the Officers, and
Labor of the Soldiers.

Whilst the English were at Sligo, there was an open Market kept, where the
Papists as well as the Protestants had the selling and disposing of what
Commodities they brought thither: Yet some time before Sligo was quitted,
several of the British coming thither, from Tirrearagh, with great store of
Meal, Cattle, etc. a party of Irish that were got into an old Castle, belonging
to Captain Henry Crofton, (an inveterate Roman Catholic) robbed and plundered
all the British of their Corn, etc. and made a store of it in the Castle; of
which an Account coming to the Lord Kingston, his Lordship immediately sent in
the Night Captain William Ormsby, and Captain Francis Gore, with a detached
party of men out of every Troop and Company under their Command, and the next
Morning before day the Lord Kingstone Marched with another party to assist them
(if there had been occasion,) but his Lordship met Cornet Charles Nicolson, who
gave him an account that our party had got the Castle by setting Fire to the
Gate, and smoking the Enemy out, who at first fired very briskly upon our men,
yet we lost none: -- We found great store of Provisions, of Meal, etc. and
seventeen Muskets belonging to the Irish Army, with several half Pikes, Irish
Daggers, and Rapparee's Swords; the Protestants had their Corn and Cattle
returned 'em, or a Market rate paid them for so much of their Corn as they
could spare.

Several Letters were written from time to time to Colonel Lundy, for a supply
of Arms and Ammunition for the Garrison of Sligo, but none could be had; 'till
at last a Ship came to Derry from Scotland with Ammunition, and then Coll.
Lundy consented to let Sligo have three Barrels of Powder, and Ballyshanny one,
provided five Pounds per Barrel were paid for it; but though a Bill of twenty
Pounds was immediately sent for that end, yet none of it ever came to Sligo.

About the 20th. of March, an Express came to Sligo from Coll. Lundy, to hasten
our March with all speed to Derry; which Letter, as all others that came from
Coll. Lundy or the Committee, were communicated to all our Officers, but the
last Letter that came was mislay'd by Capt. Coote; and on the same day a
Council of War (if then it might be so termed) was called, and a speedy March
to Derry was Voted, by the Officers who had no Commission to make 'em so, but
such as the Gentlemen they had chosen for their chief had given 'em: The Names
of the Subscribers of that Council were, (as follows) Major Owen Vaughan, Major
Thomas Heart, Captain Hugh Morgan, Captain Piercy Gethins, Captain Edward Woods,
Captain William Ormesby, Captain William Smith, Captain William Griffith,
Lieutenant Richard Brook, Lieutenant Adam Ormesby, and Cornet Oliver Brooks.

On the 21st. being the next day following, the Council was called again, where
it was hotly pressed and Voted to march Northward, and accordingly all things
were prepared against the next day, and then a March began; the Foot, Baggage,
with some Horse in the rear, Marched out early in the Morning, the rest
attending the Lord Kingston till they had broke the Trunnions, and nailed the
heavier Guns, and sent off the smallest by Boat, and staved all the rest they
could find; but those sent away were put into an Island by storm, which next
day were taken by the Irish, by help of some Boats that were concealed by them.

On the 24th. the Forces with Bag and Baggage arrived safe at Ballyshanny,
Lieut. Coll. Connell Farrell was ordered to hinder and oppose us with 180
Firelocks from Boil, with the Dartry-Irish, to the number of four or five
hundred, who attempted the breaking down of Bondrons-bridg, which they quitted
upon the approach of about fifty of our Horse, and took the Boggs, and never
opposed us in one Pass, though there were many dangerous ones, wherein a few
might hinder the Passage of a great many, had they had Courage to do it.

Either on the way, or at Ballyshanny, a Letter came to the Lord Kingston from
the Committee at Derry, with Orders (as they said) from Coll. Lundy to stay at
Ballyshanny, and keep the Passes on the Earne Water, (which was obeyed, he
having his present Majesty's Commission.)

The Garrison of Ballyshanny, under the Command of Capt. Folliot, was now
reinforced, and the Ferry-boat of that place sunk, and the Lord Folliot's
House, with other Houses on Connaught-side the Water were burnt, to prevent the
Enemy's sheltring themselves therein, and from thence annoying us with their
shot, and one Arch more of Balleek-bridge was pulled down, part being so served
by Sir James Caldwell before, and a Garrison left there under the Command of
Major Vaughan, and Lieut. Arthur Cooper, and another Garrison left at Mulick,
being the House of Lieut. Walter Johnson, under the Command of Capt. William
Smith, Capt. Francis King, and Lieut. Toby Mulloy, to observe and guard a Ford
at the mouth of Lough-Earn: and at the same time another Party was ordered to
keep the Castle and Town of Dunnegal, being Commanded by Capt. Francis Gore,
and Capt. Edward Woods. During the time of the Lord Kingston and his Party's
being at Ballyshanny and the Places before mentioned, there came several
Expresses, inviting the Lord Kingston with Eighty of his choicest Horse and
three Hundred Foot to Derry, with Promises of Provision should be made for 'em:
But the Party having been all along together, they were all of 'em against
breaking, 'till something should happen, by which they might show their Zeal to
his present Majesty's service and the Protestant Religion; and accordingly
staid there 'till a Letter came to the Lord Kingston, signed at a Council of
War at Derry, April the 13th. Ordering the Forces under his Command, as well as
all others to be at Clady, Lifford, and Long Causey, or the places near to 'em,
on Monday the 15th of April, by 10 a clock in the Morning. This Letter came not
to the Lord Kingston till the 14th of April, at ten a Clock that Night, and the
nearest of his Forces were 30 miles from the place of Rendevouz. Upon this the
Lord Kingston called a Council of War, wherein it was concluded, That tho it
was impossible for the Lord Kingston and his Party to be at any of the Places
abovementioned, in twice the time limited; yet the Lord Kingston himself, with
ten or twelve Horse, should the next Morning go toward Derry, to see how
matters were, and to give Directions accordingly to his Party: Very early the
next Morning his Lordship went, but when his Lordship came to Strannor-lane,
within five miles of Rapho, his Lordship met with several of the British
running from Cladyford, who gave his Lordship an Account, that the British
were fled with Coll. Lundy into Derry, and the Irish were got to Rapho, between
his Lordship and that place; whereupon his Lordship hastened back to Dunegal,
and sent an Express with orders for the Horse, to secure themselves in
Iniskilling, and the Foot at Dunegal, Ballishany, and other places: And then
the Lord Kingston with some of his Officers, went to Killibeggs, and took
Shipping, and were put into Scotland, from whence his Lordship hastened to give
his Majesty an Account of Affairs, hoping to have made a quick return to his
Party, with his Majesty's Commissions and Orders.

So unhappily were the designs of that Noble Lord, (who inherits the Courage as
well as the Honor of his Father,) for the preservation of that part of the
Country, which he prosecuted with extraordinary Zeal and Resolution,
frustrated by the confused, but peremptory Orders which he received from
Colonel Lundy.

What happened of moment from the time of the Forces of Antrim fleeing to
Colerain, to the time of their deserting, I shall extract out of a Diary of Sir
Arthur Rawdea's, only the Relation of what passed at Bartglenoan, was drawn up
by another hand.

March 1689.
Friday 15th.
The Forces of the Northeast parts of Ulster, came to Colerain, of which
immediate notice was sent to Colonel Lundy, then at Derry.

Saturday, 16th.
The next day several;of the North-east Officers went to see Colonel Lundy, to
advise what measures should be taken, and met with Colonel Lundy, about two or
three miles from Newton Limavady, and turned back with Colonel Lundy, and
Colonel Gustavus Hamilton to Colerain: Colonel Lundy said that he could not
spare Ammunition to defend Colerain, and therefore thought it it advisable to
quitt the Town as soon as it should be attacked, for he said he had not forty
Barrels of Powder, but assured us he had Provision to hold out a Year: And
further added, that he would take care to bring all the stacks of Corn and Hay
into Derry, which were then in great numbers on the Road, but never did it.

The Commonalty at Colerain suspected Colonel Lundy, and when he was going
toward the Bridge, to view the Town, they imagined he was going away, and drew
up the Bridge, and the Guard presented their Muskets and Pikes at him.

It was concluded, That because there was much to do at Derry, to fortify and
provide it with Stores, that Colonel Lundy should remain in Derry, and
Colonel Gustavus Hamilton manage the Field, he having been chosen Governor of
the County of Donegal before.

Monday 18th.
Lieutenant Colonel Whitney was ordered to be upon the Guard, with his men at
the Bridge of Colerain, fearing least the Townsmen should again draw up their
Bridge to hinder Lundy's going away, who that day went to Derry.

Wednesday 20th.
It was ordered by the Committee of Derry, that a Ravelin should be built to
defend the Bishops Gate, and Money was ordered for it.

Several Sums of Money were also raised for the Garrison of Colerain.

And because it was suspected and given out by some, That in case the Forces
were beaten at Colerain, the Town of Derry would not let them into their Gates;
a Paper was drawn up by the Committee, and signed by the Chief of the
Inhabitants and Officers, both of the Town and Country, being an Agreement to
stand together, and succor each other, and this was proclaimed in the
Market-house, to the great Satisfaction of all.

Thursday 21st.
Captain James Hamilton arrived with 480 Barrels of Powder, Arms and Ammunition,
(as was said for 2000 Men) Money, and a Commission to Colonel Lundy to be
Governor of Derry.

The Instructions which Captain Hamilton had, were to summon the Mayor, and all
other Officers, Civil and Military, on board him, and there before 'em all to
give the Oaths of Fidelity to Coll. Lundy, before he should give him any Arms,
etc. But instead thereof, most of the Gentlemen on Board were desired to
withdraw, on pretense of Private business: So that if Lundy was sworn, 'twas
very privately. And it was much wondered at, that when the Committee of Derry,
and the Officers, the next day desired that Lundy might take the Oaths before
them all, for their greater satisfaction, he absolutely refused it on pretense
of having taken 'em on board the day before. Mr. Charles Hamilton, Mr. William
Stewart, and others refnsed 'em; but the Mayor, Sheriffs, Aldermen, and all the
Officers were sworn, and the King and Queen were Proclaimed with great
Solemnity and Joy, the Bishop being present.

It was not fully known what Arms or Money came to Derry, nor how disposed of,
there being but 30 Muskets given to each Regiment, and tho (besides the Money
which came over) considerable sums were raised in Town, yet 'twas believed
that little of it was disposed for the Public use.

Sunday 24th.
Colonel Gustavus Hamilton called a Council of War at Colerain, and represented
to the Officers, that the want of Ammunition would make them a prey to the
Enemy, and that therefore it were best to quit the Town, and retire to Derry:
In the mean time the Enemy appeared with some squadrons of Horse before the
Town, which made all repair to the Ramparts, and hindered quitting of the Town,
which else had been done; some rambling shot were made at the Enemy, who
thereupon retired.

Monday 25.
About 2 a Clock in the Morning a fire happened in an out-house near our
Magazine, which made us suspect treachery, and we all got to the Ramparts; but
the Fire being extinguished, and no Enemy appearing, all was quieted.

Wednesday 27th.
About eight in the Morning, the whole Army, under the Command of Lieutenant
General Hamilton, appeared before our Ramparts, and advanced within about 50
yards of them, under shelter and covert of Hedges and Ditches, which Particular
Interest had hindered us from throwing down; this was on Blind-gate side; and
near the Church, the Mill sheltered them within 40 yards of a Bastion. They
raised two Batteries, one of three Guns, which played upon the Bridge, and
Blind-gate, their Design being to break down the Bridge, and hinder our escape,
they not doubting of making themselves Masters of the Town, and to that end
made several shot at the Bridge, and several at Blind-gate; one of which split
the upper Beam, and broke the Chain which Captain Archibald Mac Cullogh with
great hazard fastened, the Enemy firing very warmly at him. The other Battery
did little mischief, but killing one Man, and battering down a few Chimneys,
and making a few Breaches in the Church Roof; their Gunner was killed with a
Musket shot, by Captain Hugh Mac Gill. About four of the Clock in the Afternoon
there fell much Snow, which covered the ground in an instant. About five the
Enemy retired in great Confusion, but we (having been forced to block up the
Gates with Timber, Earth and Rubbish, which was not to be removed suddenly)
could not pursue them, only some of our men leaped over the Ramparts, and took
several Prisoners, (particularly one Courney, who went to the Enemy after ^hey
came to Derry) with some Arms, Commissions, and Red-Coats, two Tents, etc. We
lost but three Men, which is very much, considering the continual firing of the
Enemy; what they lost is uncertain, because they carried off their dead; 'twas
reported by the Country People, that they burned many of their dead in a House.

Thursday 28th.
We foraged within two miles of the Enemies Camp, and brought in Cattle, etc.

Friday 29th.
Sir Arthur Rawdens Regiment was ordered to go to Monimore, about twenty six
miles from Colerain, to oppose Gordon O Neile, who 'twas said was marching
toward Colerain with 2000 Men.

Mr. Skeffington's Regiment was ordered to Ballaghy Dawsons Bridge, and the
Passes on the Band above Port-Glenon: One Battalion of that Regiment, under the
Command of Lieutenant Colonel Houston, was ordered to keep the Pass at Toam;
but because of the floods which overspread the Woods of Creagh, they could
seldom get to their Posts, or relieve their Guards: The other part of it under
the Command of Major Michelburn, was sent to guard the Pass at Newferry, 4 or 5
miles below Toam, to which there was easier access. Colonel Edmonston was
ordered to defend and secure the pass of Port Glenon, by hindering the Enemies
repairing the Bridge, which is 14 Miles from Colerain.

Colonel Canning's Regiment was also ordered to Maherafelt, and Monimore, Sir
John Mac Gills was sent to Killrea, and that part of the Ban; care had been
taken before to sink most of the Boats and Cotts on the Ban River. Sir Tristram
Berisford's Regiment, with Colonel Francis Hamilton's, and several
Detachments, to the number of 3000 Men, were left to defend Colerain. The
Protestants at Fagivie, under Command of Captain Blair, beat back some of the
Irish who had crossed the River there.

April, Tuesday 2d.
We went to Monimore, the Irish quitting it upon our approach, and we got great
quantities of Provision in the Country, and saw no Enemy. Colonel Edmonston
sent word to Sir Arthur Rawden, that his Men were almost starved, for want of
Provisions, and that none could be had, unless he would furnish him, and withal
desired to see him; and accordingly he sent Provisions, and went there late
that Night, ( Friday 5th.) and found that he had Entrenched himself so well,
that the Enemy could not annoy them, neither with great nor small shot, and he
had destroyed great part of the Bridge; there was a contnual fireing on both
sides.

Saturday 6th.
We killed near 20 of the Enemy, and with hot Iron Bullets fired the Town where
they lay, and drove them all out of of it. --

Sunday 7th.
About two a Clock this Morning we had notice, That the Lord Galmoy, Coll.
Gordon O Neal, and Coll. Mac Mahon were come to Dungannon, with 3000 Foot, and
1000 Horse, in order to surprise and cut off the Garrison at Monimore, and Sir
Arthur Rawden was desired to hasten thither, the Letter being communicated to
the Officers, it was resolved Sir Arthur Rawden should go toward Monimore; but
he with Major Baker, Capt. Hugh Mac Gill, and Captain Dumbar had not rode above
a mile before they had an Account sent 'em, That the Irish in five or six great
Boats, had in the Nightime passed by the Guards that were kept on the
Riverside, by Coll. Skeffingtons Regiment, and were then coming down within a
mile of Colonel Edmonston's Trenches: Sir Arthur Rawden immediately sent
notice of it to Colonel Edmonston, to Lieutenant Colonel Whitney, and to
Major Michelburn. One Company of Colonel Edminston's Regiment, that lodged in
some Country houses, got to the River, and fired at them, till their Powder
was all spent. When the Boats came within half a Mile of the Trenches, they
landed the Men, and took in more Irish on the other side the River, till they
had landed a considerable Party. Two or three Companies of the Granadeers
advanced first through the Bogg, toward Colonel Edmonston's Trenches; he having
but 120 Men in 'em, went out with 60 of them to line a Ditch on the side of the
Bogg toward the Enemy, (leaving Lieutenant Colonel Will. Shaw to guard the
Trenches,) and vigorously opposed 'em till both their Ammunition was spent, and
the Irish overpowered 'em with their numbers, which were continually
increasing. About this time Sir Arthur Rawden and Captain Dunbar came to the
Trenches; and were surprised with a Volley of shot from the Irish, who
immediately sent 100 Granadeers to line the Hedges, on the way to that only
pass by which they could retreat, and to keep that pass against a party of
Protestants that they saw marching toward it. This party was five Companies of
Foot, under Command of Lieutenant Colonel Whitney, coming to Colonel
Edmonston's assistance, who Commanded three young Captains to lead on the men;
but when he observed the Enemy, he Commanded his men to face about and retire,
which all did except one Captain James Mac-Gill, who ashamed of so base a
retreat went on: About this time, Sir Arthur Rawden, and Captain Dumbar came to
the pass, and having no other way to escape, ventured through all the shot,
powered in upon 'em from the Hedges till they met Captain James Mac-Gill, but as
they were charging again, they spied another party of Irish behind 'em, and
they had not gone far before Captain James Mac-Gill was unfortunately shot off
his Horse: A Captain of the Granadeers came up and run his Sword several times
through him, and another of 'em dashed out his brains with a Musket; (so
barbarously did they kill that deserving young Gentleman, whose early Valor
would have met with other treatment from any Enemy but the Irish.) By that time
Sir Arthur Rawden had got over the pass, Major Baker and Captain Hugh Mac-Gill
were come up with what men they could get together, and had stopped Colonel
Whitney's party. Colonel Edmonston also, and Lieut. Colonel Shaw had by
several ways got up to them; but the Soldiers having little Ammunition or Match
left, the body of the Irish being increased, and especially the Lord Galmoy's
March toward Monymore being confirmed, it was resolved that Colonel
Edmonston, and Lieutenant Colonel Whitney, should March to Colerain: That Sir
Arthur Rawden with his own Regiment of Dragoons, Colonel Skeffingtons, and
Colonel Kennings Regiments of Foot, (the last of them was under Command of
Lieutenant Colonel William Cuningham,) should March toward Derry, which was
accordingly done.

Besides Captain James Mac-Gill, and several common Soldiers which were lost,
one Captain Henly was wounded and taken Prisoner. And Sir Arthur Rawden by
continual fatigue and want of rest cast himself into a dangerous Illness, which
afterward forced him to leave that Kingdom. A Gentleman who in all those
affairs of the North of Ireland, showed himself a true lover and friend of his
Country, by his extraordinary Zeal and Courage; his great Expenses and
indefatigable diligence in the defense of it. Colonel Edmonston also
contracted those Distempers in the Trenches at Port-Glenon, of which he
afterward died at Cullmore, April the 14th. having behaved himself there, and
on all other occasions with great Gallantry and Resolution.

The Irish having crossed the Ban, all those of the Army above at Monymore and
Maghrifelt, (except a few Captains that took Protection) as well as those of
Toam, and Newferry, fled over the Mountains to Derry. Colerain was deserted
least the Irish should intercept betwixt the Forces there, and those at Derry;
part of the Bridge was cut down, part of it Burnt. And all the Country came
toward Derry as their last Refuge.

April the 9th. the Body of our Army came to the Ferry that leads over to the
Town, and it was no small trouble to see so many brave and resolute men both
Horse and Foot without a General. The Horse and Dragoons were that day ordered
by Colonel Lundy, to March to Lifford and Strabane, and the next the Dragoons
were ordered to March to Letter-Kenny: The Horse and Dragoons brought in good
store of Meal and other Provisions to Derry.

April 10th. Mr. Cairns being sent from England, with Instructions and a Letter
from the King to Colonel Lundy, came this day to Derry; he met some Officers,
and a great number of people going off: Colonel Lundy had offered Passes to
the Officers, and spoke so discouragingly to many of them, concerning the
indefensibleness of the place, that they strongly suspected he had a design to
give it up; and they could see little hope of preventing it, in such a
Confusion if he proved Treacherous, and therefore were unwilling to stay, only
to be betrayed into the Enemies hands. Mr. Cairns delivered the Kings Letter to
Governor Lundy, and acquainted him and others, with the cause of his coming,
and the Forces following him at Sea for their aid; and though this good News
put new Life and resolution into many of them, yet since others, and
particularly some of the chief Officers were said to be on the Wing to depart;
he was earnest with Governor Lundy to take some speedy and effectual care to
prevent it; whereupon a Council of War was held that Night, to whom Colonel
Lundy imparted his Letter. [see it in the end.] Mr. Cairns's Instructions were
also read, and be pursuant thereto, represented to 'em his Majesty's great care
and concern for 'em, and that whole Kingdom; the great preparations making in
England for their relief, and the Forces at present hastening to 'em. He
therefore earnestly dissuaded 'em from deserting the place, and desired
according to his Instructions a particular account of the present Condition of
the City as to Men, Arms, Ammunition, etc. This had that effect, that the
Council drew up the following resolution, which Colonel James Hamilton
proposed, and was active to promote.

We the Officers hereunto subscribing, pursuant to a Resolution taken, and
agreed upon at a Council of War at Londonderry held this day; do hereby
mutually promise and engage, to stand by each other with our Forces against the
common Enemy, and will not leave the Kingdom, nor desert the public Service,
until our affairs are in a settled and secure Posture. And if any of us shall do
the Contrary, the person so leaving the Kingdom, or deserting the Service,
without consent of a Council of War, is to be deemed a Coward, and disaffected
to their Majesty's Service, and the Protestant Interest.

Dated the 10th. of April, 1689. Paulet Phillips. Hugh Mac-Gill. Rich. Croftor.
Jo. Hill. Geo. Hamilton. Arthur Upton. Ja. Hamilton. Nich. Atchison. Hugh
Montgommery. The. Whitney. Will. Ponsonby. Rich. Johnson. Robert Lundy. Blaney.
Ar. Rawden. Will. Shaw. Rich. Whaley. Dan. Mac-Neal. Will. Shaw. Jo. Forward.
Ger. Squire. J. Blaney. Jo. Tubman.


This Resolution was not only affixt on the Market-House, but read next Morning
at head of every Battallion, at which the Soldiers expressed their great
satisfaction with loud Acclamations and Huzza's. Mr. Cairns also wrote to
several persons of Note, that were then about going off at Castledoe, to
dissuade 'em, but all in vain. At the same Council there were several Articles
agreed on. [see 'em in the end] The Enemy being come to the Lough, and
threatening to come over with their Boats, and there being no other Vessel in
the Lough, but Mr. Cairne's, the Council desired, and obtained his to be used
as a Privateer against them.

The Enemy thus hastening upon them, and some discontents appearing among the
Soldiers, who murmured especially against Colonel Lundy, for taking no more
care to put 'em into a posture of defense, and expressed great readiness to
fight the Enemy if they were led on; to allay these heats and provide for the
common safety; A Council of War was held, April the 13th. in which they came to
the following Resolution.

Londonderry, April the 13th. 1689.
At a General Council of War, resolved unanimously, that on Monday next, by Ten
of the Clock, all Officers and Soldiers, Horse, Dragoons, and Foot, and all
other Armed men whatsoever of our Forces and Friends, Inlisted or not Inlisted,
that can or will Fight for their Country and Religion against Popery, shall
appear on the fittest Ground near Gladyford, Lifford, and Long-Cauly, as shall
be nearest to their several and respective Quarters, there to draw up in
Battalions to be ready to Fight the Enemy; and to preserve our Lives, and all
that is dear to us from them. And all Officers and Soldiers, of Horse, Foot,
Dragoons, and others that are Armed, are required to be then there, in order to
the purpose aforesaid, and to bring a Weeks Provision at least with them, for
Men, and as much Forage as they can for Horses.

Robert Lundy. William Stuart. Ja. Hamilton. Fran. Hamilton. Nich. Atchison.
Hugh Montgommery. Geo. Hamilton. Fran. White. Jo. Tubman. Jo. Barry. C. Fronde.
Hugh Mac-Gill. Jo. Hill. Jo. Hamilton. Jo. Forward. Kilner Brasier. Walter
Dawson. Pawlet Phillips.


At this Council Colonel Lundy was chosen to be Commander in chief in the
Field, which he undertook. This day Major Stroud made some Proposals to
Governor Lundy, of which no notice was taken; most of the Suburbs on both
sides the Water were burnt or pulled down.

April the 14th. the body of the Enemies Army Marched up toward Strabane, part
of them within view of the City, whereupon Mr. Cairns went twice to Governor
Lundy, pressing him to take some speedy effectual care for securing the Passes
of Fin-Water, least the Enemy should get over before our men could meet: he
replied in a careless manner, that he had given Orders already, but how little
was actually done toward the prevention of it, the next day gave us a sad
Demonstration. The same day several others sent word to Governor Lundy, that
if he did not March the men that day, the Enemy would certainly prevent their
getting together in any orderly body, and therefore entreated him to be with
the men that Night at Clady and Lifford. But their advice was not regarded. our
men had burnt all the Corn and Forage on the Road, so that if those Passes had
been maintained, the Enemies Horse could not have long subsisted there.

This day we had News, that a Fleet was seen off the Coast near the
Lough-mouth, but were driven off by the Wind to Sea again.

Captain Hamil, and Major Crofton with a party at Lifford, did all this Night
repulse the Enemy, (who attempted to come over the Ford,) with great resolution
and success, killing as we heard several of them, with their Cannon and small
shot.

April the 15th Colonel Cuningham, and Colonel Richards, with the English
Ships and Forces arrived in the Lough, they had particular Instructions to
receive from time to time such Orders as Colonel Lundy should give them in all
things relating to his Majesty's Service; pursuant to which, Colonel Cuningham
sent three several Messages to him: By the first, (which was from Green-Castle
about Ten in the Morning,) he acquainted him with his coming, and desired his
Orders about Landing the two Regiments on board; by the second, (from
Red-Castle about Two in the Afternoon,) having some information of their being
gone out to fight the Enemy at Clady, he wrote the following Letter.

From on Board the Swallow near Red-Castle at Two in the Afternoon, April the
15th. 1689. SIR,
HEaring you have taken the Field, in order to fight the Enemy, I have thought
it fit for their Majesty's Service to let you know there are two well
disciplined Regiments here on Board, that may join you in two days at farthest;
I am sure they will be of great use in any occasion, but especially for the
encouragement of Raw men, as I judge most of yours are, therefore it is my
opinion that you only stop the Passes at the Fords of Finn, till I can join
you, and afterward if giving Battle be necessary, you will be in a much better
posture for it than before. I must ask your pardon if I am too free in my
advice; according the remote prospect I have of things, this seems most
reasonable to me; but as their Majesty's have left the whole direction of
matters to you, so you shall find that no man living will more cheerfully obey
you, than your most humble Servant,

John Cuningham.


Having no Answer to either, he sent a third Messenger from Culmore-Castle,
about Nine at Night, to desire his Orders which he was ready to execute, but he
received no answer from Governor Lundy till that Evening, of which in its due
order.

This day a considerable party of the Irish Horse, Marched from Strabane to
Clady, some of their Foot being there before them, our men had the week before
broke down some Arches of the Bridge, and had made a Breast-work at the end of
it. Our Forces at Derry Marched about Eight or Nine in the Morning toward
Long-Causey, Lifford, and Clady; many Troops and Companies were gathering from
several parts to join them, in all above 10000. A party of the Enemy that
attempted to Ford the River at Castle-Fin, was repulsed by a party of Colonel
Skeffingtons Regiment posted there: Another small party of our men, about 30
Dragoons of Colonel Stewarts Regiment, Commanded by Captain Murray, (after
most of the few Foot posted there were beat off,) opposed the Enemies coming
over at Cladyford, till all their Ammunition was spent. But there was no more
Ammunition sent them; (nay so strangely had the Governor managed things, that
most part of the Ammunition was but coming from Derry, about three or four
Miles out of it, when some part of our Forces were fleeing thither upon their
retreat:) And Major Stroud who had some Horse near the Ford was so ill placed,
that he could not bring them on, where they were so exposed to the Enemies
shot, tho he earnestly endeavored it; so that they were forced to retire from
the Bridge, the Enemy perceiving this, and observing the scattered condition of
our men, several Troops of their Horse rush't into the River, and swam through;
(one Major Nangle and another Officer were drowned.) When they got over, they
were (as Gordon O-Neal since told me,) in terrible fear least we should have
fallen upon them, for the Waters being high, they had scarce a dry shot left:
But Governor Lundy, was so far from putting the Protestant Forces into any
posture to oppose them, that upon notice of their entering the Ford, he gave
Orders to all thereabouts, to flee to Derry, himself leading the way, but sent
none to other parts of the Army, which never met in any considerable body. Upon
this News of the Irish Horse being got over, the Foot posted at Lifford, that
were shooting at a Party of Irish cross the River at Strabane, were called off,
and retired to the Pass at Long Causey. Colonel Franc. Hamilton stopped those
that fled there, and drew 'em up in good order behind that Pass, expecting the
Irish would take that way, and Lundy would come thither from Rapho: But the
Irish Horse chiefly pursued those that took the way to Rapho, where they did
great Execution on Coll. Mountgomery's Regiment of Foot, there being no
tolerable care taken to bring 'em off. And they had been all cut off, if they
had not got into Boggs, and Marishy places, to secure themselves from the
Enemies Horse. The Forces at the Long Causey staid there till toward evening;
but fearing the Enemy might come from Rapho, to intercept their passage to
Derry, they retired thither: So inexcusable was the Conduct of the General,
both in abandoning so many Passes, and those so easily defensible by a few men,
if they had been either supplied with Ammunition, or constantly relieved, and
in never so much as attempting to draw the Forces into a Body, when there were
in the Field above 10000 men, who (whatever he pretended to the contrary)
wanted more care and resolution in their Leader than Courage in themselves: But
whether this ill Conduct must be ascribed to negligence or design, the Reader
must be left to judge by his following actions.

Governor Lundy being come into Town, ordered the Sentinels to shut the Gates,
so that many Officers, Soldiers and private Gentlemen were forced that Night to
lie about the Walls; and the reason that he since publicly gave for it, is not
unworthy the Readers notice, viz. To preserve the Provisions, which he knew to
be sufficient for 3000 men for 3 Months, after the rate of 4 pounds of Fish, 3
pounds of Flesh, and 8 quarts of Meal per Week, for each Man. And though this
was very far from being a just Acconnt, yet how very different a one he gave
the Officers of the two Regiments on board, will appear by what follows.

Governor Lundy this Night sent back Major Tiffin, Captain Lyndon, and Captain
Cornwall Commander of the Swallow Frigate (as appears by a Certificate annexed at
the end) with the following Answer to Coll. Cuningham's Message.

To Coll. John Cuningham.
SIR,
I Am come back much sooner than I expected, when I went forth; for having
numbers placed on Fin-water, as I went to a Pass, where a few might oppose a
greater number than came to the place, I found them on the run before the
Enemy, who pursued with great Vigor, and I fear March on with their Forces; so
that I wish your men would March all Night in good order, least they be
surprised; here they shall have all the accommodation the place will afford: in
this hurry pardon me for this brevity, the rest the bearer will inform you. I
rest Sir,

Londonderry, April 15. 1689. Your faithful Servant, Robert Lundy.
If the Men be not landed, let 'em land and march immediately.

Sir, Since the writing of this, Major Tiffen is come here, and I have given
him my Opinion fully, which I believe when you hear, and see the place, you
will both join with me; that without an immediate supply of Money and
Provisions, this place must fall very soon into the Enemies hands: If you do not
send your men here some time tomorrow, it will not be in your power to bring
'em at all: 'Till we discourse the matter, I remain, Dear Sir,

Your most faithful Servant, Robert Lundy.




In the Postscript he referrs Coll. Cuningham to the account he gave Major
Tiffin, which was, (as himself has since publicly owned) That there was not
above 10 days Provision in Town for 3000 Men, though all unnecessary Mouths
were put out of it, and though what was in the Town for private use were taken
to the public Stores. Accordingly he ordered Coll. Cuningham and Coll.
Richards to leave their Men still on board their Ships, and to come with some
of their Officers to Town, that they might resolve on what was fit to be done.

Accordingly April 16. Coll. Cuningham and Coll. Richards with some of their
Officers came to Town, where Coll. Lundy called a Council of War, composed of
these sixteen Persons, Chidley Coot. James Hamilton. Captains of Cuning. Reg.
Cornwall. Echlin. Traunter. Lyndon. Lundy. Blany. Cuningham. Richards. Hussy.
Tiffin.
Captains of Richards' s Regim. Pearson. Pache. Tailor.



The two Colonels with their Officers were entire strangers to the State of
the Town, and the rest were in a great measure unacquainted with it; for Coll.
Lundy had called none of the Inhabitants to it except Mr. Mogredge the Clark;
and when, several of the principal Officers (who had some suspicion of Coll.
Lundy's design) as Coll. Franc. Hamilton, Coll. Chichester, Coll. Crofton,
Lieut. Coll. Ponsonby, etc. desired to be admitted, they were absolutely
refused, though at the same Council he pretended he had sent for the two first,
but said they could not be found, and for Sir Arthur Rewdon, who he said was a
dying.

Coll Cuningham delivered to Governor Lundy his Majesty's Letter and Orders
directed to him; but the Governor, who was President of the Council, gave 'em
the same account of the State of the Town that he had before given to Major
Tiffin, and therefore advised 'em all to quit it, for he said he would do so
himself.

Those of the Council who came from England, thinking it impossible the
Governor should be ignorant of the Condition of the Town, and observing the
account to pass without any contradiction from those there who had been for
some time in it, but had not it seems informed themselves better; soon agreed
in the Opinion of returning for England, rather than stay in a place not to be
Victualled from the Country, especially when as he further said the Enemy were
near their Gates with 25000 Men; and there was no possibility of a return from
England in so short a time as the Governor affirmed what Provision they had
must be spent, (only Coll. Richards argued against it, because he looked on the
deserting that Garrison not only as the quitting that City, but the whole
Kingdom,) and accordingly they came to the following Resolution:

Upon Enquiry it appears, that there is not Provision in the Garrison of
Londonderry for the present Garrison, and the two Regiments on board, for
above a week, or ten days at most: and it appearing that the Place is not
tenable against a well appointed Army, therefore it is concluded upon, and
resolved, That it is not convenient for his Majesty's Service, but the
contrary, to land the two Regiments under Col. Cunningham, and Col. Richards,
their Command, now on board in the River of Lough-foyle: That considering the
present circumstances of Affairs, and the likelihood the Enemy will soon
possess themselves of this Place, it is thought most convenient, that the
Principal Officers shall privately withdraw themselves, as well for their own
preservation, as in hopes that the Inhabitants by a timely Capitulation may
make terms the better with the Enemy; and that this we judge most convenient
for his Majesty's Service, as the present State of Affairs now is.

On the Result of this Council, Colonel Cunningham, and Colonel Richards,
with their Officers, went down to the Ships, which that day fell down below
Red-Castle: But Colonel Lundy, to delude both the Officers and Soldiers in
Town (who were earnestly begging, that the English Forces might land, that with
their Assistance they might take the Field, and fight the Enemy, before their
Cannon were brought over, in order to the Preservation of that corner, into
which the Provisions and Wealth of 3 or 4 Counties was crowded) told 'em
publicly, It was resolved the English Forces should immediately land, and when
they were in their Quarters, the Gates should be opened, and all join in
defense of the Town: And to cloak the Intreague the better, the Sheriffs were
ordered to go through the City, to provide Quarters for 'em, who accordingly
did so. But all this was mere sham to amuse the Town, while they might get away
with the greater Ease and Safety: This Order was not publicly known till the
18th. But one of the Officers of this Council acquainted Colonel Franc.
Hamilton, and Capt. Hugh Mac Gill with it, and advised 'em to go off. Captain
Mac Gill discovered it to several Friends, and particularly to Sir Arthur
Rawden, (who then lay extremely weak, and was the only Person there by Name
excepted from Mercy in the Lord Tyrconnel's Proclamation.) This made 'em look
on the Town as betrayed, and represented affairs so desperate to 'em, that they
thought it madness in 'em to stay behind, merely to be exposed as a Sacrifice
to the Fury of the Irish: And therefore many of 'em got off to the Ships the
day following.

This Day the Body of our Foot that retreated, by command from Clady, and those
parts, came in tolerable Order to the Gates, but were surprised to find 'em
shut, by the Governors Order, who had but the Day before commanded 'em to flee
thither; they called to the Centries to open 'em, which they refused: But when
one of the Captains of Colonel Skeffingtons Regiment fired at the Centry, and
called for Fire to burn the Gate, that and the other Gates were thrown open,
and all that had been kept out the Night before, now entered the Town, which
made a considerarable Body.

There being no Forage in the Town, the Horse went all generally toward
Culmore, some both Officers and Soldiers, who had observed Colonel Lundy's
ill Conduct, and the confused Posture their Affairs were in, got to the Ships;
those that stayed, gathered to Captain Murray, and resolved to sell their lives
dear, rather than fall into the hands of an Enemy, from whom they expected no
Mercy.

Governor Lundy had placed Captain Jemmet Governor of Culmore, who afterward
by his Order deserted it, though he had been formerly active in the service of
the Town; a few Irish poffest themselves of it, but it was soon recovered by a
small Artifice.

April 17th. King James and his Army being advanced as far as St. Johnstown,
(five miles from Derry,) he, or Lieutenant Genesis Hamilton, sends one Mr.
Whitlow, a Clergyman, to Governor Lundy, to know if they in the City would
surrender on honorable terms, which they should have to prevent the effusion
of Christian Blood: On this a Council was held, who conclude to send to King
James, to know what his Majesty's Demands were, and what terms he would grant
to the City: The Messenger himself being allowed to sit and join in Debates
with them. The same Gentleman had on the 16th. told Cornet Nicholsen (his old
Acquaintance) who inquired of him what Colonel Lundy intended, That the Town
would be delivered up before Saturday following, and therefore advised him to
shift for himself. He said the same to to Mr. Henry Nicholson, Archdeacon
Hamilton, Captain Kinaston, and Captain Nevil were sent; who had access to the
King, and returned that Night, but were refused entrance by the Multitude. Only
the two former some way got in; the last (who had before been very active)
wrote in a Letter the Account of their Negotiation, and departed.

A little before this time Mr. Will. Blacker, and Ensign Twinyo came to Town,
sent (as was reported, and confirmed by an intercepted Letter) by King James
from Charlemount, to amuse the Garrison with such accounts of the Clemency of
the King on the one hand, and the formidable strength of his Army on the other,
as might incline them to a surrender. This Discourse soon exposed them to the
suspicion of the Garrison, who seized and put them under restraint. Blacker,
while thus confined, writes a Letter to the Camp (which was intercepted) to
this purpose: That he doubted not they knew he was detained a Prisoner in Town,
but he served their Interest as much there as if he were in their Camp: They
had many Friends in Town, especially Captain Darcy, Mr. White, (Collector of
Strabane,) etc. There was a Council held upon them, but after some time they
were both dismissed.

The common Soldiers, who knew nothing of the forementioned Order of the
Council, were so enraged at their Officers, several of whom (as was before
hinted) about this time left them and fled for England, that they could not
forbear expressing it with some violence on some of them. One Captain Bell was
shot dead, and another Officer hurt, who had (as was supposed with that Design)
got into a Boat with several other Officers.

This Day some in the Town sent one Captain Cole to Coll. Cunningham, to offer
him the Government of it, because they suspected Coll. Lundy's Integrity. Coll.
Cunningham's Answer was, That he being ordered to apply himself to Coll. Lundy
for direction in all things relating to their Majesty's Service, could receive
no Application from any that opposed that Authority. On the 18th. the Ships
fell down to Green-Castle, and on the 19th. sailed for England. On the 20th.
about one a clock in the Morning, a Ship making toward the Coast from whence
they came, enquired whether they had met the English Fleet; upon which Coll.
Cunningham hoping that some part of his Majesty's Fleet might be near, from
whom they might have Provisions, resolved if he could procure from them
Provisions for one Fortnight, to return to Derry. Upon which they gave the
signal, and made after that Ship, but found it to be the Bonadventure Frigate,
that was convoying some Ships with Arms and Ammunition to Derry, but no
Provisions. This Account I had from Sir Arthur Rawden, and Captain Hugh Mac
Gill, who were then on board the same Vessel. There was none of the Vessels,
but only that wherein Colonel Richards was, that took the signal, and made
after the Bonadventure Frigate.

This Night Major Crofion finding the Gates open, and two of the Keys wanting,
doubled the Guards, and changed the word. He was questioned for it the next day
by Coll. Lundy; but he thought not fit to infist on it, and so there was no
more made of it.

April 18th. What secret Assurances were given King James, that first induced
him to march his Army down to the City, or to retire again, in expectation of
the multitudes being brought to a compliance, those can give the best Account
that were most active for a surrender, and privy to all the clandestine
transactions about it. But it is certain, that the Irish Army came this day to
the Strand above the Windmill, at the South end of Derry hill, and there
stopped, waiting what Answer or Salutation the City would give them. The Council
had it the mean time given strict Orders that none offer to fire from the Walls
on severe penalties, and some were sent about the Walls to give intimation of
it. But how little the Council or their Orders were valued by the Soldiers, the
event soon showed. It was at this Council that Mr. John Mogredg, who had been
Clerk to the forementioned Council, held by Colonel Lundy, Colonel
Cunningham, etc. declared he would conceal no longer the Result of that
Council, [viz. That Colonel Cunningham should return with the two Regiments,
and all Gentlemen and Officers quitt the Garrison, and go with him.] He desired
Governor Lundy to produce the Order, which was a great surprise to this
present Council, who (tho they generally agreed too well with Colonel Lundy
about surrendering) yet deeply resented the concealing so material a thing from
them.

But our Men on the Walls paid so little Deference to either them or their
Orders, and so little regarded the secret Treaties they were managing with the
Enemy, that when King James's Forces were advancing toward them on the Strand,
they presently fired their great Guns at them, and (as was confidently
reported) killed one Captain Troy, near the Kings Person. This unnexpected
Salutation not only struck a strange Terror into the Irish Camp, but put the
King himself into some disorder, to find himself so roughly and unmannerly
treated by those, from whom he expected so dutiful a Compliance. And those who
had encouraged him to try an Experiment that proved so dangerous, thought
themselves concerned to make some Apology for it. The Council therefore
resolved to send Archdeacon Hamilton to the King, to excuse themselves for
what had passed, and lay all the blame of it on the ungovernableness of the
People, whose violent humor, they said they could not restrain, while his Army
continued there, and therefore begged his patience, till the present tumult was
over: And because some of the Council, as well as others, could hardly believe
that King James was really there, Captain White was sent with the Archdeacon
(having often seen the King) to put them out of all doubt about it. Captain
White returned to them with assurance of it, but Archdeacon Hamilton took
Protection, (that Summer he sickned and died.) But King James's being there,
was an Argument that had little force on our Men on the Walls, who were
resolved to defend the Protestant Religion, and King Williams Interest, against
him and his Army to the utmost. Nay, they now began to be impatient, to see
themselves thus betrayed by such as should have been their Leaders, and
severely threatened both the Governor and his Council, for tampering with the
Enemy.

The Governor and Council, though extremely displeased at the boldness and
resosolution of the Soldiers, could not help it, having lost all Authority and
Credit with them, of which this day produced a new Instance, as considerable as
this. Capt. Murray was advanced from Culmere Fort to the green Field below
Penny-burn-Mill, with a considerable Party of Horse, within view of the Town,
having left 1500 Foot below at Brook-hall. It was his appearing there had
encouraged the Men on the Walls to accost the Irish Army so rudely. The
Governor and Council perceiving his Motion toward the City, dispatched one
Murray an Express to him, with a Line to this purport, That he should
immediately upon sight thereof withdraw with his Men to the back of the Hill,
out of the View of the City. He understood not the meaning of so strange an
Order; but the Messenger being his Relation, explained the Mystery to him; that
the Governor and his Council were about making Terms with the Enemy for
surrendering the Town; and added, that several of his Friends advised him to
hasten to Town, if he defign'd to make any effectual opposition to the Enemy;
for if he came not, the Town would certainly be delivered into the their hands:
Upon which he resolves to March with his Horse straight to the City, where,
with some difficulty from the Enemy's Dragoons, who fired at him in the way, he
came to Ship-key-gate; Mr. Walker was sent from the Council to discourse him,
who would have had him alone to be taken up on the Walls by a Rope, which he
refused with disdain; but Mr. James Morison, Captain of the Guards, without any
Orders, opened the Gates to him and his Troops. His Presence, when he came,
struck a cold damp on the Governor and his Council, but inspired the Men on
the Walls with Vigor and Resolution.

This same Council this day proceeded to conclude a Surrender, and drew up a
Paper to that purpose, which most of them Signed, and as far as I could ever
learn, all of them, (though many of the Signers afterward heartily joined with
us in Defense of the Place.)

But to return to Capt. Murray, the Multitude having eagerly desired and
expected his coming, followed him through the streets with great expressions of
their Respect and Affection. He assured them he would stand by them in defense
of their Lives and the Protestant Interest, and assist them immediately to
suppress Lundy and his Council, to prevent their Design of surrendering the
City; desiring all who would concur with him herein, to put a White Cloth on
their left Arm, which they generally did, being also encouraged to it by Capt.
Bashford, Capt. Noble, and others. This greatly alarmed and perplexed the
Governor and his Council: They conclude to send for him, and try if they can
prevail with him to sign the Paper for surrendering the City: At their
Invitation he comes into the Council, accompanied with some Friends, (though
dissuaded by others.) What passed betwixt him and Governor Lundy being of some
importance to the right understanding that strange Turn of Affairs, on which
the Preservation of that City depended, I shall give the Reader this short
account of it. Col. Lundy desired to know the occasion of his Jealoufies of
him: Capt. Murray told him plainly, his late Actions had declared him either
Fool. or Knave; and to make this charge good, he insisted on his gross neglect
to secure the Passes at Strabane, Lifford and Clady, refusing Ammunition when
sent for, riding away from an Army of 10 or 12000 Men, able and willing to have
encountered the Enemy, neglecting the advantageous Passes of Long-causey and
Carickins, which a few Men might have defended, etc. He urged him to take the
Field, and fight the Enemy, assuring him of the readiness of the Soldiers, whom
he Vindlcated from those Aspersions of Cowardice which Coll. Lundy cast on 'em;
and when Coll. Lundy persuaded him to join with the Gent. there present, who
had Signed a Paper for surrendering the Town, and offered several Arguments to
that purpose, drawn from their Danger; he absolutely refused it, unless it were
agreed on in a general Council of the Officers, which he alleged that could
not be, since there were as many absent as present.

This Discourse being ended, The Governor and Council go on with their Design
of surrendering. Capt. Murray leaves them, and returns to the Soldiers that
waited for him: He observed that the Council were resolved to give up the City,
which if they should do, it was impossible for him to keep Culmore; and having
advised with his Friends, he resolves to stay in Town, and do his utmost to
prevent what he saw the Council intended; to which he was the more encouraged,
by the entire interest he had in the affections of the common Soldiers, whom he
knew to be generally as averse to a Surrender, and as resolute for defending
the City as himself.

The Council goes on, after the Paper for Surrender was subscribed, to consider
what methods were fit to be taken for capitulating with the King. They agree to
send out 20 Men to him for that end, as the King by a Messenger had proposed.
But the men were not chosen this Night; but before the Council was dismissed,
Governor Lundy sent for some of the N. C. Ministers to come to the Council;
none of them went, but one who refused to sit. The reasons of their being sent
for, were partly to engage them to persuade Captain Murray, to comply with the
rest for Surrendering: partly that their appearance there to countenance those
proceedings of the Council might induce the multitude to comply also, who were
generally of that persuasion; but they not appearing, this project failed, and
this proved the last Session of the Council.

That these pernicious intentions of the Council, might be the more effectually
counteracted, Captain Murray and a party with him went this Night to the
Main-Guard, took the Keys from one Captain Wigston, who then Commanded the
Guard, and appointed Guards that Night at the Gates, and on the Walls.

The Soldiers and Multitude thus headed by Captain Murray, renew their threats
against the Governor and his Council, who were so justly apprehensive of their
danger from them, that after that time Colonel Lundy kept his Chamber till he
stole away, and few of his Council durst for a while appear in the streets, for
fear of the armed Multitude.

I have insisted the more largely on the Transactions of this day, betwixt
Captain Murray, and the Governor in Council, because the opposition he made to
their design, both in the Council, and especially by his influence on the
Multitude, was the only thing that prevented the surrender of the City to King
James, and altered the whole scene of affairs in it. And I must in Justice add,
that though the body of those that joined with him were called the Rabble, yet
they were generally men as Eminent for their great Probity, as for their
Courage, acted with a hearty zeal to the Protestant Religion, and animated with
the hopes of seeing it ere long flourish in that Kingdom, under the happy
Government of King William and Queen Mary. And how much the main stress of the
defense of that City lay on them, will appear in the following account of it.

This Evening King James with his Army went back to St. Johnstown, and stayed
there till the 20th. waiting for an answer from the City.

April the 19th. the Multitude having thus broken the Authority of the Council,
would have made Captain Murray both their General, and the sole Governor of
the Town; but he modestly refused it, because he judged himself fitter for
Action and Service in the Field, than for Conduct or Government in the Town.
And therefore when several Gentlemen invited him to a Council, that they might
choose a Governor, he very readily agreed to it. At this Council, there were
at first but about 15 in all, where all the Officers of the Garrison ought to
have been, as matters then stood. The persons nominated were Major Henry Baker,
Major Mitchelburn, and Lieutenant Colonel Richard Johnston: Major Baker had
the Majority of Votes, and was chosen their Governor. Having done this, they
immediately considered what Regiments might be in Town, and concluded on 8.

Governor Baker to be Colonel to Sir Arthur Rawdens Dragoons.

Major Walker, to be Colonel to the Lord Charlemonts Regiment, the Lieutenant
Colonel being gone.

Major Parker, to Command Colerain Regiment.

Major Mitchelburn, to Command Mr. Skeffingtons Regiment.

Captain Hamill, to be Colonel to a Regiment.

Lieutenant Colonel Whitney, to be Colonel to Francis Hamiltons Regiment.

Major Crofton, to be Colonel to Colonel Kanning's Regiment.

Captain Murray, to be Colonel to the Horse.

This being done, the new chosen Governor made a Speech to acquaint them, That
the work they had now laid on him, was too much for him to discharge, and
therefore desired they would allow him an Assistant for the Stores and
Provisions: This he might have done of himself, and therefore they readily
agreed to the Motion, and desired him to nominate whom he pleased; he named Mr.
George Walker, to which they assented.

The next thing the Council fell on, (many more being now come into it,) was to
prosecute and perfect what Lundy had left unfinish't the Night before, viz. the
choice of 20 men to go out and capitulate with King James. It was proposed to
Colonel Murray to be one of them, but he refused and went to the Walls.
Colonel Lundy (who kept his Chamber,) being informed that they had chosen a
new Governor, and were proceeding to choose the 20 Commissioners, sends Mr.
Seth Whittle, Parson of Balliachy, and Mr. George Hamilton to the Council, to
make all the interest they could there to have Friends, (as he called them,)
chosen to go to King James, which they earnestly endeavored. The 20 are
chosen, and ready to go out: The multitude on the Walls and at the Gates
hearing of it, are so enraged, that they threatened, That if a man of them
offered to go out on that Errand, they would treat them as betrayers of the
Town, the Protestant Religion, and King Williams Interest. Upon which none of
them durst offer to go, and so a stop was put to that dangerous Capitulation,
notwithstanding the orders of the Governor and Council. So little did the
Soldiers regard any Commands, that seemed to cross their resolutions of
defending the City.

Now the Soldiers, whom their Officers had deserted, chose their Captains, and
each Captain which of the Colonels he would serve under, as they pleased
themselves.

What the number of Men, Women, and Children, in the Town might be is
uncertain; some of the aged people, Women and Children, with some few others,
to the number of near a thousand, left us.

This Evening a Trumpet comes to the Walls from King James, to know why they
sent not out Commissioners to treat according to their Proposals. The Multitude
having put a stop to that, Colonel Whitney wrote a few lines to excuse
themselves to the King.

April the 20th. A party of King James's Horse and Foot marched down to
Culmore, and from thence down through the Barony of Inishowen, and there Robbed
a great number of people, that were waiting for Passage to Scotland. They
placed Guards on the Waterside, to stop all passage from this City to Culmore
by Land, which debarred us of intelligence from that place.

This day the Lord Strabare, came to the Walls with many Proposals, offering
honorable terms to the City, if they would surrender. Colonel Murray waited
on his Lordship without the Gate, and discoursed long with him.

His Lordship earnestly solicited him to come over to their party, offering
him a Colonels place in their Army, and a thousand pounds gratuity from the
King; But his offers being rejected, he took his leave: Colonel Murray
conveying him through our out-Guards.

This Evening a party of our Horse and Foot, marched out with a design to
attack the Enemy, but returned upon an information of some design against them
in the Town. About the same time Colonel Lundy bribed a Continel, with whom he
stole away, and going to Brook-Hall, which was then in the Enemies power, he
wrote from thence a Letter to a Lieutenant in Town, desiring him to leave the
Town, and bring off a Crop-Horse with him.

April the 21th. The Enemy placed a Demiculverin, 180 perches distant E. by N.
from the Town on the other side of the Water, and begun early this Morning to
play upon us, but did little harm, though it was then a little more frightful
to our people than afterward, when they were more familiarized to it. This day
our men sallied out both Horse and Foot toward Penny-burn Mill, the Horse
Commanded by Colonel Murray, the Foot by several Captains, viz. Captain Arch.
Sanderson, Captain Beatty, Captain Thomas Blaire, Lieutenant David Blair, etc.
Lieut. Colonel John Cairns, and Capt. Philip Dumbar, etc. being placed on the
Hill with a Reserve. Coll. Murray divides the Horse, which were about 300 in
number, in two Partys: With the first of these he charged himself, with great
Courage; the second Squadron was led on by Major Nathaniel Bull, Son to Major
Samuel Bull, of the County of Mead; (who did us very good Service, by his
Integrity to the Interest of the Garrison, and his influence on the Soldiers
to animate their Courage.) The Rear of that Squadron was brought up by Capt.
Cochran, who when his Squadron fled, advanced with a few to the Party that was
engaged, his Horse being shot under him, and himself shot in the Leg. The
Enemy divided their Horse into two Squadrons also: He that commanded the first
Party led them on with great bravery. Coll. Murray charged through that
Brigade, and had that day three Personal Encounters with their Commander, in
the last of which he killed him on the spot, whom the Enemy themselves
confessed to be Lieut. Genesis Mammau: It was also reported, that he killed his
Brother in the same Action. In the mean time the Rear of our Horse fled toward
the Walls, the Enemies Horse being hot in the pursuit of them. Our Foot that
were at the Mill had done great Execution on the Enemy, but observing the Horse
were generally fled, (except a small Party which continued with Coll. Murray)
they came down to the Strand-side, and lined the Ditches: And the Enemies Horse
that pursued ours having no other way to come back but that, our Men fired so
thick on them at their return, that very few of all that Party escaped. This
day when this dispute was begun, the Enemy in the Afternoon brought the Cannon
they had plied us with, down to the Point, opposite to our Men on the Strand,
and played over warmly at them, (though without any Execution) 'till one of our
Guns from the Walls disabled their Gun, and killed the Gunner and others. We
could have no certain account how many of the Enemy were killed, they were said
to be above 200: We lost 9 or 10, viz. Lieut. Mac Phedris, Cornet Brown, Mr.
Mackee, one Harkness, and 5 or 6 more private Soldiers; several were wounded.
We got only one Standard, but considerable spoil of Horse, Arms, Cloaks,
Saddles, Watches, Money, etc. This Prey did not a little quicken the Appetites,
and animate the Resolutions of the Soldiers in their Sallies afterterwards; the
manner whereof (to suggest that here) was usually this, That when any Officer
of note, with a few more attending him was about to go out, all that were
willing to hazard themselves in the Enterprise followed them as Volunteers.

The Persons of note said to be killed on the Enemies side, were, General
Mammau, Major Taaff, Major Wagon, Major General Pusignian, Quartermaster
Cassore, Capt. Fitzgerald.

April 23. The Enemy planted two Cannons in the lower end of Strong's Orchard,
near 80 Perches distant from the Town, on the other side the Water, over
against Ship-key-street; these threw Ball of about ten pound weight each; with
these they played so incessantly on that street, piercing the Garrets and
Walls, that some were hurt, and few durst stay above stairs. The Besieged
having made a Blind in that street to preserve the People, repay them from the
Walls in the same coin, and killed Lieut. Fitz-patrick, Lieut. Con Oneal, 2
Sergeants, some Soldiers, and (as was reported) 2 lusty Friars.

April 25. Colonel Murray, with some Horse, and a good Party of Foot, sally
out and beat the Besiegers that had got into the Ditches out of them. Some few
of our Foot had pursued too far: A Party of the Enemies Horse coming suddenly
about the end of the little Hill, forced 'em to retire back to the rest of our
Party, who observing the Enemies Horse to advance so quick toward them, took
themselves to the Ditch by the way side, and fired so briskly and continually
on them, that they were forced to flee. Our men pursue them down to
Penny-burn-mill, and pressed so hard upon them, that their Dragoons (who were
beat from the old Mill, near an English Mile up the same water that
Penny-burn-mill stands on) left their Horses, and came down to assist their
Foot and some Horse who were in hazard at Penny-burn-mill. Our Men kept them at
warm service till toward the Evening, and returned when wearied without any
loss. A party of Men that went out late to be a rereguard to our Men at the
Mill, were beat in by a party of Horse that were dispatched (with each a
Footman behind him) from the Enemies Camp, but without loss. This day Colonel
Murray, Major Nath. Bull, Capt. Obrey, Capt. John Kennedy, Capt. Arch.
Sanderson, Capt. Mich. Cunningham, Capt. Will. Beatty, and Capt. Will Moor, and
others, behaved themselves with great bravery: The Dispute at both the Mills
was very sharp, and lasted some time. What number of the Enemy was killed we
could not learn: We lost but two Men, and had 8 or 10 wounded, who recovered.

This Night Major Parker left this City, and deserted their Majesty's Service
here on this occasion. A rereguard of Foot had been left to defend our Men from
a Party of the Enemy, which we on the Walls saw coming on them. These Major
Parker was too slow and negligent in bringing off, according to his Orders,
whereby they were exposed to great danger from the Enemy. For this misbehaviour
he was threatened with a Court Martial, which he took this course to avoid.

The Enemy planted their Mortar-pieces first in Strongs Orchard, on the other
side of the water, and threw into Town some small Bombs, which did not much
hurt. Our Ammunition was put into several places, as the Church, dry Wells,
Cellars, etc.

At this time, that there might be a good understanding and harmony among the
Besieged, it was agreed to by Governor Baker, that the Conformists should have
the Cathedral-Church the one half of the Lord's day, during the whole time of
the Siege, and the Non-conformists the other half; the latter entering at 12,
had two Sermons there every Afternoon, besides two or three other Meetings in
other parts of the City: In their Assemblies there were every Lordsday
considerable Collections for the relief of the poor People, and the sick and
wounded Soldiers, who had otherwise perished for any care was taken of them: And
they had the use of the Cathedral every Thursday.

Governor Baker, together with Coll. Walker (who was also complemented with
the Title of Governor, but always understood with reference to the Stores, the
oversight whereof was (besides his Regiment) the only trust committed to him by
the Garrison) to examine the Stores, and continue the old Store-keepers in
their several places, till our Stores began to fail, and then all was put into
one Storehouse, which was carefully kept by Mr. Jo. Harvey, and his Brother
Samuel all the time of the Siege. There were persons appointed to search all
Cellars, and what Provisions they found there, (which had been plentifully laid
in by private Gentlemen and others of the Country,) they brought to the Store,
and these were the support of the Garrison.

Some of the chief Officers spoke to the N. C. Ministers, to be Chaplains to
their Regiments, as others to some of the Conformists. Colonel Walker invited
my self to be his, the generality of his Officers as well as Soldiers being
Nonconformists; yet the Nonconformist Ministers received no allowance out of
the Stores. Some of them had brought to Town a considerable stock of Provisions
of their own, which was taken to the public Storehouse, and others of them
lived on their own money. The Conformist Ministers generally were maintained by
the store for some time, and after that had 2 s. 6 d. a week paid them, while
the others had no such allowance, which had like to have been resented to a
high degree in the Garrison, if some that considered our present circumstances
had not been careful to prevent it.

About the 27th. of April, Captain Darcy (mentioned before, one that was
brought from Scotland by Captain Hamilton before the Siege, and left Prisoner
here, having fled from England where he was one of King James's party,) had a
pass given him by our Governor to go with Horse and Arms, which he accordingly
did. Lieutenant Colonel Whitney had sold him some Horses, which were said to
be none of his own: Upon which and other misdemeanors, Whitney was confined,
and afterward tried by a Council of War, and found guilty of being no friend
to this Garrison, for which he was under confinement during the time of the
Siege.

About this time, Captain Lance is chosen Colonel to Colerain Regiment, which
Parker had deserted, and Captain Monro is chosen Colonel to Whitneys's
Regiment. So that now all the Regiments had their Colonels, which continued so
during the whole time of the Siege.

Governor Bakers Regiment of Foot, consisting of 26 Companies.

Colonel Mitchelburn's, of 17 Companies.

Colonel Walker's, of 14 Companies.

Colonel Monro's, of 12 Companies.

Colonel Lance's, of 13 Companies.

Colonel Hamill's, of 15 Companies.

Colonel Croston's, of 12 Companies.

Colonel Murray's, Regiment of Horse, consisting of 8 Troops.

Besides these Men that were Regimented, there were several Volunteers in Town
who did good service, as Captain Joseph Johnston, who was very careful to have
good Padrolls kept; Captain William Crook, and Mr. David Kennedy, and many
others, who were frequently out upon Service; the first of these having his Leg
broke with a piece of a Bomb, whereof he died.

About the beginning of May, Colonel Mitchelburn was suspected by Governor
Baker and the Garrison. The Governor confined him to his Chamber, betwixt whom
there was some little scuffle when he was apprehended. He continued under the
rules of Confinement, but was never tried by a Council of War: What the grounds
of the suspicion were, is too tedious to relate, but he was afterward
nominated by Baker Governor during his sickness.

About the same time, Governor Baker (fearing lest Enemies within the Town
should work Mines in Cellars near the Walls,) took with him Mr. William Mackie,
one of the Citizens that was very active and industrious for defense of the
Town: And they two searched all Cellars near the Walls, under pretense of
examining the Provisions, but found nothing of what they feared.

Few days passed (while the Enemies Camp were coming nearer to us,) but
Colonel Murray, Captain Noble, Captain Dumbar, Captain Andr. Adams,
(afterward Major,) Captain Wilson, Captain Arch. Hamilton, Captain Beatty,
Captain Sanderson, Junior, (whose Father Captain Alexander Sanderson was very
useful in the Garrison; So were also Major Alex. Stuart, Major John Dobbins,
Cap. Char. Shaw, Cap. Sam. Wright, Cap. James Mac-Cormick:) Cap. Bashford, Cap.
Cuningham, Lieut. Dunlop, Lieut. Maghlin, or some of them, went out with small
parties, (and sometimes private Soldiers only,) and they seldom returned
without doing some execution on the Enemy, or bringing in some small prey.

Captain Noble and others, found several Letters in the Pockets of the slain,
giving them some Intelligence, particularly about the surrender of Culmore: We
were informed that Lundy as he passed by, sent a Message to them that Derrry
was surrendered: This added to the discouragement they were under, (having
little Ammunition, and 8 of the Guns being before sent up to Town by Captain
Jemmet on Lundy's orders,) is said to have inclined them to follow the Example.

May the 5th. About the Middle of that Night, the Besiegers under the Command
of Brigadeer Ramsey, came to the Windmill, and beat in our Out-Guards which
were but few, and possessed themselves of that place, and before Sunrising had
a Line drawn from the Bog to the Water; it was old Ditches which they quickly
made up.

Early on May the 6th. Governor Baker and other Officers were about detaching
10 out of every Company to attack them, but the men were impatient and run out
of their own accord, some at Bishops-gate, others at Ferry-Key-gate, their
number being thus increased, they advanced on the Enemy, who were come into the
Ditches and old Walls, and beat them from Ditch to Ditch, till they were got
into the Line they had made, where they so continually fired on them, that they
forced them to quit the Line they had drawn, and flee for it. Our men pursued
them so close, that they came to Club-Musquet with it. But their Foot and
Dragoons flee in great confusion. Ramsey endeavored to rally them, but to no
purpose: For he and several other Officers were killed on the place; our men
pursued them beyond all the Ditches to the top of the Hill, and drove Foot and
Horse all before them: They returned about 12 a Clock. The Enemy lost on the
place about 200, (many of them shot in the Face, Forehead, and Breast over
their own Line, as they were firing,) a great number also died of the wounds
they then received.)

In this action we got 4 or 5 Colors, several Drums, Firearms, some
Ammunition and good store of Spades, Shovels, and Pick-axes. Of the Enemy these
Persons of Note were killed, viz. Brigadeer Genesis Ramsay, Capt. Barnwell, Capt.
Fox, Capt. Flemming, Lieutenant Kelley, Lieutenant Welsh, Ensign Barnwell,
Ensign Kadel. And the Persons following were taken Prisoners, Lord Nettervile,
Sir Gerrard Aylmer, Lieutenant Colonel Talbot, Lieutenant Newcomen. We lost
but 3 or 4 private Men, and some wounded, particularly Lieutenant Douglass, who
afterward died.

May the 7th. Governor Baker desires the Enemy to send some private Soldiers
and an Officer to bury their dead, which they did after a very careless manner.

This week Governor Baker, with the advice of some Officers, resolves on
drawing a line cross the Windmill hill from the Bogg to the Water. They set Men
to work and soon finished it, and afterward secured it with Redoubts, the
better to defend our Men from a Cannon the Enemy planted on the other side the
Water, directly opposite to the end of the Works our Men had made there: He
also orders every Regiment to be by turns on Guard Night and Day at this new
line on the Windmill hill, but afterward the Guard was kept by Detachments out
of each, occasioned by a suspicion of an Officer on that out-guard.

About this time the 2 Captains ( Closses) left us and took Protection.

May 10. Lieutenant Mitchel went away also, (and came again with Major Genesis
Kirk into the Lough.) About the same time Mr. John Brisben a Curate left the
Town, and took Protection.

A Party of our Men about 200, under the Command of Lieutenant Coll. Blair,
were gone out, and were posted among the Ditches, doing some Execution on the
Enemy. A great Party of the Enemy were coming down on them, whom our men in the
hollow could not see, but those on the Walls seeing them, Coll. Murray rides a
long Bog street, and tho a Party of the Enemy behind a Ditch fired incessantly
at him, he went on to the place to warn them of the danger, so that they came
off safely. Capt. Rickaby was shot in the Arm.

The Besiegers soon after placed a Camp at Ballingry, and another at
Penny-burn-mill, and a third at the Orchard beyond the water. They kept the
Guards so strictly along the water on each side, that we were barred up from
all intelligence.

After the placing of these Camps, they brought their Guns to Ballyugry, and
there successively discharged them all in the dusk of the Evening: They also
ordered their Men in a long range in all their Camps, and made them all fire
round, with a design (as we supposed) to strike the greater Terror into the
Hearts of the Besieged. The Enemy were busied in bearing Faggots, and making
Forts or Trenches, and in some parts piling up these Faggots. Our Men sally
out, came to their Forts and Piles of Faggots, and burnt both them, and several
little houses the Enemy had for Quarters, with many Bridles, Sadles, etc. and
killed several both Officers and Soldiers. The Besiegers had built a Trench
near Penny-burn-mill, on which they planted some of their Guns: Our Men
resolved in the Evening, that next Morning early they would attacque that Fort,
and either bring away their Guns, or nail them up, and accordingly they went
out, about 2 or 3000 Men, but effected not their Design (which was afterward
thought might have been accomplished, if pursued.) Tho the Enemy discharged
their Guns at our Men, none were hurt, one only was shot through the leg with a
small Bullet.

About this time our Men went out, viz. Capt. Jo. Cunningham, Capt. Noble,
Capt. Arch. Sanderson, and some others. These Captain with about 100 went too
far out in the open Fields, where they seized a Fort the Enemy had made on the
Heathy-hill, and bear the Foot out of it. In the mean time a Party of the
Enemies Horse came at full Carrier betwixt our Men and the Town, took Capt.
Cunningham Prisoner, whom, after Quarter given, they perfidiously murdered.
(They gave us other instances afterward how faithless they were to their word.
Particularly, they desired one White might come over to some of his Friends,
engaging their word for his and the Boats return; but they detained both him
and the Boat, to our loss who had no other, but to their greater reproach and
dishonor.) Capt. Noble, and the rest came off being good Footmen: We lost 15
or 16 men at that time.

May 21st. being Tuesday, the Nonconformists kept a solemn Fast, and had
Sermons in two places of the City besides the Cathedral, where there were
considerable Collections made for the Poor, who begun to stand in greater need
of 'em. Soon after the Conformists also kept another.

June 4th. being Tuesday. The Enemy approach to our Works at the Windmill with
a great Body of Foot and Horse: Our Men ordered themselves so, that in each
Redoubt there were four, and in some five Reliefs, so that they were in a
Posture of firing continually. The Irish divided their Horse in 3 Parties, and
their Foot in 2. The first Party of Horse was commanded by Capt. Butler, (the
Lord Mountgarrets Son,) and consisted most of Gentlemen, (who it is said had
sworn to top our line:) They attacque our lines at the Waterside, and the
other Parties of Horse were to follow the first: The one Party of the Foot
attacques the lines betwixt the Windmill and the water, and the other (being
Granadeers) the lines at the Bogg-side, betwixt the Windmill and the Town.
Captain James and John Gladstanes, Capt. Andrew Adams, Capt. Francis Boyd,
Capt. Robert Wallace, Capt. John Maghlin, and Captain Will. Beatty, with their
Men, had taken their ground next the water. The first Party of Horse charged
furiously, having Faggots of wood carried before them; They came on with a
huzza, seconded with a huge shout from the Irish Camp: They came by the end of
the line (it being low Water) notwithstanding our firing constantly on them.
Our Men, viz. Capt. James Gladstanes, Capt. John Gladstanes, with others next
to them, left their Redoubts, and took the Strand with their Muskets, Pikes
and Scythes, and fell on them with that vigor, that soon spoiled the Tune of
their Huzza's, for few of that Party escaped: Many of them were driven into the
River, and Capt. Butler himself taken Prisoner by Capt. John Gladstanes. The
rest of the Horse seeing the first Party so warmly received, had no great
stomach to come on. In the mean time the Foot (who had also Faggots of wood
carried before them) attacque the line betwixt the Windmill and the Water: They
were as warmly received as the Horse: And whereas they imagined our Men would
fire all together, finding that they fired successively, they soon wheeled
about, and drew off; only a few came furiously to the back of our Works, and
were either killed or haled over by the hair of their heads. In the mean time
the other Party of Foot being Granadeers, attacque our Forts by the Bogg-side,
and came on fiercely, but were as vigorously repuls't by our Men there. Coll.
Monro did there acquit himself very well; Cap. Mich. Cunningham (one of the
Citizens that had been always very active and zealous for the Defense of the
Town) was at the Bogg-side with his Company, kept our Men to their Posts, and
opposed the Granadeers with great Courage. He narrowly escaped with his Life, a
Cannon Bullet tearing up the ground about him, and he had a small Bullet cut
out of his Back; Lieutenant James Ker, Lieutenant Josias Abernethy, and
Lieutenant Clerk, did good Service, the last being wounded. Mr. Tho. Maxwell
was killed about the same time on the Walls. This day Governor Baker showed
both his Conduct and Courage in ordering and bringing out frequent Reliefs,
where the greatest danger appeared. Our Women also did good Service, carrying
Ammunition, Match, Bread and Drink to our Men; and assisted to very good
purpose at the Bogg-side, in beating off the Granadeers with stones, who came
so near to our lines. The Enemy lost a considerable number of Men. Most of
their Officers were either killed or taken Prisoners. When they retreated, they
carried away on their backs many of their Dead and mortally wounded with them,
(as was supposed) to shelter themselves the better from the storm of our shot.
Those of Note killed on the Enemies side, were Lieutenant Coll. Farrell, two
French Captains, Capt. Graham, Lieutenant Bourk, Quartermaster Kelly, Adjutant
Fahoy, Ensign Norris, Ensign Arthur. The Prisoners were Capt. Butler, Son to
the Lord Mountgarret, Capt. Macdonel, Cornet Mac-danaghy, Capt. Watson, a
French Lieutenant, Lieutenant Eustace, Serjant Peggot. We lost 5 or 6 private
men, and one Captain Maxwell had his Arm broke with a Cannon Bullet, whereof he
died within three weeks after. He had that Day behaved himself with great
courage. And one Tho. Gow had all the Flesh shot off the calfe of his Leg by a
Cannon Bullet; but the bone not being broken, he recovered. There were three of
our Colonels out that day, Murray, Monro, and Hamil; The last got a hurt on
the cheek with a small Bullet.

The next Day one Mr. Edmund Stones in time of a Parley went to a little Well
beyond the Bogg, having leave from the Irish first. But a French Officer came,
and put-his own hand to Mr. Stones's Cartridg-box, with the other treacherously
pulled out his Sword to have killed him; but he starting back the Sword only
pierced his side, and the wound proved not mortal: So meanly base were some of
our Enemies.

From the 10th of May till near the end of the Siege, we had many little
Parlies with the Enemy; sometimes to admit Doctors to see the wounded
Prisoners, the Lord Nettervile and Talbot; sometimes to admit Provisions to
them, which we granted them. Sometimes that we might have leave with safety to
send Messengers to the Ships, or abroad for intelligence, but that we could not
obtain.

Captain Cole had been among the Irish Army for near a month together at the
beginning of the Siege, and about the 10th or 12th of May came into Town again.
Governor Baker being suspicious of his being an Agent for the Enemy, ordered
him to be confined, till he was satisfied he had no ill design against the
City, but had secretly made his Escape from the Enemy, who had detained him
Prisoner.

About the end of May, most of the Officers having been for some time
suspicious of Governor Walker, drew up several Articles against him, some of
which were to the effect following, according to the Account I had of them from
the Memories of some of the Officers then present.

One was, That he and others about the 18th of April had a Secret Caball,
wherein they agreed, and privately sent a Messenger to K. James, with Proposals
about getting the Town to be delivered up.

Another was, That the said Person being on his return confined on suspicion of
this, was taken out privately by Mr. Walkers means, and sent over the Walls: He
went to Culmore, which was soon after Surrendered.

Another was, That on several days, especially about the latter end of April,
Mr. Walker held a Consultation with some others in the Town, while our Men were
out against the Enemy, to shut the Gates upon them, to Facilitate a Surrender.

Another was, For Selling or Embezling the Stores.

Another was, That he offered to betray the Town for 500 l in hand, and 700 l.
a Year, which offer was approved by K. J. and the Money promised.

Another was, For abusing Officers that went to the Stores.

Others of them relating to Personal Vices, I shall not mention.

But for a more particular and full account of these Matters, I refer to the
Articles themselves, which were lodged in Colonel Hamills Hands.

There were several Persons had examined Witnesses, and undertook to prove
these Articles; And Colonel Hamill, Colonel Murray, Colonel Crofton, and
Colonel Monro, Lieutenant Colonel Fortescue, Captain Noble, Captain Dumbarr,
and above a Hundred Officers more, Subscribed a Resolution to Prosecute him
upon these Articles, in order to the removing him from all Trust either in the
Stores, or in the Army. This occasioned a Motion which Governor Baker readily
assented to, viz. That all the Government of the Stores, as well as the
Garrison should be managed by a Council of 14, of which he was to be President,
and nothing be done but by them. But the Meetings of this Council were soon
after, through the Difficulty of the Seige, especially the danger of the Bombs,
much interrupted, though the Authority of it continued till the end of the
Siege. This being granted them, Governor Baker earnestly persuaded, and at
last prevailed with them to desist at that time from the Prosecution of the
forementioned Articles. Yet these Articles were revived, and increased to the
number of 14, soon after Governor Bakers Death. Yet all this did not
sufficiently caution Mr. Walker from what the Garrison looked on, as an
intruding himself into that part of the Government that was never intended him:
For after Governor Bakers Death, he called a Court Martial, and appointed
Lieutenant-Collonel Campbell to be President of it. The Officers hearing that
the Court was set, came in, and publicly discharged them from Sitting any
longer, declaring that he had no power that appointed them, and accordingly
they were presently Dissolved.

There are but two things relating to the Articles forementioned I would take
notice of. Those who most suspected the design mentioned in the third Article
to be real, privately agreed in all their Sallies, afterward to keep a good
Reserve in the Town for the prevention of it, the Care whereof was entrusted by
turns to Lieutenant Colonel Cairns and Captain James Gladstanes, (two
Gentlemen that showed great Fidelity and Prudence in the Council, as well as
Courage in several Sallies for the Defense of the City.) And the 4th Article
occasioned an Order of Council that Mr. Walkers Note should not be accepted by
the Keepers, till signed by the Governor or Major Adams.

June 5th. The Besiegers had thrown a great many small Bombs before this, but
they began about this time with great ones of 273 l. weight, each of them being
weighed after 17 l. of powder had been taken out of it. Some of these (both
great and small) did not break, having lost their Fire: Those which they threw
in the Night, did not much hurt to people that were able to go to the Walls;
Because they were easily seen and shunned: But several that were Sick were
killed in their Houses. We were in greater hazard by those thrown in the Day,
it being more difficult to see them: The dread of them forced our people to lie
about the Walls all Night, and to go to the places remotest from Houses, some
out of Ferry-key gate, some to the Ravelin, and others to the Wind-mill-hill;
And the Cold which the Men, especially the Women and Children contracted
hereby, added to their want of Rest and Food, occasioned Diseases in the
Garrison, as Fevers, Flux, etc. of which great Numbers died. The Bombs by
throwing down some Houses, furnished us with Fuel, which we then stood in great
need of: One of these Bombs fell into the House of Captain James Boyd, and
broke down the side of it, killing himself; But several Officers who were then
at Dinner, escaped the Danger, tho it fell near the Room where they Dined.
Another Bomb killed Mr. Alexander Lindsay the Surgeon, who was very useful
to the Sick and Wounded Soldiers. And one Major Breme was killed with a
Canon-Ball: Another Bomb killed Mr. Henry Thompson a Burgess of this City, who
showed great Zeal for the Defense of it: Another killed 14 Men, and Fired one
or two Barrels of Powder in a back House. Another killed 7, another killed 3 of
our Men.

June 7th. There came 3 Ships up to Culmore, and fired at the Castle several
days, and one of them running a ground, or being left by the Tide, was much
endangered by the Enemies Canon. The Enemy called to us from their Lines, to
send down Carpenters to mend her: But we soon had the Satisfaction of seeing
her get off again.

About this time Governor Baker was a little indisposed, and kept his Chamber.

June 13th. Major General Kirk appears with a Fleet in the Lough below Culmore,
which gave us at the present the joyful Prospect, not only of the Siege being
soon raised, but of being furnished with Provisions, which then grew very
scarce, as appears by the Allowance our Men then had from the Stores. They were
already Reduced to such Straits, that where they could find a Horse a Grazing
near the Windmil, they would kill and eat him: But when we saw them lie in the
Lough without any Attempt to come up, it cast a cold damp on our too confident
hopes, and sunk us as low as we were raised at the first sight of them.

Upon the appearing of the Ships, the Enemy seemed to be in a mighty
Consternation: We observed a great Motion in their Camp of pulling down Tents,
(as we heard,) in order to decamping; And many of their common Soldiers (as the
Country people informed us) changed their red Coats, and ran away. But the
Terror was soon over, when they saw them make no great Attempt to come up, tho
they had both, Wind and Tide to assist them. And the Enemy quickly began to
draw down their Cannon, and soon after to raise Batteries at Charlesfort, where
they planted some of their Guns to oppose the Ships coming up to our Relief:
And some time after they begun to make a Boom cross the River from that Fort to
Brook-Hall, directly opposite to it. This first Boom was made of Oak-Beams,
chained together with Iron and great Cables twisted about them: For a week
together we saw them making some Preparations for this Boom cross the River, as
drawing of Timber, etc. We afterward saw several Boats on the Water busied
about it, but (as the Country people since informed us,) it was not entirely
finished till about a fortnight after the Ships appeared in the Lough. But this
Boom when finished, was useless to their design, because it did not Float, and
it was broke by the great Tides: After this they made another of Fir-Beams,
chained as the other was. This Floated, and served their purpose better; But
this latter Boom, or what was lest of it, the Mountjoy of Derry broke.

June 16th. Coll. Walker had proposed to agree with the Enemy to take 500 l.
ransom for Lieut. Coll. Talbot. A sort of Council was held in Gov. Baker's
Chamber, wherein this was carried; but Gov. Baker perceiving it to be ill
resented in the Garrison, declined it: But Coll. Walker urged it with some
violence and threats against those that opposed it; and ordered the Bier that
should carry him away to be this day brought to his Lodging; at which the
multitude were so enraged, that Mr. Walker should take so much on him, that
they took the Bier and made a fire of it in the Main-guard. They searched for
Mr. Walker, who had fled for sanctuary to Baker's Chamber in the Bishop's
House: Not finding him immediately, they took all the Prisoners that were able
to walk from their several Lodgings, and carried them to Gaol: They had searched
Mr. Walker's own Lodging, whence they took the Beer, Mum, and Butter, which
they found to the Store: And being informed that Mr. Walker was in the
Bishops-house, they pursued him, some threatening to shoot him, others to send
him to the Gaol. Governor Baker, to whom they paid a great deference, came
out (though indisposed) to pacify them, engaged there should be no ransom
taken for the Prisoners, entreated them for his sake to pass by what Mr. Walker
had done, and suffer the Prisoners to go to their own Lodgings again; all which
they (with some difficulty) consented to, at Governor Baker's entreaty. What
construction the multitude put on this Practice of Mr. Walker's, I think not
fit to mention.

We afterward offered to release Lieut. Coll. Talbot, on Condition they would
permit a Messenger to go and return from the Ships; but this would not be
granted, and soon after Talbot died, and put an end to this Dispute.

About this time the Fever, Flux, and other Distempers grew rife, and a great
mortality spread it self through the Garrison, as well as the Inhabitants,
insomuch as it was observed, that 15 Captains or Lieutenants died in one day:
And the Garrison being in great strait for want of Provisions, some of the
Citizens and others concerned for the public good, met, called the Captain of
the Gunners, Alexander Watson, and ordered the Gunners (who for the most part
lived in Town) to make diligent search for Provisions, which they did to good
purpose; for digging up Cellars and other places, they got much Provision under
the ground, which some that went away, and others during the Siege had hid: And
many that saw how sincerely concerned they were for the safety of the place,
brought forth their Provisions of their own accord. By this means the Garrison
was furnished with Bread (though the allowance was little) 'till the end of the
Siege.

Our Iron-bullet was much spent, but this defect was supplied with Lead-bullets
made with pieces of Brick in the middle of them. Will. Brown, Adjutant to
Governor Baker's Regiment, was industrious and dexterous in this piece of
Service.

There was Oats, Shilling, and Malt in Town, which could not be used for want
of Mills; therefore Capt. Gregory and some other Work men took care to have a
Horsemill built, as also to have Carriages made for the Guns, some of which
were so out of order, that sometimes we could not use them when we wanted them

About this time, since the Enemy had so barred us up from getting any
Messenger sent to the Ships for Intelligence, the Besieged built a Boat (none
being here) to go down by Water; Lieut. Crookshanks took care of this, and some
of our men in the night attempted to go down in it, but they were beat back by
the Enemies shot from each side of the Water.

June 17. or thereabouts, Gover. Baker's Distemper increases, and he becomes
dangerously ill; and Coll. Mitchelburn was deputed by Baker Governor during
his Sickness.

June 18. Coll. Murray, Capt. Noble, Capt. Dumbar, Capt. Homes, two
Lieutenants, and about 20 more went up the Water in the Night in our New Boat;
'twas given out to rob the Fish-houses in the Isse, but the real Design was to
land a Messenger or two in a Wood about 4 Miles up the River, to send to
Inniskillin: But the Enemy soon took the Alarm, and as the Boat passed by Evans
Wood, they fired a great Gun planted there at her, which narrowly missed her.
As our Men went further up, the Enemy fired at them on both sides the shore:
But when they came up to Dunnelong Wood, where they designed to land their 2
Messengers, the Boys were so terrified that they durst not venture ashore; and
it being now early in the Morning, our Men discovered two large Boats behind
them, which the Enemy had set out and manned with Dragoons to cut off their
return: Our Men made toward them, and soon came to a very sharp engagement;
for after their shot being spent on both sides, one of the Enemies Boats came up
close to theirs, thinking to have boarded them; but as it happily fell out,
they Caught a Tartar; for our Men were as quickly in upon them, beat back some
of them into the Water, and killed 3 or 4 others, besides a Lieutenant in the
Enemy's Boat, whereupon the rest threw down their Arms and called for quarter.
We took 13 Prisoners in this Boat: The Enemy in the other Boat seeing this ill
success of their Friends, made off with what haste they could. We carried our
Prisoners and some small Prize toward the City, the Enemy still firing at us
from the shore; yet in all this Adventure not one of our Men was hurt, (except
Coll. Murray, who received some shots in his Headpiece that bruised his Head,
and for a while indisposed him for service) but one of the Prisoners that sat
among them was wounded by a shot from the shore. So remarkable was the Guard of
Divine Providence about us. Our Men being encouraged by this Success, landed
their Prisoners near the City, delivered them to the Guards, and returned to
attacque a Party of the Enemy who were at that time drawing off one of their
Guns; but the Enemy perceiving the resolute approach of our Men, left her and
fled: Our Men pursued them to the top of the Hill, 'till they perceived another
strong Party marching under covert of the Hill, to get betwixt them and their
Boats, upon which they retreated, and had scarce time to recover her before the
Enemy came up.

About the 20th. of June, Conrad de. Rosen, Marshall General of K. James's
Forces, arrived at the Enemies Camp, and soon after raised several Batteries in
the Night, and a Line on the other side of the Bogg opposite to the Windmill,
and brought their Camp and Trenches near to us, and run a Line through the
Orchard, opposite to Butchers-gate, within some few Perches of it, and ordered
the Mortar-pieces to be taken from the Orchard on the other side the Water, and
placed on the side of the Hill above the Bogg, on the West Side of the Town,
and planted their battering Guns (which threw a Ball of 20 or 21 Pounds weight)
at a convenient distance before the Butchers-gate: They plied us hard both with
their Bombs and Battering-Guns: The Bombs they threw some in the Night, and
some in the day, at uncertain hours, 'till the 21st. of July, after which time
they threw no more. Of the number of the Bombs, and the time of their throwing,
you will find an account annexed. And here began the close Siege.

We used all endeavors to get Intelligence from the Ships, but could have
none. We made many signs from the Steeple, both by Canon-shot and drawing in
our Flagg, to represent our distressed condition to them. But June 25. one
Roch, a Messenger, came to Town from Major General Kirk; when he came to the
Waterside, having no expectation of a Boat, he swam over, and gave us an
account of the Ships, Men, Provisions and Arms that were there for our Relief;
adding, that 'twas desired if he got safe to Town, to give them in the Ships
notice of it by 4 Guns from the Steeple, which was accordingly done. There came
another Messenger along with him, one Cromy; but because he could not swim, he
lay hid a day or two in the Bushes, expecting a Boat to be sent for him in the
Night, as the other had promised: But the Enemies Guards found him, and being
in hazard of his Life, they made him Promise to give the Besieged a
discouraging Account, and then hung out a Flag for a Parley, which was granted,
and some were sent over the Water to discourse him: He (being sworn to do so)
repeated to them the Words that had been put into his Mouth; but when Lieut.
Coll. Blair enquired why he gave a different Account from what Roch had done,
he replied, He was in the Enemy's Camp, Roch within the Walls of Derry. Roch
tried to go to Major General Kirk again, but was forced to come back because of
the Enemies Guards on the Waterside.

This extremely troubled us, that no Messenger could get down to give the Major
General an Account of our distressed condition. There came one Mac Gimpsy to
Coll. Murray, and voluntarily offered to swim down the Water with Intelligence.
Coll. Murray acquaints the Deputy Governor Mitchelburn with it; but he
delaying, he resolved to send him down, promised a Reward, and wrote by him a
Letter signed by himself, his Lieutenant Collo. Cairns, and Captain Gladstanes,
representing the great extremity they were reduced to, and with all imaginable
earnestness importuning speedy Relief.

This Letter was close tied in a little Bladder, in which were put 2 Musket
Bullets, that if the Enemy should take him, he might break the little string
wherewith 'twas tied about his Neck, and so let it fink in the Water. Whether
this Messenger was taken alive by the Enemy, or was killed by running himself
against the Boom (as some reported) is uncertain; But within a Day or two they
hung up a Man on a Gallows in the view of the City on the other side the water,
and called over to us to acquaint us it was our Messenger.

The Enemy work every Night to bring their Trenches near the Walls for Mineing.
Our Men were diligent to counter-line them, being incited to it every Night by
Governor Mitchelburn. These Works were carried on by the care of Capt.
Schambroon, and the indefatigable Pains and Charges of Capt. Michael Cuningham,
and Mr. Will. Mackee, who both paid some of the Soldiers for working out of
their own Pockets, and gave many of those that wrought Meat at their own
Houses: Hereby the Enemy were kept from getting to the near side of the Bogg,
without which they could Draw no Mines: There was besides a Blind raised by the
Persons forementioned before the Butchers-gate, to defend it from the Enemies
battering Guns, which had already done some hurt to it. A Collection, by way of
Free-offering, was made among the Inhabitants to carry on this work.

June the 28th. The Lord Clancarty with his Regiment comes to the Besiegers
Camp, and that Night attackt our Outworks at the Butchers-gate, and few of our
men being out at that time, they soon possessed themselves of them. In the mean
time, they were throwing their Bombs, one of them coming short of the Walls,
fell among their own men, which discovered them on their March toward the said
Works: Upon this, the few men that were out retired within the Gate. The Enemy
was led on by their Lieutenant Colonel Skeleton, who had some detachments with
him besides Clancarties Regiment: One on Horseback comes close to the Gate, and
called for Fire to burn it. Captain Noble, and Dumbar sally out with our men,
some at Bishops-gate, and some at Butchers-gate, to the number of 60 or 80 at
first, more soon followed. The sallyers attack them so briskly, being well
assisted from the Walls by great and small shot, that they were forced to quit
our Works, and run to their own Lines, to their great dishonor as well as
loss. The number of those killed on the place was about 30, how many were
wounded, and afterward died, we could not tell. Some Officers were killed,
viz. A French Lieutenant Colonel, Captain Obrian, a French Captain, an English
Captain, an English Lieutenant, Captain Macka^rtie, Corporal Mac-Guire, and a
private So^ldier, were taken Prisoners.

At this time Governor Baker died, justly lamented by the Garrison, in whose
affections his prudent and resolute Conduct had given him a great Interest.
After Governor Bakers death, there were several meetings appointed for the
Election of a Governor, but continual action prevented them: However Colonel
Mitchelburn, who had been Deputy Governor during Bakers sickness, continued to
act as Governor, tho without any confirmation from the Council.

June the 30th. Conrad de Rosen, Marshal General of King James's Forces, (who
was said to swear by the Belly of God, that he would demolish our Town, and
bury us in its Ashes,) sent in this following Letter to the Governor and
Officers.

Conrad de Rozen, Marshal General of all his Majesty's Forces,
DEclares by these presents, to the Commanders, Officers, Soldiers, and
Inhabitants of the City of Londonderry, that in case they do not betwixt this
and Monday next, at six of the Clock in the Afternoon, being the first of July,
in the year of our Lord, 1689. agree to surrender the said place of
Londonderry unto the King, upon such Conditions as may be granted them,
according to the Instructions and Power, Lieutenant General Hamilton formerly
received from his Majesty, that he will forthwith issue out his Orders from the
Barrony of Innishowen, and the Seacoasts round about as far as Charlemont, for
the gathering together of those of their Faction, whether protected or not, and
cause them immediately to be brought to the Walls of Londonderry, where it
shall be lawful for those in the same, (in case they have any pity of them,) to
open the Gates and receive them into the City, otherwise they will be forced to
see their Friends and nearest Relations, all starved for want of Food, he
having resolved not to leave any of them at home, nor any thing to maintain
them. He further declares, that in case they refuse to submit, he will
forthwith cause all the said Country to be immediately destroyed, that if any
succor should be hereafter sent them from England, they may perish with them
for want of Sustenance; besides which, he has a very considerable Army, as
well for the opposing of them, in all places that shall be judged necessary, as
for the protection of all the rest of his Majesty's dutiful Subjects, whose
goods and Chattels he promises to secure, destroying all the rest that cannot
conveniently be brought into such places as he shall judge fit to be preserved,
and burning the Houses and Mills, not only of those that are in actual
Rebellion, but also of their Friends and adherents, that no hopes of escaping
may be left for any man, beginning this very day to send his necessary Orders
to all Governors, and other Commanders of his Majesty's Forces, at Colerain,
Antrim, Carrickfergus, Belfast, Dungannon, Charlemount, Belturbet, Sligo, and
to Colonel Sarsfield, commanding a flying Army beyond Bellishanny; Colonel
Sutherland, commanding another toward Inniskillin; and the Duke of Berwick,
another on the Finwater; to cause all the Men, Women and Children, who are any
wise related to those in Londonderry, or any where else, in open Rebellion, to
be forthwith brought to this place, without hopes of withdrawing further into
the Kingdom. Moreover he declares, that in case before the said Monday, the
first day of July, in the year of our Lord 1689. be expired, they do not send
us Hostages, and other Deputies with a full and sufficient power to treat with
us for the surrender of the said City of Londonderry, on reasonable
conditions; they shall not after that time be admitted to any Treaty
whatsoever, and the Army which shall continue the Siege, and will with the
assistance of God soon reduce it, shall have order to give no Quarters, or
spare either Age or Sex in case it is taken by force. But if they return to the
obedience due to their natural Prince, he promises them, that the Conditions
granted to them in his Malesties name, shall be inviolably observed by all his
Majesty's Subjects, and that he himself will have a care to protect them on all
occasions, even to take their part, if any injury contrary to agreement should
be done them, making himself responsible for the performance of the Conditions
on which they shall agree to surrender the said place of Londonderry to the
King.

Given under my hand this 30th. day of June, in the year of our Lord, 1689. Le
Marshal de Rosen. Par Monseigneur, Fetart.


Lieutenant General Hamilton, had also a little before this Letter, sent into
Town the following Proposals.

Lientenant General Hamiltons Proposals.
1. That Colonel O-Neal, has a power to discourse with the Governony of Derry,
from General Hamilton, as appears by his sending this.

2. That the General has full power does appear by his Commission.

3. That General Rosen, has no power from the King to intermeddle with what
Lientenant General Hamilton does as to the Siege, being only sent to oppose the
English Succors and that all Conditions and Parlies are left to the said
Lieutenant General Familton, that as to what Articles shall be agreed on, they
may see by the Kings Warrant he has full power to confirm them.
Notwithstanding, if they do not think this sufficient, he will give what other
reasonable security they can demand. As to the English Landing, such as had
Commissions from the Triace of Orange need not be apprehensive, since it will
be the Kings interest to take as much care of his Pretestant Subjects as of any
other, he making no distinction of Religion.

4. As to what concerns the Inniskilling people, they shall have the same terms
as those of Derry on their submission, the King being willing to show mercy to
all his Subjects, and quiet his Kingdoms.

5. That the Lieutenant General, desires no better than having it communicated
to all the Garrison, he being willing to employ such as will freely swear to
serve his Majesty faithfully, and all such as have a desire to live in Town
shall have Protection, and free liberty of Goods and Religion.

As to the last point, such as have a mind to return to their Homes, shall have
a necessary Guard with them to their respective Habitations, and Victuals to
supply them, where they shall be restored to all they possessed formerly, not
only by the Sheriffs and Justices of the Peace, but also by Governors and
Officers of the Army, who from time to time will do them right, and give them
reprizals of Cattle from such as have taken them to the Mountains

At the Camp at Derry June 27th. 1689. Rich. Hamilton.


Lest these Proposals should be kept up from the Garrison, (they weakly
imagining the Soldiers more inclinable to comply, than the Governor or
Officers,) they threw them into us in a dead Bomb, the better to disperse them.

These Proposals not being accepted, the French General issues out his Orders,
as he had threatened in his Letter, and drove in all the Protestants for near 10
miles round, protected as well as unprotected, Men, Women, and Children, the 2
d. of July. Many tender people, and some Women with Child, died by the rude and
barbarous usage they met with on the Road, (being most stripped and guarded in
dirty Pounds and rotten Houses, etc.) When they first appeared, we took them
for a body of the Enemy, and the Guns were discharged at them, but the shot
(being directed by an unerring hand,) touched none of our Friends, but as we
afterward heard, killed some of those merciless Soldiers that were pushing
them on. But it was dismal to us to hear their cries, when we perceived who
they were, and saw the Fnemy driving them with their drawn Swords down to the
Walls: Our men resolved to put them without our Lines at the Windmill, and in
the Night many of them were brought within our Lines; It moved our compassion
the more, when these poor people so earnestly entreated us, not to surrender
out of pity to them, adding, that they knew they would save neither us nor them
alive after it. This put the Governor and Officers on making the following
Experiment: They immediately ordered a Gallows to be Erected on the Bastion
next the Camp, on which they threaten to hang all the Prisoners (now put into
Gaol) if these people have not leave to go to their several Habitations.
Lieutenant Colonel Campbell, and Captain Jenny a Clergyman (two Gentlemen that
were very Faithful and Active in the Garrison) are sent to remind them of
preparing for death: Upon which they writ this following Letter, and have leave
to send a Messenger to carry it, and bring back an Answer.

My Lord,
UPon the hard dealing the Protected (as well as other Protestants) have met
withal, in being sent under the Walls, you have so Incensed the Governors and
others of this Garrison, that we are all Condemned by Count-Martial to dye to
Morrow, undess these poor People be withdrawn: We have made Application to
Marshal General de Rosen, but having received no Answer, we make it our request
to you, (as knowing you are a person that does not delight in shedding innocent
Blood) that you will represent our Condition to the Mares^bal General; the
Lives of 20 Prisoners lie at Stake, and therefore require your Diligence and
Care. We are all willing to dye (with our Swords in our Hands) for his Majesty,
but to suffer like Malefactors is hard: Nor can we lay our Blood to the Charge
of the Garrison, the Governors and the rest having used and treated us with
all Civility imaginable. We remain,

Your most Dutiful and Dying Friends, Nettervile, E. Butler, G. Aylmor, Mac
Donall, in the Name of all the rest.
To Lieutenant General Hamilton.




The Lieutenant General returns to them this following Answer.

Gent.
IN Answer to yours, what these poor people are like to suffer, they may thank
themselves for, being their own fault; which they in Town may prevent by
accepting the Conditions have been offered them; And if you suffer in this, it
cannot be helped, but shall be Revenged on many Thousand of these people, (as
well Innocent, as others) within or without the City.

Ric. Hamilton.


But notwithstanding this Answer, we supposed the regard they had to their
Imprisoned Friends prevailed with them: For the poor people had liberty to
return to their Dwellings on the third of July, and many of our weak people,
and Women got away among them, tho they sent many back knowing them by their
Color: We got some able Men among them, which were driven in, who stayed with
us to the end of the Siege. The Enemy soon saw their Error in this Treatment of
the poor People: The Garrison had here a convincing Instance before their Eyes,
how little Trust there was to be reposed in their Promises: For many of these
people had Protections under the Kings or Lieutenant Generals own hands: And
this could not fail of making them obstinate against all Proposals of
Surrendering, while it was possible to hold out. The people being sent away, the
Gallows was taken down, and the Prisoners sent to their several Lodgings: About
this time, Mr. Andrew Robinson left us, but the Enemy stripped and sent him back,
because of some imprudent Expressions.

Capt. Beatty also went away, and took Protection, and lived at Mony-more. But
the reason of it was, because he had a Violent Flux, which rendered him useless
to the Garrison, and he went to try if he could recover his Health: For he had
been at all the Encounters and Skirmishes with the Enemy before, and ever
behaved himself with great Integrity and Valor.

About the 6th or 7th of July, we observed few Men about their Camps: Governor
Mitchelburn by Advice draws out the Body of our Men beyond our Lines at the
Windmill, that we might know what Body of Men would appear to oppose them:
Some of our Men go down to the old Ditches, and fire at theirs in their Lines.
The Enemy fired at them, Colonel Barker with about a dozen Horse came to the
Strand, and stood at a distance: Few of their Foot, not above two Companies
appear Marching down to the rest that were in the Lines: But it growing dark,
our Men by mistaking the word of Command, came within our own Lines again in
some Confusion: Colonel Barker received a Shot in his Hand, which put him into
an high Fever, whereof he was reported to have dyed.

About this time, we heard a loud Huzza in all the Camps of the Enemy round the
City, which when we inquired the reason of, they told us it was for joy of
Inniskillin being taken.

July the 11th. The Enemy calls for a Parley, and sends one to know if we would
Treat with them for Surrendering the City. We considered most of the Ships were
gone, we knew not whither, Provisions grew extreamy scarce; and therefore to
gain time, it was thought advisable to agree to it: They desired that if we
agree to Treat, there may be 6 Commissioners chosen on each side, that we send
the Names of the 6 we would choose, and the Terms we would demand with some
person the next day being the 12th, and they would send the Names of their ^
the same day, that they might have time to consider our Terms. And Saturday 13
was appointed the day of Treaty: All which was agreed to.

The Names of the Commissioners, and the Terms, you will find in the Commission
and Articles annexed in the end.

These Articles were sent to the Enemy, with the Names of the Commissioners for
the City, on the 12th of July, and on the 13th, the 6 Commissioners went out,
being empowr'd to Treat with the Enemy.

About their Commission, there was great Debate: Some of the Council of
fourteen, would have had the Commission run in their Name; because they had the
power: Mitchelburn and Walker laid some claim to it (though Mr. Walker had only
his first Post, and Mitchelburn was only deputed Governor by Baker during his
Sickness; but never confirmed Governor by a Council.) The Colonels and other
Officers would have had it run in theirs; because the Interest was chiefly
theirs. But at last the Name of Governors in General, without any particular
Application of it, was (tho not without great Opposition) thought fit to be
used, for this reason, that the Enemy might not look upon us as a Confused
multitude without any Government.

July 13th. Our Commissioners went out to the Enemies Camp, and had a long
Debate till Night with the Commissioners on their side. The Enemy consented to
all things material demanded in the foresaid Articles, except 3. viz. 1. The
time for Surrendering: They would grant no longer time than till Monday the 15
at 12 a Clock. 2. The Securing of Hostages, they would allow they should be
kept in Derry; but not put into the Ships that Major Genesis Kirk brought. 3. The
manner of Marching out: They would allow no Arms to our Soldiers, but only to
the Officers and Gentlemen in Town. Our Commissioners returned, and with great
Difficulty obtained time till next day at 12 a Clock to return an Answer.

That Night, after the return of the Commissioners, there was a Council, where
the Commissioners gave an Account of their Negotiation that day, and a Council
was appointed at 8 a Clock the next. Morning, to consider what Answer they
should return.

While our Commissioners were out on the Treaty, Colonel Walker received a
Letter from Lieutenant David Mitchell out of the Ships by a little Boy, and
Transcribed it with some Additions of his own: For whereas the Letter mentioned
Major General Kirks having sent some to Encamp at Inch, he wrote it 4000 Horse,
and 9000 Foot; This humor was the more unaccountable, because upon the return
of the Commissioners, he earnestly urged a compliance with the Enemies demands,
for Surrendering the Town the next day: And therefore when the Contents of his
Letter from Lieutenant Mitchel were Objected to him as a strong Argument
against Surrendering, especially the Numbers that were Landed, he confess't
that part of the Letter to have been framed by himself: Which indiscretion,
joined with his ill Advice, had like to have proved of as Dangerous Consequence
to himself, as the Advice had been to the Garrison, if they had complied with
it.

July 14th. The Council met, and had some debate about the Answer to be
returned: And the following Answer was resolved upon (not without renewed
Opposition from Colonel Walker,) That unless the Enemy would give us time till
the 26th of July, and secure the Hostages in the Ships, we would not Surrender:
And for the manner of Marching out, that was left to the Commissioners to
Debate. The Commissioners went out, and delivered this Answer: But the Enemy
refusing absolutely to grant these Terms, the Treaty was ended. So evidently
did that gracious God (who had Determined our Deliverance, and to whose
all-comprehending Eye that particular Season of it that would most Illustrate
his own Glory was obvious) infatuate the Councils, and harden the Hearts of our
Enemies: Had they accepted the Proposals, the City had been unavoidably
Surrendered; And we could not have held out 3 or 4 days longer than the time we
desired.

July the 16th. About 10 a Clock, a small Party of the Enemy suddenly Attack't
our works without Butchers Gate (none of our Men being out) and soon possessed
themselves of them; But from the Walls they were warmly Repuls't, and beat off
again. Our Men beat them with Stones out of the old Walls. Some few were
killed, and one taken Prisoner in this Action.

Two Regiments of the Enemy Marched down from their Camp in order, toward the
works on the Windmill-hill. Our Men go out cheerfully to the Works in
considerable Numbers, encouraged thereto by Governor Mitchelburn The Enemy
when they came to the middle of the Hill stopped, and wheeled about, and Marched
back again up the other side of the Park. Our Men raised an Huzza from one end
of the Line to the other, waving their Hats to them to come down, but they
Marched off.

This day Colonel Murray, and about 12 more with him, went down to Flank the
Enemies Trench before Butchers Gate, and continued firing till their Ammunition
was spent; One of his Men was killed, viz. James Murray, and himself shot
through both the Thighs up near his Body, which proved so dangerous to him,
that he did not fully recover of it till near November. A few days after he was
wounded, there fell out a sad Accident in his Chamber. Lieutenant Ross came
there, to search as he pretended for some of Sir Arthur. Rawden's Saddles, etc.
His unexpected rudeness, occasioned some heat betwixt him, and one of Coll.
Murrays Regiment, and the Lieutenant, striking several times at him with his
Sword, the other took up a Carbine and shot him dead.

The Enemy had played very smartly at the Town and Gate with their battering
Guns, and about this time, they took them away in the Night down to Brook-Hall,
where the Boom was, and planted them there.

There was no Action of Note from this time to the 25th of July: The Enemy had
several Cows feeding behind their Lines very near us; Our Men resolve they will
try to get so welcome a prey into their own Hands, and accordingly July 25th.
early in the Morning they go out at Shipkey, Bishops and Butchers Gates,
Surpised Sir John Fitzgerald's Regiment who were in those Lines, made havoc
of them, beat them from their Trenches, killed Lieutenant Colonel Fitzgerald;
and Captain Franc Wilson took Captain Nugent Prisoner. A Party of the Enemies
from the nearest Camp came quickly down, which forced our Men (being then
enfeebled with the scarcity of Provision) to retire without their desired Prey.
There was a considerable number of the Enemy killed; We lost one Lieutenant
Fisher, who was killed by a shot from the Enemies Drake, as he was going out.
We afterward tried another Experiment of tying a Cow to a stake, and setting
Fire to her, in hope of drawing in some of theirs; but she breaking loose that
project failed.

About the 20th of this Month, Provisions growing extremely scarce; one Mr.
James Cunningham Merchant, found out a way of supplying the Garrison for six or
seven days: He showed them where there was a good quantity of Starch in the
Town, which they mixed with Tallow, and made pancakes of: Which proved not only
good food, but Physic too to many of those whom Weariness and ill Diet had
cast into a Flux.

July 28. This Morning Captain Charleton left us, and went to the Enemy. Mr.
Walker about this time had preached a discouraging Sermon: And indeed the
desperate Necessities that were growing upon us had almost sunk us all into a
Despair of Relief. But the hour of our Extremity was the fit season for Divine
Providence to interpose, and render it self the more observable in our
Deliverance: For this Evening about seven a Clock we perceived 3 Ships ( viz.
The Mountjoy of Derry, the Phoenix of Colerain, and the Dartmouth Frig^^t,)
coming up the Lough of Culmore, betwixt whom and those in the Fort there was
desperate fireing: But when we perceived they had passed the Fort, our
Expectations of speedy Succor raised us to a strange transport of Joy. The
Enemy plied them with Cannon and small Shot from both sides the River, and the
Ships made them good Returns: But when the foremost Vessel came (as it is
supposed) to the Boom, she made some stop, the little Wind they had while they
passed the Fort entirely failing, and a dead calm succeeding. The smoke of the
Shot both from the Land and from the Ships clouded her from our sight, and she
was (as we afterward learnt) unhappily run a ground. And when the Enemy, who
gathered in swarms to the Waterside, raised a loud Huzza along the Shore,
telling us, Our Ships were taken, and we perceived them both firing their Guns
at them, and preparing Boats to board them, this struck such a sudden Terror
into our Hearts, as appeared in the very blackness of our Countenances. Our
Spirits sunk, and our hopes were expiring. But this did not continue long: For
the Mountjoy by firing a Broadside, with the help of the increasing Tide, got
off from the Shore. And we soon perceived the Ships firing at them, and
advancing toward us, tho but slowly, which made the Enemy draw their Guns from
place to to place after them. But at last they came up to the Key, to the
inexpressible Joy of our Garrison, that was at this time reduced to that
Distress, that 'twas scarce possible for them to subsist above 2 or 3 Days
longer. The first that broke or passed the Boom was the Mountjoy of Derry,
commanded by Capt. Micaiah Browning, who was to our great regrett killed by the
Enemies shot. (A Gentleman, whose Memory should never be forgotten by the
Garrison and Inhabitants of Derry, who generously sacrtfic'd his own life for
the preservation of theirs, and had freely offered to make this Attempt sooner,
if the Major Genesis would have permitted him:) But the Phoenix of Colerain came
first to the Key, Capt. Andrew Douglass Master, laden with 800 Bowls of Meal
from Scotland. The Ships came in late: And that we might the better secure the
People employed in bringing in the Provisions to the Stores, there was a Blind
made along the Key of Casks and Hogsheads filled with earth. The Enemy
continued to fire at us from their Trenches, as before, till the 31st of July.
That day we perceived them firing several parts of the Country about. In the
Night they burnt all the Tents and Hutts of their Camp round the City, and
before the daylight had gone off toward Lifford and Strabane, keeping a strong
rereguard of Horse. We had no Horse left to pursue them, and our Foot were in
no condition to make such an Attempt. They encamped at Lifford and Strabane,
till they heard the unwelcome News of their Forces under the Command of Major
General Maccarty, being routed by the Iniskilling Men. This so alarmed them,
that for have they burst some of their big Guns, threw Wagons of Arms into the
River, and left many of their Army that were sick behind them. Some few of our
Men went out, and brought in some Granadeers Prisoners, that were firing houses
at 6 or 7 Miles distance from the City. Others of them went to Inch, where
Colonel Stewart having received Orders to Ship all his Men and come off, had
called a Council of his Officers, and by their Advice delayed the Execution of
them, till he had sent to acquaint the Major General with the condition of the
Protestants there, and should receive his further Orders, as being loath to
expose so considerable a Body of them as had come in to him to the merciless
Fury of an enraged Enemy.

And thus was the Siege of Derry raised, to the Admiration of our Friends, who
had given us over for lost, and to the disappointment of our Enemies, who were
no less confident they should soon make themselves Masters of so weak and
indefensible a Place. The Glory of it being entirely due to the Almighty, who
inspired a Garrison for the most part made up of a few raw and untrain'd Men,
and those laboring under all possible discouragements, with that Resolution
that enabled them to defeat all the Attempts of a numerous Army to reduce them.
Their Zeal and Affection for the just Cause they had undertaken, supplying all
the defects of Military Discipline. So singular has been the favor of God to
that City (as well as Inniskilling) in making it once more a Sanctuary to the
distressed Protestants of the Province of Ulster.

Aug. 4. Capt. White, Capt. Dobbin, Capt. J. Hamilton, Capt. Jenny, and Mr.
Knox were sent to the Major General, who that day came to Town. Coll. Crofton
had waited on him at Inch, and desired leave to draw out 2 or 3 hundred Men, to
go out into the County at large, to preserve the Houses of the Protestants from
being burnt, promising also to bring in a vast quantity of Cattle: but his
Proposal was rejected. And near a week after that some small Parties of Irish
that stayed behind burnt Newton Limavady, and several Gentlemen's houses in the
County. The Major General put out several Proclamations, one, That all Persons
not in Arms, who had fled to that place, should leave the City (the Country
being now clear) and repair to their respective habitations, without taking any
of their goods with them, unless they had a particular Order. Hereby the
Bedding of many was detained from them. Another was, That no Person dying
should be buried within the Walls. Great Droves of the Country Peoples Cattle
were brought near the Town, upon pretense of their belonging to the Enemy, and
so few could recover their own again, that many Families were deprived thereby
of the only considerable means of their subsistence. Coll. Mitchelburn was made
Governor by the Major General, in whose hands the Cattle were left, who fold
them according to the Major General's Orders for good Rates to the Butchers and
others.

An Address was prepared to be presented to the King: And Coll. Walker was
appointed by the the Major General to go with it. Many of those that signed it
neither knew of the Bearer, nor were well pleased with the great Complement
pafs'd on the Major General in it, but were not willing at that time to make
any disturbance by any public opposition to it.

The Men were all drawn out to the Field, and every Collonel's Regiment by it
self. The Soldiers went out the more cheerfully, because it was reported the
Major General would that day distribute 2000 l. amongst them. But they soon
found themselves mistaken, not only in that, but in their hopes of continuing
in their present Posts. Colonel Mitchelburn's, and Colonel Crofton's
Regiments were joined, and Croston reduced. Colonel Walker's and Colonel
Hamil's were joined, Walker demitted, and Hamil reduced, Capt. White boing made
Colonel to it, (who died September following.) Colonel Monro's and Colonel
Lance's Regiment joined, Colonel Monro reduced, Lance made Colonel, (who died
September following.) Colonel Baker's and Colonel Murray's Regiment were
designed to be joined, but all of Colonel Murray's (except a very few)
refused, and went off into the Country with their Carrabines and Pistols, and
the Major General seized their Saddles, as he also did Col. Murrays Horse,
which he had preserved with great care during all the Siege. St. John's was made
Col. of Bakers Regiment: This being done, the Major General named new Captains
to most of the Companies, leaving them to choose their Lieutenants and Ensigns.
So that a great many of those Captains, who had not only raised and armed their
Companies almost wholly at their own charge, but had done the greatest Service
in the Defense of the Town, were either disbanded or reduced: And their
Companies were given to others, that had neither expended any thing of their
Fortunes, nor hazarded their Lives in that Cause. This was ill resented in the
Garrison, but when one of these Captains took the Liberty to complain of it,
instead of any Redress, he was (as himself informed several of us) threatened
with the new Gallows, which was ordered to be set up without the Ravelin. There
were Orders also given to the Centries at the Gates, that none should be
suffered to go out with any Arms, and some that were walking out at the Gates
had their Arms seized by the Guards placed there. This unexpected Treatment
seemed very harsh and strange to them, that they could not be trusted to bear
those Arms about them which they had so lately employed in the vigorous Defense
of their Country. The weak and sick Soldiers had nothing allowed them to
subsist on out of the Stores, whereby they were forced to travel, and beg their
Bread in the Country, which being extremely depopulated, many of them perished
for want. The Lieutenants and Ensigns fared no better than the Captains, many
of them being turned out, and others, who had at least never been in the Siege,
put in their Places. Nay, some that continued Captains, had Detachments of 15
Men taken out of their Companies, and put into the Regiments of such as could
not raise Men, and then the Captains were threatened to be turned out if they
made not up their Companies. Nay some of them were turned off, after they had
been made use of to do that piece of Service for such as were intended to
succeed them. And even the new modeled Regiments of Derry, that were received
into the Generals Army, had only the following subsistence.

l. s. d. Colonel 0 5 0 per Diem Lieutenant colonel 0 3 0 Major 0 2 6 Captain
0 2 0 Lieutenant 0 1 0 Ensign 0 0 8

Sergeants, Corporals, Drummers, and private Men 2 d. per diem each, besides
Bread, and without Bread 3 d.

The Inniskillin Foot had the same Allowance. And their Horse had only 9. d. a
day for every private Trooper, and 6. d. a day for each of the Dragoons.

But however they have been used by the Major Generals Influence, they have
always had a deep and grateful sense of his Majesty's extraordinary Care and
Concern for their Preservation. And the Honorable Chararacter which he was
graciously pleased to give of them and their Services in his Letter to them,
was it self thought a valuable Reward, and resented with the highest Affections
that Subjects can pay to a Prince who has an entire Sovereignty in their
Hearts, and from whose generous goodness they still expect all the favor and
encouragement, that may put them into a Capacity of giving more evident proofs
to the World of their Zeal for the Protestant Religion, and Affection to his
Majesty's Government.

The Letter to my Lord Mountjoy, from the Inhabitants of Derry.
Right Honorable,
THe last Post carried up to his Excellency the News of what our Rabble had
done in the Town, how they had shut the Gates against some of the Earl of
Antrim 's Regiment, which we then blamed them for, though we could not restrain
them; but yesterday and this day, being on all hands informed that a general
Massacre was determined, at least in Ulster, to be executed on the British
Protestants: And having certain intelligence that the Priests and Friars of
late bought up great numbers and quantities of Horses and Arms, and other
habiliments of War, as Chain-bridles; (whereof Dean Cahan for his part bought
up twelve:) Recollecting further many dark Speeches in ordinary Conversation of
late, and very odd Sermons by the Priests and Friars preached in this
Neighborhood: And hearing that the very Soldiers that were to quarter there,
had been overheard to utter terrible threats against us, as to burn Houses,
etc. And several Outrages being committed by some of them on several Persons,
particularly one of them, without any provocation, cut one of the Ferry-men
almost to the loss of his hand; (...) of them broke open Houses, and took
Provisions thence by force, etc. And when we were certainly informed, that
under pretense of 8 Companies, consisting of 400 Men, that were to come to this
Town, there were at least 1200 on the Road to this place, besides great numbers
of Women and-Boys (which the Ultoghs always carry along with them, when they
expect spoil:) And lastly, When we caused the Potent to be inspected, and found
that it referred in the body thereof to the Names of the Captains underneath,
and yet not one named: We cannot but think it a most wonderful Providence of
God, to stir up the Mobile for our safety, and Preservation of the Peace of the
Kingdom against such bloody Attempts as these Northern People had formed
against us, which we doubt not but his Excellency will look upon as a great and
very acceptable service to his Majesty, to whom we resolve always to bear true
Faith and Allegiance against all Disturbers of his Government whatsoever; and
only to act in our own Defense, without the least disturbance or prejudice to
any that will live peaceably with us. And we doubt not but all that are alarmed
and terrified with the like danger, in this and adjacent Countys, and hereupon
have put themselves also upon their defense, (to the Number, as we are informed
from several parts, of near 20000 Horse and Foot) will do the same, if they be
not assaulted. The Rabble in their heat sound means to get into the Magazine,
and thence took some Arms and Ammunition: But we have caused it to be locked
up, and a Guard set thereon, and an account taken of what is taken thence, and
what left therein. Our request is, That your Lordship will represent our Danger
to his Excellency, the Necessity we are under, and obtain from him his
Allowance and Countenance, for secuing our selves from these Ulster- Enemies,
that will never be obedient, when they have power in their hand. Your
Lordship's Kindness herein will be a perpetual Obligation on the Inhabitants of
this City and Neighborhood, and very much tend to his Majesty's service in
preserving the Lives of thousands of his good and innocent Subjects, that were
designed for slaughter. We remain,

Londonderry, Dec. 9. 1688. Your Lordships Most Obedient humble Servants, John
Campsie, Samuel Norman, etc.

The Letter to the Society at London, sent from Derry by Mr. Cairns.
Right Worshipful,
IN our sad Calamity, and under the greatest Apprehensions of our total
excision by the Irish in these parts of the Kingdom which border upon us, we
thought it necessary for us immediately to dispatch David Cairns, Esquire (a very
worthy Citizen of this City, and lately a Member of this Corporation) into
England, to report our Case to you, and to use his endeavors by all just means
for our speedy Relief. And we have eternal Obligations laid on us to bless God,
whose Mercy and Providence rescued us from the Designs of wicked Men, that
conspired our ruin, without any Provocation on our parts, whose Inclinations
as well as Interest it was to live peaceably with all Men.

On Friday the 7th. Instant, several intimamations came to several hands
hereabout, that on the Sunday following a Massacre was designed by the Irish in
Ulster; and although it caused great thoughts of Heart to the most assured
amongst us; yet none of the more aged and grave came to any other Resolution
than to submit to the Divine Providence, whatever the event might be: And just
in that juncture, whilst the younger and more inconsiderate were consulting
their own safety, (and it seems had resolved on the means) a part of the Earl
of Antrim's Regiment (newly levied, and all composed of Highlanders and Ulster
Papists) came to the River side, and their Officers came over into the City to
the Sheriffs, for quarters and lodgings for them: We confess our fears on the
occasion became more pungent, but we still remained silent, except our Prayers
and Devotions. But just as the Soldiers were approaching the Gates, the
Youthhood by a strange impulse ran in one Body and shut the Gates, and put
themselves in the best posture of defense they could. We blamed, but could not
guide or persuade them to any less Resolution that night; and so the Soldiers
retired, and were quartered in the Neighborhood, where, although they did not
murder or destroy any, yet many threats they uttered, and outrages they
committed. The next day we hoped to prevail with those that assumed the Power
of the City, to open the Gates and receive the Garrison; but the News and
Intimations of the general Design came so fast, so full from all quarters, that
we then blessed God for our present escape, effected by means unforeseen, and
against our wills. In the general hurry and consternation of not us only, but
all the neighboring Counties, when we have but scarce time to hear the
repeated Informations of our Danger, it is not possible for us to furnish the
Bearer with all requisite Testimonials to evince this sad truth; nor will it
consist with our safety to protract his stay 'till it can be done, the Vessel
that carries him being just ready for sail. We must refer you to his Report,
and Copies of Papers carried over by him (signed by us) for your further
satisfaction in particulars; but do most humbly and heartily beseech you, as
you are Men of Bowels and Charity to assist this Gentleman how best you can to
secure us from the common Danger, and that we may peaceably live obeying his
Majesty and the Laws, doing injury to no man, nor wishing it to any. Your
Interest here is now no Argument worthy to engage you, the Lives of thousands
of Innocent Men, Women and Children are at stake. If you can, and will not now
afford your help to the utmost, we shall never be able to use a Motive to
induce you, or to prevail upon you. May the Lord send Deliverance to us, and
preserve you all in Peace and Tranquillity, is the hearty Prayer of

Londonderry, Dec. 10. 1688. (Gentlemen) Your most Obedient Servants, George
Phillips, John Campsie, Samuel Norman, Alexander Tomkins, Matthew Cotken, etc.


A Letter from Inniskillin, directed to David Cairns, Esquire or the other Officers
commanding in chief now in Londonderry.
Gentlemen,
THe frequent Intelligence we have from all parts of this Kingdom of a general
Massacre of the Protestants, and two Companies of Foot, of Sir Thomas Newcom's
Regiment, viz. Capt. Nugent's, and Capt. Shurloe's, being upon their March to
Garrison here, and now within ten Miles, has put us upon a Resolution of
refusing them entrance, our desire being only to preserve our own Lives and the
Lives of our Neighbors, this Place being the most considerable Pass between
Conoght and Ulster, and hearing of your Resolutions we thought it convenient to
impart this to you, as likewise to beg your Assistance both in your Advice and
Relief, especially in helping us with some Powder, and in carrying on a
Correspondence with us hereafter, as we shall with Gods Assistance do with you;
which is all at present from

From Inniskillin, Dec. 15. 1688. (Gentlemen) Your faithful Friends and fellow
Christians, The Inhabitants of Inniskillin.
We are not now in a Condition to spare Men for a Guard, therefore must entreat
your Assistance in that.

Allan Cathcart. Will. Browning. Tho. Shore. William Smyth. Arch. Hamilton,
Malc. Cathcant. Ja. Ewart. Robert Clarke.




The DECLARATION of the Inhabitants of Derry.
TO all Christian People to whom these Presents shall come, the Mayors,
Sheriffs and Citizens of the City of Londonderry send greeting. Having
received Intimation from several Credible Persons, That an Insurrection of the
Irish was intended, and by them a general Massacre of the Protestants in this
Kingdom, and the same to be acted and perpetrated on or about the 9th. day of
this instant December. And being confirmed in our fear and jealousy of so
horrible a Design, by many palpable Insinuations, dubious Expressions, monitory
Letters, and positive Informations, all conducing and concurring to beget in us
a trembling Expectation of a sudden and inevitable Ruin and Destruction. We
disposed our selves to a patient and tame Resignation to the Divine Providence,
quietly hoping for some Deliverance and diversion of this impending Misery, or
to receive from the hand of God such measure of Constancy and Courage, as might
enable us to possess our Souls in patience, and Submissively to wait the issue
of so severe a Trial. Accordingly, when on the seventh instant, part of the
Earl of Antrims Forces advanced to take possesion of this place, tho we looked
on our selves as Sheep appointed for Slaughter, and on them as the Executioners
of Vengance upon us; yet we contrived no other means of escape than by Flight,
and with all Precipitation to hurry away our Families into other Places and
Countries. But it pleased the Lord who watches over us, so to order things,
that when they were ready to enter the City, a great Number of the younger, and
some of the meaner sort of the Inhabitants ran hastily to the Gates and shut
them, loudly denying Entrance to such Guests, and obstinately refusing
Obedience to us. At first we were amazed at the Enterprise, and Apprehensive of
the many ill Consequences that might result from so rash an Undertaking: But
since that, having received repeated Advertisements of the general Design, and
particular Informations, which may rationally induce us to believe it; And
being credibly assared, that under the pretense of six Companies to quarter
among us, a vast swarm of Highland and Irish Papists were on the ways and Roads
appreaching to us; That some of the Popish Clergy in our Neighborhood had
bought up Arms, and provided an unusual furniture of Iron Chains for Bridles
(whereof sixty were bespoke in one place, and some of them stized, and now in
our Custody:) We began to consider it as an especial Instance of Gods Mercy
toward us, that we were not delivered over as a prey unto them, and that it
pleased him to stir up the Spirits of the People so unexpectedly to provide for
their and our common Safety and Preservation. Wherefore we do Declare and
Remonstrate to the World, that as we have resolved to stand upon our Guard, and
Defend our Walls, and not to admit of any Papists whatsoever to Quarter among
us: So we have firmly and sincerely determined to persevere in our Duty and
Loyalty to our Sovereign Lord the King, without the least Vmbrage of Mutiny, or
Seditious Opposition to his Royal Commands. And sin^^ n^^ther Motives have
prompted us to this Resolution but the Preservation of our Lives, and to
prevent the Plots and Machinations of the Enemies of the Protestant Religion,
we are encouraged to hope that the Government will vouchsafe a candid and
favo^rable Interpretation of our proceedings, and that all (...) Maj^^ties
Protestant Subjects will interp^^^ with their Prayers to God, their
Solicitations to (...) King, and their Advice and Assistance to us, on this
(...) ext^aordinary and emergent an Occasion; which may not holy have an
influence on the rest of the King (...), but (...) have a probable Aspect
toward the Interest of the Protestant Religion, and may deserv^ a savourable
regard from all the Professors thereof within his Majesty's Dominions.

God Save the King.
The Lord Mountjoys Articles, with the City of Derry, 21 Dec. 1688.
Articles of Agreement Indented made and concluded by and between the Right
Honorable Lord Viscount Mountjoy Master of the the Ordnance, and one of his
Majesty's most Honorable Privy Coun^il, of (...) part, and the Major and
Sheriffs of (...) Londonderry, in behalf of themselves, and the I^^^bitants of
the said ^ity, and their Adherents, of the other part, at Londonderry this 21st
of December 1688.
1. THat the said Lord Mountjoy shall with all possible Expedition, and at
furthest within 15 days after the date hereof, procure a free and general
Pardon to all and every the Inhabitants of the City, Suburbs and Liberties of
the City of Londonderry, and to all and every Person and Persons within the
Province of Vlster, that have Abetted or Adhered unto them, for all matters and
things relating to the late Commotion and Revolution in the said City; And for
all Offenses done against the Law, Murder excepted, and all penalties thereby
incident and incurred; The same to be perfected under the great Seal, and
delivered to the Sheriffs of the said City, or their Order, within the time
before limited, and Published by Proclamations.

2. That until the said Pardon be so perfected and delivered, no more or other
Soldiers shall be Garrisoned in the said City, or quartered in the Liberties
thereof, except the two Companies Commanded by Lieutenant Colonel Robert
Lundy, and Captain William Stewart. And that whatsoever Companies shall after
that time, and until the first day of March next be quartered in the said City
and Liberties, shall consist of one half Protestants at the least.

3. That until the Pardon be delivered as aforesaid, the Inhabitants of the
said City, shall not be disturbed in keeping their Guards and Watches; And that
no stranger or unknown Person shall be permitted to come within the City with
Firearms or Swords, or to lodge within the Gates all Night, unless he be
allowed by Colonel Lundy, and the two Sheriffs.

4. That if at any time before the first of March next, the Soldiers of the
Lord Mountjoys Regiment shall by potent, or other order be required to remove,
the said Lord or his Officer Commanding in chief, shall leave the said City
free to their own Guards and Watches.

5. That if at any time any Inhabitant or Inhabitants of the said City and
Suburbs, shall desire to remove with his or their Family and Goods, he or they
shall be freely permitted; And that the Ships now in the Harbor, or which
shall be hereafter Laden, shall not be stopped by any Embargo; And if any Ship
or Ships which have Sailed from this Port since the seventh day of this Instant
December, shall be arrested or stopped in any Port or Harbor within this
Kingdom, on account of the late Commotion, the said Ship or Ships shall be
immediately released.

6. That until the twenty sixth day of March next, no Soldiers of the Earl of
Antrims Regiment, shall be quartered in the City or Liberties of Londonderry,
to prevent all Animosities and Disorders that may arise between them and the
people.

7. That the Lord Mountjoy shall interpose with the Commissioners of his
Majesty's Revenue on behalf of Warham Jemm^t Esquire, and other Officers of the
Customs, that no Imputation or Blame may remain on them, for the involuntary
Compliance with the people of Derry in the late Commotion; and that his
Lordship may be pleased to pardon William H^nsworth Clerk of the Stores, and
Alexander Watson Gunner for the like Offenses.

8. That the two Sons of the Lord Mountjoy now Resident in Londonderry, shall
remain in the said City, as pledges for the full and final performance of these
Articles.

9. That the said two Companies commanded by Colonel Lundy and Captain Stewart
shall be permitted to enter the City, and be quartered therein by the Sheriffs
of the said City, whenever the Lord Mountjoy shall appoint it, and the keys
of the Gates and Magazine delivered to his order.

10. That in the mean time all Arms taken out of his Majesty's Stores shall be
gathered, and after the pardon delivered as aforesaid, shall be returned to the
Clerk of the Stores fixed and in good order. The Inhabitants of the said City no
wise doubting or mistrusting, that since their undertaking and late Actions
took their rise from self-preservation, and to avoid eminent danger, they shall
be absolved before God and the World from all Tincture of Rebellion,
perverseness and wilful Disobedience to the Kings Authority, and the
established Laws of the Land.

The Antrim Association.
IT being notoriously known, not only to the Protestant Inhabitants of the
Northern Counties, but to those throughout this whole Kingdom of Ireland, that
the peace and quiet of this Nation is now in great and imminent danger; and
that it is absolutely necessary for all Protestants to agree within their
several Counties, upon some speedy and effectual methods for their own defense,
and for securing (as much as in them lies,) the Protestant Religion, their
Lives, Liberties, and Properties, and the peace of this Kingdom, which are so
much endeavored to be disturbed by Popish and illegal Counselors, and their
Abettors. And in as much as Union and Dispatch are necessary for effecting the
same: We the Nobility and Gentry of the County of Antrim do associate together,
firmly resolving to adhere to the Laws of this Kingdom and the Protestant
Religion, and to act in subordination to the Government of England, and the
promoting of a free Parliament. And we do declare, if we be forced to take up
Arms, as it will be contrary to our Inclination, so it shall be only Defensive,
not in the least to invade the Lives, Liberties, or Estates of any of our
Fellow Subjects, no not of the Popish Persuasion, whilst they demean themselves
peaceably with us. The Reasons which induce us to put our selves in some
necessary posture of Defense, are so obvious and urgent upon us, when we
consider of the great Levies daily made of Popish Soldiers, and at this time
especially when the King is retired, and their Arming can in no wise be
servicable to his Majesty's Interest: It were inconsistent with common
Prudence, not to suspect their designs to be such as will tend, if not to the
Destruction, yet to the great endangering of the Lives, Liberties, and
Properties of the Protestant Subjects of this Kingdom, if not prevented. And we
do declare, tho at present we will admit none but Protestants into our
Association, yet we will to our power protect even Papists from Violence,
whilst their behavior amongst us is peaceable and quiet: And we doubt not but
all good Protestants in this Kingdom will in their several Stations, join with
us in the same public desence: And that God will bless these our just,
innocent and necessary Undertakings, for our Lives, Laws, and Religion. And
whereas it will be necessary, for the more effectual and successful carrying on
these mutual endeavors for the preservation of our Religion and Properties,
and to avoid Confusions and Distractions, which in such cases may otherwise
happen, to appoint some eminent Person or Persons, to whose conduct we may
entirely submit our selves in this our Undertaking: We do therefore by these
Presents, unanimously elect and appoint the Right Honorable Hugh Earl of Mount
Alexander, and the Honorable Clotworthy Skeffington, Esquire or either of them,
jointly or severally as they shall think fit, to be our Commander or Commanders
in chief of all the Forces in the said County of Antrim. And do hereby oblige
our felves to serve under their, or either of their Command, in such Manner,
Place, and Station, as they or one of them, in their Discretion and Judgment
shall direct. And that we will from time to time, observe and obey, all such
Orders and Methods, for the better carrying on this Enterprise, and procuring
of Horse and Foot, and such numbers of Men, Arms, and Ammunition, as our County
Council of five shall think fit; And that with all Expedition, immediately to
be arrayed and formed into Troops and Companies, and to be disposed of from
time to time according to their, or either of their Orders: They, or one of
them, acting with the advice and consent of the said County Council of five, or
the major part thereof.

Massareene. Will. Franklin. Arthur Upton. Rob. Adaire. Will. Lesley. Char.
Stewart. Edw. Harrison. Pat. Shaw. John Donelson. Will. Cuningham. Will. Shaw.
James Mac-Cartney. Will. Shaw. Hen. Mac-Collogh. John Guest. Geo. Butthell.
Geo. Johnston. Hen. Clements. Edw. Clements. Rich. Dobb Junior. Will. Shaw.
Mich. Harrison. James Shaw.


The Kings Letter to Ireland, by Captain Leighton.
HAving received an Account from Capt. Leighton, of what be was entrusted to
represent to us, in relation to the condition of the Protestants in Ireland: We
have directed him to assure you in our Name, how sensibly we are affected with
the hazards you are exposed to, by the illegal power the Papists have of late
usurped in that Kingdom, and that we are resolved to employ the most speedy and
effectual means in our power, for rescuing you from the oppressions and
terrors you lie under; that in the mean time we do well approve of the
endeavors we understand you are using, to put your selves into a posture of
defense, that you may not be surprised, wherein you may expect all the
encouragements and assistance that can be given you from hence. And because we
are persuaded, that there are even of the Romish Communion, many who are
desirous to live peaceably, and do not approve of the violent and arbitrary
proceedings of some who pretend to be in Authority; And we thinking it just to
make distinctions of Persons, according to their behavior and deserts; Do
hereby authorize you to promise in our Name, to all such who shall demean
themselves hereafter peaceably and inoffensively, our protection and exemption
from those pains and forfeitures, which those only shall incurr who are the
Maintainers and Abetters of the said illegal Authority, assumed and continued
contrary to Law: Or who shall act any thing to the prejudice of the Protestant
Interest, or the disturbance of the public Peace in that Kingdom. And for
further particulars, we refer you to the report you shall receive from Captain
Leighton, (who has acquitted himself with fidelity and diligence in your
Concerns,) of the sincerity of our intentions toward you. And so we recommend
you to the protection of Almighty God.

Given at St. James's the 10th. day of Febr. 1688. Will. H. Orange.
To the Earl of Mount-Alexander, to be communicated to the Protestant Nobility
and Gentry, in the North of Ireland.

By his Highnesses Command. Will. Jephson.



The Declaration of the Protestants of Sligo, January the 4th. 1688/9.
WE the Protestants of the County of Sligo, at present Assembled for our common
Safety, do hereby declare the Occasions and Motives of this our Association,
and what is intended by it.

1. We resolve to adhere to the Laws of the Land, and the Protestant Religion.

2. We shall as we ought, Unite our selves accordingly with England, and hold
to the lawful Government thereof, and to a free Parliament.

3. We declare, that our taking up Arms is only defensive, and not in the least
to invade the Lives, Liberties, or Estates, of any of our fellow Subjects,
whether Roman Catholics or others, while they demean themselves in peaceable
manner to us.

4. Our Reasons for thus doing are so urgent, that we could no longer with
prudence forbear putting our selves in some necessary posture of defense. For
the Roman Catholics Arming in such vast numbers throughout all the Kingdom, do
give us just apprehensions of ill designs in them; they pretending the Kings
Commission for what they do, whereas we are assured that the King has commanded
all Roman Catholics to lay down their Arms, which we conceive should as well
extend to Ireland as England. And therefore we doubt, that the Leaders of this
Irish Army do act from their own heads, upon designs of their own, which we may
justly fear will be prejudicial to the Lives, Liberties, and Properties, of the
Protestant Subjects of this Kingdom, if not prevented.

Lastly, We declare, that as we will assault none that molest not us, so we
will to our powers protect all from Violence, even Roman Catholics themselves,
whilst they behave themselves peaceably and neighbourly amongst us, (tho we
will admit none, but Protestants into our Association,) until we be ascertained
from the lawful Authority and Government of England, what further Orders we are
to obey. And we doubt not, but that all good Protestants in this Kingdom will,
where they are able, join with us in the same public Defense, and that God
will bless this so just, innocent and necessary undertaking, for our Lives,
Laws, and Religion.

And whereas it will be necessary, for the more effectual and successful
carrying on of these our mutual endeavors, for the preservation of our Laws,
Religion and Country, and the security of our Lives and Properties, and to
avoid Confusions and Distractions, which in such cases might otherwise happen,
to appoint some Eminent Person or Persons to whose Conduct we may entirely
submit our selves in this our undertaking:

We do therefore by these Presents unanimously Nominate, Elect and appoint the
Right Honorable Robert Lord Baron of Kingston, and the Honorable Chidley
Coot, Esquire or either, or both of them, jointly and severally, as they shall
think fit, to be Commander or Commanders, in chief of all the Forces in the
said County of Sligo.

And do hereby oblige our selves to serve under his or their Command, in such
manner, and in such place and Station, as they or one of them, in their
discretion and judgment shall direct.

And that we will procure such Horse and Foot, and such a number of Men, Arms,
and Ammunition, as we or any of us can possibly provide; and that with all
Expedition, immediately to be arrayed and formed into Troops and Companies, and
to be disposed of from time to time according to their, or either of their
Orders. In witness whereof, we have hereunto subscribed our hands.

At Sligo this 4th. of January, 1688/9.
Colonel Lundy's Instructions.
Instructions to our Trusty and Wellbeloved Lieutenant Colonel Lundy,
Commander in chief of the Town and Garrison of Londonderry, or in his Absence,
to the Commander in chief there.
HAving taken into our Consideration, the Danger that at present threatens the
Protestant Interest in that Kingdom, and how much it concerns the good of our
Subjects, that all our Garrisons there be in as good a posture of Defense as
may be: We therefore reposing Trust and Confidence in your good Affection and
Courage, have thought fit hereby to direct you:

1. That you do upon receipt hereof, Buy and Furnish that Garrison with such
necessary Provisions and Ammunition, as may enable it to subsist and make
defense for some time, in case of any Attack.

2. That for its better defense, you do break down such Bridges, and cut up
such Dikes and Sluices, as in your Judgment shall be thought necessary.

3. That you take special care, in preserving the Gates of the Town, the Guns
with their Carriages, as well as the Fortifications of the place in good order
and repair, and that you add such Works as you shall find necessary.

4. That on prospect of any more imminent danger, you do pull down such Houses,
and fell and cut down such Trees, as may prove in the least a prejudice to its
defense.

5. That you put and set up Palisadoes in such places as shall be thought
necessary; and that you do, and provide for the defense of that place, what
else you shall upon due consideration judge requisite.

6. And to that end, you are to receive and dispose of the Thousand pounds
which shall be remitted to you, to the best advantage of our Service, and the
safety of that Garrison, and to transmit an account thereof hither.

7. That you also send hither from time to time, as opportunities offer, a true
and particular account of the Condition of that place to one of our principal
Secretaries of State.

8. That you also cause the Oath herewith sent you, to be taken by all the
Officers both Civil and Military, in that Town and Garrison.

Given, etc. 21. Febr. 1688.
Mr. Hamiltons Instructions.
Instructions to our Trusty and well-beloved James Hamilton, Esquire, appointed
by us to carry Arms and other Provisions of War to the Town of Londonderry, in
our Kingdom of Ireland.
William R.

YOU are to receive into your Charge, as soon as they shall be put on
Shipboard, the Arms Ammunition and Stores of War, which we have directed to be
sent to Ireland, with a Commission and Instructions to Lieutenant Costonel
Lundy, and the Sum of one Thousand pounds, which we have ordered the Officers
of the Customs and Excise at Chester to pay unto you, to be delivered by you to
the said Lieutenant Colonel Lundy, who is to dispose thereof for the necessary
occasions of that Garrison. And you are to take care, that the Ship on which
the said Arms and Stores of War shall be laden, do not leave the English C^ast
without the Convoy of a Frigate; Which we have app^inted to accompany the said
Ship to the said Town of Londonderry. And at your Arrival with the said Ships
upon or near the Coast^ of Ireland, you are if you see convenient to deliver 50
Barrels of Powder to any Officer Commassionated by us within the County of Down
or thereabouts, in order to the better Defense of those parts, taking the
Receipt of the said Officer for the same. And you are as soon as may be, to
inform your self in the best manner, at what distance the Enemy stall be as
that time from Londonderry; and with what safety the said Arms and Provision
of War may be put on Shore, at or near that place, and secured within the said
Town, for the use and defense of the Protestants against the Papists, according
to your Directions in that behalf. And in case the same may be done without
apparent Danger, you are to proceed accordingly in the Execution thereof, and
to deliver the said Commission and Instructions, Money, Arms and Stores to the
said Lieutenant Colonel Lundy, or the Commander in Chief of the said Town,
taking his Receipt for the same. Provided nevertheless, that before you deliver
the said Commission, Instructions, Money, Arms, and Stores of War to the said
Lieutenant Colonel Lundy or to the Commander in Chief of the said Town, you
first cause him to take the Oaths herewith sent, on Board the Ship wherein you
shall Arrive there, in the presence of the Mayor or Chief Civil Magistrate of
Londonderry. But if he shall refuse the said Oaths, or any one of them; Or
that you shall find the Approach to the said Town difficult, and the Landing or
Delivery of the said Arms and Stores insecure, you are then not to Land the
said Stores, or part with the said Commission, Instructions and Money; but to
cause them to be brought back on Board the said Ship under the same Convoy, to
some Port in England: Whereupon notice thereof given to us, we shall signify
our further Orders thereupon, and for so doing, etc.

Given etc. Whitehall the 22. of Febr. 1688. By His Majesty's Command,
Shrewsbury.

The Kings Letter to Colonel Lundy, by Mr. Cairns.
Whitehall 8th. March, 1688.
SIR,
I Am Commanded by the King to acquaint you, That his Majesty's greatest
Concern bath been for Ireland, and particularly for the Province of Ulster,
which he looks upon as most capable to desend it self against the Common Exemy.
And that they might be the better enobled to do it, there are two Regiments
already at the Sea-s^de ready to embark, in order to their Transportation into
that Province, with which will be sent a good quantity of Arms and Ammunition.
And they will be speedily followed by (...) considerable a Body, as (by the
Blessing of God) may be able to rescue the whole Kingdom, and re-settle the
Protestant Interest there. His Majesty does very much rely upon your Fidelity
and Resolution, not only that you should acquit your self according to the
Character he has received of you, but that you should encourage and influence
others in this difficult conjuncture to discharge their Duty to their Country,
their Religion, and their Posterity, all which call upon them for a more than
ordinary vigor, to keep out that deluge of Popery and Slavery which so nearly
threatens them.

And you may assure them, That besides his Majesty's Care for their
Preservation, who has a due tenderness and regard for them, (as well in
consideration that they are his Subjects, as that they are now exposed for the
sake of that Religion which he himself professes:) The whole bent of this
Nation inclines them to employ their utmost endeavors for their deliverance:
And it was but this very morning that his Majesty has most effectually
recommended the Case of Ireland to the two Houses of Parliament. And I do not
doubt but they will thereupon immediately come to such Resolutions, as will
show to all the World that they espouse their Interest as their own.

As to your own particular, you will always find the King graciously disposed
to own and reward the services you shall do him in such a time of Trial.

And for my part, Whatever I can contribute either to the general Service of
that Kingdom, or to your own particular satisfaction, I shall never be wanting
in:

Sir, Your very humble Servant, Shrewsbury.
Subscribed for Coll. Lundy, Governor of Londonderry.



Instructions to Mr. David Cairnes.
YOU are with what convenient Speed you can, forthwith to repair to Londonderry
in the Kingdom of Ireland.

At your Arrival there, you are to acquaint the Governor and Magistrates of
the said City, of his Majesty's great care and concern for their Security;
Which he has shown not only in sending thither at this time Men, Arms and
Ammunition, but in the further great preparations he is making, as well for the
particular Defense of that place, as for the Safety and Protection of that
whole Kingdom.

You are particularly to inform your self of the present Condition of
Londonderry, both as to Men, Arms and Ammunition; and whether the Country
thereabout can be able to furnish Provisions, for a greater force intended to
be sent thither, without carrying Provisions from England. An exact account
whereof you are to bring your self with the best speed you can, or to send it
with the first convenience to me, or to the Committee of Council appointed for
Irish Affairs.

You are to get the best Informations you can, what force the Enemy has, as
well Horse as Foot; in what Condition the Troops are, and how Armed, and what
care is taken for their Subsistence, whether by providing Magazines and Stores,
or by trusting to the Provisions they shall find where they March.

You are to enquire what new Levies have been made, of Horse, Foot or Dragoons,
by those Colonels who had their Commissions sent them some time since by
Captain Layton, of what Numbers they are, and how disposed of.

Given at the Court of White Hall, this 11th. Day of March, 1688/9. Shrewsbury.

Mr. Cairns Certificate.
Charles Earl of Shrewsbury, Waterford and Wexford, etc. one of the Lords of
His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, and Principal Secretary of State.
MR. David Cairns, the Bearer hereof, being appointed by the Committee for
Irish Affairs forthwith to repair to Londonderry; These are to Certify whom
it may concern, that the said Mr. Cairns has for these two months last past
attended constantly his Majesty and the Council in behalf of the said City, and
that he has behaved himself with Prudence, Diligence and Faithfulness.

Given at the Court at Whitehall this 11th Day of March. 1688/9. Shrewsbury.

Articles at a Council of War, at Derry, April 10th. 1689.
At a Council of War at Londonderry, Present, Coll. Robert Lundy, Coll. James
Hamilton, Coll. Hugh Mongomery, Lieut. Coll. Whitney, Lieut. Coll. White,
Lieut. Coll. Johnsten. Lieut. Coll. Shaw. Major Barry, Major Tubman. Lord
Blayney, Sir Nich. Atchison, Coll. Francis Hamilton, Lieut. Coll. Ponsonby,
Major Crofton, Major Hill, Major Phillips. Capt. Hugh Mac Gill.


1. REsolved, That a mutual Engagement be made between all the Officers of this
Garrison and the Forces adjoining, and to be signed by every Man. That none
shall desert or forsake the Service, or depart the Kingdom without leave of a
Council of War: If any do, he or they shall be looked upon as a Coward and
disaffected to the Service.

2. That a Thousand Men shall be chosen to be part of this Garrison, and joined
with the Soldiers already herein, to defend the City; the Officers of which
thousand, and the Garrison Officers, are to enter into the Engagement aforesaid.

3. That all Officers and Soldiers of any of our Forces, in the Neighborhood,
not of this Garrison, shall forthwith repair to their respective Quarters and
Commands.

4. That all Colonels and Commanders of every Regiment, or independent Troop
or Company be now armed and fitted, that so we may take up Resolutions for
Field-service accordingly: The Lists to be sent hither by Saturday next.

5. That the several Officers in their respective Quarters, shall take care to
send in Privisions to the Magazines of this Garrison, for supply thereof: And
take care that they leave with the Owner thereof some of their Victuals and
Provisions for their own Supports, and to send in Spades, Shovels and Pick-axes.

6. That the Thousand Men to be taken into this Garrison shall have the old
Houses about the Walls and Ditches without the Gates divided among them, to be
levelled with all possible speed.

7. That the several Battalions and Companies in the City shall have their
several Stations and Posts assigned them, to which they shall repair upon any
sudden Alarm.

8. That all Persons of this Garrison, upon beating of the Retreat every Night,
shall repair to their several Quarters and Lodgings.

9. That a pair of Gallows shall be erected in one of the Bastions, upon the
Southwest of the City, whereupon all mutinous or treacherous Persons of this
Garrison shall be executed, who shall be condemned thereunto by a Court Martial.

10. That the Articles of War shall be read at the Head of every Regiment,
Battalion, Troop or Company; and that all Soldiers shall be punished for their
transgressing them, according to the said Articles.

11. That every Soldier of the Garrison, and Non-commissioned Officers shall be
weekly allowed out of the Magazines eight quarts of Meal, four pound of Fish,
and three pound of Flesh, for his weekly subsistence.

12. That every Soldier, and Non-commissioned Officer shall be allowed a quart
of small Beer per diem, as soon as the same can be provided, until some Money
shall come to allow them pay.

Agreed upon at the said Council of War, and ordered to be copied.
WILLIAM R.
Orders and Instructions for our Trusty and well-beloved John Cunningham,
Esquire, Coll. of our Regiments of Foot, and upon his Death or Absence to
Colonel Solomon Richards, or the Officer in Chief with the Regiments whereof
they are Colonels.
YOU are without delay to repair to the Quarters of the Regiment under your
Command, and to take care that it be in a readiness to march to Liverpoole at
such time as you shall appoint.

Whereupon you are to go to Liverpoole, and to enquire what Ships there are in
that Port appointed to carry over the two Regiments, whereof you and Solomon
Richards are Colonels, to the Town of Londonderry, And whether the Frigate
ordered for their Convoy be arrived there. And as soon as the said Ships and
Frigate shall be in a readiness to sail, and fitted with all Provisions
necessary for the sustenance of the said Regiments, in their passage to the
said Town, and for their return from thence if there be occasion; you are to
cause Colonel Richards Regiment to go on Board, and at the same time to order
the Regiment whereof you are Colonel to march to Liverpoole, and to embark
with all speed.

And whereas we have ordered a Thousand Arms to be carried to Liverpoole, you
are to cause such a number of the said Arms as shall be wanting in the said
Regiments to be delivered unto them; And the Residue of the said Arms and
Stores, now there, to be put on Shipboard, and carried to Londonderry, to be
there employed for our Service, as the Governor of the said Town and you shall
think fit.

And we having also directed the Sum of 2000 l. Sterling, to be paid unto you
at Chester by Matb. Anderton Esquire, Collector of our Customs there; you are
hereby authorized and required to receive the same, and to dispose of the said
sum toward the necessary subsistence of the said Regiments, and for the
Defense of the said Place, in preparing and providing what shall be defective
therein; and to such other Uses as you with the Governor of the said City,
with whom you are to entertain a good correspondence and friendship, shall find
necessary for our Service. Of all which expenses you are to give us an Account
the first opportunity.

When the particulars necessary for the Voyage shall be fully complied with;
you are then, Wind and Weather permitting, with the Regiments under your
Command, to make the best of your way to Londonderry: And being arrived there,
or near that place, you are to make enquiry whether the said City be yet in the
hands of the Protestants, and whether you may with Safety put our said
Regiments into the same: And in that Case you are immediately to acquaint
Lieutenant Colonel Robert Lundy our Governor thereof, or the Commander in
Chief for the time being, with our care in sending those Regiments and Stores
for the further Relief of our Protestant Subjects in those parts; and
delivering him our Letter and Orders to him directed, you are to land the said
Regiments and Stores, and to take care that they be well quartered and disposed
of in the said City, following such Directions as you shall receive during your
stay there, from our said Governor Lieutenant Colonel Robert Lundy, in all
things relating to our Service.

You are to assure the Governor and Inhabitants of Londonderry of further and
greater succors of Men, Arms, Money and Provisions of War coming speedily from
England for their Relief, and the security of those Parts. And in the mean time
you are to make the best Defense you can against all Persons that shall attempt
to besiege the said City, or to annoy our Protestant Subjects within the same.

You are to give us an Account soon after your Arrival (and so from time to
time) of the condition of the Place, the Fortifications, Number, Quality and
Affection of the People, Soldiers, and others therein, or in the Country
thereabouts; and what quantity of Provisions of all sorts, for Horse, Foot and
Dragoons, shall or may be bought up or secured in those Parts for our Service,
without the necessity of bringing any from England, upon sending more Forces
thither.

You are to inform us whether Captain James Hamilton be arrived at
Londonderry, and how he has disposed of the Money and Stores committed to his
charge. And in general you are to return us an Account of every thing, which
you in your discretion shall think requisite for our Service.

In case you shall find it unsafe to land the Regiments at or near
Londonderry, so as to put them into the Town, which you are to endeavor by
all reasonable and prudent means, you are not to expose them to extraordinary
hazard in so doing; but to take care that they be carried in the same Ships,
and under the same Convoy, with the Arms, Stores, Money and Provisions above
mentioned to Carickfergus; and to endeavor the landing of them there, if the
same may be done with safety, or otherwise to Strangford; at both or either of
which places you are to use the same caution, and to follow as near as may be
the like Directions, as are now given you in relation to Londonderry: But in
case you do not find it for our Service to land the said Regiments at any of
the said places, you are then to take care that they be brought back to the
Port of Liverpoole, giving us speedy notice for our further Orders.

Given at our Court at Whitehall this 12th. Day of March, 1688/9. By his
Majesty's Command, Shrewsbury.
In the First Year of our Reign.
WILLIAM R.
A^^itimal (...) for our Trusty and well b^^^^ed Collon^l John Cunningham, or
the Officer in chief, with our two Regiments of Foot, whereof he and Colonel
Richards are Collo^^s.
WHereas we have ordered 2000 l. Sterling to be paid unto you by several Bills
of Exchange, over and above the 2000 l. you shall receive from our Collector in
the Port of (...); You are accordingly to receive the same: And upon your
Arrival at our City of Londonderry, to pay 500 l. thereof to our Trusty and
well beloved Robert Lundie Esquire Governor thereof, as of our Royal Bounty,
in part of the reward we intend him for his faithful Services: And the residue
of the said 2000 l. you are to apply toward the defraying the contingeut
charges, which our said Governor, your self and Colonel Richards shall find
requisite for the Security of that Garrison, or of such other place where our
said Regiments shall Arrive, or be put on Shore. Provided always, that you do
not in any manner put off or delay the departure of our said two Regiments from
Liverpoole to Londonderry, in cafe the said Sum be not immediately paid unto
you by the respective Persons, from whom it is to be received.

Given at our Court at Whitehall, the 14th of March 1688/9 in the first year of
our Reign. By his Majesty's Command. Shrewsbury.

Colonel Tiffins and Captain Lyndons Certificate to Colonel Cunningham.
THis is to certify whom it may concern, that we Z^cha^ah Tiffin Colonel of
one of their Majesty's Rigiments of Foot, and John Lyndon Captain in one
Colonel Stuarts Regiment, together with Captain Wolfrane Cornwall Commander of
the Swallow Frigate, were sent by Colonel Cunningham on the 15th day of April
last, from (...) Castle to Londonderry, with a Letter he then wrote to Colonel
Lundy, to desire his Orders and Directions, for the best and securest way of
putting into the Town the two Regiments then on Board the Fleet at Anchor near
the Castle, where the Tide had failed so as they could not Sail up that Night.
We accordingly went to Londonderry, where Colonel Lundy having read the
Letter, told us Affairs were in great Confusion, and a much worse posture than
could be imagined: Therefore desired Colonel Cunningham would leave the Fleet,
with the Soldiers on Board still at Anchor, and come next Morning to Town with
Colonel Richards, and what other Officers they thought fit; Where he intended
to call a Council of War, and give a further account of the Condition of the
Garrison. With these Orders we returned that Night to Colonel Cunningham, who
in pursuance thereto, with Colonel Richards and several of their Officers,
went up next Morning to the Town. All which we certify under our Hands the
30th day of September 1689.

Zathariah Tiffin. John Lyndon.
From the English Camp near Dundalk in Ireland. I do also Testify this
Certificate to be true,

Dated the 26th of October, 1689. Wolfranc Cornwall.



Instructions for our Trusty and well beloved Robert Lundy Esquire, Governor
of our City and Garrison of Londonderry in our Kingdom of Ireland.
WHereas we have thought fit to send two of our Regiments of Foot, under the
Command of Colonel Cunningham and Colonel Solomon Richards, for the Relief of
our City of Londonderry; We do hereby Authorize and Empower you to admit the
said Regiments into our said City, and to give such orders concerning their
Quarters, Duty and Service, during their stay in those parts, as you shall
think fit for the security of the said City and Country thereabouts.

And whereas we are sending to our said City of Londonderry further Succors
of Money, Men, Arms and Provisions of War; We do expect from your Courage,
Prudence and Conduct, that in the mean time you make the best defense you can
against all persons that shall Attempt to Besiege the said City, or to annoy
our Protestant Subjects within the same, or within the Neighboring parts; And
that you hinder the Enemy from possessing themselves of any Passes near or
leading to the said City; giving all Aid and Assistance you may with Safety to
such as shall desire it, and receiving into the said Town such Protestant
Officers, and Men able and fit to bear Arms, as you may confide in; whom you
are to form into Companies, and to cause to be well exercised and disciplined.
Taking care withal, that you do not take in more unuseful People, Women and
Children into the said City, than there shall be a Provision sufficient to
maintain, besides the Garrison. You are to give us an account as soon as may
be, and so from time to time, of the Condition of our City of Londonderry, the
Fortifications, Number, Quality and Affections of the people, Soldiers and
others therein, or in the Country thereabouts; And what quantity of Provisions
of all sorts, for Horse, Foot, and Dragoons, shall or may be bought up or
secured in those-parts for our Service, without the necessity of bringing the
same from England, upon sending of more Forces thither.

Lastly, We do recommend unto you, that you entertain good Correspondence and
Frienship with the Officers of the said Regiments, and more especially with the
respective Colonels of the same: Not doubting but by your joint Councels, and
by your known Courage, as well as your Affection to the Protestant Religion;
which we shall not fail to reward with our Royal Favor and Bounty, the said
City will continue under our Obedidience, until upon the Arrival of an Army,
which we are sending from England, all things shall be in such a posture, as
that we may there with the Blessing of God, restore in a short time our Kingdom
of Ireland to its sormer Peace and Tranquillity.

Given at our Court at Whitehall, the 12th day of March 1688/^ in the first
year of our Reign. By his Majesty's Command.

Proposals of Articles to be made to the Right Honorable Lientenant G^neral
Hunnston by the Governors, Commanders, Officers, Soulaiers and Citizens of the
City and Garrison of Londonderry, the 11th of July 1689.
IMprimis, That all Persons, as well Officers and Soldiers, Clergymen and
Laymen, as others, that now are in the said City, or have been in the same
since the 7th day of December last, or that have born Arms against his Majesty
King James the Second, in the Provinces of Vlster and Connaught, or either of
them; Or that have been Aiding, Abetting, Counselling, Adviseing, or in any
ways assisting to them, or any of them, or any way deemed of that Party, shall
be pardoned and forgiven until the 26th day of July instant, of and from all
Treasons, Rebellions, Robberies, Felonies and other Offenses whatsoever, by
them or any of them, committed against his said Majesty, or any Person or
Persons whatsoever. And that such of the said Persons now alive, or which shall
be alive the said 26th day of July, and the Heirs, Executors, Administrators or
Assigns of such of them that are dead, or shall before that time be killed or
dye, shall be immediately restored to all their personal and real Estates; as
if they or any of them had never taken up Arms, or committed any offense
against his said Majesty, or any other Person or Persons whatsoever. And that
they and every one of them shall, and may have, hold and enjoy their said
Estates, with other their Rights, Liberties and Privileges, notwithstanding
any Act or Acts by them committed or done, or to be committed or done, against
his said Majesty, or any other Person or Persons whatsoever, until the 26th of
July Instant. And that they, their Heirs Executors, Administrators or Assigns,
shall have their Estates Personal and Real put in their actual Possession
immediately after the said 26th of July Instant. And that from the date hereof,
there shall no wast or harm be committed, suffered or done, on any of their
Lands, Iaheritances, Possessions, Woods, Farms, Houses, Mills, Barns, Kills,
Stables, or other Houses, or on any of their Corns, and other Goods and
Chattels.

2. That all Ecclesiastical Persons of the Protestant Religion within the
said-Provinces, shall immediately have the possession of their several
Churches, Chapels, Tithes, and other Ecclesiastical dues, and enjoy the same,
as they did before the 7th day of December last. And that all other
Protestants, as well Ministers as others, shall from the said 26th of July
Instant, have the full and free benefit and exercise of their Religion, as they
had before the said 9th of December.

3. That all persons whatsoever now in Lendon-derry, shall have free liberty to
depart this Kingdom for England or Scotland: And those that are willing to
remain in this Kingdom, shall have safe Conducts to Dublin, or any other part
in Ireland, with their Goods and Chattels. And those that have a mind to
transport themselves by the Shipping under the power of the said King, or by
other English or Scottish Ships, shall have Passports from time to time allowed
them, and liberty of Boats from England or Scotland to transport them.

4. That all persons to be pardoned, that please, shall transport and carry
with them their Goods and Chattels, unless they have a mind to sell them here,
and that then they may have liberty to dispose of them to their best advantage.
And likewise those that depart the Kingdom, shall be put in Possession of their
Goods and Chattels, Lands and Tenements, by their Attorneys, which they
formerly enjoyed, and Reprisals of Goods and Chattels, if not to be found in
specie.

5. That such Persons, Men, Women, and Children, as are not able to Travel to
their respective Habitations, shall have a sufficient competency of Provisions
to maintain them, until they be able to depart and get to their several
Dwellings. And that all Officers and Soldiers that are sick or wounded, now in
the Garrison of Londonderry, or shall be there the 26th. of July instant,
shall have the same allowance and provision, and as great care taken for their
Recovery, as those of the said Kings Army; and that from time to time, they
shall be sent into England or Scotland, or to any part in Ireland, as they
shall think fit, and convenience shall offer, with Provisions and safe Passes.

6. That all persons here designed to be pardoned, shall have reprisals of
their Goods and Chattels immediately after the said 26th. of July instant,
given them by the said Lieutenant General; and until they shall be so reprised,
they shall have sufficient Provisions of Meat, Drink, and Bedding allowed and
given them.

7. That no person or persons hereby designed to be pardoned, shall be forced
to take any Oath to his Majesty, but those that voluntarily enter into his
Service in the Army, or shall take on him some Office or Place of Trust, nor
shall they be compelled to enter into his Majesty's Service.

8. That if any Prince or State, shall Land an Army in this Kingdom against the
said King, the persons hereby designed to be pardoned, and which shall remain
in the same, shall not be molested any ways in his Body, Goods, or Estate, they
not taking up Arms against his Majesty.

9. That no person or persons hereby designed to be pardoned, shall hereafter
be Sued, Arrested, Impleaded, or Imprisoned, at the Suit of the King, for any
Debt due to his Majesty before the Date hereof. And that none of the persons
aforesaid, hereafter shall be Sued, Arrested, Impleaded, or Imprisoned, for any
Wounding, Maiming, Trespassing, taking of Goods or Chattels, or for any other
cause whatsoever accrued, or which shall accrue, before the said 26th. of July,
by any party or person whatsoever, other than for Debt, and not for Debt for
twelve Months from the Date hereof. And that his Majesty shall not call for, or
receive any of his Crown-Rents, Quit-Rents, Hearth-Money, Excise or License of
Wine, Ale, Beer, Strong Water due, or which shall fall due unto him, by any of
the persons aforesaid, before the said 26 of July.

10. That no Interest of Money, shall be allowed or paid, from the first of
May, 1688, until the first of November, 1690, and then but a moderate Interest,
and not according to the rate of Ten pound per cent. per annum.

11. That the Officers and Gentlemen, hereby designed to be pardoned, that will
remain in this Kingdom, and each one of them a Servant, shall have liberty to
keep and wear Pistols and Swords, and keep their Fuzees without Molestation;
and the Citizens and Townsmen to have the like Liberty: And that the rest of
the people may keep their Swords, and wear them.

12. That the said Half-Pike-men, and Rabble of the mere Irish in the said
Provinces, be disarmed, and care taken that they Kill not, Rob or spoil the
Protestants in the said Provinces; and that they be sent to their Habitations,
and not suffered to cotier and wander in the Country, or use reproachful
Language to the Protestants.

13. That all Troops and Companies, now in the City of Londonderry, which
please, shall have liberty to depart, either by Land or Water, to Culmore, or
any part near the same for convenience of Shipping, and that with their Arms,
Colors flying, Drums beating, light Matches, and a suitable quantity of
Ammunition, and there to Ship or Embark; and shall before their departure,
deliver up to the said Lieutenant General, or to such whom he shall appoint for
his Majesty's use, the Possession of the said City, with all Stores,
Ammunition, Artillery, and other Implements and Habiliments of War, other than
the Arms herein before excepted

14. That all and every Person and Persons whatsoever, that have taken the
Possession of the Lands, Houses, Farms, of the Persons hereby designed to be
pardored, shall immediately duit the Possession of the same, and restore them
to the Owners, or their Agents and Assigns, with their Goods and Chattels now
in their Possession; and that the said Owners, their Agents and Assigns, may
cut and carry home their Corn and Hay.

15. That all the said Articles and Conditions, or such of them as shall be
thought needful, by those that are designed to be pardoned, shall within (...)
be confirmed by Act of Parliament, to be passed in this Kingdom, or by the
King, under the great Seal of Ireland.

Provided always, that no person or persons, now in Arms against the King, in
or about Inniskillin, Bellishanny, Donegall, or Killebeggs, that will accept of
these or the like Articles, before the said 26th. day of July, shall have the
benefit of them, they or their chief Commanders, having eight days notice of
these Articles before the said 26th. of July, by having delivered to them
Copies of them, which are to be sent them by the said Lieutenant General, by
some of his party, and some of this Garrison.

16. That a convenient number of persons be appointed as Commissioners in this
City, and in each County of the said Provinces, before the 26th. of July, by
the said Lieutenant General and the Governors, Commanders, Off^cers and
Soldiers of this Garrison, with sufficient Authority, to see these Articles
made good and performed.

17. That Hostages be given, by the said Lieutenant General to the Garrison of
Derry, to be kept there, or on Board of the English Ships now in the River of
Foil, viz.

And for the Garrison of Derry

to be given as Hostages, and kept in their Camp, or at Strabane, Lifford, or
Raphoe.

18. That during the time of Treaty, and until the said 26th. day of July, (if
in the mean time no Army shall come to relieve the City,) there shall be a
Cessation of Arms between the Besiegers and the Besieged, and that no Acts of
Hostility shall be committed by either side, provided that none of either
party, (but such as shall have Licenses,) shall come within the Lines of the
other.

19. That as well the Persons that are in this Garrison, or shall be there the
26th of July, as shall embarque or Ship for England or Scotland, as those that
go to the Country, shall at their departure hence, have Horses and Boats
allowed them, for carrying the Officers, Sickmen, Women, and Children home to
their several Habitations, or places whither they have a mind to resort.

Provided always, that these Articles shall not be binding on either Party, in
case the said City shall be relieved, by the English or some other Army before
the said 26th. day of July, and if it shall be so relieved, that then the said
Hostages delivered on both sides, shall be delivered to each other in safety.

The COMMISSION.
TO all Christian people to whom these presents shall come: Know ye, that we
the Governors, Commanders, Officers, Soldiers, and Citizens, now in the City
and Garrison of Londonderry, have nominated, constituted, appointed and
authorized, and by these presents do nominate, constitute, appoint and
authorize, Colonel Hugh Hamil, Colonel Thomas Lance, Captain Robert White,
Captain William Dobbin, Matthew Cockins, Esquire, and Mr. John Mac-Kenzey, as
Commissioners for us, and in our Name, to repair to, and treat with the Right
Honorable Lieutenant General Richard Hamilton, now encamped against
Londonderry, with an Army of his Majesty's King James the Second, besieging
the said City and Garrison, or to somewhere near the said Camp and City, or to
Colonel Dominick Sheldon, Coll. Gordon O Neal, Sir Neal O-Neal, Sir Edw.
Vaudry, Lieutenant Colonel Skeleton, and Captain Francis Marow, Commissioners
nominated, constitutted, appointed and authorized by the said Lieutenant
General Hamilton, and there to treat with him or them, concerning the rendering
up of the said City and Garrison to the said Lieutenant General, for his
Majesty's use, with all the Stores, Ammunition, Artillery, Arms, Implements,
and Habiliments of War, according to the annexed Instructions and Articles, and
such other Instructions and Articles as you shall from time to time have from
us; and on such other Articles, matters and things, as shall be proposed to you
our said Commissioners, by the said Lieutenant General, or by his said
Commissioners. And on such Treaty to conclude on such Articles, matters and
things* for the delivering up of the said City, to the said Lieutenant General,
or whom he shall appoint, with the said Stores, Ammunition, Artillery, Arms,
Implements and Habiliments of War, for his Majesty's use; and for the giving
and receiving of Hostages, for the performance of what shall be stipulated and
agreed upon: And the same to reduce into Writing, and Sign and Seal, and to
receive the counterpart thereof Signed and Sealed by the said Lieut. Genesis or
the said Commissioners for us and in our behalf. And what Articles, Matters and
things you shall agree upon, and reduce into Writing, and Sign and Seal, for
us, and on our behalf, We by these Presents bind and oblige our selves to
observe, keep and perform entirely. In Witness whereof, we hereunto put our
Hands and Seals, at Londonderry, this 12th. Day of July, 1689.

Signed and Delivered in the Presence of Francis Hamilton. Robert Cockrane.
James Young, Stephen Herd. David Ross. Robert Wallace. Christophilus Jenney.
Arth. Noble. Adam Downey. Arch. Hamilton. Henry Arkwright. Tho. Ash. Theophilus
Morison. Will. Ragston. Will. Hamilton. Warren Godfre^. Geo. Holmes. J^.
Hender^on. Hercules Burleigh. *George Walker. John Mitchelb^rn. Richard
Crofton. Adam Murray. Hemy Monroe, Stephen Miller. Alexander Stewart. John
Crooks. Will. Campbell. Will. Draper. James Grabame. John Cockrane. Fran.
^brey. John Crof^on. John Thompson. Will. Mare. Richard Aplin.


* I should not take notice of so trivial a thing as Mr. W^^^er's signing
first, if it had not been improved into an Argument of his being Governor of
the Garrison, as well as the Stores. But, as the foremen^ioned Debates about
this very Commission, as well as the whole Story of the Seige, evidently show
the contrary: So to obviate this Objection against the Truth of those passages,
I am obliged to add, That Mr. Walker's signing first in some Papers during the
Siege, was partly owing to the Modesty and Complaisance of Governor Baker, and
afterward Governor Mitchelburn, but much more to the forward Temper of
Colonel Walker; who when Governor Baker or Mitchelburn signed first, seldom
failed to crowd in his Name before them. Of which I could produce several
notorious Instances, but shall only mention a late one: Several Certificates
were signed by Mitchelburn in Nov. last to some Officers of Baker's Regiment,
which, when brought here, he not only thrust in his Name above him, but blotted
out of each of these Certificates these words, Colonel Baker, [Governour of
the said City.]

THese are to Certify all whom it may concern, That the Bearer hereof, Robert
Louther, served during the late Siege of Londonderry, in the Station or Post
of a Lieutenant, in Captain Nicholas Holmes 's Company, under the Command and
Regiment of Colonel Henry Baker; (late Governor of the foresaid City) and
also after under the Command of Colonel St. John, and continued in the said
Regiment till the 9th Day of October, during which Siege he behaved himself
with good Conduct and Courage, both in the Sallies that were made against the
Enemy, and the Preservation of the said City.

Given under my hand at Londonderry the 27th Day of November. 1689. George
Walker. I. Mitchelburn.


And how far he was from being esteemed as Governor of the Garrison, even
after Governor Baker's Death, may appear by the following Testimony of one of
Major General Kirk's Officers, (who commanded the Soldiers in the Phoenix, when
Derry was relieved, and showed great Resolution in that eminent piece of
Service,) and I insert it the rather, because it cannot be reasonably suspected
of the least partiality.

As I was commanded in Person with my Detachments by Colonel Mitchelburn,
Governor of Derry; so during my stay there I observed in every particular, and
upon all occasions he not only was, but acted as sole Governor, and was the
only Person that Application was made to as such. --

Fiennes Twisleton


The same Gentleman confirms the Account given before concerning the Boom, and
even when the Ships came up to our Relief, they saw Boats working at it to
repair it, for some days before they made the Attempt.

An Account of Officers killed and taken by the Besieged in Derry, during the
Siege.
April 18. Captain Troy killed, as was considently reported. Killed at
Penny-burn-Mill, April 21. General Mammau. Major Taaffe. Major Wagon. Major
General Pusignian. Quartermaster Cassore. Captain Fitzgerald.
Killed at the Windmill, May 6. Brigadier General Ramsey. Captain Barnwell.
Captain Fox. Captain Flemming. Lieutenant Kelley. Lieutenant Welsh. Ensign
Barnwell. Ensign Kadel.
Prisoners taken. Lord Nettervile. Sir Gerrard Aylmer. Lieutenant Colonel
Talbott. Lieutenant Newcomen.
Killed at the Windmill, June the 4th. Lieutenant Colonel Farrel. Two French
Captains. Captain Graham. Lieutenant Bourk. Quartermaster Kelly. Adjutant
Faboy. Ensign Norris. Ensign Arthur.
Prisoners taken at the same time. Capt. Butler Son to my Lord Mountgarret.
Captain Mac Donnel. Captain Mac Donnaghy. Captain Wa^s^n. A French Lieutenant.
Lieutenant Eustace. Serjant Peggot.
Killed at the Butchers Gate, June 28. A French Lieutenant Colonel. Captain O
Bryan. A French Captain. An English Captain. An English Lieutenant. Captain
Maccarty.
Taken Prisoners. One Corporal Mac Guire. And one private Soldier.
Officers killed in several places about the Town. Lieutenant Fitzpatrick in
the Orchard on the other side the Water. Lieutenant Grneral O Neal. Ensign
Connelly killed in the Boat. Two Friars killed in their Habits. Ensign Ambrose
on the Mountains. Lieutenant Talbot had his Arm shot off at Culmore from the
Ships.
Drowned coming over to Clady, Major Nangle, and one Ensign as was reported.

An Account of all the Enemies Officers killed during the Siege.
Generals 1 Brig. Generals 1 Maj. Generals 1 Lieut. Colonels 3 Majors 5
Captains 16 Lieutenants 9 Ensigns 5 Sergeants 1 Corporals 1 Cornets 1
Quarter Masters 2 Adjutant 1 In all 49, and 2 Friars.

An Account of the Bombs.
Big. Small. April 24. 00 03 25. 00 03 27. 00 11 From the 27. till the 6 of
May, at several times -- 0 06 June 2. 03 01 3. 28 00 4. 37 00 5. 22 00 6. 30 00
7. 06 00 8. 36 00 11. 00 28 13. 26 00 21. 00 11 24. 06 00 27. 13 00 28. 22 00
29. 10 00 July 2. 00 22 3. 00 28 4. 14 00 5. 03 06 6. 05 10 7. 00 18 8, and 10.
00 24 11. 00 04 14. 00 18 15, and 16. 00 40 17, and 18. 00 26 19. 00 22 21. 00
28 261 326 Total 587, 'till the 22d. of July.

Memorand. That one of the great Bombs being brought to the Scale did weigh 272
l. pound, after 17 pound of Powder was emptied out of it.

And that one of the smallest being emptied, did weigh 34 pound.

July 22. 42 Cannon Ball thrown into the City, about 20 l. weight apiece,
before 9 of the Clock in the Morning: more Six the same Evening.

July 23. 20 more before Noon.

An Account of the Subsistence delivered out of the Stores to the Soldiers, by
the Store-keepers.
April 20. TO each Company a Barrel of Beef and a Boll of Meal. 27. To each Man
4 pounds of Beef, 4 quarts of Meal, and 3 pounds of Salmon.
May 4. To each Company a Barrel of Beef, 120 pound of Meal, half a hundred
weight of Butter. 11. Six Pounds of Meal for each private Man. 18. Two pounds
of Wheat to each Man. ^4. Half a Barrel of Beef to each Company, 120 pound of
Meal, half a Barrel of Barley.
June 1. To each Regiment 5 Barrels of Wheat, and 5 Barrrels of Shillin, to be
divided proportionably according to the number of Companies in each Regiment.
8. One pound and a half of Meal to each Man, and half a Barrel of Barley to
each Company. 15. Half a Barrel of Barley to each Company, and a pound of Meal
to each Man. 19. One pound of Meal, and one pound and a half of Wheat to each
Man. 21. One pound and a half of Wheat to each Man. 25. One pound of Tallow to
each Man, one pound of Meal, and half a pound of Beef, the Army consisting of
6185 Men.
July 4. To each Man one pound of Meal, one pound of French-butter, and two
pound of Ginger, the Army being 5709 men. 8. To each Man one pound of Meal, one
pound of French-butter; two pounds of Anniseeds to each Company, and one
quarter of a pound of Tobacco, the Army being reduced by Death to 5520 Men. 13.
To each Man half a pound of Meal, half a pound of Shillin, half a pound of
Beef, the Army consisting of 5334. 17. To each Man half a pound of Meal, half a
pound of Shillin, half a pound of Tallow, 3 pound of Salt Hides, the Army being
5114. 22. To each Man half a pound of Starch, a quarter of a pound of Tallow.
One pound of Anniseeds to a Company, the Army being 4973. 25. To each Man half
a pound of Tallow, half a pound of Shillin, three quarters of a pound of dry
Hides, the Army being 4892 Men. 27. To each Man half a pound of Meal, one pound
and a half of Beef, with two Pecks of Bay Salt to each Company, the Army being
4456 men. 30. To each Man three pound of Meal, two pound of Beef, one pint of
Pease, the Army being 4508 Men.



There was Subsistence delivered out to the Officers beside, though the
Allowance was but very small.

The Names of the Clergy that stayed in Londonderry, in the time of the Siege.
Conformists.
MR. George Walker of Donoghmore, near Dungannon. Mr. Christophilus Jinny of
Mullahbroak. Mr. Moses Davis of Donaghendrie. Mr. John Knox of Glaslogh. Mr.
Bartho. Black of Aghalow. Mr. Tho. Sempell of Donaghmore, near Cladyford. Mr.
Robert Morgan of Cappy. Mr. John Campbell of Sego. Mr. Andrew Robertson of
Derriloran. Mr. Mich. Mac Clenachan of Derry. Mr. Christy of Monaghan. Mr. Seth
Whittell of Balliagby. Dead. Mr. Will. Cuningham of Killishandra. Dead. Mr.
Rich. Crowther of Comber. Dead. Mr. James Watmough of Arigal. Dead. Mr. John
Rowan of Balteagh. Dead. Mr. -- Elingsworth near Newry. Dead.


Non-Conformists.
Mr. Tho. Boyd of Aghadowy. Mr. Will. Crooks of Ballykelly. Mr. John Rowat of
Lifford. Mr. John Mackenzie of Derilleran. Mr. John Hamilton of Donachedie.
Dead. Mr. Robert Wilson of Strabane. Dead. Mr. David Brown of Urney. Dead. Mr.
Will. Gilchrist of Kilrea. Dead.


FINIS.

