Ordered by the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled, That
Hubart Bourk, and John Macnamara, have hereby leave given them, to Print and
Publish their respective Informations or Narratives concerning the Popish Plot
formerly by them given in at the Bar of this House.

JOHN BROWN Cleric. Parlimentorum.

By Virtue of the Order above mentioned, I do appoint Randolph Tailor, near
Stationers' Hall, to Print this my Information; and that no other person or
persons do Print the same.

JOHN MACNAMARA.
December. 14. 1680.
THE INFORMATION OF John Macnamara, Gent.

Touching the POPISH PLOT IN IRELAND: Carried on by the Conspiracies of the
EARL of TYRONE, And others his Confederates, To deliver up that Kingdom to the
French King, and Establish the Popish Religion therein.

Being all Matter of Fact, delivered upon Oath to His Majesty, and both Houses
of Parliament, in November. 1680.

LONDON. Printed for Randolph Tailor, and are by him sold at his House near
Stationers' Hall, Anno 1680.

To the Right Honorable ANTHONY Earl of Shaftsbury.
May it please your Lordship,
THere is no question to be made, but that the Grand Enemies both of His
Majesty's Person and Government, did believe that their Party had been
sufficiently prevalent in England to have trampled upon Persons, whom they had
rendered friendless and impoverished in Ireland. Where Authority had made a
League with Greatness, and covered all it is faults; as if the Earl of Tyrone
could not be Guilty, because he was a Person of so high a degree Kindred,
Friends, Relations, Tenants and Dependants all assisted Him; but the Detectours
of his Conspiracies, had not one Patron to take them into his Protection.
England they soon found deeply apprehensive of the Dangers that threatened one
of the fairest Kingdoms of the British Monarchy. And certainly it could not
choose but be an Extraordinary Consolation of their former discouragements to
meet with, here, so many Eminent and worthy Patriots, Personages of chief
renown and Dignity, so readily giving ear to, and so judicially weighing and
examining the discoveries of their Loyalty. For my own part, it was not only
known to me, for It was known to all the Christian World, how conspicuous your
Lordship had always been for your indefatigable Zeal, and Vigilance over the
safety of His Majesty's most Sacred Person, and the welfare of the whole Extent
of His Dominions.

This I observed to be the reason why so many of His Majesty's Loyal English
Subjects made their Addresses to your Lordship. And if I among the Irish am not
the first that have pressed to implore the Countenance of your Lordships
favor, it was only the want of a happy Opportunity to render my self capable
of so high an Honor. To which if now I presume to aspire, I hope it will prove
an argument, that I firmly intend to maintain and justify my Information, and
therebyin some measure to make my self worthy of that Noble Title of being.

My LORD, Your Lordships most humble, most faithful, and most obedient Servant,
John Macknamara.

THE INFORMATION OF John Macnamara, Gent.
THis Informant says, that in the Year 1676. one John Brenan, who was then
lately come from Rome, was made Archbishop of Cashell, Waterford and Lismere,
by one Plunkett, who by the Authority of Rome, pretended to be Primate of
Ireland, the said Brenan producing Bulls from the Pope to the said pretended
Primate for that purpose, together with several other Bulls brought over at the
same time by the said Brenan, of which Dean Power, the Earl of Tyrone's Kinsman
informed this Informant, as hereafter shall appear. In the year abovesaid this
Informant observed the tumultuous Gongregations of Priests and Friars, who
resorted to Knock-house, a House of Entertainment, three Miles Westward of
Waterford. This Informant took extraordinary notice of it, as being not a thing
so usual; insomuch that being in company with several of the said Priests, in
the said House, and that at several times; but especially with the aforesaid
Dean Power, who was nex in dignity to the said Brenan, this Informant began to
enquire the reason of their Meetings so public and so frequent in time of
Persecution. The said Power made answer, That he would satisfy this Informant
as to that, next Patron day, at Resk; which happened to be upon the Lady Day
following, and within a few days after the proposal of the Question.
Accordingly this Informant met at the time and place appointed, and there
received the following satisfaction. For the Congregations being gathered
together to confess and receive the Sacrament, after the Popish manner, one
Edmund Poor, a Jesuit, preached a Sermon, the substance of which was, to let
the Congregation understand, that they had an indulgence from the Pope of Rome
granted them, and liberty to eat flesh on Wednesdays. But in the conclusion
told them, that there was a consideration for which so great a Privilege as
that was granted; which the Priest of every Parish had orders to give in charge
to his Parishioners at the time of confession. Sermon being done, the Priests
fell to the exercise of their main duty, which was to confess the Congregation,
and this Informant being then one of that Religion, made his Confession to the
aforesaid Dean Power. Now at the time of his Confession, the said Dean gave
this Informant in charge as follows, That he should not divulge to any person
whatsoever, on pain of mortal sin and damnation; and as he would be thought
worthy of the holy Sacrament which he was to receive, what he should impart to
this Informant; upon which this Informant promised him he would not With that
he proceeded thus; That the aforesaid Indulgence and Liberty was granted upon
this account, That whoever was in a capacity to help and assist the Holy Cause
in the present Designs, and which had been in hand for a long time, might have
the benefit of the aforesaid Indulgencies, which was a pardon of sins for many
years. He further added, That the Clergy of Ireland were to have the benefits
and profits of the Tithes, accrewing out of each Parish, with the Gleabes and
Monks Lands and Appurtenances belonging unto them, which the Heretics had
wrongfully possessed for a long time. That great preferments were intended for
others; and that the French King, and the rest of the Popish Confederates,
together with the assistance of his Holiness the Pope, did intend immediately
to invade the Kingdoms of England and Ireland, and then proceeding, we do not
doubt, said he, but by the assistance of God to bring our design to pass in a
short time, and to wash the hands of Heretics out of the Estates of our
Ancestors; for that the Duke of York gives full consent, and is of our side,
besides that we have the assistance of the Earl of Anglesey, and several other
Persons of Quality in the Kingdom of England for whom we are to have
instructions to celebrate several hundreds of Masses, which he the said Dean
had accordingly ordered all the Parish Priests to do within his Titular
Jurisdiction. After which time this Informant observed, that there were several
Masses said; particularly for the welfare and prosperity of His Royal Highness
the Duke of York, and of the Earl of Anglesey, in several places of the said
County of Waterford; and in some of those Congregations, this Informant has
prayed himself for the said persons, according to the directions of the said
Priests and Dean. The said titular Dean moreover said, That the Earl of
Anglesey being assisted by the Duke of York, did endeavor that the Parliament
should not sit, to prevent the persecution of the Roman Catholics.

And this Informant further says, That in the year 1677. the Earl of Tyrone
produced unto this Informant a Letter sent over by Captain Daniel Macnamara,
setting forth, That what he expected from His Majesty, (meaning the French
King) was granted; and that Captain Garrett Fitz Girald, one of the French
Captains, was sent over with the Articles of Agreement, which were concluded on
by the French King, being all according to his Lordships desire, which was,
that his Lordship should raise a thousand Men in the County of Waterford; to
which purpose the French King had sent his Lordship a Commission, under his
Hand and Seal, to be a Colonel of Horse; and blank Commissions, to be disposed
of as his Lordship thought convenient, together with the said French King's
Propositions, which were, That his Lordship would be satisfied to have the
County and City of Waterford, to be his Lordships lot and share for his good
service. And further said, That if his Lordship did deserve it, he would make
him Lieutenant General of his Forces in that Kingdom.

This Informant further says, That in the same year, before that the said Earl
made this Informant privy unto this said Letter, the said Captain Garrett Fitz
Girald, by whom the said Message was sent, lodged at the said Earl's house for
one mouth, and that this Informant was several times in the said Captain's
company, both at Waterford and Caraghmore; and that the said Captain did
present the respects and service of the said Capt. Daniel Macnamara to this
Informant, as from a person of his familiar acquaintance; and also told this
Informant, that he the said Capt. was sent over by his King, meaning the French
King, with a Message to the Right Honorable Richard Earl of Tyrone.

This informant further says, That the said Capt. Fitz Girald desired this
Informant to let the Brother of this Informant go along with him the said Capt.
into France; and that he would get him an Ensigns place in the French King's
Service. This Informant informed the said Earl of that proffer made to this
Informant's Brother, but the said Earl made answer, that he should not go, in
regard he the said Earl did not know how soon an opportunity might fall to
prefer him to as good a place in his Native Country.

This Informant further says, That the said Captain Garret Fitz Girald, when
he saw his time, went away from the said Earls house in disguize, after he had
ended his business with the said Earl, and took a Ship immediately for France.

This Informant further says, that Capt. Daniel Macnamara came out of France
some time before, and this Informant meeting with him in the City of Waterford;
after his the said Captains Landing, went into one Mr. Goodricks house in
Waterford, to give the said Capt. his welcome into Ireland, as being one of this
Informants Relations and Name, where he fell into a discourse with the said
Capt. what his occasions of coming over were at that time. The said Capt. told
this Informant, that he was sent over by the French King, unto the Earl of
Tyrone, and from thence he would go to the County of Clare, and County of
Linmick, and deliver his Message there, and would immediately take shipping
again at Dingleicuse, and told this Informant withal, he should see an
alteration of the world very suddenly.

This Informant further says, That in the same year 1677. a friend of this
Informants, whose Wife had then a Child of this Informan is at Nurse, had a
difference with another man, which occasioned a quarrel between them, upon
which they both falling to blows, this Informants friend beat the other person,
who thereupon got a Warrant of the Peace against his Adversary, from one Andrew
Lynn Esquire, which as soon as this Informant heard of, he went to another
Justice of the Peace, one Mr. Bradley, being a friend of this Informants, to
procure a Superfedeas of Mr. Lynn's Warrant. The said Mr. Bradley presently
took this Informants word for the Appearance of his Acquaintance, and
discharged him from the Warrant above mentioned; and having so done, took this
Informant side, and then gave him an Oath of Secrecy, in reference to the Plot
intended, and designed in Ireland by the Earl of Tyrone, and the rest of the
Confederates agianst the King's Majesty. At which time he imparted to this
Informant, that the Earl of Tyrone had received a Commission from the French
King, to be a Colonel of Horse in the County of Waterford, and that he the
said William Bradley was to be his Lieutenant Colonel, and desired this
Informant to provide himself with Horse and Arms, and to procure as many as he
could of those he durst to trust; and that this Informant should have a Command
of a Captain under the said Earl and him. Whereupon this Informant did provide
himself, and spoke unto John Follio, James Finicon, and Denis Macnamara, to
provide themselves with such necessaries as were requisite for that purpose,
informing them also, that Mr. Bradley had imparted several matters of
concernment unto this Informant; and thereupon this Informant furnished them
all three with Arms, but to the said Denis Macnamara gave both Horse and Arms.
And this Informant also did accordingly impart the same matters to the said
John Folio, John Finicon, and Denis Macnamara, who being afterward sent for by
his Grace the Lord Lieutenant and Council, did confess the same during this
Informants Confinement; and that too before this Informant had liberty to speak
with them, or they with him, being then kept close Prisoner from any one of the
King's Evidence.

This Informant further says, That after the aforesaid William Bradley did
impart to this Informant the aforesaid Treason, this Informant met with the
Earl of Tyrone upon the Lands of Saveston in the County of Waterford, with two
of his Men, viz. Thomas Power his Gentleman, and Garrett Mac Teege his Fowler;
and another whose name is Luke Power; this Informant having in company with him
one William Power, and Boethius Clancy, being then abroad a hunting with their
Dogs. The said Earl, knowing this Informant at a distance, called to him, upon
which this Informant went to his Lordship. The said Earl then taking this
Informant from the company, asked him, whether Mr. Bradley had imparted to him
any matter of Secrecy? This Informant replied, he had. Thereupon the said Earl
told this Informant, that he must be very private, and discover it to none but
those he was very well assured of. After which, the said Earl drew a List out
of his pocket, and showed this Informant a Roll of the names of several persons
that were to be superior Officers, both in the County of Waterford, County of
Corks, County of Kerry, County of Limrick, and County of Clare, which this
Informant took special notice of, and knew several of the persons; and amongst
the rest, the Earl entered this Informants Name with his own Pen and Ink, in the
List; the said Earl telling this Informant he had his Commission sent him from
the French King under hand and seal, to be a Colonel of a Regiment of Horse in
the County of Waterford. And further added, that there was hardly a County in
Ireland, wherein persons were not appointed and commissioned by the French King
for that purpose. Among the rest his Lordship named, in the County of Limrick,
Colonel Pierce Lacy, and the Lord Brittas, Sir John Fitz Girald, David Fitz
Girald, and several others. In the County of Clare, John Macnamara, and several
others. In the County of Kerry, Sir Turlo Mac Mahoon, and several others; and
others in the County of Cork. And for the County of Waterford, the said Earl of
Tyrone named himself to be Coll. of Horse, Mr. Bradly to be his Lieutenant,
Quarterm after Ely for his Major, and Mr. John Butler senior, to be one of his
Captains, having at the same time in his hand a List of the Names of several
others. The said Earl saying, they were to raise several hunderds of Men in
every County, and that the superior Officers were to meet, on purpose that they
might return an exact Account of their Forces to the French King. Which being
done, and all things ready, the said King would land man thousands of his own
Men upon the Coast of the River Shamion; and as soon as they were landed, the
next business was to march to the City of Limrick, with a Party of 500 Men,
divided into two parts; the one Party to enter the City by Candlelight, and
that at several Gates; in which Attempt, such as best knew the City were
appointed to set upon the Guards, and keep them in play, while the other Party,
which was to be hard by the City, came up to their relief, the Body of the Army
being ordered to follow, with all the speed imaginable. By which means, said
the Earl, we do not question but to possess our selves of the City, and King's
Castle, and to expel all the English very suddenly. And indeed, said the Earl,
it is the providence of God to bring this downfall on that unjust King, the Duke
of Ormond, and his Children, that wronged me in so high a nature, upon the
account of Villiars. Therefore, said the Earl, go home, lose no time, but make
your selves ready; for we know not how soon occasion may require your
assistance, and speak to as many friends as you can, which accordingly this
Informant did, and provided Horse and Arms for the same purpose.

After Discovery made hereof by Hubert Bourke as you may read in his
Information, who partly knew of these proceedings, the said Hubert, upon his
Discovery, was bound by Recognizance to prosecute the said Earl at the next
Assizes at Waterford; but for want of this Informants and other testimonies;
and for other Reasons mentioned in his Examination, he was forced to absent
himself from the Assizes, unto which he was bound, as is before mentioned.

In reference to which, this Informant says, that in the month of August, in
the year 1677, when the Earl of Tyrones Trial was to be at Waterford; when Mr.
Hubert Bourk was also to prosecute the said Earl, the said Mr. Bourk preferring
a Petition to the Judges of Assize, and setting forth therein, that he wanted
his Witnesses, which were able to make out more than he could; naming Mr. Tho.
Sampson, Mr. Ed. Ivy, this Informant and some others, one Robert Power was
sent from the said Earl to this Informant with an express from the said Earl,
that this Informant should not appear in Court, for fear of being called in
question upon the same account. This Informant therefore absented himself for
the space of that day, until such time as there was intelligence brought him by
Mr. Boethius Clancy, that the said Bourk was run away. Upon which, this
Informant repaired to Waterford, and kept himself private for some time, but
sent word to the Earl of Tyrone, that he this Informant was in the said City.
Upon which, the said Earl sent one Edmund Power to this Informant desiring him
to come to his Lodging, which this Informant accordingly did, where he found
the said Earl and the Judges of Assize at Dinner at that time. Thereupon, this
Informant coming to the Chamber Door, desited the man of the House, who was one
Mr. Fish, to inform his Lordship that this Informant attended without.

Upon delivery of the said Message to the said Earl, one Captain Tho. Power,
one of the said Earls Relations, was sent to this Informant, to let him know,
that it was contrived by the said Earl, and advised by the said Judges, that
this Informant should not come near the said Earl for that time, for fear
notice should be taken of it by some persons tha^ were in Court, and that it
was directed by the said Judges, that this Informant should go to Caraghmore to
the said Earls house, where the said Earl would have a private conference with
him upon the whole Business, which accordingly this Informant did, and after
his coming to the said Caraghmore, this Informant sent word by Major John
Butler, to the said Earl, that he this Informant was there ready to attend his
Lordship. Upon which, the said Earl ordered a back door, leading to his private
Garden to be opened, by which this Informant was ordered to go in to the said
Garden, together with the said Major. John Butler. After a little time, the
said Earl entered at another door, and after some Ceremonies, asked this
Informant, whether he the said Information gave any Tolleration to the said
Bourke, to produce him this Informant as a witness? To which this Informant
made answer, no. Why, said the said Earl, Mr. Bradley swore to me at Matthew
Hores House, that you did, or else that Mr. Bourke could never have known so
much as he does. To which this Informant swore again, that he never did; but
that he had courted Mr. Ivy, being this Informants Tenant, to trappan Mr.
Sampson which was the said Earls late Steward, and that the said Ivy had
engaged to contrive the matter so, as to bring the said Sampson to Keale in
Craghs house at Kilmacthomas, and there to make him drunk, and that he the said
Ivy would make him confess that he knew nothing against the said Earl, in
reference to any Plot, that when the said Confession was to be made, Mr. Pierce
Power, Mr. William Power and this Informant, were to be in a private Room next
adjoining to hear and make information of the said Sampsons Confession.
Whereupon the said Earl was very well satisfied, and commending the said
contrivance, said that Bourk had not the wit to prosecute him without the
assistance of the said Sampson. However to prevent any further danger, said the
Earl. I would have you write unto the said Bourk, and bring him to some
composition. This Informant made answer, that he knew not where the said Bourk
was. Whereupon the said Earl told this Informant, that he was at Gurtens in the
County of Kilkenny, and that he heard that the said Bourk had a design for
England, to apply himself to the King and Council therefore to prevent that
mischief, said he go home, and write a Letter immediately to him; and let the
Contents of the Letter be, that you have urgent occasions with him, and that
you must of necessity have some private conference with him. According to the
said Earls instructions, this Informant went home, and writ a Letter to the
said Bourk, desiring him to come to this Informants house: but the said Bourk
refused so to do. Nevertheless, this Informant understanding afterward by a
Messenger sent by the said Bourk, where he was, being then removed from the
aforesaid Gurtens, whither the Earl had said he was retired, This Informant
went to Waterford, and there meeting with the said Bourke, courted him so long
to go with him to this Informants house, that after many persuasions, the said
Bourk consented to go along with this Informant. Of which, two days after, this
Informant went and gave notice to the Earl. Whereupon, the said Earl gave this
Informant these following Instructions. That this Informant should endeavor to
get the said Bourke to confess that one Squier Villiers, Capt. Nichols, Mr.
May, Mr. Bradley and Peter Anthony were the persons that had hited him the said
Bourke to accuse the said Earl; and that if he would acknowledge the same, and
give it under his hand, the said Earl promised he would give him the said
Bourke a Farm well stockt, together with a considerable sum of money, and would
save him harmless from any danger that could ensue.

This Informant in answer to the said Earl, knowing that the said Mr. Bradley
was concerned in the Plot, asked his Lordship the Reason, why he should go
about to bring the said Bradleys Name in question? The said Earl made Answer,
that Mr. Lyn, his very good friend, and Mr. Bradley had contrived it so, that
if Bourk did acknowledge the same, the said Mr. Bradley should confirm what the
said Bourk should say, and that he the said Earl should bring his Action of
Sandalum Magnatum, to the vallue of 40000 pound against the rest. After which
the said Earl appointed Major John Butler and Mr. John Ronan, to meet Mr. Bourk
and this Informant at Cariginure Mill, being also an Alehouse. And that this
Infarmant should appear as the said Bourks friend, and the other two for the
said Earl, which accordingly we did.

There we had a long conference about the business; but the said Bourk being
very obstinate, refusing to concur with our desire, though we proffered him the
said Farm and Stock and a thousand pound to boot,

We broke off, and the said Major Butler and Mr. Bourk went along with this
Informant to his House that night. The next morning the said Major Butler
departed with an Account to the said Earl, that we could not bring the said
Bourk to any composition. Upon which the said Earl immediately petitioned the
Lord Lieutenant, that whereas the said Bourk, according to his Recognizance,
had not appeared to prosecute him, that there might be some course taken
therein. Upon which, there was an Order granted for apprehending the said
Bourk, who thereupon was taken at this Informants House, and carried to Dublin
by the Pursivants, and examined the reason of his absenting himself from the
Assizes, where he was bound to prosecute the Earl of Tirone. He answered, that
he wanted the rest of the Witnesses, and being examined who they were? he said,
there wan^ed Mr. Sampson, Mr. Ivy and this Informant with several other
Witnesses, upon which the said Sampson and Ivy were sent for, and appeared; and
upon their appearance gave in an Information against Quartermaster Ely, John
Ronan, Major John Butler, Dawrence Sulivin, this Informant and several other
persons. Upon which Information, a Letter missive was sent for the aforesaid
persons together with this Informant, and directed to Quartermaster Ely,
notwithstanding he was accused.

The said Quartermaster having received the Letter, immediately repaired to
Caraghmore to the said Earls House, and showed him his Order, upon which the
said Earl sent Tho. Power his Gentleman for this Informant: But this Informant
being not at home at that time, the said Thomas Power followed this Informant
to Waterford, where he found this Informant in Company with the High Sheriff of
the said County and one Squire Welsh, a Relation and correspondent of the said
Earls, and told this Informant his Message, and that he must immediately repair
to Caraghmore, for that there were Orders from Dublin for this Informant and
the aforementioned persons to appear there, and answer a Charge laid against
them by the aforesaid Sampson, Bourk and Ivy. Upon which the said Squire Welsh,
Son to Sir Robert Welsh now or late living in this City of London, begged of
this Informant to appear for the said Earl, with promises of great rewards for
so doing, which this Informant promised he would do; the said Wealsh afterward
being one of the Grand Jury for the Trial of the said Earl. But this Informant
having sent his Horse home that night by his Servant, told the said Earls man
that he had never a Horse to go along with him. Upon which the said Earle's man
procured a Horse for th^^ Informant. In our journey to Caraghmore we met with
one Jasper Grant, that had been a Captain of one of his Majesty's Men of War,
who told this Informant that the said Earl had employed him the said Grant to
speak with this Informant, and to go seek him where ever he could find him, and
further said, that if this Informant did appear for the said Earl in Dublin, he
would reward him at a high rate. This Captain was also afterward admitted of
the Jury for the Trial of the said Earl.

This Informant further says, that after he arrived at Caraghmore at the said
Earls house, the said Earl together with the said Quartermaster Ely, took him
into the Garden; and there did engage this Informant not to discover any kind
of thing that he knew, and swear to the contrary of having any knowledge of any
Treason, and that Father Robert Power, the Titular Dean, would give an
Absolution to the said Informant for so doing, for that it was not a sin to
swear any thing to save a man's Life; and further told this Informant that Judge
Keating and Sir John Davis were the said Earls great Eriends, and would stick
close to this Informant, and gave the said Informant Letters to be delivered to
the said Judge, which were to Invalidate the Testimony of the aforesaid Bourk,
and which this Informant delivered accordingly, and found that what the said
Earl said was true; for during the time that this Informant denied the Treason,
and kept it undiscovered, the said Judge did Act for him as much as he could; so
that at night after the Council was up, the aforesaid Quartermaster, Ronan,
Sulivan and this Informant went to Sir. John Davis, being Secretary of State,
and one of the Earls great friends, all the while that this Informant was of
the said Earls Party; who gave us the aforesaid Witnesses a full Account of
what was done against us every day in Council.

This Informant further says, that the said Earl, at this Informants coming to
Dublin, exchanged one of his Gueldings with Mr. Michael Roe, because this
Informant should ride the said Roes Horse, for fear that there would be notice
taken of this Informants riding the said Earls Horse; and gave this Informant
money to bear his expenses to Dublin, with promises of greater rewards for
appearing for him; and withal, admonished this Informant in what danger he was
if he should discover the said Treason, as well as the said Earl, which very
much terrified this Informant and kept him from making any Discovery for a long
time.

This Informant further says, that the said Quartermaster Ely, after the
Commitment of this said Informant into the Pursivants hands by Order of the
Lord Lieutenant and Council, was with him every day, charging this Informant
not to discover, for his Life, the said Treason, for that if he did, he would
certainly be hanged; and gave this Informant money to bear his charges till the
said Earl could furnish him this Informant with more.

And this Informant further says, that one John Power Esquire, a Relation of
the Earls, together with Mr. Cowdal and Mr. Roe, proferred 700 l. security for
this Informant, during his Confinement, and brought this Informant a Petition
to prefer to the Lord Lieutenant and Council, wherein they had ordered this
Informant to move that the said security might be taken, with Reflections upon
the Kings Witnesses in a high nature; which this Informant kept, but never
preferred. And further says, that being alone in the Condition that he was,
this Informant made his Addresses by Prayer to Heaven, to direct him the said
Informant, being then at a stand, whether it were better for him to Discover
the Treason or to Conceal it, for the guilt lay so heavy upon this Informant's
Conscience, that he was in as much fear of himself, as of those that were most
concerned But at last, and he believes it to be the Effect of his Prayers, God
put it into his mind, that in was the truest way to discover what he knew. Upon
which this Informant gave in this his Information concerning the Plot, and his
knowledge of such Persons as were to be Commandders in the Army intended to be
raised by the Earl of Tyrone, and William Bradley Esquire for the use of the French
King.

This Informant further says, that at what time he went to the said Earl to
give him an Account of what this Informant and the rest had done with Bourk,
when they were ordered to tamper and make a Composition with him, the said Earl
of Tyrone showed this Informant a Letter from his Father in Law the Earl of
Anglesey, Signed Anglesey, and which the said Earl averd to this Informant, to
be his own Letter and Subscription, wherein this Informant read, that the said
Earl of Anglesey, had made so many Friends in England and Ireland for him the
said Earl of Tyrone, that there was no need to fear what was laid to his
Charge, and that he had spoken with the Duke of York about Interceding for him,
which the Duke had promised he would do.

This Informant further says, that the Earl of Tyrone did employ several
persons whose names were James Power, Richard Power, William Power and Owen
Whelam, formerly a Tory, and one of the said Earls followers, with several
others, to steal Horses from several parts of the Kingdom for the service of
the Army designed and promised by him to be raised, to join with the French
Kings Forces, which were expected to be Landed in Ireland. In pursuance of
which directions of his Lordship, the said persons did accordingly steal
several Horses of good value out of several parts of Ireland, and brought them
all into the County of Waterford, to the number of thirty or thereabouts, which
by order of the said Earl were distributed among such persons as were by him
engaged in, and privy to his design. Particularly, some to William Finch, the
said Earls menial Servant and a Papist, some to one Mr. John Welsh, Nephew to
the said Earl; some to this Informant, some to Mr. William Dobbin, and some to
Mr. William-Bradleys Servant John Labor, which by the Order of his Master he
received at Raghneskdoig, and some to John Power of Clonmel. But some of the
owners of the said Horses making pursuit after their stolen goods, and
apprehending by Virtue of a Warrant some of the Persons who had stolen their
said Horses, they were by Sir Thomas Osborn Committed to the Custody of one
Patrick Karney, then High Constable, and one of Mr. William Bradleys Fosterers,
to be by him Conveyed to the Goal of Waterford, from whence they were to be
removed to Maroborough Goal in Queens County. Whereupon, the said Mr. William
Bradley understanding that the said Persons were Apprehended, and as he knew
well upon what account, being doubtful least they might betray the Business,
immediately wrote to the said High Constable, his Fosterer, to set those
Persons at liberty. Upon which, the said High Constable, in the way to
Waterford, notwithstanding he had a sufficient Guard of Six petty Constables
and others Assistants, gave liberty to the Felons in Custody to make their
escape upon a couple of the stolen Horses that were led along with them,
bridled and saddled for that purpose. For doing of which, he had the engagement
of the said Mr. Bradley, and the said Earl of Tyrone to save him harmless.
Wherein they were as good as their words; for the said High Constable being
questioned at the next Assizes at Waterford, the said Earl and Mr. Bradley, by
their great interest in the High Sheriff, who was then that very William
Dobbins already mentioned, who had some of the said Horses in his Custody, and
being a Confederate provided the High Constable such a Jury that he was soon
acquitted: besides that the Judge of the Assize, the Lord Chief Justice Keating
was no less the Earl of Tyrones friend, then the High Sheriff.

And this Informant further says, that after this Informants appearing against
the Earl of Tyrone in the City of Dublin, John Folio and Mr. Denis Macnamara,
being in the company of this Informant, those Felons (of which mention has
been already made) did acknowledge the particulars aforesaid. Whereupon this
Informant together with one Mr. Edward Ivy, went to the Lord Chancellor of
Ireland, for Advice how to procure a Warrant for the apprehending the said
Felons. But in the Interim of time, the Wife of Richard Power, one of the said
Felons, went and Informed the forementioned William Dobbins, High Sherif of the
County of Waterford, that the said Felons did intend to appear against the said
Earl of Tyrone. Upon which the said Dobbins, with the assistance of one Captain
Morris, a friend of the said Earls, procured a Warrant to seize upon the said
Felons, before this Informant should do it himself. Which was done, and they
Committed to Newgate in Dublin; which this Informant no sooner understood, but
he, together with Mr. Hubert Bourk, went to the said Persons in Newgate, who
acknowledged before this Informant and Hubert Bourk, that they were committed
to prevent the appearance against the Earl of Tyrone and Mr. Bradley, and that
they had the same matters to inform, if they could be admitted their Liberty.
At the same time, this Informant and Mr. Bourk, being with the said Felons at
the same Conference, the aforesaid Mr. Dobbins and Captain Morris came into
the next Room, and sent for the said Felons out of this Informants Company, and
there concluded an Agreement with the said Felons, that they should not appear
against the Earl or Mr. Bradley, upon Consideration, that the said Dobbins and
Morris should clear them out of Goal, and obtain their acquitment from the
Crime laid to their Charge. Which the said Felons did acknowledge to this
Informant and Mr. Bourk the next Morning. The truth whereof appeared, for that
the said Persons were immediately Bailed by the said Dobbins and Morris, and
so discharged out of Goal.

This Informant further says, that although he cannot make the Information
himself, yet he believes he may be able to bring sufficient Testimony of the
quantity of Arms and Ammunition that was received by Mr. Bradley upon the
account of the Earl of Tyrone for the service of the French King, and where
they were by him Concealed, till occasion should require.

And this informant further says, that being in the City of London in April
last past, to complain of his own grievances, and the miscarriages of the Irish
Jury in the acquittal of the Earl of Tyrone, his Majesty and the Council were
pleased to order him back again, to make out before the Lieutenant and Council
in Dublin what he had here made known, which accordingly he did, viz. That the
Major part of the said. Jury were the Relations and the Dependents of the said
Earl of Tyrone and Mr. William Bradley, picked and cul'd not only out of the
proper County, but out of several other remote parts and places of the
Kingdom. During which time, for about a quarter of a year, he was not only
exposed to the Malice of his Enemies, but also to very great necessities,
without any Allowance or Consideration from the Lord Lieutenant. Whereas on the
other side a poor and needy Scotchman coming in and pretending a Sham-Plot of
the Presbyterians, and denying the Popish Plot, was immediately kindly
entertained and cherished, and well Rewarded for his pains Which said Scotchman
came also at the same time to this Informant, and endeavored to persuade this
Informant to join with him, and desist from Prosecuting the Papists, saying, it
would be far more advantageous to this Informant so to do than to Prosecute the
Popish Plot, in regard it was not minded, as being an Affair wherein the Duke
of York was concerned. However in a short time after the said Scotchman gave
them the slip and run away.

This Informant further says, that in the same year, 1677. at the time when
William Bradley Esquire, imparted to this Informant the Design which was
carried on by the Earl of Tyrone, and the said Mr. William Bradley, together
with the rest of the Confederates, the said Mr. Bradley gave this Informant to
understand, that the French King would send Ammunition and Arms to furnish the
Army designed for the Service of the said French King in Ireland: and that
there were several persons in Ireland, appointed for receiving the same; and
that among the rest, he the said Mr. Bradley, was appointed for one; and that
he did expect the said Arms very speedily, together with the Ammunition
promised. He also said, that the Roman Catholic Clergy, both in England and
Ireland, made it part of their business to write Letters both to Rome and
France, and had their Agents abroad in those parts to solicit and procure the
raising of several thousands of pounds as well in Italy as in France, to
furnish and supply the wants of such as were employed by the Pope, the French
King and the rest of the Confederates. And that the said Arms should be landed
in the Creek of Ballirone, which lay within half a mile of his House, between
the City of Waterford and the Town of Dungarvan, which is also a Seaport-Town.

This Informant further says, that at the time of his Conference with the
Titular Dean of Waterford, Robert Power by Name, he told this Informant, that
one Dr. White was employed as an Agent betwixt the persons concerned in Ireland
and the Pope, to give the said Pope an account how Affairs were carried on, and
in what Condition the Kingdom stood. The said Titular Dean also further said,
that there was hardly a Province in Ireland, but there was one or other
employed for that purpose.

This Informant further says, that about two years since, the Earl of Tyrone
did acknowledge to this Deponent, that one James Lavalline, who was to murder
the King, was sent over into Ireland to be there secured from being
apprehended; and that the said Earl did receive Letters to that purpose from
his Highness the D. of York; upon which, he forthwith sent the said Lavalline
to his Kinsman Mr. John Power to be there kept private.

This Informant further says, that the persons concerned in this Conspiracy
for the County of Waterford, were the Earl of Tyrone, William Bradley, Esquire,
Quartermaster Ely, Mr. John Butler, Paul Strange, Richard Power, Pierce Welsh,
John Power, William Power, Pierce Power, Edmund Power, William Fits. Gerrald,
Michael Row, Richard Manswell, John Folio, James Fumigan, Denis Macnamarra,
John Lahor, and this Informant, with several others.

In the County of Limerick the Lord Brittas Bourk, Colonel Pierce Lacy, John
Harly, Sir John Fits-Gerrald, David Fits Gerrald, and several others.

In the County of Cork, William Fits-Gerrald, William Barry, James Barry,
Theoby Roch, David Coudon, Denis Mac Cartie, Teige Mac-Cartie, and several
other.

In the County of Kerry, Sir Tirlagh Mac-Mahon, Daniel Mac-Conor, Teige
Mac-Conor, John Sulivan, Derby Sulivan, Daniel Sulivan, and Garret Skack, with
several others.

In the County of Clare, John Macnamara, Tirlagh Obrian, with several others.

FINIS.
ARRATA, P. 9. l. 2. read for 1677. read 1679. and l. 26. for Fish, read Frith.


