OF True Religion, HAERESIE, SCHISM, TOLERATION, And what best means may be
used against the growth of POPERY

The Author J. M.

LONDON Printed in the Year, 1673.

OF True RELIGION, HAERESIE, SCHISM, and TOLERATION.
IT is unknown to no man, who knows ought of concernment among us, that the
increase of Popery is at this day no small trouble and offense to greatest part
of the Nation; and the rejoicing of all good men that it is so; the more their
rejoicing, that God has given a heart to the people to remember still their
great and happy deliverance from Popish Thraldom, and to esteem so highly the
precious benefit of his Gospel, so freely and so peacealy enjoyed among them.
Since therefore some have already in Public with many considerable Arguments
exhorted the people to beware the growth of this Romish Weed; I thought it no
less then a common duty to lend my hand, how unable soever, to so good a
Purpose. I will not now enter into the Labyrinth of Councels and Fathers, an
intangl'd wood which the Papist loves to fight in, not with hope of Victory,
but to obscure the shame of an open overthrow: which yet in that kind of
Combat, many heretofore, and one of late, has eminently given them. And such
manner of dispute with them, to Learned Men, is useful and very commendable:
But I shall insist now on what is plainer to Common apprehension, and what I
have to say, without longer introduction.

True Religion is the true Worship and Service of God, learnt and believed from
the Word of God only. No Man or Angel can know how God would be worshipped and
served unless God reveal it: He has Revealed and taught it us in the holy
Scriptures by inspired Ministers, and in the Gospel by his own Son and his
Apostles, with strictest command to reject all other traditions or additions
whatsoever. According to that of St. Paul, Though we or an Angel from Heaven
preach any other Gospel unto you, than that which we have preached unto you,
let him be Anathema, or accursed. And Deuteronomy. 4. 2. Ye shall not add to the word
which I command you, neither shall you diminish ought from it. Rev. 22. 18, 19.
If any man shall add, etc. If any man shall take away from the Words, etc. With
good and Religious Reason therefore all Protestant Churches with one consent,
and particularly the Church of England in Her thirty nine Articles, Artic. 6th,
19th, 20th, 21st, and elsewhere, maintain these two points, as the main
Principles of true Religion: that the Rule of true Religion is the Word of God
only: and that their Faith ought not to be an implicit faith, that is, to
believe, though as the Church believes, against or without express authority of
Scripture. And if all Protestants as universally as they hold these two
Principles, so attentively and Religiously would observe them, they would avoid
and cut off many Debates and Contentions, Schisms and Persecutions, which too
often have been among them, and more firmly unite against the common adversary.
For hence it directly follows, that no true Protestant can persecute, or not
tolerate his fellow Protestant, though dissenting from him in some opinions, but
he must flatly deny and Renounce these two his own main Principles, whereon
true Religion is founded; while he compels his Brother from that which he
believes as the manifest word of God, to an implicit faith (which he himself
condemns) to the endangering of his Brothers soul, whether by rash belief, or
outward Conformity: for whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin.

I will now as briefly show what is false Religion or Heresy, which will be
done as easily: for of contraries the definitions must needs be contrary.
Heresy therefore is a Religion taken up and believed from the traditions of
men and additions to the word of God. Whence also it follows clearly, that of
all known Sects or pretended Religions at this day in Christendom, Popery is
the only or the greatest Heresy: and he who is so forward to brand all others
for Heretics, the obstinate Papist, the only Heretic. Hence one of their own
famous Writers found just cause to style the Romish Church Mother of Error,
School of Heresy. And whereas the Papist boasts himself to be a Roman
Catholic, it is a mere contradiction, one of the Popes Bulls, as if he should
say, universal particular a Catholic Schismatic. For Catholic in Greek
signifies universal: and the Christian Church was so called, as consisting of
all Nations to whom the Gospel was to be preached, in contradistinction to the
Jewish Church, which consisted for the most part of Jews only.

Sects may be a in true Church as well as in a false, when men follow the
Doctrine too much for the Teachers sake, whom they think almost infallible; and
this becomes, through Infirmity, implicit Faith; and the name Sectary, pertains
to such a Disciple.

Schism is a rent or division in the Church, when it comes to the separating of
Congregations; and may also happen to a true Church, as well as toa false; yet
in the true needs not tend to the breaking of Communion; if they can agree in
the right administration of that wherein they Communicate, keeping their other
Opinions to themselves, not being destuctive to Faith. The Pharisees and
Saduces were two Sects, yet both met together in their common worship of God at
Jerusalem. But here the Papist will angrily demand, what! Are Lutherans,
Calvinists, Anabaptists, Socinians, Arminians, no Heretics? I answer, all
these may have some errors, but are no Heretics. Heresy is in the Will and
choice profestly against Scripture; error is against the Will, in
misunderstanding the Scripture after all sincere endeavors to understand it
rightly: Hence it was said well by one of the Ancients, Err I may, but a
Heretic I will not be. It is a humane frailty to err, and no man is infallible
here on earth. But so long as all these profess to set the Word of God only
before them as the Rule of faith and obedience; and use all diligence and
sincerity of heart, by reading, by learning, by study, by prayer for
Illumination of the holy Spirit, to understand the Rule and obey it, they have
done what man can do: God will assuredly pardon them, as he did the friends of
Job, good and pious men, though much mistaken, as there it appears, in some
Points of Doctrine. But some will say, with Christians it is otherwise, whom God
has promised by his Spirit to teach all things. True, all things absolutely
necessary to salvation: But the hottest disputes among Protestants calmly and
charitably inquired into, will be found less then such. The Lutheran holds
Consubstantiation; an error indeed, but not mortal. The Calvinist is taxt with
Predestination, and to make God the Author of sin; not with any dishonorable
thought of God, but it may be overzealously asserting his absolute power, not
without plea of Scripture. The Anabaptist is accused of Denying Infants their
right to Baptism; again they say, they deny nothing but what the Scripture
denies them. The Arian and Socinian are charged to dispute against the Trinity:
they affirm to believe the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, according to Scripture,
and the Apostolic Creed; as for terms of Trinity, Triniunity, Coessentiality,
Tripersonality, and the like, they reject them as Scholastic Notions, not to be
found in Scripture, which by a general Protestant Maxim is plain and
perspicuous abundantly to explain its own meaning in the properest words,
belonging to so high a Matter and so necessary to be known; a mystery indeed in
their Sophistic Subtilties, but in Scripture a plain Doctrine. Their other
Opinions are of less Moment. They dispute the satisfaction of Christ, or rather
the word Satisfaction, as not Scriptural: but they acknowledge him both God and
their Savior. The Arminian lastly is condemned for setting up free will
against free grace; but that Imputation he disclaims in all his writings, and
grounds himself largly upon Scripture only. It cannot be denied that the
Authors or late Revivers of all these Sects or Opinions, were Learned, Worthy,
Zealous, and Religious Men, as appears by their lives written, and the same of
their many Eminent and Learned followers, perfect and powerful in the
Scriptures, holy and unblameable in their lives: and it cannot be imagined that
God would desert such painful and zealous laborers in his Church, and ofttimes
great sufferers for their Conscience, to damnable Errors and a Reprobate sense,
who had so often implored the assistance of his Spirit; but rather, having made
no man Infallible, that he has pardoned their errors, and accepts their Pious
endeavors, sincerely searching all things according to the rule of Scripture,
with such guidance and direction as they can obtain of God by Prayer. What
Protestant then who himself maintains the same Principles, and disavowes all
implicit Faith, would persecute, and not rather charitably tolerate such men as
these, unless he mean to abjure the Principles of his own Religion? If it be
asked how far they should be tolerated? I answer doubtless equally, as being all
Protestants; that is on all occasions to give account of their Faith, either by
Arguing, Preaching in their several Assemblies, Public writing, and the
freedom of Printing. For if the French and Polonian Protestants enjoy all this
liberty among Papists, much more may a Protestant justly expect it among
Protestants; and yet some times here among us, the one persecutes the other
upon every slight Pretense.

But he is wont to say he enjoins only things indifferent. Let them be so
still; who gave him authority to change their nature by injoyning them? If by
his own Principles, as is proved, he ought to tolerate controverted points of
Doctrine not slightly grounded on Scripture, much more ought he not impose
things indifferent without Scripture. In Religion nothing is indifferent, but,
if it come once to be Imposed, is either a command or a Prohibition, and so
consequently an addition to the word of God, which he professes to disallow.
Besides, how unequal, how uncharitable must it needs be, to Impose that which
his conscience cannot urge him to impose, upon him whose conscience forbids him
to obey? What can it be but love of contention for things not necessary to be
done, to molest the conscience of his Brother, who holds them necessary to be
not done? To conclude, let such a one but call to mind his own Principles above
mentioned, and he must necessarily grant, that neither he can impose, nor the
other believe or obey ought in Religion, but from the Word of God only. More
amply to understand this, may be read the 14th. and 15th. Chapters to the
Romans, and the Contents of the 14th, set forth no doubt but with full
authority of the Church of England; the Gloss is this. Men may not contemn, or
condemn one the other for things indifferent. And in the 6th Article above
mentioned, Whatsoever is not read in Holy Scripture, nor may be proved thereby,
is not to be required of any man as an article of Faith, or necessary to
salvation. And certainly what is not so, is not to be required at all; as being
an addition to the Word of God expressly forbidden.

Thus this long and hot Contest, whether Protestants ought to tolerate one
another, if men will be but Rational and not Partial, may be ended without need
of more words to compose it.

Let us now enquire whether Popery be tolerable or no. Popery is a double thing
to deal with, and claims a twofold Power, Ecclesiastical, and Political, both
usurpt, and the one supporting the other.

But Ecclesiastical is ever pretended to Political. The Pope by this mixed
faculty, pretends right to Kingdoms and States, and especially to this of
England, Thrones and Unthrones Kings, and absolves the people from their
obedience to them; sometimes interdicts to whole Nations the Public worship of
God, shutting up their Churches: and was wont to dreign away greatest part of
the wealth of this then miserable Land, as part of his Patrimony, to maintain
the Pride and Luxury of his Court and Prelates: and now since, through the
infinite mercy and favor of God, we have shaken off his Babylonish Yoke, has
not ceased by his Spies and Agents, Bulls and Emissaries, once to destroy both
King and Parliament; perpetually to seduce, corrupt, and pervert as many as
they can of the People. Whether therefore it be fit or reasonable, to tolerate
men thus principl'd in Religion toward the State, I submit it to the
consideration of all Magistrates, who are best able to provide for their own
and the public safety. As for tolerating the exercise of their Religion,
supposing their State activities not to be dangerous, I answer, that Toleration
is either public or private; and the exercise of their Religion, as far as it
is Idolatrous, can be tolerated neither way: not publicly, without grievous and
unsufferable scandal given to all conscientious Beholders; not privately,
without great offense to God, declared against all kind of Idolatry, though
secret. Ezekiel 8. 7, 8. And he brought me to the door of the Court, and when I
looked, behold a hole in the Wall. Then said he unto me, Son of Man, digg now
in the wall; and when I had dug, behold a Door, and he said unto me, go in,
and behold the wicked Abominations that they do here. And verse 12. Then said
he unto me, Son of Man, have thou seen what the Ancients of the house of Israel
do in the dark? etc. And it appears by the whole Chapter, that God was no less
offended with these secret Idolatries, then with those in public; and no less
provokt, then to bring on and hasten his Judgments on the whole Land for these
also.

Having shown thus, that Popery, as being Idolatrous, is not to be tolerated
either in Public or in Private; it must be now thought how to remove it and
hinder the growth thereof, I mean in our Natives, and not Foreigners,
Privileged by the Law of Nations. Are we to punish them by corporal punishment,
or fines in their Estates, upon account of their Religion? I suppose it stands
not with the Clemency of the Gospel, more then what appertains to the security
of the State: But first we must remove their Idolatry, and all the furniture
thereof, whether Idols, or the Mass wherein they adore their God under Bread
and Wine: for the Commandment forbids to adore, not only any Graven Image, but
the likeness of any thing in Heaven above, or in the Earth beneath, or in the
Water under the Earth, thou shall not bow down to them nor worship them, for I
the Lord thy God am a Jealous God. If they say that by removing their Idols we
violate their Consciences, we have no warrant to regard Conscience which is not
grounded on Scripture: and they themselves confess in their late defenses, that
they hold not their Images necessary to salvation, but only as they are
enjoined them by tradition.

Shall we condescend to dispute with them The Scripture is our only Principle
in Religion; and by that only they will not be Judged, but will add other
Principles of their own, which, forbidden by the Word of God, we cannot assent
to. And the common Maxim also in Logic is, against them who deny Principles, we
are not to dispute. Let them bound their disputations on the Scripture only,
and an ordinary Protestant, well read in the Bible, may turn and wind their
Doctors. They will not go about to prove their Idolatries by the Word of God,
but run to shifts and evasions, and frivolous distinctions: Idols they say are
Laymens Books, and a great means to stir up pious thoughts and Devotion in the
Learned. I say they are no means of Gods appointing, but plainly the
contrary: Let them hear the Prophets; Jerem. 10. 8. The stock is a Doctrine of
Vanities. Habakkuk 2. 18. What profits the graven Image that the maker
thereof has graven it: The Molten Image and a teacher of Lies? But they
allege in their late answers, that the Laws of Moses given only to the Jews,
concern not us under the Gospel: and remember not that Idolatry is forbidden as
expressly, [in several places of the Gospel,] But with these wiles and fallacies
compassing Sea and Land, like the Pharisees of old, to make one Proselite, they
lead away privily many simple and ignorant Souls, men or women, and make them
twofold more the Children of Hell then themselves, Matt. 23. 15. But the
Apostle has well warned us, I may say, from such Deceivers as these, for their
Mystery was then working. I beseech you Brethren, says he, mark them which
cause divisions and offenses, contrary to the doctrine which ye have learned,
and avoid them; for they that are such serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, but
their own belly, and by good words and fair speeches deceive the heart of the
simplea Romans 16. 17, 18.

The next means to hinder the growth of Popery will be to read duly and
diligently the Holy Scriptures, which as St. Paul says to Timothy, who had
known them from a child, are able to make wise unto salvation. And to the whole
Church of Colossi; Let the word of Christ dwell in you plentifully, with all
wisdom, Coloss. 3. 16. The Papal Antichristian Church permits not her Laity to
read the Bible in their own tongue: Our Church on the contrary has proposd it
to all men, and to this end translated it into English, with profitable Notes
on what is met with obscure, though what is most necessary to be known be still
plainest: that all sorts and degrees of men, not understanding the Original,
may read it in their Mother Tongue. Neither let the Countryman, the Tradesman,
the Lawyer, the Physician, the Statesman, excuse himself by his much business
from the studious reading thereof. Our Savior says, Luke 10. 41, 42. Thou art
careful and troubled about many things, but one thing is needful. If they were
ask't, they would be loath to set earthly things, wealth, or honor before the
wisdom of salvation. Yet most men in the course and practice of their lives are
found to do so; and through unwillingness to take the pains of understanding
their Religion by their own diligent study, would fain be saved by a Deputy.
Hence comes implicit faith, ever learning and never taught, much hearing and
small proficience, till want of Fundamental knowledge easily turns to
susperstition or Popery: Therefore the Apostle admonishes, Eccles. 4. 14. That
we henceforth be no more children tossed to and fro and carried about with
every wind of Doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness whereby
they lie in wait to deceive. Every member of the Church, at least of any
breeding or capacity, so well ought to be grounded in spiritual knowledge, as,
if need be, to examine their Teachers themselves, Acts. 17. 11. They searched
the Scriptures daily, whether those things were so. Rev. 2. 2. Thou have tried
them which say they are Apostles, and are not. How should any private Christian
try his Teachers unless he be well grounded himself in the Rule of Scripture,
by which he is taught. As therefore among Papists, their ignorance in Scripture
chiefly upholds Popery; so among Protestant People, the frequent and serious
reading thereof will soonest pull Popery down.

Another means to abate Popery arises from the constant reading of Scripture,
wherein Beleivers who agree in the main, are every where exhorted to mutual
forbearance and charity one toward the other, though dissenting in some
opinions. It is written that the Coat of our Savior was without seame: whence
some would infer that there should be no division in the Church of Christ. It
should be so indeed; Yet seams in the same cloth, neither hurt the garment,
nor misbecome it; and not only seams, but Schisms will be while men are
fallible: But if they who dissent in matters not essential to belief, while the
common adversary is in the field, shall stand jarring and pelting at one
another, they will be soon routed and subdued. The Papist with open mouth makes
much advantage of our several opinions; not that he is able to confute the
worst of them, but that we by our continual jangle among our selves make them
worse then they are indeed. To save our selves therefore, and resist the common
enemy, it concerns us mainly to agree within our selves, that with joint forces
we may not only hold our own, but get ground; and why should we not? The Gospel
commands us to tolerate one another, though of various opinions, and has
promised a good and happy event thereof, Phil. 3. 15. Let us therefore as many
as be perfect be thus minded; and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God
shall reveal even this unto you. And we are bid, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. Prove all
things, hold fast that which is good. St. Paul judged that not only to
tolerate, but to examine and prove all things, was no danger to our holding
fast of that which is good. How shall we prove all things, which includes all
opinions at least founded on Scripture, unless we not only tolerate them, but
patiently hear them, and seriously read them? If he who thinks himself in the
truth professes to have learnt it, not by implicit faith, but by attentive
study of the Scriptures and full persuasion of heart, with what equity can he
refuse to hear or read him, who demonstrates to have gained his knowledge by
the same way? is it a fair course to assert truth by arrogating to himself the
only freedom of speech, and stopping the mouths of others equally gifted? This
is the direct way to bring in that Papistical implicit faith which we all
disclaim. They pretend it would unsettle the weaker sort* the same groundless
fear is pretended by the Romish Clergy in prohibiting the Scripture. At least
then let them have leave to write in Latin which the common people understand
not; that what they hold may be discust among the Learned only. We suffer the
Idolatrous books of Papists, without this fear, to be sold and read as common
as our own. Why not much rather of Anabaptists, Arians, Arminians, and
Socinians? There is no Learned man but will confess he has much profited by
reading Controversies, his Senses awakt, his Judgment sharpn'd, and the truth
which he holds more firmly established. If then it be profitable for him to
read; why should it not at least be tolerable and free for his Adversary to
write? In Logic they teach, that contraries laid together more evidently
appear: it follows then that all controversies being permitted, falsehood will
appear more false, and truth the more true* which must needs conduce much, not
only to the confounding of Popery, but to the general confirmation of
unimplicit truth.

The last means to avoid Popery, is to amend our lives: it is a general
complaint that this Nation of late years, is grown more numerously and
excessively vicious then heretofore* Pride, Luxury, Drunkenness, Whoredom,
Cursing, Swearing, bold and open Atheism every where abounding: Where these
grow, no wonder if Popery also grow a pace. There is no man so wicked, but at
sometimes his conscience, will wring him with thoughts of another world, and the
Peril of his soul: the trouble and melancholy which he conceives of true
Repentance and amendment he endures not; but enclines rather to some carnal
Superstion, which may pacify and lull his Conscience with some more pleasing
Doctrine. None more ready and officious to offer her self then the Romish, and
opens wide her Office, with all her faculties to receive him; easy Confession,
easy Absolution, Pardons, Indulgences, Masses for him both quick and dead,
Agnus Dei's, Relics, and the like: and he, instead of Working out his
salvation with fear and trembling, strait thinks in his heart (like another
kind of fool then he in the Psalms) to bribe God as a corrupt judge; and by
his Proctor, some Priest or Friar, to buy out his Peace with money, which he
cannot with his repentance. For God, when men sin outragiously, and will not be
admonisht, gives over chastizing them, perhaps by Pestilence, Fire, Sword, or
Famine, which may all turn to their good, and takes up his severest punishments,
hardness besottedness of heart, and Idolatry, to their final perdition.
Idolatry brought the Heathen to heinous Transgressions, Romans 2 a. And heinous
Transgressions often times bring the slight professors of true Religion, to gross
Idolatry: Thess^ 2. 11, 12. For this cause, God shall send them strong delusion
that they should believe a lie, that they all might be damed* who believe not
the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteoussness. And Isaiah 44. 18. Speaking of
Idolaters, They have not known nor understood* for he has shut their Eyes that
they cannot see, and their hearts that they cannot understand. Let us therefore
using this last means, last here spoken of, but first to be done, amend our
lives with all speed; least through impenitency we run into that stupidly,
which we now seek all meansso warilyto avoid, the worst of superstitions, and
the heaviest of all Gods Judgments, Popery.

FINIS.

