The ready and easy way to establish a free Commonwealth; and the excellence
thereof com pared with the inconveniences and dangers of readmitting Kingship
in this Nation.

The second edition revised and augmented.

The author J. M.

-- -- -- et nos
consilium dedimus Syl'ae, demus populo nunc.
LONDON, Printed for the Author, 1660.

The ready and easy way to establish a free Commonwealth.
ALthough since the writing of this treatise, the face of things has had some
change, writs for new elections have bin recalled, and the members at first
chosen, readmitted from exclusion, yet not a little rejoicing to hear declared
the resolution of those who are in power, tending to the establishment of a
free Commonwealth, and to remove, if it be possible, this noxious humor of
returning to bondage, instilld of late by some deceivers, and nourishd from bad
principles and falls apprehensions among too many of the people, I thought best
not to suppress what I had written, hoping that it may now be of much more use
and concernment to be freely publishd, in the midst of our Elections to a free
Parliament, or their sitting to consider freely of the Government; whom it
behooves to have all things represented to them that may direct their judgment
therein; and I never read of any State, scarce of any tyrant grown so incurable
as to refuse counsel from any in a time of public deliberation; much less to be
offended. If their absolute determination be to enthrall us, before so long a
Lent of Servitude, they may permit us a little Shroving-time first, wherein to
speak freely, and take our leaves of Liberty. And because in the former
edition through haste, many faults escaped, and many books were suddenly
dispersd, ere the note to mend them could be sent, I took the opportunity from
this occasion to revise and somewhat to enlarge the whole discourse, especially
that part which argues for a perpetual Senate. The treatise thus revised and
enlarged, is as follows.

The Parliament of England, assisted by a great number of the people who
appeerd and stuck to them faithfullest in defense of religion and their civil
liberties, judging kingship by long experience a government unnecessarie,
burdensome and dangerous, justly and magnanimously abolishd it; turning regal
bondage into a free Commonwealth, to the admiration and terror of our emulous
neighbors. They took themselves not bound by the light of nature or religion,
to any former covenant, from which the King himself by many forfeitures of a
latter date or discovery, and our own longer consideration thereon had more and
more unbound us, both to himself and his posterity; as has bin ever the
justice and the prudence of all wise nations that have ejected tyranny. They
covnanted to preserve the Kings person and authority in the preservation of the
true religion and our liberties; not in his endeavoring to bring in upon our
consciences a Popish religion, upon our liberties thraldom, upon our lives
destruction, by his occasioning, if not complotting, as was after discoverd,
the Irish massacre, his fomenting and arming the rebellion, his covert leaguing
with the rebels against us, his refusing more then seven times, propositions
most just and necessary to the true religion and our liberties, tenderd him by
the Parliament both of England and Scotland. They made not their covenant
concerning him with no difference between a king and a god, or promisd him as
Job did to the Almighty, to trust in him, though he slay us: they understood
that the solemn engagement, wherein we all forswore kingship, was no more a
breach of the covant, then the covenant was of the protestation before, but a
faithful and prudent going on both in the words, well weighd, and in the true
sense of the covenant, without respect of persons, when we could not serve two
contrary masters, God and the king, or the king and that more supreme law,
sworn in the first place to maintain, our safety and our liberty. They knew
the people of England to be a free people, themselves the representers of that
freedom; and although many were excluded, and as many fled (so they pretended)
from tumults to Oxford, yet they were left a sufficient number to act in
Parliament; therefore not bound by any statute of preceding Parlaments; but by
the law of nature only, which is the only law of laws truly and properly to all
mankind fundamental; the beginning and the end of all Government; to which no
Parliament or people that will thoroughly reform, but may and must have
recourse; as they had and must yet have in church reformation (if they
thoroughly intend it) to evangelic rules; not to ecclesiastical canons, though
never so ancient, so ratified and establishd in the land by Statutes, which for
the most part are mere positive laws, neither natural nor moral, and so by any
Parliament for just and serious considerations, without scruple to be at any
time repealed. If others of their number, in these things were under force, they
were not, but under free conscience; if others were excluded by a power which
they could not resist, they were not therefore to leave the helm of government
in no hands, to discontinue their care of the public peace and safety, to
desert the people in anarchie and confusion; no more then when so many of their
members left them, as made up in outward formalitie a more legal Parliament of
three estates against them. The best affected also and best principl'd of the
people, stood not numbering or computing on which side were most voices in
Parliament, but on which side appeerd to them most reason, most safety, when
the house divided upon main matters: what was well motiond and advised, they
examind not whether fear or persuasion carried it in the vote; neither did they
measure votes and counsels by the intentions of them that voted; knowing that
intentions either are but guessd at, or not soon anough known; and although
good, can neither make the deed such, nor prevent the consequence from being
bad: suppose bad intentions in things otherwise welldon; what was welldon, was
by them who so thought, not the less obeyed or followd in the state; since in
the church, who had not rather follow Iscariot or Simon the magician, though to
covetous ends, preaching, then Saul, though in the uprightness of his heart
persecuting the gospel? Safer they therefore judgd what they thought the better
counsels, though carried on by some perhaps to bad ends, then the wors, by
others, though endevord with best intentions: and yet they were not to learn
that a greater number might be corrupt within the walls of a Parliament as well
as of a city; whereof in matters of nearest concernment all men will be judges;
nor easily permit, that the odds of voices in their greatest council, shall
more endanger them by corrupt or credulous votes, then the odds of enemies by
open assaults; judging that most voices ought not always to prevail where main
matters are in question; if others hence will pretend to disturb all counsels,
what is that to them who pretend not, but are in real danger; not they only so
judging, but a great though not the greatest, number of their chosen Patriots,
who might be more in weight, then the others in number; there being in number
little virtue, but by weight and measure wisdom working all things: and the
dangers on either side they seriously thus waighd: from the treaty, short
fruits of long labors and seven years war; security for twenty years, if we
can hold it; reformation in the church for three years: then put to shift again
with our vanquishd master. His justice, his honor, his conscience declared
quite contrary to ours; which would have furnishd him with many such evasions,
as in a book entitled an inquisition for blood, soon after were not conceald:
bishops not totally removed, but left as it were in ambush, a reserve, with
ordination in their sole power; their lands already sold, not to be alienated,
but rented, and the sale of them called sacrilege; delinquents few of many
brought to condign punishment; accessories punishd; the chief author, above
pardon, though after utmost resistance, vanquished; not to give, but to receive
laws; yet besought, treated with, and to be thankd for his gracious
concessions, to be honored, worshipd, glorified. If this we swore to do, with
what righteousness in the sight of God, with what assurance that we bring not
by such an oath the whole sea of bloodguiltiness upon our own heads? If on the
other side we prefer a free government, though for the present not obtaind,
yet all those suggested fears and difficulties, as the event will prove, easily
overcome, we remain finally secure from the exasperated regal power, and out of
snares; shall retain the best part of our liberty, which is our religion, and
the civil part will be from these who deferr us, much more easily recoverd,
being neither so subtle nor so awefull as a King reinthron'd. Nor were their
actions less both at home and abroad then might become the hopes of a glorious
rising Commonwealth: nor were the expressions both of army and people, whether
in their public declarations or several writings other then such as testified a
spirit in this nation no less noble and well fitted to the liberty of a
Commonwealth, then in the ancient Greeks or Romans. Nor was the heroic cause
unsuccesfully defended to all Christendom against the tongue of a famous and
thought invincible adversary; nor the constancy and fortitude that so nobly
vindicated our liberty, our victory at once against two the most prevailing
usurpers over mankind, superstition and tyranny unpraisd or uncelebrated in a
written monument, likely to outlive detraction, as it has hitherto covinc'd or
silenced not a few of our detractors, especially in parts abroad. After our
liberty and religion thus prosperously fought for, gaind and many years
possessd, except in those unhappie interruptions, which God has removed, now
that nothing remains, but in all reason the certain hopes of a speedy and
immediate settlement for ever in a firm and free Commonwealth, for this extolld
and magnified nation, regardless both of honor wonn or deliverances voutsaf't
from heaven, to fall back or rather to creep back so poorly as it seems the
multitude would to their once abjured and detested thraldom of Kingship, to be
our selves the slanderers of our own just and religious deeds, though don by
some to covetous and ambitious ends, yet not therefore to be staind with their
infamy, or they to asperse the integrity of others, and yet these now by
revolting from the conscience of deeds welldon both in church and state, to
throw away and forsake, or rather to betray a just and noble cause for the
mixture of bad men who have ill managed and abused it (which had our fathers
don heretofore, and on the same pretense deserted true religion, what had long
ere this become of our gospel and all protestant reformation so much intermixed
with the avarice and ambition of some reformers?) and by thus relapsing, to
verify all the bitter predictions of our triumphing enemies, who will now
think they wisely discernd and justly censured both us and all our actions as
rash, rebellious, hypocritical and impious, not only argues a strange
degenerate contagion suddenly spread among us fitted and prepared for new
slaverie, but will render us a scorn and derision to all our neighbors. And
what will they at best say of us and of the whole English name, but scoffingly
as of that foolish builder, mentiond by our Savior, who began to build a
tower, and was not able to finish it. Where is this goodly tower of a
Commonwealth, which the English boasted they would build to overshaddow kings,
and be another Rome in the west? The foundation indeed they laid gallantly; but
fell into a wors confusion, not of tongues, but of factions, then those at the
tower of Babel; and have left no memorial of their work behind them remaining,
but in the common laughter of Europ. Which must needs redound the more to our
shame, if we but look on our neighbors the United Provinces, to us inferior in
all outward advantages; who notwithstanding, in the midst of greater
difficulties, courageously, wisely, constantly went through with the same work,
and are settled in all the happy enjoiments of a potent and flourishing
Republic to this day.

Besides this, if we return to Kingship, and soon repent, as undoubtedly we
shall, when we begin to find the old encroachments coming on by little and
little upon our consciences, which must necessarily proceed from king and
bishop united inseparably in one interest, we may be forced perhaps to fight
over again all that we have fought, and spend over again all that we have
spent, but are never like to attain thus far as we are now advanced to the
recoverie of our freedom, never to have it in possession as we now have it,
never to be voutsaf't hereafter the like mercies and signal assistances from
heaven in our cause, if by our ungrateful backsliding we make these fruitless;
flying now to regal concessions from his divine condescensions and gracious
answers to our once importuning prayers against the tyranny which we then
groand under: making vain and viler then dirt the blood of so many thousand
faithful and valiant English men, who left us in this liberty, bought with
their lives; losing by a strange after game of folly, all the battles we have
wonn, together with all Scotland as to our conquest, hereby lost, which never
any of our kings could conquer, all the treasure we have spent, not that
corruptible treasure only, but that far more precious of all our late
miraculous deliverances; treading back again with lost labor all our happy
steps in the progress of reformation; and most pitifully depriving our selves
the instant fruition of that free government which we have so dearly purchasd,
a free Commonwealth, not only held by wisest men in all ages the noblest, the
manliest, the equallest, the justest government, the most agreeable to all due
liberty and proportiond equality, both human, civil, and Christian, most
cherishing to virtue and true religion, but also (I may say it with greatest
probability) planely commended, or rather enjoind by our Savior himself, to
all Christians, not without remarkable disallowance, and the brand of gentilism
upon kingship. God in much displeasure gave a king to the Israelites, and
imputed it a sin to them that they sought one: but Christ apparently forbids
his disciples to admit of any such heathenish government: the kings of the
gentiles, says he, exercise lordship over them; and they that exercise
authority upon them, are called benefactors: but ye shall not be so; but he
that is greatest among you, let him be as the younger; and he that is chief, as
he that serves. The occasion of these his words was the ambitious desire of
Zebede's two sons, to be exalted above their brethren in his kingdom, which they
thought was to be ere long upon earth. That he speaks of civil government, is
manifest by the former part of the comparison, which inferrs the other part to
be always in the same kind. And what government coms nearer to this precept
of Christ, then a free Commonwealth; wherein they who are greatest, are
perpetual servants and drudges to the public at their own cost and charges,
neglect their own affairs; yet are not elevated above their brethren; live
soberly in their families, walk the streets as other men, may be spoken to
freely, familiarly, friendly, without adoration. Whereas a king must be adored
like a Demigod, with a dissolute and haughty court about him, of vast expense
and luxury, masks and revels, to the debaushing of our prime gentry both male
and female; not in their passetimes only, but in earnest, by the loos
imploiments of court service, which will be then thought honorable. There will
be a queen also of no less charge; in most likelihood outlandish and a Papist;
besides a queen mother such already; together with both their courts and
numerous train: then a royal issue, and ere long severally their sumptuous
courts; to the multiplying of a servile crew, not of servants only, but of
nobility and gentry, bred up then to the hopes not of public, but of court
offices; to be stewards, chamberlains, ushers, grooms, even of the close-stool;
and the lower their minds debased with court opinions, contrary to all virtue
and reformation, the haughtier will be their pride and profuseness: we may well
remember this not long since at home; or need but look at present into the
French court, where enticements and preferments daily draw away and pervert the
Protestant Nobility. As to the burden of expense, to our cost we shall soon
know it; for any good to us, deserving to be termd no better then the vast and
lavish price of our subjection and their debausherie; which we are now so
greedily cheapning, and would so fain be paying most inconsideratly to a single
person; who for any thing wherein the public really needs him, will have little
else to do, but to bestow the eating and drinking of excessive dainties, to set
a pompous face upon the superficial actings of State, to pageant himself up and
down in progress among the perpetual bowings and cringings of an abject people,
on either side deifying and adoring him for nothing don that can deserve it.
For what can he more then another man? who even in the expression of a late
courtpoet, sits only like a great cipher set to no purpose before a long row of
other significant figures. Nay it is well and happy for the people if their King
be but a cipher, being often times a mischief, a pest, a scourge of the nation,
and which is wors, not to be removed, not to be controlled, much less accused
or brought to punishment, without the danger of a common ruin, without the
shaking and almost subversion of the whole land. Whereas in a free Commonwealth,
any governor or chief counselor offending, may be removed and punishd without
the least commotion. Certainly then that people must needs be madd or strangely
infatuated, that build the chief hope of their common happiness or safety on a
single person: who if he happen to be good, can do no more then another man, if
to be bad, has in his hands to do more evil without check, then millions of
other men. The happiness of a nation must nee^s be firmest and certainest in a
full and free Council of their own electing, where no single person, but reason
only swa^es. And what madness is it, for them who might manage nobly their own
affairs themselves, sluggishly and weakly to devolve all on a single person;
and more like boys under age then men, to committ all to his patronage and
disposal, who neither can perform what he undertakes, and yet for undertaking
it, though royally paid, will not be their servant, but their lord? how unmanly
must it needs be, to count such a one the breath of our nostrils, to hang all
our felicity on him, all our safety, our well-being, for which it we were
aught else but sluggards or babies, we need depend on none but God and our own
counsels, our own active virtue and industry; Go to the Ant, thou sluggard,
says Solomon; consider her ways, and be wise; which having no prince, ruler,
or lord, provides her meat in the summer, and gathers her food in the harvest.
which evidenly shows us, that they who think the nation undon without a king,
though they look grave or haughty, have not so much true spirit and
understanding in them as a pismire: neither are these diligent creatures hence
concluded to live in lawless anarchie, or that commended, but are set the
examples to imprudent and ungovernd men, of a frugal and selfgoverning
democratie or Commonwealth; safer and more thriving in the joint providence and
counsel of many industrious equals, then under the single domination of one
imperious Lord. It may be well wonderd that any Nation styling themselves free,
can suffer any man to pretend hereditarie right over them as their lord; when as
by acknowledging that right, they conclude themselves his servants and his
vassals, and so renounce their own freedom. Which how a people and their leaders
especially can do, who have fought so gloriously for liberty, how they can
change their noble words and actions, heretofore so becoming the majesty of a
free people, into the base necessity of court flatteries and prostrations, is
not only strange and admirable, but lamentable to think on. That a nation
should be so valorous and courageous to winn their liberty in the field, and
when they have wonn it, should be so heartless and unwise in their counsels, as
not to know how to use it, value it, what to do withit or with themselves; but
after ten or twelve years prosperous war and contestation with tyranny,
basely and besottedly to run their necks again into the yoke which they have
broken, and prostrate all the fruits of their victory for naught at the feet of
the vanquishd, besides our loss of glory, and such an example as kings or
tyrants never yet had the like to boast of, will be an ignomine if it befall
us, that never yet befell any nation possessd of their liberty; worthy indeed
themselves, whatsoever they be, to be for ever slaves: but that part of the
nation which consents not with them, as I persuade me of a great number, far
worthier then by their means to be brought into the same bondage. Considering
these things so plane, so rational, I cannot but yet further admire on the other
side, how any man who has the true principles of justice and religion in him,
can presume or take upon him to be a king and lord over his brethren, whom he
cannot but know whether as men or Christians, to be for the most part every way
equal or superior to himself: how he can display with such vanity and
ostentation his regal splendour so supereminently above other mortal men; or
being a Christian, can assume such extraordinary honor and worship to
himself, while the kingdom of Christ our common King and Lord, is hid to this
world, and such gentilish imitation forbid in express words by himself to all
his disciples. All Protestants hold that Christ in his church has left no
vicegerent of his power, but himself without deputy, is the only head thereof,
governing it from heaven: how then can any Christianman derive his kingship
from Christ, but with wors usurpation then the Pope his headship over the
church, since Christ not only has not left the least shadow of a command for
any such vicegerence from him in the State, as the Pope pretends for his in the
Church, but has expressly declared, that such regal dominion is from the
gentiles, not from him, and has strictly charged us, not to imitate them
therein.

I doubt not but all ingenuous and knowing men will easily agree with me, that
a free Commonwealth without single person or house of lords, is by far the best
government, if it can be had; but we have all this while say they bin expecting
it, and cannot yet attain it. It Is true indeed, when monarchy was dissolvd, the
form of a Commonwealth should have forthwith bin framed; and the practice
thereof immediately begun; that the people might have soon bin satisfied and
delighted with the decent order, ease and benefit thereof: we had bin then by
this time firmly rooted, past fear of commotions or mutations, and now
flourishing: this care of timely settling a new government instead of ye old,
too much neglected, has bin our mischief. Yet the cause thereof may be ascribed
with most reason to the frequent disturbances, interruptions and dissolutions
which the Parliament has had partly from the impatient or disaffected people,
partly from some ambitious leaders in the Army; much contrary, I believe, to
the mind and approbation of the Army it self and their other Commanders, once
undeceivd, or in their own power. Now is the opportunity, now the very season
wherein we may obtain a free Commonwealth and establish it for ever in the
land, without difficulty or much delay. Writs are sent out for elections, and
which is worth observing in the name, not of any king, but of the keepers of
our liberty, to summon a free Parliament: which then only will indeed be free,
and deserve the true honor of that supreme title, if they preserve us a free
people. Which never Parliament was more free to do; being now called, not as
heretofore, by the summons of a king, but by the voice of liberty: and if the
people, laying afide prejudice and impatience, will seriously and calmly now
consider their own good both religious and civil, their own liberty and the only
means thereof, as shall be here laid before them, and will elect their Knights
and Burgesses able men, and according to the just and necessary qualifications
(which for aught I hear, remain yet in force unrepeald, as they were formerly
decreed in Parliament) men not addicted to a single person or house of lords,
the work is don; at least the foundation firmly laid of a free Commonwealth,
and good part also erected of the main structure. For the ground and basis of
every just and free government (since men have smarted so often for commiting all
to one person) is a general council of ablest men, chosen by the people to
consult of public affairs from time to time for the common good. In this Grand
Council must the sovrantie, not transferrd, but delegated only, and as it were
deposited, reside; with this caution they must have the forces by sea and land
committed to them for preservation of the common peace and liberty; must raise
and manage the public revenue, at least with some inspectors deputed for
satisfaction of the people, how it is imploid; must make or propose, as more
expressly shall be said anon, civil laws; treat of commerce, peace, or war
with foreign nations, and for the carrying on some particular affairs with more
secrecy and expedition, must elect, as they have already out of their own
number and others, a Council of State.

And although it may seem strange at first hearing, by reason that men's minds
are prepossed with the notion of successive Parlaments, I affirm that the
Grand or General Council being well chosen, should be perpetual: for so their
business is or may be, and often times urgent; the opportunity of affairs gaind
or lost in a moment. The day of counsel cannot be set as the day of a festival;
but must be ready always to prevent or answer all occasions. By this
continuance they will become every way skilfullest, best provided of
intelligence from abroad, best acquainted with the people at home, and the
people with them. The ship of the Commonwealth is always under sail; they sit
at the stern; and if they stear well, what need is there to change them; it
being rather dangerous? And to this, that the Grand Council is both foundation
and main pillar of the whole State; and to move pillars and foundations, not
faulty, cannot be safe for the building. I see not therefore, how we can be
advantaged by successive and transitory Parlaments; but that they are much
likelier continually to unsettle rather then to settle a free government; to
breed commotions, changes, novelties and uncertainties; to bring neglect upon
present affairs and opportunities, while all minds are suspense with
expectation of a new assembly, and the assembly for a good space taken up
with the new settling of it self. After which, if they find no great work to
do, they will make it, by altering or repealing former acts, or making and
multiplying new; that they may seem to see what their predecessors saw not, and
not to have assembld for nothing: till all law be lost in the multitude of
clashing statutes. But if the ambition of such as think themselves injured that
they also partake not of the government, and are impatient till they be chosen,
cannot brook the perpetuity of others chosen before them, or if it be feared
that long continuance of power may corrupt sincerest men, the known expedient
is, and by some lately propounded, that annually (or if the space be longer, so
much perhaps the better) the third part of Senators may go out according to the
precedence of their election, and the like number be chosen in their places, to
prevent the settling of too absolute a power, if it should be perpetual: and
this they call partial rotation. But I could wish that this wheel or partial
wheel in State, if it be possible, might be avoided; as having too much
affinity with the wheel of fortune. For it appeers not how this can be don,
without danger and mischance of putting out a great number of the best and
ablest: in whose stead new elections may bring in as many raw, unexperienced
and otherwise affected, to the weakening and much altering for the wors of
public transactions* Neither do I think a perpetual Senate, especially chosen
and entrusted by the people, much in this land to be feared, where the
well-affected either in a standing army, or in a settled militia have their arms
in their own hands. Safest therefore to me it seems and of least hazard or
interruption to affairs, that none of the Grand Council be moved, unless by
death or just conviction of some crime: for what can be expected firm or
steadfast from a floating foundation? however, I forejudge not any probable
expedient, any temperament that can be found in things of this nature so
disputable on either side. Yet least this which I affirm, be thought my single
opinion, I shall add sufficient testimony. Kingship it self is therefore
counted the more safe and durable, because the king and, for the most part, his
council, is not changed during life: but a Commonwealth is held immortal; and
therein firmest, safest and most above fortune: for the death of a king, causes
ofttimes many dangerous alterations; but the death now and then of a Senator is
not felt; the main body of them still continuing permanent in greatest and
noblest Commonwealths, and as it were eternal. Therefore among the Jews, the
supreme council of seaventie, called the Sanhedrim, founded by Moses, in
Athens, that of Areopagus, in Sparta, that of the Ancients, in Rome, the Senate,
consisted of members chosen for term of life; and by that means remaind as it
were still the same to generations. In Venice they change indeed ofter then
every year some particular councels of State, as that of six, or such other; but
the true Senate, which upholds and sustains the government, is the whole
aristocracie immovable. So in the United Provinces, the States General, which
are indeed but a council of st te deputed by the whole union, are not usually
the same persons for above three or six years; but the States of every city,
in whom the sovrantie has bin placed time out of mind, are a standing Senate,
without succession, and accounted chiefly in that regard the main prop of their
liberty. And why they should be so in every well orderd Commonwealth, they who
write of policy, give these reasons; "That to make the Senate successive, not
only impairs the dignity and luster of the Senate, but weakens the whole
Commonwealth, and brings it into manifest danger; while by this means the
secrets of State are frequently divulgd, and matters of greatest consequence
committed to inexpert and novice counselors, utterly to seek in the full and
intimate knowledge of affairs past." I know not therefore what should be
peculiar in England to make successive Parlaments thought safest, or convenient
here more then in other nations, unless it be the fickl'ness which is
attributed to us as we are Ilanders: but good education and acquisit wisdom
ought to correct the fluxible fault, if any such be, of our watery situation. It
will be objected, that in those places where they had perpetual Senats, they
had also popular remedies against their growing too imperious: as in Athens,
besides Areopagus, another Senate of four or five hunderd; in Sparta, the
Ephors; in Rome, the Tribunes of the people. But the event tells us, that these
remedies either little availd the people, or brought them to such a licentious
and unbridl'd democratie, as in fine ruind themselves with their own excessive
power. So that the main reason urged why popular assemblies are to be trusted
with the peoples liberty, rather then a Senate of principal men, because great
men will be still endeavoring to enlarge their power, but the common sort will
be contented to maintain their own liberty, is by experience found false; none
being more immoderat and ambitious to amplify their power, then such
popularities; which was seen in the people of Rome; who at first contented to
have their Tribunes, at length contended with the Senate that one Consul, then
both; soon after, that the Censors and Praetors also should be created
Plebeian, and the whole empire put into their hands; adoring lastly those, who
most were advers to the Senate, till Marius by fulfilling their inordinat
desires, quite lost them all the power for which they had so long bin striving,
and left them under the tyranny of Sylla: the balance therefore must be
exactly so set, as to preserve and keep up due authority on either side, as
well in the Senate as in the people. And this annual rotation of a Senate to
consist of three hunderd, as is lately propounded, requires also another
popular assembly upward of a thousand, with an answerable rotation. Which
besides that it will be liable to all those inconveniences found in the
foresaid remedies, cannot but be troublesome and chargeable, both in their motion
and their session, to the whole land; unweildie with their own bulk, unable in so
great a number to mature their consultations as they ought, if any be allotted
them, and that they meet not from so many parts remote to sit a whole year
lieger in one place, only now and then to hold up a forest of fingers, or to
convey each man his bean or ballot into the box, without reason shown or common
deliberation; incontinent of secrets, if any be imparted to them, emulous and
always jarring with the other Senate. The much better way doubtless will be in
this wavering condition of our affairs, to deferr the changing or
circumscribing of our Senate, more then may be done with ease, till the
Commonwealth be thoroughly settled in peace and safety, and they themselves give
us the occasion. Military men hold it dangerous to change the form of battle
in view of an enemy: neither did the people of Rome bandie with their Senate
while any of the Tarquins livd, the enemies of their liberty, nor sought by
creating Tribunes to defend themselves against the fear of their Patricians,
till sixteen years after the expulsion of their kings, and in full security of
their state, they had or thought they had just cause given them by the Senate.
Another way will be, to welqualifie and refine elections: not committing all to
the noise and shouting of a rude multitude, but permitting only those of them
who are rightly qualified, to nominat as many as they will; and out of that
number others of a better breeding, to choose a less number more judiciously,
till after a third or fourth sifting and refining of exactest choice, they only
be left chosen who are the due number, and seem by most voices the worthiest.
To make the people fittest to choose, and the chosen fittest to govern, will be
to mend our corrupt and faulty education, to teach the people faith not without
virtue, temperance, modesty, sobriety, parsimonie, justice; not to admire
wealth or honor; to hate turbulence and ambition; to place every one his
private welfare and happiness in the public peace, liberty and safety. They
shall not then need to be much mistrustfull of their chosen Patriots in the
Grand Council; who will be then rightly called the true keepers of our
liberty, though the most of their business will be in foreign affairs. But to
prevent all mistrust, the people then will have their several ordinary
assemblies (which will henceforth quite annihilate the odious power and name of
Committies) in the chief towns of every county, without the trouble, charge,
or time lost of summoning and assembling from far in so great a number, and so
long residing from their own houses, or removing of their families, to do as much
at home in their several shires, entire or subdivided, toward the securing of
their liberty, as a numerous assembly of them all formd and convened on purpose
with the wariest rotation. Where of I shall speak more ere the end of this
discourse: for it may be referrd to time, so we be still going on by degrees to
perfection. The people well weighing and performing these things, I suppose
would have no cause to fear, though the Parliament, abolishing that name, as
originally signifying but the parlie of our Lords and Commons with their Norman
king when he pleased to call them, should, with certain limitations of their
power, sit perpetual, if their ends be faithful and for a free Commonwealth,
under the name of a Grand or General Council. Till this be don, I am in doubt
whether our State will be ever certainly and thoroughly settled; never likely
till then to see an end of our troubles and continual changes or at least never
the true settlement and assurance of our liberty. The Grand Council being thus
firmly constituted to perpetuity, and still, upon the death or default of any
member, supplied and kept in full number, there can be no cause alleag'd why
peace, justice, plentiful trade and all prosperity should not thereupon ensue
throughout the whole land; with as much assurance as can be of human things,
that they shall so continue (if God favor us, and our wilful sins provoke him
not) even to the coming of our true and rightful and only to be expected King,
only worthy as he is our only Savior, the Messiah, the Christ, the only heir
of his eternal father, the only by him anointed and ordaind since the work of
our redemption finishd, Universal Lord of all mankind. The way propounded is
plane, easy and open before us; without intricacies, without the introducement
of new or obsolete forms, or terms, or exotic models; idea's that would effect
nothing, but with a number of new injunctions to manacle the native liberty of
mankind; turning all virtue into prescription, servitude, and necessity, to
the great impairing and frustrating of Christian liberty: I say again, this
way lies free and smooth before us; is not tangl'd with inconveniences;
invents no new encumbrances; requires no perilous, no injurious alteration or
circumscription of men's lands and proprieties; secure, that in this
Commonwealth, temporal and spiritual lords removed, no man or number of men can
attain to such wealth or vast possession, as will need the hedge of an Agrarian
law (never succesful, but the cause rather of sedition, save only where it
began seasonably with first possession) to confine them from endangering our
public liberty; to conclude, it can have no considerable objection made
against it, that it is not practicable: least it be said hereafter, that we
gave up our liberty for want of a ready way or distinct form proposed of a
free Commonwealth. And this facility we shall have above our next neighboring
Commonwealth (if we can keep us from the fond conceit of something like a duke
of Venice, put lately into many men's heads, by some one or other sutly driving
on under that notion his own ambitious ends to lurch a crown) that our liberty
shall not be hamperd or hoverd over by any engagement to such a potent family
as the house of Nassaw of whom to stand in perpetual doubt and suspicion, but
we shall live the cleerest and absolutest free nation in the world.

On the contrary, if there be a king, which the inconsiderate multitude are now
so madd upon, mark how far short we are like to com of all those happinesses,
which in a free state we shall immediately be possessd of. First, the Grand
Council, which, as I showed before, should sit perpetually (unless their leisure
give them now and then some intermissions or vacations, easily manageable by
the Council of State left sitting) shall be called, by the kings good will and
utmost endeavor, as seldom as may be. For it is only the king's right, he will
say, to call a parliament; and this he will do most commonly about his own
affairs rather then the kingdom's, as will appeer planely so soon as they are
called. For what will their business then be and the chief expense of their time,
but an endless tugging between petition of right and and royal prerogative,
especially about the negative voice, militia, or subsidies, demanded and often
times extorted without reasonable cause appeering to the Commons, who are the
only true representatives of the people, and their liberty, but will be then
mingled with a court-faction; besides which within their own walls, the sincere
part of them who stand faithful to the people, will again have to deal with
two troublesome counter-working adversaries from without, mere creatures of the
king, spiritual, and the greater part, as is likeliest, of temporal lords,
nothing concernd with the peoples liberty. If these prevail not in what they
please, though never so much against the peoples interest, the Parliament shall
be soon dissolvd, or sit and do nothing; not sufferd to remedy the least
greevance, or enact aught advantageous to the people. Next, the Council of
State shall not be chosen by the Parliament, but by the king, still his own
creatures, courtiers and favorites; who will be sure in all their counsels to
set their maister's grandeur and absolute power, in what they are able, far
above the peoples liberty. I deny not but that there may be such a king, who
may regard the common good before his own, may have no vicious favorite, may
hearken only to the wisest and incorruptest of his Parliament: but this rarely
happens in a monarchy not elective; and it behooves not a wise nation to
committ the sum of their welbeing, the whole state of their safety to fortune.
What need they; and how absurd would it be, when as they themselves to whom his
chief virtue will be but to hearken, may with much better management and
dispatch, with much more commendation of their own worth and magnanimity govern
without a master. Can the folly be paralleld, to adore and be the slaves of a
single person for doing that which it is ten thousand to one whether he can or
will do, and we without him might do more easily, more effectually, more
laudably our selves? Shall we never grow old anough to be wise to make
seasonable use of gravest autorities, experiences, examples? Is it such an
unspeakable joy to serve, such felicity to wear a yoke? to clink our shackles,
locked on by pretended law of subjection more intolerable and hopeless to be
ever shaken off, then those which are knocked on by illegal injury and
violence? Aristotle, our chief instructor in the Universities, least this
doctrine be thought Sectarian, as the royalist would have it thought, tells us
in the third of his Politics, that certain men at first, for the matchless
excellence of their virtue above others, or some great public benifit, were
created kings by the people; in small cities and territories, and in the
scarcity of others to be found like them: but when they abused their power and
governments grew larger, and the number of prudent men increasd, that then the
people soon deposing their tyrants, betook them, in all civilest places, to the
form of a free Commonwealth. And why should we thus disparage and prejudicate
our own nation, as to fear a scarcity of able and worthy men united in
counsel to govern us, if we will but use diligence and impartiality to find
them out and choose them, rather yoking our selves to a single person, the
natural adversary and oppressor of liberty, though good, yet far easier
corruptible by the excess of his singular power and exaltation, or at best, not
comparably sufficient to bear the weight of government, nor equally disposed to
make us happy in the enjoyment of our liberty under him.

But admit, that monarchy of it self may be convenient to some nations; yet to
us who have thrown it out, receivd back again, it cannot but prove pernicious.
For kings to com, never forgetting their former ejection, will be sure to
fortify and arm themselves sufficiently for the future against all such
attempts hereafter from the people: who shall be then so narrowly watchd and
kep so low, that though they would never so fain and at the same rate of their
blood and treasure, they never shall be able to regain what they now have
purchasd and may enjoy, or to free themselves from any yoke imposed upon them:
nor will they dare to go about it; utterly disheartn'd for the future, if these
their highest attempts prove unsuccesfull; which will be the triumph of all
tyrants hereafter over any people that shall resist oppression; and their song
will then be, to others, how sped the rebellious English? to our posterity,
how sped the rebels your fathers? This is not my conjecture, but drawn from
God's known denouncement against the gentilizing Israelites; who though they
were governd in a Commouwealth of God's own ordaining, he only their king, they
his peculiar people, yet affecting rather to resemble heathen, but pretending
the misgovernment of Samuel's sons, no more a reason to dislike their
Commonwealth, then the violence of Eli's sons was imputable to that priesthood
or religion, clamourd for a king. They had their longing; but with this
testimony of God's wrath; ye shall cry out in that day because of your king
whom ye shall have chosen, and the Lord will not hear you in that day. Us if he
shall hear now, how much less will he hear when we cry hereafter, who once
deliverd by him from a king, and not without wondrous acts of his providence,
insensible and unworthie of those high m^ies, are returning precipitantly, if
he withold us not, back to the captivity from whence he freed us. Yet neither
shall we obtain or buy at an easy rate this new gilded yoke which thus
transports us: a new royal-revenue must be found, a new episcopal; for those
are individual: both which being wholly dissipated or bought by private persons
or assigned for service don, and especially to the Army, cannot be recoverd
without a general detriment and confusion to men's estates, or a heavy
imposition on all men's purses; benifit to none, but to the worst and ignoblest
sort of men, whose hope is to be either the ministers of court riot and excess,
or the gainers by it: But not to speak more of losses and extraordinary levies
on our estates, what will then be the revenges and offenses rememberd and
returned, not only by the chief person, but by all his adherents; accounts and
reparations that will be required, suites, incitements, inquities, discoveries,
complaints, informations, who knows against whom or how many, though perhaps
neuters, if not to utmost infliction, yet to imprisonment, fines, banishment,
or molestation; if not these, yet disfavor, discountnance, disregard and
contempt on all but the known royalist or whom he favors, will be plenteous:
nor let the new royaliz'd presbyterians persuade themselves that their old
doings, though now recanted, will be forgotten; what ever conditions be
contrived or trusted on. Will they not believe this; nor remember the
pacification, how it was kept to the Scots; how other solemn promises many a
time to us? Let them but now read the diabolical forerunning libells, the
faces, the gestures that now appeer foremost and briskest in all public places;
as the harbingers of those that are in expectation to reign over us; let them
but hear the insolences, the menaces, the insultings of our newly animated
common enemies crept lately out of their holes, their hell, I might say, by the
language of their infernal pamphlets, the spue of every drunkard, every ribald;
nameless, yet not for want of license, but for very shame of their own vile
persons, not daring to name themselves, while they traduce others by name; and
give us to foresee that they intend to second their wicked words, if ever they
have power, with more wicked deeds. Let our zealous backsliders forethink now
with themselves, show their necks yoked with these tigers of Bacchus, these new
fanatics of not the preaching but the sweating-tub, inspired with nothing
holier then the Venereal pox, can draw one way under monarchy to the
establishing of church discipline with these new-disgorg'd atheismes: yet shall
they not have the honor to yoke with these, but shall be yoked under them;
these shall plow on their backs. And do they among them who are so forward to
bring in the single person, think to be by him trusted or long regarded? So
trusted they shall be and so regarded, as by kings are wont reconciled enemies;
neglected and soon after discarded, if not prosecuted for old traitors; the
first inciters, beginners, and more then to the third part actors of all that
followd; it will be found also, that there must be then as necessarily as now
(for the contrary part will be still feared) a standing army; which for
certain shall not be this, but of the fiercest Cavaliers, of no less expense,
and perhaps again under Rupert: but let this army be sure they shall be soon
disbanded, and likeliest without a^rear or pay; and being disbanded, not be
sure but they may as soon be questiond for being in arms against their king: the
same let them fear, who have contributed money; which will amount to no small
number that must then take their turn to be made delinquents and compounders.
They who past reason and recoverie are devoted to kingship, perhaps will
answer, that a greater part by far of the Nation will have it so; the rest
therefore must yield. Not so much to convince these, which I little hope, as to
confirm them who yield not, I reply; that this greatest part have both in
reason and the trial of just battle, lost the right of their election what the
government shall be: of them who have not lost that right, whether they for
kingship be the greater number, who can certainly determine? Suppose they be;
yet of freedom they partake all alike, one main end of government: which if the
greater part value, not, but will degeneratly forgo, is it just or reasonable,
that most voices against the the main end of government should enslave the less
number that would be free? More just it is doubtless, if it com to force, that
a less number compel a greater to retain, which can be no wrong to them, their
liberty, then that a greater number for the pleasure of their baseness, compel
a less most injuriously to be their fellow slaves. They who seek nothing but
their own just liberty, have always right to winn it and to keep it, when ever
they have power, be the voices never so numerous that oppose it. And how much
we above others are concernd to defend it from kingship, and from them who in
pursuance thereof so perniciously would betray us and themselves to most certain
misery and thraldom, will be needless to repeat.

Having thus far shown with what ease we may now obtain a free Commonwealth,
and by it with as much ease all the freedom, peace, justice, plenty that we
can desire, on the other side the difficulties, troubles, uncertainties, nay
rather impossibilities to enjoy these things constantly under a monarch, I will
now proceed to show more particularly wherein our freedom and flourishing
condition will be more ample and secure to us under a free Commonwealth then
under kingship.

The whole freedom of man consists either in spiritual or civil liberty. As
for spiritual, who can be at rest, who can enjoy any thing in this world with
contentment, who has not liberty to serve God and to save his own soul,
according to the best light which God has planted in him to that purpose, by
the reading of his revealed will and the guidance of his holy spirit? That this
is best pleasing to God, and that the whole Protestant Church allows no supreme
judge or rule in matters of religion, but the scriptures, and these to be
interpreted by the the scriptures themselves, which necessarily inferrs liberty
of conscience, I have heretofore proved at large in another treatise, and
might, yet further by the public declarations, confessions and admonitions of
whole churches and states, obvious in all history since the Reformation.

This liberty of conscience which above all other things ought to be to all men
dearest and most precious, no government more inclinable not to favor only but
to protect, then a free Commonwealth; as being most magnanimous, most fearless
and confident of its own fair proceedings. Whereas kingship, though looking big,
yet indeed most pusillanimous, full of fears, full of jealousies, startled at
every ombrage, as it has bin observd of old to have ever suspected most and
mistrusted them who were in most esteem for virtue and generositie of mind, so
it is now known to have most in doubt and suspicion them who are most reputed
to be religious. Queen Elizabeth though her self accounted so good a
Protestant, so moderate, so confident of her Subjects love would never give way
so much as to Presbyterian rereformation in this land, though once and again
besought, as Camden relates, but imprisond and persecuted the very proposers
thereof; alleging it as her mind and maxim unalterable, that such reformation
would diminish regal authority. What liberty of conscience can we then expect
of others, far wors principl'd from the cradle, traind up and governd by Popish
and Spanish counsels, and on such depending hitherto for subsistence?
Especially what can this last Parliament expect, who having revived lately and
publishd the covenant, have reingag'd themselves, never to readmitt Episcopacie:
which no son of Charles returning, but will most certainly bring back with him,
if he regard the last and strictest charge of his father, to persevere in not
the doctrine only, but government of the church of England; not to neglect the
speedy and effectual suppressing of errors and schisms; among which he
accounted Presbytery one of the chief: or if notwithstanding that charge of
his father, he submitt to the covenant, how will he keep faith to us with
disobedience to him; or regard that faith given, which must be founded on the
breach of that last and solemnest paternal charge, and the reluctance, I may
say the antipathie which is in all kings against Presbyterian and Independent
discipline? for they hear the gospel speaking much of liberty; a word which
monarchy and her bishops both fear and hate, but a free Commonwealth both
favors and promotes; and not the word only, but the thing it self. But let our
governors beware in time* least their hard measure to liberty of conscience be
found the rock whereon they ship wrack themselves as others have now don before
them in the course wherein God was directing their stearage to a free
Commonwealth, and the abandoning of all those whom they call sectaries, for the
detected falsehood and ambition of some, be a wilful rejection of their own chief
strength and interest in the freedom of all Protestant religion, under what
abusive name soever calumniated.

The other part of our freedom consists in the civil rights and advancements of
every person according to his merit: the enjoyment of those never more certain,
and the access to these never more open, then in a free Commonwealth. Both
which in my opinion may be best and soonest obtaind, if every county in the
land were made a kind of subordinate Commonaltie or Commonwealth, and one
chief town or more, according as the shire is in circuit, made cities, if they
be not so called already; where the nobility and chief gentry from a
proportionable compass of territory annexd to each city, may build, houses or
palaces, befitting their quality, may bear part in the government, make their
own judicial laws, or use these that are, and execute them by their own elected
judicatures and judges without appeal, in all things of civil government
between man and man. so they shall have justice in their own hands, law executed
fully and finally in their own counties and precincts, long wishd, and spoken
of, but never yet obtaind; they shall have none then to blame but themselves,
if it be not well administerd; and fewer laws to expect or fear from the
supreme authority; or to those that shall be made, of any great concernment to
public liberty, they may without much trouble in these commonalties or in more
general assemblies called to their cities from the whole territory on such
occasion, declare and publish their assent or dissent by deputies within a time
limited sent to the Grand Council: yet so as this their judgment declared shall
submitt to the greater number of other counties or commonalties, and not avail
them to any exemption of themselves, or refusal of agreement with the rest, as
it may in any of the United Provinces, being sovran within it self, often times
to the great disadvantage of that union. In these imploiments they may much
better then they do now, exercise and fit themselves, till their lot fall to be
chosen into the Grand Council, according as their worth and merit shall be taken
notice of by the people. As for controversies that shall happen between men of
several counties, they may repair, as they do now, to the capital city, or any
other more commodious, indifferent place and equal judges. And this I find to
have bin practisd in the old Athenian Commonwealth, reputed the first and
ancientest place of civilitie in all Greece; that they had in their several
cities, a peculiar; in Athens, a common government; and their right, as it
befell them, to the administration of both. They should have here also schools
and academies at their own choice, wherein their children may be bred up in their
own sight to all learning and noble education not in grammar only, but in all
liberal ars and exercises. This would soon spread much more knowledge and
civilitie, yea religion through all parts of the land, by communicating the
natural heat of government and culture more distributively to all extreme
parts, which now lie numm and neglected, would soon make the whole nation more
industrious, more ingenuous at home, more potent, more honorable abroad. To
this a free Commonwealth will easily assent; (nay the Parliament has had
already some such thing in design) for of all governments (...) Commonwealth
aims most to make the people flourishing, virtuous, noble and high spirited.
Monarchs will never permit: whose aim is to make the people, wealthy indeed
perhaps and well fleec't, for their own she^ing and the supply of regal
prodigality; but otherwise softest, basest, vitiousest, servilest, easiest to
be kept under; and not only in fleece, ^ut in mind also sheepishest; and will
have all the benches of judicature annexd to the throne, as a gift of royal
grace that we have justice don us; when as nothing can be more essential to the
freedom of a people, then to have the administration of justice and all public
ornaments in their own election and within their own bounds, without long
traveling or depending on remote places to obtain their right or any civil
accomplishment; so it be not supreme, but subordinate to the general power and
union of the whole Republic. In which happy firmness as in the particular above
mentiond, we shall also far exce^ the United Provinces, by having, not as they
(to the retarding and distracting often times of their counsels or urgentest
occasions) many Sovranties united in one Commonwealth, but many Commonwealths
under one united and entrusted Sovrantie. And when we have our forces by sea
and land, either of a faithful Army or a settled Militia, in our own hands to
the firm establishing of a free Commonwealth, public accounts under our own
inspection, general laws and taxes with their causes in our own domestic
suffrages, judicial laws, offices and ornaments at home in our own ordering and
administration, all distinction of lords and commoners, that may any way divide
or sever the public interest, removed, what can a perpetual senate have then
wherein to grow corrupt, wherein to encroach upon us or usurp; or if they do,
wherein to be formidable? Yet if all this avail not to remove the fear or envy
of a perpetual sitting, it may be easily provided, to change a third part of
them yearly or every two or three years, as was above mentiond; or that it be
at those times in the peoples choice, whether they will change them, or renew
their power, as they shall find cause.

I have no more to say at present: few words will save us, well considerd; few
and easy things, now seasonably don. But if the people be so affected, as to
prostitute religion and liberty to the vain and groundless apprehension, that
nothing but kingship can restore trade, not remembering the frequent plagues and
pestilences that then wasted this city, such as through God's mercy we never
have felt since, and that trade flourishes no where more then in the free
Commonwealths of Italy, Germany, and the Low Countries before their eyes at
this day, yet if trade be grown so craving and importunate through the profuse
living of tradesmen, that nothing can support it, but the luxurious expenses of
a nation upon trifles or superfluities, so as if the people generally should
betake themselves to frugalitie, it might prove a dangerous matter, least
tradesmen should mutiny for want of trading, and that therefore we must forgo
and set to sale religion, liberty, honor, safety, all concernments Divine or
human to keep up trading, if lastly, after all this light among us, the same
reason shall pass for current to put our necks again under kingship, as was
made use of by the Jews to return back to Egypt and to the worship of their
idol queen, because they falsely imagind that they then livd in more plenty and
prosperity, our condition is not sound but rotten, both in religion and all
civil prudence; and will bring us soon, the way we are marching, to those
calamities which attend always and unavoidably on luxury, all national
judgments under foreign or domestic slaverie: so far we shall be from mending
our condition by monarchizing our government, whatever new conceit now
possesses us. However with all hazard I have ventured what I thought my duty to
speak in season, and to forewarne my country in time: wherein I doubt not but
there be many wise men in all places and degrees, but am sorry the effects of
wisdom are so little seen among us. Many circumstances and particulars I could
have added in those things whereof I have spoken; but a few main matters now put
speedily in execution, will suffice to recover us, and set all right: and there
will want at no time who are good at circumstances; but men who set their minds
on main matters and sufficiently urge them, in these most difficult times I
find not many. What I have spoken, is the language of that which is not called
amiss the good Old Cause: if it seem strange to any, it will not seem more
strange, I hope, then convincing to backsliders. Thus much I should perhaps
have said though I were sure I should have spoken only to trees and stones; and
had none to cry to, but with the Prophet, O earth, earth, earth! to tell the
very soil it self, what her perverse inhabitants are deaf to. Nay though what I
have spoke, should happ'n (which Thou suffer not, who did create mankind
free; nor Thou next, who did redeem us from being servants of men!) to be the
last words of our expiring liberty. But I trust I shall have spoken persuasion
to abundance of sensible and ingenuous men: to some perhaps whom God may raise
of these stones to become children of reviving liberty; and may reclaim,
though they seem now choosing them a captain back for Egypt, to bethink
themselves a little and consider whether they are rushing; to exhort this
torrent also of the people, not to be so impetuos, but to keep their due
channel; and at length recovering and uniting their better resolutions, now
that they see already how open and unbounded the insolence and rage is of our
common enemies, to stay these ruinous proceedings; justly and timely fearing to
what a precipice of destruction the deluge of this epidemic madness would
hurrie us through the general defection of a misguided and abused multitude.

The end.

