A VINDICATION OF THE GOVERNMENT IN SCOTLAND. During the REIGN of King Charles
II. AGAINST Mis-Representations made in several Scandalous Pamphlets. To which
is added the Method of proceeding against Criminals, as also some of the
Phanatical Covenants, as they were Printed and Published by themselves in that
Reign.

By Sir GEORGE MACKENZIE, Late LORD ADVOCATE, There.

LONDON, Printed for I. Hindmarsh at the Golden Ball in Cornhill. 1691.

A VINDICATION OF THE Government in SCOTLAND During the Reign of King CHARLES
II. AGAINST Mis-representations made in several Scandalous Pamphlets.
THe Design of this Paper is neither to seduce others into Faction, nor to make
an Apology; the one being too Malicious, and the other too Mean: But because
many honest and sincere Men have been abused by some late Misinformations,
whereby the Charity and Unity of Protestants amongst themselves are much
weakened; therefore this Paper comes to set things in their true light, by a
bare Narrative, which will be sufficient to reclaim those who are abused, and
to confute those malicious Authors, who have endeavored to Reproach a whole
Nation with Villainies, of which none but these Authors themselves could have
been guilty.

Because the Civil Government in Scotland was never bigot in that King's Reign,
therefore we shall not run back to consider Episcopacy or Presbytery,
otherways than as they may concern the Civil Government. Neither should we run
so far back as to the Government of King Charles I. were it not to prove, that
these of the same persuasion, who now complain, were the first Aggressors; and
consequently, what was done against them deserves rather the name of
Self-defence than Persecution.

For clearing this, it is necessary to represent, that in the Year 1637, we
lived under the most Pious and Orthodox Prince of the Age, and yet a Rebellion
was formed against him, as a Papist, and a Tyrant, by which all the Fundamental
Laws were shaken, and all honest Men ruined. Neither needs there any other
proof for this Assertion, than the Records of Parliament, General Assemblies,
and Justice Court.

From the Records and Acts of Parliament it is undeniable, that the power of
nominating Judges, Counselors, and all Officers of State; the power of levying
War, and raising Taxes, were usurped by the people; Covenants were entered into
by a part of the Subjects, and by them imposed imperiously upon the rest;
Leagues and Covenants were entered into with England; Ambassadors were sent to
Foreign Princes and States; and even to France (though little less terrible then,
than now) exclaiming against the Injustice of the King, justifying their taking
Arms against him* and therefore entreating the French Aid and Assistance: The
King himself was inhumanely delivered up to his Enemies, and thereafter the
Army that went in to defend his precious Life, were declared Rebels, all which
was uncontravertedly inconsistent with the Laws of the Kingdom then standing.

From the Acts of the General Assembly it is clear, that the Assembly, 1639.
refused to rise, when dissolved by the King's Commissioner, and most of the
following Assemblies did both sit down and rise without his Warrant. This
Assembly threw out the Bishops, and abrogated Episcopacy without Authority of
Parliament, though the Bishops were always the first of the three Estates of
Parliament. A new Oath was invented, called, the Covenant, without the King's
Authority; and all Men Women and Children, that were above ten years of age,
forced to take it; and such as took it not, were Excommunicated, upon which all
their Movables or Chattels were Confiscated, and they themselves being
declared disobedient to the Laws, were forced to fly. The King's Negative Voice
was declared Illegal, and the Acts made for assisting him in the Year Forty
Eight, were declared Void and Null, by an unparalled Invasion, the General
Assembly, (imitating in this, as in many other things, the Church of Rome)
raised themselves above King and Parliament.

From the Records of the Justice Court we find that the Estates made Advocates
or Attorney Generals by their own Authority; who prosecuted to death such as
defended their own Houses by virtue of express Commissions from the King, and
such as rose in Arms for his Defense, though they had both his Commissions, and
Remissions, though the Iudes that Condemned them, sat by virtue of that very
King's Commission. They not only borrowed vast Sums by mere force from private
Men, whom they never paid* but also they were the first that brought in Free
and dry Quarter, Cess, Excise, and all these Public burdens afterward so
much complained of ( when they were continued upon necessary Exigencies, by
lawful Authority) we having neither formerly known Oaths, nor Public burdens
under our gentle Kings, against whom they so much exclaimed as Tyrants, because
forsooth they kept them from being such: All these Proceedings were not only
condemned by the general Opinion of both Protestants and Papists abroad, but
stand yet condemned by express Acts of Parliament, and by many Acts in the like
Cases in Scotland, and England, and so nothing which can be alleged in
justification of them, deserves or needs an answer.

King Charles the Second being restored by almost the Universal consent of all
the People, the worst of whom grew weary of their Villainies: The Parliament of
Scotland being called, they enquired very seriously into the occasion of such
Disorders, and soon found that they were all to be charged upon the Solemn
League and Covenant, and those who adhered thereto; and therefore they
endeavored to persuade the Presbyterians to disown the Covenant, all favor
being promised to them upon that condition: But finding that the Presbyterians
generally thought themselves bound to own the Covenant, the Parliament
concluding that the same Men, owning the same Principles, would be ready upon
occasion to act over again the same things, therefore they by Vote (which may
be called unanimous, seeing only four or five dissented) restored Episcopacy,
and that so much the rather, because that Government had in no age nor place
forced its way into the State by the Sword, but had still been brought in by
the uncontraverted Magistrate, without ever thrusting it self in by Violence,
and yet the Government did sustain Episcopacy as a part of the State, but never
as a Hierarchy wholly independent from it,

The Presbyterian Preachers had all along taught the People, That as their
Government was Iure Divino, so the People might thereby be obliged to defend
them and it, under pain of Eternal Damnation, even ( when Episcopacy was
Established by Law;) and accordingly some of the People who retained that
Principle, frequented the Conventicles at which these Ministers Preached;
whereupon the State fearing that the old Humor might ferment again into a
Rebellion, discharged under some small Penalties any above Five Strangers to
meet in a Conventicle, leaving thereby at once the free exercise of their
Conscience in their Families, and yet securing the State against such a total
defection, as might involve us in a New Civil-War, which without doubt was all
the State designed: But to elude these Penalties for House-Conventicles, some
Preachers (amongst whom were some of those who had been formerly banished)
gathered the People together in the Fields; they bringing Arms with them to
secure their Ministers, came at last to have such an Opinion of their own
strength, that they formed themselves into an Army, and were defeated at
Pentland Hills, November. Anno 1666. Yet within a short time of that, the State
Indulged them so far as to allow them their own Ministers, settling them in
Churches, and allowing them the enjoyment of the Benefices in many places. This
did not satisfy these People, because the Ministers so Indulged acknowledged
the King and Council's Authority; and they, with some of their violent
Preachers railed as much against these Indulged Ministers, as against the
Bishops, and regular Clergy, and called them Council Curates, and separated
from them. The State considering that by the Laws of all Nations, rising in
Arms is to be accounted Rebellion, and that a Preacher's Presence could
legitimate the Action no more than a Priest could Transubstantiate the
Elements; they declared by several Acts, Field-Meetings to be the Rendevouzes
of Rebellion: Notwithstanding all which, these Dissenters proceeded, as from
House to Field-Meetings, so from Field-Conventicles to publish Proclamations,
Declaring that the Covenant was the Original Contract betwixt God, the King,
and the People; and therefore King Charles the Second having broken it, Vid.
Cargil and Sanchars Covenant at the end.
forfaulted his Crown, and being to be considered only as a private Subject,
and Enemy to God, they had declared a just War against him, and that it was
lawful to kill him, and all who served him, following as was pretended the
Noble Examples of Phineas and Eliud; and in consequence of this Doctrine they
murdered the Archbishop of St. Andrews, and several others; to defend these
Murderers an Army was gathered by them, which was beat a Bothuel-Bridge, Anno
1679. But yet the King to reclaim them, granted both an Indemnity and
Indulgence; notwithstanding of which, a New Plot was entered into, and it was
Contrived in a Meeting of the Scots at London, that 20000 Men should be raised
in Scotland, and that the Garrisons of Berwick, and Carlisle, and all the
Officers of State should be seized, which was likewise seconded by Monmouth,
and Argyle's Rebellion, Anno 1685. Whereupon the Parliament finding that the
Preaching up of Rebellion in private Conventicles had occasioned all this
danger to King and People, and that nothing could be secure whilst every thing
might be preached, they Enacted, That the Ministers who preached at Conventicles
should be Capitally Punished; but by Virtue of this Act, no Man was ever
Punished, much less Executed.

This being the true Progress, and these the Occasions of making those Acts, it
is admired why the Government is taxed with so much Cruelty, and the Acts
themselves reproached as Diabolical: For First, These against
House-Conventicles are the same with the Laws in England, and less severe than
those made against Dissenters in Queen Elizabeth's time, or than those now
standing against the Calvinists in Sweden, or those made, and now executed by
the Presbyterians and Independents in New England; but much more gentle than
those our Presbyterians made when they Governed.

2. Whatever might be said against such Acts in Countries where Dissenters
never entered into a War, yet in this Isle, where they upon the same Principles
overturned the Government and Laws, and were upon every occasion again
attempting it, so small a Caution cannot be accounted severe. 3. This Caution
was much more just in Scotland, than even in England; because the Dissenters in
Scotland were more bigoted to the Covenant, which is a constant Fond for
Rebellion. 4. The Posteriour Acts made against Field-Conventicles, were the
necessary product of new accessional degrees of Rebellion; and were not
Punishments designed against Opinions in Religion, but merely against
Treasonable Combinations, which exceeded what was attempted in England, or
elsewhere; and the Governors (for the time) can truly and boldly say, That no
Man in Scotland ever suffered for his Religion. But if any will pretend, that
Religion obliges him to rise in Arms, or to Murder, this Principle ought
neither to be sustained as a Defense, nor the obviating of it to be made a
Crime; and as the Covenanters laughed at such a defense when proposed for them,
who assisted King Charles I. merely for Conscience sake, so they cannot deny,
but they zealously pressed Sir John Dalrymple, then Advocate, to hang Mr. Renwick
a Field-Preacher, for Field-Preaching, where some of his Hearers were Armed,
because he was like to divide their Church, after they got an Indulgence from
King James, against the accepting whereof, Renwick and his Party exclaimed
highly; and that so much the more plausibly, for that many of them, who now
accepted an Indulgence from a King professedly Popish, had rejected and preached
against those who accepted of one when offered by a King of the Protestant
Profession. I must also ask them, if any should now rise in Arms in defense of
Episcopacy, and allege Conscience for so doing, would they sustain that as a
just defense? 5. When ever any Man offered to keep the Church, former Fines
were generally remitted, if timeous Application was made; and more Indulgencies
and Indemnities were granted by this King* than by any that ever reigned; and
generally no Man was executed in his Reign, who would say, God Bless the King,
or acknowledge his Authority; an unusual Clemency, never shown in any other
Nation, and such as was not practiced by those, who now cry out against the
Severity of that Government..

The Reader will be astonished, when we inform him; that the way of Worship in
our Church, differed nothing from what the Presbyterians themselves practiced,
(except only, that we used the Doxologie, the Lord's Prayer, and in Baptism,
the Creed, all which they rejected.) We had no Ceremonies, Surplice* Altars,
Cross in Baptisms, nor the meanest of those things which would be allowed in
England by the Dissenters, in way of Accommodation: That the most Able and
Pious of their Ministers, did hear the Episcopal Clergy Preach, many of them
Communicated in the Churches, and almost all the People Communicated also; so
that it cannot be said that they were Persecuted, and forced to join with an
Unsound, much less Heretical Church, as the French Protestants are.

From all which, it follows clearly, that the Complainers* were the Aggressors,
that the Government proceeded by slow steps, to Punish even those who had
forced it into a Resentment, and that all pains were taken to Reclaim rather
than Punish.

Any Reasonable and Unprejudiced Man must allow, that the State had reason to
be jealous that the same Men who had Invaded and overturned the Government
under King CHALES I. retaining still the same Principles as Sacred, and
bursting forth into the same Excesses under King CHARLES II. were still to be
kept in awe, and within the Barriers of Law, and that by their own Principle of
Salus Populi, better some few of the Society should perish than that the whole
should go to ruin. Vnitas, non unus, as was said by them in the E. Straffords
Case; and if two States of Parliament without the King, were thought the best,
and necessary Judges, of what was Salus Populi in those days; much more should
it be acknowledged, that the King and three Estates, in many subsequent
Parliaments, agreeing cordially together, should be acknowledged to be the true
Judges of what was Salus Populi in our Government, especially when what they
did was founded on a Series of uncontraverted Laws, and upon long and
deplorable experience of the Mischiefs occasioned by that Pary. Whereas they
who condemn our proceedings, must, and do acknowledge before they Condemn us,
that they consider themselves as a People coming into a Country where there
were no Laws, and so might take any new Laws they thought fit, for the present
exigent: A Liberty which we (Poor Slaves!) durst never take, foolishly
conceiving our selves overruled by our Statute-Books, Ancient Customs, and
Oaths, regulating our Duty and Conscience.

For answering the Objections which are made against the Government, I shall
class them into these General Enormities with which the Government is charged,
and into the particular instances of its pretended Cruelty.

The first General Objection is, That the severe Laws made against Conventicles
were yet more severely put in execution by Sir James Turner, and Sir William
Ballantine, and others, which occasioned the Insurrection at Pentland-hills,
and it is alleged that these Conventiclers came only to petition the Council,
not to overturn the Government.

To this it is answered, That all rising in Arms upon any pretext whatsoever,
is declared Rebellion in this and all other Nations; and if any should rise now
in Arms because Free Quarter is taken from them against Law, they would find
this Government so to take it. Nor can it be pretended that Justice was denied
to private Petitioners; but on the contrary, Turner and Ballantine were laid
aside, which is all the State could do, it being impossible to answer for all
the extravagancies of Soldiers, even under the most just Government. From this
likewise it necessarily follows, that because this was no just War, therefore
the Learned and Worthy Sir John Nisbet, then King's Advocate, and the Criminal
Judges were unjustly reproached for refusing to allow the defense founded on
giving Quarter, that being only to be allowed in Iusto Bello: And it is to be
remembered, that this defense was not allowed to the Worthy President Sir Robert
Spotswood, Son to the famous Archbishop, in Anno 1645, though the War was just on
the King's side, and he acted by virtue of a Commission from that very King* by
whose Authority the Parliament that Condemned him was called; and it could not
be proved by those that were taken at Pentland-hills, that Quarter was granted
them; whereas it was clearly proved, that the Council in General had discharged
granting of Quarter upon the foresaid account. We pass under silence here, the
Dreadful Slaughter of several Hundreds Killed after Free Quarter given, and
Surrendering of the Castle of Dunvileigh, (which made Lieutenant General Leslie,
who then commanded the Army, threaten to lay down his Commission,)
notwithstanding of a violent Sermon made before him upon these words, 1 Samuel
Chap. 15. v. 14. What means then this bleating, etc. That is, this noise of
Prisoners yet preserved alive. So the Preacher applied his Doctrine.


As to the sending away People to the Plantations, it is answered that none
were sent away, but such as were taken at Bothuel-Bridge, or in Argyle's
Rebellion; and the turning Capital Punishment into exile, was an Act of
Clemency; not of Cruelty. As to Torture, it is allowed not only by the Law of
our Nation, but of all Nations except England, and founded on the forementioned
Maxims, Salus Populi, etc. Pereat unus, potius quam Vnitas; nor was it ever
inflicted, but where the Person tortured was evidently proved to be Guilty of
Accession to the Crime, and that he knew the Accomplices; it being still left
in his power to secure himself against Torture, by confessing who were his
Accomplices, or by clearing himself by his Oath, that he did not know them,
which Oath was required to free, not to bind the Deponent; because his
Knowledge of the matter was first proved, and it was still previously declared
by Act of Council, that nothing he was to Depone should prejudge him; And those
who had been in that Government were very sorry that when Torture was declared
a Grievance in the last Convention, Matters of high importance relating to the
Government, were still excepted, which exposed the Subjects to as much danger
as formerly. As to the Imprisoning free Leidges without giving any reason, and
detaining them in Prison for many Years; It is answered, that we have no Act
for Habeas Corpus in Scotland, and so these things may be accounted Severe, but
not Illegal; and they were introduced in the late Unhappy Presbyterian
Rebellion, where thousands were kept in Prison a great many years, without any
Crime or Hopes of Releasment; but the true Reason of the frequent
Imprisonments, during K. Charles the 2 d's Government, should only be charged
on those who were Accessories to the Plots and Rebellions which occasioned
them; and no Men wished more than we did, to see those peaceable times which
might allow an Act of Parliament for Habeas Corpus.

Another thing which occasioned these long Imprisonments, was, That the persons
imprisoned refused to acknowledge the King's Authority, without which they
could not have been set at liberty, when there was a clear Probation against
them. But can this be objected to Us, by those who have since Imprisoned more
in one Year than we did in five?

As to the bringing in the Highlanders on the Western shires, and taking free
Quarter there; it is answered, that many thousands had gathered in Field
Conventicles with Arms for several Years; and when these Conventicles which
used to meet in several places, pleased to join in one, they could easily form
an Army. To prevent which, the Council wrote a Letter to these Westernshires,
entreating them to fall upon some course for security of the Peace; they
returning for answer, That the Peace could not be secured there without
Abrogating Episcopacy. The King and Council considered this as a Sacrificing
the Laws to the Humors and Passions of private Men, and such too, as they had
reason to think, could no more be satisfied with that Concession than their
Predecessors were, who proceeded to ruin King Charles I. after he had parted
with the Order of Episcopacy to please them; and therefore the Highlanders were
sent in, to secure the Peace; and because Money could not be provided in haste,
the Council declared by their Act, That those on whom they were quartered
should be paid out of the first and readiest of the Fines owing there, and the
Superplus should be paid by the King; nor have those who were then in the
Government, clamoured so much now for a Years Free Quarter as these People did
then for a Fortnights, and even during that Fortnight most men paid for their
Quarters; nor was there any more Surety sought, at least from Masters and
Heretors, than the ordinary Surety of Law-borrows, by the very style whereof,
any private Man may force another by the Law to secure him against all
Prejudices from his Men, Tennents and Servants, and others of his Command,
Out-hounding and Ra^ihabition. And that the King had great reason to be jealous
of their breaking the Peace, appears fully from the Reasons above Represented,
and when this Surety was thereupon approved by Parliament, by which it was
Enacted, that Masters should be liable either to remove their Tennents from
their Lands, or to present them to Justice: It proved a most advantageous
Remedy for settling the Nation, to the great advantage both of Master and
Servant; this alternative securing the Master from many hardships, and engaging
his Servants to obey him, as he was obliged to obey the King* and keep the
Peace.

As to the Cumulative Jurisdiction so much complained of, because it gives the
King a power to name Sheriffs, and other Inferior Judges, who may have an
equal share in the Administration with those who had the sole Heretable
Jurisdiction formerly, whereby it is pretended the Property of the Subjects was
invaded. It is answered, that Heretable Jurisdictions are of themselves very
little to be favored, because the Heir must be a Judge both in Matters of Life
and Fortune, though he want Probity or Knowledge in the Law, and the Interested
Superiors or Over-Lords had thereby the unfortunate poor Vassals absolutely at
their Devotion, and therefore by an old Law in K. James the 2 ds time, there
was an Act made, discharging all Heretable Jurisdictions without consent of
Parliament; and Sir John Nisbet The truly learned Advocate for the King.
upon these and many other good Reasons, advised, that all the other Heretable
Jurisdiction (because almost all granted since that time) should be Repealed;
and yet, though these Heretable Judges refused to concur in putting the Laws
against Field-Conventicles, and Armed Insurrections in Execution, or connived
at them, whereby they grew very formidable, the Council unwilling to take away
these Jurisdictions totally, chose rather to name others to sit with those
Judges, or to supply their absence if they refused to come; but there-after S.
G. M. succeeding as Advocate, to prevent all Debate, advised the bringing this
point to the Parliament, to the end, that that procedure of the King's Council
might be either Vncontravertedly Legal if acquiesc'd in, or let fall if
refused; and accordingly the Parliament having passed it into an Act; it seems
great Malice and Ignorance to call this Illegal; and it being founded upon such
just and solid Reasons, it seemed as strange, why it should be thought severe,
and never Lawyer spoke against it except those who had Heretable Jurisdictions.
It were unreasonable that the King should complain of what he consented to in
Parliament in favors of his Subjects; and so it must be likewise concluded
unreasonable that the Subject should complain of this point which they have
granted to the King, especially seeing it is more in favors of the Subjects
than of Him, it being a strong Bulwark against great Men's oppressing of their
Vassals and Inferiors; and therefore I cannot see why the Inferior sort should
be so dull or unreasonabe as to complain of it. But notwithstanding of this
Clamor, and abstracting even from this Act, it is still maintained by the
Advocate, that all Lawyers, and particularly our Learned Craig in his Book De
Feudis, assert, that the Superior has still an Accumulative Jurisdiction with
his Vassal as to the point of Judging; for though he delegate a Jurisdiction for
his Convenience, yet that is not exclusive, that being a quality which still
adheres, as Craig says; Illud tamen generaliter observandum, quod Iurisdictio
nunquam privative sed cumulative delega^i potest, non est quasi transitio juris
de un^ persona in aliam sed tantum mandata, jurisdictio quod non obstante
Delegatione adhuc remanet in delegante.
however Sir George Makenzee, Advocate, advised to stop all Clamours, that the
Heretable Judge might still have the Casualties, so that his Property could not
be said to be invaded; and lest this might be drawn to the Session, as is
ridiculously pretended, the Act is only made Relative to Jurisdictions given by
his Majesty to his good Subjects, which can in no sense fall under the
Cognizance of the Session, i. e. the Judges.

As to the Act made in Council, allowing Soldiers to kill such as refused to
own the King's Authority; It is answered, that there being many Proclamations
issued out, by the Dissenters, declaring, That the King had forfaulted his
Right by breaking the Covenant, and that therefore it was lawful to kill him,
and those who served him: Many accordingly being killed, it was thought
necessary by some (upon the fresh news of Murdering some of the King's
Horse-Guard at Swyn-Abbey in their Beds) to terfy them out of this
Extravagancy, by allowing the Soldiers to use them as in a War, in which, if
any call, For whom are you? and the others owning that they were for the Enemy;
it is lawful then to kill: And thus they felt their Folly, and the necessary
effects of their Principle; and yet still it was ordered, That none should be
killed except those who were found in Arms, owning that Principle of
Assassination, and refusing to clear themselves of their having been in
Accession to the declaring of War, which they had then begun; nor were these
killed but when their deliberate refusal could be proved by two Witnesses. But
that it may plainly appear, that no more was in all this intended by the
Governors, than to secure the Public Peace, by terrifying those Assassines
who had so manifestly invaded it; Secret Orders were given, that this should
not last above a fortnight, and that none should be killed except those who
were found in the publicly printed List of declared Rebels, who may be killed
by the Laws of all Nations; and but very few, even of those Rebels were killed,
though this has been made the Foundation of many dreadful Lies. This mischief was
intolerable in it self, and we desire to know how it could have been otherways
remedied, for the Law must find Cures for all Mischiefs, and these who
occasioned them, should of all others, be least allowed to complain.

After the terror of that procedure had much cooled the Zeal of Assassination
for a time, it took new fire, and several Proclamations for disowning the
King's Authority, and Murdering his Servants were posted upon all Church
Doors, and Mercat-Crosses, so that no man who served the King could know
whether or not his Murderer was at his elbow, and they had reason to look upon
every place as their Scaffold: Considering the violent and cruel temper of
their Enemies.
Whereupon the Advocate being desired to raise Processes against some who owned
those Pernicious Principles, he prevailed with the Council to ask the Opinion
of all the Judges upon this Quaery, viz. Whether any of his Majesty's Subjects
being questioned by his Majesty's Judges or Commissioners, if they own a late
Proclamation in so far as it does declare War against his Sacred Majesty, and
asserts that it is lawful to kill all those who are employed by his Majesty,
refusing to answer upon Oath, are thereby guilty of High Treason, and are airt
and part of the said Treasonable Declaration, Salus Populi requiring that every
one should contribute what was in his Power to the preservation of the Society;
and as none of the Kings Servants without this could know if he was secure of
his Life, so it was very easy for the person accused to clear himself if he
was innocent: They considered likewise that Law in general, for the good of the
People, did accommodate its self to what probation could be allowed, and
therefore invented presumptive probation upon that account, whereof there are
so many instances to be seen in all Laws, that it were Childish to insist on
them, and no man has been so just as to produce one Law or Reason to convince
us of the Illegality of this Opinion; and there is an express Act of Parliament
penned by the Learned Sir John Nisbet, whereby for the same Reason, such as are
prosecuted for Conventicles are obliged to Swear whether they were Innocent or
Guilty, which does run yet higher than this Opinion.

There is another Opinion given by the Judges much challenged, viz. That some
having gone about amongst the People, demanding Fifty Pound Sterling from each
as a Contribution for the Earl of Argyle then forfaulted, they from whom that
Money had been asked, and concealed it, were found Guilty of Treason, because
this was so far beyond private Charity, that it would have amounted to a
greater Sum than any Parliament had ever granted the King: And whereas the
proposal of any Assistance to a Rebel is Treasonable, the Concealing of it by
our Law, and by the Law of Nations is undoubted Treason. If the matter of Fact
in these Answers had been Represented to the late Convention, it cannot in
Reason be thought they would have condemned them; and if any Man will compare
these Opinions of the Judges, with that Grievance pretended in the late
Convention, and that again with the Act of Parliament, they will find the
matter of Fact variously represented in all the three. We must likewise inform
the World, That no Man died upon either of these Opinions; and to cut off all
Debate, both these forenamed Opinions of the Judges are expressly ratified by
Parliament, and consequently are the Sense of the Nation.

Before we enter upon private Processes, we must complain, That though K. Chapter
having by Act of Parliament, added five of the Learned of all his Judges to
his Justice General and Justice Clark in place of two Advocates, who were
generally but Young or Mean, because they had only Fifty pounds Salary, and
that seldom paid; that yet every Ignorant Scribler should presume to Reproach
their Sentences, and should take upon them to judge the deepest Controversies
in point of Law; and should Dogmatically-Write of Criminal Sentences, though they
never saw a Criminal Court, and be Applauded in things which every Servant
about that Court knew to be Nonsense: Particularly, 'as that the Advocate,
Threatened Iuries; whereas all he did, was to Protest for an Assize of Error,
which the Laws Command, and which all Advocates ever did, and to this day do.
Again, it is as Foolishly pretended; That the Advocate Prosecuted Men without
Order; whereas indeed, he never Prosecuted any, until he was Commanded by the
Council, who are our Grand Jury upon Oath, and all their Orders are
Registrated; the Court likewise, was so very favorable to these Criminals,
that they did ordinarily Name (those of their own Profession) Presbyterians to
pass upon their Jury, and sent Ministers of their own Persuasion, to Reclaim
them; and these Jurors and Ministers, seldom failed to Condemn them as much as
the Judges did.

The Capital Sentences in that Court, were Founded Generally upon Actual
Rebellion; and even as to those, there was not one of a thousand Executed: Nor
in all Argyle's Rebellion, was any Executed by their Sentence, except one or
two, who were pitched upon as Examples to terrify others. Nor did there dye
upon any Public Account, Twelve, in all that Reign so Exclaimed against, as
Bloody; and not one Dyed for any Principle in Religion, unless it be thought a
Religious Principle to Dye for Actual Rebellion; as to such, there needs no
particular Defense, the very Light of Nature, the common Interest of Societyes,
and the Laws of Nations, declaring it a Crime to justify them.

It is pretended, That though the Crimes had been Legally founded, yet the
Probation was suspect in those times, because the Depositions of Witnesses were
Previously taken, whereby Witnesses being once Ensnared, were forced to stand
by their Depositions. To which it is answered, that in all Nations abroad,
Depositions are Previously taken, as is Uncontroverted by all their Criminal
Writers, and this is very necessary for the Good of the Subjects, lest they
should be Prosecuted groundlesly, and this is as fit for the Good of the King,
or Kingdom, lest such as are Guilty of Atrocious Crimes against the whole
Society, should escape without being Punished, because Tried when the formal
and full Probation is not ready; yet to prevent all mistakes, the Advocate
interceeded that this Trust of Examining Witnesses, should not be left to the
King's Advocate, as it ever formerly had been, but should be lodged in the
Judges, and that lest their Depositions should be any Tie upon them, the Judges
with Consent of the Advocate, ordered that the Depositions should be torn
before they Deposed in Judgment, and they were allowed either to Correct or
Pass from their former Depositions as they pleased; And whereas formerly the
King's Advocate had the Naming of the Jury, it is now lodged by Act of
Parliament in the Judges. Nor was there ever any Witnesses suspected, except
only in Chesnock's Case, wherein the Depositions were true; and albeit the
Witnesses afterward Asserted upon Oath on their Knees, That their first
Deposition was very true, and that they were only Frighted and Confounded in
the Second; yet the Council would not resume the Process, and thereupon he was
Absolved: in the rest the Probation was but too clear, for beside all the Legal
Probation, most of those who Died, owned and Gloried in their Crimes when they
Died, Exhorting others to imitate them, in their Disowning the King, and
Rebelling against him: and many of them Exhorted the People, to Kill all such
as opposed their Principles, assuring them, that to Kill Malignants was
acceptable to God.

Strangers would likewise be pleased to be informed, That our Law allows the
Party Accused, a Liberty to call in Witnesses, who may Depose upon Oath for Him
against the King, which the Law of England does not, and this kind of
Exculcapation was never allowed till the Reign of King CHARLES II. The first
Act which was the Warrant thereof, having been made by Sir John Cunningham, and
Sir George Mackenzie, when they were Criminal Judges: and this was never
refused to the Persons Accused, albeit they brought in frequently Witnesses,
who took very great Latitudes, to save those of their own Principles by
Swearing; for instance, that though they saw a Person very like the Panel or
Party Accused, yet they could not Depose it was he, because it might have been
a Vision, albeit at the same time, they had known him formerly very well, and
that they Talked with him that time in Arms, at the distance of ten or twelve
paces, for half an hour together; and at other times, they did positively
refuse to Depose that they saw him have a Sword, though they owned that they saw
the Hilt and Scabbard: Notwithstanding of which, and many such ridiculous
Evasions, the Party Accused, was always Acquitted.

To descend to particular Processes: It is clamoured, that Mitchill the Famous
Assassine, was Executed after he Confessed the Crime upon Promise of Life; To
which it is answered, that Mitchill having upon the High Street of Edinburgh,
Shot at the Archbishop of St. Andrews, with a design to Murder him, he
Wounded the Bishop of Orkney with that Shot, of which he never Recovered, and
being thereafter Apprehended, Confessed the Crime, but continuing still to
Glory in it, and very Famous Witnesses having Deposed, that Mitchill was upon a
new Plot to Kill the same Archbishop; Mitchill was brought to a Trial, and his
Defenses were, that the Earl of Rothes, to whom he Confessed it, had promised to
secure his Life, or that the Privy Council had afterward promised the same;
for clearing whereof, the said Earl, and all who were upon the Committee,
together with all such Members of Council as he desired to be cited, were fully
examined, upon all his interrogatories: and the Registers of Council were
produced, but not the least mark of a promise was made to appear by either, so
that nothing remained, but that the Lord high Chancellor, and Lords of the
Privy Council (as they alleged) perjured themselves, and that the Registers of
Council were vitiated; and how it is possible to imagine that all this Villainy
was committed to take so inconsiderable a Fellows life; I leave the World to
Judge? However, he also died glorying in his Crimes, and recommending to others
the sweetness of such Assassinations.

George Lermonth is alleged to have been unjustly executed, because he was
condemned for being present at a Field-Conventicle, with a Rod only in his
hand: whereas the truth is, that he was condemned for being Art and Part, that
is to say, accessory to the Death of a Soldier, who was killed upon that place,
and that he commanded those who killed him as an Officer, of which a man may be
guilty in Law, without having a Sword; and therefore the Justices most legally
repelled the defense founded on his not having a Sword.

Hamilton of Monkland was not found guilty because he went into the Rebels to
seek his Son, as some falsely suggest: but because being there, he solicited a
Committee of the Rebels to make his Servant an Officer; and accordingly he
being made one, he came back within some few days, and stayed several Months
with Monkland, a point of Law so clear that his own Advocates could make no
reply to evade it.

There were indeed two Women executed, and but two in both these Reigns, and
they were punished for most heinous Crimes which no Sex should defend. Their
Crimes were, that they had recepted and entertained, for many Months together,
the Murderers of the Archbishop of St. Andrews, who were likewise condemned
Traitors for having been openly in Rebellion at Bothwell-Bridge, whereupon they
having been prosecuted, declined the King's Authority, as being an Enemy to
God, and the Devil's Vicegerent. And though a pardon was offered to them upon
their Repentance, they were so far from accepting it, that they owned the
Crimes to be duties; and our Accusers should remember that these Women were
executed for higher Crimes, than the following Montross's Camp, for which
fourscore Women and Children were drowned, being all in one day thrown over the
Bridge at Linlithgow by the Covenanters, and six more at Elgine by the same
Faction, all without Sentence, or the least formality of Law.

Baillie of Iervisewood was executed for being accessory to, and concealing of
a design of raising twenty thousand Men, and siezing the Garrisons of Berwick
and Carlisle, and the Officers of State. Nor would the Advocate raise an
Indictment until Sir George Lockhart, and one of the Learned of the present
Judges; did declare that the point of Law and Probation were both most clear,
and thereupon concurred in the process (concealing of Treason is beyond all
debate punishable as Treason in our Law) and some of the Witnesses were his own
Relations, who swore plainly and positively against him.

The E. of Argile's Process deserves to be more largely cleared* and since this
last Parliament has rescinded it, we shall without any Justification represent
the Matter of Fact, which stands thus. The TEST being Enacted to be a Bulwark
to the Protestant Religion, as upon the Event it proved, the E. was not
obliged, but would needs take it with this Caution, I take it as far as it is
consistent with it self, or with the Protestant Religion; and I declare, that I
mean not to bind up my self to wish or endeavor any Alteration I think to the
advantage of the Church or State; whereupon the Council observing, that the
Test by one part of this his Declaration appeared Ridiculous, and by the other
it became ineffectual to all the Intents and Purposes for which it was
designed; for so every Man's Opinion became the Rule of his own Loyalty, and no
Man thereby obliged to be further Loyal than he himself might think convenient.
They therefore Interposed earnestly with the Earl to pass from this his
Declaration, but he refusing to disown it in the least, and Copies of it being
industriously spread abroad, it was represented to him, that by Acts of
Parliament, all such as put Limitations upon their Allegiance were guilty of
Treason, for beside, that Men are not obliged to dispute the Reasonableness of
Acts of Parliament after they were once made; it is apparent that this Act was
made upon most just and necessary Motives, for the Foundation of the Rebellion
in the last Age, was, That by the Covenant the Subjects were not further
obliged to own the King's Interest, than in so far as it agreed with the word
of God, and the Laws of the Land, of which every private Breast made himself
the Judge; and if this be allowed, no Oath of Allegiance can bind, and so all
Society must be dissolved. Notwithstanding all which, the Earl still
persisting, and the Duke then High-Commissioner, being assured by one of the
best Lawyers in the Nation, that the Paper imported Treason, (though the Advocate
scrupled to prosecute him from a Principle of Personal Kindness to the Earl) he
was thereupon prosecuted, and found Guilty after a full Debate, wherein Eight
or Nine of the best Lawyers of the Nation, by a positive Command from the
Council, did assist the Earl It is here also very observable, that no Malice
could be designed against the Earl; because he was earnestly entreated to pass
from the Paper containing his Declaration before the Process should commence;
and after all, the Captain of the Castle was allowed not to keep him strictly,
and as it is undeniable, That the King allowed the Earl's Estate to his
Creditors, and that his Children got a far larger share of it, than if he had
died in his Bed; so it can be proved it was fully resolved, that he should not
die, nor did he die till he had Invaded his Native Country by open War,
whereby the Parliament being convinced by this Open Act, that he had very
clearly designed by the former Caution in his Explicatory Declaration of the
Test, to reserve to himself a Power to rise in Rebellion when he thought fit;
as was argued in the former Process; they therefore ratified the Process of
Forfaulture (nemine contradicente) and added their Authority to that of the
Justice Court, and because it is wondered why he was not prosecuted upon this
New Rebellion; it is answered, That by the Laws of all Nations, and by the Laws
especially of Scotland and England, no Man can be tried for the very same crime
for which he stands convicted, though he may for a crime which deserves a greater
Punishment, for the Law has exhausted its Revenge by the first Sentence; but
yet where a new Notorious Aggravation superveens, which is so clear, that it
can admit of no Debate, nor needs no Probation; it were very unjust that the
Law should not here be put in Execution, though the first Sentence had been
thought too severe to deserve it. We conclude then this Process with this
Reflection, That a Government can in no sense be called Severe, where the
person accused has Liberty (and is entreated) to retract his crime, where his
Children and Creditors get all his Estate, and where he himself does not
suffer, until he made it manifest by his Invasion of his Native Country, that
the design of his explaining the Test in a Paper under his Hand, was to reserve
to himself a power to Rebel, and till he had aggravated highly his former
guilt. But why do they reproach us with this one Decision, who do yet sustain
those abominable ones, that were executed without the least shadow of Justice
against the Marquess of Huntley and Montrose, President Spotswood, Haddo, and
Seven hundred Gentlemen more, who died by their Justice Court, when their
Covenant overruled Law and Equity: and against Four hundred and Fifty
Gentlemen and Commons who died by the Justice-Court of Argyle, beside the many
thousands who died in the Civil War, (of which they must be guilty, who raised
it, and who never yet made the least profession of Repentance for it.

The Parliament, 1685, being informed of Monmouth and Argyle's Invasion, and
being convinced that Argyle had reserved that power in his Explicatory Paper of
the Test, merely that he might Invade his Country and its Laws; and reflecting
on the Treasonable Principle of the Covenant of defending the King, only in
defense of Religion, and the late limitations of owning no King, except he had
taken their Covenant; They therefore (not by a Recognizing Act, but in the
Narrative only of the Act relating to the Excise) offered their Lives and
Fortunes, without reserve; which Clause was inserted by the Parliament, not to
introduce a blind Slavery, as some maliciously pretend, but merely to exclude
these Rebellious Limitations of Obedience invented by the Covenanters, which
were inconsistent with former standing Laws, and by which the People had been
highly debauched in the late Civil War; for in that very Parliament they
enlarged the Peoples Liberties, and ratified all Laws in favors of the
Protestant Religion; and the very same persons in the next Parliament refused
to take away the Penal Statutes, whereas, if an absolute Slavery had been
designed, all the former Acts establishing our Liberty and Property, and all
the Concessions granted to us by our Kings for securing our Lives and Fortunes,
should have been expressly* Enumerated and Abrogated; and so the words in the
Narrative of that Act could be no warrant for the Proclamation, disabling the
Laws against Toleration as some would have us believe: and they who now
complain, were the only persons who then took the benefit of that stretch of
the Prerogative.

We could wish that our Accusers would be careful, that in being too rigid
Censurers of us, they do not expose all Governments, and even the present to
reproach; for it would seem to some who are now bystanders, as they then were,
that though they cried out against us for torturing, when it was warranted by
our uncontroverted Law; yet the expediency of Government, or some other reason
makes them do it, after they had declared it a Grievance, and had railed
against it as inconsistent with all humanity. Nor do I see that the reserving
it only to King and Parliament answers this Objection; for the Parliament by
their Authority cannot make that fit, which is inconsistent with Humane Nature,
or that convenient which was declared to be incapable to produce the true
effect for which it was designed: and the making Torture then only a Grievance,
when inflicted without a Cause (as is pretended) seems to satisfy as little,
since every Man can easily pretend that what he does is done upon just Motives.
The Imprisoning many, and keeping them long, can hardly be objected to us,
since the present Government find themselves obliged to do both; and the last
Parliament, in their great Wisdom, thought it fit to reject a Bill for Habeas
Corpus, when it was pressed as suitable to one of the Grievances: Nor can we
yet discover why the forfeitures of those should be rescinded by the current
Parliament, who were Sentenced for having taken up Arms at Pentland-Hills, and
Bothwell-Bridge; or those who were forfeited for the Proclamations at Sanquhar,
and elsewhere, wherein King Charles was declared to have lost his Right to the
Crown, for having broke the Covenant (that Tripartit and Fundamental Contract
betwixt God, the King, and his People) and wherein it is declared a Duty to
kill him, and all who served him, and to throw off the Race of the Stewarts, as
constant Enemies to God: Compare this with the Sanchar Declaration, and
Cargil's Covenant at the end of this Paper.
As also how the Forfeiture of the Duke of Monmouth, and all who adhered to
him, and that of the Earl of Argyle were repealed in Cumulo; for if it be
lawful for Subjects to rise in Arms upon the single pretense of Conscience, no
King, nor no Government can be secure: If a considerable part of the Nation
should now rise for Liberty, Property and Episcopacy, upon the same pretext,
would the Parliament find this defense good; some are also found who reproach
the present Government for suffering Ministers to be thrown out by the Rabble
without any previous Trial or reparation afterward, and many other things
which afford but too great ground for Satyr and Complaint, if I were inclined
to either.

The Necessity of State is that Supereminent Law to which upon occasion all
particular Acts must bow; what else can be alleged to justify the throwing
out the first estate of Parliament, the passing by the Magistrates then in
possession in making of their Elections; and allowing some who had been
sentenced for Treason to sit and Vote in Parliament, without ever examining the
grounds upon which they had been Condemned: These who think that the necessity
of State can justify such Proceedings, (which must be their only Plea,) ought
to be very careful how they blame their Predecessors for Severities, which some
Men's ungovernable humors necessitated them to.

We must also be allowed to admire how those who so eminently complied with the
Dispencing Power in taking an Indulgence from the Papists, and who magnified
King James upon that account as the best of Kings that ever Reigned, should so
snarle at us, who in a Parliament (at which not one of them assisted) refused
to take away the Penal Laws made against Popery, whilst many of us resigned our
Places willingly in defense of those Laws? Or how those who did sit in
Parliament and Judicatures with us, consenting to and approving what was done
in those Reigns, should now Countenance such Reproaches against us; it being
most undeniable that there is but very few who deserved any Employment, or had
any sense, who did not concur in most of those things for which we are now so
severely censured, and there are very few of any Note or Consideration either
in the last Convention, or present Parliament, who have not been accessory to
many of the things now complained of.

We do therefore in the last place recommend to all disinteressed Men, to
consider that the Men of the greatest Quality, Learning, Experience, Parts, and
Estates being then in the Government, and upon Oath, it is to be presumed that
love to the Salvation of their Souls, respect to their Honor, and care of
their Families and Posterity would have obliged them to shun and avoid all
those Severities with which they are now most unjustly charged, and in common
Charity to believe, that what was then done by those in Power, was designed
only for the Security of the Protestant Religion, against those Factions and
Schisms, and to preserve the Country from those Civil Wars and Distractions
which had destroyed both in the last Age; and threatened to do the like in this;
notwithstanding all the Pains and Care that was taken to reduce the Authors of
those Mischiefs to live peaceably and quietly. We foreseeing very clearly, that
one Months Civil War would occasion more ruin and destruction to the Country,
than possibly the Severities of a whole Reign could do.

The only Design of this Paper being to defend our selves, without offending
others, and rather to cement than widen Differences, we wish that all sides may
busy themselves so much in settling their Native Country, that they may forget
injuries, which the most impartial cannot think so great in the Reign of King
Chapter the Second, as those that were committed by the Complaining Party in the
Reign of K. Chapter the First, and we should be sorry they had been balanced. But
sure they will be most unpardonable, who begin again upon a new score; for
after that nothing can be expected, but that all Parties will run in an endless
Circle of Severities. Which God of his infinite Mercy avert.

A TRUE ACCOUNT OF THE Forms used in pursuits of Treason, ACCORDING TO The Law
of Scotland: By which the JUSTICE of that Nation may be known to misinformed
Strangers.
Written Anno 1690.
IT is much to be admired, That such as never read our Law, revised our
Records, nor were ever employed as Judges or Advocats in our Criminal Courts,
should adventure to condemn the Proceedings of those, who for many years have
made that part of our Law their constant Study, who were upon Oath, and knew
that their Posterity should be judged by their Decisions. But to inform all men
more particularly, and to set things in their true light; I shall represent the
Legal way of Procedure in Cases of Treason, which is the only Crime to which
this Jealousy may reach; and then prove that the King's Advocat cannot
prejudge the party accused in any step of the process.

Treason may be pursued either at the instance of a private Informer, or at the
instance of the King's Advocat, who is ratione Officii, Calumniator Publicus:
If a private person inform, then his Name must be expressed, to the end he, nor
none of his Relations may be used as Witnesses, he must find Surety that he
shall prove, and that he shall insist, as being liable in That is, the same
Punishment which the Law provides against such a Criminal.
Poenam Talionis, if he fail in proving the Crime. When the pursuit was to be
carried on for the public Interest, the King's Advocat examined the Witnesses
alone; but Sir George Mackenzie thinking the Advocat might have been jealous'd,
as too interested, prevailed to get this Examination referred to the Judges,
who in all Nations enquire into the Grounds whereupon pursuits are to be
raised, and after the Depositions were taken, and signed by the Judges and
Witnesses, the Advocat presents them to the Privy Council; and if, after
reading them, and a full debate upon them (many of the Learned Lawyers of the
Nation being Privy Counselors) it be found by Vote of Council, that there is
sufficient ground from the Evidence to raise Process of Treason, then there is
an Act of Council drawn, ordering the King's Advocat to insist; but in this
Trial, the Advocat, tho a Counselor, never votes. The Reason why this previous
Examination is allowed, is to secure the Subjects against their being rashly
and unwarrantably pursued or prosecuted without sufficient Grounds: But left a
Witness might have looked upon himself as pre-engaged by this previous
Deposition; therefore these first Depositions were always torn, and the
Witnesses declared free from whatever they had formerly deposed.

To strengthen the Security of the Defendant or party accused, Sir George
Mackenzie used to interpose with the Officers of State, before the Depositions
were brought into the Council, and to represent to them his own scruples: And
if the Officers of State continued still of Opinion that a Process was to be
raised, or the Party accused to be proceeded against, then he desired the
ablest Advocats of the Nation to be called, before whom the Depositions were
read, and if they concurred with the Officers of State in their Judgment of the
matters being criminal, then these Advocats were Ordained also to concur with
him in the pursuit. And many of the most learned and most popular Advocats did
concur with him in the most intricate cases; as in Argyle's, Iervis Wood's,
etc. which is not to be imagined they would have done, had they thought their
Pleading in these cases any guilt or fault.

Tho by the Laws of England and other Nations, the Defendant is allowed no
Advocats to plead for him in Criminal Cases, but especially not in Treason,
except where the Judges can see debateable points of Law, yet lest the
Defendant may by ignorance or confusion omit to represent those matters of
Fact, from which new points of Law may arise, therefore Our Law allows always
Advocats to the Defendant, and forces any whom he does name to accept the
Employ. Act 91. Parl. II. I. 6.

Tho by the Laws of some Nations no Witnesses are allowed to be produced for
the Defendant, but such as do appear voluntarily, yet when Sir George Mackenzie
was a Judge in the Criminal Court, which answers to the King's Bench in
England, he ordered for the good of the People the Remedy of Exculpation,
whereby the Defendant representing that he has some Defenses, a Warrant is
given to force the Witnesses whom he names to appear, under severe Penalties;
and such time is granted to him and them, as may be sufficient for their
appearance, and these Witnesses when compearing are examined upon Oath, and the
Jury is obliged to believe any two of them (tho no Witnesses are allowed to
Swear against the King in England) This Order was thereafter turned into an Act
of Parliament. Act 16.3 Sess. Parl. 2. Chapter 2. Article II. And also to take off
all possibility of Packing Iuries in Edinburgh, where generally the Juries are
chosen, 'twas ordered by the Judges, at Sir George his earnest Request, That
the Town of Edinburgh should give up a List of all their Housekeepers who were
able to pass upon Iuries, and that all these should be named per vices,
according to the situation of the place where they lived.

Because the Defendant did not know what Witnesses were to be produced against
him by the King's Advocate, and so could not have Witnesses ready to prove his
Objections against them, Art. eod. II.
therefore Sir George prevailed with the Parliament that the King's Advocate
should be for ever after obliged to give with the Indictment a List of what
Witnesses or Members of inquest were to be used by them; and an order is given
for citing any Witnesses the Defendant pleases, with a competent time for
bringing them. Fifteen days being still the least time allowed by our Law, for
preparing the Defendant in all such cases.

When the day of Trial or Appearance comes, the Witnesses who were present at
the giving the citation are obliged to depose upon Oath, that they truly saw
the citation given: thereafter the King's Advocate produces his Warrant: Nor
did ever Sir George Mackenzie prosecute any man until he was commanded by the
Council, and till he produced his Warrant, (as still appears from the Records
of the Council and Criminal Court, to both which he solemnly appeals;) and then
the Indictment is read, after which the Advocates for the Defendant, dictate to
the Clerk his defenses; to which the King's Advocate dictates his replies, the
Defendants Advocates again their duplies, etc. and that to the end the Judges
may the better consider what is said, and may stand in awe of posterity. After
the debate is closed, the King's Advocate and all others retire, and the Judges
having read fully the Debate, they argue the case amongst themselves, and
thereupon they by their Interlocutory Sentence find such and such points to be
relevant, that is to say, well founded in Law, and they sign this Interlocutory
Sentence or Judgment, which is imposed as a further tie upon the Judges, for
the security of the People; nor are Witnesses allowed to be examined upon any
thing, but what they have found thus to be Legal.

The Advocates for the King and Defendant being both called in before the
Court, the Defendant hears the Sentence read, and then the forty five Jurors
are called, and the Defendant's Objections against them are discussed; and though
of old the King's Advocate had the naming of the Jury, as being presumed
disinteressed, yet Sir George Mackenzie prevailed to get an Act of Parliament,
Art. 3. ejusdem.
whereby the Nomination of the Jury was referred to the Judges, fifteen of
these forty five only are admitted as a sufficient Jury, and the Defendant is
allowed to challenge or reject, without giving any ground or reason for it, any
thirty that he pleases of that number, and the fifteen who remain make up the
Jury, and are set by the Judges.

The Jury being thus constituted, in the next place all the Witnesses are
called in before the Court one by one, and not allowed to hear what one another
say; and after the Objections against such Witnesses are fully debated in Writ
and upon Record, the Witnesses are either admitted or rejected, as the Judges
find ground in Law and Equity: If admitted, the President of the Court examines
only upon what is found legal or relevant in the Indictment. And in the next
place he is examined upon any Interrogatory that is moved either by the
Defendant, or any of the Jury for him, and then the whole Deposition is
dictated by the President of the Court, and is fully read in the hearing of the
Witness, and of the Defendant and his Advocats; and if they desire any thing to
be corrected, it is accordingly done, if the Witness agree with them in the
correction; and in the last place, the Deposition is signed by the President
and the Witness that gave it.

All the Depositions being thus taken, the Advocats for the King, and Defendant
speak to the Jury in a full Harangue; but because the Public Interest was
still to be preferred to private men's, therefore our Law allowed the King's
Advocat to be the last Speaker in all Criminal Cases, till Sir George prevailed
with the Parliament to give the last word to the Defendant in all Cases except
that of Treason, Art. 10.
because ordinarily the greatest impression was supposed to be made by the last
pleading.

The Debate and Examinations thus ended, the Jury are enclosed, and get in with
them the whole Debate, interlocutory Sentence and Depositions in writing,
signed by the Judges, Clerk, and Witnesses. This instructs them fully how to
proceed; and after they have chosen a Chancellor (or Foreman) and a Clerk,
they read all the Process, and debate fully upon it; and to the end every Iuror
may stand in awe of Posterity, it is marked by the Clerk in the Verdict, who
absolved, and who condemned; and as no Witness can be examined but in presence
of the Party indicted, so if any man speak to any of the Jury after they are
enclosed, Act 92. Ses. II. Iac. 6.
the Defendant is for ever Free. And tho of old the Clerk of the Court was used
to be enclosed with the Jury for their direction; yet Sir George Mackenzie
procured, that, because the Clerk had some dependence upon the Crown, he might
be excluded from going in with them, and that they might choose their own Clerk;
which they use accordingly to do since that Act. Art. 8. of the foresaid Act.
16.

By this it appears, that no Nation is more nice in securing the Subject, or
have ever showed more judgment in Processes or Proceedings of Treason, than
Scotland has.

In the next place I must observe, That no Nation has ever blamed a King's
Advocat for assisting in Criminal Processes, nor lies there any Action or
Scandal against him any where on that account; as can be proved from many
hundreds of Citations of the best Laws and Lawyers; but he darkens his own
Cause, when just, who uses these to ignorant people; and he lessens his own
esteem, who thinks he needs them amongst men of better sense: The Law trusts
him entirely as a Public Servant, who manages these Pursuits by Virtue of his
Office, and not by Malice. The King's Advocat must either have a Negative over
the King and all the Iudicatories, by refusing to concur, by which he might
make the justest pursuit useless (for tho he should lay down his Employment,
yet it would give an ill impression even of the best Cause) or otherways he
must be obliged to concur; in which Case he can do no prejudice, because Judges
are presumed to be learned, and the Advocat is still to be considered as too
interested, to have any dangerous Influence: Nor can he abuse the Jury with any
misrepresentation in point of Law, for they are only allowed by our Law to
consider what is mere matter of Fact, and whether the precise point of Law
referred to them by the Judges, be proved by these Depositions of the Witnesses
which lie before the Jury in Writing. Judges may err in point of Law, and
Juries in point of Fact, but neither of these are entrusted to the Advocate, so
that poor People are abused extremely when they are informed that the King's
Advocate occasioned any Man's Death. Sir George might here likewise represent,
that in the Rebellion against K. Chapter I. many Noblemen and Gentlemen were
pursued for rising in Arms by that same King's Commission by whose Authory
their Judges did sit; and yet none of the Advocats of these times were ever
quarreled with or misrepresented for debating even against their Master's
Commission and Remission, as will appear by the Processes of Haddo, President
Spotswood, Marquess of Huntley, Montross, and hundreds of other Gentlemen, but
Sir Geo. needs justify himself by no such Precedents.

In the third place, Sir George Mackenzie may unanswerably urge, that no Man
who endeavored so to lessen the Power of the King's Advocats by Acts of
Parliament and Regulations, can be thought to have had any inclinations to
stretch it; as also he may value himself for refusing to accept the King's
Advocate's place, till his Predecessor resigned it under his hand; that he
never informed against any Man, nor suggested any pursuit; that when a Pursuit
was motioned, he pleaded as much in private for the Defendant, if the case was
dubious, as any of his Advocates did thereafter in the process; nor did he ever
show any vehemence in the process, except when he was jealous'd of Friendship
to the Defendant, or of love to popularity, because he had so pleaded in
private: and no age did ever see so many thousands pardoned, nor so many
Indemnities granted, as was in his time, which as it must be principally
ascribed to the extraordinary Clemency of the Kings he served, so it may be in
some measure imputed to the natural Bias which Sir George had to the merciful
hand.

There is great Reason to believe that poor People are only misled by
mis-informations, since some in their Pamphlets clamor against the Advocate
for threatening the Jury with a Process of Error, whereas all that he does is
to protest for a process of Error, which is a duty imposed upon him by our
Law. They accuse him also for having occasioned great expenses to the Country,
for keeping Witnesses unexamined, whereas it appears fully from our Statutes
and Practice that the examination of Witnesses is no part of his duty, for the
Solicitor presents them, and the Judges only can examine them.

The bulk of all the processes raised in K. Charles 2. and K. James 7. Reigns,
were against such as rose in actual Rebellion at Pentland-Hills,
Bothwell-Bridge, and Argyle 's Invasion; the first were pursued by Sir John
Nisbet, one of the best Lawyers and Countrymen that ever pleaded; and Sir
George Mackenzie did but Copy his Libels in pursuing Men in the other two
Rebellions, These Indictments were founded upon the Laws of all Nations, and
particularly of Scotland, declaring that Subjects taking Arms against the King
and his Authority were Traitors. All the Nobility and Gentry, almost all who
are in the present Government rose against them with their Swords in their
hands, and so were more guilty (if that must be called guilt) than any Judge;
these Proceedings were justified by many Parliaments, and all the Iudicatures;
and England still continues to think that Monmouth's Invasion was a Rebellion;
so that the succeeding King's Advocates could not be blamed for pleading in
defense of what others fought for, and judged.

There were other two Classes of Men prosecuted in those times, the one was of
the Murderers of the Archbishop of St. Andrews, the other was of such as in
public Rendezvous of Rebellion, Vid. Cargils Covenant and Sanchar. Declaration.
as at Sanqhuar, wherein they declared K. Chapter 2. to have forfeited his Right to
the Crown, because he had broken the Covenant, which was the fundamental
Contract betwixt God, the King, and the People, and therefore they declared War
against him, and that it was lawful to kill all who served him. Now it is left
to any indifferent Reader to judge whether there needed any Eloquence to
prevail with Judges or Jurors to condemn such Rebels. But to show the Clemency
of the Government, Strangers would be pleased to consider that though above 20000
had been guilty of public Rebellion, yet 200 died not by the Criminal Court,
and above 150 of these might have saved their lives, by saying God bless the
King; not that the refusing to say this was made a Crime (as is villainously
represented) but that this easy defense was allowed under this G^ntle King,
whose Clemency we wish may be imitated by those who cry so much out against his
Cruelty; and amongst the many thousands that rose with Argyle, only two
notorious Rebels were pitched upon by the Criminal Court to die for the example
and terror of others. And I may safely say, that there died not six in all the
the time that Sir Geo. was Advocate, except for being in actual Rebellion, and
for being Guilty of Assassination clearly proved; nor did the Earl of Argyle
himself die till he had actually invaded his native Country: nor George
Lermonth, till it was proved, that (though he wanted Arms) yet he commanded those
who were in Arms to fall upon the King's Soldiers, and so they were killed by
his Command. And what Eloquence is requisite to persuade Judges or Juries to
condemn in such Crimes?

TO THE READER.
WHEN we inform Strangers of the Seditious Principles of the Scotch
Presbyterians, they are justly surprised that such Villainies can be practiced,
where Humanity and Christianity are not openly and plainly renounced, and
therefore some of their own Authentic Papers are here subjoined, which contain
the natural consequences of their Covenant and Principles, by which we leave
the World to Judge whether Sir George Mackenzie has not treated them with all
modesty and tenderness, and whether any Form of Government can possibly
subsist, where such wicked and pernicious Fooleries are propagated.

THE Solemn League and Covenant.
WE Noblemen, Barons, Knights, Gentlemen, Citizens, Burgesses, Ministers of
the Gospel, and Commons of all sorts in the Kingdoms of Scotland, England and
Ireland, by the Providence of GOD living under one King, and being of one
reformed Religion, Having before our eyes the Glory of GOD, and the Advancement
of the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the Honor and Happiness
of the Kings Majesty and his Posterity, and the true Public Liberty, Safety,
and Peace of the Kingdoms, wherein every ones private condition is included;
And calling to mind the treacherous and bloody Plots, Conspiracies, Attempts,
and Practices of the Enemies of GOD, against the True Religion, and Professors
thereof in all places, especially in these three Kingdoms, ever since the
Reformation of Religion, and how much their Rage Power and Presumption are of
late, and at this time increased and exercised; whereof the deplorable estate
of the Church and Kingdom of Ireland, the distressed estate of the Church and
Kingdom of England, and the dangerous estate of the Church and Kingdom of
Scotland are present and public Testimonies; We have now at last (after other
means of Supplication, Remonstance, Protestations and Sufferings) for the
preservation of our selves and our Religion from utter ruin and destruction,
according to the commendable practice of these Kingdoms in former times, and
the Example of GOD's People in other Nations, after mature deliberation,
resolved and determined to enter into a mutual and solemn League and Covenant:
Wherein we all subscribe, and each one of us for himself, with our hands lifted
up to the most high GOD, do Swear:

1. THat we shall sincerely, really, and constantly, through the Grace of GOD,
endeavor in our several places and Callings, the Preservation of the
Reformed-Religion in the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline
and Government, against our Common Enemies; The Reformation of Religion in the
Kingdoms of England and Ireland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and
Government, according to the Word of GOD, and the Example of the best Reformed
Churches; And shall Endeavor to bring the Churches of GOD in the three
Kingdoms to the nearest conjunction and Uniformity in Religion, Confession of
Faith, Form of Church Government, Directory for Worship and Catechizing; That
We and our Posterity after us, may, as Brethren, live in Faith and Love, and
the Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of us.

2. That we shall in like manner, without respect of persons, endeavor the
Extirpation of Popery, Prelacy (that is, Church Government by Archbishops,
Bishops, their Chancellours and Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters,
Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on that
Hierarchy) Superstition, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness, and whatsoever shall be
found to be contrary to sound Doctrine and the Power of Godliness; Lest we
partake in other men's sins, and thereby be in danger to receive of their
plagues; And that the Lord may be One, and his Name One in the three Kingdoms.

3. We shall with the same sincerity, reality, and constancy, in our several
Vocations, endeavor with our Estates and Lives mutually to preserve the Rights
and Privileges of the Parliaments, and the Liberties of the Kingdoms; And to
preserve and defend the Kings Majesty's Person and Authority, in the
preservation and defense of the True Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdoms;
That the World may bear witness with our Consciences of our Loyalty, and that
we have no thoughts or intentions to diminish His Majesty's Just Power and
Greatness.

4. We shall also with all faithfulness endeavor the Discovery of all such as
have been, or shall be Incendiaries, Malignants, or evil Instruments, by
hindering the Reformation of Religion, dividing the King from his People, or
one of the Kingdoms from another, or making any Faction or Parties amongst the
People, contrary to this League and Covenant, That they may be brought to
public Trial, and receive condign punishment, as the degree of their Offenses
shall require or deserve, or the supreme Iudicatories of both Kingdoms
respectively, or others having power from them for that effect, shall judge
convenient.

5. And whereas the happiness of a Blessed Peace between these Kingdoms, denied
in former times to our Progenitors, is by the good Providence of GOD granted
unto us, and has been lately concluded, and settled by both Parliaments, We
shall each one of us, according to our place and Interest, endeavor that they
may remain conjoined in a firm Peace and Union to all Posterity, And that
Justice may be done upon the wilful Opposers thereof, in manner expressed in
the precedent Article.

6. We shall also according to our places and callings in this common Cause of
Religion, Liberty, and Peace of the Kingdoms, assist and defend all those that
enter into this League and Covenant, in the maintaining and pursuing thereof;
and shall not suffer our selves directly or indirectly by whatsoever
Combination, Persuasion, or Terror, to be divided and withdrawn from this
Blessed Union and Conjunction, whether to make defection to the contrary part,
or to give our selves to a detestable indifferency, or neutrality in this
Cause, which so much concerns the Glory of GOD, the Good of the Kingdoms, and
Honor of the King; But shall all the days of our lives zealously and
constantly continue therein, against all opposition, and promote the same
according to our power, against all Lets and Impediments whatsoever; and what
we are not able our selves to suppress or overcome, we shall reveal and make
known, that it may be timely prevented or removed: All which we shall do as in
the sight of GOD.

And, because these Kingdoms are guilty of many sins and provocations against
GOD, and his Son Jesus Christ, as is too manifest by our present distresses and
dangers, the fruits thereof, we profess and declare before GOD and the World,
our unfeigned desire to be humbled for our own sins, and for the sins of these
Kingdoms, especially that we have not, as we ought, valued the inestimable
benefit of the Gospel, that we have not labored for the Purity and Power
thereof, and that we have not endeavored to receive Christ in our Hearts, nor
to walk worthy of him in our lives, which are the causes of other sins and
transgressions so much abounding amongst us, and our true and unfeigned
purpose, desire, and endeavor for our selves and all others under our Power
and Charge, both in public and in private, in all Duties we owe to GOD and
Man, to amend our lives, and each one to go before another in the example of a
real Reformation; That the Lord may turn away his wrath, and heavy indignation,
and Establish these Churches and Kingdoms in Truth and Peace. And this Covenant
we make in the presence of Almighty GOD the Searcher of all Hearts, with a true
intention to perform the same, as we shall answer at that great Day when the
secrets of all Hearts shall be disclosed; Most humbly beseeching the Lord to
strengthen us by his holy Spirit for this end, and to bless our desires, and
proceedings with such Success as may be deliverance and safety to his People,
and Encouragement to other Christian Churches groaning under, or in danger of
the Yoke of Antichristian Tyranny, to join in the same, or like Association and
Covenant, To the glory of God, the enlargement of the Kingdom of Jesus Christ,
and the Peace and Tranquillity of Christian Kingdoms, and Commonwealths.

West-kirk the 13. day of August, 1650.
THe Commission of the General Assembly, considering that there may be just
ground of stumbling from the Kings Majesty's refusing to subscribe and emit the
Declaration offered unto him by the Committee of Estates, and Commissioners of
the General Assembly concerning his former carriage and resolutions for the
future, in reference to the Cause of God, and the Enemies and Friends thereof;
Does therefore declare that this Kirk and Kingdom do not own nor espouse any
Malignant party or quarrel or interest, But that they fight merely upon their
former Grounds and Principles, and in defense of the Cause of God and of the
Kingdom, as they have done these twelve Years past: And therefore as they do
disclaim all the Sin and Guilt of the King and of his House, so they will not
own Him, nor his Interest, otherwise than with a Subordination to God, and so
far as he owns and prosecutes the Cause of God, and disclaimes his and his
Fathers opposition to the Work of God, and to the Covenant, and likewise all
the Enemies thereof; And that they will with convenient speed take in
Consideration the Papers lately sent unto them from OLIVER CROMWELL, and
vindicate themselves from all the falsehoods contained therein, especially in
those things, wherein the quarrel betwixt us and that party is mis-stated, as
if we owned the late Kings proceedings, and were resolved to Prosecute, and
Maintain his present Majesty's interest, before and without acknowledgement of
the Sins of his House and former ways, and Satisfaction to Gods People in both
Kingdoms.

A. Ker.


13. of August, 1650.
THe Committee of Estates having seen and considered a Declaration of the
Commission of the General Assembly anent the stating of the quarrel whereon the
Army is to fight, do Approve the same, and heartily Concur therein.

Tho Henderson.


A True and Exact Copy of a Treasonable and Bloody Paper, called, The Fanatics
New Covenant: which was taken from Donald Cargill at Queens-Ferry, June 3.
1680. one of their Field-Preachers, a declared Rebel and Traitor.
Together with their Execrable Declaration published at the Cross of Sanquhair,
upon the Two and twentieth day of the said Month of June; after a solemn
Procession and singing of Psalms, by Cameron, the notorious Ringleader of, and
Preacher at, their Field-Conventicles, accompanied with Twenty of that wretched
Crew.
WE Under-Subscribers, for our selves, and all that join with us, and adhere to
us, being put to it by God, our Consciences, and Men; Do bind our Souls with a
solemn and sacred Bond, lest on the one hand we should be carried away with the
stream of the Apostasy and defection of the Church in this time, and on the
other hand, lest we should (not being so engaged) evanish in Vanity, and be
without a right Rule in good Designs: We have judged it our duty again to
Covenant with God, and one another, and to publish this DECLARATION to the
World of our Purposes, that Men may know our most inward thoughts, the Rules
that we walk by, and the outmost ends that we have before our eyes for this
intent, that those who are lovers of God, zealous of His reigning in Glory, and
desirous of Reformation, and the propagation of His Kingdom, may have occasion
no more to be jealous of our Intentions, and others may have no ground to load
us with odious and foul Aspersions; but, that all knowing the truth of us, if
they shall strive against us, and Truth with us, shall do it without excuse,
and against conviction; and that those who shall join with us, may do it upon
solid and undoubted grounds, and both they and we may expect Grace from Him,
Faithfully to persevere, and happily to be successful in so good Purposes.

It is true, We are not ignorant of the great unmindfulness, failing,
counteracting, and mocking that has been in our former Vows and Covenants with
God, and of the great Judgments that has, and are like to follow such impious
and sinful dealing with God in such weighty Matters, (for which we both ought
and desire to be Humbled before Him,) which cannot but make us with great
trembling of Heart enter into new ones, knowing both our own weakness and
readiness to relapse, and the great hazard and danger of such relapses; Yet,
the desire of recovering and preserving a remnant, and the conviction of this,
as the most convenient mean, the zeal to Gods glory, and Christ's reigning,
(which is the highest and most acceptable duty Man can perform to God,) hoping
for His Mercies (who is witness to the Integrity of our Hearts and rightness of
our Intentions*) that he will instruct, direct, accept, and prosper us, we go
forward, declaring, that nothing else but what we here express is our Design.

I. We Covenant and Swear, that we take the only true and living God, Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, to be our God, and betakes our selves to the Merits and
Righteousness of His Son, as the alone Righteousness that can justify us
before God; and that we take His Scriptures and Word to be the Object of our
Faith, and rule of our Conversation in all things; and that we shall give up
our selves to Him, to be renewed, instructed, and in all things ruled by His
Spirit, according to that Word; and shall earnestly endeavor by His Grace, to
render to Him that Love, Worship, and Obedience, that His Word requires, and
His Goodness engages us to.

II. That we shall to the outmost of our Power, advance the Kingdom of Christ
established throughout the Land, (if at any time hereafter God shall give us
this opportunity) Righteousness and the true reformed Religion, in the truth of
its Doctrine, in the purity and power of its Worship and Ordinances, and its
Discipline and Government, and free the Church of God from the Thraldom,
Tyranny, Incroachment, and corruption of Prelacy on the one hand, and
Erastianism on the other. And we shall to our power, relieve the Church and
Subjects of this Kingdom, (we being called thereto, by His giving of us Power,
Power being Gods Call to do good) of that Oppression that has been exercised
upon their Consciences, Civil Rights and Liberties, that Men may serve Him
Holily, without fear, and possess their civil Rights in quietness, without
disturbance.

III. That we shall endeavor to our outmost, the extirpation of the Kingdom of
Darkness, and whatsoever is contrair to the Kingdom of Christ, and especially
Idolatry and Popery in all the Articles of it, as we are bound in our National
Covenant; and Superstition, Will Worship, and Prelacy, with its Hierarchy, as
we are bound in our Solemn League and Covenant; And that we shall with the same
sincerity, endeavor (God giving us Assistance) the overthrow of that Power
that has established that Prelacy and Erastianism over the Church, and
exercises such a Lustful and Arbitrary Tyranny over the Subjects, seeking again
to introduce Idolatry and Superstition in these Lands, contrair to our
Covenants: And in a word, that we shall endeavor the extirpation of all the
works of Darkness, and the Relicts of Idolatry and Superstition, (which are
both much enlarged and revived in our times,) and execute righteous Judgments
impartially (according to the Word of God, and degree of Wickedness) upon the
Committers of these things, but especially Blasphemy, Idolatry, Atheism,
Sorcery, Perjury, Uncleanness, Profanation of the Lords day, Oppression and
Malignancy, that being thus zealous for God, he may delight to dwell among us.

IV. Seriously considering, that the hand of our Kings has been against the
Throne of the Lord, and that now for a long time, the Succession of our Kings,
and the most part of our Rulers with him, has been against the purity and
power of Religion and Godliness, and freedom of the Church of God, and has
degenerate from the virtue and good Government of their Predecessors, into
Tyranny, and has of late so manifestly rejected God, his Service and
Reformation, as a Slavery, as they themselves call it in their public Papers,
(especially in these last Letters to the King, and Duke of Lauderdale)
disclaiming their Covenant with God, and Blasphemously inacting it to be burnt
by the hand of a Hangman, governed contrary to all right Laws divine and
humane, excercised such Tyranny and Arbitrary Government, oppressed Men in their
Consciences and Civil Rights, used free Subjects (Christian and reasonable Men)
with less discretion and justice than their Beasts; and so not only frustrate
the great end of Government, (which is, that Men may live Godly, Holily and
Peaceably under them, and might be maintained in their Rights and Liberties
form injury and wrong) but has also walked contrary to it, so that it can no
more be called a Government, but a lustful Rage, excercised with as little
right Reason, and with more Cruelty than in Beasts, and they themselves can be
no more called Governors, but public Grassators, and public Judgments,
which all Men ought as earnestly to labor to be free of, as of Sword, Famine,
or Pestilence raging amongst us; and besides, has stopped (instead of
punishing) the Course of Law and Justice against Idolaters, Blasphemers,
Atheists, Murderers, Incestuous and Adulterous, and other Malefactors; and
instead of rewarding the Good, has made Butcheries and Murders on the Lord's
People, sold them as Slaves, Imprisoned, For faulted, Banished and Fined them,
upon no other account, but for maintaining the Lords Right to rule Consciences,
against the Usurpations of Men, for fulfilling their Vows, and repelling unjust
Violence, which innocent Nature allows to all; of all which, and more
particulars, we can give (we speak as before God) innumerable and sure
Instances: Neither can it be thought that there is hope of their returning from
these Courses, having so often showed their Natures and Enmities against God
and all Righteousness, and so often declared and renewed their Purposes and
Promises of persevering in these Courses. And, suppose they should dissemble a
Repentance of these Evils, and profess to return to better Courses, being put
to Straits, or for their own Ends, (for upon no other account can we reasonably
expect it;) and though it might be thought, that there might be Pardon for what
is done, (which we cannot yet see to be, without the violation of the Law of
God, and a great guiltiness on the Land, from which guiltiness the Land can
never be free, but by executing of God's righteous Judgments upon them, for
omitting of so greatly deserved, and so necessarily requisite a Justice;) yet
they cannot be believed, after they have violated all Ties that Humane Wisdom
can devise to bind Men; and beside, there will be something of Folly found, to
think to bind a King that pretends to absoluteness: And our Fathers, or rather
our selves, at first judged it not warrantable to receive Him, without
consenting to, and swearing of the Covenant: And if so, the renouncing and
disclaming thereof, we ought at present to judge to be a just and reasonable
ground of rejecting Him upon these Grounds, being assured of God's approbation,
and Men's, whose Hearts are not utterly biased, and their Consciences
altogether corrupted, and knowing assuredly, that the upholding of such, is to
uphold Men to bear down Christ's Kingdom, and to uphold Satan's, and the
depriving of Men of right Government and good Governors, to the ruining of
Religion, and undoing of Humane Society. We then seeing the innumerable Sins
and Snares that are in giving obedience to their Acts, on the other hand,
seeing if we shall acknowledge their Authority, and refuse Obedience to their
sinful Commands, the endless Miseries that will follow, and siding with God
(who we hope will accept and help us to a liberation from their Tyranny)
against his stated and declared Enemies; do reject that King, and those
associate with him, from being our Rulers, because standing in the way of our
Right, free and peaceably serving of God, propagating his Kingdom and
Reformation, and overthrowing Satan's Kingdom, according to our Covenant; And
declares them henceforth to be no lawful Rulers, as they have declared us to be
no lawful Subjects, upon a ground far less warrantable, as Men unbyassed may
see; and that after this, we neither owe, nor shall yield any willing Obedience
to them, but shall rather suffer the outmost of their Cruelties and Injustice,
until God shall plead our Cause, and that upon these Accounts; because they
have altered and destroyed the Lord's established Religion, overturned the
fundamental and established Laws of the Kingdom* taken altogether away Christ's
Church and Government, and changed the Civil Government of this Land (which was
by King and free Parliament) into Tyranny, where none are associate to be
partakers of the Government, but only those who will be found by Justice to be
Guilty of Criminals, and all others excluded, even those who by the Laws of the
Land by Birth had a right to, and a share in that Government, and that only,
because not of the same Guiltiness and mischievous Purposes with themselves:
And also, all free elections of Commissioners for Parliaments, and Officers for
Government, are made void by their making those the Qualifications of admission
to these Places, which by the Word of God, and the Laws of this Land, were the
cause of their exclusion before, so that none can look upon us, or judge us
bound in Allegiance to them. unless they say also we are bound in Allegiance to
Devils, they being his Vicegerents, and not Gods.

V. We then being made free, by God and their own doings, he giving the Law,
and they giving the Transgression of that Law, which is the cause that we are
loosed now from all Obligations, both Divine and Civil to them, and knowing
that no Society of Men that has Corruption in them, (which always is ready to
beget disorders and do injuries, unless restrained and punished by Laws and
Government) can be without Laws and Government, and withal desiring to be
governed in the best way that is least liable to Inconveniences and Tyranny:
We do declare, that we shall set up over our selves, and over all that God
shall give us Power, Government, and Governors, according to the Word of God,
and especially according to that word, Exodus 18. v. 21. Moreover, thou shall
provide out of all the People, able Men, such as fear God, Men of Truth, hating
Covetousness; and that we shall no more commit the Government of our selves,
and the making of Laws for us, to any one single Person, and lineal Successor,
we not being tied as the Jews were by God, to one Family, Government not being
an Inheritance, but an Office, which must be squared, not to the Interest and
Lust of a Man, but to the good of the Commonwealth, and this kind of Government
by a single Person, etc. being most liable to Inconveniences, (as sad and long
experience may now teach us,) and aptest to Degenenate into Tyranny. Moreover,
we declare that these Men whom we shall set over us, shall be engaged to govern
us principally by that Civil or Judicial Law, given by God to his People of
Israel, especially in matters of Life and Death, and in all other things also,
so far as they teach, excepting only that Law, ( viz. anent Slaves,) which does
not agree with that Christian Liberty established in all Christendom, (only
violated by our Tyrants, and some others of late,) and that of Divorces and
Poligamy; the one being not a Law, but a Permission granted upon the account of
the hardness of their Hearts, the other being a Sinful Custom contrair to the
first institution of Marriage, crept in into the Church: We know that Men of
Malignant and perverse Spirits, that has not a higher God than a wicked King,
which suits only with their lustful licentiousness, and it may be others with
them that seemed to be of better Principles, will raise an ignorant Clamor
upon this, that it is a Fifth-Monarchy; and we Fifth-Monarchy-men, and will
labor to amuse the People with strange Terms, and put odious names on good
things to make them hateful, as their way is; but if this be their
Fifth-Monarchy, we both are, and ought to be such, and that according to his
word.

VI. It being the work of the Ministers of the Gospel, to preach, propagate,
and defend the Kingdom of God, and to preserve the Doctrine, Worship,
Discipline, Government, Liberties and Privileges of the same, from all
Corruptions and Encroachments of Rulers, and all others. And seeing* that the
Ministers of the Church of Scotland, (at least the greatest part of them
before) not only were defective in Preaching and Testifying against the Acts of
these Rulers, for overthrowing Religion and Reformation, abjuring our Covenant
made with God, establishing a Government in the Church, which that King calls
his own Government, (and so not God's,) contrair to our Covenant; Against
inacting of that Blasphemous (so Calvin calls that Supremacy of Henry the
Eighth, upon which this Prerogative is founded, and from which it is derived,
and is no less, if not more jnjurious to Christ, and inslaving to his Church,)
and Sacrilegious Prerogative given to a King over the Church of God, and
against the other Acts and Encroachments of His Church, and hindered others also
who were willing* and would have testified against them, and censured some that
did it, (for which, together with the other Causes in their Trust and
Administration, we may say, God has left them to do worse things;) but also
has voted in that Meeting, (which they are pleased to call an Assembly of
Ministers, but how justly, let Men judge,) an Acceptance of that Liberty,
founded upon, and given by virtue of that blasphemously arrogated and usurped
Power; and has appeared before their Courts to accept of that Liberty, and to
be enacted and authorized there as Ministers, and so has willingly (for this
is an elicit Act of the Will, and not an Act of Force and Constraint)
translated the Power of sending out, ordering, censuring, (for as they accept
of their Liberty* from them, so they submit to their Censures and Restraints,
at least all of them who were yet tried with it, and others of them appeared
and acknowledged before their Courts, that they would not have done these
things that they were charged with, if they had thought it would have offended
them,) Ministers departing from the Court of Christ, and subjection to the
Ministry, to the Courts of Men, and subjection to the Magistrate, (which had
been impious and injurious to Christ and His Church, though they had been
Righteous and Lawful Rulers,) and by their changing of Courts (according to
common Law) has changed their Masters, and of the Ministers of Christ are
become the Ministers of Men, and bound to answer to them as often as they will;
and as by the acceptance of this Liberty in such manner, they have Translated
the Power, so they have given up and utterly quit the Government, and a
succession of a Presbyterian Ministry; for as these were not granted them of
their Masters, so they Exercise their Ministry without them, and so by this, as
the Ecclesiastick-Government is swallowed up in the Civil, (if the rest had
followed them) the Ministry should have also been extinct with themselves, and
the whole Work of Reformation had been buried in Oblivion, not so much as the
remembrance of it kept up: These, together with the other of their Commissions
in Preaching, the lawfulness of paying that Tribute declared to be imposed for
the bearing down of the true Worship of God, (which they falsely termed
Seditious Conventicles,) and their advising these poor Prisoners to subscribe
the Bond, and consequently could not but so advise all others, if put to it,
(for the hazard that Men were in, will not make a real change of the morality
of that Action,) and beside, the rest may be put to it upon the same hazard,
and so if the one should advise, (which consequently they must do,) and the
other should subscribe, this would altogether close that door which the Lord
has made use of in all the Churches of Europe, for casting off the Yoke of the
Whore, and restoring the Truth and Purity of Religion and Reformation, and
freedom of the Churches, and should have stopped all ingress for Men, when once
brought under Tyranny, to recover their Liberty again. These Ministers then,
not being followers of Christ, who before Pontius Pilate, gave a good
Confession, which was, that he was a King; and no King, if he have not power to
order his House and Subjects, and they not following him, nor his Ministers, if
not asserting and maintaining of this Kingly Power, against all Incroachers and
Usurpers of it; and besides, we being commanded, If any Brother walk
disorderly, from such to withdraw; and although in the capacity we now are in,
we neither have, nor assume to our selves Authority to give our definite and
authoritative Sentences of Deposition and Suspension against these Ministers;
yet we declare, which is proper for us to do, that we neither can, nor will
bear Preaching, nor receive Sacraments from these Ministers that has accepted
of, and voted for that Liberty; and declares all who have encouraged and
strengthened their Hands, by hearing and pleading for them, all those who have
traffiqued for an union with them, without their renouncing and repenting of
these things, all those that do not testify faithfully against them, and after
do not deport themselves suitably to their Testimonies, and all who join not in
public with their Brethren, who are testifying against them; we declare, that
we shall not hear them Preach, nor receive Sacraments from them, at least, till
they stand in Judgment before these Ministers, and be judged by them who have
followed the Lord, and kept themselves free of these Defections: And as our
Hearts has cleaved to these Ministers, while they were on the Lord's side, and
subjected our selves to them, so we shall still cleave to those that abide
following him, and shall be subject to them in the Lord.

VII. Then we do declare and acknowledge, that a Gospel Ministry, is a standing
Ordinance of God, appointed by Christ, to continue in the Church, until the end
of the World; and that none of us shall take upon him the preaching of the
word, or administering the Sacraments, unless called, and ordained thereto, by
the Ministers of the Gospel: And as we declare that we are for a standing
Gospel Ministry, rightly chosen, and rightly ordained, so we declare, that we
shall go about this work in time to come, with more Fasting and Praying, and
more careful Inspection into the Conversation and Holiness of these Men that
shall be chosen and ordained, the want of which formerly, has been a great
sin, both in Ministers and People, which has not been the least cause of this
Defection.

THE Declaration and Testimony OF THE True-Presbyterian, Anti-Prelatick, and
Anti-Erastian, Persecuted-Party in SCOTLAND.
IT is not amongst the smallest of the Lords Mercies to this poor Land, that
there has always been some who has given a Testimony of every course of
Defection which we were guilty of, which is a token for Good, that he does not
as yet intend to cast us off altogether, but that He will leave a remnant, in
whom He will be glorious, if they (through His Grace) keep themselves clean
still, and walk in His Way and Method, as it has been walked in, and owned by
Him in our Predecessors (of truly worthy Memory) their time, in their carrying
on our noble Work of Reformation, in the several steps thereof, from Popery and
Prelacy, and likewise from Erastian-Supremacy, so much usurped by him, who it
is true (so far as we know) is descended from the Race of our Kings; yet he
has so far deborded from what he ought to have been, by Perjury and Usurpation
in Church Matters, and Tyranny in Matters Civil, as is known by the whole Land,
that we have just reason to believe, that one of the Lords great Controversies
against us is, that we have not disowned him, and the Men of his Practices,
whether inferior Magistrates, or any others, as Enemies to our Lord and His
Crown, and the True-Protestant* and Presbyterian Interest in their hands, our
Lords espoused Bride and Church. Therefore, although we be for Government and
Governors, such as the Word of God, and our Covenants allows, yet we for our
selves, and all that will adhere to us, as the Representatives of the True
Presbyterian Church, and covenanted Nation of Scotland, considering the great
hazard of lying under such a sin, do by these presents Disown Charles Stuart,
who has been reigning, or rather (we may say) tyrannizing on the Throne of
Scotland, or Government thereof, (for faulted several years since by his
Perjury and breach of Covenant with God and His Church,) and Usurpation of his
Crown and Royal Prerogatives therein, and many other breaches in matters
Ecclesiastic, and by his Tyranny and breach of the very Leges Regnandi in
matters Civil; for which Reasons, we declare, That several years since he
should have been denuded of being King, Ruler, or Magistrate, or having any
Power to act, or to be obeyed as such: As also, being under the Standard of
Christ, Captain of Salvation, we declare War against such a Tyrant and Usurper,
and all the Men of his Practices, as Enemies to our Lord Jesus Christ, His
Cause and Covenants, and against all such as have strengthened him, sided with
him, or any ways acknowledged him in his Usurpation and Tyranny, Civil and
Ecclesiastic, yea, and against all such as shall strengthen, side with, or any
ways acknowledge any other in the like Usurpation and Tyranny, far more against
such as would betray or deliver up our free Reformed Mother Church, into the
Bondage of Antichrist, the Pope of Rome.

By this we Homologat the Testimony given at Rutherglen, the twenty ninth of
May, 1679. and all the faithful Testimonies of those that have gone before us,
as of those also that have suffered of late; and we do disclaim that
Declaration published at Hamiltoun, June 1679. chiefly, because it takes in the
Kings Interest, which we are several years since loosed from, because of the
foresaid Reasons, and others, which may after this (if the Lord will) be
published. As also, we disown, and by this resents the reception of the Duke of
York, a professed Papist, as repugnant to our Principles and Vows to the most
High God, and as that which is the great (though alace too just) reproach of
our Church and Nation: We also, by this, protest against his succeeding to the
Crown, and whatever has been done, or any are essaying to do in this Land
(given to the Lord) in prejudice to our Work of Reformation.

And to conclude, We hope none will blame us for, or offend at, our rewarding
those that are against us, as they have done to us, as the Lord gives the
opportunity. This is not to exclude any that has declined, if they be willing
to give satisfaction to the degree of their offense.

Given at Sanqhuair, June 22. 1680. These are the True and Exact Copies of the
Fanatics New Covenant and Declaration; Collationed with the Originals, which
are kept amongst the Records of His Majesty's Privy Council; and attested by All. Gibson, Cl. Sti. Concilii. And Will. Paterson, Cl. Sti. Concilii.
A Blasphemous and Treasonable PAPER, Emitted by the Phanatical
Undersubscribers, On May 1. 1681.
According to the Original lying in the hands of the Clerks of His Majesty's
Most Honorable Privy Council.
WE undersubscribers, now Prisoners for the truth in the Cannongate Tolbuith,
though most vile, yet it pleased the Holy Ghost to work on our Spirits of a
time past, in clearing causes of wrath, and showing us duty from day to day,
that now in some time past we are, and have been called Mad men and Devils, and
now there is none in the Kingdom, in Prison, or out of Prison that we can
converse with as Christians. And yesterday being the 26 day of the 5 th Month,
it seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us, to take out of our Bibles the
Psalms in meeter for several causes mentioned afterward, for the Book of the
Revelation says, if any Man should add unto these things, God shall add unto
him the Plagues which are written in this Book; and we did Burn them in our
Prisonhouse, and sweep away the Ashes. Likewise, in the Holy Scriptures, we
renounce Chapters and Verses, and Contents, because it is only done by Humane
Wisdom, and the changing of the Books after the Holy Ghost had placed them: we
being pressed to this work by the Holy Ghost, do renounce the Impression and
Translation of both the Old and New Testaments, and that for additions put unto
them by Men, and other causes; as first, putting in horrid Blasphemy, making a
Tyrant Patron of the Church, when the Scriptures holds of none but of God, and
needs no Patronage from any King, Prince, or Rulers, and the writing of that
Blasphemous, Sacrilegious, (as some call it) the Epistle Dedicatory, filled
with such Language, as Dread Sovereign Highness, most High and Mighty, most
Sacred Majesty; and likewise the horrid unparalleled Blasphemy, making a
Triangle with these Hebrew Letters in it thus, (...) Jehovah, representing the
Trinity; and likewise putting in horrid Pictures in several places of the Holy
Scripture, and likewise drawing scores betwixt the Books of the Bible, and
other superfluous Traditions. Likewise we renounce the Catechisms Larger and
Shorter, and Confession of Faith, against which we have many causes; one cause
is, in the 23 Chap. for the Scripture proofs that they cite, proves the
contrary of that they write. We renounce the Acts of the General Assembly, and
all the Covenants, and acknowledging of Sins and engagement to Duties, and that
which they call Preaching Books, and all their works, way, form, and manner of
Worship, Doctrine, Discipline, and Government, and the studying on their Books,
the thing they call their Preaching, for instead of going to God for his mind
to the People, they go to their Books, and so makes their Books their God and
their leader, and so all following that way, go to Hell together: The cause of
this is, we find none of their works but they are like themselves, Carnal and
Corrupt, according to that Scripture, Hate the Garment spotted with the Flesh.
We renounce the limiting of the Lord's Mind by Glasses, and their ordination of
Men only Learned, and their saying, that Learning is the essential of a
Minister without grace. Likewise, we renounce their manner of renewing
Covenants, pressing Men's Consciences to take a Covenant, and by so doing has
filled the Kirk and State with Tyrants and incarnate Devils, as we find this
day, they knew the Men to have no marks of grace, but on the other hand, to be
profane, as them they call King and Rulers, Captains and Comanders in State
and Armies, and all Kirk Officers whom we call Tyrants and Iudas's, for by so
doing they have corrupted both Kirk and State, as this day Kirk Men and States
Men, whom we call Iudas's and Tyrants, are studying in opposition to Holiness
and the work of Reformation, who entered in by these same Covenants, are now
pursuing our lives for a Christian walk. And likewise, we renounce the Covenant
taken at Queensferry, commonly called Cargil's Covenant, and likewise Hamiltown
Declaration, yea, and Sanquhare Declaration, because they may and has owned
these, and are owning these, who are Enemies to Holiness, and were Enemies to
us, as some of them said, we should suffer Kirk Censure for giving over the old
Apostat Ministers to the Devil, and some of them counted us their Enemies for
the truths sake, and sent us word they would protest against us, and so we
justify our Lord in breaking them at Airds Moss, we justify the Lord
likewise, in taking away that they call Field-Preachings, or mockings, because
they were nothing but Rebellion against the High Lord, as we find now when our
Lord is come to the Cross, there is neither Minister nor People to bide by him,
of the many Thousands has flocked to the thing they call Preachings or
mockings, and therefore now all are found void of saving Grace, and so we see
that word is accomplished, Strait and narrow is the way that leads unto Life,
and few there be that find it: And that other word, many shall strive and shall
not be able. We finding all former Actions to be such as Devils has and can
creep in at (as Declarations and Covenants) and get the name of Saints:
Therefore, this day it seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us, to renounce and
burn the former Covenants and Declarations, because they are not strait enough
according to Scripture, and all their Works such like, and therefore we will
own none of their Works, till it please the Lord to give us teaching from
himself. By this all may know and understand, we overturn, and formally burns
all the former Works of the Clergy of Scotland, and throughout all the whole
World, that are in opposition to Holiness, dated the 6 th day of the Week,
being the 27. of the 5 th Month, 1681. about Midday.

We renounce and decline all Authority throughout the World, and all that are
in Authority, and all their Acts and Edicts, from the Tyrant Charles Stuart, to
the lowest Tyrant, and burns them the same day, being the 6 th day of the week,
the 27 day of the 5 th Month, 1681. at Cannongate Tolbuith Iron-house.

We renounce the names of Months, as January, February, March, April, May,
June, July, August, September, October, November, December. Sunday, Monday,
Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday, Saturday. Martimas, Holydays, for there
is none holy but the Sabbath day. Lambmas day, Whitsunday* Candlemas, Beltan,
Cross stones, and Images, Fairs named by Saints, and all the remnants of
Popery, Tool or Christmas, old Wives Fables and By-words, as Palmsunday,
Carlinesunday, the 29 th of May, being dedicat by this Generation to
Prophanity, Peacesunday, Halloweven, Hogmynae night, Valentins even; no
Marrying in the Month they call May, the innumerable Relicts of Popery, Atheism
and Sorcery, and New years day, and Hansell-Monday, Dredgies and Likewakes,
Valenteins Fair, Chapels and Chaplains: likewise Sabbath days Feastings,
Blythmeats, Banquetings, Revelling, Pipings, Sportings, Dancings, Laughings,
Singing profane and lustful Songs and Ballads, Table-Lawings, Monk-lands,
Frier-lands, Blackfrier-lands, Kirks and Kirkyards, and Mencat Crosses,
Fount-stones, Images, Registers of Lands and Houses, Register Bonds,
Discharges, and all their Law-works, Inhibitions, Hornings, Letters of
Adjudications, Ships-passes, Prophanity and all unchaste thoughts, words and
Actions, formality and indifferency, Story-books and Ballads, Romances and
Pamphlets, Comedy-books, Cards and Dice, and all such like, we disown all of
them, and burns them the 6 th day of the week being the 27 th day of the 5 th
Month, 1681, at the Cannongate, Tolbuith Iron-house.

We renounce all the Customs and Fashions of this Generation, their way and
custom of eating and drinking, sleeping and wearing, and all our own former
ways, as well Religious as Moral, in so far as they have been squared and
casten in this Generations mould, and all our iniquious courses, lightness and
unconcernedness with the Glory of God, the only end wherefore we were sent into
the World the 7 th day of the Week, being the 27 th of the 5 th Month.

We renounce all that are now in Prison-houses or Correction-houses, Men and
Women; for none of them are with us in this work, and when we sent them a Copy
of this our Renounciation, they called us Devils. The Copy of this we burnt
instead of the Books and Works of this Apostate Generation, and buried the
Ashes in our and covered it with dust.

Notwithstanding of our burning Covenants and Declarations, and renouncing of
them and their works; Be it known to All, that we do neither vindicate the
cursed Murderers of their Bloodshed on Fields, and Scaffolds, and Seas, and
other horrid Cruelties, such as Torturings, Imprisonments, Pillagings,
Banishments, Scourgings, Stigmatizings, etc. nor condemn we the worthy Martyrs,
and the sufferings of others, only we give the Lord Justice, and vindicats his
tarrying, for now the Furnace has brought forth a more pure Cause which we
term, Holiness to be built upon the word of God.

That all may know and see our innocence, and know our end is and was the Glory
of God in all we did, though we came far short; and in the Months past we could
get none to show us kindness for Meat or Lodging, though we could pay for it
our selves: That word in Malachy, Ye are cursed with a curse, for ye have
robbed me, even the whole Nation. And likewise in Deuteronomy. We seeing the Land all
thus cursed, and all justifying themselves in that iniquity, were afraid to
eat, or drink, or sleep under a Roof with them: though there were many that
would have sheltered us, yet we could not eat, drink, converse, or pray with
them, lest we had come under the Curse, so many times our Beds has been in the
open Fields, and we have come to houses and they would not sell us Meal to make
Potage of, and we have found Meal and Water a rare dish, because the curse was
off it, and it was blessed to us, according to that Scripture, the blessing of
the Lord makes Rich. We are not murmuring in this, but when the Weather has
been worst, Winds and Rain, cold Frost and Snow, and when we had fasted most,
we were best satisfied, according to that Scripture, all shall work together
for their good, that truly seek the Lord; when we had outward straits, then we
had most inward peace, we had joy in the Holy Ghost, so the things the World
calls the worst of our life, as reproaches, imprisonments, nakedness, hunger,
and cold, etc. we had rather be suffering for our Lords sake, than be Kings of
the whole earth, for our joy no man can take from us, and our Prison is so
pleasant through our Lord, that we care for no company, for we know no company
but all are cursed, and we know not what it is to be weary, but according to
that Scripture, eat and drink my beloved, yea eat and drink abundantly, we are
rather in Paradise.

These things were cleared to us when fasting and praying, and we were pressed
to do this by the Holy Ghost, we had many Fasts about this thing, and this Week
we took some Milk and Bread in the third day of the week in the morning being
the 24 after the 5 th Month 1681. And tasted neither meat nor drink, nor any
other kind of living, till the 6 th day of the week at 4* day of noon (and then
we took a little Milk and Bread) for to find out the causes of his wrath we
have wandered, mourned, wept, many a night and day in Houses and Fields, for we
have and has had no other end but his Glory, that the Elect such as should be
saved might be brought in, and it is only Conscience that keeps us from giving
Men Reverence in word and behavior, though some call us dumb Devils, and
unlearned Bruits, and one of us when coming before them they call Rulers, was
called a Block-head, notwithstanding of all that came on us, we know and are
taught by the Holy Scriptures, to give Honor unto whom Honor is due, and to
salute one another, but it has been our work of a time to renounce the filthy
vile Imbracings, Salutations, and Complements of this Generation, which they
call Court-breeding, our carriage, professing to follow the Lord Jesus, should
be steed and circumspect according to that Scripture, Let us walk
circumspectly, not as Fools, but as wise Men, as it is written in Matthew, Let
your light so shine before Men, that they may see your good works, and glorify
your Father which is in Heaven.

Cursed are they that says peace to a Land, who are in the place of Watchmen,
when the Lord says no peace, which practice, we silly unlearned Creatures
renounce, for we bless him he has kept us from resting till the Ark rest, and
as for these they call Watchmen, that cries peace or keep silence, we shall
refer them to the Prophet Ezekiel, which ye may read at leisure, which we think
shall be Scotland. Doom, for we have heard tell of few of them they call
Ministers, but they have all said peace, when brought before the Enemies to
witness their practice, being most unconscionable on Hill sides, and Moor
sides, before several thousands, they called them Tyrants, and intolerable
Oppressors, and their Government Tyranny and Oppression, and that the Crown of
Supremacy that Charles Stuart had usurped over the Kirk, would weigh him down
from the Throne, and all that Race with him, and when they are brought before
them, and into Prisons, nothing but in with the other supplication, to the
Honorable Lords of His Majesty's Secret Council, beck and being, and please
your Lordships Grace, etc. and now they are all at peace with his Enemies, save
one whom we disown, and so or long the Enemies shall Curse them, when the Lord
awakens their Consciences, (though we confess we have had some special
Witnesses of Ministers) and we think or long, the Malignants shall pursue these
Ministers to Death for unfaithfulness, for the vilest Creatures in the Land
high and low, Rich and Poor, noble and ignoble, must give account for works
done in the flesh; then the Dogs, Sorcerers, Whoremongers, and Murderers, and
Idolaters, False-Swearers, Cursers, Sabbath Breakers, Idle loose Livers, and
all that are unchaste in thoughts, words, and behavior, and all that makes no
Conscience of their way, and whosoever loves and makes a lie, shall tremble
that day when they shall enter into Eternity; when it shall be said as it was
to Dives, Thou in thy Lifetime had thy good things, and Lazarus his bad
things: For except a Man be born again, he can in no wise enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven.

We take up the Book of the Holy Scripture at the Lords command, and for a
Testimony of our Dissatisfaction, at the abounding Corruptions, both of
Translators and the Press, and likewise for a Testimony of our desires and
intentions for a new Translation and Impression, free of the foresaid and other
abuses, we to our power reform our own Books, and says, that the word of God
needs no humane Art; we hold that the Word of God is laid the Foundation of
this new Building, and shortly it shall become the head Corner stone of the
Building, over both Kirk and Stater Kirk-Men, and Statesmen; so that Scripture
toward the end of the Rev. of John shall be fulfilled; And I saw Heaven
opened, and behold a white Horse, and he that sat upon him was called Faithful
and True, and in Righteousness he does Judge and make War, his Eyes were as a
flame of Fire, and on his Head were many Crowns, and he had a new Name written
that no Man knew, but he himself, and he was Clothed with a Vesture dipped in
Blood, and his Name is called the word of God.

And first, to show that we take the Word of God in every point to be our Rule,
the sum and end of our so much reproached and mocked at Exercise (Fasting and
Prayer) will be found in the Book of Psalms; Be thou exalted, O God, above the
Heavens; and let thy glory be above all the Earth. It is written in the Acts of
the Apostles, It seemed good to the Holy Ghost and to us: but they usurping
Supremacy, says, by the Authority of the General Assembly allows these Psalms
to be sung in Congregations, etc. which we renounce: And more, we think the
Psalm Book in Meeter, and no other thing ought to be within the broads of the
Bible, but the simple Scriptures of Truth; the Psalms may be had in a Book by
themselves.

We are so reproached and calumniate, that we are forced to make our defense,
and show that we have mourned, fasted, and prayed many a day, and many a night
this last Winter, many times in the open Fields, in Frost and Snow, while our
Clothes were frozen upon us, and our Feet frozen in our Shoes, as the Town of
cursed Borronstonness can witness, and all this to find out the causes of our
Lords tarrying, when those who are now calling us Devils, were turning
themselves upon their Ivory beds, like a door upon the Hinges, eating the fat
and drinking the sweet at their own ease: And when we were driven thence by
Persecution, we took our selves to the Fields, holding still by our duty, where
many Women did offer themselves to the Work, with whom our spirits was many a
time burdened, whom we could not put away (as our blessed Lord dealt with Judas
whom he knew would betray him) without manifest causes: We stayed not with them
but on solemn days, such as Sabbaths, and appointed times for public meeting,
but when they took their rest betwixt hands, we continnued still in Fields,
nights and days, fasting and praying for two or three days together several
times, and it was always their fear we should propose some question to try them
for Separation, and that night before we was taken, we warned them that the
Soldiers would come, and told them to use their freedom: we saw them also a
mile off, an hour before they came, and none of them would go away; and after
we were brought in hither, after some several days Fasting and Prayer, we being
warned by the Holy Ghost, followed Esther's advice, and continued from eight a
Clock of the morning the 24 day of the 5 Month, till the 27 at four afternoon,
Fasting and Praying; we sent them word likewise to Fast and Pray, and when we
sent them the answer of our Prayers in the writ, they called us Devils: Thence
we fasted till the 28 day at night, and thence till the 30 at night, waiting
still to see if they would recover, but they waxed still worse, and we were
forced to write this to vindicate our carriage toward them.

Walter Ker. John Gibb. David Iamison. John Young.

This is Exactly Compared and Collationed with the Principal Copy, by me

WILL. PATERSON, Cl. Sti. Concilii.



FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books Printed for Io. Hindmarsh at the Golden-Ball over
against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill.
THE Antiquity of the Royal Line of Scotland farther Cleared and Defended,
against the Exceptions lately offered by Dr. Stillingfleet, in his Vindication
of the Bishop of St. Asaph. By Sir George Mackenzie, His Majesty's Advocate for
the Kingdom of Scotland.

The Moral History of Frugality with its opposite Vices, Covetousness,
Niggardliness, Prodigality, and Luxury. Written by the Honorable Sir George
Mackenzie, late Lord Advocate of Scotland.

A Memorial for His Highness the Prince of Orange, in Relation to the Affairs
of Scotland: Together with the Address of the Presbyterian-Party in that
Kingdom to His Highness; And some Observations on that Address. By two Persons
of Quality.

An Account of the Present Persecution of the Church in Scotland, in several
Letters.

The Case of the Present Afflicted Clergy in Scotland truly represented. To
which is added for Probation, the attestation of many unexceptionable Witnesses
to every Particular; and all the Public Acts and Proclamations of the
Convention and Parliament relating to the Clergy. By a Lover of the Church and
his Country.

An Historical Relation of the late Presbyterian General Assembly, held at
Edinburgh, from October 16. to November 13. In the Year 1690. In a Letter from
a Person in Edinburgh to his Friend in London.


