MEDICINA MILITARIS: OR, A BODY OF MILITARY MEDICINES Experimented.

BY Raymundus Mindererus, Late Chief Physician of the Electoral Court of
Bavaria, and of the Imperial City of Auspurg.

Englished out of High Dutch.

LONDON, Printed by William Godbid, and are to be Sold by Moses Pit, at the
Angel, over against the Little North Door of St. Paul's Church. 1674.

A BODY OF MILITARY MEDICINES EXPERIMENTED.
CHAP. I. Concerning the Morals of a Soldier.
WHereas the Old Philosophers wished to every one MENTEM SANAM IN CORPORE SANO,
a Sound Mind in a Sound Body; considering how much it conduced to the Health of
the Body to have the Mind free from Vice and Vexation: It will behoove a
Soldier, as much at least as any man, to endeavor after that Soundness and
Integrity of conscience which may inspire him with true Fortitude, undisturbed
from the troubles and anxieties accompanying Impiety and Injustice. To this
end, he ought, in the first place, be constant in paying his Duties to Almighty
God, by serving Him in public and private, by imploring the Divine protection
and blessing in all his Just undertakings, and by returning his humble
acknowledgments for every good success. Next, he ought to serve his Prince
faithfully to the best of his skill and power, to obey his Officers readily,
and to do to all others, as he would be done to, if he were in their condition.

CHAP. II. What care a Soldier is to take of his Body.
THe Mind being thus taken care of, thou art to advise with a skilful Physician
concerning thy Body, whether it be not necessary to purge it, the better to
secure thy self from Agues and Fevers. Then furnish thy self with some
Mithridate or Treacle, to use it against infection; taking of it in the morning
fasting, against the ill Air, the quantity of a hasel-nut. Take also with thee
a quantity of Zedoary, Angelica, Imperatoria or Masterwort, and Carlina; of
which thou shall do well, now and then to eat some for the preservation of thy
strength, and against the corruption of the Air. But especially keep thy Head
and Feet warm, by the neglect of which thou may cast thy self into great
danger. Take heed of surcharging thy stomach, which is to prepare and to convey
the nourishment for the whole body, and restrain as much as thou can thy
appetite, there being nothing more hurtful to health, than when that is
irregular and extravagant.

Gird thy self well, that thy body may be close, and so be secured from
receiving mischief in leaping, falling, storming, etc. and thy bowels from
being put out of their place.

Take also with thee out of the Apothecary's shop a powder, called Pulvis
solutivus de Tribus, which is not dear. Of this, when thou need purging,
take the weight of a ducat or a little more, according to thy constitution, in
warm flesh-broath or the like, early in the morning fasting; so ordering the
matter, that that day thou may keep thy self warm in thy quarter. Fast two
hours after the taking of it, and then eat warm meat. The same may be done with
Pulvis Sena Montagnana, and Pulvis solutivus de Tartaro.

If thou be troubled with Corns on thy feet, apply to them every day fresh
lard, and continue this, till by the fatness of the lard they grow soft; and
then they will fall off from the very roots without pain.

To free or secure thy self from Vermin, take a good quantity of Wormwood, and
the inner cuttings of horse-hoofs, cut out by the Farriers when they shoe
horses; boil these both together in half lie and half water, and so put thy
shirt into it, and afterward dry it in the Air, without washing it out any
other way, and not a lowse will come into it. This Experiment is found approved
amongst the old German Soldiers; and although there should be a lowse in thy
shirt, it would not stay there.

If thy feet be moist and sweaty, (which is very troublesome not only to thy
self, but to others also,) take the filings of Brass, which are sometimes used
for dust to dry moist writings with, and put some of it into thy socks, and
walk upon it. Refresh this every other or third day, and thou shall soon be
freed of that inconvenience: Nor be thou troubled, that it makes, as it will
do, thy feet look greenish; for there is no hurt at all in that, since you are
not like to put them in your cap.

Take also with thee some Stags or Bucks-grease, to make use of in case thou
should be galled any where in riding, or going on foot. Anoint the part
therewith at the fireside, and it will soon be healed.

To prevent Rust, draw thy Sword through the fat of a Goose or Capon, or grease
thy Arms therewith.

Take care to have always about thee a hard crust of Rye-bread; for if thou art
dry, and destitute of water, wine or beer, to quench thy thirst, chew some of
this dry crust, and it will moisten thy mouth, and considerably abate thy
thirst. The same may be done with a Leaden-bullet, rolled to and fro in the
mouth, Lead being cooling.

It has been prescribed above, to take with thee the Herbs Imperatoria and
Carlina. Of this be mindful; for if it should happen, that thou should be
obliged to stand some hours in battle or in the field, take a piece of it in
thy mouth for hunger, thirst, and refreshment, and thou shall find, it will
keep thee a good while from faintness. But woe to thy fellows, if they want it;
for they will certainly faint, unless thou be so kind as to give them a share
in thy provision.

In the best Apothecary-shops may be found a root, called Costus, somewhat like
Cinnamon; which has the same effect. And if others should eat Onions, others
drink Brandy, and I only hold in my mouth of this root the bigness of half a
pea; I should keep in breath a good while longer than they. But take notice,
that this, I speak of, is not the common Costus, which hitherto has been sold
for the true in common shops; but that which comes to us from the Indies.

If thou art a Horseman, take a good quantity of Bay Salt, a little Brimstone,
Clove, and Ginger, and mingle with it some of the powder of the two abovesaid
herbs, Imperatoria and Carlina, and give it to thy Horse, or in case of want of
Provender let him have of it upon his bitt, or give him some upon a slice of
bread, and it will make him strong and vigorous.

If thou art to ride in a German Saddle, the two hind-knobs whereof are wont
only to be stuffed out with straw or horse-hair; get thee made two Tin-flaskes
with good screws, fitted for those places. In one of them carry Brandy, in the
other Vinegar. The Brandy will serve thee in cold nights, and fresh mornings;
and 'twill be good also for thy horse, giving him a little of it upon bread.
The Vinegar will be of use to thee for the heat of the day, washing thy mouth
with it, as also spirting a little of it into thy horses mouth. Besides,
mingling it with water, it will afford thee a good cooling drink.

If it be very cold, put some of that horse-hair, that is wont to be curried
out of their mains and tails, into thy boots. I never received on such
occasions more warmth from any thing, especially keeping my self dry. A
Hares-skin is also good for this purpose, making socks of it; but if it grow
wet, it is naught.

Gather of the Wheel-grease that runs out at the nave of the Wheels, and would
else be lost, which has taken in some of the substance of the Iron that is
about the Axel-tree, witness its blackness: This is a good Ointment for Horses.

When thou come into the field, and art to lie abroad, look out for some
rising ground, that the Rain, which may possibly fall, may run away from thee:
And avoid as much as is possible, Valleys, Marshes, Ditches, Meadows, and the
like low and moist places.

Besides, observe the Air, and put up thy Tent toward the East; which quarter
though it be cool, yet it is wholesome. But lest it should be too cool, order it
so, that thou may enjoy that wind, which comes from between the East and
South, as being one of the wholsomest of all Airs, and temperate, the South-air
qualifying the sharpness of the Eastern. Beware of the Western Wind, especially
that which blows from between the South and West. The Air of Midnight is
wholesome enough and dry, but sharp and piercing. Believe it, a Soldier is
much concerned in the Air; nor has Hippocrates without cause written a whole
Book De Aere, Aquis and Locis, to teach, how the Air, Water, and Places are to
be discerned and chosen.

Moreover, look about thee for good clear Water, such as grows warm and cool
again sooner than other waters; and observe this mark for my sake. I know
water, that will not boil Pease, Vetches, Stock Fish, Flounders, etc. In some
Springs Iron is turned into Brass, and great care is to be had in the choice of
water for drinking.

But if thou can not have Spring Water, but art necessitated to use Pit or
Ditch-water; have a care not to drink it without straining, least thou should
swallow Frog or Snake-spawn. For I have known and had in my cure a
Countryman, who voided, though not at once but at different times, two
hundred fifty and five Frogs, and of them many in my own house, in the presence
of diverse Ecclesiastical and Secular Persons; and some of the biggest of them,
being dried, are still to be seen in the Repository of Mantua, as also in that
of Mr. Philip Hainhofer at Auspurg. And there is a Cook in the Hospital of
Wessenburg or Landsberg, who, (as appeared by the event) had drunk the Spawn of
Serpents, out of which were bred diverse Serpents in his body, some of which he
voided by virtue of the Medicine he took, amongst which there was one of the
length of a Bavarian Ell. The Man has been since in good health, and continues
in his service to this day.

Wherefore it will behoove you to spread your handkerchief over the
Ditch-water, and so drink through it; or if you take any of it up unstrain'd,
quench first a red-hot Stone or Iron in it, whereby the noxious quality will be
destroyed. Or, if you lie still, and can get any Oil of Vitriol, let some drops
of that fall into it, and you need not then fear any corruption or poison in
such water. Otherwise, if time will permit, let it boil up and cool again, and
put a crust of bread into it, and you may drink of it safely.

Those Waters that run out of stony hills and from under rocks, are the best;
to which may be reckoned those Springs, that flow from high places, and purge
themselves in clear sand and pebles.

If thou meet with Beer or Wine, take heed of excess; and forbear drinking New
beer that has not yet done working, or is not some days old, because new beer
causes the Strangury. And in case this should trouble thee, take a handful of
Hay-blossoms, boil them in water, and Urine over it, drawing into thy body the
warm steam thereof, and anointing thy Navel several times with warm suet.

If thou art hot, and can not forbear drinking, make water first; then wash
thy mouth, and cool the arteries on both thy temples, and those of both thy
wrists; and then drinking will hurt thee less.

If you chance to drink whilst you are hot, (which is so dangerous a thing,
that some have dyed within 24 hours after it; others have fallen into
consumptive Coughs, others been troubled with Pains in their sides and with
Impostumes, etc.) then take of the leaves of Bellis or Daisy, which grows in
all meadows and pasture-grounds, and is green both winter and summer, and wash
them clean, and dress them like a Salad with Oil, Vinegar and a little Salt,
and forthwith eat thereof; and it helps immediately, as I know by much
Experience. But this must be used presently, the sooner the better. I can say
with truth, that in all my Practice of Physic for above 20 years I have not
met with any Experiment of so quick an Operation from any herb, as from this.
But here I must note, that I have always used the Red Daisy, and have not tried
the other sorts; though I am apt to believe, the others may have the like
effect. You must not eat the Flowers, but only the Leaves. This Experiment
should be put up on all posts every where, for the good of Courriers, Mowers,
and other laboring Men, that are wont to drink plentifully when they are hot,
and thereby spoil themselves in great numbers.

But to proceed; as thou art to beware of excess of drinking at all times, so
thou art especially to forbear when thou art to stand Sentinel, lest thou
should fall a sleep; whereby thou may lose thy life, at least, thy place
and thy preferment for ever.

Neither be fond of Gaming at dice, tables, etc. whence are occasioned
quarrels, mistrusts, deceit, swearing, and what not?

Avoid also the company of base women, lest thou should be constrained to
undergo the Mercurial Salivation, and with it a very lean Diet, of thin broth,
water gruel, barley-broth, prunes, roasted apples, and such like, without any
flesh-meat at all.

CHAP. III. Concerning the Physicians and Chirurgions in an Army.
EVery Army ought to be well provided with one or more able Physicians, such as
are not only expert in the cure of inward Diseases, but also understanding in
outward Cases, as Wounds, Burnings, Luxations, Dislocations, Erysipelas's or
St. Antony's Fires, etc.

These Physicians ought to be no Youngsters, that are lately come from Schools
and Universities, knowing only in Controversies and Disputations, but such as
are expert in the Cure of Diseases, especially such as are most frequent in
Armies. They are also to be Men of good nature, great honesty and
condescension, willing to take pains with the poor as well as the rich.
Physicians thus qualified may so gain the hearts of the Soldiers, that these
will love and honor them as if they were their Parents.

Likewise the Chirurgions ought to be learned, discreet, and affable, such as
have been long versed, and experienced, in all the operations of Surgery,
that can distinguish well of Diseases, and with prudence make their judgments
thereon: They ought also to be diligent, and careful of those committed to
their charge, and very knowing in all manner of outward applications, as
Unguents, Plasters, Pulments, Lenitives, Stiptiques, Attractives, Digestives,
Causticks, Escharotiques, as also their Mollifying, Dissipating, Repelling,
Suppurating and Mundifying, etc. Medicines. They ought to be skilful in
discerning them, and withal in knowing well the cases and times where and when
to use them. They are to be very careful in observing the beginning, middle and
end of Ulcers, Wounds, etc. since it often may be impertinent and even hurtful
too, to use that in the beginning, that may be pertinent and beneficial in the
midst of the cure, and the like.

An able and dextrous Surgeon is a great Treasure in an Army, and cannot be
enough valued, especially if he consult in all dangerous cases with an
understanding Physician.

These two, Physicians and Chirurgions, are to be intimate friends together,
assisting one another without envy and pride, for the better relief and the
greater safety of their Patients.

It Is very necessary, both these should go abroad and travel before they
undertake to practice, thereby to acquire experience, and to learn also to
converse with the more discretion and gentleness with all sorts of humors. And
when they come to practice, the Chirurgions ought to advise with Physicians,
who are but lame Doctors, if they be not skilled in Surgery; since this is
the third part of Physic, from which it can and ought not to be separated,
being an integral part thereof. It is recorded in history, that above 2000
years since, Podalyrius and Machaon, Sons to Aesculapius, went both with
Agamemnon in the Expedition for Troja, and there purchased great honor by
their practice not so much of Physic as Surgery.

CHAP. IV. Of Fevers, Hungarian Distempers, Spotted Fevers, and other
Pestilential Diseases, as also of Hereditary Maladies, together with their
Remedies.
It Is known seldom to fail, that in an Army there reigns some Disease or
other, according to the nature and constitution of the Country, Air, and Diet.
The reasons are;

First, that amongst so great a number of Men, raised from so many different
places, there are to be found Men of very different tempers and constitutions,
sound and unsound; and amongst the latter, some that are scabby, others
scorbutical, others laboring under venereal Diseases, many inclined to
dangerous and infectious Fevers, etc. all which a Physician must have a
watchful eye upon, and endeavor to prevent their spreading.

Secondly, that Soldiers in an Army want conveniences wherewith to take due
care of their health; but are often constrained to expose themselves and sleep
in the open Air on moist ground, the vapors whereof penetrate into their
bodies; and they are careless or want opportunities of expelling them out again
by sweat. Whence is caused an inward putrefaction in the blood and humors,
which sometimes proceeds so far, as to assume a venomous nature, and to break
out into spots, tumors, bubo's, carbuncles, etc.

Thirdly, that Soldiers commonly keep an irregular diet. Sometimes they have
plenty and do super-abound; at other times they have nothing; and then being
very hungry, when they come again to a place of plenty, they over-feed and
surfeit; whence are bred crudities in the stomach, and corruption, which causes
malignant Fevers in abundance. Besides, they often feed upon meat that is
unwholesome, as stinking Venison, rotten cheese, musty bread, etc. which cannot
but occasion many Diseases. And when they come to places, where Fruit abounds,
as Apples, Pears, Plums, Melons, Cherries, Grapes, etc. they over-eat
themselves, and thereby cause Gripings in the Guts, Diarrhaea's, etc.

Lastly, sometimes the Air is corrupted, especially after a great battle, and
slaughter of Men that remain unburied; whereby the Air being tainted infects
the living that take it in. Which is often made worse by the exhalations of low
and moorish ground, and by thick fogs.

These are the general Causes of the common Distempers reigning in Armies;
against which thou art to arm thy self accordingly. First then be careful in
thy Diet; eat not greedily and indiscreetly every thing that comes to hand; and
though it be good, yet eat and drink not too plentifully of it, but restrain
thy appetite, considering how destructive every excess may be to thy health.

If thou can and have no aversion from it, drink every morning of thy own
Urine, which prevents corruption in the Stomach, opens obstructions in the
Liver, Spleen, Mesaraic Veins; which if not removed, there will follow Fevers,
the yellow Jaundice, Swellings, and Difficulty of breathing. If thou art averse
from doing so, eat some bread and butter with rue on it; or, if it be not hot
weather, take in the morning the quantity of a haselnut of Mithridate or
Treacle; or infuse in brandy, or rather in Spirit of Juniper Berries, some
Zedoary, Angelica, and a little Citron-peels, and drink a spoonful of it in the
morning.

When the Air is corrupted, and there be at hand a Goat, rub thy self at him,
and let not the strong smell keep thee from it. Also put Quicksilver in an
empty hasel-nut, closed up with Spanish Wax, and hang it about thy neck; or the
Zenechton prepared of Arsenic, (after the manner by and by to be described,)
sowed up in thin leather; for if it should touch the bare skin, it would cause
blisters and do harm. This Zenechton is a plaster, out of which are cut pieces
of the bigness of a dollar, which are carried about the neck, and hang down
near the heart; keeping good a whole year. And when the infection is past, this
Zenechton, being reduced to powder, will yet serve to kill rats and mice with.
It is to be thus prepared;

Take of yellow and white Arsenic, of each an ounce, or ^/4 of an ounce; of
gummi Tragacanth an ounce; put this gummi in Rose Water or in common water over
night, and it will yield a slimy water. Then beat thy Arsenic in a mortar, and
put so much of this gummed water to it, as is necessary to reduce it to a paste
having the consistence of dough; work it well and round it, and then cut off a
slice of the bigness of a dollar, somewhat thicker; let this slice dry in the
Air, and sow it in a piece of thin leather (well-dressed dog-skin is the best
for this purpose;) carry this about thy neck so as to let it hang down upon,
and to touch the place of, thy heart. Some mix with it a proportion of the
powder of dried toads, which I have done my self, it being esteemed more
powerful. Some carry about their necks dried spiders; Theophrastus commends
Celondine, leaves and root, carried about the neck.

Remember also to burn frequently Juniper-wood before thy tent; though all
ordinary fires cleanse the Air; Upon which account Hippocrates advised great
fires to be made in Greece at the time of a great plague, which was thought to
have been removed by that means. Some burn only a few chips of Juniper-roots,
or some of the berries of that shrub, which is as effectual.

If these means cannot be had, burn some Gunpowder, ordering it like a train;
this purifieth the Air likewise. And the volleys of shot made mornings and
evenings in a camp, conduce very much to the dispelling of mist, and qualifying
raw weather.

Frankincense also, Mastick, and such other perfumes as dry and clear the Air,
may be very usefully burnt; and even a Scholars perfume made of waste Paper is
not to be despised.

If thou can get Rue, smell often to it: And remember me for this general
hint, to take good notice of all herbs that are green winter and summer, and
which are not eaten by Horses or Cattle; for they are endowed with excellent
virtues for the good of Man, and therefore made to grow at all seasons of the
year.

When the Air is pestilential or breeding any Epidemical Disease, then wash thy
face with Vinegar every morning. If thou can get Acetum of Rue,
Elder-flowers, Lavender, Roses, Marigold-flowers, it is the better. Or, if you
have the convenience, prepare the following Acetum: Take Rue, Elder-flowers,
Burnet-roots, white Dittany, Carlina, of each equal quantity; a few Orange or
Citron-peels, (of which the latter are the better of the two,) and a little
Camphire, and some Walnut-kernels (the fresher the better,) leaving the bitter
skins upon them; put all these into common Vinegar, and with this infusion
moisten every morning thy temples, mouth and nostrils, and the beating arteries
of both thy wrists; taking down a good spoonful of it, and thou have a good
preservative.

If it be cold weather, take Angelica-roots, Zedoaria, white Dittany, some
dried Citron-peels, and a little Camphir, infuse them all in Brandy, especially
in such as is made out of Wormwood or Juniper Berries. Of this liquor drink in
the morning a spoonful. But if thou be of a hot constitution, then content thy
self with the former Acetum, in which you may mix a little Treacle.

Some advise to take fasting some of the Juice of Marigold, freshly expressed
out of the flower and leaves, as a good preservative against the Infection.
This I have not tried; but I have often in such cases used the Acetum of
Marigold-flowers, especially for a cordial and sudorisick, and, I think, with
very good success.

Or make an Electuary, of Rue and Juniper Berries, of each equal quantity,
adding thereto a double quantity of Walnuts, with their bitter skin on them,
some Figs, a little Treacle, and a little Saffron; beat them together in a
mortar, and pour on them, whilst thou art beating, as much Rue-vinegar as will
reduce it to a thick Pulls or Electuary: Of this take the bigness of a hasel-nut
or two, fasting.

Take the roots of the greater Burrdock, and those of Celondine, both well
cleared, and the bark of Ash; infuse them 24 hours in half White Wind and half
Rue-vinegar; then distill it, and in the distilled water mix a little
Brimstone-oyl, to render it a little sowrish. Of this take two spoonfuls in the
morning for a preservative. But if any be already infected with the Plague, let
him take of the same six or eight spoonfuls at a time, and sweat upon it, it
being a very sudorifique liquor, which, under the name of Aqua Bardana
composita, has been used by me and my Colleagues in Hospitals and other places
with very great success. You may mix some Mithridate with it, if you please.

Else take Carlina, Imperatoria, Serpentaria, Valerian, Saxifrage, Tormentill,
Gentian, Angelica and Zedoaria, all cut small; infuse them in Brandy, and drink
of it a spoonful in the morning for a preservative; but if thou have the
contagion, take two spoonfuls, to sweat upon it, in case the pestilential
poison be not yet broken out, and the Patients tongue not dry; but if it be,
content thy self with the newly prescribed Acetum, as being more safe, and an
inflammation being to be feared from the Brandy.

Hold Zedoar, Angelica, Lovage, or Imperatoria, in thy mouth; but if thou be
subject to the Headache, then cut it first small, and infuse it in Vinegar, and
let it stand infused for the space of 24 hours; then take it out again, dry it,
and use it as prescribed above.

Amongst the good Preservatives reckon this also: Take Garden-rue, beat it in a
mortar, pour Vinegar on it, and strain all through a cloth; mix some Treacle
with it, set it by in a glass, and take of it in the morning half a spoonful or
a whole. Put a little Camphir to it, if you will have it stronger.

Or put Camphir in Wormwood-wine, and drink a good draught of it every morning.

When I served in times of great mortality, I infused in Wine Carduus
benedictus, Wormwood, Scordium, Dictamne of Creet, Burnet-roots, and
Citron-peels, and after I had taken every morning a good mess of sowrish broth,
I drank after it a good glass of this infusion. As long as the herbs retain a
bitterness, fresh wine may be infused upon them.

Infuse also white and well cleansed Garlic in Acetum made of Rue, and take of
it a spoonful or two in the morning.

In the Apothecary-shops are Pills, called Pestilential Pills: Among these
cause a little Camphir to be mixed, and of it let Pills be made; of which take
at once three or four every week, taking them in a spoonful of White Wind, an
hour before supper. These prevent all inward putrefaction, and keep off all
infection, nor do they suffer any collection of morbifique matter within thee,
though they purge not, but only keep the body soluble. They are made up of
Aloe, Myrrh and Saffron. Formerly I have printed a whole Book of such Pills,
which I called Marocostinas in Latin, where I have described their virtues at
large.

For the Rich may serve what follows: Take Terra* Sigillata, Bolus Armenus,
Pulvis Alexipharmacus, or Bezoardicum Nicolai, or the Cordiales Alexandrini
Benedicti; item Species de Hydcintho, Aqua Stapediana, Acetum Theriacale, or
the Red Hungarian Powder; all these serving not only to preserve, but also to
recover, by Gods blessing.

Provide out of the Apothecaries-shops Pastils of the extract of Angelica or
Zedoaria; take one or two of them in thy mouth every morning, and there let
them melt down.

Keep thy body clean every way; be cheerful; avoid rashness; nor be afraid,
considering that many have been infected by fear, terror, and melancholy.
Cheer thy self up now and then with a glass of good and sincere Wine, but not
to excess. Never fasting, nor never full. One that is empty, will soon be
caught with this distemper, especially if he live amongst infected people. If
he do, let him drink a good draught of Wormwood-wine, Juniper-berry-wine,
Rosemary, Sage, or Zedoar-wine; which may keep thee from many dangers. But
remember, not to drink more of it than will cheer thee up and revive thy
Spirits. At least, drink a little Wine with Camphir and Vinegar, kindling the
Camphir and letting it burn in the Wine, so as to let it sink into it; for if
it burn on the top, it will there remain swimming: And if the Wine be skinned
over with it, kindle it again till it be quite burnt out. Take of Camphir for
one draught, the quantity of a pease; but if thou be subject to the Headache,
then Camphir will not agree with thee.

In case that any come to be infected, he is forthwith to be separated from the
sound, and to be laid to bed, so as his head and shoulders may lie somewhat
high; by which means he will be less subject to faintness. Then let him
presently take some sudorifick Medicine, to make him sweat; for if the poison
be not speedily driven from the heart, the Patient is lost. You are also to
take great care, that this Distemper prevail not, and to endeavor to discover
it before the Patient be quite disabled: For, as soon as any begins to droop,
grows melancholy, faint and feeble in his limbs, so as that he is hardly able
to hold up his head, drawing his breath with difficulty, letting his head fall
to and fro, losing his stomach, growing yellowish about his eyes, with the
apples of his eyes standing out, finding headache, interrupted heats and colds;
as soon, I say, as these symptoms appear in times of the Plague, Spotted
Fevers, Hungarian Disease, etc. you may then look to it by times; forasmuch as
such Patients, that are already infected, go often about until the sixth or
eighth day, as I have known my self, until the lurking poison of the heart has
got the prevalency; and then the poor Patient is quite cast down, and often
dies in very few days, and even in a few hours. Wherefore thou art not to stay,
till the swellings and boils appear behind the ears, under the arms, etc. or
till the Carbuncles, Bubo's, and the like, break out; but thou art immediately
to make use of the best Medicines, thou can be Master of, to drive out the
poison, if thou will save thy life. I never found any thing, that was
considerable, done in the Plague, by means of Purging and Bleeding; but rather
on the contrary, all those that had Spots, if they were purged or let blood,
soon after died. However, I will prescribe nothing magisterially to any man;
let every one endeavor to do, what he can give a good account of. I have,
together with my Colleagues, treated many hundreds in our Hospitals infected
with the Plague, without ever opening a vein, and yet we have by Gods blessing
recovered near 600 persons; besides those that by the same mercy we have cured
in their several Houses.

Now to procure sweat in the very beginning, take the quantity of two
hasel-nuts of Treacle, dissolve it in common Vinegar; but if thou can have a
cordial Acetum, made of Rosemary, Lavender, Elder-blossoms, Rue, Roses, or
Elder-berries, use it much rather, and give it the Patient to sweat.

Or take the roots of Celondine, boil them in Vinegar, and dissolve some
Treacle in it: Or take Carduus benedictus, Rue, Petasites or Butter-burr, a
little Angelica, Zedoaria, or Saxifrage-roots, boil them together in half
White Wind, and half Vinegar, or only Water, dissolve a little Treacle or
Mithridate in it, and let the Patient take it warm, to make him sweat.

Mithridate has the like virtue with Treacle, yet neither of them are safe to
take for Women with Child, old Persons and young Children.

You may also make use to good purpose of the Saxon-powder, taking of it the
weight of a Ducat in Carduus benedictus, Scabius, or Sorrel-water; which Powder
is thus to be prepared:

Take Valerian half an ounce; Celondine, or Nettel-roots, of each one ounce;
Polypody, Althaea, (or Marchmallow,) wild Angelica, of each two ounces; of
garden Angelica, four ounces; of the rind of Laurcola, (or Lowry,) an ounce and
an half: These roots are to be dug up in their best strength, viz. between the
middle of August and the middle of September, and being cleansed, they are to
be cut small, and then put in a glazed pot, pouring a sharp Vinegar upon it, so
as to cover it two inches high. Then lute on the cover with a lute made of
whites of Eggs and Flower; let all be boiled upon a gentle fire; then pour off
the liquor, and dry the roots, and reduce them to powder, mixing with it some
26 berries of Herb Paris, (or One-Berrie) which look like Pepper-corns, very
good against poison; and thus the powder is made. This herb grows in shadowed
and moderately moist places; I have found of it several times in Koshinger-wood
near Ingolstad: It has four leaves on one stalk, and one berry on the top. An
herb belonging to the family of Solanum's or Night-shades; whence the leaves of
it do very much cool Inflammations, especially those of the Eyes, when laid
upon them.

Take notice of Sorrel, bruise some of it and pour Vinegar on it, (the
Rue-acetum is the best,) and strain the juice through a cloth; put into it a
little powder of Angelica, about the weight of half a Ducat; or of the root of
Dictam, or of Butter-burr, or a little Treacle or Mithridate, and give it to
sweat.

On this occasion of mentioning Dictam, I must add, that in our Country there
grows only the white Dictam, which is, among others, an excellent Antidote, but
you must take of it the double quantity and weight to that of Creta. You may
boil of the root of half an ounce in half White Wind and half Vinegar, or,
instead of the Wine, in Carduus-benedictus water; and drink of the Decoction
warm, and put your self to sweat; or take of the powder of it a dram and an
half in warm broth, with a little Vinegar, for the same purpose.

The Dictam of Creta has hairy leaves and purpureous blossoms, and is used in
the preparation of Treacle. This herb by its odor drives away Serpents. The
wild Goats being hurt by any Arrows eat this herb, and it is said, that by this
means the Arrows fall out of the wound. This perhaps has no other ground than
that of the Poet Virgil, affirming that Venus with this herb healed her Son
Aeneas when wounded in the War. His words are Aeneid. 12.

Hic Venus indigno nati concussa dolor:
Dictamnum genitrix Cretaea carpit ab Ida,
Puberibus caulem foliis and flore comantem
Purpureo, non illa feris incognita Capris
Gramina, cum tergo volucres haesere sagittae.
About this time came in the Hungarian Infection, which was a Disease that bred
such a putrefaction in the bodies of Men, that even when they were near death,
they fell a vomiting, but that with such a stench, that no body could endure
it. Here those Medicines do well, that preserve the body from putrefaction; for
the Plague, Spotted Fevers, and the Hungarian Distemper, proceed all from
inward corruption. And of them, the Plague attacks the Spirits residing in the
Heart, and so kills very quickly; whereas Spotted Fevers have their seat in
the Blood, and therefore do last twelve, fourteen, and sometimes twenty days
before they kill. But the Hungarian Disease is seated chiefly in the putrified
Phlegm of the Head and Brains; whence those that labor under it, are tormented
with great and maniacal headache.

But though these three Diseases have their rise from one and the same cause
(Putrefaction,) and are to be cured by the same remedies; yet is therein
required the discretion of a prudent Physician, for the ordering and
prescribing of Medicines according to circumstances.

Take a dram of Zedoary, give it pulverised to the Patient in Acetum of Rue,
or Elder, or Marigold-flowers, or even in common Vinegar: Let him sweat upon
it. It Is good against all sorts of venom, and causes a sweet breath, as
resisting inward corruption.

In the Apothecary Shops you find an Electuary, called Diascordium, found by
that famous Physician Hieronymus Fracastorius. It is like to Treacle and
Mithridate; only it is red from some Ingredients giving it that color. This may
be used with safety by Women with Child, young Children and all sorts of
Persons, whereas, as was said above, Treacle and Mithridate may not. It is made
chiefly of Scordium or Water-Germander, which has the smell of Leek when
bruised.

Galen in his first Book De Antidotis, Chap. 12. writes, that when in a great
battle some slain bodies chanced to fall upon this Herb, they rotted not as far
as they were touched by this Herb.

The said Fracastorius did compound this his Diascordium out of this Herb
Scordium, Tormentil, Serpentaria, Gentian, Bole Armeniac and Terra Sigillata,
and such like Ingredients.

It is chiefly to be used in the hot Diseases of the Head; which I have done
many a hundred times. Take of it the weight of about two ducats in common
Vinegar, or in Elderwater, or rather in the expressed Juice of fresh Sorrel,
and sweat upon it. It Is very good especially in the Hungarian Sickness and other
venomous and infectious Diseases. To young People you may give a lesser
quantity, and proportionably you are to lessen the dose for Women with Child or
in Childbed, and little Children.

Besides take notice of the Powder of Doctor Hessius, which has been used with
great benefit, and is thus prepared;

Take a dram of Sugar Candy, a quarter of an ounce of pulverised Ginger, and
a dram of Camphir; reduce all to a fine powder; give of it to the infected
Patient the weight of a dram in Vinegar mingled with the water of
Marigold-flowers, Scabious or Sorrel, and sweat upon it. If you have none of
these waters, then look that the Vinegar be not too sharp, and to that end
dilute it with some wine and water. Mean time, though in this case I highly
value Camphir, yet in stead of Ginger I would use Zedoary, Saxifrage, Carlina
or Imperatoria, or the true Petasites or Butter-burr.

Again, Brimstone is none of the meanest remedies in these infectious cases;
for it preserves the body from putrefaction. Wherefore take of the noble
Flowers of Sulphur a quarter of an ounce, being sublimed from Colcothar; add to
it one scruple of Camphir, an ounce of the Spirit or Oil of Cyprian or Venetian
Turpentine. Put all this into a Glass-head, lute it well and put it upon hot
sand or ashes, whereby the Oil of Turpentine will come to open the Brimstone,
and produce a red color like a Ruby, or at least as yellow as a high-colour'd
Hyacinth. Of this give some to the Patient three or four times, mingled with a
little Treacle, or in Sorrel, Cardobenedictus, or Scabious-water. This Balsom
is excellent also in sore Breasts that are growing purulent, taken in warm
broth, or in a good wound-drink. But this must be in cases of no great heat or
inflammation, in which it would be dangerous.

Amongst all the Remedies, which serve against Infectious Diseases, that of
Henricus Stapedius, to be found in my Book de Pestilentia, is an excellent one,
and perhaps the best for curing as well as preserving; of which half a spoonful
being taken fasting, is able to keep a Man well for twelve hours or more: But
if any be already infected, he must take of it at any time immediately, to the
quantity of a spoonful and an half, or two spoonfuls, for sweating. Which is to
be repeated every eighteen or twenty four hours, to make the Patient sweat,
till he recover, or till the Pestilential Boyls and Carbuncles break out behind
the Ears, under the Arms, or elsewhere. This Water, though it be somewhat
dear, yet its virtue countervailes its price. The older it grows, the more
virtue it has.

Many have ascribed great efficacy to the Blood of Animals: Thus old
Democritus, (witness Galen,) prepared an Electuary of such Blood, called
Diathaematon. Some esteem much the Blood of Storks, because they eat Toads and
Snakes; others value the Blood of Hens, because they eat Spiders and other
venomous Infects. I should esteem most the Flesh or Blood of Badgers; which is
to be dried in the shade, and that done, you must mix with it Saffron, Camphir,
and some or other of the Anti-pestilential roots, as of Angelica, Zedoaria, or
the like, together with a little live Brimstone to the quantity of a ducat;
which is to be taken in Acetum of Rue, or Marigold-flowers, or Walnuts, and in
case of want of these, in common Vinegar: Upon which the Patient is to sweat.
If thou art a good husband, have ready a good Acetum of Rue, Walnut-kernels and
Marigold-flowers, taking the greater quantity of Rue; and as you use it, fill
it up again with Acetum of Elder-berries.

The Rich do use for their Physic in the time of the Plague the red Hungarian,
as also the Imperial red and gray Powder, Bezoar, Hartshorn, Antidotum
Matthioli, Terra Sigillata, Bole Armeniack, Scorzonera and Contrayerva, Species
de Gemmis, Diamargariton de Hyacintho, and other high Medicines, of which I
have largely discoursed in my above cited Book De Pestilentia. But I, though I
have used such remedies among the Rich, yet I content my self commonly with the
plainer and most common Medicines, of which I have more knowledge and
experience.

The Pickle of Ebulus or Walwort, ( alias Dane-wort or Dwarf-elder,) which is
of kin to Elder; as also the Pickle of Juniper Berries, are also of great use
in this case.

The Physicians of Ausburg made great use, in the year 1572, of the red
Imperial powder; the composition of which is in the Augustan Dispensatory at
large, as also in my Book de Peste.

These are the several means to provoke sweat, which I esteem to be of great
efficacy for that purpose upon a sudden. And though Soldiers have not the
convenience of a bed for sweating, when they are in a march, and often cannot
put off their clothes for many nights together; yet let them use such
sudorifique means: for, though they cannot sweat outright, yet they may fall
into a dampish moisture, which if it strike not in again, may prove as good as
a sweat. Yet in this case he must turn his shirt: Quod non facit sudor,
praestat id tenuis udor.

But here is to be noted, that it is not enough, once only to give a sudorifique
Medicine to an infected Body; considering that the venom, like a raging Sea, is
tossed to and fro every way. And though it should seem to thee, as if by thy
approved Antidote thou had overcome the Disease, the Symptoms of it excepted,
yet thou art not to trust in this case; for I my self have been sometimes
deceived, and hard put to it to make good what by confidence I had omitted.
Wherefore you must not trust to the once taking a sudorifique potion or powder,
because such malign and lurking Diseases, that keep no stitch, do indeed fly
the first time from thy Medicament, and hide themselves under it, but they are
wont suddenly to re-appear. Wherefore you must repeat the Antidotes, that were
first administered to you, for the time of 16, 18, 20 or 24 hours, according to
circumstances, and so long and often, till you judge your sick Brothers or
Friends Heart secured from the infectious Venom.

When the sweating is over, thou must then refresh thy Patient, first by drying
him well, and next by giving him a little Vinegar to taste in a spoon. The Rich
may afford some slices of Citron, of which Theopompus Chius writes, that the
Tyrant Clearchus Heracleota, who lived in Pontus, having poisoned many People,
the virtue of Citron was at length found out, of which a slice being eaten
proved an effectual Antidote against it. The same virtue may be found in a
slice of a common Apple; and the Syrupus de Pomis is one of the Cordials of our
shops.

But the thirst, that uses to follow upon sweating, will not be quenched with
so small a matter; wherefore take three parts of water, one part of Vinegar,
and, if the Patient be not too hot, one part of Wine, mixing some Sugar
therewith, and of this let him drink a good draught, and it will cool and
refresh him.

Besides, take some of the guts of Hens, and some slices of Radish, sprinkle
them with Vinegar and Salt, and bind them to the soles of his feet; this will
draw away the heat. But let not the Radish lie too long upon them, because it
will give a stink that may increase the headache, wherewith the People that
have the Plague are commonly troubled enough without provoking it. Moreover you
will do well to tie about his wrists some Rue beaten with Vinegar. Anoint his
Loins and Backbone with the Unguent of Roses, or with fresh Butter; but if
there appear any Spots, forbear to anoint him, lest they should be driven in.

You will do well to have Epithemata of good things about you, as of Rose Water
and Elder-vinegar, to lay over the Heart; with which mix some Camphir. But if
you find any thing of Specks, etc. broke out, you must use no wet thing.

Anoint his Heart with Oil of Scorpions, take the Oil of Sea-blossoms and of
those Earthworms that appear after rain, of each six ounces, of St John's Wort
Oil two ounces, of fresh Elder-blossoms and Rue, each a handful and an half, of
the Acetum of Marigold-flowers and Roses, each about three ounces, of live
Spiders forty five: Boil all these together, till the Vinegar be so qualified,
that when it is thrown into the fire, it cause no cracking there. Then strain
it, and in this strained Oil put a matter of five and twenty Spiders more, of
the biggest sort, and add to it of Camphir dissolved in the Spirit of Roses
half a dram; let it stand in Balneo Mariae or upon hot embers for twelve
hours, and then put to it of Treacle and Mithridate, of each half an ounce, and
let them work together. With this Oil anoint the eight Pulses, viz. both
Temples, behind both Ears, both Hands, and both Knees, as also the Heart. And
this is an excellent Succedaneum to Scorpion-oyl, much used by the Germans.

Besides, you must refresh and strengthen the Patient with convenient Meat and
Drink; I mean with good Flesh- or Barley-broath, with a little Vinegar in it to
make it savoury to him who will have appetite too little else, till he have
shaken off this venomous Distemper; which when he has done, his stomach will
be so keen, that you will find work enough to keep him from surfeiting.

Be also careful to keep thy Patients Body open; if he be obstructed, use a
Clister, or take Butter or Hog's Grease, mixing a little Salt with it, or, if it
be to be gotten, a little Mice-trickles, and put it into his bowels. Physic at
the mouth for this purpose is not always safe: When the Patient is discharged
of the venom, a little liquor of stewed Prunes with some Senna-leaves in it
will do well for opening the body. Some fresh Butter eaten in the morning, or
melted in warm Broth, and taken down, is wont also to keep the body soluble.

The Drink of these Patients may be, Water with some Bread soaked in it; or
take of such Water, wherein Bread has been soaked, one quart, and a little
Vinegar, with two or three spoonfuls of Kitchin-sugar, mingling it well
together. If you have no Sugar, use such Water with Vinegar alone: This affords
good Drink in malignant Fevers. Among the Romans it was drunk by the
Soldiers, under the name of Posca.

You may also take a handful of well cleaned Plantain-roots, and boil them up
in three quarts of Water, and then decant the Water, which though it be,
somewhat bitter, yet it is very good in Fevers, and a good Drink in hot
Distempers.

If you have Oil of Vitriol, let a few drops of it fall into clear Water,
mingling it well; and you will have a factitious Sawer-brun or Acidulae. But
use no Metalline Vessel for this purpose. With this kind of Water many People
have been served in all sorts of Fevers; the Oil of Vitriol in such Distempers,
if rightly used, being very beneficial.

But if a Man should have with it any Pulmonick Disease, in that case he must
forbear acid things, and use Liquorice, and content himself with Ptisane. Nor
is it at all good to use acids in Pestilential Pleurisies.

And since on this occasion we mention this case, and we having above given
warning, not easily to blood in Pestilential Diseases; yet may Venae-section be
sometimes, upon good consideration, used in that Pleurisy, provided it be done
in the very beginning, and the Patient be strong and full of blood. Yet this is
not to lessen the blood, but only to give it vent; but before bleeding the
Patient is to sweat by taking some of the above specified Antidotes.

If the Patient have violent Headache, lay on his head Vine-leaves or fresh
Cabbage-leaves; and, if you have no Alablaster-salve, take two parts of
Vinegar, and one part of Oil of Olives (the Sea-blossoms Oil, and Elder-Vinegar
were better;) dip long rags of linen therein, and having well squeezed them
again, lay them lukewarm over the face and temples. Even Vinegar alone is good.
Of such Applications you may make many, of Acetum of Roses, Elder-blossoms, and
the like, with a little Camphir. The expressed Milk of Peaches is also very
effectual in this case.

If at the going off of this Distemper, a hot defluxion should fall into the
Eyes, take Camphir and infuse it in water, and often moisten the Eyes
therewith; and if it should be cold and windy weather, you will do well to keep
your self out of the open Air, and not to let this water dry up in your Eyes in
the cold wind.

In case of having lost thy hearing, take of thy own Urine, and with it wash
thy Ears within, but withal dry them very well, because that moisture is very
noxious to the Ears* And it often happens, that after the Hungarian Sickness
People grow deaf or hard of hearing. Others put the water of Carduus-benedictus
distilled with Wine into the Ears, or the Oil of bitter Almonds.

If thy Throat swell, or the Palate of thy Mouth be fallen down, gargarize thy
Throat with warm Milk, wherein Figgs have been boiled, or sweetened with Sugar.
The Flowers of Phyllirea or Mock-privet, which grows in the hedges, boiled, and
used for a gargarism, heals also a sore Throat. The same does the middle rind
of Oxyacantha or Haw-thorn if boiled, with a little Allom dissolved in the
Decoction. If you have the juice of Mulberries, mix a little honey of Roses
with it, and often take a little thereof. The roots of Sloes boiled in red
Wine, and the Mouth often washed therewith, is also very good.

If thou have the Squinancy, boil Scabious in Mead, and drink thereof warm,
when strained. Beat Turnips and fry them in Butter or Oil, and clap them in a
cloth round about thy Neck.

If thou cast up blood, take Mouse-ear, Ground Ivy, Cumfrey; boil them in half
Wine and half Water, or in Mead, and drink often of it. But if the Plague
reign not, open first a Vein.

For a violent Cough, boil white Turnips, well cleansed in common water; throw
away this first water, pour on other water, and in it let the Turnips boil till
they grow soft. Strain this water, sweeten it with Sugar, or infuse in it
Liquorice cut small; and drink of it mornings and evenings warm. Or make a
Decoction of St John's bread, and drink it, abstaining from all sour and salt
things,

The bleeding at the Nose is also incident to persons infected; which is no
good sign, though in sound persons it often frees from the Headache, and cools
the Liver. If this bleeding be too violent, clap Ice-cold water about the
Patients Neck, or let him put his Pudenda in cold Vinegar.

CHAP. V. Of the Inflammation of the Tongue, its rise, and concomitants,
together with the Remedies.
When the Tongue is inflamed, the whole Oesophagus or Weasand is inflamed
also, and this from beneath upward, because the inward fire sends up its smoke
all along, as it were, that chimney, which like soot sticks to it, drying and
blackning the same.

But there is another Inflammation, much more dangerous, which takes its rise
about the Heart, and therefore is called the Inflammation of the Heart, which
proceeds from the great inflammation of the orifice of the Stomach, situate
near the Heart, in which is inserted the sixth pair of Nerves, which makes the
said orifice very sensible of any pain. This part being seized by so great an
inflammation, which is venomous withal, it must in a manner harden, and
shrink; and this heat is of that extent, that, the inner Membrane of the
Stomach and that of the Tongue being one and the same, what befalls the
Stomach, the Tongue must needs be sensible of it. Whence it comes to pass, that
if the Gall overflows and passes into the Stomach, the Tongue presently finds
the bitterness of it; or if the Stomach be full of slime, or foul, or the like,
the Tongue is soon affected therewith.

There is another kind of Inflammation, by the Latins called Prunella alba.
This is of the same kind with the rest, but not of the same degree; for it is
not of so dry a nature, as the others are, but commonly is moist, yet overlays
all the Gums, the Throat, and the Weasand with such a tough white slime, like a
kind of leather, and so covers the Almonds with the same, that sometimes it can
hardly be removed even with Instruments, The Tongue is as if it were crusted
over with dough, the Gums like an Oven that by the heat of fire is burnt white,
the Almonds covered as 'twere with white leather, and the Palate of the Mouth
likewise. And in this case if the Patient will speak, he lalls and stutters,
his Tongue being burdened with a load of slime; or, if he make his Tongue
wagg, the slime spins out like a thread, and so invades the Teeth as if they
were laid over with varnish. And when this varnish on the Teeth grows black (as
I have often observed it to do) and dries on them, it is a mortal sign; of
which Hippocrates says, Quibus in febribus livores circum dentes nascuntur,
his fortes fiunt febres, 4. Aph. 53.

These are the three sorts of Inflammation; for which let us now seek out the
Remedies, beginning from the last, the White. This is not to be mastered by
gargarisms alone, but the hand must be employed also. Take therefore
Cotton-wool, or Flax, and wind it about a stick or rod, and dip this in
Vinegar, and rake his Throat and Gums therewith, yet taking care not to make it
raw; let him gargarise between, and wash well his Mouth with Water and Vinegar,
or Mulberry-juyce. Privet that grows in the hedges, or the middle rind of
Hawthorn, boiled in Water and a little Vinegar, then strained, with a little
Salarmoniack put into it, is in this case an excellent gargarism; but if there
be blisters upon the Tongue, or elsewhere, then take instead of Sal-armoniack a
little un-burnt Allom, and mix it therewith. If you can have the Juice of
Turnips, or the Juice of fresh House-leek, dissolve therein also a little
Sal-armoniack, and use it to wet the stick, wherewith thou cleansest the Throat
of the Patient; dipping it often therein, and carrying it about the Uvula or
Palate of the Mouth; and you will see lumps come away as big as Pease. The skin
is under this Prunella alba fair and red, but tender. Whilst thou art cleansing
the Patients Mouth, let him often gargarise with the Waters above-specified,
and he will clear his Mouth of the loosened lumps. If thou can get
Mulberry-juyce mixed with Honey of Roses, the Mouth will heal the better; for
upon this sort of Inflammation there usually follows a Putrefaction of the
Mouth; and in case thou perceivest any such thing, take Wood Sorrel, and the
abovesaid rind of Hawthorn, make a Decoction of it, and put in it a little
Allom, and often gargarise with it. Clean thy Teeth from the slime with Water
well sharpened with Vitriol.

The common Inflammation of the Mouth may be cured with frequent washing of the
Mouth, taking a gargarism made of House-leek, Lettice, Nightshade, or
Self-heal Water, mixing a little Honey of Roses and Mulberry-juyce with it. Of
this gargarism the Patient is also to swallow a little, thereby to moisten the
Throat.

Some take House-leek, and beat it, and put to a pound of it half an ounce of
Sal-armoniack, mixing it well together. And so they put it for some days in an
earthen pot glased under ground; then they distill of it a Water in Balneo or
in Sand: Which is excellent both to drink and to gargarise, though the
Sal-armoniack make it a little unpleasant.

But there is nothing better to allay this Inflammation than Niter; which is so
well known amongst Soldiers, that they are wont to give one another Gunpowder
to drink, which Powder performs this effect not upon the account of the Coals
or Brimstone, but the Saltpeter.

For this cause Experienced Physicians and Chirurgions endeavor to purify
Niter for this use, that it may have the greater effect; and this they do in
manner following:

They take of the purest Niter they can get, as much as they think fit; they
beat it to a fine powder, and melt it in a large Crucible, and whilst it boils
up and foameth, they pour into it a little powdered Sulphur, and so let it boil
together, till the blew Sulphur-flame cease; then they cast in more fresh
Sulphur: Which they repeat often, and then pour out the Niter into an earthen
vessel glased, making Lozenges of it, of which they put one pulverised into a
quart of limpid water, and so give the Patient to drink of it as much as he
needs to quench his thirst. Or they give of this purified Niter to their
Patients, laboring under this Inflammation, the quantity of a ducat or half a
ducat weight in Broth, or in Ptisan, till they find the Tongue cleared of its
slime.

The use of Saltpeter thus prepared removes also the Inflammation of the
Heart, especially if it be melted upon Lead, and then proceeded with as before.
For Lead is a considerable cooler, of which cooling quality the Niter, whilst
it is melting upon it, takes in not a little. Let then your Lead melt, and
when it is melted, dissolve the Niter upon it, and then, to purify it, cast
some Brimstone into it, as was said above, till it be cleansed from all
impurity; and then give of it to thy Patient two or three times a day,
according as need shall require.

Otherwise, take live Crafishes and fresh House-leek, beat them together in a
mortar, squeeze out the Juice, with it mix a little Sal-armoniack, or a pretty
deal of thy prepared Niter; make a Potion of it, and give of it even cold to
thy Patient, repeating this several times, every eight or ten hours once,
according as you shall see occasion.

Or, take fresh Lard, (if it be salted, draw it through hot water to unsalt
it,) and cut a slice of it two fingers large, and of the thickness of a knives
back; put this into the Mouth of thy Patient, it is an excellent remedy against
this Inflammation; of which I shall give the reason hereafter. I have seen
wonders done with it. But if thy Patient do rave, then fasten this slice of
Lard with a thread and needle to his shirt or doublet, lest he swallow it. Or
take fresh Butter, and put it in cold water, and of it give thy Patient at a
time the quantity of a haselnut to hold it upon his Tongue, and let it melt
there; which will keep the Tongue always moist. And if thou work among this
Butter some of thy prepared Niter, it has a wonderful effect, though the taste
be not pleasant.

I promised above to explain the Reason of the Cure of these Inflammations.
When you take a gargarism of the Waters of Nightshade, Wood Sorrel,
Knot-grass, Endive, House-leek, and the like, mingled with Vinegar, you do
well, but this is not enough; the reason is: If you wet a piece of Leather, you
make it indeed limber, but when it comes to be dry, it grows hard and shrinks;
except you grease it over with some fatty matter, and then it will remain
smooth. So it is with the Tongue; though it be made clean with gargarisms, yet
will it become again rough and untoward, unless some fatness be used: For which
cause I have directed to use Lard, or Butter mixed with Niter.

If the Almonds be swelled, thou must abstain from all sour things, and prepare
a gargarism of Figgs, St. John's Bread, Mallows-flowers, Liquorice, Elder-canes,
mixing with it some Rose-honey or Juice of Walnuts, or the Rob Diamorom,
gargling often with it, seeing that this symptom is a dangerous thing; for when
the Throat swells of it, few Patients do escape death, especially if it be a
Pestilential Squinancy. And in case there appear any Tumor outwardly, take
fine Flower, Milk and Saffron, making a Pulse of it, and, to keep it from
growing hard, mix with it Althea-salve, or Houndstongue-salve, the Oil of blew
Violets, Mullein, white Lillies, Camomile, or the like, adding a little Oil of
Scorpions to it, and applying this outwardly.

Make also a Scraper of Alder-wood, if it may be had; if not, other wood will
serve, though Alder be best. Throw it into cold water, and let it lie there,
using it as often as there is need; yet take heed of making thy Tongue sore or
raw.

CHAP. VI. Of Fevers, Belly-aches, Tumors of the Belly, Yellow Jaundise and
Distempers of the Liver.
IN Camps there is nothing more frequent than Fevers of the Stomach, arising
from ill diet, which Soldiers are often put to for want of better, eating what
they can get, Cheese, Herbs, Flesh half boiled, stale and musty Bread and the
like. Hence is gathered a morbifick matter in the Stomach, which causes
putrefaction, and consequently Stomack-feavers.

In this case thou art first to purge: And for that purpose make use of the
Pulvis solutivus de tribus, recommended above, taking the weight of a ducat or
a ducat and an half, in warm broth, and fasting two or three hours after it.
Or fetch from the Apothecary of the Tabulatum Diaturbith cum Rhubarbaro, or the
Diaphoenicon in tabulis, taking half an ounce at a time, and keeping thy
Chamber. Or, infuse Sena-leaves in Wormwood-wine, and drink a small glass-full
of it an hour before thy breakfast: This will also serve very well, especially
if some Carduus benedictus have also been fermented in the Wormwood-wine.

If thou art troubled with Gripings or Inflation of the Belly, take of Zedoar,
or Angelica-roots, or Orange-peels, cut them small, and take at a time the
weight of a ducat in hot broth. If the Inflation be much, take in the morning
the quantity of a hasel-nut of Mithridate, fasting an hour after it; and if the
pains of thy Belly prevail, make a Decoction of Wormwood in Wine, and drink of
it as hot as thou can; this will allay the pains and give thee some stools.
Mean time abstain from raw Fruit, and Beer, Milk, Herbs; and such like.

If thou art swollen, take half a dram of Rubarb, and about the same quantity
or a little less of Mechocan; reduce it to powder, and take it in
Wormwood-wine, or warm broth, in the morning fasting, and eat nothing within
an hour or two after. Be careful to take down some Treacle in the morning
fasting; but you are first to be purged. Otherwise make a Decoction of the
Roots of Elecampane and Pimpernel, or Swallow-wort, in Wine, and drink a warm
draught of it mornings; it will provoke Urine. If thou can bear amongst it
Wormwood, Carduus benedictus, or Centory, add them in the Decoction, and it is
a good potion for the Liver.

An Herb, called by the Latins Eupatoriam Avicennae, in English (I think)
Common Hemp-Agrimony, has a great operation in swelled People, drinking of the
Decoction thereof, made in Wine. Besides, use in this case Parsley and
Smallage-roots in thy meat. Boil Horseradish, and drink of the Decoction warm
in the morning. Thy ordinary drink is to be a water, in which has been boiled
a good quantity of Cummin, Annis or Fennel. You may also now and then drink a
little Wine, swelled People having no great heat in them.

From these obstructions of the Liver and Mesaraic Veins comes difficulty of
Breathing and a dry Cough, which occasions the Inflation of the Belly, and
helps to entertain the crudities and indigestions: Mean time there uses to
follow upon this the Yellow Jaundise. For this, take the Roots of Cyclamen or
Sow-bread, reduce them to powder, and take the weight of half a ducat in Mead,
or Wine mixed with a little Honey, sweating upon it; and you shall find your
sheets discolored of a yellowish color. In the same manner make use of the
Seed of Aquileja, or Columbine. I have reduced these three to powder, and mixed
them together, and given of it the weight of a ducat to sweat; which has
proved very successful. Orange-peels used in like manner, do also much good in
this case. The bitter Centory boiled in Mead, and a good draught drank of it
warm in the morning, is also very good. Likewise a Decoction of the white
Horehound and Cichory-roots is also used to good purpose in this case. These
things expel also Worms, if any do lodge within thee; for which may also be
used the Soldiers Pills of Aloe, called Marocostinae. In this case Vinegar of
Squills is also an excellent remedy, taking of it in the morning early a
spoonful, two or three, and exercising after it. It will open the Breast, and
make you expectorate phlegm and slime in abundance.

If you be troubled with Wind and Gripings of the Guts, be careful to have your
Body soluble. Boil Calamus, cut small, in broth, drink of it hot, putting a
little Angelica, or Masterwort. Do this mornings and evenings, and beware of
drinking cold, and abstain from all Milk, keeping your self very warm,
especially about the Feet, which you will do well to bath with a Decoction made
of Asarabacca, Camomile, wild Trefoil, wild Marierom, wild Thyme, putting a
little Salt into it. For your drink, boil Cummin, Annis or Fennel in water; and
now and then a glass of wine may do well.

These Gripings may also be cured with drinking very bitter Wormwood-wine, as
hot as you can endure it. This is also opening. If you boil Elecampane, and
Orange-peels with the Wormwood, it will have the greater effect. And if you add
to it Allium Sylvestre (Crow-Garlick) you have an excellent Medicine for this
purpose. This I have used my self, and found present relief from it, when in a
very hard Winter upon a Journey I was taken with these Gripings. It Is indeed a
very unpleasant potion, exceeding bitter, especially being to be drunk hot; but
the good effects will make amends for that. If the pains should not cease after
all this, mix with it the quantity of a hasel-nut of Treacle or Mithridate, and
so drink it off together.

If you can get Malvasy, mix a little Oil of Olives with it, and drink of it
warm. Oil of sweet Almonds would be better, one half of that and the other of
Malvasy; though these things perhaps will not so easily be had in a Camp. Fresh
Butter may serve instead of Oil.

Else make a Decoction of Juniper Berries, or Laurel-berries, and Elecampane in
strong Wine, and drink a good draught of it mornings and evenings. Or reduce
the Herb Carduus benedictus to powder, and drink its weight of a ducat in warm
Malvasy or other strong Wine; it will remove the Gripings, especially if you
mix with it a little Zedoary pulverised.

For your Meat, take Larks, if they chance to be in season, draw them, and fill
their bellies with Garlic, and so roast and eat them.

Make a Decoction of Burnet, or of Master-wort, and Laurel-berries, in Beer,
strain it, and melt a little Butter in it, adding a little Pepper, and so drink
of it hot.

For an outward Application, take the Oil of Rue and Wormwood, dip Cotton into
it, and put it warm to thy Navil. Or beat Onions, and fry them in Dill or
Camomile-Oyl, wrap it up in a linen Cloth, and apply it to thy Belly, where
the pain is most violent, refreshing it often.

The Oil of Laurel-berries, mixing a little Juniper-berry-oyl or Nutmeg-oyl
with it, may be used with great benefit, anointing the Navil therewith, and
afterward put to the Navil a warm dry bag filled with Bran and
Camomile-blossoms. Or fry Cow Dung in the Oil of Dill, or of Camomile, or of
white Lillies, and apply it thus to thy Navil, keeping thy self, and especially
thy Legs, very warm.

If you perceive any Hydropical Distemper in you, make a Decoction of Wormwood
and Juniper Berries in Wine, drink every morning a warm draught of it fasting.
You may also to very good purpose boil with it Swallow-wort, Burnet, or Succory
roots, adding also to it some Annis or Fennel-seed. But it will be requisite
first of all to purge with Mechoacan and Rhubarb; and now and then to repeat
this purgation. Abstain from Milk, Beer, Fruit, and all raw and obstructing
food. If you knew how to use Elder, you would have an excellent Purge to free
your Body from the Hydropical water, because the Juice of the Roots of Elder
purges Hydropical Persons exceedingly: But it is not so safe to use it, unless
you do it with great caution, because a very little of it taken inwardly
purges both by stool and vomit, like Antimony. Half a nutshel full may
suffice. The like effect you will find in Elder-buds boiled, and then dressed with
Oil and Vinegar like a Salad, eating a very little of it. But I advise you not
to use too much of it; else it will cast you into great faintness. The Juice of
the Roots of blew Lillies has the like virtue, but is likewise to be used with
great discretion.

Otherwise take Earthworms, and having washed them clean in Wine, reduce them
to powder, and take of it for some mornings the weight of half a dram in warm
Broth or Wine, mixing a little Rhubarb with it.

The Swelling of your Legs may be removed by heating some Tiles and sprinkling
them with Wine, and clapping them about your Legs to make them sweat. For a
swelled Groin, take warm Milk, wherein Calamus Aromaticus has been boiled, and
sweeten it well with Sugar, and apply it.

CHAP. VII. Of all sorts of Fluxes; as also the Tenasmus, or vain endeavor of
going to stool; and the Hemorrhoid or Riles, and Marisca's or sore Fundaments.
IN Wars and Camps, Bloody and other Fluxes are very frequent, caused by an
irregular and ill diet; and these Distempers, especially the Bloody Flux, carry
away abundance of Men. Where it is to be noted, that the Bloody Flux is
infectious, and very catching.

Common Fluxes and Loosenesses may easily be cured. Amongst other Remedies,
take burnt Hartshorn, and take it often in Broth; or pulverise
Medlar-kernels, and take of the powder in Broth likewise. Also an Electuary
made of Quinces and Sloes will cure them. The same does Nutmeg, and the Roots
of Tormentil, Snakeweed, or the Roots of Cinquefoil, baked in Eggs, and eaten.
Likewise the Seed of Dock, broad Plantain; item Terra Sigillata, or Bolus
Armenus, and Wheaten-bread coming hot out of the oven, and dipped in red Wine,
and eaten. Again, Mastick pulverised, and put into Almon-milk, red Wine, or
Broth, the weight of a dram, is good for such a Looseness especially as
comes from indigestion; adding a little Nutmeg or Galingal to it. Oaken-leaves
also, or the Rinds of Pear Trees, with a little Mace boiled in Wine, and drunk,
cures common Fluxes. Again, Bursa Pastoris (Shepherds-Purse) boiled in
Steel-water with a little Coriander, and drunk, is also very good; and so are
Crafishes boiled in Vinegar, and the scales beaten to powder, taking a dram
of it mornings and evenings, either in red Wine, or in Broth wherein red-hot
Steel has been several times quenched. Hawes also boiled, and made into a
thick Electuary, and strained, is beneficial, if taken in the morning fasting,
and an hour or so before supper, the quantity of a Walnut.

Besides, take new Milk with its Cream on it, quench therein diverse times
red-hot Pebble-stones, so that the Milk may grow hot of it; then mix with it
two or three well-beaten Yolks of Eggs, two ounces of Sugar, melting in it an
ounce and an halt of the Suet of a Deer or Stagg, and about half an ounce of
Album-graecum, using it for a Clyster, which cleanses and heals the Guts,
and allays the sharpness of the Blood and other corrosive humors, that annoy
the Bowels.

But take heed of not stopping too suddenly the Bloody Flux, or any other
Laske; for if you do, the annoyance will remain in the Body, and cause
Impostumes, Difficulty of breathing, and other dangerous Distempers. Wherefore
consult with thy strength, and if that be considerable, make not too much have;
yet keep a bridle upon it, so as to be able to stop it when there is need. Mean
time, if it be without a Fever or heat, you may do much with new Milk, drinking
it also mornings and evenings warm, some red-hot Stones having been quenched
therein, and some Sugar mixed with it, to prevent curdling in your Stomach.
This Medicine was known to the famous Grecian Physicians, Aetius, Alexander
Trallianus, and Galenus himself, l. 10. de Simpl. Med. facult. If you add a
little Album-graecum to it, 'twill be the better. I have my self done much good
with thus prepared Milk, but then there must be no Fever; which if there be,
you will easily perceive it by a great thirst, quick pulse, hot hands, and little
sleep, etc. For, Bloody Fluxes are not wont to be accompanied with shaking
Fevers, but only with hot fits, which spend more of the Patients strength in an
hour, than shaking Agues in several days; which is to be well heeded.

Eggs boiled hard in Vinegar, and given to the Patient, that is troubled either
with the Bloody or any other Flux, it will be stopped.

The Roots of Tormentil, or of Snake-weed pulverised, and this powder drunk in
a convenient vehicle, the weight of a dram, is one of the most approved
remedies against these Fluxes; Tormentil-roots being very powerful not only to
stop them, but also to take away their carching malignity.

The Moss that grows on wild Rose-shrubs, reduced to powder, and taken in Wine,
wherein have been boiled the husks of Acorns; is an approved remedy in this
case.

Scrape red Lead or Rudle, such as Carpenters mark their lines with, put it
into Wine or Broth, wherein has been boiled the broader kind of Plantain and
Tormentil-roots; or take it in an Egg.

Hares-blood dried, and taken inwardly, is also a tried Medicine in this
Distemper. Item, open a new-laid Egg, take out the white, and fill it up with
Nutmeg, or the pulverised root of Tormentil or of Snake-weed, and give it the
Patient to eat; or put into it some pulverised Boodstone, and it will do good.

I have used with good success the Seed of the broader Plantain, grossly beaten,
and roasted in an Egg, against the Flux; and I know it also to have been
beneficially used against the Bloody Flux.

Take of Mummy, a little Mastic, Bol Armeniac, Sanguis Draconis, mix them
together, and make a powder of them, and take of it in a convenient liquor, the
weight of a dram, once or twice a day.

Take Rye-biscuit, and boil it in water with Coriander and the roots of
Tormentil or of Cranes-bill; quench some Steel in it once or twice, and give of
it to the Patient to drink.

Make a Decoction of Shepherds-purse and Meadow-sweet, in water and wine, and
now and then drink of it.

Burn live Crasishes in an earthen Pipkin well-closed, until they be so burnt
as to be reduced to powder; of which give to the Patient mornings and evenings
a thimble-full or two in a convenient liquor.

A dried Liver of a sucking Lamb, or of any other such Animal, is very good in
this case, provided such a Liver, before it is dried, be boiled in Vinegar. Let
the Patient take a dram of it twice a day. Also the Blood of a Lamb, or of a
Hind, both dried, will have here a good effect.

Take a Pigeon, Wood-cock, or Partridge, and having drawn any of them, fill
them with Mastic and a little Nutmeg, and so roast them on a spit, and whilst
they are rosting, baste them with red wine, and so let them roast till they grow
so hard as will make them pulverable; then reduce them or any of them to
powder, and take a spoonful of it at a time in warm broth.

The highest Experiment in this case is Crocus Martis, taken in the Juice of
the broader kind of Plantain, or in a Pulse of red Beans, or Rice-broath; the
dose is half a dram. But when the pain is very great, you may then add to it
some opiat Medicine, as of the Trochisques de Garabe, or one only grain of
Laudanum Opiatum. And give the Patient now and then a little new-made Treacle,
or mix with it a few grains of the Confection of Archigenes; for of such
Medicaments a Field-Apotheque is not wont to be destitute.

For the Patients ordinary drink, boil water, and in it Coriander, dried Sloes,
dried slices of Quinces, burnt Hartshorn, Mastic, Nutmeg, or any one of these;
putting to it some of the roots of Snake-weed, Tormentil, or such like
adstringent roots. Of this water the Patient may drink according as his
necessity shall require.

The red Juice of Quinces, boiled up without Sugar, is also much to be
commended in this case, for strengthening the bowels, two or three spoonfuls of
it being taken at a time, and that twice a day.

In many places a drink is made of Sloes, Pilosella or Mouse-ear, and
Juniper Berries, infusing them all in common water, and letting them ferment
together. This yields a pleasant acid drink, allaying the violence of the Flux,
and quenching thirst withal.

The Rich may make Granat or Quince-wine. But I have here undertaken to deliver
such things, as are parable and cheap for the poor common Soldier.

I am sorry, that in the Field there is no convenience of administering
Clysters: For, though I prescribe none without great necessity; yet Clysters
being of great benefit in Diseases of the bowels; they being to them like
Plasters, I cannot but recommend in this Distemper Clysters of Milk, wherein
Pebble-stones have been several times quenched, mixing a little of the melted
suet of a Stag or Hind, without any oil or other fat. I remember, I had once a
Patient of quality, that had about an hundred stools within twenty four hours,
who by the use of such Clysters, once or twice applied, was fully restored. The
cause whereof is, that the Milk washes the bowels, and clears them of the sharp
humors that annoy them; moreover, it is healing and repairing, by reason of the
Pebbles quenched therein. The Sugar is abstersive, and helps to clean the
injured places. The Far sticks to the parts annoyed, to defend them from being
further hurt by the subsequent humors, which running down over it, can find no
stay there, and consequently cause no more hurt to those parts.

Yet must you not put in any greasy Fat, or any Oil of Olives, because they
hinder healing; and all Oil, except that of Linseed, Poppies, Hemp and Almonds,
is very sharp; and you will find, that if any drop of Oil of Olives should
chance to fall into your eye, no Juice of Orenges or Limons is so strong as to
exceed the acrimony of that Oil. But of this Oil more will be said in the next
Chapter, to which I therefore refer you. If you would have your Clyster yet
milder and more sanative, you may beat a yolk or two of new-laid Eggs, and mix
them with it; though I have contented my self with the Ingredients before
mentioned, and found great benefit thereby. Else you may in this case use for a
Clyster the Cremor hordei, mixed with yolks of Eggs beaten in it; which is also
very good to wash out the bowels.

Here is no convenience of making much use of Apothecary-shops; else many
things might be prescribed to lay upon the belly and the navil, as also diverse
fermentations, and stomachical unguents. You may therefore content your self
with those plain and easily parable means, already delivered, and be thankful
to God for them.

But then you are also to think upon means to obviate Symptoms of this
Distemper, and particularly Drought, which is wont very much to torment people
in this Disease. It Is true, Acid things do quench thirst, but they cannot be
used boldly, and therefore you must use them with great discretion and
wariness. And as for sweet things, they usually increase thirst, and do easily
corrupt, and turn into gall. Wherefore give to the Patient preserved Currants;
or, if fresh ones be in season, mix a quantity of them with Honey or Sugar, and
give him of it to eat upon white-Bread and Butter. Or plump dried
Black-cherries, or dried Damascene-prunes, in half Wine and half Water, and let
him hold and squeeze them in his mouth. Or, if you can, mingle some Almond-milk
with Chalybeat-water, and let him drink thereof; and this is both meat and
drink. Or let him drink water, wherein Coriander and roots of Tormentil have
been boiled. Or boil in water dried slices of Quinces, roots of Bistorta or
Snake-weed, and burnt Hartshorn, put into it a tosted crust of Rye-bread
rubbed with Nutmeg, but let it not lie in it above a quarter of an hour, lest
the water should thicken and become viscous. Marmelat also of Quinces,
Black-cherries, and Sloes, is proper in this case, giving the Patient a slice
of it to hold upon his tongue, and so to swallow it down.

Further, you must learn how to remedy a Tenasmus, which is more irksome to the
Patient, and occasions more trouble to the Physician, than the Bloody Flux it
self, since it night and day painfully provokes the poor Patient to go to
stool, and yet to no purpose. For this I have used many remedies, but found
almost nothing more beneficial, than Fomentations of this nature following:
Take Potentilla (wild Tansie Silver-weed) Knotgrass, Mullein, and Oak-leaves,
of each as much as you please, put them into two linen bags, and let them boil
in Smiths-water, wherein much Iron has been quenched: Squeeze out these bags
between two boards, and let them be held alternately to the anus, as hot as can
be endured. Black Pitch, such as is found on Larch and Fir-trees, put upon a
heated fire-shovel, and the fundament held over it, is also a good remedy; and
so is Turpentine, used after the same manner.

Again, take a black well-burnt Brick out of the hearth, heat it thoroughly,
and wet it with sharp Vinegar, and wrap it about with a linen cloth, and let
the Patient sit on it as hot as he can endure it. This was the Experiment and
Remedy of old Aetius; but he reduced the Brick to powder, and by boiling it in
Vinegar, reduced it to a pulse, and so put it into a linen rag, and applied it
to the fundament. You may choose which you please of the two.

Milk-Clysters, such as above prescribed, would also be good, but that it is not
safe with Clyster-pipes to vex the anus, which is already sore enough. Yet you
may give a Suppository of Deers-suet mixed with some Oil of Mullein. And the
gray Diapompholox, or the white Camphire-unguent, or the like, mixed with it,
would not be improper in this case.

If there be a Falling down of the fundament, then let it often take in the
fumes of the abovementioned Herbs, adding to them the beaten stalks of
Sloe-shrubs, and those of red Roses, as also Mouse-ear, and Mugwort. The outer
bark of Elder, and of Shepherds-purse, does also well with it. But above all
things keep the Patient warm, and let by no means any of the abovesaid steams
grow cold on the sore part.

Make also a Decoction of Garlic, and pour it hot into your close-stool, let
the Patient sit upon it, to receive the hot steams. Besides, put some burnt
Hartshorn in a linen cloth, and so strew it upon the fundament, by little and
little to draw it up. Or heat an Oaken-board very well, and cover it over with
Stags-suet, and let the Patient sit upon it whilst it is hot. Put Colophonium or
the Rosin of Pine Tree upon a heated Iron, and let the Patient by holding his
fundament over it take in the steams thereof. Anoint also the part with Butter,
in which Onions have been boiled; and strew upon it Album-graecum very finely
pulverised. You may also make a Salve of Ceruse, Bol Armeniack, Dragons-blood,
Stags-suet, Bloodstone, Oil of Myrrh, or Butter in which first has been boiled
broad Plantain, Mullein, or wild Tansie Silver-weed; and with this anoint the
fundament.

As for the Marisca's, which do torment Men especially, they may be cured with
Oil of Eggs, Salve of red Hounds-tongue, as also with the Unguentum Populeum,
or with Butter stirred up and down in a Leaden Mortar, till it turn gray or
blackish. Let the Patient drink also of Scrophularia or Fig-wort, infused in
his drink, this being a specific for that evil. Also the Oil of Mullein,
Elder-blossoms, Water-lilly, and White-lillies, is an excellent remedy for it,
a rag dipped therein being laid upon the part affected. To use scarifying on
the lower part of the backbone, is also very good, though it be very painful.

If the Hoemorrhoid-vein bleed in a convenient time, and do not over-bleed, it
is an exceeding good thing, and preserves from many Diseases, as the
Inflammation of the Lungs, Stitches of the sides, the Leprosy, Melancholy,
Quartans, and the like. If the same vein should bleed in one that is mad, or
disturbed in his mind, or in one that is troubled with the Inflammation of the
Kidneys, these Distempers would thereby be allayed. But if it should bleed too
often and too violently, it weakens much, causes a pale color and the
Dropsy. My Colleagues and I have often opened it by Leeches, and thereby found
great benefit. But in case it should exceed in bleeding, you must deal with it
as you do with the Bloody Flux, and give to the Patient Terra Sigillata, Bol
Armeniack, burnt Hartshorn, and the like adstringent things. If you can get
some teeth of the Hippo-potamus, rasp it into powder, and drink some of it in
red or white wine; it stops all bleeding, of the nose, mouth, guts, fundament,
hoemorrhoids, the matrix, especially the bleeding of Women after delivery.

Here is also very useful the expressed Juice of Plantain, Shepherds-purse, and
of the tender leaves of Rasberries, or Brambles, infused in wine and drunk.

CHAP. VIII. Of Pestilential Boyls, Ulcers, Carbuncles, and other venomous
Sores.
ABove I have prescribed some, both Preservative and Curative, Medicines
against the Plague, reserving for this place the Chirurgical means, to be used
against that Distemper, thinking it best to discourse of them together in a
place apart.

Concerning then the Pestilential Bubo's and Sores, that rise behind the Ears,
under the Arms, and about the Groin, the Cure of them consists chiefly in this,
that they be ripened with speed; for which end are to be employed mere
emollient and suppurating things. Yet are you to know to distinguish between
Boyls, there being some of them that are not venomous, especially in young
people; and they may be hereby discerned, that at the touch they cause no pain,
whereas the Pestilential ones are very painful; which are also discovered by
the accompanying venomous Fever, and other pernicious Symptoms. And of these
latter great care must be had to bring them out, and to a speedy maturation,
because those that lie deep are very dangerous.

Some there have been, that have used Scarification, and even Vesicatories,
thereby thinking to fetch out the venom. Others have pierced the Sores through,
about a hands breadth beneath the Sores, putting the root of black Helebore
into them, thereby to draw out the venomous matter. But such means have rather
irritated the evil, caused great pains, and put the Patient to greater danger.

Wherefore I judge nothing safer and better, than, as I was intimating, to use
Emollients. Take then of the common Diachylon, and lay it upon the envenomed
Boyls; and besides make a pulse of these herbs, viz. of Camomile, Mallows,
Melilot, Dill, Line-seed, Fenu-greek, Althaea, the roots of White Lillies, as
also salve of Althaea, Oil of Camomile and Lillies, mixing a little Saffron
with it, and some Oly of Scorpions. Of this pulse make some warm, and lay it
over the Diachylon upon the Sore.

Or, boil Wheaten-bread in the broth of Mallows and Camomile, till it grow
soft, then saffron it over, and mix March-mallows-salve with it, and lay it on.
Or make a Plaster of Figgs and roasted Onions; or, make a pulse of
Bread-leaven, Honey, yolks of Eggs, and the juice of Onions, adding a little
Turpentine to it, and so lay it on.

If the mere common Diachylon be not sufficient, use the Plaster Diachylon cum
gummis or de Mucilaginibus, or mix a Melilot-plaister with the common
Diachylon, make a pulse of it with Oil of Lillies, mixing a little Oil of
Scorpions with it, and so lay it on.

In laying on of Treacle, I have this consideration, that Treacle hinders
putrefaction, which is the thing here most of all desired, because all
maturation, which here is a reducing the Sore to suppuration, is a kind of
putrefaction.

Here also the Plaster called Basilicon is of good use; likewise the Ceratum
Oesipum Philagrii and Mesuae, which Cerata are made of Gummi Ammoniac,
Bdellium, Turpentine, liquid Styrax, Goose-grease, Marrow of Cows-bones and
Oesipum, and a little Saffron. Some take a dried Toad, and lay it upon the
boil, to draw out the venom.

Now when the Sores are softened and ripe, and yet break not of themselves, they
are to be opened with a lancet; and if you have to do with Persons so delicate
that they cannot endure a lancet, you may make use of the Lapis Septicus or
Corrosive-stone, which opens without pain, but is more slow. Mean time beware
of opening the Sores too soon; for then they will turn to a hard swelling,
which the Patient will not wear off whilst he lives.

There are also some Plague-sores that never break, but wear away by sweat. Yet
if they should leave behind some hardness, you may, when the danger is past and
the sickness overcome, make use of some fomentations of Melilot, Camomile,
March-mallows, Mullein and such like: You may also take of the Gum, called
Tacamahaca, and mix with it a Plaster of Melilot or Diachylon, and lay it on.

The Sores being opened, they must be kept open with small pellets, (called by
the Germans, Quellmaisseln,) dipped in a Salve made for this purpose out of fresh
Butter, Yolks of Eggs, and Turpentine, well mixed together cold.

But it happens sometimes, that such Bubo's, by reason of the venomous matter,
do eat in, or grow fistulous, or make matter-baggs, in which the matter
settles. In this case you must use the Unguentum fuscum, Apostolicum, or the
Aegyptiacum: Or make the following water, to be squirted into such Sores;
namely of Celondine, Scordium or Water-germander, Carduus-benedictus, Centory,
or the like Herbs, together with Tormentil and Whitlow-grass; all boiled in
wine. If the Sores be very ill, you may boil with it some quick Brimstone, and
Myrrh, and, if need be, mix with it a little fine Verdigrease. Or, take Honey
four ounces and an half, a quarter of an ounce of Aloes Epatica, a dram of
Salt, an ounce and a half of Scordium, mix all well together, and keep it for
use; and when you have occasion for any of it, then dissolve it in wine, and
spirt it in. Mean time, enlarge the opening of the Boyls with the aforesaid
pellets, that so the matter may have vent enough, and come away without any
impediment.

The Unguent of Ulysses Aldrovandus is also very good, for the clearing of such
Sores; and it is made of Oil of Roses, the Juice of broad Plantain,
sharp-pointed Dock, Centory, and Nightshade, with a little Litharge, burnt
Lead, and prepared Camphir. Instead of the Juice of Nightshade you may take
that of Cumfry.

As for the Sores called Anthraces, and those they call Carbuncles, great care
must be taken to break them soon, and to heal them slowly, that so the
poisonous matter may all come away. They ripen and break soonest by fatty (but
not hot) Plasters and Unguents; especially such as are made of butter, leaven,
yolks of Eggs and Honey; or if you mix together Turpentine, Unguentum Populeum,
or Rose-salve mixed with yolks of Eggs, or the Unguentum Anodynum mixed with the
Ointment of Hounds-tongue, and laid on it. It must be often refreshed, because
such hot Sores and Ulcers, before they break, do so draw, waste, and, as
'twere, lick up those fatnesses, that sometimes of the plasters, that have
lain on them, there remains nothing but the bare ragg. The Emplastrum
Basilicon, or the common yellow drawing plaster, is here the most useful.

You must also surround the Anthrax with good defensives; for if it invade the
neighboring part never so little, it will soon make a large halo or circle,
which will at length separate from the sound, and fall away like an escarre.
For such defensives make use of Album Camphoratum, or the Unguentum de
Liquiritia, known by our people under the name of Dr. Mindererus his
Licorish-ointment. Item the Unguentum de Lithargyro; or the Unguentum Jovis,
prepared of fresh Butter, with Thlaspiminus, or Bowyers Mustard, (otherwise
Narrow-leaved wild Cresses,) Cranes-bill, Elder, Poppy, Vervain, and some
shaved Licorish. Some take nothing but Vervain and the fresh leaves of Henbane,
beaten together, and the Juice strained, and so used. Of this Ointment you may
make much with confidence; for it will do you very good service in
Inflammations, especially in the case of the swelling of the groins.

Amongst the approved Medicines for this purpose, may deservedly be reckoned
the plaster made of Soot; which is thus to be prepared: Take of the finest
Chimney-soot one ounce and a quarter; of Leaven, Turpentine and fresh Butter,
ana one ounce; of Venetian Soap an ounce and a half; two yolks of Eggs; of
Treacle and Mithridate, ana a quarter of an ounce: Beat all these together in a
mortar; and so reduce it to a paste, and then use it plaister-wise.

When the Anthrax or the Carbuncle is broken, you must then handle it very
gently and discreetly; using only the above described Egg-salve, putting it
into the opening, and covering the Sore only with the common yellow drawing
plaster, or the plaster prepared of Oil, Wax, and Rosin, or Turpentine. Let
the matter work out well, and when you are sure that it is very clean, and have
a mind to consolidate it, make only use of Triapharm^con* i^ vulgarly called
the brown Diachylon; you may besides put into it some of the Unguentum de
Tutia, and that of the Diapompholox and one of the plasters of them upon it.
The Ulme-plaister also, made of Oil and Ceruse, heals also very well. But be
very careful, lest any of the matter remain lurking in the Ulcer. If here and
there any should be found yet remaining, as often happens, then make use of the
Emplastrum Apostolorum. But if you can prepare the Diapalma, otherwise called
Diacalcithros, make use of that. I am wont to call it the Fistula-plaister,
because it does not easily suffer Fistula's to stink, but keeps them clean and
sweet. Such a plaster is also that, which is called Isis, to be found in
Galen, and performing the same thing. They are both to be found in the Augustan
Dispensatory, together with the way of preparing them.

Now what concerns Old Sores, which many are troubled with, in their Legs
especially, because the humors of the body usually settle there; you must above
all things be careful to keep them clean, and to that end wash them, at least
once a day, with your own urine: Or boil Carduus-benedictus, Egrimony,
Plantain, and roots of Tormentil, in half small mead and half wine, and wash
the Ulcer with it, as often as you dress it. Among the common plasters for
such evils is the brawn Diachylum one of the best. Else you may prepare this
Ointment which follows: Take the middle rind of Elder, and St. John's Wort, boil
them in oil, putting a little wine to it, and so let it boil up till the wine
be boiled away; then take it off from the fire, and let it cool; this done,
stir a little Turpentine amongst it, and a yolk or two of Eggs, according as
you make a greater or lesser quantity; mixing with it a little Alum, and
Vitriol, (the white is the best) stir all well together, and apply it to the
Ulcer, and make a bandage, and cover it as usually. For a good
Drawing-plaister, take Rosin, Bee-wax and Oyl-olive; the quantity of the Rosin
must be but the half of the Wax: Let them melt together, and stir amongst it
some Tartar exquisitly powdered. Use not much of fatty things to such Ulcers. I
have had under my care such Ulcers, that were to be healed with only dry
things, as with strewing in of Crocus Martis, and the red Earth of Vitriol, of
which hereafter.

For this reason the ancient Physicians and Chirurgions invented a dry Stone,
which they kept so secret, that they called it Lapis Philosophorum; which is
easily made, as follows: Take Alum, Hungarian Vitriol, of each one pound;
beat them to powder, and mix them well together; then put all into a glased
earthen pot, and pour upon it two quarts of water, boil them together, and stir
them continually with a Spatula, taking off the scurn: When it is boiled in, put
to it an ounce of Bolus Armenus, an ounce and a half of Ceruse, a quarter of an
ounce of Camphir, all finely powdered, stirring it well about; lastly put it to
a quart of sharp Vinegar, and boil all together to a stony consistence; which
reduce to powder, and of it strew a little into the Ulcer, or let some of it
dissolve in a convenient liquor, and wash the Ulcer therewith, or dip some
linen rags in it, and lay it over the place.

It Is also prepared this way: Take green and white Vitriol, of each a dram;
of Lapis calaminaris, Ceruse, Bol Armeniac, of each two ounces and a half; of
Sal Ammoniac an ounce. Beat them all to powder, put them in an earthen pot,
mingle and stir them together in Vinegar, to be a thick pulse; then put your
pot upon a hot charcoal-fire, to let it grow red hot, so as that the matter be
reduced to a stony consistence; of which dissolve about half an ounce in half a
pint of water, dip linen rags into it, and put it twice a day upon the Ulcer.
It Is also very good for purulent Breasts.

I was speaking above of Lavements: These you may prepare of all sorts of
Wound-herbs, by boiling Consound, Bugle, Fluellin, Ground Ivy, Yarrow,
Snake-weed, Avens, Arsmare; you may also, against putrefaction and the settling
of purulent matter, mix sometimes a little Myrrh, or Aloes Epatica,
Frankincense, Mastick, quick Brimstone, Camphir, Niter, Alum, Vitriol, or the
like. Nor is it need to bind your self to this or that precisely, but you may
take such of them as you can get.

I have a peculiar Ulcer-salve, which I call Unguentum Decameron, being made of
ten sorts of Juices. Of these the principal is the Juice of Persicaria,
(Arsmart;) to which are added the Juices of Groundsel, Tobacco, Yarrow,
sharp-pointed Dock, Cranes-bill, broad and pointed Plantain, Centory, St.
John's Wort, and Celondine. These Juices must be well strained, and then kept
for some days in glasses or glased vessels to settle; and then very gently pour
off the clear from the sediment. Which done, boil them with fresh butter, and
some good Licorish newly scraped, as also some Tormentil and Cumfrey, adding a
little red Hounds-tongue salve and Oil of Myrrh, and Deer-suet: Let all be
boiled together, till the cracking cease, and the Juice be boiled in. Then
strain it through a linen cloth, and add to it some Venice-Turpentine, Gum
Elemi and a little Beeswax, both the latter melted each a part. Of the Wax
there needs no more than to bring the Salve to a due consistence. Then is this
Unguent prepared, to which may be added a little refined Verdigrease, which
will make it perfect. It is of great efficacy in foul wounds, for both
cleansing and healing; as experience will show.

A Surgeon, in meeting with Ulcers, is to observe well the purulent matter
that issues, since he may from thence learn the condition of the evil, whether
it proceed from foul blood, gall, corrupt phlegm, or adust melancholy. If the
evil grow worse, and the humors of the body force their way copiously through,
then beware, and withal exhort the Patient to purge, or to sweat with taking
some Sassafrass, or the like.

The Sanies or matter that is thick, white, and well digested, is the best; but
when there runs but a sharp water out of the Ulcer, this is not good, and is
withal painful. Which to obviate, you must use Litharge, Cerusse* and the
like; putting also beaten Lead upon the place, and cleansing the fistulat holes
with Lead-oyl, qualifying its sharpness with Oil of Eggs. This Lead-oyl is made
two ways, the one out of Cerusse, which is green; the other out of Litharge,
which is yellow or reddish. Both are prepared with Vinegar.

Boil Celondine in wine, and with this wine you may also cleanse the Ulcer with
good effect. Mix afterward a dram of Verdigrease with about four ounces of
the Juice of Ground Ivy; use it with wiecks or rags dipped therein for the foul
Ulcer-holes.

Burn Oyster-shells to powder, and use it for old Ulcers that need cleansing,
which this powder will well perform by reason of the Salt that is in those
shells. You may sometimes have occasion also of the Mercurius praecipitatus, or
the Mercurius dulcis Cosmeticus. If you can prepare this, you have a good
Remedy.

As for hard Knobs and Boyls, they commonly owing their rise to the Venereal
Disease are not so proper for this place. However you may make a plaster
against such Knobs of the phlegm of Althaea or Marshmallows, Gummi Ammoniac,
Galbanum, Turpentine, Myrrh, Missel-toe of the oak, mixing a little Bee-wax
therewith and some Oil of Earthworms. If you will have it stronger, mix with
it Gumm Elemi, Tacamahaca or Carana. But this can only be compassed by the rich
men; the poor must be content with the Melilot-plaister, mixed with Saffron and
the Oil of Mullain or Dill. You may also prepare for such Patients a Salve of
Fox-oyl, Dill-oyl, Turpentine, Man-grease, and the like, mixing therewith some
Oil of Earthworms and the Oil of Mullain-flowers, Camomil and white Lillies.

CHAP. IX. Of the Chirurgical means of staunching blood, of Wound-balsoms and
plasters, of Wound-drinks, and remedies for Burnings.
THis is the most necessary Chapter of this whole Tract. For, although in every
Camp, yea in every Regiment, and even in every Company there ought to be one or
more Chirurgions; yet because in a battle, or the storming of a strong-hold,
there may be wounded a very great number of men, who, by reason of the
multitude, cannot all be dressed by the Chirurgions, every common Soldier,
that is found and un-hurt, is obliged to assist his fellow, considering it may
soon be his own case.

In the first place then, refresh thy fellow, that is wounded, with wine, cold
water, vinegar, or the like; then place him in a right posture. For, if the
wounds be in the head or about the breast, you ought to lay him high with his
head and shoulders, that so the blood may sink down from the places wounded. If
his leg be hurt, put it so that it may not hang downwards, and thereby the
afflux from the body be prevented, which otherwise might cause a tumor. If the
wounds be in the middle of the body, then place him so, that, if possible, he
may lie somewhat hollow with his back.

This done, wash the wound very gently, (so as not to anger it,) with mere
wine, or even with pure common water, only with a very little salt cast into
it; or with the Patients own urine; and then dry it with lint of long-worn
linen, without much stirring in the wound, for fear of making the veins bleed
again.

If any one do bleed so copiously, that it is not easily stopped, and the
Patient is in danger, then receive of his blood in an Iron pan, and letting it
run about therein, hold it over the fire till it be dry and between your
fingers friable to powder; of which strew some into the bleeding wound, and it
will stop it. But of this case more hereafter.

The wound being cleansed, and the bleeding stayed, take fine linnen-raggs,
burn them as you are wont to do for tinder, and quench it in Oil of Olives; and
put some of it into the wound. If you have no plaster at hand, take a slice of
unsalted lard and lay it on. If that be also wanting, dip a pledget of
linnen-raggs in warm wine, and being wrung out very dry, lay it upon the wound,
and a dry bandage over it, that so the moist pledget may long keep warm. Though
in such wounds, as are apt to bleed much, warm bandages are often to be
avoided, and sometimes (but with singular care and discretion) cold bandages to
be used, if the hurt be not in the brain, breast or bowels. Whence old
Hippocrates has this Aphorism: Frigido vero in iis locis utendum, unde sanguis
aut fluit aut fluxunus est. Yet this must be done with great caution, lest in
the place affected there should follow a Gangrene.

After this, take Oil of Olives and Wine, beat them well together, and warm the
mixture; dip in it linen pledgets, wring them dry, and lay them on warm with a
dry bandage over it. This must be done once every hour or every two hours; nor
let this care and labor seem irksome to you, for it will have a good effect.

This Dress is almost the only thing, which the Knights of Maltha make use of
at Sea to heal their wounds; for the Oil allays the pain and the swelling, as
the Wine cleanses, and these two together cause healing. Whence the Samaritan
in the Gospel is said to have poured only Oil and Wine into the wounds of him,
that was fallen among Thieves. You may therefore make out of these two (...)
Wound-salve that may be equivalent to almost every common Wound-balsom,
preparing it thus:

Take one part of Oyl-olive, and two parts of Wine, boil them together till the
Wine be boiled in, and the Oil, when any is thrown into the fire, cracks no
more; and you have a Wound-oyl according to wish: Put of it with fine linen
shavings into the wound, and it will, for a plain remedy, do marvels.

You may also melt Lard unsalted, mix it with Honey and Rye flower, and so make
it into a Salve, which, though plain and simple, may, when put upon the wound;
have as good an effect, as many Plasters that are in great esteem.

Otherwise, for a very good Wound-salve, take of the best Aloes cleanly
pulverised the weight of a ducat, mingle and stir it with half an ounce of fine
honey; melt afterward by it self half an ounce of Deer-suet, and stir it among
the other Ingredients: Thus you have a good Salve against the putrefaction of
wounds, and for the asswaging of their pains, as also for healing them, if you
duly apply it to the wound: If you will add to it a little Cyprus-Turpentin with
the yolk of an Egg, you may.

The black Wheel-grease in a time of need is also a good Wound salve, and is
only despised because of its plainness. When you use it, lay only over it the
leaves of Snake-weed, or of pointed Plantain.

But by all means keep the wound clean, and let not many look into it, for fear
they should by their breath annoy it; some being fasting, others having eaten
one thing, others another. But especially admit not many women, when you open
the wound for cleansing and dressing it. But above all things take care, to
exclude the Air as much as is possible from the opened wound, especially if any
Artery or Nerve be hurt. Take notice, that Carpenters and Joyners, when they
have hurt themselves, do almost by this only means of well closing their wounds
and keeping out the Air, heal themselves. They take a very thin chip, and lay
upon it some of the glue, wherewith they join together the boards of their
work, and this they apply to the wound, first well cleansed, and let it lie on,
till it fall off of it self, and the wound is healed. But this will not do in
case any Bones be hurt.

Item, take Honey and the Dust-flower of the Mills, fresh Butter and
Bol-armeniack, and knead it well together, without any fire, until it be as
thick as a Plaster, and this laid on, is very good.

Item, take Cumphrey well cleansed, out it small, add to it one or two of the
Vulnerary Herbs, such as you may (...) ^et with in the field, as Pyrola or
Winter-green, Yarrow, Plantain, Fluellin, Orpin, Confound, Sanible, Bugle, etc.
Boil this in Linseed-oyl and a little Wine, until the Wine is boiled away; and
this being strained, put to it some raw Honey and one or two well beaten yolks
of Eggs, (according to the quantity you make) and a little Turpentin, and so
thrust it, with some Hemp or Flax dipped in it, into the wound.

Limewater is one of the simplest on plainest remedies, but heals admirably
well. Take only some unflaked Lime, pour on it clear water, and let it stand
upon it till the Lime be fallen to the bottom: Wash the wound with it,
especially such as are old running Sores, and you will find a wonderful effect.

These plain means may be raised, in case you want a Surgeon, taking the
assistance of your Fellow-souldier in the application; though those very
remedies may challenge a place among the most chargeablednes, prescribed and
applied by Masters. And provided the Surgeon do not under-value these my
plain and cheap remedies, but receive them thankfully, I am ready, here to
teach him some ways, hitherto concealed by me, which I scruple to keep any
longer from public knowledge.

Know then first, that to a Physician belongs also the knowledge of Surgery,
as a third part of the Art of Medicine, the other two being the Pharmaceutica,
prescribing Medicines for inward Diseases, and the Diatetica, ordering the
Patients Diet and other necessaries. I have my self, whilst I practiced
Physic, dressed in Camps many wounds with my own hands and cured them,
carrying always my Chirurgical apparatus about me, without any disparagement to
my Profession; imitating herein the Examples, above alleged, of Podalyrius and
Machaon, two of the chief Physicians of the Ancients in the Army before Troy,
who were not at all ashamed to practice Surgery, and to attend the cure of
wounded Soldiers!

First of all then, consider well, whether the wound be mortal or no. Next,
what limb or part it is that has received the wound: The wounds in the Head
are commonly the most dangerous, by reason of the Symptoms incident to them, as
the Apoplexy, Falling Sickness or other Convulsions, the Palsy and Laming of
the limbs by reason of the hurt nerves, as also Phrensy, Loss of Hearing and
Speech, etc. which are wont to be consequent, according as the respective
nerves have been struck or wounded. If the Breast be any where wounded, great
care also is to be had, and the means must be directed to prevent purulency
(which that place, by reason of the heat there, is subject to,) and to heal the
pleura or the inner membrane of the ribbs; the like is to be done concerning
the diaphragme, etc.

You ought also to observe, what kind of wound it is, you have to do with,
whether any bone, any nerve, or artery be hurt; whether it be a mere
flesh-wound, and the like. If it be a gaping wound, you must, if it has taken
cold from the Air, bath it with warm wine, and keep it very close; and make use
of the strong astringent plaster, prepared of Rosin, Gumm Elemi, Turpentin,
Pitch, with some Mastick, Frankincense, Sarcocolla, as also some Boodstone,
Mummy, and Crocus Martis mixed therewith, and keep all on carefully with a good
bandage, which is a great matter in all wounds. For, some months since, I had a
Patient under my cure, whose Skull in the place of one of its sutures was
severed, so as that I found a considerable space between the two parts
separated. I ordered a Surgeon of my particular acquaintance to draw those
parts forcibly together with good bandages; which being well done, I caused his
hair to be shorn away, and an astringent plaster to be applied, which was
almost like a Rupture-plaister; whereby in three or four weeks, to the
admiration of many, my Patient was perfectly healed. This plaster was the
Ceratum expelle arietina, mixed with Gumm Elemi, and with a little Ceratum de
Betonica.

You must also be provided with good Blood-staunching remedies. The common ones
are, Bol-armeniac, Sheep-trickles, Boodstone, Tragacanth. Terra Sigillata,
Mill-dust, Hares-hair, Peacocks-dung, etc. Avoid by all means Causticks,
especially Sublimat, Arsenic, Colcothar; with which you anger a wound, and cast
the Patient into very dangerous symptoms: For, though they may by their
corrosiveness at first astringe the wound, yet they do afterward so fret and
eat it, that you would think, hellfire were in it. Beware also of a hot Iron,
which many have a refuge to as to a Masterpiece and the last remedy.

Among the chief Astringents, is Frog-spawn; which therefore you are, when it is
in season, to make good provision of, for the whole year. Take therefore in the
Spring a lump of rags, and dip it into Smiths-water, in which first some crude
Alum has been dissolved. Let this lump be dried again, and then draw it
thorough the Spawn of Frogs, so as that the Spawn may every where hang on it,
and expose it to the Air to dry; and afterward draw the same again thorough
Frog-spawn: Which repeat as often as you can, during the season of Frog-spawn;
for the oftener you dip the rags into it, the more virtue they will receive.
This Spawn stauncheth bleeding, with a good bandage. I have often used with
good success the distilled water of Frog-spawn in the bleeding of the Nose,
first mixed with crude Alum, and then drawn up into the Nostrils. Take a green
Frog, burn him in a pipkin, not to ashes, but so as to be reducible to powder:
This powder put into a small Taffaty-bagg, and hang it about the neck of a
woman that floods excessively; and she will find great help from it.

Having often made mention of Alum, which is one of the chief remedies for
stopping of blood, I will make public the Magistery of Alum, which I have
hitherto kept secret. Take then of the best and clearest Alum as much as you
please; pulverise it, and put the powder into an Ox- or Swines-bladder, tying
it very close: Then throw it into a kettle of hot water, and the Alum will be
dissolved; this Solution bring over the helm out of a low retort, until the
Alum get a caput mortuum; then cease to urge the fire any more, lest you force
corrosive spirits from it, which are noxious to our present purpose. This caput
mortuum put again into a bladder, and dissolve it as before; and do this so
long, until the whole body of your Alum be brought over the helm. But you must
filter the first solution, for fear of any dust or other heterogeneous matter
mixed with it.

This is the Magistery of Alum, able to draw the veins together without
corrosion. Apply this to wounds, or any other bleeding part. You may mix with
it Tragacanth, Gummi Arabic, Sanguis Draconis, and well-beaten Whites of Eggs.

Take good notice, whether the wounded Patient have heated himself in storming
a place, or by any other military execution, or whether he be yet distempered
by passion; for, as long as this lasts, the blood is in a rage, and can hardly
be stopped In this case stop the wound with Peacocks dung; and take Vinegar and
Whites of Eggs well beaten together, a little Alum, and refined Saltpeter;
put to it as much Frog-spawn, Shepherds purse, broad Plantain, or other
convenient water, as is necessary; so that there may be three parts of water
and one part of vinegar; dip pledgets into it, and clap them cold to the wound,
and the bleeding will cease.

Crocus Martis also is an excellent stauncher of blood, to be used both
inwardly and outwardly. For inwardly it cures the Bloody Flux and other
Fluxes; and outwardly applied to wounds and strewed into them, it closes the
veins. But it must not be prepared with Aquafortis, or distilled Vinegar, or
any corrosive thing, but only by the heat of a reverberating furnace; and
afterward distill often from it some proper water, as of Roses, Speed-well,
Self-heal or broad Plantain; after which preparation it is diverse times to pass
again through a reverberating furnace, until it grow as light as a
down-feather: And then it is fit for our purpose; for as long as it is strong
and heavy, the body of it is not thoroughly opened.

Among other things, you may make use of the Red earth of Vitriol; which is to
be thus prepared: Take Vitriol, as much as you please, put it, in a new
unglased pipkin, into a Potters oven, to deprive it of its moisture, and to
reduce it to a Colcothar: Then pulverise this calcined Vitriol, and in a large
glased earthen dish pour hot water on it, letting it stand so for four or five
hours; then decant the water, and pour other hot water upon it, as before,
repeating this three, four, or five times, until all the salt be got out of the
said Colcothar; which whether it be done, may easily be found by the taste.
Then dry this red dulcified Earth, and it will prove a very good blood
staunching medicine; which may also in other cases be variously used; as you will
find it hereafter of great use in my plaster for wounds made by thrusting.

The water you had poured on this Colcothar, you ought not to throw away as
useless, but to put it by; and, for other occasions, you may boil it away, and
it will leave a Salt behind, as white as snow, with which you may do wonders in
foul Sores. I have used it with good success in such cases; in which it
cleanses and makes a firm ground for new and good flesh to grow, upon. For,
though there be many things, that cleanse Sores, yet they leave the flesh loose
and spung^; but this is both astringent, and withal makes such a found and
firm bottom, that you may trust to it: Whence also it is to be used in
fistulous Sores.

But to return to the stopping of Blood; take the blood of a Lamb or Sheep, let
it stand in a clean earthen vessel, until the serum be severed from it; pour
this off, and dry the blood well in a new glased pipkin, upon hot embers; Then
pulverise it, and mix with it a fourth part of clean pulverised Tragacanth, and
strew this into the wound. If the issue of the blood be so impetuous, that it
washes away the first application, then wipe the wound again, and strew into it
of the same powder the second time. Putting amongst it Alum, Crocus Martis, or
the red Earth of Vitriol, you will do well: Bind the wound with the Emplastrum
Santalinum, (which is called Incognitum by our Chirurgions,) or with the
Ceratum ex pelle arietinae, due to Arnoldus de Villa nova.

The blood being stopped, and the wound cleansed, you must then apply good
vulnerary Oils or Wound-balsoms. Oils are all, as I mentioned above; fatty;
whence it is, that they do not easily consolidate wounds, unless you put to
them some refined Mastic, Sarco-colla, Sanguis Draconis, Sandarach, or the like.

But to open unto you the good affection of my heart, I shall describe here my
Wound-balsom, wherewith I have, by Gods assistance, done much good; viz.

Take as much as you please of Turpentin of Cyprus, which comes from Venice,
and is taken inwardly; and the same quantity of the red Oil of St. John's wort,
dissolve them together! Then take Gumm Elemy, dissolve it apart, and pour it
among the other; and so let all cool, and when it is half cold, pour amongst it
a little Oil of Beeswax, and your Balsom is prepared. I cannot tell you the
precise weight of each ingredient, because as often as I have prepared it, I
have done it by the Eye, and as it seemed good unto me; only note, that there
must be so much of the Gumm Elemy as to give it a due consistence; which you
may try, by casting a drop or two of it into cold water; this Balsom being to
be thinner than an Unguent, and yet thicker than Oil.

This Balsom heals very speedily, especially when used in wounds freshly
inflicted, on fine pledgets, and only with a yellow Tractif bound over it.

Be also provided with good Plaster for wounds made by Thrusting, such as are
the Opodeldoch of Theophrastus, or the good black Thrust plaster, thus to be
prepared: Take of Oil of Rose seven ounces; of Colophonium, black Pitch, white
Wax, Roman Vitriol, Cerusse, Frankincense, Mirth, ana eight ounces, of Mastic,
one ounce; of the Oil of Eggs, two ounces; of Spike-oyl, one ounce, of the Oil
of Juniper Berries, three ounces; of Mumia, two ounces; off white Vitriol and
red Corals, ana two ounces; of Heron-suet, one ounce; of Magnet, two ounces; of
well cleansed Earthworms pulverised and of Camphir, ana one ounce: Of all this
make a powder secundum artem.

My Opodeldoch, that I make use of, is almost like this, but that I mix with it
the red Earth of the Oil of Vitriol, above spoken of in the matter of
Blood-staunching; and add also to it Turpentin and Gumm Elemi, with some Tutia,
Aloes epatica, well prepared Lapis Calaminaris, and Crocus Martis: And thus the
Plaster becomes red and hard, like Spanish Sealing-wax. I take also Gummi
Ammoniac, Galbanum and Opoponax, the Oil of St. John's Wort and Myrrh. This
Plaster draws from the bottom, and reaches deep. A Soldier, having this about
him, and, upon ocsion, working it only to some flatness, there being no need of
laying it on a cloth, may thus put it on the wound, taking it off mornings and
evenings to wipe it clean; and then working it through again, lay it on as
before: And so he may heal himself; which when done, let him clean the
Plaster, and role it up in a bladder, for another occasion.

I have seen considerable operations of Gumm Elemi used alone, laid on leather,
and put upon the thrust; but this wound is then to be kept from falling
together.

To prevent incidental heat and inflammation of the wounds, make use of the Oil
of Roses, Bol Armeniac, Whites of Eggs and Camphir. But to avoid trouble, you
may find ready, in the Apothecary-shops, the Unguentum album, Unguentum de
Minlo, Camphoratum de Liguiritia, de Lithargyro, Santalinum, and the like; to
be put about the wound when dressed.

You may with great benefit, and you ought also, especially in the wounds of
the Head, provided there be no danger of bleeding, lay over the bandage some
fine rags moistened in wine, and well dried again. This allays the pain, and
withal prevents swelling.

And in case the wound be swelled, you may also to good purpose make use of
Fomentations, made of the herb and flowers of Mullein, Betony, Egrimony,
Cowslips, Camomil, Melilot, Ground Ivy, red Roses, Bugle, and the like: But
beware of all hot things, whatever they be. Boil the aforesaid herbs or the
like in half wine and water; but if the wound be not inflamed, take two parts
of wine and one of water. With such fomentations I have done much good; among
others upon a Fencing-Master of Nurenberg, called Cameysen, who in the public
Fencing-school received thrusts in both his Eyes, insomuch that by reason of
the great swelling that ensued thereupon he lost all his sight; but by the use
of such fomentations, God blessing the means, I recovered his sight.

A Bone being broken, set it carefully, and bind it up strongly, having laid
upon it Oxycroceum or Emplastrum de pelle Arietina. You may also comfort such
wounds with the like fomentations, as before described.

On the bank of the Rhine is found a Stone in the gravel, called Lapis
sabulosus, which is easily reducible to powder: Of this, if you can get it,
give to the Patient, whose bone is broken, a dram to be taken in broth,
mornings; of which he will find a very good effect.

In the case of a Limb wrenched, clap to it Bran boiled in wine, sometimes,
according to occasion, mixing with it a little Salt, and Marshmallows or red
Hounds-tongue-salve. If it have happened long ago, then make a pulse of
Wheaten-flower, Milk, and the Oil of Camomil or Mullein, mixing a little
Saffron with it, and clap it on hot. If there be any collection or coagulation
of blood, the Unguent of Hounds-tongue will do well, together with a linen
compress moistened in warm wine.

You must also be provided with good Wound-drinks; but they must be prepared
diversely, according to the several places wounded. Thus in the wounds of the
Head, Betony challenges the pre-eminence and the greatest quantity of all the
Vulnerary Herbs; in the wounds of the Sides, Carduus benedictus claims that
right; in the wounds of the Breast, Veronica (or Speedwell) ought to have it;
in those about the Kidneys, the Herb Strawberry must be preferred; in those
near the Liver, Agrimony will have the precedence, and so forth. Mean time, the
Vulnerary Herbs, to be used in such occasions, are these; Sanicle,
Winter-green, Ladies-mantle, Speedwell, Orpine, Mugwort, Ground Ivy,
Strawberry-leaves, Agrimony, St. John's Wort, Cinquefoil, Bugle, Tormentil,
Snakeweed, Avens, Woodrooff, etc.

You may make an excellent Wound-drink of these four Ingredients, viz.
Winter-green, Orpine, Mugwort and Snakeweed, boiled in half wine and water; but
in case there be an inflammation, wine is to be forborne, or very little of it
to be employed.

If any Bone be broken into splinters, do not pull them out with any violence,
but loosen them with a good Ointment of Eggs, keeping the wound open the
longer. Nature herself will not suffer any splinter to remain behind.

Now you must be ready with some good thing for blood coagulated, in case any
person should have been flung down, squeesed, beaten, or fallen from a high
place. The right powder for this purpose is thus made: Take of Terra Sigillata
or Bol Armeniac, Sanguis Draconis and Mumia, ana half an ounce, of Sperma Ceti
and Rhubarbana half a dram, reduce it to a powder; of which give the Patient
the weight of about a ducat in wine, or chervil-water. Or take a good quantity
of Chervil, boil it in mead or flesh-broath, and let the Patient drink a good
draught of it warm, three times a day. Or let him drink a thimble full of
Sperma Ceti in beer, adding a little butter to it. Or take of Mumia half an
ounce, of Sperma Ceti two drachms, of Oculi Cancrorum (of which the blew ones,
which sometimes fall from Crafishes whilst alive, are the best,) three drachms,
adding to it a little Licorish and Cinnamon, and some Tormentil-roots: Of this
pulverised give every day to the Patient, mornings and evenings, the weight of
about half a ducat, and by this means you will expel purulent matter and blood,
and bony splinters, and sometimes even bullets lurking in the flesh; not
omitting other good Wound-drinks, and vulnerary Balsoms, Plasters, Ointments
and Fomentations. Again, take of the red Hounds-tongue Ointment, of the bigness
of a great Walnut, dissolve it in warm broth; it expels all coagulated blood,
especially if you mix some Sperma Ceti with it.

If you have any thorns, thistles, bullets, small shot, or the like, to draw
out, where perhaps you cannot reach them with Instruments, then burn live
Crafishes in a new pipkin, until they be reducible to powder, but burn them not
to ashes. This powder mix with Hares-suet, and lay it on, and you will find a
good effect. Also take the roots of the big Reed that grows in marshes, dry
them to be pulverised, and mix Virgin-honey with it, and lay it upon the part;
and of the same powder give the Patient to drink, twice a day, the weight of
half a ducat in wine, or in broth, or in a vulnerary potion, if you have any
at hand. The first of this I learned of the Excellent Doctor Schleer of
Constance.

The excrement of a Gander, being applied, is also powerful in drawing out
Iron. Again, Quince-wine mingled with vinegar, and putting some saffron and gun
powder amongst it, if you give it to one that has been shot, it will do him
good. Otherwise, they make a plaster of the roots of Cumfrey, Aron, Polypody,
Juniper, and dried Radishes, all reduced to powder, and mix it with Hares-suet
and gray Diachylum, making a thick Ointment of it, and spreading it over a
piece of Hare-skin, and so laying it on. This is greatly praised, especially
when seconded with good Wound-drinks, of which Masterwort is one of the
Ingredients: But if you have not this at hand, take a Beet and boil it in wine,
and lay it warm on the wound. Likewise, young Swallows, not yet fledge, burnt
to powder, and this powder made by acetum of Roses into a pulse, and laid on,
does the same.

You ought also to be provided for the Synovia: And if you proceed aright with
my Wound-balsom above described, and keep the wound warm, you may therewith do
much good. Mix with it, ex abundanti, the red Earth of Vitriol, above
discoursed of. This Synovia is a dangerous thing, and often causes almost
intolerable pain, if it be not well handled; the Herb of Straw-berries and its
Juice have great virtue in this case. Some make use of the White of Eggs, Bol
Armeniac, and the like. The Magistery of Alum also belongs hither; for, Alum
mixed with vinegar, and clapped on very warm, allays it also. Elder-blossoms
likewise, used every way, are effectual in the same case. Employ also
diligently such Defensive-plaisters, as are not fatty, because fat lays no hold
on water.

To proceed to Burnings, I know almost no better Salve for burning than this;
Take a Tench, or any common Pond-fish; fry one or more of them with good
butter, pour the fatness upon cold water in a broad earthen part, and you have
an excellent Ointment against Burnings. When, some years since, a Powder-mill
was blown up, and the Attendants upon the work so miserably burnt, that they
looked as if they had been roasted, they were healed with this Ointment, only a
little finely powdered Sage being mixed with it.

Cream and Linseed-oyl mingled together, and rags, moistened therein, put upon
the burnt part, heals, though the burning were made with Aquafortis; for, to
my knowledge, a certain Chemist that had thus burnt all his arm, was thereby
restored. Or, take Oil of Elder, or stale Oil that has been long in a burning
lamp; beat half as much, as you take of that, of the Whites of Eggs amongst it,
and anoint the burnt part therewith. If you can get no Oil of Elder, take any
other cooling Oil, as of Nymphaea (Water Lillies) Poppy-seeds, Violets or
Roses, or the Oil of Poplar-buds, or of Mar^h-marigold Flowers.

If you can have Quince-wine, it marvailously extinguishes the burning of any
shot, dipping a linen pledget in it and drawing it through the wound, or left
in it, repeating this every twelfth hour. The Juice or Wine of Quinces must be
used as it comes from the fruit, without any mixture of Sugar. This I learned
from a Nobleman, a great Soldier, of long experience in the Wars of France,
the Low Countries, and Hungary.

The Unguentum Jovis, made of Henbane, Vervain and Butter, is also very useful
for this purpose. Likewise the Ointment of Calx viva, which is first six or
seven times to be slaked and dulcified with pure water, pouring every twelve or
sixteen hours fresh water upon it, and decanting the former, so as to leave
always the Calx at the bottom; which is then to be mixed with Oil of Roses, or
some other cooling Oil, for an Ointment.

If you be well acquainted with Elder, and know how to use it, you may obtain
out of it one of the best Cures of Burnings, especially out of its middle
rinds. Again, Yolks of Eggs and Linseed-oyl, equal quantities, mixed together,
and spread over the burning, is also very good. Egg-oyl likewise used by it
self, and Vernice employed by Joyners, do well also; but the latter of these
two, if it be mixed with Oil of Spicanard, or Petroleum, is to be mingled
amongst Linseed-oyl.

Spread fresh Butter upon Cabbage-leaves, having first fried the Butter with
some blossoms or the middle rind of Elder; and so lay them to the burning;
Elder being a great resister of Inflammations, and therefore very good to allay
St. Antonies fire; if you pull its mild green rinds from the stem, and lay them
on, without moistening them. Else they use against the said Fire, Flower mixed
with the powder of Licorice, to be clapped on with a ragg done over with red
Saunders. My way is, to take the shavings of some fresh and juycy Licorice, and
to fry them in new Butter; then to strain the Butter from it, and to fry the
like fresh Licorice therein, and to strain the Butter from that again;
repeating this five or six times. Among this strained Butter I stir some pure
and fine Cerusse, Whites of Eggs and a little Camphire. And with this Ointment
I have, by the assistance of God, done much good in the said inflammation of
St. Antonies fire; and the common people do to this very day call this Ointment
by no other name than that of Doctor Minderer's Licorice-ointment. But to
return to the quenching of Burnings.

If you can have Milk-cream, mingle it with Cow Dung freshly made, and so clap
it on; though fresh Cowdung alone allays burning. Crafishes pounded alive, and
fried in fresh Butter or in common Suet, the Butter strained herefrom, is also
a good Ointment against burnings. Unsalted Lard, melted by a Wax-candle, or an
hot Iron, and dropped upon fresh cold water, and then gathered up from the
water, and carefully rubbed from the same, has the like operation. Take one of
the cooling Oils abovenamed, and fresh Butter, boil the middle rind of Elder
in it, and with a sufficient quantity of Wax make of it a Salve, and this also
will cure burning.

You ought also to be provided with a fit apparatus, Lints, Swathing-clouts,
etc. and to take Deer-suet, Oil of Roses or Elder, and white Wax, and melt them
over the fire, yet so as that you melt the Wax by it self, and add of it no
more to the rest than to make it a thin plaster. Into this compound you must
dip some fine lint, and you will find it very useful for any angry part; as also
when one limb presses or otherwise incommodes another, as happens in hydropical
and other swollen people, whose belly so sinks down, that the thighs suffer by
it; in which case such lints are to be put between the parts, to keep them from
immediately touching and pressing one another.

A Gangrene is cured with Sal-armoniac boiled in Urine, especially in that of
the Patient, and clapping such Urine upon the part affected: The quantity of
the Sal-armoniac may be six drachms.

For frozen Feet, take Gander-suet and Deer-suet; dissolve them together, and
pour them into a white excavated Turnip, and expose this for a while to the
Air, Rain, Wind, Hoar-frost, Snow, according as the season shall be. Then mince
the Turnip, and fry it in the same Suet which you had poured into it; that
done, squeese it out, and let the fat fall upon cold water; and being there
brought to consistence, take it off, and bring it over the helm from burned
Wine, and decant this carefully from it again, and it is duly prepared. You may
also recover frozen Feet with white rotten Turnips, beaten with Butter or
Tallow, and so clapped on.

CHAP. X. Of several promiscuous Medical Practices, for the Service of the
honest Soldier.
THis Chapter I have annexed to the former as an Appendix, for the ease and
good of Soldiers; wherein some things will occurr, not inferior to those,
that have preceded. But herein I have kept no order, but set them down
promiscuously, yet faithfully, to supply what may have been omitted before.

If you be troubled with the Toothach, coming from the cold in winter, take the
root of Pyrethrum (Pellitory of Spain) and boil it in Vinegar, and hold this
Vinegar warm in your mouth, and it will draw out the phlegm that causes the
pain. Or, take the root of Elder, boil it in half Wine and half Water, and hold
it warm upon the Teeth. But what you take of this Decoction must be often spit
out, and other fresh taken into your mouth; of which I have found wonderful
Effects.

The root of Heath boiled together with the same herb in wine, and laid on, is
esteemed to be powerful in drawing out thorns and splinters.

You may make a good Ointment against the Itch and Scabbs, of Savin, stale Fat,
Brimstone and Juniper Berries Oil.

If your Limbs after a long sickness be weak, boil Valerian-roots in
Camomil-oyl, and anoint such Limbs therewith. Also the Oil of Lillies in the
valley, and that of yellow Violets, is good for the same purpose.

For worms in the Fingers, bruise Persicaria (Arsmart,) and lay it on; or take
of a Piggs Bladder of Gall, and put it on the affected Finger like a Thimble.

If you have any coagulated or congealed blood in your Breast, make a Decoction
of Scabious, Chervil, and Germander, in two parts of wine, and one part of
water; strain it, and drink of it mornings and evenings.

Against the putrefaction of the Mouth, make a Decoction of Privet in water,
adding afterward a little Alum to it, and use it for a gargarism. Also a
Decoction of the middle rind of Hawthorn, with a little Alum, is of great
effect in the same case.

Cabbage and Colewort-leaves burnt to ashes, and a Lixivium made of it, and
clapped on, cures a Gangrene, and the wild Fire, especially if you mingle a
little Oil of Elder therewith. If you can have no Elder-blossoms for this Oil,
take the green middle rind of Elder, and boil it in Oil Olive, and then strain
the Oil; which done, take fresh rind of Elder, and proceed with it as before,
repeating it three or four times to make the Oil the stronger. You may add a
little wine to it whilst it is boiling, but that must all boil away, and so long
till the Oil cracks no more in the fire.

Southern-wood stamped with grease and laid on, draws out splinters.

If you have the Itch or are scabby, and can light upon some water standing in
the hollowness of a Beech-tree, wash your self with it. Or make a Decoction of
the brown rind of Alder, (which is under the gray,) in Butter, and anoint your
self with it; mixing, if you will, a little Brimstone therewith.

If you be troubled with the Ringworm, or any running Scab, infuse Litharge in
Vinegar, and let it stand a night infused, or make a Decoction of the same in
Vinegar. But your pan or vessel must be of brass. This Vinegar mingle with Oil
of Elder, or of Roses, or the like, and it will become a fine gray Salve,
curing such running Scabs as aforesaid, and cooling also Inflammations.

If your Body be bound, take Sage pulverised, and mix it with grease, and
anoint your Navil with the quantity of a hasel-nut of it. This I have with very
good success advised to women in childbed, that were thus bound and obstructed.
If you will have it stronger, mix with it the Gall of a Fish or of any Animal
whatsoever; but then you must not give it to a woman in childbed.

Gromel (by the Latins called Milium Solis) pulverised, and the weight of half
a ducat of it taken in wine or broth, provokes urine; yet must the belly be
opened first. The same does Linaria or Toad-flax, boiled in wine or broth.
Likewise distilled water of Radishes, repeating the distillation several times
from other fresh Radishes. Which will have the better effect, if the Patient
bath his lower parts in a bath made of Marshmallows, Melilot, and the like.

Gromel, abovementioned, taken in warm broth, expels the birth: And so do the
blossoms or buds of Walnut-trees; Crab's-eyes also, pulverised and taken in warm
broth; likewise Issop boiled in wine, and drank warm. This I have inserted for
the sake of poor Souldiers-wives, who amongst us often follow the Camp. If they
have any great After-pains, let them bath their lower parts in a Bath made of
Dill, and Camomil-flowers. And the yolks of hard Eggs, beaten together with
some convenient Oil (Nut-oyl is the best,) and a Plaster made of it, and laid
to the belly, is also very good. If they have too great a profusion of blood,
let them take a dram of burnt Hartshorn, and burnt Ivory, in a convenient
Vehicle.

In case of a mortal wound, take of pure Turpentine four ounces, wash it with
fresh limpid water, and then dissolve it over a mild fire; which done, mix with
it two ounces or two ounces and an half of white Wax, dissolved apart: To this
add about three ounces of Womans-milk, which is sucked by a Boy. The Turpentine
and Wax being somewhat cooled together, must be well stirred, and then powered
on cold Vinegar; whence, when it is brought to a consistence, it is to be taken
off, and made into a Plaster, and so laid on.

Horse-tail (in Latin, Equisetum) heals the wounds in the urinary parts, the
powder of it being taken in broth or Speedwel-water, or the Decoction thereof
being drank.

Gummi Ammoniac is a good discutient of hard Tumors and Knobs: Tacamahaca
appeaseth pain proceeding from cold, being laid on the part affected.

To make the pellets used to be put in wounds that are to be kept open, (which
here in Germany we call Quell-maissel,) take a Sponge of the finest sort, put
it in Whites of Eggs well beaten and mixed with Rose Water, to make the said
Sponge imbibe this moisture. Which done, bind it close together with thread, and
let it well dry in the Air, and so convey of it into the wound that is to be
kept open: where it will swell again, and so distend the wound.

If you be troubled with the Gonorrhoea, take House-leek growing on old walls
(called by the Latins, Semper vivum minus,) put it into your shoes, and go
barefoot upon it; anoint your loins and privy parts with Henbane-oyl; and take
mornings the quantity of two big hasel-nuts of well washed Turpentine, for some
days together, avoiding all aromatic, hard, and salt meat.

An old Experimenter has noted, That whosoever shall wash his head twice a
week with a Lixivium made of Juniper-ashes, his sight shall never fail him, but
remain good to his end; nor shall that person be troubled with any vermin upon
his head, nor with any headache, nor suffer any change of his hair. For my
part, I never tried it; but it being a very plain and safe thing, I thought
good here to insert it.

Against the biting of a Mad-dog, lay Assa fatida with Garlic upon the bite;
it will draw out the venom.

To free your self from the Gravel, make a Decoction of Ash-wood in wine, and
drink of it warm once or twice a day upon an empty stomach; using withal good
baths. Vervin also, the leaves and roots, beaten together, and drank, is very
good in this case.

If you have a strong breath, proceeding from a foul stomach, infuse Wormwood
and Carduus benedictus, together with some Citron-peels, in wine, and let them
boil a little therein, and then drink a good draught of it mornings. Chew also
and swallow sometimes a little Myrrh, and take now and then three or four
Aloes-pills.

I could add many other things, if my leisure would permit: These which I have
set down, you will take in good part; and though I have not tried them all my
self, yet you may rest assured, that such as have not been experimented by my
self, have been tried by my honored Colleagues and other honest persons, and
approved.

FINIS.
INDEX.
A.
AIr, what to be observed of it in the Campy 9. Preservatives against the
corruption of the Air, 21, etc. Animals, their blood of what efficacy, 45.
Antonies fire, how to be allayed, 140, 141.
B.
BElly, the cure of the Aches and Tumors and Gripings thereof, 65, 66. Beer,
new beer causes the Strangury, 12. Blood, how to cure casting up of blood, 54.
And the bleeding of the Nose, ibid. Blood coagulated, how to be helped, 133,
145.
Boyls pestilential and their cure, 92, and seq. Brick well burnt good against
a Tenasmus, 87. Brimstone a good Medicine in infectious cases, 41. Bread,
wheaten-bred coming hot out of the oven and dipped in red wine very good against
Fluxes, 75. The same duly prepared good in pestilential Sores, 94. Bones
broken, how to be ordered, 131. Bran good for wrenching of Limbs, 131. Burning,
how to be healed, 137.
C.
CArbuncles pestilential, and their cure, 92. Carlina good against faintness,
6. Chirurgions of an Army, and their qualities, 14. Cold Nights how to provide
against, 8. Corns of the Feet how to be cured, 4. Cough, and its cure, 54.
Crafishes burnt alive good against the Bloody Flux, 80. Crafishes, after a
certain way prepared, of great use for drawing out of the body thorns,
small-shot, etc. 135. The same fried in fresh butter allays burning, 141.
Crocus Martis a high Remedy against the Bloody Flux, 81. Clysters, and their
use in the field, 83. Cheerfulness good in pestilential times, 31.
D.
DAisie and its excellency, 13. Diseases in an Army, and their cure, 18, etc.
Diet to be well observed in the Camp, 20. Drinks how to provide in the field,
7. The excess of it to be avoided, 12. The danger of drinking whilst one is
hot, and the care to be taken in that case, 12, 13. Drinks in cold weather, 25.
Drawing out of thorns, splinters, etc. how to be effected, 135. 145. Dropsy,
and its cure, 72. Drought, how to be remedied, 85.
E.
EGg-oyl good for Burnings, 140. Elder-flowers good in the plague, 24. 48.
Elder-vineger good to apply to the Heart in the plague, 48. Elder-roots, the
Juice of them purges hydropical persons exceedingly, 73. But to be used with
great caution, ibid. Boiled Elder-buds have the like virtue, ibid. Emollients
in pestilential Boils, 93. Excrement of a Gander is powerful in drawing Iron
out of the body, 135.
F.
FAintness how to prevent, 6, 7. Feet sweaty how to remedy, 5. Feet frozen how
to recover, 143. Fevers of all sorts how to he managed and cured in an Army,
18. 65. Fluxes, their several sorts and cures, 74. Of the Bloody Flux in
particular, and its cure, 77. Frankincense dryes and clears the Air, 23.
Fundament, the cure of its falling down, 88.
G.
GAngrene how to cure, 142. 146. Galling how to cure, 5. Garlic useful in
Fluxes by way of decoction, 88. Goat, good for men to rub at them when the Air
is corrupted, 21. Groin swelled how to cure, 74. Guts, the Griping of them how
to be cured, 69 -- 72. Granat-wine cures the Bloody Flux, 82. Gunpowder
purifies the Air, 23. Gum Elemi of considerable use in wounds, 129. Gonorrhoea
how to be ordered, 150. Gravel how to be removed, 151.
H.
HAwes cure Fluxes, 76. Hartshorn good against Fluxes, 75. Hearing how to be
recovered. 53. Heart, the cure of its Inflammation, 61. Haemorrhoid-vein, the
use of its bleeding, 90. Horses how to be made vigorous, 7. Ointment for
Horses, 8. Hunger and Thirst to be prevented by certain herbs, 6.
I.
JAundise, the cause and cure of it, 68. Imperatoria good against faintness, 6.
Infection, its preservatives and cures, both for the Poor and Rich, 20 -- 36.
The Hungarian Infection and its cure, 37, and seq. Inflammation, its several
sorts and cures, 55 -- 65. Juniper-wood burnt, good in times of the plague, 23.
Itch how to be cured, 145, 146.
L.
LArd, when fresh very good against the Inflammation of the Mouth, 62. Lard
good against Burnings, 141. Lead a considerable cooler, 61. Legs, the cure of
their swelling, 74. Liver, the cure of the Obstructions thereof, 68. Lillies,
the Juice of the Roots of blew Lillies have great virtue of purging hydropical
persons, but to be used with great discretion, 73. Lapis sabulosus good to heal
broken Bones, 131. Luxations how to be ordered, 131.
M.
MArisca's, and the cure of them, 89. Mastic, drys and clears the Air, 23.
Mesaraic-veins, and the effects of their being obstructed, 68. Milk duly
prepared good against the Bloody Flux, 77. Moss of wild Rose-shrubs an approved
Remedy in Bloody-fluxes, 78. Mouth, how to remedy the falling down of the
Palate of the Mouth, 53.
N.
NIter excellent to allay Inflammations, 60. The way how to prepare it for that
use, 61. Nose, how to remedy the bleeding of it, 54.
O.
OBstructions of the Liver, and the cure, 68. Oil of Scorpions very good to
anoint the Heart with in the Plague, 48. A good Succedancum to it described,
48. Oil of Vitriol good in Fevers, 51. Oaken-leaves do cure common Fluxes, 76.
P.
PEstilential Diseases and cure, 24, and seq. 92, and seq. Physicians of an
Army and their qualities, 14. Pear Trees, the rinds of them cure common Fluxes,
76. Preservatives fit for Soldiers, 3, 26, etc. Purgatives fit Soldiers, 3,
4. Putrefaction the cause of grievous Diseases, 38. 65. Putrefaction of the
Mouth how to be cured, 145.
Q.
QUince-wine good against the Bloody Flux, 82. The same extinguishes
marvellously the burning of any shot, 138.
R.
RIng worm, how to be cured, 146. Rust of Arms how to prevent, 6. Rye-biscuit
duly prepared good against the Bloody Flux, 80.
S.
SCarification and its use, 93. Soldiers Morals, 1. Soldiers care of his
body, 2. Soldiers Diseases in the Field; through the whole Book. Sores
pestilential and their cure, 92, and seq. Spotted Fevers and their cures, 18,
and seq. Squinancy and its cure, 54. Strangury and its cure, 12. Surfets and
their cures, 19. Swellings of the Throat and Almonds, how to be cured, 53. 64.
Swelling of the Legs how to cure, 74. Sweat and the ways of procuring it, 33,
and seq. See also 44, and seq. Swallows, burnt to powder, good to those that
have been shot, 136. Synovia, how to be ordered, 137.
T.
TEnasmus and its cure, 86. Tench fried good for Burnings, 137. Thirst, how to
quench in case of want of drink, 6. Thirst how to quench in Fluxes, 85. Throat
swollen how to cure, 53 Toothache, its cure, 144. Tongue, the cure of the
Inflammations of it, 55. Turnips, after a certain way prepared, or rotten, cure
frozen feet, 143.
V.
VErmin how to remove, 4. Vein, the use of the bleeding of the
Haemorrhoid-vein, 90. Vesicatories and their use, 93. Ulcers and their cure,
92. Vinegar good to wash the Temples with, in times of the Plague, 24.
Venae-section not easily to be admitted in pestilential Diseases, 32, 51.
Vulnerary Herbs for several sorts of Wounds, 132.
W.
Water, its differences and choice, 10. Wheel-grease a good Ointment for
Horses, 8. Wind in the Guts requires keeping the Body soluble, 69. Worms;
Earthworms good against the Dropsy, together with the way of preparing them,
74. Wounds, their Inflammation how to be prevented, 129. Their swelling how to
be helped, 130. Wound-drinks of several sorts, 132. Wounds mortal how to order,
149. Worms in fingers, how be oured, 145. Wounds how to be cured, see chap. 10.

