LETTERS OF STATE, Written by Mr. John Milton, To most of the Sovereign Princes
and Republics of EUROPE.

From the Year 1649. Till the Year 1659.

To which is added, An Account of his Life. Together with several of his Poems;
And a Catalogue of his Works, never before Printed.

LONDON: Printed in the Year, 1694.

TO THE READER.
PRejudice over rules and sways a World of People; and there is no question but
this Collection will meet with a great deal. There are some perhaps may censure
it with an Infandum Regina jubes -- Bigots to something, but they know not
what; nor is it in their Nature to examine the Reasons of their Antipathy. For
after the exactest Scrutiny that can be made, there is nothing to be met with
in the following Sheets, not wrested by Tyrannical Innuendo's, that can give
the least Offense; unless good Latin made good English be a Crime. Here are no
discussions, which of the Contending Parties were in the Right; no
Justifications of the Prosperous, nor Conclusions from Success. Here are only
bare Matters of Fact, abstracted from the Domestic Broils, and Civil
Dissentions of those Times. It only appears from hence, that a Certain Party of
People, having by Victory obtained the Supreme Government of the Kingdom, took
the Common Methods of Prudence and Policy to strengthen themselves abroad, by
Leagues and Amities with Foreign Princes. Whatever they had done at home, they
paid to all the European Monarchs and Potentates, that deference which became
'em: yet were they not so pusillanimously forward neither to court Foreign
Friendship, or to conclude any Treaties but to the Advantage of the Nation,
according to those Maxims which they professed; and how severe soever they were
to those they believed their Enemies within dors, both the one and the other
were most careful, not to suffer the Merchants to be abused abroad, if either
Force or Intercession could prevail. Then, for the Honor of those People, who
had in those times successively Usurped the Supreme Authority of the Nation,
nothing more plainly discovers it then the different Style of the ensuing
Letters: for Mr. Milton is not to be thought to have Written his own Sense, but
what was dictated to him by his Superiors. The Language of the Long Parliament
was more Imperious and downright; Oliver's Vein more full of Cants; and where
he concluded with Threats, he began with Godly Expostulations. In the last
place, to question the Truth of those Transactions to which these following
Letters have Relation, would be a Solecism which Ignorance it self would be
ashamed to own. The Dates, the Subscriptions, Superscriptions, render every
thing Authentic. So that were it only for their Character of Truth which must
be allowed 'em, that alone is sufficient to recommend 'em to Posterity: at
least to those who may be ambitious to be the English Thuanus's of succeeding
Ages, to whom the Verity of these Letters will be a useful Clue, so far as it
reaches, to guide them through the Labyrinth of forgotten story. Honey Soit qui
mal y pence.

THE LIFE OF Mr. John Milton.
OF all the several parts of History, that which sets forth the Lives, and
Commemorates the most remarkable Actions, Sayings, or Writings of Famous and
Illustrious Persons, whether in War or Peace; whether many together, or any one
in particular, as it is not the least useful in it self, so it is in highest
Vogue and Esteem among the Studious and Reading part of Mankind. The most
Eminent in this way of History were among the Ancients, Plutarch and Diogenes
Laertius of the Greeks; the first wrote the Lives, for the most part, of the
most Renowned Heroes and Warriors of the Greeks and Romans; the other the
Lives of the Ancient Greek Philosophers. And Cornelius Nepos (or as some will
have it Acmilius Probus) of the Latins, who wrote the Lives of the most
Illustrious Greek and Roman Generals. Among the Moderns, Machiavel a Noble
Florentine, who Elegantly wrote the Life of Castrucio Castracano, Lord of Luca.
And of our Nation, Sir Fulk Grevil, who wrote the Life of his most intimate
Friend Sir Philip Sidney: Mr. Thomas Stanly of Cumberlo-Green, who made a most
Elaborate improvement to the foresaid Lacrtius, by adding to what he found in
him, what by diligent search and enquiry he Collected from other Authors of
best Authority.

Isaac Walton, who wrote the Lives of Sir Henry Wotton, Dr. Done; and for his
Divine Poems, the admired Mr. George Herbert. Lastly, not to mention several
other Biographers of considerable Note, the Great Gassendus of France, the
worthy Celebrator of two no less worthy Subjects of his impartial Pen; viz. The
Noble Philosopher Epicurus, and the most politely Learned Virtuoso of his Age,
his Countryman, Monsieur Periesk. And pity it is the Person whose memory we
have here undertaken to perpetuate by recounting the most memorable
Transactions of his Life, (though his Works sufficiently recommend him to the
World) finds not a well-informed Pen able to set him forth, equal with the best
of those here mentioned; for doubtless had his Fame been as much spread through
Europe, in Thuanus's time as now it is, and has been for several Years, he had
justly merited from that Great Historian, an Eulogy not inferior to the
highest, by him given to all the Learned and Ingenious that lived within the
compass of his History. For we may safely and justly affirm, that take him in
all respects, for Acumen of Wit, Quickness of Apprehension, Sagacity of
Judgment, Depth of Argument, and Elegancy of Style, as well in Latin as
English, as well in Verse as Prose, he is scarce to be paralleled by any the
best of Writers our Nation has in any Age brought forth. He was Born in
London, in a House in Breadstreet, the Lease whereof, as I take it, but for
certain it was a House in Breadstreet, became in time part of his Estate in the
Year of our Lord, 1606. His Father John Milton, an Honest, Worthy, and
Substantial Citizen of London, by Profession a Scrivener, to which Profession
he voluntarily betook himself, by the advice and assistance of an intimate
Friend of his, Eminent in that Calling, upon his being cast out by his Father,
a bigoted Roman Catholic, for embracing, when Young, the Protestant Faith,
and abjuring the Popish Tenets; for he is said to have been Descended of an
Ancient Family of the Miltons, of Milton, near Abington in Oxfordshire; where
they had been a long time seated, as appears by the Monuments still to be seen
in Milton-Church, till one of the Family having taken the wrong side, in the
Contests between the Houses of York and Lancaster, was sequestered of all his
Estate, but what he held by his Wife. However, certain it is, that this
Vocation he followed for many Years, at his said House in Breadstreet, with
success suitable to his Industry, and prudent conduct of his Affairs; yet did
he not so far quit his own Generous and Ingenious Inclinations, as to make
himself wholly a Slave to the World; for he sometimes found vacant hours to the
Study (which he made his recreation) of the Noble Science of Music, in which
he advanced to that perfection, that as I have been told, and as I take it, by
our Author himself, he Composed an In Nomine of Forty Parts: for which he was
rewarded with a Gold Medal and Chain by a Polish Prince, to whom he presented
it. However, this is a truth not to be denied, that for several Songs of his
Composition, after the way of these times, three or four of which are still to
be seen in Old Wilby's set of Airs, besides some Compositions of his in
Ravenscrofs Psalms, he gained the Reputation of a considerable Master in this
most charming of all the Liberal Sciences: Yet all this while, he managed his
Grand Affair of this World with such Prudence and Diligence, that by the
assistance of Divine Providence favoring his honest endeavors, he gained a
Competent Estate, whereby he was enabled to make a handsome Provision both for
the Education and Maintenance of his Children; for three he had, and no more,
all by one Wife, Sarah, of the Family of the Castons, derived originally from
Wales. A Woman of Incomparable Virtue and Goodness; John the Eldest, the
Subject of our present Work. Christopher, and an only Daughter Ann;
Christopher being principally designed for the Study of the Common Law of
England, was Entered Young a Student of the Inner Temple, of which House he
lived to be an Ancient Bencher, and keeping close to that Study and Profession
all his Lifetime, except in the time of the Civil Wars of England; when being
a great favourer and assertor of the King's Cause, and Obnoxious to the
Parliament's side, by acting to his utmost power against them, so long as he
kept his Station at Reading; and after that Town was taken by the Parliament
Forces, being forced to quit his House there, he steered his course according
to the Motion of the King's Army.

But when the War was ended with Victory and Success to the Parliament Party,
by the Valor of General Fairfax, and the Craft and Conduct of Cromwell; and
his composition made by the help of his Brother's Interest, with the then
prevailing Power; he betook himself again to his former Study and Profession,
following Chamber-Practice every Term, yet came to no Advancement in the World
in a long time, except some small Employ in the Town of Ipswich, where (and
near it) he lived all the latter time of his Life. For he was a person of a
modest quiet temper, preferring Justice and Virtue before all Worldly Pleasure
or Grandeur: but in the beginning of the Reign of K. James the II. for his
known Integrity and Ability in the Law, he was by some Persons of Quality
recommended to the King, and at a Call of Sergeants received the Coif, and the
same day was Sworn one of the Barons of the Exchequer, and soon after made one
of the Judges of the Common Pleas; but his Years and Indisposition not well
brooking the Fatigue of public Employment, he continued not long in either of
these Stations, but having his Quietus est, retired to a Country Life, his
Study and Devotion. Ann, the only Daughter of the said John Milton the Elder,
had a considerable Dowry given her by her Father, in Marriage with Edward
Philips, (the Son of Edward Philips of Shrewsbury,) who coming up Young to
Town, was bred up in the Crown-Office in Chancery, and at length came to be
Secondary of the Office under Old Mr. Bembo; by him she had, besides other
Children that dyed Infants, two Sons yet surviving, of whom more hereafter; and
by a second Husband, Mr. Thomas Agar, who (upon the Death of his Intimate
Friend Mr. Philips) worthily Succeeded in the place, which except some time of
Exclusion before and during the Interregnum, he held for many Years, and left
it to Mr. Thomas Milton (the Son of the aforementioned Sir Christopher) who at
this day executes it with great Reputation and Ability. Two Daughters, Mary who
died very Young, and Ann yet surviving.

But to hasten back to our matter in hand; John our Author, who was destined to
be the Ornament and Glory of his Country, was sent, together with his Brother,
to Paul's School, whereof Dr. Gill the Elder was then Chief Master; where he
was entered into the first Rudiments of Learning, and advanced therein with
that admirable Success, not more by the Discipline of the School and good
Instructions of his Masters, (for that he had another Master possibly at his
Father's house, appears by the Fourth Elegy of his Latin Poems written in his
18th year, to Thomas Young Pastor of the English Company of Merchants at
Hamborough, wherein he owns and styles him his Master) than by his own happy
Genius, prompt Wit and Apprehension, and insuperable Industry; for he generally
sat up half the Night, as well in voluntary Improvements of his own choice, as
the exact perfecting of his School-Exercises: So that at the Age of 15 he was
full ripe for Academick Learning, and accordingly was sent to the University of
Cambridge; where in Christ's College, under the Tuition of a very Eminent
Learned man, whose Name I cannot call to mind, he Studied Seven years, and took
his Degree of Master of Arts; and for the extraordinary Wit and Reading he had
shown in his Performances to attain his Degree, (some whereof spoken at a
Vacation-Exercise in his 19th. year of Age, are to be yet seen in his
Miscellaneous Poems) he was loved and admired by the whole University,
particularly by the Fellows and most Ingenious Persons of his House. Among the
rest there was a Young Gentleman, one Mr. King, with whom, for his great
Learning and Parts he had contracted a particular Friendship and Intimacy;
whose death (for he was drowned on the Irish Seas in his passage from Chester
to Ireland) he bewails in that most excellent Monody in his forementioned
Poems) Entitled Lycidas. Never was the loss of Friend so Elegantly lamented;
and among the rest of his Juvenile Poems, some he wrote at the Age of 15, which
contain a Poetical Genius scarce to be paralleled by any English Writer. Soon
after he had taken his Master's Degree, he thought fit to leave the University:
Not upon any disgust or discontent for want of Preferment, as some Ill-willers
have reported; nor upon any cause whatsoever forced to fly, as his Detractors
maliciously feign; but from which aspersion he sufficiently clears himself in
his Second Answer to Alexander Morus, the Author of a Book called, Clamor Regii
Sanguinis ad Caelum, the chief of his Calumniators; in which he plainly makes
it out, that after his leaving the University, to the no small trouble of his
Fellow-Collegiates, who in general regretted his Absence, he for the space of
Five years lived for the most part with his Father and Mother at their house at
Horton near Colebrook in Barkshire; whither his Father, having got an Estate to
his content, and left off all business, was retired from the Cares and Fatigues
of the world. After the said term of Five years, his Mother then dying, he was
willing to add to his acquired Learning the observation of Foreign Customs,
Manners, and Institutions; and thereupon took a resolution to Travel, more
especially designing for Italy; and accordingly, with his Father's Consent and
Assistance, he put himself into an Equipage suitable to such a Design; and so
intending to go by the way of France, he set out for Paris accompanied only
with one Man, who attended him through all his Travels; for his Prudence was
his Guide, and his Learning his Introduction and Presentation to Persons of
most Eminent Quality. However, he had also a most Civil and Obliging Letter of
Direction and Advice from Sir Henry Wootton then Provost of Eaton, and formerly
Resident Ambassador from King James the First to the State of Venice; which
Letter is to be seen in the First Edition of his Miscellaneous Poems. At Paris
being Recommended by the said Sir Henry and other Persons of Quality, he went
first to wait upon my Lord Scudamore, then Ambassador in France from King
Charles the First. My Lord received him with wonderful Civility; and
understanding he had a desire to make a Visit to the great Hugo Grotius, he
sent several of his Attendants to wait upon him, and to present him in his Name
to that Renowned Doctor and Statesman, who was at that time Ambassador from
Christina Queen of Sweden, to the French King. Grotius took the Visit kindly,
and gave him Entertainment suitable to his Worth, and the high Commendations he
had heard of him. After a few days, not intending to make the usual Tour of
France, he took his leave of my Lord, who at his departure from Paris, gave him
Letters to the English Merchants residing in any part through which he was to
Travel, in which they were requested to show him all the Kindness, and do him
all the Good Offices that lay in their Power.

From Paris he hastened on his Journey to Nicaea, where he took Shipping, and
in a short space arrived at Genoa; from whence he went to Leghorn, thence to
Pisa, and so to Florence: In this City he met with many charming Objects, which
Invited him to stay a longer time then he intended; the pleasant Situation of
the Place, the Nobleness of the Structures, the exact Humanity and Civility of
the Inhabitants, the more Polite and Refined sort of Language there, than
elsewhere. During the time of his stay here, which was about Two Months, he
Visited all the private Academies of the City, which are Places established for
the improvement of Wit and Learning, and maintained a Correspondence and
perpetual Friendship among Gentlemen fitly qualified for such an Institution:
and such sort of Academies there are in all or most of the most noted Cities in
Italy. Visiting these Places, he was soon taken notice of by the most Learned
and Ingenious of the Nobility, and the Grand Wits of Florence, who caressed him
with all the Honors and Civilities imaginable, particularly Jacobo Gaddi,
Carolo Dati, Antonio Francini, Frescobaldo, Cultelino, Banmatthei and
Clementillo: Whereof Gaddi has a large Elegant Italian Canzonet in his Praise:
Dati, a Latin Epistle; both Printed before his Latin Poems, together with a
Latin Distich of the Marquess of Villa, and another of Selvaggi, and a Latin
Tetrastick of Giovanni Salsilli a Roman.

From Florence he took his Journey to Siena, from thence to Rome; where he was
detained much about the same time he had been at Florence; as well by his
desire of seeing all the Rarities and Antiquities of that most Glorious and
Renowned City, as by the Conversation of Lucas Holstenius, and other Learned
and Ingenious men; who highly valued his Acquaintance, and treated him with all
possible Respect.

From Rome he Traveled to Naples, where he was introduced by a certain
Hermit, who accompanied him in his Journey from Rome thither, into the
Knowledge of Giovanni Baptista Manso, Marquess of Villa, a Neapolitan by Birth,
a Person of high Nobility, Virtue, and Honor, to whom the famous Italian Poet,
Torquato Tasso, Wrote his Treatise de Amicitia; and moreover mentions him with
great Honor in that Illustrious Poem of his, Entitled, Gieruemme Liberata:
This Noble Marquess received him with extraordinary Respect and Civility, and
went with him himself to give him a sight of all that was of Note and Remark in
the City, particularly the Viceroys Palace, and was often in Person to Visit
him at his Lodging. Moreover, this Noble Marquess honored him so far, as to
make a Latin Distich in his Praise, as has been already mentiontd; which being
no less pithy then short, though already in Print, it will not be unworth the
while here to repeat.

Vt Men's, Forma, Decor, Facies, si This word relates to his being a Protestant
not a Roman Catholic.
Pietas, sic,
Non Anglus Verum Hercle Angelus ipse foret.
In return of this Honor, and in gratitude for the many Favors and Civilities
received of him, he presented him at his departure with a large Latin Eclogue,
Entitled, Mansus, afterward's Published among his Latin Poems. The Marquess at
his taking leave of him gave him this Complement, That he would have done him
many more Offices of Kindness and Civility, but was therefore rendered
incapable in regard he had been over-liberal in his speech against the Religion
of the Country.

He had entertained some thoughts of passing over into Sicily and Greece, but
was diverted by the News he received from England, that Affairs there were
tending toward a Civil War; thinking it a thing unworthy in him to be taking
his Pleasure in Foreign Parts, while his Countrymen at home were Fighting for
their Liberty: But first resolved to see Rome once more; and though the
Merchants gave him a caution that the Jesuits were hatching designs against
him, in case he should return thither, by reason of the freedom he took in all
his discourses of Religion; nevertheless he ventured to prosecute his
Resolution, and to Rome the second time he went, determining with himself not
industriously to begin to fall into any Discourse about Religion; but, being
asked, not to deny or endeavor to conceal his own Sentiments; Two Months he
staid at Rome; and in all that time never flinch'd, but was ready to defend the
Orthodox Faith against all Opposers; and so well he succeeded therein, that
Good Providence guarding him, he went safe from Rome back to Florence, where
his return to his Friends of that City was welcomed with as much Joy and
Affection, as had it been to his Friends and Relations in his own Country, he
could not have come a more joyful and welcome Guest. Here, having staid as long
as at his strfi coming, excepting an excursion of a few days to Luca, crossing
the Apennine, and passing through Bononia and Ferrara, he arrived at Venice,
where when he had spent a Month's time in viewing of that Stately City, and
Shipped up a Parcel of curious and rare Books which he had picked up in his
Travels; particularly a Chest or two of choice Musick-books of the best Masters
flourishing about that time in Italy, namely, Luca Marenzo, Monte Verde,
Horatio Vecchi, Cifa, the Prince of Venosa and several others, he took his
course through Verona, Milan, and the Poenine Alps, and so by the Lake Leman to
Geneva, where he staid for some time, and had daily converse with the most
Learned Giovanni Deodati, Theology-Professor in that City, and so returning
through France, by the same way he had passed it going to Italy, he, after a
Peregrination of one complete Year and about Three Months, arrived safe in
England, about the time of the Kings making his second Expedition against the
Scots. Soon after his return, and visits paid to his Father and other Friends,
he took him a Lodging in S. Brides Churchyard, at the House of one Russel a
Tailor, where he first undertook the Education and Instruction of his Sister's
two Sons, the Younger whereof had been wholly committed to his Charge and Care.
And here by the way, I judge it not impertinent to mention the many Authors
both of the Latin and Greek, which through his excellent judgment and way of
Teaching, far above the Pedantry of common public Schools (where such Authors
are scarce ever heard of) were run over within no greater compass of time, then
from Ten to Fifteen or Sixteen Years of Age. Of the Latin the four Grand
Authors, De Re Rustica, Cato, Varro, Columella, and Palladius; Cornelius
Celsus, an Ancient Physician of the Romans; a great part of Pliny's Natural
History, Vitruvius his Architecture, Frontinus his Stratagems, with the two
Egregious Poets, Lucretius, and Manilius. Of the Greek; Hesiod, a Poet equal
with Homer; Aratus his Phenomenon, and Diosemeia, Dionysius Afer de situ Orbis,
Oppian's Cynegeticks and Halieuticks. Quintus Calaber his Poem of the Trojan
War, continued from Homer; Apollonius, Rhodius his Argonuticks, and in Prose,
Plutarch's Placita Philosophorum and (...) Geminus's Astronomy; Xenophon's Cyri
Institutio and Anabasis, Aelians Tacticks, and Polyaenus his Warlike
Stratagems; thus by teaching he in some measure increased his own knowledge,
having the reading of all these Authors as it were by Proxy; and all this might
possibly have conduced to the preserving of his Eyesight, had he not,
moreover, been perpetually busied in his own Laborious Undertakings of the Book
or Pen. Nor did the time thus Studiously employed in conquering the Greek and
Latin Tongues, hinder the attaining to the chief Oriental Languages, viz. The
Hebrew, Caldee and Syriac, so far as to go through the Pentateuch, or Five
Books of Moses in Hebrew, to make a good entrance into the Targum or Chaldee
Paraphrase, and to understand several Chapters of St. Matthew in the Syriac
Testament, besides an Introduction into several Arts and Sciences, by Reading
Vrstisius his Arithmetic, Riffs Geometry, Petiscus his Trigonometry, Joannes
de Sacro Bosco de Sphaera; and into the Italian and French Tongues, by reading
in Italian, Giovan Villani's History of the Transactions between several petty
States of Italy; and in French a great part of Pierre Davity, the famous
Geographer of France in his time. The Sunday's work was for the most part the
Reading each day a Chapter of the Greek Testament, and hearing his Learned
Exposition upon the same, (and how this savoured of Atheism in him, I leave to
the courteous Backbiter to judge). The next work after this, was the writing
from his own dictation, some part, from time to time, of a Tractate which he
thought fit to collect from the ablest of Divines, who had written of that
Subject; Amesius, Wollebius, etc. viz. A perfect System of Divinity, of which
more hereafter. Now persons so far Manuducted into the highest paths of
Literature both Divine and Human, had they received his documents with the same
Acuteness of Wit and Apprehension, the same Industry, Alacrity, and Thirst
after Knowledge, as the Instructor was endued with, what Prodigies of Wit and
Learning might they have proved! the Scholars might in some degree have come
near to the equalling of the Master, or at least have in some sort made good
what he seems to predict in the close of an Elegy he made in the Seventeenth
Year of his Age, upon the Death of one of his Sister's Children (a Daughter)
who died in her Infancy.

Then thou the Mother of so sweet a Child,
Her false Imagined Loss cease to Lament,
And Wisely learn to curb thy Sorrows Wild;
This if thou do, he will an Offspring give,
That to the Worlds last end, shall make thy Name to live.
But to return to the Thread of our Discourse; he made no long stay in his
Lodgings in St. Brides Churchyard; necessity of having a place to dispose his
Books in, and other Goods fit for the furnishing of a good handsome House,
hastening him to take one; and accordingly a pretty Garden-House he took in
Aldersgate Street, at the end of an Entry; and therefore the fitter for his
turn, by the reason of the Privacy, besides that there are few Streets in
London more free from Noise then that.

Here first it was that his Academick Erudition was put in practice, and
Vigorously proceeded, he himself giving an Example to those under him, (for it
was not long after his taking this House, e're his Elder Nephew was put to
Board with him also) of hard Study, and spare Diet; only this advantage he had,
that once in three Weeks or a Month, he would drop into the Society of some
Young Sparks of his Acquaintance, the chief whereof were Mr. Alphry, and Mr.
Miller, two Gentlemen of Gray's-Inn, the Beau's of those Times, but nothing
near so bad as those nowadays; with these Gentlemen he would so far make bold
with his Body, as now and then to keep a Gaudy day.

In this House he continued several Years, in the one or two first whereof, he
set out several Treatises, viz. That of Reformation; that against Prelatical
Episcopacy; The Reason of Church Government; The Defense of Smectimnuus, at
least the greatest part of them, but as I take it, all; and some time after,
one Sheet of Education, which he Dedicated to Mr. Samuel Hartlib, he that wrote
so much of Husbandry; this Sheet is Printed at the end of the Second Edition of
his Poems; and lastly, Areopagitica. During the time also of his continuance in
this House, there fell out several Occasions of the Increasing of his Family.
His Father, who till the taking of Reading by the Earl of Essex his Forces, had
lived with his other Son at his House there, was upon that Son's dissettlement
necessitated to betake himself to this his Eldest Son, with whom he lived for
some Years, even to his Dying Day. In the next place he had an Addition of some
Scholars; to which may be added, his entering into Matrimony; but he had his
Wife's company so small a time, that he may well be said to have become a
single man again soon after. About Whitsuntide it was, or a little after, that
he took a Journey into the Country; no body about him certainly knowing the
Reason, or that it was any more than a Journey of Recreation: after a Month's
stay, home he returns a Married-man, that went out a Bachelor; his Wife being
Mary the Eldest Daughter of Mr. Richard Powell, then a Justice of Peace, of
Forresthil, near Shotover in Oxfordshire; some few of her nearest Relations
accompanying the Bride to her new Habitation; which by reason the Father nor
any body else were yet come, was able to receive them; where the Feasting held
for some days in Celebration of the Nuptials, and for entertainment of the
Bride's Friends. At length they took their leave, and returning to Forresthill,
left the Sister behind; probably not much to her satisfaction; as appeared by
the Sequel; by that time she had for a Month or thereabout led a Philosophical
Life, (after having been used to a great House, and much Company and Joviality)
Her Friends, possibly incited by her own desire, made earnest suit by Letter,
to have her Company the remaining part of the Summer, which was granted, on
condition of her return at the time appointed, Michalemas, or thereabout: In
the mean time came his Father, and some of the forementioned Disciples. And now
the Studies went on with so much the more Vigor, as there were more Hands and
Heads employed; the Old Gentleman living wholly retired to his Rest and
Devotion, without the least trouble imaginable: Our Author, now as it were a
single man again, made it his chief diversion now and then in an Evening to
visit the Lady Margaret Lee, Daughter to the -- Lee, Earl of Marlborough, Lord
High Treasurer of England, and President of the Privy Council to King James the
First. This Lady being a Woman of great Wit and Ingenuity, had a particular
Honor for him, and took much delight in his Company, as likewise her Husband
Captain Hobson, a very Accomplished Gentleman; and what Esteem he at the same
time had for Her, appears by a Sonnet he made in praise of her, to be seen
among his other Sonnets in his Extant Poems. Michalemas being come, and no news
of his Wife's return, he sent for her by Letter, and receiving no answer, sent
several other Letters, which were also unanswered; so that at last he
dispatched down a Foot-Messenger with a Letter, desiring her return; but the
Messenger came back not only without an answer, at least a satisfactory one,
but to the best of my remembrance, reported that he was dismissed with some
sort of Contempt; this proceeding, in all probability, was grounded upon no
other Cause but this, namely, That the Family being generally addicted to the
Cavalier Party, as they called it, and some of them possibly engaged in the
King's Service, who by this time had his Head Quarters at Oxford, and was in
some Prospect of Success, they began to repent them of having Matched the
Eldest Daughter of the Family to a Person so contrary to them in Opinion; and
thought it would be a blot in their Escutcheon, when ever that Court should
come to Flourish again; however, it so incensed our Author, that he thought it
would be dishonorable ever to receive her again, after such a repulse; so that
he forthwith prepared to Fortify himself with Arguments for such a Resolution,
and accordingly wrote two Treatises, by which he undertook to maintain. That it
was against Reason (and the enjoynment of it not proveable by Scripture) for
any Married Couple disagreeable in Humor and Temper, or having an aversion to
each, to be forced to live yoked together all their Days. The first was, His
Doctrine and Discipline of Divorce; of which there was Printed a Second
Edition, with some Additions. The other in prosecution of the first, was
styled, Tetrachordon. Then the better to confirm his own Opinion, by the
attestation of others, he set out a Piece called the Judgment of Martin Bucer,
a Protestant Minister, being a Translation, out of that Reverend Divine, of
some part of his Works, exactly agreeing with him in Sentiment. Lastly, he
wrote in answer to a Pragmatical Clerk, who would needs give himself the Honor
of Writing against so great a Man, His Colasterion or Rod of Correction for a
Saucy Impertinent. Not very long after the setting forth of these Treatises,
having application made to him by several Gentlemen of his acquaintance, for
the Education of their Sons, as understanding happily the Progress he had infixed
by his first undertakings of that nature, he laid out for a larger House, and
soon found it out; but in the interim before he removed, there fell out a
passage, which though it altered not the whole Course he was going to Steer,
yet it put a stop or rather an end to a grand Affair, which was more than
probably thought to be then in agitation: It was indeed a design of Marrying
one of Dr. Davis's Daughters, a very Handsome and Witty Gentlewoman, but averse
as it is said to this Motion; however, the Intelligence hereof, and the then
declining State of the King's Cause, and consequently of the Circumstances of
Justice Powell's Family, caused them to set all Engines on Work, to restore the
late Married Woman to the Station wherein they a little before had planted her;
at last this device was pitched upon. There dwelt in the Lane of St.
Martins-L-Grand, which was hard by, a Relation of our Author's, one
Blackborough, whom it was known he often visited, and upon this occasion the
visits were the more narrowly observed, and possibly there might be a
Combination between both Parties; the Friends on both sides concentring in the
same action though on different behalfs. One time above the rest, he making his
usual visit, the Wife was ready in another Room, and on a sudden he was
surprised to see one whom he thought to have never seen more, making Submission
and begging Pardon on her Knees before him; he might probably at first make
some show of aversion and rejection; but partly his own generous nature, more
inclinable to Reconciliation than to perseverance in Anger and Revenge; and
partly the strong intercession of Friends on both sides, soon brought him to an
Act of Oblivion, and a firm League of Peace for the future; and it was at
length concluded, That she should remain at a Friend's house, till such time as
he was settled in his New house at Barbican, and all things for her reception
in order; the place agreed on for her present abode, was the Widow Webber's
house in St. Clement's Churchyard, whose Second Daughter had been Married to
the other Brother many years before; the first fruits of her return to her
Husband was a brave Girl, born within a year after; though, whether by ill
Constitution, or want of Care, she grew more and more decrepit. But it was not
only by Children that she increased the number of the Family, for in no very
long time after her coming, she had a great resort of her Kindred with her in
the House, viz. her Father and Mother, and several of her Brothers and Sisters,
which were in all pretty Numerous; who upon his Father's Sickning and Dying
soon after went away. And now the House looked again like a House of the Muses
only, tho the accession of Scholars was not great. Possibly his proceeding thus
far in the Education of Youth may have been the occasion of some of his
Adversaries calling him Paedagogue and Schoolmaster: Whereas it is well known
he never set up for a Public School to teach all the young Fry of a Parish,
but only was willing to impart his Learning and Knowledge to Relations, and the
Sons of some Gentlemen that were his intimate Friends; besides, that neither
his Converse, nor his Writings, nor his manner of Teaching ever savored in the
least any thing of Pedantry; and probably he might have some prospect of
putting in Practice his Academical Institution, according to the Model laid
down in his Sheet of Education. The Progress of which design was afterward
diverted by a Series of Alteration in the Affairs of State; for I am much
mistaken, if there were not about this time a design in Agitation of making him
Adjutant-General in Sir William Waller's Army; but the new modelling of the
Army soon following, proved an obstruction to that design; and Sir William, his
Commission being laid down, began, as the common saying is, to turn Cat in Pan.
It was not long after the March of Fairfax and Comwel through the City of
London with the whole Army, to quell the Insurrections Brown and Massy, now
Malcontents also, were endeavoring to raise in the City against the Armies
proceedings, ere he left his great House in Barbican, and betook himself to a
smaller in High Holbourn, among those that open backward into Lincoln's Inn
Fields, here he lived a private and quiet Life, still prosecuting his Studies
and curious Search into Knowledge, the grand Affair perpetually of his Life;
till such time as the War being now at an end, with complete Victory to the
Parliament's side, as the Parliament then stood purged of all it is Dissenting
Members, and the King after some Treaties with the Army, re Infecta, brought to
his Trial; the form of Government being now changed into a Free State, he was
hereupon obliged to Write a Treatise, called the Tenure of Kings and
Magistrates. After which his thoughts were bent upon retiring again to his own
private Studies, and falling upon such Subjects as his proper Genius prompted
him to Write of, among which was the History of our own Nation from the
Beginning till the Norman Conquest, wherein he had made some progress. When for
this his last Treatise, reviving the fame of other things he had formerly
Published, being more and more taken notice of for his excellency of Style, and
depth of Judgment, he was courted into the Service of this new Commonwealth,
and at last prevailed with (for he never hunted after Preferment, nor affected
the Tintamar and Hurry of Public business) to take upon him the Office of
Latin Secretary to the Counsel of State for all their Letters to Foreign
Princes and States; for they stuck to this Noble and Generous Resolution, not
to write to any, or receive Answers from them, but in a Language most proper to
maintain a Correspondence among the Learned of all Nations in this part of the
World; scorning to carry on their Affairs in the Wheedling Lisping Jargon of
the Cringing French, especially having a Minister of State able to cope with
the ablest any Prince or State could employ for the Latin Tongue; and so well
he acquitted himself in this station, that he gained from abroad both
Reputation to himself, and Credit to the State that Employed him; and it was
well the business of his Office came not very fast upon him, for he was scarce
well warm in his Secretaryship before other Work flowed in upon him, which took
him up for some considerable time. In the first place there came out a Book
said to have been written by the King, and finished a little before his Death,
Entitled, (...), that is, The Royal Image; a Book highly cried up for it is
smooth Style, and pathetical Composure; wherefore to obviate the impression it
was like to make among the Many, he was obliged to Write an Answer, which he
Entitled (...), or Image-Breaker; and upon the heels of that, out comes in
Public the great Kill-cow of Christendom, with his Defensio Regis contra
Populum Anglicanum; a Man so Famous and cried up for his Plinian Exercitations,
and other Pieces of reputed Learning, that there could no where have been found
a Champion that durst lift up the Pen against so formidable an Adversary, had
not our little English David had the Courage to undertake this great French
Goliath, to whom he gave such a hit in the Forehead, that he presently
staggered, and soon after fell; for immediately upon the coming out of the
Answer. Entitled, Defensio Populi Anglicani, contra Claudium Anonymum, etc. he
that till then had been Chief Minister and Superintendant in the Court of the
Learned Christina Queen of Sweden, dwindled in esteem to that degree, that he
at last vouchsafed to speak to the meanest Servant. In short, he was dismissed
with so cold and slighting an Adieu, that after a faint dying Reply, he was
glad to have recourse to Death, the remedy of Evils, and ender of
Controversies: And now I presume our Author had some breathing space; but it
was not long; for though Salmasius was departed, he left some stings behind,
new Enemies started up, Barkers, though no great Biters; who the first Assertor
of Salmasius his Cause was, is not certainly known, but variously conjectured
at, some supposing it to be one Janus a Lawyer of Gray's Inn, some Dr. Bramhal,
made by King Charles the Second after his Restoration Archbishop of Armagh in
Ireland; but whoever the Author was, the Book was thought fit to be taken into
correction, and our Author not thinking it worth his own undertaking, to the
disturbing the progress of whatever more chosen work he had then in hands,
committed this task to the youngest of his Nephews, but with such exact
Emendations before it went to the Press, that it might have very well have
passed for his, but that he was willing the person that took the pains to
prepare it for his Examination and Polishment, should have the Name and Credit
of being the Author; so that it came forth under this Title, Joannis Philippi
Angli Defensio pro Populo Anglicano contra, etc. during the Writing and
Publishing of this Book, he lodged at one Thomson's next door to the Bull-head
Tavern at Charing Cross, opening into the Spring-Garden, which seems to have
have been only a Lodging taken, till his designed Apartment in Scotland-Yard
was prepared for him; for hither he soon removed from the foresaid place; and
here his third Child, a Son was born, which through the ill usage, or bad
Constitution of an ill chosen Nurse, died an Infant; from this Apartment,
whether he thought it it not healthy, or otherwise convenient for his use, or
whatever else was the reason, he soon after took a pretty Garden-house in
Petty-France in Westminster, next door to the Lord Scudamore's and opening into
St. James's Park; here he remained no less than Eight years, namely, from the
year 1652, till within a few weeks of King Charles the 2d's. Restoration. In
this House his first Wife dying in Childbed, he Married a Second, who after a
Year's time died in Childbed also; this his Second Marriage was about Two or
Three years after his being wholly deprived of Sight, which was jusst going,
about the time of his Answering Salmasius; whereupon his Adversaries gladly
take occasion of imputing his blindness as a Judgment upon him for his
Answering the King's Book, etc. whereas it is most certainly known, that his
Sight, what with his continual Study, his being subject to the Head-ake, and
his perpetual tampering with Physic to preserve it, had been decaying for
above a dozen years before, and the sight of one for a long time clearly lost.
Here he wrote, by his Amanuensis, his Two Answers to Alexander More; who upon
the last Answer quitted the field. So that being now quiet from
State-Adversaries and public Contests, he had leisure again for his own
Studies and private Designs; which were his foresaid History of England, and a
New Thesaurus Linguae Latinae, according to the manner of Stephanus; a work he
had been long since Collecting from his own Reading, and still went on with it
at times, even very near to his dying day; but the Papers after his death were
so discomposed and deficient, that it could not be made fit for the Press;
However, what there was of it, was made use of for another Dictionary. But the
Height of his Noble Fancy and Invention began now to be seriously and mainly
employed in a Subject worthy of such a Muse, viz. A Heroic Poem, Entitled,
Paradise Lost; the Noblest in the general Esteem of Learned and Judicious
Persons, of any yet written by any either Ancient or Modern: This Subject was
first designed a Tragedy, and in the Fourth Book of the Poem there are Ten
Verses, which several Years before the Poem was begun, were shown to me, and
some others, as designed for the very beginning of the said Tragedy. The Verses
are these;

O Thou that with surpassing Glory Crowned!
Look from thy sole Dominion, like the God
Of this New World; at whose sight all the Stars
Hide their diminished Heads; to thee I call,
But with no friendly Voice; and add thy Name,
O Sun! to tell thee how I hate thy Beams
That bring to my remembrance, from what State
I fell; how Glorious once above thy Sphere;
Till Pride and worse Ambition threw me down,
Warring in Heaven, against Heaven's Glorious King.
There is another very remarkable Passage in the Composure of this Poem, which
I have a particular occasion to remember; for whereas I had the perusal of it
from the very beginning; for some years as I went from time to time to Visit
him, in a Parcel of Ten, Twenty, or Thirty Verses at a Time, which being
Written by whatever hand came next, might possibly want Correction as to the
Orthography and Pointing; having as the Summer came on, not been showed any for
a considerable while, and desiring the reason thereof, was answered, That his
Vein never happily flowed, but from the Autumnal Equinoctial to the Vernal, and
that whatever he attempted was never to his satisfaction, though he courted his
fancy never so much; so that in all the years he was about this Poem, he may be
said to have spent but half his time therein. It was but a little before the
King's Restoration that he Wrote and Published his Book in Defense of a
Commonwealth; so undaunted he was in declaring his true Sentiments to the
world; and not long before, his Power of the Civil Magistrate in Ecclesiastical
Affairs; and his Treatise against Hirelings, just upon the King's coming over;
having a little before been sequestered from his Office of Latin Secretary, and
the Salary thereunto belonging, he was forced to leave his House also, in Petty
France, where all the time of his abode there, which was eight years, as
abovementioned, he was frequently visited by persons of Quality, particularly
my Lady Ranala, whose Son for some time he instructed; all Learned Foreigners
of Note, who could not part out of this City, without giving a visit to a
person so Eminent; and lastly, by particular Friends that had a high esteem for
him, viz. Mr. Andrew Marvel, young Laurence (the Son of him that was President
of Oliver's Council) to whom there is a Sonnet among the rest, in his Printed
Poems; Mr. Marchamont Needham, the Writer of Politicus; but above all, Mr.
Cyriak Skinner whom he honored with two Sonnets, one long since public among
his Poems; the other but newly Printed. His next removal was, by the advice of
those that wished him well, and had a concern for his preservation, into a place
of retirement and abscondence, till such time as the current of affairs for the
future should instruct him what farther course to take; it was a Friend's House
in Bartholomew-Close, where he lived till the Act of Oblivion came forth; which
it pleased God, proved as favorable to him as could be hoped or expected,
through the intercession of some that stood his Friends both in Council and
Parliament; particularly in the House of Commons, Mr. Andrew Marvel, a Member
for Hull, acted vigorously in his behalf, and made a considerable party for
him; so that, together with John Goodwin of Coleman-Street, he was only so far
excepted as not to bear any Office in the Commonwealth. Soon after appearing
again in public, he took a House in Holborn near Red Lion Fields, where he
stayed not long before his Pardon having passed the Seal, he removed to Jewin
Street; there he lived when he married his 3d. Wife, recommended to him by his
old Friend Dr. Paget in Coleman-street; but he stayed not long after his new
Marriage, ere he removed to a House in the Artillery-walk leading to Bunhill
Fields. And this was his last Stage in this World, but it was of many years
continuance, more perhaps than he had had in any other place besides. Here he
finished his noble Poem, and published it in the year 1666. the first Edition was
Printed in Quarto by one Simons a Printer in Aldersgate Street, the other in a
large Octavo, by Starky near Temple Bar, amended, enlarged, and differently
disposed as to the Number of Books, by his own Hand, that is by his own
appointment; the last set forth many years since his death in a large Folio
with Cuts added by Jacob Tonson. Here it was also that he finished and published
his History of our Nation till the Conquest, all complete so far as he went,
some Passages only excepted, which being thought too sharp against the Clergy,
could not pass the Hand of the Licencer, were in the Hands of the late Earl of
Anglesey while he lived; where at present is uncertain. It cannot certainly be
concluded when he wrote his excellent Tragedy entitled Samson Agonistes, but
sure enough it is that it came forth afert his publication of Paradise lost,
together with his other Poem called Paradise regained which doubtless was begun
and finished and Printed after the other was published, and that in a wonderful
short space considering the sublimeness of it; however it is generally censured
to be much inferior to the other* though he could not hear with patience any
such thing when related to him; possibly the Subject may not afford such
variety of Invention, but it is thought by the most judicious to be little or
nothing inferior to the other for style and decorum. The said Earl of Anglesy
whom he presented with a Copy of the unlicens'd Papers of his History, came
often here to visit him, as very much coveting his society and converse; as
likewise others of the Nobility, and many persons of eminent quality; nor were
the visits of Foreigners ever more frequent than in this place, almost to his
dying day. His Treatise of true Religion, Heresy, Schism and Toleration, etc.
was doubtless the last thing of his writing that was published before his Death.
He had, as I remember, prepared for the Press an answer to some little scribing
Quack in London, who had written a Scurrilons Libel against him, but whether by
the disswasion of Friends, as thinking him a Fellow not worth his notice, or
for what other cause I know not, this Answer was never published. He died in the
year 1673. toward the latter end of the Summer, and had a very decent
interment according to his Quality, in the Church of St. Giles Cripplegate,
being attended from his House to the Church by several Gentlemen then in Town,
his principal wellwi-shers and admirers He had three Daughters who survived him
many years (and a Son) all by his first Wife (of whom sufficient mention has
been made.) Anne his Eldest as abovesaid, and Mary his Second, who were both
born at his House in Barbican; and Debora the youngest, who is yet living, born
at his House in Petty-France; between whom and his Second Daughter, the Son,
named John, was born as abovementioned, at his Apartment in Scotland Yard. By
his Second Wife, Catharine the Daughter of Captain Woodcock of Hackney, he had
only one Daughter, of which the Mother the first year after her Marriage died
in Child bed, and the Child also within a Month after. By his Third Wife
Elizabeth the Daughter of one Mr. Minshal of Cheshire, (and Kinswoman to Dr.
Paget) who survived him, and is said to be yet living, he never had any Child;
and those he had by the First he made serviceable to him in that very
particular in which he most wanted their Service, and supplied his want of
Eyesight by their Eyes and Tongue; for though he had daily about him one or
other to Read to him, some persons of Man's Estate, who of their own accord
greedily caught at the opportunity of being his Readers, that they might as
well reap the benefit of what they Read to him, as oblige him by the benefit of
their reading; others of younger years sent by their Parents to the same end,
yet excusing only the Eldest Daughter by reason of her bodily Infirmity, and
difficult utterance of Speech, (which to say truth I doubt was the Principal
cause of excusing her) the other two were Condemned to the performance of
Reading, and exactly pronouncing of all the Languages of what ever Book he
should at one time or other think fit to peruse. Viz. The Hebrew (and I think
the Syriac) the Greek, the Latin, the Italian, Spanish and French. All which
sorts of Books to be confined to Read, without understanding one word, must
needs be a Trial of Patience, almost beyond endurance; yet it was endured by
both for a long time, yet the irksomeness of this employment could not be
always concealed, but broke out more and more into expressions of uneasiness;
so that at length they were all (even the Eldest also) sent out to learn some
Curious and Ingenious sorts of Manufacture, that are proper for Women to learn,
particularly Imbroideries in Gold or Silver. It had been happy indeed if the
Daughters of such a Person had been made in some measure Inheritrixes of their
Father's Learning; but since Fate otherwise decreed, the greatest Honor that
can be ascribed to this now living (and so would have been to the others had
they lived) is to be Daughter to a man of his extraordinary Character.

He is said to have dyed worth 1500 l. in Money (a considerable Estate, all
things considered) besides Household Goods; for he sustained such losses as
might well have broke any person less frugal and temperate then himself; no
less then 2000 l. which he had put for Security and improvement into the Excise
Office, but neglecting to recall it in time, could never after get it out, with
all the Power and Interest he had in the Great ones of those Times; besides
another great Sum, by mismanagement and for want of good advice.

Thus I have reduced into form and order what ever I have been able to rally
up, either from the recollection of my own memory, of things transacted while I
was with him, or the information of others equally conversant afterward, or
from his own mouth by frequent visits to the last.

I shall conclude with two material passages, which though they relate not
immediately to our Author, or his own particular concerns; yet in regard they
happened during his public employ, and consequently fell most especially under
his cognizance; it will not be amiss here to subjoin them The first was this,

Before the War broke forth between the States of England, and the Dutch, the
Hollanders sent over Three Ambassadors in order to an accommodation; but they
returning re infecta, the Dutch sent away a Plenipotentiary, to offer Peace
upon much milder terms, or at least to gain more time

But this Plenipotentiary could not make such haste, but that the Parliament
had procured a Copy of their Instructions in Holland, which were delivered by
our Author to his Kinsman that was then with him, to Translate for the Council
to view, before the said Plenipotentiary had taken Shipping for England; an
Answer to all he had in Charge lay ready for him, before he made his public
entry into London.

In the next place there came a person with a very sumptuous train, pretending
himself an Agent from the Prince of Conde, then in Arms against Cardinal
Mazarine: The Parliament mistrusting him, set their Instrument so busily at
work, that in Four or Five Days they had procured Intelligence from Paris, that
he was a Spy from K. Charles; whereupon the very next Morning our Author's
Kinsman was sent to him, with an Order of Council commanding him to depart the
Kingdom within Three Days, or expect the Punishment of a Spy.

By these two remarkable passages, we may clearly discover the Industry and
good Intelligence of those Times.

Here is a Catalogue added of every Book of his that was ever published, which
to my knowledge is full and complete.

TO Oliver Cromwell.
CRomwell our Chief of Men, that through a Crowd,
Not of War only, but distractions rude;
Guided by Faith, and Matchless Fortitude:
To Peace and Truth, thy Glorious way have Plough'd,
And Fought God's Battles, and his Work pursued,
While Darwent Streams with Blood of Scots imbrued;
And Dunbarfield resound thy Praises loud,
And Worcester's Laureat Wreath; yet much remains
To Conquer still; Peace has her Victories
No less than those of War; new Foes arise
Threatening to bind our Souls in secular Chains,
Help us to save Free Conscience from the paw
Of Hireling Wolves, whose Gospel is their Maw.
To my Lord FAIRFAX.
FAirfax, whose Name in Arms through Europe rings,
And fills all Mouths with Envy or with Praise,
And all her Jealous Monarchs with Amaze.
And Rumors loud which daunt remotest Kings,
Thy firm unshaken Valor ever brings
Victory home, while new Rebellions raise
Their Hydra-heads, and the false North displays
Her broken League to Imp her Serpent Wings:
O yet! a Nobler task awaits thy Hand,
For what can War, but Acts of War still breed,
Till injured Truth from Violence be freed;
And public Faith be rescued from the Brand
Of public Fraud; in vain does Valor bleed,
While Avarice and Rapine shares the Land.
To Sir HENRY VANE.
VANE, Young in years, but in Sage Councels old,
Then whom a better Senator never held
The Helm of Rome, when Gowns, not Arms, repelled
The fierce Epirote, and the African bold,
Whether to settle Peace, or to unfold
The Drift of hollow States, hard to be Spelled;
Then to advise how War may best be upheld,
Manned by her Two main Nerves, Iron and Gold,
In all her Equipage: Besides, to know
Both Spiritual and Civil, what each means,
What serves each, thou have learned, which few have done.
The bounds of either Sword to thee we owe;
Therefore on thy Right hand Religion leans,
And reckons thee in chief her Eldest Son.
To Mr. CYRIAC SKINNER Upon his Blindness.
CYRIAC this Three years day, these Eyes though clear
To outward view of blemish or of Spot,
Bereft of Sight, their Seeing have forgot:
Nor to their idle Orbs does day appear,
Or Sun, or Moon, or Star, throughout the Year;
Or Man, or Woman; yet I argue not
Against Heaven's Hand, or Will, nor bate one jot
Of Heart or Hope; but still bear up, and steer
Right onward. What supports me, do thou ask?
The Conscience, Friend, to have lost them over plied
In Liberties Defense, my noble task;
Of which all Europe rings from side to side.
This thought might lead me through this World's vain mask
Content, though blind, had I no other Guide.
A CATALOGUE OF Mr. John Milton's Works.
(...) In Answer to a Book, Entitled, (...), The Portraiture of his Sacred
Majesty in his Solitudes and Sufferings.

The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates; proving, That it is Lawful, and has been
held so through all Ages, for any who have the Power, to call to Account a
Tyrant, or Wicked King; and after due Conviction to Depose and put him to
Death, if the ordinary Magistrate have neglected or denied to do it; and that
they who of late so much blame Deposing, are the men that did it themselves.
4to.

Observations upon the Articles of Peace with the Irish Rebels, on the Letter
of Ormond to Colonel Jones, and the Representation of the Presbytery of
Belfast. 4to.

The ready and easy way to establish a Free Commonwealth; and the Excellency
thereof compared with the Inconveniences and Dangers of Readmitting Kingship
in this Nation. 4to.

Areopagitica; A Speech of John Milton for the Liberty of Unlicensed Printing,
to the Parliament of England. 4to.

Brief Notes upon a Sermon Entitled, The Fear of God and the King, Preached and
since Published by Matthew Griffeth, D. D. and Chaplain to the late King;
wherein many notorious Wrestings of Scripture, and other Falsities are
observed: By J. M. 4to.

Of Reformation touching Church Discipline in England, and the Causes that
hitherto have hindered it. Two Books written to a Friend. 4to.

Of Prelatical Episcopacy, and whether it may be deduced from the Apostolical
times by virtue of those Testimonies which are alleged to that purpose in some
late Treatises; one whereof goes under the Name of James Archbishop of Armagb.
4to.

Animadversions upon the Remonstrants defense against Smectymnuus. 4to.

An Apology for Smectymnuus, with the Reason of Church Government. 4to.

The Reason of Church Government urged against Prelacy. In Two Books. 4to.

Of True Religion, Heresy, Schism, Toleration, and what best means may be used
against the growth of Popery. 4to.

The Doctrine and Discipline of Divorce, restored, to the Good of both Sexes,
from the Bondage of Canon Law and other mistakes, to the true meaning of
Scripture in the Law and Gospel compared. Wherein also are set down the bad
consequences of Abolishing, or Condemning of Sin, that which the Law of God
allows, and Christ abolisht not. Now the second time Revised, and much
Augmented in Two Books. To the Parliament of England, with the Assembly. In 4to.

Colasterion. A Reply to a nameless Answer against the Doctrine and Discipline
of Divorce. Wherein the Trivial Author of that Answer is discovered, the
Licenser conferred with, and the Opinion which they traduce defended. 4to.

Tetrachordon: Expositions upon the Four chief Places in Scripture, which Treat
of Marriage, or Nullities in Marriage, on Genesis 1 27, 28. Compared and
Explained by Genesis 2. 18, 23, 24. Deuteronomy. 24. 1, 2. Matt. 5. 31, 32. with Matt.
19. from the 3d. to the 11. verse. 1 Cor. 7. from the 10th. to the 16th.
Wherein the Doctrine and Discipline of Divorce, as was lately Published, is
confirmed by Explanation of Scripture, by Testimony of Ancient Fathers, of
Civil Laws, in the Primitive Church, of Famousest Reformed Divines: And lastly,
by an intended act of the Parliament and Church of England in the last year of
Edward the Sixth. 4to.

The Judgment of Martin Bucer concerning Divorce, written to Edward the Sixth,
in his second Book of the Kingdom of Christ, and now Englished; wherein a late
Book restoring the Doctrine and Discipline of Divorce is here Confirmed and
Justified by the Authority of Martin Bucer. To the Parliament of England. 4to.

The History of Britain, that part especially now called England: From the
first Traditional Beginning, continued to the Norman Conquest. Collected out of
the Ancientest and best Authors thereof, in 4to.

Paradise lost, A Poem in Twelve Books in 4to.

Paradise regained, a Poem in four Books; to which is added Samson Agonistes.
Octav.

Poems upon several Occasions, both English and Latin, etc. Composed at several
times.

A brief History of Muscovia, and of other less known Countries, lying Eastward
of Prussia, as far as Cathay; gathered from the writings of several
Eyewitnesses. Oct.

A Treatise of Civil Power in Ecclesiastical Causes, showing that it is not
Lawful for any Power on Earth, to Compel in Matters of Religion. Twelves.

Considerations touching the likeliest means to remove Hirelings out of the
Church; wherein is also discoursed, of Tithes, Church-Fees, and
Church-Revenues; and whether any maintenance of Ministers can be settled by Law.
Twelves.

A Declaration, or Letters Patents of the Election of John King of Poland. A
Translation.

Opera Latina, Viz.
Defensio pro populo Anglicano. The same lately Translated into English.

Defensio Secunda.

Defensio Pro se.

Defensio Miltoni per Johannem Philippum.

Literae Pseudo-Senatus Cromwellii Reliquorumque perduellium nomine ac jussu
conscriptae a J. M. Twelves.

Johannis Miltoni Angli Epistolarum Familiarium Liber unus: Quibus Accesserunt,
jam olim in Collegio Adolescentis, Prolusiones Quaedam Oratoriae. Octavo.

Accidence Commenet Gramar.

Johannis Miltoni Angli Artis Logicae Plenior Institutio ad Petri Rami Methodum
Concinnata: Adjecta est Praxis Annalytica and Petri Rami vita libris Duobus.
Twelves.

LETTERS Written in the Name of the Parliament.
The Senate and People of England, to the most Noble Senate of the City of
Hamborough.
FOR how long a series of past Years, and for what important Reasons the
Friendship entered into by our Ancestors with your most Noble City has
continued to this day, we both willingly acknowledge, together with your
selves; nor is it a thing displeasing to us, frequently also to call to our
remembrance. But as to what we understand, by your Letters dated the 25th. of
June, that some of our People deal not with that Fidelity and Probity, as they
were wont to do in their Trading and Commerce among ye; we presently referred
it to the consideration of certain Persons well skilled in those matters, to
the end they might make a more strict enquiry into the Frauds of the Clothiers
and other Artificers of the Woollen Manufacture. And we farther promise, to
take such effectual care, as to make you sensible of our unalterable
intentions, to preserve sincerity and justice among our selves, as also never
to neglect any good Offices of our kindness that may redound to the welfare of
your Commonwealth. On the other hand, there is something likewise which we not
only require, but which Equity it self, and all the Laws of God and Man, demand
of your selves, That you will not only conserve inviolable to the Merchants of
our Nation their Privileges, but by your Authority and Power defend and protect
their Lives and Estates, as it becomes your City to do. Which as we most
earnestly desired in our former Letters, so upon the repeated Complaints of our
Merchants that are daily made before us, we now more earnestly solicit and
request it: they complaining, That their safety, and all that they have in the
world, is again in great jeopardy among ye. For although they acknowledge
themselves to have reaped some Benefit for a short time of our former Letters
sent you, and to have had some respite from the Injuries of a sort of
Profligate People; yet since the coming of the same Coc -- m to your City (of
whom we complained before) who pretends to be honored with a sort of Embassy
from -- the Son of the lately deceased King, they have been assaulted with all
manner of ill Language, Threats and naked Swords of Ruffians and Homicides, and
have wanted your accustomed Protection and Defense; insomuch, that when Two or
Three of the Merchants, together with the President of the Society, were
hurried away by surprise Aboard a certain Privateer, and that the rest implored
your Aid, yet they could not obtain any Assistance from you, till the Merchants
themselves were forced to embody their own strength, and rescue from the hands
of Pirates the Persons Seized on in that River, of which your City is the
Mistress, not without extreme hazard of their Lives. Nay, when they had
fortunately brought 'em home again, and as it were by Force of Arms recovered
'em from an Ignominious Captivity, and carried the Pirates themselves into
Custody; we are informed that Coc -- m was so audacious, as to demand the
Release of the Pirates, and that the Merchants might be delivered Prisoners
into his hands. We therefore again, and again, beseech and adjure ye, if it be
your intention that Contracts and Leagues, and the very ancient Commerce
between both Nations should be preserved, the thing which you desire, That our
People may be able to asiure themselves of some certain and firm support and
reliance upon your Word, your Prudence and Authority; that you would lend 'em a
favorable Audience concerning these matters; and that you would inflict
deserved Punishment as well upon Coc -- m, and the rest of his Accomplices in
that wicked act, as upon those who lately assaulted the Preacher, hitherto
unpunished, or command 'em to depart your Territories; nor that you would
believe that expelled and exiled Tarquins are to be preferred before the
Friendship, and the Wealth, and Power of our Republic. For if you do not
carefully provide to the contrary, but that the Enemies of our Republic shall
presume to think lawful the committing of any Violences against us in your
City, how unsafe, how ignominious the Residence of our People there will be, do
you consider with your selves. These things we recommend to your Prudence and
Equity, your selves to the Protection of Heaven.

Westminster, Aug. 10. 1649.
To the Senate of Hamborough.
YOUR conspicuous Favor in the doubtful condition of our Affairs, is now the
reason, that after Victory and prosperous Success, we can no longer question
your good will and friendly inclination toward us. As for our parts, the War
being almost now determined, and our Enemies every where vanquished, we have
deemed nothing more just, or more conducing to the firm Establishment of the
Republic, then that they who by our means (the Almighty being always our
Captain and Conductor) have either recovered their Liberty, or obtained their
Lives and Fortunes, after the pernicious Ravages of a Civil War, of our free
Gift and Grace, should testify and pay in exchange to their Magistrates
Allegiance and Duty in a solemn manner, if need required. More especially, when
so many Turbulent and Exasperated Persons, more then once received into
Protection, will make no end, either at home or abroad, of acting Perfidiously,
and raising new Disturbances. To that purpose we took care to enjoin a certain
form of an Oath, by which all who held any Office in the Commonwealth, or
being fortified with the Protection of the Law, enjoyed both Safety, Ease, and
all other Conveniences of Life, should bind themselves to Obedience in words
prescribed. This we also thought proper to be sent to all Colonies abroad, or
wherever else our People resided for the convenience of Trade; to the end
that the Fidelity of those over whom we are set, might be proved and known to
us, as it is but reasonable and necessary. Which makes us wonder so much the
more at what our Merchants write from your City, that they are not permitted to
execute our Commands by some or other of your Order and Degree. Certainly what
the most Potent United Provinces of the Low Countries, most jealous of their
Power and their Interests, never thought any way belonging to their inspection,
namely whether the English Foreigners swore Fidelity and Allegiance to their
Magistrates at home, either in these or those Words, how that should come to be
so suspected and troublesome to your City, we must plainly acknowledge that we
do not understand. But this proceeding from the private inclinations or fears
of some, whom certain Vagabond Scots, expelled their Country, are said to have
enforced by Menaces, on purpose to deter our Merchants from Swearing Fidelity
to us, we impute not to your City. Most earnestly therefore we entreat and
conjure ye (for it is not now the interest of Trade, but the honor of the
Republic it self that lies at stake) not to suffer any one among ye, who can
have no reason to concern himself in this Affair, to interpose his Authority,
whatever it be, with that Supremacy which we challenge over our own Subjects,
not by the judgment and opinion of Foreigners, but by the Laws of our Country;
for who would not take it amiss, if we should forbid your Hamburghers, residing
here, to Swear Fidelity to you that are their Magistrates at Home? Farewell.

Jan. 4. 1649.
To the Most Serene and Potent Prince Philip the Fourth, King of Spain. The
Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, Greeting.
WE send to your Majesty Anthony Ascham, a person of Integrity, Learned, and
Descended of an Ancient Family, to Treat of matters very advantageous, as we
hope, as well to the Spanish, as the English Nation. Wherefore in freindly
manner, we desire that you would be pleased to Grant, and Order him a Safe and
Honorable Passage to your Royal City, and the same in his return from thence,
readily prepared to repay the kindness when occasion offers. Or if your Majesty
be otherwise inclined, that it may be signified to him with the soonest, what
your Pleasure is in this particular, and that he may be at Liberty to depart
without Molestation.

Feb. 4. 1649.
To the Most Serene and Potent Prince, Philip the Fourth, King of Spain. The
Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, Greeting.
WHAT is the condition of our Affairs, and by what heinous Injuries provoked
and broken, at length we began to think of recovering our Liberty by force of
Arms; what Constituted form of Government we now make use of, can neither be
concealed from your Majesty, nor any other Person who has but cast an impartial
Eye upon our Writings Published upon these Occasions. Neither ought we to think
it a difficult thing, among fit and proper judges of things, to render our
Fidelity, our Equity, and Patience, manifest to all men, and justly meriting
their Approbation, as also to defend our Authority, Honor, and Grandeur,
against the infamous Tongues of Exiles and Fugitives. Now then, as to what is
more the concern of Foreign Nations, after having subdued and vanquished the
Enemies of our Country through the Miraculous Assistance of Heaven, we openly
and cordially profess our selves readily prepared to have Peace and Friendship,
more desirable then all enlargement of Empire, with our Neighbor Nations. For
these reasons we have sent into Spain to your Majesty, Antony Ascham, of
approved Dexterity and Probity, to treat with your Majesty, concerning
Friendship and the accustomed Commerce between both Nations; or else, if it be
your Pleasure, to open a way for the Ratifying of new Articles and Alliances.
Our request therefore is, that you will grant him free Liberty of Access to
your Majesty, and give such Order, that care may be taken of his Safety and his
Honor, while he resides a Public Minister with your Majesty; to the end he
may freely propose what he has in charge from us, for the Benefit, as we hope
of both Nations; and certify to us with the soonest, what are your Majesty's
sentiments concerning these matters.

Westminster, Feb. 4. 1649.
To the Most Serene Prince, John the Fourth, King of Portugal. The Parliament
of the Commonwealth of England, Greeting.
AFTER we had suffered many, and those the utmost Mischiefs of a Faithless
Peace, and intestine War, Our being reduced to those Exigences, that if we had
any regard to the safety of the Republic, there was a necessity of altering
for the chiefest part the form of Government, is a thing which we make no
question is well known to your Majesty, by what we have both publicly Written
and declared in justification of our Proceedings. To which, as it is but
reason, if credit might be rather given, then to the most malicious Calumnies
of Loose and Wicked men; perhaps we should find those persons more amicably
inclined, who now abroad have the worst sentiments of our actions. For as to
what we justify our selves to have justly and strenuously performed after the
Example of our Ancestors, in pursuance of our Rights, and for recovery of the
native Liberty of Englishmen, certainly it is not the work of Human force or
wit to eradicate the perverse and obstinate Opinions of People wickedly
inclined concerning what we have done. But after all, in reference to what is
common to us with all Foreign Nations, and more for the general interest on
both sides, we are willing to let the world know, that there is nothing which
we more ardently desire, then that the Friendship and Commerce which our People
have been accustomed to maintain with all our Neighbors, should be enlarged
and settled in the most ample and solemn manner. And whereas our People have
always driven a very great Trade, and gainful to both Nations, in your Kingdom;
we shall take care, as much as in us lies, that they may not meet with any
Impediment to interrupt their dealings. However, we foresee that all our
Industry will be in vain, if, as it is reported, the Pirates and Revolters of
our Nation shall be suffered to have Refuge in your Ports, and after they have
taken and plundered the Laden Vessels of the English, shall be permitted to
sell their Goods by Public Outcries at Lisbon. To the end therefore that a
more speedy remedy may be applied to this growing Mischief, and that we may be
more clearly satisfied concerning the Peace which we desire, we have sent to
Your Majesty the most Noble Charles Vane, under the Character of our Agent,
with Instructions and a Commission, a plenary Testimonial of the Trust we have
reposed, and the employment we have conferred upon him. Him therefore we most
earnestly desire your Majesty graciously to hear, to give him Credit, and to
take such Order, that he may be safe in his Person and his Honor within the
bounds of your Dominions. These things, as they will be most acceptable to us,
so we promise, whenever occasion offers, that the same offices of kindness to
your Majesty shall be mutually observed on all our parts.

Westminster, Feb. 4. 1649.
To the Most Serene Prince, John the Fourth, King of Portugal. The Parliament
of the Commonwealth of England, Greeting.
ALmost daily and most grievous complaints are brought before us, that certain
of our Seamen and Officers, who revolted from us the last year, and
Treacherously and Wickedly carried away the Ships with the Command of which
they were entrusted, and who having made their escape from the Port of Ireland,
where being blockt up for almost a whole Summer together, they very narrowly
avoided the punishment due to their Crimes, have now betaken themselves to the
Coast of Portugal, and the mouth of the River Tagus; that there they practice
furious Pyracy, Taking and Plundering all the English Vessels they meet with
Sailing to and fro upon the account of Trade, and that all the adjoining Seas
are become almost impassible by reason of their notorious and infamous
Robberies. To which increasing Mischief, unless a speedy Remedy be applied, who
does not see but that there will be a final end of that vast Trade so gainful
to both Nations, which our People were wont to drive with the Portugueses?
Wherefore we again and again request Your Majesty, that you will command those
Pirates and Revolters to depart the Territories of Portugal: And that if any
pretended Ambassadors present themselves from * * * * * * * that you will not
vouchsafe to give them Audience; but that you will rather acknowledge us, upon
whom the Supreme Power of England, by the Conspicuous Favor and Assistance of
the Almighty, is devolved; and that the Ports and Rivers of Portugal, may not
be barred and defended against your Friends and Confederates Fleet, no less
serviceable to your Emolument, then the Trade of the English.

To Philip the Fourth, King of Spain.
HOW heinously, and with what Detestation your Majesty resented the Villainous
Murder of our Agent, Anthony Ascham, and what has hitherto been done in the
Prosecution and Punishment of his Assassinates, we have been given to
understand, as well by your Majesty's own Letters, as from your Ambassador Don
Alphonso de Cardenos. Nevertheless, so often as we consider the horridness of
that bloody Fact, which utterly subverts the very Foundations of Correspondence
and Commerce and of the Privilege of Ambassadors, most sacred among all
Nations, so villanously violated without severity of punishment, we cannot but
with utmost importunity repeat our most urgent Suit to your Majesty, That those
Parricides may with all the Speed imaginable be brought to Justice, and that
you would not suffer their merited Pains to be suspended any longer by any
delay or pretense of Religion. For tho most certainly we highly value the
Friendship of a Potent Prince; yet it behooves us to use our utmost endeavors,
that the Authors of such an enormous Parricide should receive the deserved
Reward of their Impiety. Indeed, we cannot but with a grateful mind acknowledge
that Civility, of which by your Command, our People were not unsensible, as
also your surpassing Affection for us, which lately your Ambassador at large
unfolded to us: Nor will it be displeasing to us to return the same good
Offices to your Majesty, and the Spanish Nation, whenever opportunity offers.
Nevertheless, if Justice be not satisfied without delay, which we still most
earnestly request, we see not upon what foundations a sincere and lasting
Friendship can subsist. For the preservation of which, however, we shall omit
no just and laudable occasion; to which purpose we are likewise apt to believe
that the presence of your Ambassador does not a little conduce.

To the Spanish Ambassador.
Most Eccellent Lord,
THe Council of State, so soon as their weighty Affairs would permit 'em,
having carried into Parliament the four Writings, which it pleased your
Excellency to impart to the Council upon the 19th of December last, have
received in Command from the Parliament to return this Answer to the first Head
of those Writings, touching the villainous Assassinates of their late Agent,
Anthony Ascham.

The Parliament have so long time, so often, and so justly demanded their being
brought to deserved Punishment, that there needs nothing further to be said on
a thing of so great importance, wherein (as your Excellency well observed) his
Royal Majesty's Authority it self is so deeply concerned, that unless Justice
be done upon such notorious Offenders, all the foundations of Humane Society,
all the ways of preserving Friendship among Nations, of necessity must be
overturned and abolished. Nor can we apprehend by any argument drawn from
Religion, that the Blood of the Innocent, shed by a propensely malicious
Murder, is not to be avenged. The Parliament therefore once more most urgently
presses, and expects from his Royal Majesty, according to their first demands,
That satifaction be given 'em effectually, and sincerely in this matter.

To the Most Serene Prince Leopold, Archduke of Austria, Governor of the
Spanish Low Countries, under King Philip.
SO soon as word was brought us, not without a most grevious complaint, that
Jane Puckering, an Heiress of an Illustrious and Opulent Family, while yet by
reason of her Age, she was under Guardians, not far from the House wherein she
then lived at Greenwich, was violently forced from the Hands and Embraces of
her Attendants; and of a sudden in a Vessel to that purpose ready prepared,
carried off into Flanders, by the treachery of one Walsh, who has endeavored
all the ways imaginable, in contempt of Law both Human and Divine, to constrain
a Wealthy Virgin to marriage, even by terrifying her with Menaces of present
Death. We deeming it proper to apply some speedy remedy to so enormous and
unheard of a piece of Villainy, gave order to some Persons to treat with the
Governors of Newport and Ostend (for the Unfortunate Captive was said to be
landed in one of those two places) about rescuing the Freeborn Lady out of the
Hands of the Ravisher. Who, both out of their singular Humanity and Love of
Virtue, lent their assisting aid to the young Virgin in servitude, and by
downright Robbery rifl'd from her Habitation: So that to avoid the violence of
her Imperious Masters, she was as it were deposited in a Nunnery, and committed
to the charge of the Governess of the Society. Wherefore the same Walsh to get
her again into his Clutches, has commenced a Suit against her in the
Ecclesiastical Court of the Bishop of Ypre, pretending a Matrimonial Contract
between him and her. Now in regard that both the Ravisher and the Ravished
person are Natives of our Country, as by the Witnesses upon their Oaths
abundantly appears; as also for that the splendid Inheritance after which most
certainly the Criminal chiefly gape, lies within our Territories; so that we
conceive that the whole cognizance and determination of this Cause belongs
solely to our selves. Therefore let him repair hither, he who calls himself the
Husband, here let him commence his Suit, and demand the delivery of the Person
whom he claims for his Wife. In the mean time, this it is that we most
earnestly request from your Highness, which is no more then what we have
already requested by our Agent residing at Brussels, that you will permit an
afflicted and many ways misused Virgin, Born of Honest Parents, but Pyrated out
of her Native Country, to Return, as far as lies in your power, with Freedom
and Safety home again. This not only we, upon all opportunities offered, as
readily prepared to return the same Favor and Kindness to your Highness, but
also Humanity it self, and that same hatred of Infamy, which ought to accompany
all persons of Virtue and Courage, in defending the Honor of the Female Sex,
seem altogether jointly to require at your hands.

Westminster, March 28. 1650.
To the Most Serene Prince, John the Fourth, King of Portugal.
UNderstanding that Your Majesty had both Honorably received our Agent, and
immediately given him a favorable Audience, we thought it became us to assure
your Majesty without delay, by speedy Letters from us, That nothing could
happen more acceptable to us, and that there is nothing which we have decreed
more sacred, then not to violate by any word or deed of ours, not first
provoked, the Peace, the Friendship and Commerce, now for some time settled
between us and the greatest number of other Foreign Nations, and amongst the
rest with the Portugheses. Nor did we send the English Fleet to the Mouth of
the River Tagus with any other intention or design, then in pursuit of Enemies
so often put to flight, and for recovery of our Vessels, which being carried
away from their Owners by Force and Treachery, the same Rabble of Fugitives
conducted to your Coasts, and even to Lisbon it self, as to the most certain
Fairs for the Sale of their Plunder. But we are apt to believe that by this
time almost all the Portugheses are abundantly convinced, from the Flagitious
manners of those People, of their Audaciousness, their Fury and their Madness.
Which is the reason we are in hopes that we shall more easily obtain from your
Majesty; First, That you will, as far as in you lies, be assistant to the most
Illustrious Edward Popham, whom we have made Admiral of our New Fleet, for the
subduing those detested Freebooters; and that you will no longer suffer 'em
together with their Captain, not Guests, but Pirates; not Merchants, but the
Pests of Commerce, and Violaters of the Law of Nations, to Harbor in the Ports
and under the shelter of the Fortresses of your Kingdom; but that wherever
the Confines of Portugal extend themselves, you will Command 'em to be Expelled
as well by Land as by Sea. Or if you are unwilling to proceed to that
extremity, at least that with your leave it may be lawful for us with our
proper Forces to assail our own Revolters and Sea Robbers, and if it be the
pleasure of Heaven, to reduce 'em into our Power. This, as we have earnestly
desired in our former Letters, so now again with the greatest ardency and
importunity we request of your Majesty. By this, whether equity, or act of
kindness, you will not only enlarge the fame of your Justice over all well
Governed and Civil Nations, but also in a greater measure bind both us and the
People of England, who never yet had other then a good opinion of the
Portugheses, to your self and to your Subjects. Farewell.

Westminster, 27. April. 1650.
To the Hamburghers.
MORE then once we have Written concerning the controversies of the Merchants,
and some other things which more nearly concern the Dignity of our Republic,
yet no Answer has been returned. But understanding that Affairs of that nature
can hardly be determined by Letters only, and that in the mean time certain
Seditious Persons have been sent to your City by * * * * * * * Authorized with
no other Commission then that of Malice and Audaciousness, who make it their
business utterly to extirpate the ancient Trade of our People in your City,
especially of those whose fidelity to their Country is most conspicuous;
Therefore we have commanded the worthy and most eminent Richard Bradshaw to
reside as our Agent among ye; to the end he may be able more at large to Treat
and Negotiate with your Lordships such Matters and Affairs, as are interwoven
with the Benefit and Advantages of both Republics. Him therefore we request
ye, with the soonest to admit to a favorable Audience; and that in all things
that Credit may be given to him, that Honor paid him, as is usually in all
Countries, and among all Nations paid to those that bear his Character. Farewell.

Westminster, April 2. 1650.
To the Hamburghers.
Most Noble, Magnificent, and Illustrious, our dearest Friends.
THAT your sedulities in the Reception of our Agent were so cordial and so
egregious, we both gladly understand, and earnestly exhort ye, that you would
persevere in your good Will and Affection toward us. And this we do with so
much the greater vehemence, as being informed that the same Exiles of ours,
concerning whom we have so frequently Written, now carry themselves more
insolently in your City then they were wont to do, and that they not only
openly Affront, but give out threatening Language in a most despiteful manner
against our Resident. Therefore once more by these our Letters we would have
the safety of his Person, and the honor due to his Quality, recommended to
your Care. On the other side, if you inflict severe and timely Punishment upon
those Fugitives and Ruffians, as well the old ones as the new comers; it will
be most acceptable to us, and becoming your Authority and Prudence.

Westminster, May 31. 1650.
To Philip the Fourth, King of Spain.
TO our infinite sorrow we are given to understand, That Antony Ascham, by us
lately sent our Agent to your Majesty, and under that Character most Civilly
and Publicly received by your Governors; upon his first coming to your Royal
City, naked of all defense and guard, was most bloodily Murdered in a certain
Inn, together with John Baptistade Ripa his Interpreter, Butchered at the same
time. Wherefore we most earnestly request your Majesty, That deserved
Punishment may be speedily inflicted upon those Parricides already apprehended,
as it is reported, and committed to Custody, who have not only presumed to
wound our selves through his sides, but have also dared to Stabb, as it were,
to the very heart* your Faith of Word and Royal Honor. So that we make no
question but what we so ardently desire would nevertheless be done effectually
by a Prince of his own accord so Just and Pious, though no body required it. As
to what remains, we make it our farther suit, That the breathless Carcass may
be delivered to his Friends and Attendants to be brought back and Enterr'd in
his own Country, and that such care may be taken for the security of those
that remain alive, as is but requisite, till having obtained an Answer to these
Letters, if it may be done, they shall return to us the Witnesses of your Piety
and Justice.

Westminster, June 28. 1650.
To the most Excellent Lord, Anthony John Lewis dela Cerda, Duke of Medina
Celi, Governor of Andalusia. The Council of State constituted by Authority of
Parliament: Greeting.
WE have received Advice from those most Accomplished Persons, whom we lately
sent with our Fleet into Portugal in pursuit of Traitors, and for the recovery
of our Vessels, that they were most civilly received by your Excellency, as
often as they happened to touch upon the Coast of Gallaecia, which is under
your Government, and assisted with all things necessary to those that perform
long Voyages. This Civility of yours, as it was always most accept^ble to us,
so it is now more especially at this time, while we are sensible of the ill
will of others in some places toward us without any just cause given on our
side. Therefore we make it our request to your Illustrious Lordship, that you
will persevere in the same good Will and Affection to us, and that you would
continue your Favor and Assistance to our People, according to your wonted
Civility, as often as our Ships put in to your Harbors: and be assured that
there is nothing which we desire of your Lordship in the way of Kindness, which
we shall not be ready to repay both to you and yours, whenever the like
occasion shall be offered us.

Westminster, Nov. 7. 1650. Sealed with the Seal of the Council, J. Bradshaw,
President.

To the Illustrious and Magnificent Senate of the City of Dantzick.
Magnificent and Most Noble Lords, our dearest Friends,
MAny Letters are brought us from our Merchants trading upon the Coast of
Borussia, wherein they complain of a grievous Tribute imposed upon 'em in the
Grand Council of the Polanders, enforcing 'em to pay the Tenth part of all
their Goods for the Relief of the King of Scots, our Enemy. Which in regard it
is plainly contrary to the Law of Nations, that Guests and Strangers should be
dealt withal in such a manner; and most unjust that they should be compelled to
pay public Stipends in a Foreign Commonwealth to him from whom they are, by
God's Assistance, delivered at home; we make no question but that out of
respect to that Liberty, which as we understand you your selves enjoy, you will
not suffer so heavy a Burden to be laid upon Merchants in your City, wherein
they have maintained a continual Amity and Commerce, to the extraordinary
Advantage of the place for many years together. If therefore you think it
convenient to undertake the Protection of our Merchants trading among ye, which
we assuredly expect as well from your Prudence and Equity, as from the Dignity
and Grandeur of your City; We shall take that care, that you shall be sensible
from time to time, of our grateful Acceptance of your Kindness, as often as the
Dantzichers shall have any dealings within our Territories, or their Ships, as
frequently it happens, put into our Ports.

Westminster, Febr. 6. 1650.
To the Portugal Agent.
Most Illustrious Lord,
WE received your Letters dated from Hampton the 15th of this Month, wherein
you signify, That you are sent by the King of Portugal to the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England; but say not under what Character, whether of
Ambassador, or Agent, or Envoy, which we would willingly understand by your
Credential Letters from the King, a Copy of which you may send us with all the
speed you can. We would also further know, whether you come with a Plenary
Commission, to give us satisfaction for the Injuries, and to make Reparation
for the Damages which your King has done this Republic, protecting our Enemy
all the last Summer in his Harbors, and prohibiting the English Fleet, then
ready to assail Rebels and Fugitives, which our Admiral had pursued so far; but
never restraining the Enemy from falling upon ours. If you return us word that
you have ample and fu^l Commission to give us satisfaction concerning all these
matters, and send us withal a Copy of your Recommendatory Letters, we shall
then take care, that you may with all speed repair to us upon the Publ^ck
Faith: At what time, when we have read the King's Letters, you shall have
liberty freely to declare what further Commands you have brought along with you.

The Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, to the Most Serene Prince D.
Ferdinand, Grand Duke of Tuscany, etc.
WE have received your Highness's Letters, dated April 22. 1651. and delivered
to us by your Resident, Signor Almerick Salvetti, wherein we readily perceive
how greatly your Highness favors the English Name, and the value you have for
this Nation, which not only our Merchants, that for many years have traded in
your Ports, but also certain of our young Nobility, either Traveling through
your Cities, or residing there for the improvements of their Studies, both
testify and confirm. Which as they are things most grateful and acceptable to
us, we also on our parts make this request to your Highness, that your Serenity
will persevere in your accustomed good Will and Affection toward our
Merchants, and other Citizens of our Republic, Traveling through the Tuscan
Territories. On the other side we promise and undertake, that as to what
concerns the Parliament, That nothing shall be wanting which may any way conduce
to the Confirmation and Establishment of that Commerce and mutual Friendship
that now has been of long continuance between both Nations, and which it is our
earnest wish and desire should be preserved to perpetuity by all Offices of
Humanity, Civility and mutual Observance.

Westminster, Jan. 20. 1651. Sealed with the Seal of the Parliament, and
Subscribed by William Lenthal, Speaker of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England.

The Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, to the Illustrious and
Magnificent Senate of the City of Hamborough.
Most Noble, Magnificent, and Illustrious, our dearest Friends.
THE Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, out of their earnest desire to
continue and preserve the Ancient Friendship and mutual Commerce between the
English Nation and your City, not long since sent thither Richard Bradshaw,
Esquire, with the character of our Resident; and among other Instructions
tending to the same purpose, gave him an express Charge to demand Justice
against cert in persons within your Jurisdiction, who endeavored to Murder
the Preacher belonging to the English Society, and who likewise laid impious
hands upon the Deputy President, and some of the principal Merchants of the
same Company, and hurried 'em away aboard a Privateer. And although the
aforesaid Resident upon his first Reception and Audience made known to your
Lordships in a particular manner the Commands which he received from us, upon
which it was expected that you would have made those Criminals ere this a
severe Example of your Justice; yet when we understood our expectations were
not answered, considering with our selves what danger both our People and their
Estates were in if sufficient provision were not made for their Security and
Protection against the malice of their Enemies; we again sent Orders to our
before said Resident to represent to your Lordships our Judgment upon the whole
Matter; as also to exhort and persuade ye in the name of this Republic to be
careful of preserving the Friendship and Alliance contracted between this
Commonwealth and your City, as also the Traffic and Commerce no less
advantageous for the Interest of both; and to that end, that you would not fail
to Protect our Merchants, together with their Privileges from all Violation,
and more particularly against the Insolences of one Garmes who has carried
himself contumeliously toward this Republic, and publicly cited to the
Chamber of Spire certain Merchants of the English Company residing in your
City, to the great contempt of this Commonwealth, and trouble of our Merchants;
for which we expect such Reparation, as shall be consentaneous to Equity and
Justice.

To Treat of these Heads, and whatever else more largely belongs to the common
Friendship of both Republics, we have Ordered our Resident aforesaid to attend
your Lordships, requesting that ample credit may be given to him in such
matters as he shall propose relating to these Affairs.

Westminster Mar. 12. 1651. Sealed with the Parliament Seal, and Subscribed.
Speaker, etc.
The Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, to the Most Serene Christiana,
Queen of the Swedes, Goths, and Vandals, etc. Greeting.
Most Serene Queen,
WE have received and read your Majesty's Letters to the Parliament of England,
dated from Stockholm the 26th. of September last, and delivered by Peter
Spering Silvercroon; and there is nothing which we more vehemently and
cordially desire, then that the ancient Peace, Traffic and Commerce of long
continuance between the English and Swedes may prove diuturnal, and every day
increase. Nor did we question but that your Majesty's Ambassador was come amply
Instructed to make those Proposals chiefly which should be most for the
Interest and Honor of both Nations, and which we were no less readily prepared
to have heard, and to have done effectually that which should have been thought
most secure and beneficial on both sides. But it pleased the Supreme Moderator
and Governor of all things, that before he had desired to be heard as to those
Matters which he had in Charge from your Majesty to propound to the Parliament,
he departed this Life (whose loss we took with that heaviness and sorrow, as
became persons whom it no less behooved to acquiesce in the Will of the
Almighty) whence it comes to pass that we are prevented hitherto from knowing
your Majesty's pleasure, and that there is a stop at present put to this
Negotiation. Wherefore we thought we could do no less then by these our
Letters, which we have given to our Messenger on purpose sent with these
unhappy Tidings, to signify to your Majesty, how acceptable your Letters, how
grateful your Public Minister were to the Parliament of the Commonwealth of
England; as also how earnestly we expect your Friendship, and how highly we
shall value the Amity of so great a Princess; assuring your Majesty, that we
have those thoughts of increasing the Commerce between this Republic and your
Majesty's Kingdom, as we ought to have of a thing of the highest importance,
which for that reason will be most acceptable to the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England. And so we recommend your Majesty to the Protection of
the Divine Providence.

Westminster, March -- 1651. Sealed with the Parliament Seal, and Subscribed,
Speaker, etc.
The Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, to the Most Serene and Potent
Prince, Philip the Fourth, King of Spain, Greeting.
THE Merchants of this Commonwealth who Trade in your Majesty's Territories,
make loud Complaints of extraordinary Violence and Injuries offered 'em, and of
new Tributes imposed upon 'em by the Governors and other Officers of your Ports
and Places where they Traffic, and particularly in the Canary Islands, and
this against the Articles of the League which both Nations have Solemnly
Ratified upon the account of Trade: the truth of which Complaints they have
confirmed by Oath. And they make it out before us, That unless they can enjoy
their Privileges, and that their Losses be repaired: Lastly, That except they
may have some certain Safeguard and Protection for themselves and their Estates
against those Violences and Injuries, they can no longer Traffic in those
Places. Which Complaints of theirs being duly weighed by us, and believing the
unjust proceedings of those Ministers either not at all to have reached your
knowledge, or else to have been untruly represented to your Majesty, we deemed
it convenient to send the complaints themselves, together with these our
Letters to your Majesty. Nor do we question but that your Majesty, as well out
of your love of Justice, as for the sake of that Commerce no less gainful to
your Subjects then our People, will command your Governors to desist from those
unjust Oppressions of our Merchants, and so order it that they may obtain
speedy Justice, and due Satisfaction for those Injuries done 'em by Don Pedro
de Carillo de Guzman, and others, and that your Majesty will take care that the
Merchants aforesaid may reap the fruit of those Articles; and be so far under
your Protection, that both their Persons and their Estates may be secure and
free from all manner of Injury and Vexation. And this they believe they shall
for the greatest part obtain, if your Majesty will be pleased to restore 'em
that Expedient, taken from 'em, of a Judge Conservator, who may be able to
defend 'em from a new Consulship more uneasy to 'em; least if no shelter from
Injustice be allowed 'em, there should follow a necessity of breaking off that
Commerce which has hitherto brought great Advantages to both Nations, while the
Articles of the League are violated in such a manner.

West. Aug. -- 1651.
To the Most Serene Prince the Duke of Venice, and the Most Illustrious Senate.
Most Serene Prince, Most Illustrious Senate, our dearest Friends,
CErtain of our Merchants, by name John Dickins, and Job Throckmorton, with
others, have made their Complaints unto us, That upon the 28th. of November,
1651. having Seized upon a hundred Butts of Caveare in the Vessel called the
Swallow, Riding in the Downs, Isaac Taylour Master, which were their own proper
Goods, and Laden Aboard the same Ship in the Muscovite Bay of Archangel, and
this by the Authority of our Court of Admiralty; In which Court, the Suit being
there depending, they obtained a Decree for the delivery of the said Butts of
Caveare into their Possession, they having first given security to abide by the
Sentence of that Court; And that the said Court, to the end the said Suit might
be brought to a conclusion, having Written Letters, according to custom, to the
Magistrates and Judges of Venice, wherein they requested liberty to cite John
Piatti to appear by his Proctor in the English Court of Admiralty, where the
Suit depended, and prove his Right, nevertheless that the said Piatti and one
David Rutts a Hollander, while this Cause depends here in our Court, put the
said John Dickins, and those other Merchants to a vast deal of trouble about
the said Caveare, and solicit the Seizure of their Goods and Estates as
Forfeited for Debt: All which things, and whatever else has hitherto bin done
in our foresaid Court, is more at large set forth in those Letters of Request
aforementioned; which after we had viewed, we thought proper to be transmitted
to the most Serene Republic of Venice, to the end they might be assistant to
our Merchants in this Cause. Upon the whole therefore, it is our earnest
Request to your Highness, and the Most Illustrious Senate, That not only those
Letters may obtain their due force and weight, but also that the Goods and
Estates of the Merchants which the foresaid Piatti and David Rutts, have
endeavored to make liable to Forfeiture, may be discharged; and that the said
Defendants may be referred hither to our Court, to try what Right they have in
their Claim to this Caveare. Wherein your Highness, and the Most Serene
Republic will do as well what is most Just in it self, as what is truly
becoming the spotless Amity between both Republics; and lastly, what will
gratefully be recompensed by the good Will and kind Offices of this Republic,
whenever occasion offers.

White Hall, Feb. -- 1652. Sealed with the Seal of the Council, and Subscribed,
President of the Council.
To the Spanish Ambassador.
Most Excellent Lord,
THE Council of State, according to a Command from the Parliament, dated the 2d.
of March, having taken into serious deliberation your Excellencies Paper of the
15th. of February, delivered to the Commissioners of this Council, wherein it
seemed good to your Excellency to propose that a Reply might be given to Two
certain Heads therein specified as previous, returns the following Answer to
your Excellency.

The Parliament when they gave an Answer to those things which were Proposed by
your Excellency at your first Audience, as also in those Letters which they
Wrote to the most Serene King of Spain, gave real and ample demonstrations how
grateful and how acceptable that Friendship and that mutual Alliance which was
offered by his Royal Majesty, and by your self in his Name, would be to 'em;
and how fully they were resolved, as far as in them lay, to make the same
returns of Friendship and Good Offices.

After that, it seemed good to your Excellency, at your first Audience in
Council upon the 19th. of December, Oldstile, to propound to this Council, as a
certain ground or method for an Auspitious commencement of a stricter Amity,
that some of their body might be nominated, who might hear what your Excellency
had to propose, and who having well weighed the benefit that might redound from
thence, should speedily report the same to the Council. To which request of
yours that satisfaction might be given, the Council appointed certain of their
number to attend your Excellency, which was done accordingly. But instead of
those things which were expected to have bin propounded, the Conference
produced no more then the abovementioned Paper, to which the Answer of the
Council is this.

When the Parliament shall have declared their minds, and your Excellency shall
have made the Progress as above expected, we shall be ready to confer with your
Excellency, and to treat of such matters as you shall propose in the Name of
the King your Master, as well in reference to the Friendship already concluded,
as the entering into another more strict and binding; or as to any thing else
which shall be offered by our selves in the Name of this Republic: And when we
descend to particulars, we shall return such Answers as are most proper, and
the nature of the thing proposed shall require.

White Hall, March 21. 1652.
The Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, to the Most Serene Prince,
Frederick the Third, King of Danemark, etc. Greeting.
Most Serene and Potent King,
WE have received your Majesty's Letters, dated from Copenhagen the 21st. of
December last, and delivered to the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England by
the Noble Henry Willemsem Rosenwyng de Lynsacker, and most gladly perused 'em,
with that affection of mind which the matters therein propounded justly merit,
and request your Majesty to be fully persuaded of this, That the same
inclinations, the same desires of continuing and preserving the ancient
Friendship, Commerce, and Alliance for so many years maintained between England
and Danemark, which are in your Majesty, are also in us. Not being ignorant,
that though it has pleased Divine Providence, beholding this Nation with such a
benign and favorable Aspect, to change for the better the received Form of the
former Government among us; nevertheless, that the same Interests on both
sides, the same common Advantages, the same mutual Alliance and Free Traffic
which produced the former Leagues and Confederacies between both Nations, still
endure and obtain their former Force and Virtue, and oblige both to make it
their common study, by rendering those Leagues the most beneficial that may be
to each other, to establish also a nearer and sounder Friendship for the time
to come. And if your Majesty shall be pleased to pursue those Counsels which
are manifested in your Royal Letters, the Parliament will be ready to embrace
the same with all Alacrity and Fidelity, and to contribute all those things to
the utmost of their Power, which they shall think may conduce to that end. And
they persuade themselves that your Majesty for this reason, will take those
Counsels in reference to this Republic, which may facilitate the good success
of those things propounded by your Majesty to our selves so desirous of your
Amity. In the mean time the Parliament wishes all Happiness and Prosperity to
your Majesty and People.

Westminster, April -- 1652. Under the Seal of the Parliament, and Subscribed in
its Name and by the Authority of it, Speaker, etc.
The Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, to the most Illustrious and
Magnificent the Proconsuls and Senators of the Hanse-Towns, Greeting.
Most Noble, Magnificent, and Illustrious, our dearest Friends,
THE Parliament of the Commonwealth of England has both received and perused
your Letthrs of the 16th. of January last, delivered by your Public Minister
Leo ab Aysema, and by their Authority have given him Audience; at what time he
declared the cordial and friendly Inclinations of your Cities toward this
Republic, and desired that the ancient Friendship might still remain on both
sides. The Parliament therefore, for their parts, declare and assure your
Lordships, That they deem nothing more grateful to themselves, then that the
same Friendship and Alliance which has hitherto bin maintained between this
Nation and those Cities, should be renewed, and firmly ratified; and that they
will be ready upon all occasions fitly offered, what they promise in words
solidly to perform in real deeds; and expect that their ancient Friends and
Confederates should deal by them with the same Truth and Integrity. But as to
those things which your Resident has more particularly in Charge, in regard
they were by us referred entire to the Council of State, and his Proposals were
to be there considered, they transacted with him there, and gave him such
Answers, as seemed most consentaneous to Equity and Reason, of which your
Resident is able to give you an Account; whose Prudence and Conspicuous Probity
proclaim him worthy the Public Character by you conferred upon him.

Westminster, April, -- 1652. Under the Seal of the Parliament, in the Name, and
by the Authority of it, Subscribed, Speaker, etc.
The Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, to the Illustrious and
Magnificent Senate of the City of Hamborough, Greeting.
Most Noble, Magnificent, and Illustrious, our dearst Friends,
THE Parliament of the Commonwealth of England has received and perused your
Letters, dated from Hamborough the 15th. of January last, and delivered by the
Noble Leo ab Aysenia, yours and the rest of the Hanseatic Cities Resident, and
by their own Authority gave him Audience, and as to what other particular
Commands he had from your City, they have referred 'em to the Council of State,
and gave 'em Orders to receive his Proposals and to Treat with him as soon as
might be, concerning all such things as seemed to be Just and Equal: Which was
also done accordingly. And as the Parliament has made it manifest, that they
will have a due regard to what shall be proposed by your Lordships, and have
testified their singular good Will toward your City, by sending their Resident
thither and commanding his Abode there; so on the other side they expect and
deservedly require from your Lordships, that the same Equity be returned to
them, in things which are to the Benefit of this Republic, either already
proposed, or hereafter to be propounded by our said Resident in their Name to
your City, anciently our Friend and Confederate.

Westminster, April, -- 1652. Under the Seal of the Parliament in the Name, and
by the Authority of it, Subscribed, Speaker, etc.
The Council of State of the Republic of England, to the Most Serene Prince
Ferdinand the Second, Grand Duke of Tuscany, Greeting,
THE Council of State being informed by Letters from Charles Longland, who
takes care of the Affairs of the English in your Highnesses Court of Leghorne,
That lately Fourteen Men of War, belonging to the United Provinces, came into
that Harbor, and openly threatened to Sink, or Burn the English Ships that were
Riding in your Port; but that your Serenity, whose Protection and Succor the
English Merchants implored, gave Command to the Governor of Leghorn, That he
should Assist and Defend the English Vessels; they deemed it their duty to
certify to your Highness how acceptable that Kindness and Protection which you
so favorably afforded the English Nation, was to this Republic; and do
promise your Highness that they will always keep in remembrance the Merit of so
deserving a Favor, and will be ready upon all occasions to make the same
returns of Friendship and Good Offices to your People, and to do all things
else which may conduce to the preservation and continuance of the usual Amity
and Commerce between both Nations. And whereas the Dutch Men of War, even in
the time of Treaty offered by themselves, were so highly perfidious, as to fall
upon our Fleet in our own Roads, (in which foul Attempt, God as a most Just
Arbiter, showed himself Offended and Opposite to their Design) but also in the
Ports of Foreigners endeavored to Take or Sink our Merchants Vessels; we
thought it also necessary to send this Declaration also of the Parliament of the
Commonwealth of England, to your Highness, the Publishing of which was
occasioned by the Controversies at present arisen between this Republic and
the United Provinces. By which your Highness may easily perceive how unjust and
contrary to all the Laws of God and of Nations those People have acted against
this Republic; and how cordially the Parliament labored, for the sake of
public Tranquillity, to have retained their pristin Friendship and Alliance.

White Hall, July 29. 1652. In the Name, and by the Authority of the Council,
Subscribed, President.
To the Spanish Ambassador.
Most Excellent Lord,
THe Council of State, upon mature deliberation of that Paper which they
received from your Excellency, 27 May 6 of June 1652. as also upon that which
your Excellency at your Audience the 6/16 of this Month delivered to the
Council, return this Answer to both those Papers. That the Parliament, etc. was
always very desirous of preserving the firm Friendship and good Peace settled at
present between this Republic and his Royal Majesty of Spain, from the time
that first your Excellency signified the tendency of his Majesty's Inclinations
that way, and was always ready to ratify and confirm the same to the Benefit
and Advantage of both Nations. And this, the Council of State in the Name, and
by Command of the Parliament, in their Papers oftimes made known to your
Excellency; and particularly, according to your Excellency's desire, made
choice of Commissioners to attend and receive from your Excellency such
Proposals as might conduce to the same purpose. At which meeting. instead of
making such Proposals, it seemed good to your Excellency only to propound some
general Matters, as it were previous to a future Conference, concerning which
it seemed to the Council that the Parliament had in former Papers fully made
known their Sentiments. Nevertheless, for more ample and accumulative
satisfaction, and to remove all scruples from your Excellency concerning those
matters which they at that time proposed, the Council in that Paper, dated 31
March, 10 April, declared themselves ready to come to a Conference with your
Excellency concerning those things which you had in charge from his Royal
Majesty, as well in reference to the pristin Amity, as to any farther
Negotiation; as also touching such matters as should be exhibited by us, in the
name of this Republic; and when we came to such particulars as were to the
purpose, and the nature of the thing required, then to give convenient Answers.
To which it seemed good to your Excellency to make no Reply, nor to proceed any
farther in that Affair for almost Two Months. About that time the Council
received from your Excellency your first Paper, dated 27 May, 6 June, wherein
you only made this Proposal, That the Articles of Peace and League between the
Late King Charles and your Master, dated the 6/16. of November. 1630. might be
reviewed, and that the several Heads of it might be either enlarged or left out
according to the present condition of times and things, and the late Alteration
of Government. Which being no more then what we our selves briefly and clearly
signified in our foresaid Paper of the 31 March, 10 April, the Council expected
that some particular Articles would have bin Propounded out of that League,
with those Amplifications and Alterations of which you made mention; since
otherwise it is impossible for us to return any other Answer concerning this
matter then what we have already given. And whereas your Excellency in your
last Paper seems to charge us with delay, the Council therefore took a second
review of your foresaid Paper of the 27 of May, 6 of June, and of what was
therein Propounded, and are still of Opinion, That they have fully satisfied
your Excellency in that former Paper, to which they can only farther add, That
so soon as your Excellency shall be pleased, either out of the Leagues already
made, or in any other manner, to frame such conditions, as shall be
accommodated to the present state of Things and Times, upon which you desire to
have the foundations of Friendship laid on your side, they will immediately
return you such Answers as by them shall be thought Just and Reasonable, and
which shall be sufficient Testimonials that the Parliament still perseveres in
the same desires of preserving an untainted and firm Amity with the King your
Master, and that on their parts they will omit no honest endeavors, and worthy
of themselves, to advance it to the highest perfection.

Furthermore the Council deems it to be a part of their duty, That your
Excellency should be put in mind of that Paper of ours, dated Jan. 30. 1651. to
which in regard your Excellency has returned no Answer as yet, we press and
expect that satisfaction be given to the Parliament, as to what is therein
mentioned.

The Answer of the Council of State to the Reply of the Lords Ambassadors
Extraordinary from the King of Danemark and Norway, delivered to the
Commissioners of the Council, to the Answer which the Council gave to their
Fourteen Demands.
TO the end that satisfaction may be given to the foresaid Lords Ambassadors in
reference to the Answer of the Council to the Fifth, Sixth, Seventh, Eigth and
Ninth Article, the Council consents that this following Clause shall be added
at the end of their Answers: That is to say, Besides such Colonies, Islands,
Ports and Places under the Dominion of either Party, to which it is by Law
provided that no body shall resort upon the account of Trade or Commerce,
unless upon special leave first obtained of that Party to which that Colony,
Island, Port or Places belong.

The Receiving of any person into any Ship that shall be driven in by stress of
Weather into the Rivers, Ports or Bays belonging to either Party, shall not
render that Vessel liable to any Trouble or Search, by the Answer of the
Council to the Eleventh Article, as the foresaid Lords Ambassadors in their
Reply seem to have understood, unless it be where such a Receiving shall be
against the Laws, Statutes, or Custom of that Place where the Vessel put in;
wherein it seems to the Council, That there is nothing of severity ordained,
but what equally conduces to the security of both Republics.

As to the proving the Property of such Ships and Goods as shall be cast ashore
by Shipwreck, the Council deems it necessary that an Oath be Administered in
those Courts which are already, or shall hereafter be constituted, where the
Claimers may be severally heard, and every Body's Right be determined and
adjudg'd; which cannot be so clearly and distinctly done by Written
Certificates, whence many scruples and doubts may arise, and many frauds and
deceits creep into that sort of proof, which it concerns both Parties to
prevent. The Council also deems it just, that a certain time be prefixed,
before which time whoever does not prove himself the lawful Owner of the said
Goods, shall be excluded, to avoid Suits. But as to the manner of putting
Perishable Goods to Sale that are cast A shore by Shipwreck, the Council thinks
it meet to propose the way of selling by Inch of Candle, as being the most
probable means to procure the true value of the Goods for the best Advantage of
the Proprietors. Nevertheless, if the foresaid Lords Ambassadors shall propose
any other method already found out which may more properly conduce to this end,
the Council will be no hinderance, but that what is just may be put in
practice. Neither is it to be understood, that the consideration of this matter
shall put any stop to the Treaty.

As to the Punishment of those that shall violate the propounded Treaty, the
Council has made that Addition which is mentioned in their Answer to the
Fourteenth Article for the greater force and efficacy of that Article, and
thereby to render the League it self more firm and lasting.

As to the last Clause of the Fourteenth Article, we think it not proper to
give our Assent to those Leagues and Alliances, of which mention is made in the
foresaid Answers, and which are only generally propounded, before it be more
clearly apparent to us what they are. But when your Excellencies shall be
pleased to explain those matters more clearly to the Council, we may be able to
give a more express Answer to those Particulars.

A Reply of the Council of State to the Answer of the foresaid Lords
Embassodours, which was returned to the Six Articles propounded by the Council
aforesaid, in the Name of the Republic of England.
THE Council having viewed the Commissions of the foresaid Lords Ambassadors,
giving them Power to Transact with the Parliament or their Commissioners,
concerning all things expedient to be Transacted in order to the reviving the
old Leagues or adding new ones, believed indeed the foresaid Lords to have bin
furnished with that Authority as to be able to return Answers, and Negotiate
all things, as well such as should be propounded by this Republic, as on the
behalf of the King of Danemark and Norway, and so did not expect the Replies
which it has pleased the foresaid Lords Ambassadors to give to the First,
Second, Third and Fifth demand of the Council; whereby of necessity a stop will
be put to this Treaty, in regard it is but just in it self, and so resolved on
in Council, to comprehend the whole League, and to Treat at the same time as
well concerning those things which regard this Republic, as those other
matters which concern the King of Danemark and Norway. Wherefore it is the
earnest desire of the Council, That your Excellencies would be pleased to return
an Answer to our First, Second, Third, and Fifth demand.

As to the Fourth Article concerning the Customs of Gluckstadt, in regard they
are now abolished, as your Excellencies have mentioned in your Answer, the
Council presses that their Abrogation may be ratified by this Treaty, lest they
should be reimpos'd hereafter.

As to the Sixth Article concerning Pyracy, the Counil inserted it, as equally
appertaining to the benefit of both, and to the establishing of Trade in
common, which is much disturbed by Pirates and Sea-Robbers. And whereas the
Answer of the Lords Ambassadors, as to this Article, relates only to Enemies,
but makes no mention of Pirates, the Council therefore desires a more distinct
Reply to it.

And whereas the foresaid Lords Ambassadors in their Reply to the Answer of the
Council, have passed over both their Tenth Article and the Answer of the
Council to it, the Council have thought it necessary to add this following
Article to their following Demands.

That the People and Inhabitants of the Republic of England Trading into any
Kingdoms, Regions, or Territories of the King of Danemark and Norway, shall not
for the future pay any more Customs, Tribute, Taxes, Duties or Stipends, or in
any other manner, then the People of the United Provinces, or any other Foreign
Nation that pays the least, coming in or going out of Harbor; and shall enjoy
the same and as equally ample Freedom, Privileges and Immunities, both coming
and going, and so long as they shall reside in the Country, as also in
Fishing, Tradeing, or in any other manner, which any other People of a Foreign
Nation enjoys, or may enjoy in the foresaid Kingdoms, and throughout the whole
Dominions of the said King of Danemark and Norway. Which Privileges also the
Subjects of the King of Danemark and Norway shall equally enjoy throughout all
the Territories and Dominions of the Republic of England.

The Council of State of the Republic of England, to the most Serene Prince,
Ferdinand the Second, Grand Duke of Tuscany, Greeting.
Most Serene Prince, our dearest Friend,
THE Council of State understanding as well by your Highness's Agent here
residing, as by Charles Longland, chief Factor for the English at Leghorn, with
what Affectiou and Fidelity your Highness undertook the Protection of the
English Vessels, putting in to the Port of Leghorn for shelter, against the
Dutch Men of War threatening 'em with nothing but Ransack and Destruction, by
their Letters of the 29th. of July (which they hope are by this time come to
your Highness's hands) have made known to your Highness how grateful and how
acceptable it was to 'em; and at the same time sent to your Serenity a
Declaration of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England concerning the
present Differences between this Republic and the United Provinces. And
whereas the Council has again bin informed by the same Charles Longland, what
further Commands your Highness gave for the security and defense of the English
Vessels, notwithstanding the opposite endeavors of the Dutch, they deemed this
opportunity not to be passed over, to let your Highness understand once more,
how highly they esteem your Justice and singular Constancy in defending their
Vessels, and how acceptable they took so great a piece of Service. Which being
no mean testimony of your solid Friendship and Affection to this Republic;
your Highness may assure your self, that the same offices of Kindness and good
Will toward your Highness shall never be wanting in us; such as may be able to
demonstrate how firmly we are resolved to cultivate both long and constantly,
to the utmost of our Power, that Friendship which is between your Serenity and
this Republic. In the mean time we have expressly commanded all our Ships upon
their entrance into your Ports not to fail of paying the accustomed Salutes by
Firing their Guns, and to give all other due Honors to your Highness.

White Hall, Sep. -- 1652. Sealed with the Council Seal, and Subscribed.
President.
To the Spanish Ambassador, Alphonso de Cardenas.
Most Excellent Lord,
YOUR Excelleny's Letters of the 1/11 of November, 1652. delivered by your
Secretary, together with Two Petitions enclosed, concerning the Ships, the
Sampson and Sun Salvadore, were read in Council. To which the Council returns
this Answer, That the English Man of War meeting with the foresaid Ships, not
in the Downs, as your Excellency Writes, but in the open Sea, brought 'em into
Port as Enemies Ships, and therefore Lawful Prize; and the Court of Admiralty,
to which it properly belongs to take Cognizance of all Causes of this nature,
have undertaken to determine the Right in dispute. Where all Parties concerned
on both sides shall be fully and freely heard, and you may be assured that
Right shall take place. We have also sent your Excellency's request to the
Judges of that Court, to the end we may more certainly understand what progress
they have made in their proceeding to Judgment. Of which so soon as we are
rightly informed, we shall take care that such Orders shall be given in this
matter, as shall correspond with Justice, and become the Friendship that is
between this Republic and your King. Nor are we less confident, that his Royal
Majesty will by no means permit the Goods of the Enemies of this Commonwealth
to be concealed and escape due Confiscation under the shelter of being owned by
his Subjects.

White Hall, Nov. 11. 1652. Sealed with the Council Seal, and Subscribed,
William Masham, President.

To the Spanish Ambassador.
Most Excellent Lord,
BUT lately the Council has bin informed by Captain Badiley, Admiral of the
Fleet of this Republic in the Streights, that after he himself, together with
three other Men of War, had for two days together engaged Eleven of the Dutch,
put into Porto Longone, as well to repair the Damages he had received in the
Fight, as also to supply himself with Warlike Ammunition; where the Governor of
the Place performed all the good Offices of a most just and courteous Person,
as well toward his own, as the rest of the Men of War under his Conduct. Now in
regard that that same Place is under the Dominion of the Most Serene King of
Spain, the Council cannot but look upon the singular Civility of that Garrison
to be the copious fruit of that stricter mutual Amity so auspiciously
commenced; and therefore deem it to be a part of their duty to return their
thanks to his Majesty for a Kindness so opportunely received, and desire your
Excellency to signify this to your most Serene King, and to assure him that the
Parliament of the Commonwealth of England will be always ready to make the same
returns of Friendship and Civility upon all occasion offered.

Westminster, Nov. 11. 1652. Sealed with the Council Seal, and Subscribed,
William Masham, President.

The Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, to the Most Serene Prince,
Ferdinand the Second, Grand Duke of Tuscany, Greeting.
Most Serene Prince, our dearest Friend,
THE Parliament of the Commonwealth of England has received your Letters dated
from Florence, August 17. concerning the restitution of a certain Ship laden
with Rice, which Ship is claimed by Captain Cardi of Leghorn. And though the
Judges of our Admiralty have already pronounced Sentence in that Cause against
the foresaid Cardi, and that there be an Appeal depending before the Delegates;
yet upon your Highness's Request, the Parliament, to testify how much they value
the good Will and Alliance of a Prince so much their Friend, have given Order
to those who are entrusted with this Affair, that the said Ship, together with
the Rice, or at least the full Price of it, be restored to the foresaid Captain
Cardi; the fruit of which Command his Proctor here has effectually already
reaped. And as your Highness by favorably affording your Patronage and
Protection to the Ships of the English in your Port of Leghorn, has in a more
especial manner tied the Parliament to your Serenity; so will they, on the other
side, take care, as often as opportunity offers, that all their Offices of
sincere Friendship and good will toward your Highness may be solidly effectual
and permanent; withal recommending your Highness to the Divine Benignity and
Protection of the Almighty.

Westminster, Nov. 1652. Sealed with the Seal of the Commonwealth, and
Subscribed, Speaker, etc.
The Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, to the Most Serene and Potent
Prince, King of Danemark. etc.
Most Serene and Potent King,
THE Parliament of the Commonwealth of England have received Information from
their Admiral of that Fleet so lately sent to Copenhagen, your Majesty's Port,
to Convoy our Merchants homeward bound, that the foresaid Ships are not
permitted to return along with him, as being detained by your Majesty's
Command; and upon his producing your Royal Letters declaring your
Justifications of the matter of Fact, the Parliament denies that the Reasons
laid down in those Letters for the detaining of those Ships are any way
satisfactory to 'em. Therefore that some speedy Remedy may be applied in a
matter os so great moment, and so highly conducing to the prosperity of both
Nations, for preventing a greater, perhaps, ensuing mischief, the Parliament
have sent their Resident at Himborough, Richard Bradshaw, Esquire, a Person of
great Worth and known Fidelity, with express Commands to Treat with your
Majesty, as their Agent also in Danemark, concerning this Affair. And therefore
we entreat your Majesty to give him a favorable Audience and ample Credit in
whatever he shall propose to your Majesty on our behalf, in reference to this
matter. In the mean time recommending your Majesty to the Protection of Divine
Providence.

Westminster, Nov. 6. 1652. Under the Seal of the Parliament, and in their Name,
and by their Authority, Subscribed, Speaker, etc.
The Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, to the Most Serene Prince the
Duke of Venice, Greeting.
THE Parliament of the Commonwealth of England has received your Highness's
Letters, dated June 1. 1652. and delivered by Lorenzo Pallutio, wherein they
not only, gladly perceive both yours, and the cordial Inclinations of the
Senate toward this Republic, but have willingly laid hold of this opportunity
to declare their singular Affection and good Will toward the Most Serene
Republic of Venice; which they shall be always ready to make manifest both
really and sincerely, as often as opportunity offers. To whom also all the ways
and means that shall be propounded to 'em for the preserving or increasing
mutual Friendship and Alliance, shall be ever most acceptable. In the mean time
we heartily pray that all things Prosperous, all things Favorable, may befall
your Highness and the Most Serene Republic.

Westminster, December, 1652. Sealed with the Parliament Seal, and Subscribed,
Speaker, etc.
The Parliament of the Republic of England, to the Most Serene Prince,
Ferdinand the Second, Grand Duke of Tuscany, Greeting.
ALthough the Parliament of the Republic of England some time since redoubled
their Commands to all the chief Captains and Masters of Ships arriving in the
Ports belonging to your Highness, to carry themselves peacefully and civilly,
and with becoming observance and duty to a most Serene Prince, whose Friendship
this Republic so earnestly endeavors to preserve, as having bin obliged by so
many great Kindnesses; an Accident altogether unexpected has fallen out,
through the Insolence, as they hear, of Captain Appleton in the Port of
Leghorn, who offered Violence to the Sentinel then doing his Duty upon the
Mole, against the Faith and Duty which he ows this Republic, and in contempt
of the Reverence and Honor which is justly owing to your Highness: the
relation of which Action, as it was really committed, the Parliament has
understood by your Letters of the 7th. and 9th. of December, dated from
Florence; as also more at large by the most Worthy Almeric Salvetti, your
Resident here. And they have so sincerely laid to heart your Highness's Honor,
which is the main concern of this Complaint, that they have referred it to the
Council of State, to take care that Letters be sent to Captain Appleton, to
come away without stop or stay by Land, in order to his giving an Account of
this unwonted and extraordinary Act (a Copy of which Letters is sent herewith
enclosed) who so soon as he shall arrive, and be accused of the Fact, we
promise that such a course shall be taken with him, as may sufficiently testify
that we no less heinoussy brook the violation of your Right, then the
Infringement of our own Authority. Moreover, upon mature debate concerning the
recovered Ship, called the Phoenix of Leghorn, which Affair is also related and
pressed by your Highness and your Resident here, to have bin done by Captain
Appleton, contrary to promise given, whereby he was obliged not to fall upon
even the Hollanders themselves within sight of the Lanthorn; and that your
Highness, trusting to that Faith, promised security to the Hollanders upon your
word; and therefore that we ought to take care for the satisfaction of those
who suffer damage under the Protection of your Promise; the Parliament begs of
your Excellency to be assured, That this Fact, as it was committed without
their Advice or Command, so it is most remote from their Will and Intention
that your Highness should undergo any Detriment or Diminution of your Honor by
it. Rather they will make it their business, that some Expedient may be found
out for your satisfaction, according to the nature of the Fact upon Examination
of the whole matter. Which that they may so much the more fully understand,
they deem it necessary that Captain Appleton himself should be heard, who was
bound by the same Faith, and is thought by your Excellency at least to have
consented to the violation of it; especially since he is so suddenly to return
home. And so soon as the Parliament has heard him, and have more at large
conferred with your Resident concerning this matter of no small moment, they
will pronounce that Sentence that shall be Just, and Consentaneous to that
extreme good will which they bear to your Highness, and no way unworthy the
favors by you conferred upon 'em. Of which, that your Highness might not make
the least question in the mean time, we were willing to certify your Highness
by this Express on purpose sent, that we shall omit no opportunity to testify
how greatly we value your Friendship.

Westminster, Dec. 14. 1652. Sealed with the Parliament Seal, and Subscribed,
Speaker, etc.
The Council of State of the Republic of England, to the most Serene Prince,
Frederick, Heir of Norway, Duke of Sleswick, Holsatia, Stormaria, Ditmarsh,
Count in Oldenburgh and Delmenhort, Greeting.
THough it has pleased the Most Wise God, and Most Merciful Moderator of all
things, besides the Burden which he laid upon us in common with our Ancestors,
to wage most just Wars in defense of our Liberty against Tyrannical Usurpation,
signally also to succor us with those Auspices and that Divine Assistance,
beyond what he afforded to our Predecessors, that we have bin able not only to
extinguish a Civil War, but to extirpate the Causes of it for the future, as
also to repel the unexpected Violences of Foreign Enemies; Nevertheless, with
grateful minds, as much as in us lies, acknowledging the same Favor and
Benignity of the Supreme Deity toward us, we are not so puffed up with the
success of our Affairs, but that rather instructed in the singular Justice and
Providence of God, and having had long experience our selves, we abominate the
thoughts of War, if possible to be avoided, and most eagerly embrace Peace with
all men. Therefore as hitherto we never were the first that violated or desired
the violation of that Friendship, or those ancient Privileges of Leagues that
have bin ratified between us and any Princes or People whatever; so your
Highness, in consideration of your ancient Amity with the English, left us by
our Ancestors, may with a most certain assurance promise both your self and
your People all things equitable, and all things friendly from us. Lastly, as
we highly value, which is no more then what is just and reasonable, the
testimonies of your affection and good offices offered us, so we shall make it
our business that you may not at any time be sensible of the want of ours
either to your self or yours. And so we most heartily recommend your Highness
to the Omnipotent Protection of the Almighty God.

White Hall, July -- 1653. Sealed with the Council-Seal, and Subscribed,
President.
To the Count of Oldenburgh.
Most Illustrious Lord,
THE Parliament of the Commonwealth of England have received an extraordinary
Congratulation from your Excellency, most kindly and courteously delivered to
us by word of mouth by Herman Mylius, your Councellor and Doctor of Laws; who
wished all things Lucky and Prosperous, in your Name, to the Parliament and
English Interest, and desired that the Friendship of this Republic might
remain inviolable within your Territories. He also desired Letters of safe
Conduct, to the end your Subjects may the more securely Trade and Sail from
place to place; together with our Orders to our public Ministers abroad, to be
Aiding and assisting to your Excellency and your Interests with their good
Offices and Counsels. To which Requests of his we willingly consented, and
granted both our Friendship, the Letters desired, and our Orders to our Public
Ministers under the Seal of the Parliament. And though it be some Months ago
since your Public Minister first came to us, however that delay neither arose
from any unwillingness on our part, to assent to the request made in your
Excellency's Name, or that your Deputy was at any time wanting in his Sedulity
(whose Solicitations were daily and earnest with all the Diligence and
Importunity that became him, to the end he might be dispatched) but only it
happened so, that at that time the greatest and most weighty Affairs of the
Republic were under Debate and serious Negotiation. Of which we thought meet
to certify your Illustrious Lordship, lest any body through a false
construction of this delay, should think those Favors unwillingly or hardly
obtained, which were most gladly granted by the Parliament of the Commonwealth
of England. In whose Name these are commanded to be Signed,

Henry Scobel, Clerk of the Parliament.

To the Most Illustrious and Noble Senators, Scultets, Landam., and Senators of
the Evangelick Cantons of Switzerland, Zurick, Bern, Glaris, Bale, Schaffhusen,
Appenzel, also of the Confederates of the same Religion in the Country of the
Grisons, of Geneva, St. Gall, Mulhausen and Bienne; our dearest Friends.
YOUR Letters, most Illustrious Lords and Dearest Confederates, dated December
24. full of civility, good will, and singular affection toward us and our
Republic, and what ought always to be greater and more sacred to us, breathing
Fraternal and truly Christian Charity, we have received. And in the first place
we return Thanks to Almighty God, who has raised and established both you and
so many noble Cities, not so much entrenched and fortified with those
enclosures of Mountains, as with your innate Fortitude, Piety, most prudent and
just Administration of Government, and the Faith of mutual Confederacies, to be
a firm and inaccessible shelter for all the truly Orthodox. Now then that you,
who over all Europe were the first of Mortals who after deluges of barbarous
Tyrants from the North, Heaven prospering your Valor, recovered your Liberty,
and being obtained, for so many years have preserved it untainted, with no less
Prudence and Moderation; that you should have such noble sentiments of our
Liberty recovered; that you, such sincere Worshippers of the Gospel, should be
so constantly persuaded of our Love and Affection for the Orthodox Faith, is
that which is most acceptable and welcome to us. But as to your exhorting us
to Peace, with a Pious and Affectionate intent, as we are fully assured,
certainly such an Admonition ought to be of great weight with us; as well in
respect of the thing it self which you persuade, and which of all things is
chiefly to be desired, as also for the great Authority which is to be allowed
your Lordships above others in this particular, who in the midst of loud
tumultuons Wars on every side, enjoy the sweets of Peace both at home and
abroad, and have approved your selves the best example to all others of
embracing and improving Peace; and lastly, for that you persuade us to the very
thing which we our selves of our own accords, and that more then once,
consulting as well our own, as the interest of the whole Evangelical Communion,
have begged by Ambassadors, and other public Ministers, namely, Friendship and
a most strict League with the United Provinces. But how they treated our
Ambassadors sent to 'em to Negotiate, not a bare Peace, but a brotherly Amity
and most strict League; what Provocations to War they afterward gave us, how
they fell upon us in our own Roads in the midst of their Ambassadors
Negotiations for Peace and Alliance, little dreaming any such Violence, you
will abundantly understand by our Declaration set forth upon this subject, and
sent you together with these our Letters. But as for our parts, we are wholly
intent upon this, by God's assistance, though prosperous hitherto, so to carry
our selves, that we may neither attribute any thing to our own Strength or
Forces, but all things to God alone, nor be insolently puffed up with our
Success; and we still retain the same ready Inclinations to embrace all
occasions of making a Just and Honest Peace. In the mean time your selves,
Illustrious and most Excellent Lords, in whom this Pious and Noble Sedulity,
out of mere Evangelical Affection, exerts it self, to reconcile and pacify
contending Brethren, as ye are worthy of all applause among men, so doubtless
will ye obtain the Celestial Reward of Peacemakers with God; to whose Supreme
Benignity and Favor we heartily recommend in our Prayers both you and yours,
no less ready to make returns of all good Offices both of Friends and Brethren,
if in any thing we may be serviceable to your Lordships.

Westminster, October, 1653. Sealed with the Parliament Seal, and Subscribed,
Speaker, etc.
To the Spanish Ambassador.
Most Illustrious Lord,
UPON grievous Complaints. brought before us by Philip Niel, John Godal, and
the Society of Merchants of Foy in England, that a certain Ship of theirs,
called the Ann of Foy, an English Ship by them fitted out, and laden with their
own Goods, in her return home to the Port of Foy about Michaelmas last, was
unjustly and without any cause set upon and taken by a certain Privateer of
Ostend, Erasmus Bruer Commander, and the Seamen unworthily and barbarously
used; The Council of State wrote to the Marquis of Leda concerning it (a copy
of which Letter we also send enclosed to your Excellency) and expected from
him, that without delay Orders would have bin given for the doing of Justice in
this matter. Nevertheless after all this, the foresaid Noel. together with the
said Company make further heavy complaint, that although our Letters were
delivered to the Marquess, and that those Merchants from that time forward
betook themselves to Bruges to the Court there held for Maritime Causes, and
there asserted and proved their Right and the Verity of their Cause, yet that
Justice was denied 'em; and that they were so hardly dealt with, that though
the Cause had bin ripe for Trial above three Months, nevertheless they could
obtain no Sentence from that Court, but that their Ship and Goods are still
detained, notwithstanding the great Expenses they have bin at in Prosecuting
their Claim. Now your Excellency well knows it to be contrary to the Law of
Nations, of Traffic, and that Friendship which is at present settled between
the English and Flemings, that any Ostender should take any English Vessel, if
bound for England with English Goods; and that whatever was Inhumanly and
Barbarously done to the English Seamen by that Commander deserves a rigorous
Punishment. The Council therefore recommends the whole matter to your
Excellency, and makes it their request that you would Write into Flanders
concerning it, and take such speedy care, that this business may no longer be
delai'd; but that Justice may be done in such a manner, that the foresaid Ship,
together with the Damages, Costs and Interest, which the English have sustained
and bin out of purse, by reason of that Illegal Seizure, may be restored and
made good to 'em, by the Authority of the Court, or in some other way; and that
care be taken that hereafter no such Violence may be committed, but that the
Amity between our People and the Flemings may be preserved without any
Infringement.

Signed in the Name, and by the Command of the Council of State, appointed by
Authority of Parliament.
To the Marquess of Leda.
GREAT Complaints are brought before us by Philip Noel, John Godal, and the
Company of Foy Merchants, concerning a Ship of theirs, called the Ann of Foy,
which being an English Vessel, by them fitted out, and laden with their own
Goods, in her return home to her own Port about Michaelmas last, was taken
unawares by a Freebooter of Ostend, Erasmus Brewer Commander. It is also
further related, that the Ostenders, when the Ship was in their Power, used the
Seamen too inhumanly, by setting lighted Match to their Fingers, and plunging
the Master of the Ship in the Sea till they had almost drowned him, on purpose
to extort a false Confession from him, that the Ship and Goods belonged to the
French. Which though the Master and the rest of the Ship's Crew resolutely
denied, nevertheiess the Ostenders carried away the Ship and Goods to their own
Port. These things, upon strict enquiry and examination of Witnesses have bin
made manifest in the Admiralty Court in England, as will appear by the Copies
of the Affidavits herewith sent your Lordship. Now in regard that that same
Ship, called the Ann of Foy, and all her lading of Merchandise and Goods
belongs truly and properly to the English, so that there is no apparent reason
why the Ostenders should seize by force either the one or the other, much less
carry away the Master of the Ship, and use the Seamen so unmercifully; and
whereas according to the Law of Nations, and in respect to the Friendship
between the Flemings and English, that Ship and Goods ought to be restored, we
make it our earnest request to your Excellency, that the English may have
speedy Justice done, and that Satisfaction may be given for their losses, to
the end the Traffic and Friendship which is between the English and Flemings
may be long and inviolably preserved.

To the Spanish Ambassador.
THE Parliament of the Commonwealth of England understanding that several of the
People of this City daily resort to the Houses of your Excellency and other
Ambassadors and Public Ministers from Foreign Nations here residing, merely to
hear Mass, gave Order to the Council of State to let your Excellency
understand, That whereas such Resort is prohibited by the Laws of the Nation,
and of very evil Example in this our Republic, and extremely Scandalous, that
they deem it their duty to take care that no such thing be permitted
henceforward, and to prohibit all such Assemblies for the future. Concerning
which, it is our desire that your Excellency should have a fair Advertisement,
to the end that henceforth your Excellency may be more careful of admitting any
of the People of this Republic to hear Mass in your House. And as the
Parliament will diligently provide that your Excellencies Rights and Privileges
shall be preserved inviolable, so they persuade themselves, that your
Excellency, during your abode here, would by no means that the Laws of this
Republic should be violated by your self or your Attendants.

A Summary of the particular real damages sustaiu'd by the English Company, in
many Places of the East Indies, from the Dutch Company in Holland.
1. THe Damages comprehended in Sixteen Articles and formerly exhibited,
Amounting to 298555 Royals which is of our Money -- 74638 l. 15 s. 00 d.

2. We demand Satisfaction to be given for the incomes of the Island of
Pularon, from the year 1622. to this time, of Two hundred thousand Royals,
besides the future Expense, till the Right of Jurisdiction over that Island be
restored, in the same condition as when it was wrestest out of our hands, as
was by League agreed to, amounting of our Money to -- 50000 l. 00 s. 00 d.

3. We demand Satisfaction for all the Merchandise, Provision and Furniture
taken away by the Agents of the Dutch Company in the Indies, or to them
delivered, or to any of their Ships bound thither, or returning home; which Sum
amounts to 80635 Royals, of our Money -- 20158 l. 00 s. 00 d.

4. We demand Satisfaction for the Customs of Dutch Merchandise laden on board
their Ships in Persia, or landed there from the year 1624, as was granted us by
the King of Persia, which we cannot value at less then Fourscore thousand
Royals, -- -- 2000 l. 00 s. 00 d.

5. We demand Satisfaction for Four Houses Maliciously and Unjustly Burnt at
Jocatra, together with the Warehouses, Magazines and Furniture, occasioned by
the Dutch Governor there, of all which we had Information from the Place it
self, after we had exhibited our first complaints; the total of which damage we
value at -- 50000 l. 00 s. 00 d.

We demand Satisfaction for 32899 Pound of Pepper taken out of the Ship
Endymion in 1649, the total of which damage amounts to -- 6000 l. 00 s. 00 d.
-- 220796 l. 15 s. 00 d.

A Summary of some particular damages sustained also from the Dutch East India
Company.
1. FOR Damages sustained by those who Besieged Bantam, whence it came to pass
that for Six years together we were excluded from that Trade, and consequently
from an opportunity of laying out in Pepper Six hundred thousand Royals, with
which we might have laden our homeward bound Ships, sor want of which lading
they rotted upon the Coast of India. In the mean time our Stock in India was
wasted and consumed in Mariners Wages, Provision and other Furniture; so that
they could not value their Loss at less then Twenty hundred and four thousand
Royals -- 600000 l. 00 s. 00 d.

2. More for Damages by reason of our due part lost of the fruits in the
Molucca Islands, Banda and Amboyna, from the time that by the slaughter of our
men we were thence expelled, till the time that we shall be satisfied for our
Loss and Expenses, which space of time from the year 1622. to this present year
1650. for the yearly Revenue of 250000 lib. amounts in 28 years to -- 700000 l.
00 s. 00 d.

3. We demand Satisfaction for one hundred and two thousand nine hundred
fifty nine Royals, taken from us by the Mogul's People, whom the Dutch
protected in such a manner, that we never could repair our Losses out of the
Money or Goods of that People which lay in their Junks, which we endeavored to
do, and was in our Power had not the Dutch unjustly defended 'em. Which lost
Money we could have trebled in Europe, and value at -- 77020 l. 00 s. 00 d.

4. For the Customs of Persia, the half part of which was by the King of Persia
granted to the English, Anno 1624. Which to the year 1629. is vrlued at Eight
thousand Royals, to which add the Four thousand Lib. which they are bound to
pay since 1629. which is now One and twenty years, and it makes up the Sum of
-- 84000 l. 00 s. 00 d. -- From the First Account 220796 l. 15 s. Sum Total --
1681996 l. 15 s.

The Interest from that time will far exceed the Principal.

LETTERS Written in the Name of OLIVER the Protector.
To the Count of Oldenburgh.
Most Illustrious Lord,
BY your Letters, dated January 20. 1654. I have bin given to understand, That
the Noble Frederick Matthias Wolisog, and Chirstopher Griphiander were sent
with certain Commands from your Illustrious Lordship into England, who when
they came to us, not only in your Name Congratulated our having taken upon us
the Government of the Eoglish Republic, but also desired that you and your
Territories might be comprehended in the Peace which we are about to make with
the Low Countries, and that we would confirm by our present Authority the
Letters of safe Conduct lately granted your Lordship by the Parliament.
Therefore in the first place we return your Lordship our hearty thanks for your
Friendly Congratulation, as it becomes us; and these will let you know that we
have readily granted your two Requests. Nor shall you find us wanting upon any
opportunity, which may at any time make manifest our Affection to your
Lordship. And this we are apt to believe you will understand more at large from
your Agents, whose Fidelity and Diligence in this Affair of yours, in our
Court, has bin eminently conspicuous. As to what remains, we most heartily wish
the Blessings of Prosperity and Peace, both upon you and your Affairs.

Your Illustrious Lordship's most Affectionate, Oliver Protector of England,
Scotland, and Ireland, etc.

To the Count of Oldenburgh.
Most Illustrious Lord,
WE received your Letters, dated May 2 from Oldenburgh, most welcome upon more
then one account; as well for that they were full of singular Civility and
Good Will toward us, as because they were delivered by the hand of the most
Illustrious Count Antony, your beloved Son. Which we look upon as so much the
greater Honor, as not having trusted to Report, but with our own Eyes, and by
our own Observation discerned his Virtues becoming such an Illustrious
Extraction, his noble Manners and Inclinations, and lastly his extraordinary
Affection toward our selves. Nor is it to be questioned but he displays to his
own People the same fair hopes at home, that he will approve himself the Son of
a most Worthy and most excellent Father, whose signal Virtue and Prudence has
all along so managed Affairs, that the whole Territory of Oldenburgh for many
years, has enjoyed a profound Peace and all the blessings of Tranquillity in the
midst of the raging confusions of War thundering on every side. What reason
therefore why we should not value such a Friendship that can so wisely and
providently shun the Enmity of all men? Lastly, Most Illustrious Lord, it is for
your Magnificent The Horses which threw him out of the Coach-box.
Present that we return you Thanks; but it is of Right, and your Merits claim,
That we are cordially

Westminster, June 29. 1654. Your Illustrious Lordship's most Affectionate,
Oliver, etc. Superscrib'd, To the Most Illustrious Lord, Anthony Gunther, Count
in Oldenburgh, and Delmenhorst, Lord in Jehvern and Kniphausen.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, etc.
To the most Serene Prince, Charles Gustavus, King of the Swedes, Goths and
Vandals, Great Prince of Finland, Duke of Esthonia, Carelia, Breme, Verden,
Stettin in Pomerania, Cassubia and Vandalia. Prince of Rugia, Lord of Ingria,
Wismaria, as also Count Palatine of the Rhine, and Duke of Bavaria, Cleves and
Monts, etc. Greeting.
Most Serene King,
THough it be already divulged over all the world that the Kingdom of the
Swedes is translated to your Majesty with the extraordinary Applause and
Desires of the People, and the free Suffrages of all the Orders of the Realm,
yet that your Majesty should rather choose that we should understand the welcome
News by your most friendly Letters, then by the common voice of Fame, we
thought no small Argument both of your good will toward us, and of the honor
done us among the first. Voluntary therefore, and of Right we Congratulate this
Accession of Dignity to your egregious Merits, and the most worthy guerdon of
so much Virtue. And that it may be Lucky and Prosperous to your Majesty, to the
Nation of the Swedes, and the true Christian Interest, which is also what you
chiefly wish, with joint supplications we implore of God. And whereas your
Majesty assures us, That the preserving entire the League and Alliance lately
concluded between this Republic and the Kingdom of Sweden shall be so far your
care, that the present Amity may not only continue firm and inviolable, but if
possible, every day increase and grow to a higher perfection, to call it into
question would be a piece of impiety, after the Word of so great a Prince once
interposed, whose surpassing Fortitude has not only purchased your Majesty a
Hereditary Kingdom in a Foreign Land, but also could so far prevail, that the
most August Queen, the Daughter of Gustavus, and a Heroess so matchless in all
degrees of Praise and Masculine Renown, that many Ages backward have not
produced her equal, surrendered the most just possession of her Empire to your
Majesty, neither expecting nor willing to accept it. Now therefore it is our
main desire, your Majesty should be every way assured, that your so singular
Affection toward us, and so eminent a signification of your Mind can be no
other then most dear and welcome to us, and that no Combat can offer it self to
us more glorious, then such a one wherein we may, if possible, prove Victorious
in out-doing your Majesty's Civility by our kind Offices that never shall be
wanting.

Westminster, July 4. 1654. Your Majesty's most Affectionate, Oliver Protector
of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, etc.

To the most Illustrious Lord, Lewis Mendez de Haro.
WHAT we have understood by your Letters, most Illustrious Lord, that there is
an Ambassador already nominated and appointed by the most Serene King of Spain,
on purpose to come and Congratulate our having undertaken the Government of the
Republic, is not only deservedly acceptable of it self, but rendered much
more welcome and pleasing to us by your singular Affection and the speed of
your Civility, as being desirous we should understand it first of all from your
self. For, to be so beloved and approved by your Lordship, who by your Virtue
and Prudence have obtained so great Authority with your Prince, as to preside,
his equal in Mind, over all the most Important Affairs of that Kingdom, ought
to be so much the more pleasing to us, as well understanding that the judgment
of a surpassing Person, cannot but be much to our Honor and Ornament. Now as
to our cordial Inclinations toward the King of Spain, and ready propensity to
hold Friendship with that Kingdom, and increase it to a stricter perfection, we
hope we have already satisfied the Present Ambassador, and shall more amply
satisfy the other, so soon as he arrives. As to what remains, Most Illustrious
Lord, we heartily wish the Dignity and Favor wherein you now flourish with
your Prince, perpetual to your Lordship; and that whatever Affairs you carry on
for the Public Good, may prosperously and happily succeed.

White Hall, September. 1654. Your Illustrious Lordship's most Affectionate,
Oliver, etc.

To the Most Serene Prince Charles Gustavus Adolphus, King of the Swedes,
Goths, and Vandals, etc.
BEing so well assured of your Majesty's good will toward me by your last
Letters, in answer to which I wrote back with the same Affection, methinks I
should do no more then what our mutual Amity requires, if as I communicate my
grateful Tidings to reciprocal Joy, so when contrary Accidents fall out, that I
should lay open the sense and grief of my Mind to your Majesty, as my dearest
Friend. For my part this is my Opinion of my self, That I am now advanced to
this degree in the Commonwealth, to the end I should consult in the first
place, and as much as in me lies, for the common Peace of the Protestants.
Which is the reason, that of necessity it behooves me more grievously to lay to
heart what we are sorry to hear concerning the bloody Conflicts and mutual
Slaughters of the Bremeners and Swedes. But this I chiefly bewail, that being
both our Friends, they should so despitefully Combat one against another, and
with so much danger to the Interests of the Protestants; and that the Peace of
Munster, which it was thought would have proved an Asylum and Safeguard to all
the Protestants, should be the occasion of such an unfortunate War, that now
the Arms of the Swedes are turned upon those whom but a little before, among
the rest, they most stoutly defended for Religions sake; and that this should
be done more especially at this time when the Papists are said to Persecute the
Reformed all over Germany, and to return to their intermitted for some time
Oppressions, and their pristin Violencies. Hearing therefore that a Truce for
some days was made at Breme, I could not forbear signifying to your Majesty,
upon this opportunity offered, how cordially I desire, and how earnestly I
implore the God of Peace, that this Truce may prove successfully happy for the
Good of both Parties, and that it may conclude in a most firm Peace, by a
commodious Accommodation on both sides. To which purpose, if your Majesty
judges that my Assistance may any ways conduce, I most willingly offer and
promise it, as in a thing, without question, most acceptable to the most Holy
God. In the mean time, from the bottom of my heart, I beseech the Almighty to
Direct and Govern all your Counsels for the common Welfare of the Christian
Interest, which I make no doubt, but that your Majesty chiefly desires.

White Hall, October. 26. 1654. Your Majesty's most Affectionate, Oliver, etc.

To the Magnificent and most Noble, the Consuls and Senators of the City of
Breme.
BY your Letters delivered to us by your Resident Henry Oldenburgh, that there
is a difference kindled between your City and a most Potent Neighbor, and to
what streights you are thereby reduced, with so much the more Trouble and Grief
we understand, by how much the more we love and embrace the City of Breme, so
eminent, above others, for their Profession of the Orthodox Faith. Neither is
there any thing which we account more sacred in our wishes, then that the whole
Protestant Name would knit and grow together in Brotherly Unity and Concord. In
the mean time, most certain it is, that the common Enemy of the Reformed
rejoices at these our Dissentions, and more haughtily every where exerts his
Fury. But in regard the Controversy which at present exercises your contending
Arms, is not within the power of our decision, we Implore the Almighty God,
that the Truce begun may obtain a happy issue. Assuredly, as to what you
desired, we have written to the King of the Swedes, exhorting him to Peace and
Agreement, as being most chiefly grateful to Heaven, and have offered our
Assistance in so Pious a Work. On the other side we likewise exhort your selves
to bear an equal Mind, and by no means to refuse any honest conditions of
Reconciliation. And so we recommend your City to Divine Protection and
Providence.

White Hall, October. 26. 1654. Your Lordships most Affectionate, Oliver
Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc.

Oliver Protector of the Republic of England, To the most Illustrious Prince
of Tarentum.
YOUR Love of Religion, apparently made known in your Letters to us delivered,
and your excelling Piety and singular Affection to the Reformed Churches, more
especially considering the Nobility and Splendour of your Character, and in a
Kingdom too, wherein there are so many and such abounding hopes proposed to all
of Eminent Quality that revolt from the Orthodox Faith, so many Miseries to be
undergone by the Resolute and constant, gave us an occasion of great joy and
consolation of Mind. Nor was it less grateful to us that we had gained your
good Opinion, upon the same account of Religion, which ought to render your
Highness most chiefly beloved and dear to our selves. We call God to Witness,
That whatever hopes or expectations the Churches, according to your Relation,
had of us, we may be able one day to give them satisfaction, if need require,
or at least to demonstrate to all men how much it is our desire never to fail
'em Nor should we think any fruit of our Labors, or of this Dignity or Supreme
Employment which we hold in our Republic, greater, then that we might be in a
condition to be serviceable to the enlargement, or the welfare, or which is
more sacred, to the Peace of the Reformed Church. In the mean time, we exhort
and beseech your Lordship to remain steadfast to the last minute in the Orthodox
Religion, with the same resolution and constancy, as you profess it received
from your Ancestors with Piety and Zeal. Nor indeed, can there be any thing
more worthy your self, or your Religious Parents, nor in consideration of what
you have deserved of us, though we wish all things for your own sake, that we
can wish more Noble or Advantageous to your Lordship, then that you would take
such Methods and apply your self to such Studies, that the Churches, especially
of your Native Country, under the Discipline of which your Birth and Genius
have rendered you Illustriously Happy, may be sensible of so much the more
assured security in your Protection, by how much you excel others in Luster and
Ability.

White Hall, April -- 1654.
Oliver the Protector, etc. To the most Serene Prince, Immanuel Duke of Savoy,
Prince of Piemont, Greeting.
Most Serene Prince,
LEtters have bin sent us from Geneva, as also from the Dauphinate, and many
other Places bordering upon your Territories, wherein we are given to
understand, That such of your Royal Highness's Subjects as profess the Reformed
Religion, are Commanded by your Edict, and by your Authority, within three days
after the Promulgation of your Edict, to depart their Native Seats and
Habitations, upon pain of capital Punishment, and Forfeiture of all their
Fortunes and Estates, unless they will give security to relinquish their
Religion within Twenty days, and embrace the Roman Catholic Faith. And that
when they applied themselves to your Royal Highness in a most Suppliant manner,
imploring a Revocation of the said Edict, and that being received into pristin
favor, they might be restored to the Liberty granted 'em by your Predecessors,
a part of your Army fell upon 'em, most cruelly Slew several, put others in
Chains, and compelled the rest to Fly into Desert places and to the Mountains
covered with snow, where some Hundreds of Families are reduced to such
Distress, that it is greatly to be feared, they will in a short time all
miserably Perish through Cold and Hunger. These things, when they were related
to us, we could not choose but be touched with extreme Grief and Conpassion for
the Sufferings and Calamities of this Afflicted People. Now in regard we must
acknowledge our selves linked together not only by the same tie of Humanity,
but by joint Communion of the same Religion, we thought it impossible for us to
satisfy our Duty to God, to Brotherly Charity, or our Profession of the same
Religion, if we should only be affected with a bare sorrow for the Misery and
Calamity of our Brethren, and not contribute all our endeavors to Relieve and
Succor 'em in their unexpected Adversity, as much as in us lies. Therefore in
a greater measure we most earnestly Beseech and Conjure your Royal Highness,
that you would call back to your thoughts the moderation of your most Serene
Predecessors, and the Liberty by them Granted and Confirmed from time to time
to their Subjects the Vaudois. In Granting and Confirming which, as they did
that, which without all question was most grateful to God, who has bin pleased
to reserve the Jurisdiction and Power over the Conscience to himself alone, so
there is no doubt but that they had a due consideration of their Subjects also,
whom they found Stout and most Faithful in War, and always Obedient in Peace.
And as your Royal Serenity in other things most laudably follows the footsteps
of your Immortal Ancestors, so we again and again beseech your Royal Highness
not to swerve from the path wherein they trod in this particular; but that you
would vouchsafe to Abrogate both this Edict, and whatsoever else may be Decreed
to the Disturbance of your Subjects upon the account of the Reformed Religion;
that you would ratify to 'em their conceded Privileges and pristin Liberty,
and command their Losses to be repaired, and that an end be put to their
Oppressions. Which if your Royal Highness shall be pleased to see performed,
you will do a thing most acceptable to God, revive and comfort the miserable in
dire Calamity, and most highly oblige all your Neighbors that Profess the
Reformed Religion, but more especially our selves, who shall be bound to look
upon your Clemency and Benignity toward your Subjects as the fruit of our
earnest Solicitation. Which will both engage us to a reciprocal return of all
good Offices, and lay the solid foundations not only of establishing, but
increasing Alliance and Friendship between this Republic and your Dominions.
Nor do we less promise this to our selves from your Justice and Moderation; to
which we Beseech Almighty God to incline your Mind and Thoughts. And so we
cordially Implore Just Heaven to bestow upon your Highness and your People the
Blessings of Peace and Truth, and prosperous Success in all your Affairs.

White Hall, May -- 1655.
Oliver Protector of the Republic of England, to the most Serene Prince of
Transylvania, Greeting.
Most Serene Prince,
BY your Letters of the 16th. of Nov. 1654. you have made us sensible of your
singular good will and affection toward us; and your Envoy, who delivered those
Letters to us, more amply declared your desire of contracting Alliance and
Friendship with us. Certainly for our parts, we do not a little rejoice at this
Opportunity offered us to declare and make manifest our Affection to your
Highness, and how great a value we justly set upon your Person. But after Fame
had reported to us your egregious Merits and Labors undertaken in behalf of
the Christian Republic, when you were pleased that all these things, and what
you have farther in your thoughts to do in the defense and for promoting the
Christian Interest, should be in Friendly manner imparted to us by Letters from
your self, this afforded us a more plentiful occasion of Joy and Satisfaction,
to hear, that God, in those remoter Regions, had raised up to himself so Potent
and Renowned a Minister of his Glory and Providence: And that this great
Minister of Heaven so famed for his Courage and Success, should be desirous to
associate with us in the common Defense of the Protestant Religion, at this
time wickedly assailed by Words and Deeds. Nor is it to be questioned but that
God, who has infused into us both, though separated by such a spacious interval
of many Climates, the same desires and thoughts of defending the Orthodox
Religion, will be our Instructor and Author of the ways and means whereby we
may be assistant and useful to our selves and the rest of the Reformed Cities,
provided we watch all opportunities that God shall put into our hands, and be
not wanting to lay hold of 'em. In the mean time we cannot without an extreme
and penetrating sorrow forbear putting your Highness in mind how unmercifully
the Duke of Savoy has Persecuted his own Subjects, Professing the Orthodox
Faith, in certain Valleys at the feet of the Alps. Whom he has not only
constrained by a most severe Edict as many as refuse to embrace the Catholic
Religion, to forsake their Native Habitations, Goods and Estates, but has
fallen upon 'em with his Army, put several most Cruelly to the Sword, others
more Barbarously Tormented to Death, and driven the greatest number to the
Mountains, there to be consumed with Cold and Hunger, exposing their Houses to
the Fury, and their Goods to the Plunder of his Executioners. These things as
they have already bin related to your Highness, so we readily assure our
selves, that so much cruelty cannot but be grievously displeasing to your ears,
and that you will not be wanting to afford your Aid and Succor to those
miserable Wretches, if there be any that survive so many Slaughters and
Calamities. For our parts we have Written to the Duke of Savoy, beseeching him
to remove his insenc'd Anger from his Subjects; as also to the King of France,
that he would vouchsafe to do the same; and lastly to the Princes of the
Reformed Religion, to the end they might understand our sentiments concerning
so fell and savage a piece of Cruelty. Which though first begun upon those poor
and helpless People, however threatens all that Profess the same Religion, and
therefore imposes upon all a greater necessity of providing for themselves in
general, and consulting the common Safety; which is the course that we shall
always follow, as God shall be pleased to direct us. Of which your Highness may
be assured, as also of our sincerity and affection to your Serenity, whereby we
are engaged to wish all prosperous success to your Affairs, and a happy issue
of all your Enterprises and Endeavors, in asserting the Liberty of the Gospel
and the Worshippers of it.

White Hall, May -- 1655.
Oliver Protector, to the most Serene Prince, Charles Gustavus Adolphus, King
of the Swedes, Greeting.
WE make no question but that the same of that most rigid Edict has reached
your Dominions, whereby the Duke of Savoy has totally Ruined his Protestant
Subjects Inhabiting the Alpine Valleys, and commanded 'em to be extirminated
from their Native Seats and Habitations, unless they will give security to
renounce their Religion received from their Forefathers, in exchange for the
Roman Catholic Superstition, and that within Twenty days at farthest; so that
many being killed, the rest Strip to their Skins and exposed to most certain
destruction, are now forced to wander over desert Mountains and through
perpetual Winter, together with their Wives and Children, half dead with Cold
and Hunger; and that your Majesty has laid it to heart with a Pious sorrow and
compassionate consideration we as little doubt. For that the Protestant Name
and Cause, although they differ among themselves in some things of little
Consequence, is nevertheless the same in general and united in one common
Interest, the hatred of our Adversaries, alike insenc'd against Protestants,
very easily demonstrates. Now there is no body can be ignorant, that the Kings
of the Swedes have always joined with the Reformed, carrying their Victorious
Arms into Germany in Defense of the Protestants without distinction. Therefore
we make it our chief request, and that in a more especial manner to your
Majesty, that you would solicit the Duke of Savoy by Letters, and by
interposing your intermediating Authority, endeavor to avert the horrid
Cruelty of this Edict, if possible, from People no less Innocent then
Religious. For we think it superfluous to admonish your Majesty, whither these
rigorous begininnings tend, and what they threaten to all the Protestants in
general. But if he rather choose to listen to his Anger then to our joint
Entreaties and Intercessions, if there be any Tie, any Charity or Communion of
Religion to be Believed and Worshipped, upon Consultations duly first
communicated to your Majesty and the chief of the Protestant Princes, some
other course is to be speedily taken, that such a numerous multitude of our
Innocent Brethren may not miserably Perish for want of Succor and Assistance.
Which in regard we make no question but that it is your Majesty's Opinion and
Determination, there can be nothing in our opinion more prudently resolved,
then to join our Reputation, Authority, Councels, Forces, and whatever else is
needful, with all the speed that may be, in pursuance of so Pious a design. In
the mean time we beseech Almighty God to Bless your Majesty.

Oliver Protector, etc. to the High and Mighty Lords, the States of the United
Provinces.
WE make no question but that you have already bin informed of the Duke of
Savoy's Edict, set forth against his Subjects Inhabiting the Valleys at the
feet of the Alps, Ancient Professors of the Orthodox Faith; by which Edict they
are commanded to abandon their Native Habitations, stripped of all their
fortunes, unless within Twenty days they embrace the Roman Faith; and with what
Cruelty the Authority of this Edict has raged against a needy and harmless
People; many being slain by the Soldiers, the rest Plundered and driven from
their Houses together with their Wives and Children, to combat Cold and Hunger
among desert Mountains, and perpetual Snow. These things with what commotion of
Mind you heard related, what a fellow-feeling of the Calamities of Brethren
pierced your breasts, we readily conjecture from the depth of our own Sorrow,
which certainly is most Heavy and Afflictive. For being engaged together by the
same tie of Religion, no wonder we should be so deeply moved with the same
Affections upon the dreadful and undeserved Sufferings of our Brethren.
Besides, that your conspicuous Piety and Charity toward the Orthodox,
wherever overborn and oppressed, has bin frequently experienced in the most
urging streights and calamities of the Churches. For my own part, unless my
thoughts deceive me, there is nothing wherein I should desire more willingly to
be overcome, then in Good will and Charity toward Brethren of the same Religion
afflicted and wronged in their quiet Enjoyments; as being one that would be
accounted always ready to prefer the Peace and Safety of the Churches before my
particular Interests. So far therefore as hitherto lay in our power, we have
Written to the Duke of Savoy, even almost to Supplication, beseeching him that
he would admit into his breast more placid thoughts and kinder effects of his
Favor toward his most Innocent Subjects and Suppliants; that he would restore
the Miserable to their Habitations and Estates, and grant 'em their pristin
freedom in the Exercise of their Religion. Moreover we Wrote to the chiefest
Princes and Magistrates of the Protestants, whom we thought most nearly
concerned in these matters, that they would lend us their Assistance to entreat
and pacify the Duke of Savoy in their behalf. And we make no doubt now but you
have done the same, and perhaps much more. For this so dangerous a president,
and lately renewed severity of utmost Cruelty toward the Reformed, if the
Authors of it meet with prosperous Success, to what apparent dangers it reduces
our Religion, we need not admonish your Prudence. On the other side, if the
Duke shall once but permit himself to be atton'd and won by our united
Applications, not only our Afflicted Brethren, but we our selves shall reap
the noble and abounding Harvest and Reward of this laborious Undertaking. But
if he still persist in the same obstinate Resolutions of reducing to utmost
extremity those People, among whom our Religion was either disseminated by the
first, Doctors of the Gospel, and preserved from the defilement of
Superstition, or else restored to its Pristin sincerity long before other
Nations obtained that felicity; and determins their utter extirpation and
destruction; we are ready to take such other Course and Counsels with your
selves, in common with the rest of our Reformed Friends and Confederates, as
may be most necessary for the preservation of Just and Good men upon the brink
of inevitable Ruin, and to make the Duke himself sensible, that we can no
longer neglect the heavy Oppressions and Calamities of our Orthodox Brethren.
Farewell.

To the Evangelick Cities of Switzerland.
WE make no question but the late Calamity of the Piemontois, Professing our
Religion, reached your Ears, before the unwelcome News of it arrived with us.
Who being a People under the Protection and Jurisdiction of the Duke of Savoy,
and by a severe Edict of their Prince Commanded to depart their Native
Habitations, unless within Three days they gave security to embrace the Roman
Religion, soon after were assailed by Armed Violence, that turned their
Dwellings into Slaughter-houses, while others, without Number, were terrified
into Banishment, where now Naked and Afflicted, without House or Home, or any
Covering from the Weather, and ready to perish through Hunger and Cold, they
miserably wander thorough desert Mountains, and depths of Snow, together with
their Wives and Children. And far less reason have we to doubt, but that, so
soon as they came to your knowledge, you laid these things to heart, with a
Compassion no less sensible of their multiplied Miseries, then our selves; the
more deeply imprinted perhaps in your minds, as being next Neighbors to the
sufferers. Besides, that we have abundant proof of your singular Love and
Affection for the Orthodox Faith, of your constancy in retaining it, and your
Fortitude in defending it. Seeing then, by the most strict Communion of
Religion, that you, together with our selves, are all Brethren alike, or rather
one body with those unfortunate People, of which no member can be Afflicted
without the feeling, without pain, without the detriment and hazard of the
rest; we thought it convenient to Write to your Lordships concerning this
matter, and let you understand, how much we believe it to be the general
Interest of us all, as much as in us lies, with our common Aid and Succor, to
relieve our extirminated and indigent Brethren; and not only to take care for
removing their Miseries and Afflictions, but also to provide, that the mischief
spread no farther, nor incroach upon our selves in general, encouraged by
Example and Success. We have Written Letters to the Duke of Savoy, wherein we
have most earnestly besought him out of his wonted Clemency, to deal more
gently and mildly with his most faithful Subjects, and to restore 'em, almost
Ruined as they are, to their Goods and Habitations. And we are in hopes, that
by these our Entreaties, or rather by the united Intercessions of us all, the
most Serene Prince at length will be atton'd, and grant what we have requested
with so much Importunity. But if his mind be obstinately bent to other
determinations, we are ready to communicate our Consultations with yours, by
what most prevalent means to relieve and re-establish most Innocent men, and
our most dearly beloved Brethren in Christ, tormented and overlaid with so many
Wrongs and Oppressions; and preserve 'em from inevitable and undeserved Ruin.
Of whose welfare and Safety, as I am assured, that you according to your wonted
Piety, are most cordially tender, so, for our own parts, we cannot but in our
opinion prefer their preservation before our most important Interests, even the
safeguard of our own life. Farewell.

Westminster, May, 19. 1655. O. P.
Superscrib'd, To the most Illustrious and Potent Lords, the Consuls and
Senators of the Protestant Cantons and Confederate Cities of Switzerland,
Greeting.
To the most Serene and Potent Prince, Lewis King of France,
Most Serene and Potent King,
BY your Majesty's Letters which you Wrote in answer to ours of the 25th of
May, we readily understand, that we failed not in our Judgment, that the
inhuman Slaughter and barbarous Massacres of those men, who profess the
Reformed Religion in Savoy, perpetrated by some of your Regiments, were the
Effects neither of your Orders nor Commands. And it afforded us a singular
occasion of Joy, to hear that your Majesty had so timely signified to your
Colonels and Officers, whose violent precipitancy engaged 'em in those inhuman
Butcheries without the encouragement of Lawful Allowance, how displeasing they
were to your Majesty; that you had admonished the Duke himself to forbear such
Acts of Cruelty; and that you had interposed with so much Fidelity and
Humanity, all the high Veneration paid you in that Court, your near Alliance
and Authority, for restoring to their ancient Abodes those unfortunate Exiles.
And it was our hopes, That that Prince would in some measure have condescended
to the good Pleasure and Intercessions of your Majesty. But finding not any
thing obtained either by your own, nor the Entreaties and Importunities of
other Princes in the Cause of the Distressed, we deemed it not foreign from our
duty, to send this noble Person, under the Character of our extraordinary
Envoy, to the Duke of Savoy, more amply and, fully to lay before him, how
deeply sensible we are of such exasperated Cruelties inflicted upon the
Professors of the same Religion with our selves, and all this too out of a
hatred of the same Worship. And we have reason to hope a success of this
Negotiation so much the more prosperous, if your Majesty would vouchsafe to
employ your Authority and Assistance once again with so much the more urgent
importunity; and as you have undertaken for those Indigent People that they
will be Faithful and Obedient to their Prince, so you would be graciously
pleased to take care of their Welfare and Safety, that no farther Oppressions
of this nature, no more such dismal Calamities may be the portion of the
Innocent and Peaceful. This being truly Royal and Just in it self, and highly
agreeable to your Benignity and Clemency, which every where protects in soft
security so many of your Subjects professing the same Religion, we cannot but
expect, as it behooves us, from your Majesty. Which Act of yours, as it will
more closely bind to your Subjection all the Protestants throughout your
spacious Dominions, whose Affection and Fidelity to your Predecessors and your
self in most important Distresses have bin often conspicuously made known; so
will it fully convince all Foreign Princes, that the Advice or Intention of
your Majesty were no way contributory to this prodigious Violence, whatever
inflamed your Ministers and Officers to promote it. More especially, if your
Majesty shall inflict deserved punishment upon those Captains and Ministers,
who of their own Authority, and to gratify their own Wills, adventured the
perpetrating such dreadful Acts of Inhumanity. In the mean while, since your
Majesty has assured us of your justly merited aversion to these most inhuman
and cruel Proceedings, we doubt not but you will assord a secure Sanctuary and
Shelter within your Kingdom to all those miserable Exiles that shall fly to
your Majesty for Protection; and that you will not give permission to any of
your Subjects to assist the Duke of Savoy to their prejudice. It remains that
we make known to your Majesty, how highly we esteem and value your Friendship:
In testimony of which, we farther affirm there shall never be wanting upon all
occasions the real assurances and effects of our Protestation.

White Hall, July 29. 1655. Your Majesty's most Affectionate, Oliver Protector
of the Commonwealth of England, etc.

To the most Eminent Lord, Cardinal Mazarine.
Most Eminent Lord Cardinal,
HAving deemed it necessary to send this Noble Person to the King with Letters,
a Copy of which is here enclosed, we gave him also farther in Charge to Salute
your Excellency in our Name, as having entrusted to his Fidelity certain other
matters to be communicated to your Eminency. In reference to which Affairs, I
entreat your Eminency, to give him entire Credit, as being a Person in whom I
have reposed a more then ordinary confidence.

White Hall, July 29. 1655. Your Eminencies most Affectionate, Oliver Protector
of the Commonwealth of. England.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, to the most Serene Prince,
Frederick III. King of Danemark, Norway, etc.
WITH what a severe and unmerciful Edict Immanuel Duke of Savoy has expelled
from their Native Seats his Subjects inhabiting the Valleys of Piemont, men
otherwise harmless, only for many years remarkably famous for embracing the
Purity of Religion; and after a dreadful Slaughter of some numbers, how he has
exposed the rest to the hardships of those desert Mountains, Stripped to their
Skins, and barred from all relief, we believe your Majesty has long since
heard, and doubt not but that your Majesty is touched with a real commiseration
of their Sufferings, as becomes so puissant a Defender and Prince of the
Reformed Faith. For indeed the Institutions of Christian Religion require, that
whatever Mischiefs and Miseries any part of us undergo, it should behove us all
to be deeply sensible of the same: Nor does any man better then your Majesty
foresee, if we may be thought able to give a right conjecture of your Piety and
Prudence, what dangers the success and example of this fact portend to our
selves in particular, and to the whole Protestant name in general. We have
written the more willingly to your self, to the end we might assure your
Majesty, that the same sorrow which we hope you have conceived for the Calamity
of our most Innocent Brethren, the same opinion, the same judgment you have of
the whole matter, is plainly and sincerely our own. We have therefore sent our
Letters to the Duke of Savoy, wherein we have most importunately besought him
to spare those miserable People that implore his mercy, and that he would no
longer suffer that dreadful Edict to be in force. Which if your Majesty and the
rest of the Reformed Princes would vouchsafe to do, as we are apt to belive
they have already done, there is some hope that the Anger of the most Serene
Duke may be asswag'd, and that his Indignation will relent upon the
Intercession and Importunities of his Neighbor Princes. Or if he persist in
his Determinations, we protest our selves ready, together with your Majesty,
and the rest of our Confederates of the Reformed Religion, to take such speedy
methods as may enable us, as far in us lies, to relieve the distresses of so
many miserable Creatures, and provide for their Liberty and Safety. In the mean
time we beseech Almighty God to bless your Majesty with all Prosperity.

White Hall, May -- 1655.
Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. to the most Noble the
Consuls and Senators of the City of Geneva.
WE had before made known to your Lordships our excessive Sorrow for the heavy
and unheard of Calamities of the Protestants Inhabiting the Valleys of Piemont,
whom the Duke of Savoy Persecutes with so much Cruelty, but that we made it our
business that you should at the same time understand, that we are not only
affected with the multitude of their sufferings, but are using the utmost of
our endeavors to Relieve and Comfort 'em in their distresses. To that purpose
we have taken care for a gathering of Alms to be made throughout this whole
Republic; which upon good grounds we expect will be such, as will demonstrate
the affection of this Nation toward their Brethren laboring under the burden
of such horrid Inhumanities; and that as the Communion of Religion is the same
between both People, so the sense of their Calamities is no less the same. In
the mean time while the Collections of the Money go forward, which in regard
they will require some time to accomplish, and for that the Wants and
Necessities of those deplorable People will admit of no delay, we thought it
requifite to remit beforehand Two thousand Pounds of the Value of England, with
all possible speed to be distributed among such as shall be judged to be most
in present need of Comfort and Succor. Now in regard we are not ignorant how
deeply the miseries and wrongs of those most innocent people have affected your
selves, and that you will not think amiss of any Labor or Pains where you can
be assisting to their Relief, we made no scruple to commit the Paying and
Distributing this Sum of Money to your Care; and to give ye this farther
trouble, that according to your wonted Piety and Prudence, you would take care
that the said Money made be distributed equally to the most Necessitous, to the
end that though the Sum be small, yet there may be something to Refresh and
Revive the most Poor and Needy, till we can afford 'em a more plentiful Supply.
And thus, not making any doubt but you will take in good part the trouble
imposed upon ye, we beseech Almighty God to stir up the hearts of all his
People Professing the Orthodox Religion, to resolve upon the common Defense of
themselves, and the mutual Assistance of each other against their embittered
and most implacable Enemies: In the prosecution of which we should rejoice that
our helping hand might be any way serviceable to the Church. Farewell.

Fifteen hundred Pounds of the foresaid Two thousand will be remitted by Gerard
Hench from Paris, and the other Five hundred Pounds will be taken care of by
Letters from the Lord Stoup.

June 8. 1655.
Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. to the most Serene
Prince, the Duke of Venice.
Most Serene Prince,
AS it has bin always a great occasion of rejoicing to us when ever any
prosperous Success attended your Arms, but more especially against the Common
Enemy of the Christian Name; so neither are we sorry for the late Advantage
gained by your Fleet, though as we understand, it happened not a little to the
Detriment of our People. For certain of our Merchants, William and Daniel
Williams and Edward Beale, have set forth in a Petition presented to us, that a
Ship of theirs, called the Great Prince, was lately sent by them with Goods and
Merchandise to Constantinople, where the said Ship was detained by the
Ministers of the Port, to carry Soldiers and Provisions to Creet; and that the
said Ship being constrained to Sail along with the same Fleet of the Turks,
which was set upon and vanquished by the Galleys of the Venetians, was taken,
carried away to Venice, and there adjudg'd Lawful Prize by the Judges of the
Admiralty. Now therefore in regard the said Ship was pressed by the Turks, and
forced into their Service without the Knowledge or Consent of the Owners
directly or indirectly obtained, and that it was impossible for her, being
Shipped with Soldiers, to withdraw from the Engagement, we most earnestly
request your Serenity, That you will remit that sentence of your Admiralty, as
a Present to our Friendship, and take such care that the Ship may be restored
to the Owners, no way deserving the displeasure of your Republic by any Act of
theirs. In the obtaining of which request, more especially upon our
Intercession, while we find the Merchants themselves so well assured of your
Clemency, It behooves us not to question it. And so we beseech the Almighty God
to continue his prosperous Blessings upon your Noble, Designs and the Venetian
Republic.

Westminster, December -- 1655. Your Serenity's, and the Venetian Republick's,
most Affectionate, Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. to the most Serene
Prince, Lewis King of France.
Most Serene King,
CErtain of our Merchants, by name, Samuel Mico, William Cockain, George
Poyner, and several others, in a Petition to us have set forth, That in the
year 1650. they Laded a Ship of theirs, called the Unicorn, with Goods of a
very considerable value; and that the said Ship being thus Laden with Silk, Oil
and other Merchandise, amounting to above Thirty four thousand of our Pounds,
was taken by the Admiral and Vice Admiral of your Majesty's Fleet in the
Mediterranean Sea. Now it appears to us, that our People who were then in the
Ship, by reason there was at that time a Peace between the French and us, that
never had bin violated in the least, were not willing to make any Defense
against your Majesty's Royal Ships, and therefore overruled besides by the
fair Promises of the Captains Paul, and Terrery, who faithfully engaged to
dismiss our People, they paid their Obedience to the Maritime Laws, and
produced their Bills of Lading. Moreover, we find that the Merchants aforesaid,
sent their Agent into France to demand Restitution of the said Ship and Goods:
And then it was, that after above Three years slipped away, when the Suit was
brought so far that Sentence of Restitution or Condemnation was to have bin
given; that his Eminency Cardinal Mazarine acknowledged to their Factor Hugh
Morel, the wrong that had bin done the Merchants, and undertook that
Satisfaction should be given, so soon as the League between the two Nations,
which was then under Negotiation, should be Ratified and Confirmed. Nay, since
that, his Excellency M. de Bourdeaux, your Majesty's Ambassador, assured us in
express Words, by the Command of your Majesty and your Council, That care
should be taken of that Ship and Goods in a particular Exception, a part from
those controversies, for the decision of which a general provision was made by
the League; of which promise, the Ambassador, now opportunely arrived here to
solicit some business of his own, is a Testimony no way to be questioned. Which
being true, and the Right of the Merchants in redemanding their Ship and Goods
so undeniably apparent, we most earnestly request your Majesty, that they may
meet with no delay in obtaining what is justly their due, but that your Majesty
will admit the grant of this Favor, as the first fruits of our revived Amity
and the lately renewed League between us. The refusal of which, as we have no
reason to doubt, so we beseech Almighty God to Bless with all Prosperity both
your Majesty and your Kingdom.

Westminster, December. -- 1655. Your Majesty's most Affectionate, Oliver
Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, etc.

To the Evangelic Cities of Switzerland.
IN what condition your Affairs are, which is not the best, we are abundantly
informed, as well by your public Acts transmitted to us by our Agent at
Geneva, as also by your Letters from Zurick, bearing date the 27th. of
December. Whereby, although we are sorry to find your Peace, and such a lasting
League of Confederacy broken; nevertheless since it appears to have happened
through no fault of yours, we are in hopes that the Iniquity and perverseness
of your Adversaries are contriving new occasions for ye to make known your
long-ago experienced Fortitude and Resolution in Defense of the Evangelick
Faith. For as for those of the Canton of Schwits, who account it a Capital
Crime for any person to embrace our Religion, what they are might and main
designing, and whose instigations have incensed 'em to resolutions of Hostility
against the Orthodox Religion, no body can be ignorant, who has not yet forgot
that most detestable Slaughter of our Brethren in Piemont. Wherefore, most
beloved Friends, what you were always wont to be, with God's assistance still
continue, Magnanimous and Resolute; suffer not your Privileges, your
Confederacies, the Liberty of your Consciences, your Religion it self to be
trampled under foot by the Worshippers of Idols; and so prepare your selves,
that you may not seem to be the Defenders only of your own Freedom and Safety,
but be ready likewise to Aid and Succor, as far as in you lies, your
Neighboring Brethren, more especially those most deplorable Piedmontois; as
being certainly convinced of this, that a Passage was lately intended to have
bin opened over their Slaughtered bodies to your sides. As for our part, be
assured, that we are no less anxious and solicitous for your Welfare and
Prosperity, then if this conflagration had broken forth in our Republic; or as
if the Axes of the Schwits Canton had bin sharpened for our Necks, or that
their Swords had bin drawn against our Breasts, as indeed they were against the
bosoms of all the Reformed. Therefore so soon as we were informed of the
condition of your Affairs, and the obstinate Animosities of your Enemies,
advising with some sincere and honest Persons, together with some Mininisters
of the Church most eminent for their Piety, about sending to your Assistance
such Succor as the present posture of our Affairs would permit, we came to
those Results, which our Envoy Pell will impart to your consideration. In the
mean time we cease not to implore the Blessing of the Almighty upon all your
Counsels, and the Protection of your most just Cause as well in War as in Peace.

Westminster, Jan. -- 1655. Your Lordships and Worships most Affectionate,
Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England etc. to the most Serene Prince
Charles Gustavus, by the Grace of God King of the Swedes, Goths and Vandals,
Great Prince of Finland, etc.
Most Serene King,
SEeing it is a thing well known to all men, that there ought to be a
Communication of concerns among Friends, whether in Prosperity or Adversity; it
cannot be, but most grateful to us, that your Majesty should vouchsafe to
impart unto us by your Letters the most pleasing and delightful part of your
Friendship, which is your joy. In regard it is a mark of singular Civility, and
truly Royal, as not to live only to a man's self, so neither to rejoice alone,
unless he be sensible that his Friends and Confederates partake of his
gladness. Certainly then, we have reason to rejoice for the Birth of a young
Prince Born to such an excellent King, and sent into the world to be the Heir
of his Father's Glory and Virtue; and this at such a lucky season, that we have
no less cause to Congratulate the Royal Parent with the memorable Omen that
befell the Famous Philip of Macedon, who at the same time received the Tidings
of Alexander's Birth, and the Conquest of the Illyrians. For we make no
question, but the wresting of the Kingdom of Poland from Papal Subjection, as
it were a Horn dismembered from the Head of the Beast, and the Peace so much
desired by all Good men, concluded with the Duke of Brandenburgh will be most
highly conducing to the Tranquillity and Advantage of the Church. Heaven grant a
conclusion correspondent to such signal beginnings; and may the Son be like the
Father in Virtue, Piety, and Renown, obtained by great Atchievments. Which is
that we wish may luckily come to pass, and which we beg of the Almighty, so
propitious hitherto to your Affairs.

Westminster, Feb. -- 1655. Your Majesty's most Affectionate, Oliver Protector
of the Comonwealth of England, etc.

To the King of Danemark.
Most Serene and Potent Prince,
JOhn Freeman and Philip Travess, Citizens of this Republic, by a Petition
presented to us, in their own and the Name of several other Merchants of
London, have made a complaint, That whereas about the Month of March in the
year 1653. they Freighted a certain Ship of Sunderburgh, called the Savior,
Nicolas Weinskinks Master, with Woollen Cloth, and other Commodities to the
Value of above Three thousand Pound, with Orders to the Master, That he should
Sail directly up the Baltic for Dantzick, paying the usual Tribute at
Elsenore, to which purpose in particulor they gave him Money; nevertheless that
the said Master, Perfidiously and contrary to the Orders of the said Merchants,
slipping by Elsenore without paying the usual Duty, thought to have proceeded
in his Voyage, but that the Ship for this reason was immediately Seized and
detained with all her Lading. After due consideration of which Complaints, we
Wrote in favor of the Merchants to your Majesty's Ambassador residing at
London, who promised, as they say, that as soon as he returned to your Majesty,
he would take care that the Merchants should be taken into consideration. But
he being sent to Negotiate your Majesty's Affairs in other Countries, the
Merchants attended upon him in vain, both before and after his departure, so
that they were forced to send their Agent to prosecute their Right and Claim at
Copenhagen, and demand Restitution of the Ship and Goods; but all the Benefit
they reaped by it, was only to add more expenses to their former damages, and
a great deal of labor and pains thrown away; the Goods being condemned, to
Confiscation, and still detained: Whereas by the Law of Danemark, as they set
forth in their Petition, the Master is to be Punished for his Offense, and the
Ship is to be Condemned but not the Goods. And they look upon this misfortune
to lie the more heavy upon 'em, in regard the Duty which is to be paid at
Elsenore, as they tell us, is but very small. Wherefore seeing our Merchants
seem to have given no cause of Proscription, and for that the Master confessed
before his death, that this damage befell them only through his neglect; and
the Father of the Master deceased, by his Petition to your Majesty, as we are
given to understand, by laying all the blame upon his Son, has acquitted the
Merchants, we could not but believe the detaining of the said Ship and Goods to
be most unjust; and therefore we are confident, that so soon as your Majesty
shall be rightly informed of the whole matter, you will not only disapprove of
these Oppressions of your Ministers, but give command that they be called to an
account, that the Goods be restored to the Owners or their Factors, and
Reparation made 'em for the Losses they have sustained. All which we most
earnestly request of your Majesty, as being no more then what is so just and
consentaneous to reason, that a more equitable demand or more legal
satisfaction cannot well be made, considering the Justice of our Merchants
Cause, and which your own Subjects would think but fair and honest upon the
like occasions.

To the most Serene Prince, John the Fourth, King of Portugal, etc.
Most Serene King,
THE Peace and Friendship which your Majesty desired, by your Noble and
Splendid Embassy, sent to us some time since, after certain Negotiations begun
by the Parliament, in whom the Supreme Power was vested at that time, as it was
always most affectionately wished for by us, with the assistance of God, and
that we might not be wanting in the Administration of the Government which we
have now taken upon us, at length we brought to a happy conclusion, and as we
hope, as a sacred Act, have ratified it to perpetuity. And therefore we send
back to your Majesty, your extraordinary Ambassador, the Lord John Roderigo de
Sita Meneses, Count of Pennaguiada, a person both approved by your Majesty's
judgment, and by us experienced to excel in Civility, Ingenuity, Prudence and
Fidelity, besides the merited applause which he has justly gained by
accomplishing the ends of his Embassy, which is the Peace which he carries
along with him to his Country. But as to what we perceive by your Letters dated
from Lisbon the second of April, that is to say, how highly your Majesty
esteems our Amity, how cordially you favor our Advancement, and rejoice at our
having taken the Government of the Republic upon us, which you are pleased to
manifest by singular Testimonies of Kindness and Affection, we shall make it
our business, that all the world may understand, by our readiness at all times
to serve your Majesty, that there could be nothing more acceptable or grateful
to us. Nor are we less earnest in our Prayers to God for your Majesty's safety,
the welfare of your Kingdom, and the prosperous success of your Affairs.

Your Majesty's most Affectionate, Oliver, etc.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the High and Mighty
States of the United Provinces.
Most High and Mighty Lords, our dearest Friends,
CERTAIN Merchants, our Contrymen, Thomas Bassel, Richard Bear, and others
their Copartners, have made their complaints before us, That a certain Ship of
theirs, the Edmund and John, in her Voyage from the Coast of Brasile to Lisbon,
was set upon by a Privateer of Flushing, called the Red-Lyon, Commanded by
Lambert Bartelson, but upon this condition, which the Writing Signed by Lambert
himself testifies, That the Ship and whatsoever Goods belonged to the English
should be restored at Flushing: where when the Vessel arrived, the Ship indeed
with what peculiarly belonged to the Seamen was restored, but the English
Merchants Goods were detained and put forthwith to Sale: For the Merchants who
had received the Damage, when they had su'd for their Goods in the Court of
Flushing, after great Expenses for Five years together, lost their Suit, by the
pronouncing of a most unjust Sentence against 'em by those Judges, of which
some being interested in the Privateer, were both Judges and Adversaries, and
no less Criminal altogether. So that now they have no other hopes but only in
your Equity and uncorrupted Faith, to which at last they fly for Succor; and
which they believed they should find the more inclinable to do 'em Justice, if
assisted by our Recommendation. And men are surely to be pardoned, if afraid of
all things in so great a struggle for their Estates, they rather call to mind
what they have reason to fear from your Authority and high Power, then what
they have to hope well of their Cause, especially before sincere and upright
Judges: Though for our parts we make no question, but that induced by your
Religion, your Justice, your Integrity, rather then by our Entreaties, you will
give that Judgment which is Just and Equal and truly becoming your selves. God
preserve both you and your Republic to his own Glory and the defense and
Succor of his Church.

Westminster, April 1. 1656. Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England,
etc.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, etc.
To the most Serene Prince, Charles Gustavus, King of the Swedes, Goths and
Vandals, Great Prince of Finland, Duke of Esthonia, Carelia, Breme, Verden,
Stettin, Pomerania, Cassubia and Vandalia, Prince of Rugia, Lord of Ingria and
Wismaria, Count Palatine of the Rhine, Duke of Bavaria, Juliers, Cleves and
Monts.
Most Serene Prince,
PEter Julius Coict having accomplished the Affairs of his Embassy with us, and
so acquitted himself, that he is not by us to be dismissed without the Ornament
of his deserved Praises, is now returning to your Majesty. For he was most
acceptable to us, as well and chiefly for your own sake, which ought with us to
be of high consideration, as for his own deserts in the diligent acquittal of
his Trust. The Recommendation therefore which we received from you in his
behalf, we freely testify to have bin made good by him, and deservedly given
by your self; as he on the other side is able with the same Fidelity and
Integrity to relate and most truly to declare our singular Affection and
Observance toward your Majesty. It remains for us to beseech the most Merciful
and All-powerful God to Bless your Majesty with all Felicity, and a perpetual
course of Victory over all the Enemies of his Church.

Westminster, Apirl 17. 1656. Your Majesty's most Affectionate, Oliver
Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the most Serene and
Potent Prince, Lewis King of France.
Most Serene Prince,
JOhn Dethic Mayor of the City of London for this Year, and William Wakefield
Merchant, have made their Addresses to us by way of Petition complaining, That
about the middle of October 1649. they freighted a certain Ship, called the
Jonas of London, Jonas Lightfoot Master, with Goods that were to be sent to
Ostend; which Vessel was taken in the mouth of the River Thames, by one White
of Barking, a Pyrate Robbing upon the Seas by Virtue of a Commission from the
Son of King Charles deceased, and carried to Dnnkirk, then under the
Jurisdiction of the French. Now in regard that by your Majesty's Edict in the
year 1647. renewed in 1649. and by some other Decrees in favor of the
Parliament of England, as they find it recorded, it was Enacted, That no Vessel
or Goods taken from the English, in the time of that War, should be carried
into any of your Majesty's Ports to be there put to Sale, they presently sent
their Factor Hugh Morel to Dunkirk, to demand Restitution of the said Ship and
Goods from M. Lestrade then Governor of the Town; more especially finding them
in the Place for the most part untouched, and neither Exchanged or Sold. To
which the Governor made Answer, That the King had bestowed that Government upon
him of his free Gift for Service done the King in his Wars, and therefore he
would take care to make the best of the Reward of his Labor. So that having
little to hope from an Answer so unkind and unjust, after a great Expense of
Time and Money, the Factor returned home. So that all the remaining hopes which
the Petitioners have, seem wholly to depend upon your Majesty's Justice and
Clemency, to which they thought they might have the more easy access by means
of our Letters. and therefore that neither your Clemency nor your Justice may
be wanting to People despoiled against all Law and Reason, and contrary to your
repeated Prohibitions, we make it our request. Wherein, if your Majesty
vouchsafe to gratify us, since there is nothing required but what is most just
and equitable, we shall deem it as obtained rather from your innate Integrity,
then any entreaty of ours.

Westminster, May -- 1656. Your Majesty's most Affectionate, Oliver Protector
of the Commonwealth of England, etc.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the High and Mighty
Lords, the States of the United Provinces.
Most High and Mighty Lords, our dearest Friends,
JOhn Brown, Nicholas Williams, and others, Citizens of London, have set forth
in their Petition to us, that when they had every one brought in their
Proportions and Freighted a certain Ship called the Good-Hope of London, bound
for the East Indies, they gave Orders to their Factor to take up at Amsterdam
Two thousand four hundred Dutch Pounds, to insure the said Ship; that
afterward this Ship in her Voyage to the Coast of India was taken by a Ship
belonging to the East India Company; upon which they who had engaged to Insure
the said Vessel refused to Pay the Money, and have for this Six years by
various delays eluded our Merchants, who with extraordinary Diligence and at
vast Expenses endeavored the recovery of their just Right. Which in regard it
is an unjust Grievance that lies so heavy upon the Petitioners, for that some
of those who obliged themselves are Dead or become Insolvent, therefore that no
farther Losses may accrue to their former Damages, we make it our earnest
request to your Lordships, that you will vouchsafe your Integrity to be the
harbor and refuge for People tossed so many years, and almost shipwrack'd in
your Courts of Justice, and that speedy judgment may be given according to the
rules of Equity and Honesty in their Cause which they believe to be most just.
In the mean time we wish you all Prosperity to the Glory of God and the Welfare
of his Church.

Westminste, May -- 1656. Your High and Mighty Lordships most Affectionate,
Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the High and Mighty
Lords, the States of the United Provinces,
Most High and Mighty Lords, our dearest Friends,
THE same Persons in whose behalf we wrote to your Lordships in September the
last year, Thomas and William Lower, the lawful Heirs of Nicholas Lower,
deceased, make grievous complaints before us, that they are oppressed either by
the Favor or Wealth of their Adversaries, notwithstanding the Justice of their
Cause; and when that would not suffice, although our Letters often pleaded in
their behalf, they have not bin able hitherto to obtain Possession of the
Inheritance left 'em by their Father's Will. From the Court of Holland, where
the Suit was first Commenced, they were sent to your Court, and from thence
hurried away into Zealand (to which three Places they carried our Letters) and
now they are remanded, not unwillingly, back again to your Supreme Judicature;
for where the Supreme Power is, there they expect Supreme Justice. If that hope
fail 'em, eluded and frustrated, after being so long tossed from post to pillar
for the recovery of their Right, where at length to find a resting place they
know not. For as for our Letters, if they find no benefit of these the Fourth
time Written, they can never promise themselves any advantage for the future
from slighted Papers. However, it would be most acceptable to us, if yet at
length, after so many contempts, the injured Heirs might meet with some Relief
by a speedy and just Judgment, if not out of respect to any Reputation we have
among ye, yet out of a regard to your own Equity and Justice. Of the last of
which we make no question, and confidently presume you will allow the other to
our Friendship.

Westminster, May -- 6656. Your High and Mighty Lordships most Affectionate,
Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the most Serene
Prince, John King of Portugal.
Most Serene King,
WHereas there is a considerable Sum of Money owing from certain Portugal
Merchants of the Brasile Company to several English Merchants, upon the account
of Freightage and Demorage, in the years 1649 and 1650. which Money is detained
by the said Company by your Majesty's Command, the Merchants beforementioned
expected that the said Money should have bin paid long since according to the
Articles of the last League, but now they are afraid of being debarred all
hopes and means of recovering their Debts; understanding your Majesty has
ordered, That what Money is owing to 'em by the Brasile Company, shall be
carried into your Treasury, and that no more then one half of the Duty of
Freightage shall be expended toward the Payment of their Debts; by which means
the Merchants will receive no more then the bare Interest of their Money, while
at the same time they utterly lose their Principal. Which we considering to be
very severe and heavy upon 'em, and being overcome by their most reasonable
Supplications, have granted 'em these our Letters to your Majesty; chiefly
requesting this at your hands, to take care that the aforesaid Brasile Company
may give speedy Satisfaction to the Merchants of this Republic, and pay 'em
not only the Principal Money which is owing to 'em, but the Five years
Interest; as being both just in it self, and conformable to the League so
lately concluded between us; which on their behalf in most friendly manner we
request from your Majesty.

Your Majesty's most Affectionate, Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth, etc.
From our Palace at Westminster, July -- 1656.
Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the Most Serene
Prince Charles Gustavus, King of the Swedes, Goths, and Vandals, etc
Most Serene King,
AS it is but just that we should highly value the Friendship of your Majesty,
a Prince so Potent, and so Renowned for great Achievements; so is it but
equally reasonable that your Extraordinary Ambassador, the most Illustrious
Lord Christiern Bond, by whose sedulity and care a strict Alliance is most
sacredly and solemnly ratified between us, should be most acceptable to us, and
no less deeply fixed in our esteem. Him therefore, having now most worthily
accomplished his Embassy, we thought it became us to send back to your Majesty,
though not without the high Applause which the rest of his singular Virtues
merit; to the end, that he who was before conspicuous in your esteem and
respect, may now be sensible of his having reaped still more abundant fruits of
his Sedulity and Prudence from our Recommendation. As for those things which
yet remain to be transacted, we have determined in a short time to send an
Embassy to your Majesty for the settling of those Affairs. In the mean time
Almighty God preserve in safety so great a Pillar of his Church, and of
Swedeland's welfare.

From our Palace at Westminster, July -- 1656. Your Majesty's most
Affectionate, Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. to the most Serene
Prince, Lewis King of France.
Most Serene King, our most dear Friend and Confederate.
CErtain Merchants of London, Richard Baker and others, have made their
complaint in a Petition to us, That a certain hired Ship of theirs, called the
Endeavor, William Jop Master, Laden at Tenariff with Three hundre'd Pipes of
rich Canary, and bound from thence for London, in her Voyage between Palma and
that Island, upon the 21st. of November in the year 1655. was taken by Four-
French Vessels, seeming Ships of Burden, but fitted and manned like
Privateers, under the Command of Giles de la Roche their Admiral, and carried
with all her Freight, and the greatest part of the Seamen to the East Indies,
whither he pretended to be bound (Fourteen excepted, who were put ashore upon
the Coast of Guiney) which the said Giles affirmed he did with that Intent,
that none of 'em might escape from so Remote and Barbarous a Country to do him
any harm by their Testimony. For he confessed he had neither any Commission to
take the English Vessels, neither had he taken any, as he might have done
before, well knowing there was a firm Peace at that time between the French and
our Republic: But in regard he had designed to revittle in Portugal, from
whence he was driven by contrary Winds, he was constrained to supply his
necessities with what he found in that Vessel; and believed the Owners of his
Ships would satisfy the Merchants for their Loss. Now the Loss of our
Merchants amounts to Sixteen Thousand English Pounds, as will easily be made
appear by Witnesses upon Oath. But if it shall be Lawful upon such trivial
Excuses as these, for Pirates to violate the most Religious Acts of Princes,
and make a sport of Merchants for their particular benefits, certainly the
sanctity of Leagnes must fall to the ground, all Faith and Authority of Princes
will grow out of date and be trampled under foot. Wherefore we not only
request your Majesty, but believe it mainly to concern your Honor, that they
who have adventured upon so slight a pretense to violate the League and most
Sacred Oath of their Sovereign, should suffer the Punishment due to so much
Perfidiousness and daring Insolence; and that in the mean time the Owners of
those Ships, though to their Loss, should be bound to satisfy our Merchants
for the vast Detriment which they have so wrongfully sustained. So may the
Almighty long preserve your Majesty, and support the Interest of France against
the Common Enemy of us Both. From our Palace at Westminster, August -- 1656.

Your Majesty's most Affectionate, Oliver Protector, etc.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, To his Eminency Cardinal
Mazarine.
Most Eminent Lord,
HAving an occasion to send Letters to the King, we thought it likewise an
offered opportunity to Write to your Eminency. For we could not think it proper
to conceal the subject of our Writing from the sole and only person, whose
singular Prudence Governs the most important Interests of the French Nation,
and the most weighty Affairs of the Kingdom with equal Fidelity, Council and
Vigilance. Not without reason we complain, in short, to find that League by
your self, as it were a crime to doubt, most sacredly concluded, almost the
very same day contemned and violated by one Giles a Frenchman, a petty Admiral
of Four Ships, and his Associates equally concerned, as your Eminency will
readily find by our Letters to the King, and the Demands themselves of our
Merchants: Nor is it unknown to your Excellency howmuch it concerns not only
Inferior Magistrates, but even Royal Majesty it self, that those first
Violators of solemn Alliances should be severely punished. But they, perhaps,
by this time being arrived in the East Indies, whither they pretended to be
bound, enjoy in undisturbed possession the Goods of our People as Lawful Prize
won from an Enemy, which they Robbed and Pilledg'd from the Owners contrary to
all Law and the pledged Faith of our late sacrd League. However, this is that
which we request from your Eminency, That whatever Goods were taken from our
Merchants by the Admiral of those Ships, as necessary for his Voyage, may be
restored by the Owners of the same Vessels, which was no more then what the
Rovers themselves thought Just and Equal; which, as we understand, it lies
within your Power to do, considering the Authority and Sway you bear in the
Kingdom. From our Palace at Westminster, August -- 1656.

Your Eminencies most Affectionate, Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth, etc.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the most High and
Mighty Lords, the States of the United Provinces.
Most High and Mighty Lords, our dear Friends and Confederates.
WE make no doubt, but that all men will bear us this Testimony, That no
considerations, in contracting Foreign Alliances, ever swayed us beyond those
of defending the Truth of Religion, or that we accounted any thing more sacred,
then to Unite the Minds of all the Friends and Protectors of the Protestants,
and of all others, who at least were not their Enemies. Whence it comes to
pass, that we are touched with so much the more grief of Mind, to hear that the
Protestant Princes and Cities, whom it so much behooves to live in Friendship
and Concord together, should begin to be so jealous of each other, and so ill
disposed to mutual Affection; more especially, that your Lordships and the King
of Sweden, then whom the Orthodox Faith has not more Magnanimous and Courageous
Defenders, nor our Republic Confederates more strictly conjoined in Interests,
should seem to remit of your confidence in each other; or rather, that there
should appear some too apparent signs of tottering Friendship and growing
discord between ye. What the causes are, and what progress this alienation of
your Affection has made, we protest our selves to be altogether ignorant.
However, we cannot but conceive an extraordinary trouble of mind for these
beginnings of the least dissension arisen among Brethren, which infallibly must
greatly endanger the Protestant Interests. Which if they should gather
strength, how prejudicial it would prove to the Protestant Churches, what an
occasion of triumph it would afford our Enemies, and more especially the
Spaniards, cannot be unknown to your Prudence, and most industrious experience
of Affairs. As for the Spaniards, it has already so enlivened their confidence,
and raised their Courage, that they made no scruple by their Ambassador
residing in your Territories, boldly to obtrude their Counsels upon your
Lordships, and that in reference to the highest concerns of your Republic;
presuming partly with Threats of renewing the War, to terrify, and partly with
a false prospect of Advantage to solicit your Lordships to forsake your
Ancient and most Faithful Friends the English, French and Danes, and enter into
a strict Confederacy with your old Enemy, and once your domineering Tyrant, now
seemingly atton'd, but what is most to be feared, only at present treacherously
fawning to advance his own Designs. Certainly he, who of an inveterate Enemy,
lays hold of so slight an occasion of a sudden to become your Counselor, what
is it that he would not take upon him? where would his Insolency stop, if once
he could but see with his eyes, what now he only ruminates and labors in his
thoughts; that is to say, Division and a Civil War among the Protestants? We
are not ignorant, that your Lordships, out of your deep Wisdom, frequently
revolve in your Minds what the posture of all Europe is, and what more
especially the condition of the Protestants: That the Cantons of Switzerland
adhering to the Orthodox Faith, are in daily expectation of new Troubles to be
raised by their Contrymen embracing the Popish Ceremonies; scarcely
recovered from that War which for the sake of Religion was kindled and blown up
by the Spaniards, who supplied their Enemies both with Commanders and Money:
That the Councils of the Spaniards are still contriving to continue the
slaughter and destruction of the Piemontois, which was cruelly put in execution
the last year: That the Protestants under the Jurisdiction of the Emperor are
most grievously harassed, having much ado to keep Possession of their Native
Homes: That the King of Sweden, whom God, as we hope, has raised up to be a
most stout Defender of the Orthodox Faith, is at present waging with all the
Force of his Kingdom a doubtful and bloody War with the most Potent Enemies of
the Reformed Religion: That your own Provinces are threatened with Hostile
Confederacies of the Princes your Neighbors, Headed by the Spaniards; and
lastly, that we our selves are busied in a War proclaimed against the King of
Spain. In this posture of Affairs, if any Contest should happen between your
Lordships and the King of Sweden, How miserable would be the condition of all
the Reformed Churches over all Europe, exposed to the Cruelty and Fury of
unsanctifi'd Enemies? These cares not slightly seize us; and we hope your
Sentiments to be the same; and that out of your continued Zeal for the common
Cause of the Protestants, and to the end the present Peace between Brethren
professing the same Faith, the same Hope of Eternity, may be preserved
inviolable, your Lordships will accommodate your Counsels to these
Considerations, which are to be preferred before all others; and that you will
leave nothing neglected that may conduce to the establishing Tranquillity and
Union between your Lordships and the King of Sweden. Wherein if we can any way
be useful, as far as our Authority, and the Favor you bear us will sway with
your Lordships, we freely offer our utmost Assistance, prepared in like manner
to be no less serviceable to the King of Sweden, to whom we design a speedy
Embassy, to the end we may declare our Sentiments at large concerning these
matterso We hope, moreover, that God will bend your Minds on both sides to
moderate Counsels and so restrain your Animosities, that no provocation may be
given either by the one or the other, to fester your differences to extremity:
But that on the other side both parties will remove whatever may give offense,
or occasion of jealousy to the other. Which if you shall vouchsafe to do, you
will disappoint your Enemies, prove the consolation of your Friends, and in the
best manner provide for the welfare of your Republic. And this we beseech you
to be fully convinced of, that we shall use our utmost care to make appear,
upon all occasions, our extraordinary Affection and Good Will to the States of
the United Provinces. And so we most earnestly implore the Almighty God to
perpetuate his Blessings of Peace, Wealth and Liberty upon your Republic, but
above all things to preserve it always flourishing in the Love of the Christian
Faith, and the true Worship of his Name. From our Palace at Westminster, Aug.
-- 1656.

Your High and Mightinesses most Affectionate, Oliver Protector of the
Commonwealth of England, etc.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, to the most Serene Prince,
John King of Portugal.
Most Serene Prince,
UPON the 11th. of July last, Old-stile, we received by Thomas Maynard the
Ratification of the Peace Negotiated at London, by your Extraordinary
Ambassador, as also of the private and preliminary Articles, all now confirmed
by your Majesty: And by our Letters from Philip Medows, our Agent at Lisbon,
dated the same time, we understand that our Ratification also of the same Peace
and Articles, was by him, according to our Orders sent him, delivered to your
Majesty: And thus, the Instruments of the forementioned Ratification being
mutually interchang'd on both sides in the beginning of June last, there is now
a firm and settled Peace between both Nations. And this pacification has given
us no small occasion of joy and satisfaction, as believing it will prove to the
common benefit of both Nations, and to the no slight detriment of our common
Enemies, who as they found out a means to disturb the former League, so they
left nothing neglected to have hindered the renewing of this. Nor do we
question in the least, that they will omit any occasion of creating new matter
for scandals and jealousies between us. Which we however have constantly
determined, as much as in us lies, to remove at a remote distance from our
thoughts; rather we so earnestly desire, that this our Alliance may beget a
mutual confidence greater every day then other, that we shall take them for our
Enemies, who shall by any artifices endeavor to molest the Friendship by this
Peace established between our selves and both our People. And we readily
persuade our selves, that your Majesty's thoughts and intentions are the same.
And whereas it has pleased your Majesty, by your Letters dated the 24th. of
June, and some days after the delivery by our Agent of the interchang'd
Instrument of confirmed Peace, to mention certain clauses of the League, of
which you desired some little Alteration, being of small moment to this
Republic, as your Majesty believes, but of great importance to the Kingdom of
Portugal, we shall be ready to enter into a particular Treaty in order to those
Proposals made by your Majesty, or whatever else may conduce, in the judgment
of both Parties, to the farther establishment and more strongly fastening of the
League: wherein we shall have those due considerations of your Majesty and your
Subjects, as also of our own People, that all may be satisfied; and it shall be
in your choice, whether these things shall be Negotiated at Lisbon or at
London. However, the League being now Confirmed, and duly Sealed with the Seals
of both Nations, to alter any part of it, would be the same thing as to annul
the whole; which we are certainly assured your Majesty by no means desires to
do. We heartily wish all things Lucky, all things Prosperous to your Majesty.
From our Palace at Westminster, August -- 1656.

Your Majesty's most Affectionate, Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of
England, etc.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the most Serene
Prince, John King of Portugal.
Most Serene King,
WE have received the unwelcome News of a wicked and inhuman Attempt to have
Murdered our Agent Philip Medows, residing with your Majesty, and by us sent
upon the blessed Errand of Peace; the hainousness of which was such, that his
Preservation is only to be attributed to the Protection of Heaven. And we are
given to understand by your Letters dated the 26th. of May last, and delivered
to us by Thomas Maynard, that your Majesty justly incensed at the horridness of
the Fact, has Commanded inquiry to be made after the Criminals, to the end they
may be brought to condign Punishment: But we do not hear that any of the
Ruffians are yet apprehended, or that your Commands have wrought any effect in
this particular. Wherefore we thought it our duty openly to declare how deeply
we resent this barbarous outrage in part Attempted, and in part committed: And
therefore we make it our Request to your Majesty, That due Punishment may be
inflicted upon the Authors, Associates, and Encouragers of this Abominable
Fact. And to the end that this may be the more speedily accomplished, we
farther demand, That persons of Honesty and Sincerity, Well-wishers to the
Peace of both Nations, may be entrusted with the Examination of this Business,
That so a due scrutiny may be made into the bottom of this malicious
contrivance, to the end both Authors and Assistants may be the more severely
Punished. Unless this be done, neither your Majesty's Justice, nor the Honor
of this Republic can be vindicated; neither can there be any stable assurance
of the Peace between both Nations. We wish your Majesty all things Fortunate
and Prosperous. From our Palace at White Hall, August -- 1656.

Your Majesty's most Affectionate, Oliver, Protector of the Commonwealth of
England, etc.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the most Illustrious
Lord, the Conderd' Odemira.
Most Illustrious Lord,
YOUR singular Good Will toward us and this Republic, has laid no mean
obligation upon us, nor slightly ti'd us to acknowledgment. We readily
perceived it by your Letters of the 25th. of June last, as also by those which
we received from our Agent Philip Meadows, sent into Portugal to conclude the
Peace in Agitation; wherein he informed us of your extraordinary zeal and
diligence to promote the Pacification, of which we most joyfully received the
last Ratification; and we persuade our selves, that your Lordship will have no
cause to repent either of your pains and diligence in procuring this Peace, or
of your Good Will to the English, or your Fidelity toward the King, your
Sovereign; more especially considering the great hopes we have, that this Peace
will be of high Advantage to both Nations, and not a little Inconvenient to our
Enemies. The only Accident that fell out unfortunate and mournful in this
Negotiation, was that unhallowed Villanany nefariously attempted upon the
Person of our Agent, Philip Medows. The concealed Authors of which intended
piece of Inhumanity, ought no less diligently to be sought after, and made
Examples to Posterity, then the vilest of most openly detected Assassinates.
Nor can we doubt in the least of your King's Severity and Justice in the
Punishment of a Crime so horrid, nor of your Care and Sedulity to see that
there be no remissness of Prosecution; as being a person bearing due veneration
to the Laws of God, and Sanctity among men, and no less zealous to maintain the
Peace between both Nations; which never can subsist if such inhuman Barbarities
as these escape unpunished and unrevenged. But your abhorrency and detestation
of the Fact is so well known, that there is no need of insisting any more at
present upon this unpleasing subject. Therefore, having thus declared our
Good Will and Affection to your Lordship, of which we shall be always ready to
give apparent demonstrations, there nothing remains, but to implore the
Blessings of Divine Favor and Protection upon you, and all yours. From our
Palace at Westminster. Aug. -- 1656.

Your Lordship's most Affectionate, Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of
England, etc.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England etc. to the most Serene Prince
Charles Gustavus, King of the Swedes, Goths and Vandals, etc.
Most Serene King, our dearest Friend and Confederate,
BEing assured of your Majesty's concurrence both in Thoughts and Councels, for
the defense of the Protestant Faith against the Enemies of it, if ever, now at
this time, most dangerously vexatious, though we cannot but rejoice at your
prosperous Successes, and the daily Tidings of your Victories, yet on the other
side we cannot but be as deeply afflicted to meet with one thing that disturbs
and interrupts our joy; we mean, the bad News, intermixed with so many welcome
Tidings, that the Ancient Friendship between your Majesty and the States of the
United Provinces, looks with a dubious Aspect, and that the mischief is
exasperated to that height, especially in the Baltic Sea, as seems to bode an
unhappy rupture. We confess our selves ignorant of the Causes; but we too
easily foresee that the Events, which God avert, will be fatal to the Interests
of the Protestants. And therefore, as well in respect to that most strict
Alliance between us and your Majesty, as out of that Affection and Love to the
Reformed Religion, by which we all of us ought chiefly to be swai'd, we thought
it our duty, as we have most earnestly exhorted the States of the United
Provinces to Peace and Moderation, so now to persuade your Majesty to the same.
The Protestants have Enemies every where enough and to spare, inflamed with
inexorable revenge; they never were known to have conspired more perniciously
to our destruction, witness the Valleys of Piemont, still reaking with the
Blood and Slaughter of the Miserable; witness Austria, lately turmoil'd with
the Emperor's Edicts and Proscriptions; witness Switzerland; But to what
purpose is it in many words to call back the bitter lamentations and
remembrance of so many Calamities? Who so ignorant, as not to know that the
Counsels of the Spaniards, and the Roman Pontiff, for these Two years have
filled all these Places with Conflagrations, Slaughter, and Vexation of the
Orthodox. If to these mischiefs there should happen an access of Dissension
among Protestant Brethren, more especially between Two Potent States, upon
whose Courage, Wealth and Fortitude, so far as human Strength may be reli'd
upon, the Support and Hopes of all the Reformed Churches depend, of necessity
the Protestant Religion must be in great jeopardy, if not upon the brink of
destruction. On the other side, if the whole Protestant Name would but observe
perpetual Peace among themselves with that same Brotherly Union as becomes
their Profession, there would be no occasion to fear what all the Artifices or
Puissance of our Enemies could do to hurt us, which our fraternal Concord and
Harmony alone would easily repel and frustrate. And therefore we most earnestly
request and beseech your Majesty to harbor in your Mind propitious thoughts of
Peace, and inclinations ready bent to repair the breaches of your Pristin
Friendship with the United Provinces, if in any part it may have accidentally
suffered the decays of mistakes or misconstruction. If there be any thing
wherein our Labor, our Fidelity and Diligence may be useful toward this
Composure, we offer and devote all to your service. And may the God of Heaven
favor and prosper your Noble and Pious Resolutions, which together with all
Felicity, and a perpetual course of Victory we cordially wish to your Majesty.
From our Palace at Westminster. Aug. -- 1656.

Your Majesty's most Affectionate, Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of
England, etc.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the States of Holland.
Most High and Mighty Lords, our dearest Friends,
IT has bin represented to us, by William Cooper a Minister of London, and our
Countryman, That John le Maire of Amsterdam, his Father-in-Law, about Three
and thirty years ago devised a Project, by which the Revenues of your Republic
might be very much advanced without any burden to the People, and made an
agreement with John Vandenbrook to share between 'em the reward which they
should obtain for their Invention, which was the settling of a little Seal to be
made use of in all the Provinces of your Territories, and for which your High
and Mightinesses promised to pay the said Vandenbrook and his Heirs the yearly
Sum of 3000 Gilders, or 300 English Pounds. Now although the use and method of
this Little Seal has bin found very easy and expeditious, and that ever since
great Incomes have thereby accru'd to your High and Mightinesses and some of
your Provinces, nevertheless nothing of the said Reward, tho with much
importunity demanded, has bin paid to this day; so that the said Vandenbrook
and le Maire being tired out with long delays, the Right of the said Grant is
devolved to the foresaid William Cooper, our Countryman; who desirous to reap
the fruit of his Father-in-Law's Industry, has petitioned us, That we would
recommend his just demands to your High and Mightinesses, which we thought not
reasonable to deny him. Wherefore, in most friendly wise, we request your High
and Mightenesses favorably to hear the Petition of the said William Cooper,
and to take such care, that the Reward and Stipend, so well deserved, and by
contract Agreed and Granted, may be paid him annually from this time forward,
together with the Arrears of the years already passed. Which not doubting but
your High and Mightinesses will vouchsafe to perform, as what is no more then
just and becoming your Magnificence, we shall be ready to show the same favor
to the Petitions of your Contrymen upon any occasions of the same nature,
whenever presented to us. From our Palace at White Hall, September -- 1656.

Your High and Mightinesses most Affectionate, Oliver Protector of the
Commonwealth, etc.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the most Serene
Prince, Lewis King of France.
Most Serene King, our dearest Friend and Confederate,
AGainst our will it is that we so often trouble your Majesty with the wrongs
done by your Subjects, after a Peace so lately renewed. But as we are fully
persuaded that your Majesty disapproves their being committed, so neither can
we be wanting to the complaints of our People. That the Ship Anthony of Dieppe
was Legally taken before the League, manifestly appears by the Sentence of the
Judges of our Admiralty Court. Part of the Lading, that is to say, Four
thousand Hides, Robert Brown, a Merchant of London fairly bought of those who
were entrusted with the Sale, as they themselves testify. The same Merchant,
after the Peace was confirmed, carried to Dieppe about Two hundred of the same
Hides, and there having Sold 'em to a Currier, thought to have received his
Money, but found it Stopped and Attached in the hands of his Factor; and a Suit
being commenced against him, he could obtain no favor in that Court.
Wherefore, we thought it proper to request your Majesty, that the whole matter
may be referred to your Council, that so the said Money may be discharged from
an unjust and vexatious Action. For if Acts done and adjudg'd before the Peace,
shall after Peace renewed be called into question and controversy, we must look
upon assurance of Treaties to be a thing of little moment. Nor will there be
any end of these complaints, if some of these Violators of Leagues be not made
severee and timely Examples to others. Which we hope your Majesty will speedily
take into your Care. To whom God Almighty in the mean time vouchsafe his most
Holy Protection. From our Palace at White Hall, September -- 1656.

Your Majesty's most Affectionate, Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of
England, etc.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the most Serene
Prince, John, King of Portugal.
Most Serene King,
THE Peace being happily concluded between this Republic and the Kingdom of
Portugal, and what refers to Trade being duly provided for and ratified, we
deemed it necessary to send to your Majesty Thomas Maynard, from whom you will
receive these Letters to reside in your Dominions, under the Character and
Employment of a Consul, and to take care of the Estates and Interests of our
Merchants. Now in regard it may frequently so fall out, that he may be enforced
to desire the Privilege of free Admission to your Majesty, as well in matters
of Trade, as upon other occasions for the Interest of our Republic, we make it
our request to your Majesty, That you will vouchsafe him favorable Access and
Audience, which we shall acknowledge as a singular demonstration and testimony
of your Majesty's Good Will toward us. In the mean tlme we beseech Almighty God
to bless your Majesty with all Prosperity. From our Court at Westminster. October --
1656.

Your Majesty's most Affectionate, Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of
England, etc.

To the King of the Swedes.
Most Serene and Potent King,
ALthough your Majesty's wonted and spontaneous Favor and Good Will toward all
deserving men be such, that all recommendations in their behalf may seem
superfluous, yet we were unwilling to dismiss without our Letters to your
Majesty, this Noble Person, William Vavassour Knight, serving under your
Banners, and now returning to your Majesty: Which we have done so much the more
willingly, being informed, that formerly following your Majesty's fortunate
Conduct, he had lost his Blood in several Combats to assert the Noble Cause for
which you Fight. Insomuch, that the succeeding Kings of Swedeland in
renumeration of his Military Skill, and bold Achievements in War, rewarded him
with Lands and Annual Pensions, as the Guerdons of his Prowess. Nor do we
question but that he may be of great use to your Majesty in your present Wars,
who has bin so long conspicuous for his Fidelity and Experience in Military
Affairs. It Is our desire therefore that he may be recommended to your Majesty
according to his merits, and we also farther request, That he may be paid the
Arrears that are due to him. This, as it will be most acceptable to us, so we
shall be ready, upon the like occasion, whenever offered, to gratify your
Majesty, to whom we wish all Happiness and Prosperity.

Your Majesty's most Affectionate, Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of
England, etc.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the most Serene
Prince, John King of Portugal.
Most Serene King, our dearest Friend and Confederate,
THomas Evans, a Master of a Ship, and our Countryman, has presented a
Petition to us, wherein he sets forth, that in the years 1649. and 1650. he
served the Brafile Company with his Ship the Scipio, being a Vessel of Four
hundred Tuns, and of which he was Master: that the said Ship was taken from
him, with all the Lading and Furniture by your Majesty's Command; by which he
has received great Damage, besides the loss of Six years gain arising out of
such a Stock. The Commissioners by the League appointed on both sides for the
deciding controversies, valued the whole at Seven thousand of our Pounds, or
twice as many Milreys of Portugal Money, as they made their report to us. Which
Loss falling so heavy upon the foresaid Thomas, and being constrained to make a
voyage to Lisbon for the Recovery of his Estate, he humbly besought us that we
would grant him our Letters to your Majesty in favor of his demands. We
therefore, although we Wrote the last year in behalf of our Merchants in
general to whom the Brasile Company was Indebted, nevertheless that we may not
be wanting to any that implore our aid, request your Majesty, in regard to that
Friendship which is between us, that consideration may be had of this man in
particular, and that your Majesty would give such Orders to all your Ministers
and Officers, that no obstacle may hinder him from demanding and recovering
without delay, what is owing to him from the Brasile Company, or any other
persons. God Almighty Bless your Majesty with perpetual Felicity, and grant
that our Friendship may long endure. From our Palace at Westminster. October -- 1656.

Your Mrjesty's most Affectionate, Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of
England, etc.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the Illustrious and
Magnificent Senate of Hamborough.
Most Noble, Magnificent, and Right Worshipful,
JAmes and Patrick Hays, Subjects of this Commonwealth, have made grievous
Complaint before us, That they being Lawful Heirs of their Brother Alexander,
who died Intestate, were so declared by a Sentence of your Court pronounced in
their behalf against their Brother's Widow; and the Estates of their deceased
Brother, together with the Profits, only the Widow's Dowre excepted, being
adjudg'd to them by virtue of that Sentence; nevertheless, to this very day
they could never reap any benefit of their Pains and Expenses in obtaining the
said Judgment, notwithstanding their own declared Right, and Letters formerly
Written by King Charles in their behalf; for that the great Power and Wealth of
Albertvan Eyzen, one of your Chief Magistrates, and with whom the greatest part
of the Goods was deposited, was an Opposition too Potent for them to surmount,
whilst he strove all that in him lay that the Goods might not be restored to
the Heirs. Thus disappointed and tired out with delays, and at length reduced
to utmost Poverty, they are become suppliants to us that we would not forsake
'em, wronged and oppressed as they are in a Confederated City. We therefore
believing it to be a chief part of our duty, not to suffer any Countryman of
ours in vain to desire our Patronage and Succor in distress, make this request
to your Lordships, which we are apt to think we may easily obtain from your
City, That the Sentence pronounced in behalf of the two Brothers may be
Ratified and duly Executed according to the intents and purposes for which it
was given; and that you will not suffer any longer delay of Justice, by any
Appeal to the Chamber of Spire, upon any pretense whatever: For we have
required the Opinions of our Lawyers, which we have sent to your Lordships
fairiy Written and Signed. But if entreaty and fair means will nothing avail,
of necessity (and which is no more then according to the customary Law of
Nations, though we are unwilling to come to that extremity) the severity of
Retaliation must take its course; which we hope your Prudence will take care to
prevent. From our Palace at Westminster. October. 16. 1656.

Your Lordships most Affectionate, Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of
England, etc.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the most Serene and
Potent Lewis, King of France.
Most Serene and Potent King, our dearest Friend and Confederate,
WE are apt to believe that your Majesty received our Letters dated the 14th of
May, of the last year, wherein we wrote that John Dethic, Mayor of London that
year, and William Waterford, Merchant, had by their Petition set forth, That a
certain Vessel, called the Jonas, freighted with Goods upon their Account, and
bound for Dunkirk, then under the Jurisdiction of the French, was taken at the
very Mouth of the Thames, by a Sea-Rover, pretending a Commission from the Son
of the late King Charles: Which being directly contrary to your Edicts, and the
Decrees of your Council, That no English Ship taken by the Enemies of the
Parliament, should be admitted into any of your Ports, and there put to sale,
they demanded Restitution of the said Ship and Goods from M. Lestrade, then
Governor of the Town, who returned 'em an answer no way becoming a Person of
his Quality, or who pretended Obedience to his Sovereign; That the Government
was conferred upon him for his good Service in the Wars, and therefore he would
make his best advantage of it, that is to say, by right or wrong; for that he
seemed to drive at: As if he had received that Government of your Majesty's
free gift, to authorize him in the robbing your Confederates, and contemning
your Edicts, set forth in their favor. For what the King of France forbids his
Subjects any way to have a hand in, that the King's Governor has not only
suffered to be committed in your Ports, but he himself becomes the Pirate,
seizes the Prey, and openly avouches the Fact. With this Answer therefore the
Merchants departed, altogether baffled and disappointed; and this we signified
by our Letters to your Majesty the last year with little better success; for as
yet we have received no Reply to those Letters. Of which we are apt to believe
the reason was, because the Governor was with the Army in Flanders; but now he
resides at Paris, or rather flutters unpunished about the City, and at Court
enriched with the Spoils of our Merchants. Once more therefore, We make it our
Request to your Majesty, which it is your Majesty's Interest in the first place
to take care of, That no person whatever may dare to justify the wrongs done to
your Majesty's Confederates by the contempt of your Royal Edicts. Nor can this
Cause be properly referred to the Commissioners appointed for deciding Common
Controversies on both sides; since in this Case, not only the Rights of
Confederates, but your Authority it self, and the Veneration due to the Royal
Name, are chiefly in dispute. And it would be a wonder, that Merchants should
be more troubled for their Losses, then your Majesty provoked at Encroachments
upon your Honor. Which while you disdain to brook, with the same labor you
will demonstrate that you neither repent of your Friendly Edicts in favor of
our Republic, nor connived at the Injuries done by your Subjects, nor
neglected to give due respect to our demands. From our Court at Westminster,
November. -- 1656.

Your Majesty's most bounden by Good Will, by Friendship and Solemn League,
Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth, etc.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the most Serene and
Potent Prince, Frederic III. King of Danemark, Norway, the Vandals and Goths;
Duke of Sleswich, Holsatia, Stormatia and Dithmarsh; Count in Oldenburgh and
Delmenhorst, etc.
Most Serene and Potent King, our dearest Friend and Confederate,
WE received your Majesty's Letters, dated the 16th of February, from
Copenhagen, by the most worthy Simon de Pitkum, your Majesty's Agent here
residing. Which when we had perused, the Demonstrations of your Majesty's
Good Will toward us, and the Importance of the Matter concerning which you
write, affected us to that degree, that we designed forthwith to send to your
Majesty some person, who being furnished with ample Instructions from us, might
more at large declare to your Majesty our Counsels in that Affair. And tho we
have still the same Resolutions, yet hitherto we have not been at leisure to
think of a Person proper to be entrusted with those Commands, which the weight
of the matter requires; tho in a short time we hope to be more at liberty. In
the mean while, we thought it not convenient any longer to delay the letting
your Majesty understand, that the present Condition of Affairs in Europe has
employed the greatest part of our Care and Thoughts; while for some years, to
our great grief, we have beheld the Protestant Princes and Supreme Magistrates
of the Reformed Republics, (whom it rather behooves, as being engaged by the
common Tie of Religion and Safety, to combine and study all the ways imaginable
conducing to mutual defense) more and more at weakening variance among
themselves, and jealous of each other's Actions and Designs; putting their
Friends in fear, their Enemies in hope, that the Posture of Affairs bodes
rather Enmity and Discord, then a firm agreement of mind to defend and assist
each other. And this solicitude has fixed it self so much the deeper in our
thoughts, in regard there seems to appear some sparkles of jealousy between
your Majesty and the King of Sweden; at least, that there is not that
conjunction of Affections, which our Love and Good Will in general toward the
Orthodox Religion so importunately requires; your Majesty, perhaps, suspecting
that the Trade of your Dominions will be prejudiced by the King of Sweden; and
on the other side, the King of Sweden being jealous, that by your means the
War, which he now wages, is made more difficult, and that you oppose him in his
contracting those Alliances which he seeks. It Is not unknown to your Majesty,
so eminent for your profound Wisdom, how great the Danger is that threatens the
Protestant Religion, should such Suspicions long continue between two such
Potent Monarchs; more especially, which God avert, if any symptom of Hostility
should break forth. However it be, for our parts, as we have earnestly exhorted
the King of Sweden, and the States of the United Provinces to Peace, and
moderate Counsels (and are beyond expression glad to behold Peace and Concord
renewed between them; for that the Heads of that League are transmitted to us
by their Lordships, the States General) so we thought it our duty, and chiefly
becoming our Friendship, not to conceal from your Majesty what our Sentiments
are concerning these matters, (more especially being so affectionately invited
so to do by your Majesty's most Friendly Letters; which we look upon, and
embrace, as a most singular Testimony of your Good Will toward us) but to lay
before your eyes, how great a necessity Divine Providence has imposed upon us
all, that profess the Protestant Religion, to study Peace among our selves, and
that chiefly at this time, when our most embittered Enemies seem to have on
every side conspired our destruction. There Is no necessity of calling to
remembrance the Valleys of Piemont still besmeared with the Blood and Slaughter
of the miserable Inhabitants; nor Austria, tormented at the same time with the
Emperor's Decrees and Proscriptions; nor the impetuous Onsets of the Popish
upon the Protestant Switzers. Who can be ignorant, that the Artifices and
Machinations of the Spaniards, for some years last past, have filled all these
places with the confused and blended havoc of Fire and Sword? To which
unfortunate Pile of Miseries, if once the Reformed Brethren should come to add
their own Dissentions among themselves, and more especially two such Potent
Monarchs, the chiefest part of our strength, and among whom so large a
Provision of the Protestants Security and Puissance lies stored and hoarded up
against Times of Danger, most certainly the Interests of the Protestants must
go to ruin, and suffer a total and irrecoverable Eclipse. On the other side,
If Peace continue firmly fixed between two such powerful Neighbors, and the
rest of the Orthodox Princes; if we would but make it our main study to abide
in Brotherly Concord, there would be no cause, by God's assistance, to fear
neither the force nor subtilty of our Enemies; all whose Endeavors, and
laborious Toils, our Union alone would be able to dissipate and frustrate. Nor
do we question, but that your Majesty, as you are freely willing, so your
willingness will be constant in contributing your utmost Assistance to procure
this blessed Peace. To which purpose, we shall be most ready to communicate,
and join our Counsels with your Majesty; professing a real and cordial
Friendship, and not only determined inviolably to observe the Amity so
auspiciously contracted between us, but as God shall enable us, to bind our
present Alliance with a more strict and Fraternal Bond. In the mean time, the
same Eternal God grant all things prosperous and successful to your Majesty.
From our Caurt at White Hall, December. -- 1656.

Your Majesty's most closely united by Friendship, Alliance and Good Will,
Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the most Serene and
Illustrious Prince and Lord, the Lord William, Lantgrave of Hess, Prince of
Herefeldt, Count in Cutzenellebogen, Decia Ligenhain, Widda and Schaunburg, etc.
Most Serene Prince,
WE had returned an Answer to your Letters sent us now near a Twelvemonth
since, for which we beg your Highnesses pardon, had not many, and those the
most Important Affairs of the Republic under our care, constrained us to this
unwilling silence. For what Letters could be more grateful to us, then those
which are written from a most Religius Prince, descended from Religious
Ancestors, in order to settle the Peace of Religion, and the Harmony of the
Church? Which Letters attribute to us the same Inclinations, the same Zeal to
promote the Peace of Christendom, not only in your own, but in the Opinion and
Judgment of almost all the Christian World, and which we are most highly glad
to find so universally ascribed to our selves. And how far our Endeavors have
been signal formerly throughout these Three Kingdoms, and what we have effected
by our Exhortations, by our Sufferings, by our Conduct, but chiefly by Divine
Assistance, the greatest part of our People both well know, and are sensible
of, in a deep tranquillity of their Consciences. The same Peace we have wished
to the Churches of Germany, whose Dissentions have been too sharp, and of too
too long endurance; and by our Agent Dury, for many years in vain endeavoring
the same Reconciliation, we have cordially offered whatever might conduce on
our part to the same purpose. We still persevere in the same Determinations,
and wish the same Fraternal Charity one among another, to those Churches. But
how difficult a task it is to settle peace among those Sons of Peace, as they
give out themselves to be, to our extreme grief, we more then abundantly
understand. For that the Reformed, and those of the Augustan Confession, should
cement together in a Communion of one Church, is hardly ever to be expected:
It Is impossible by force to prohibit either from defending their Opinions,
whether in private Disputes, or by public Writings. For Force can never
consist with Ecclesiastical Tranquillity. This only were to be wished, that they
who differ, would suffer themselves to be entreated, that they would disagree
more civilly and with more moderation; and notwithstanding their Disputes, Love
one another; not embittered against each other as Enemies, but as Brethren,
dissenting only in Trifles, though in the Fundamentals of Faith most cordially
agreeing. With inculcating and persuading these things, we shall never be
wearied; beyond that, there is nothing allowed to human Force or Counsels: God
will accomplish his own work in his own time. In the mean while, you, most
Serene Prince, have left behind ye a noble testimony of your Affection to the
Churches, an eternal Monument becoming the Virtue of your Ancestors, and an
Exemplar worthy to be followed by all Princes. It only then remains for us to
implore the Merciful and Great God to Crown your Highness with all the
Prosperity in other things which you can wish for; but not to change your Mind,
then which you cannot have a better, since a better cannot be, nor more Piously
devoted to his Glory. Westminster. March -- 1656.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the most Serene
Prince, the Duke of Curland.
Most Serene Prince,
WE have bin abundantly satisfied of your Affection to us, as well at other
times, as when you kindly entertained our Ambassador in his Journey to the Duke
of Muscovy, for some days together making a stop in your Territories: Now we
are no less confident that your Highness will give us no less obliging
Testimonies of your Justice and Equity, as well out of your own Good nature, as
at our request. For we are given to understand, That one John Johnson, a
Scotchman, and Master of a certain Ship of yours, having faithfully discharged
his Duty for 7 years together in the Service of your Highness, as to your
Highness is well known, at length delivered the said Ship, called the Whale, in
the Mouth of the River, according as the Custom is, to one of your Pilots, by
him to be carried safe into Harbor. But it so fell out, that the Pilot being
ignorant of his Duty, though frequently Warned and Admonished by the said
Johnson, as he has proved by several Witnesses, the said Ship ran aground and
split to pieces, not through any fault of the Master, but through the want of
Skill, or Obstinacy of the Pilot. Which being so, we make it our earnest
request to your Highness, That neither the said Shipwreck may be imputed to the
forementioned Johnson, the Master, nor that he may upon that account be
deprived of the Wages due to him; by the only enjoyment of which, he having
lately suffered another misfortune at Sea, he hopes however to support and
comfort himself in the extremity of his Wants. From our Court at Westminster. March
-- 1657.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the most Noble the
Consuls and Senators of the Republic of Dantzick.
Most Noble and Magnificent, our dearest Friends,
WE have always esteemed your City, flourishing in Industry, Wealth, and
studious Care to promote all useful Arts and Sciences, fit to be compared with
any the most Noble Cities of Europe. Now in regard that in this War, that has
long bin hovering about your Confines, you have rather chosen to side with the
Polanders, then with the Swedes; we are most heartily desirous, that for the
sake of that Religion which you embrace, and of your ancient Commerce with the
English, you would chiefly adhere to those Counsels, which may prove most
agreeable to the Glory of God, and the Dignity and Splendor of your City.
Wherefore we entreat ye, for the sake of that Friendship which has bin long
established between your selves and the English Nation, and if our Reputation
have obtaine'd any favor or esteem among ye, to set at Liberty Count
Conismark, conspicuous among the Principal of the Swedish Captains, and a
Person singularly famed for his Conduct in War, but by the Treachery of his own
People surprised at Sea; wherein you will do no more then what the Laws of War,
not yet exasperated to the height, allow; or if you think this is not so
agreeable to your Interests, that you will however deem him worthy a more easy
and less severe Confinement. Which of these two Favors soever you shall
determine to grant us, you will certainly perform an act becoming the Reputation
of your City, and highly oblige besides the most famous Warriers and most
eminent Captains of all Parties; and lastly, lay upon our selves an obligation
not the meanest; and perhaps it may be worth your Interest to gratify us. From
our Court at Westminster. April -- 1657.

Your Lordships most Affectionate, Oliver, etc.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, etc.
To the most Serene and Potent Prince and Lord, Emperor and great Duke of all
Russia, sole Lord of Volodomaria, Moscow and Novograge, King of Cazan, Astracan
and Syberia, Lord of Vobscow, great Duke of Smolensko, Tuerscoy, and other
Places. Lord and great Duke of Novogrod, and the Lower Provinces of Chernigoy,
Rezansco and others. Lord of all the Northern Climes; also Lord of Eversco,
Cartalinsca, and many other Places.
ALL men know how Ancient the Friendship, and how vast the Trade has bin for a
long train of years between the English Nation and the People of your Empire:
But that singular Virtue, most August Emperor, which in your Majesty far
outshines the Glory of your Ancestors; and the high Opinion which all the
Neighboring Princes have of it, more especially moves us to pay a more then
ordinary Veneration and Affection to your Majesty, and to desire the imparting
of some things to your Consideration, which may conduce to the Good of
Christendom and your own Interests. Wherefore, we have sent the most
Accomplished Richard Bradshaw, a person of whose Fidelity, Integrity, Prudence,
and Experience in Affairs, we are well assured, as having bin employed by us in
several other Negotiations of this nature, under the Character of our Agent to
your Majesty; to the end he may more at large make known to your Majesty our
singular Good will and high Respect toward so Puissant a Monarch, and Transact
with your Majesty concerning the matters abovementioned. Him therefore we
request your Majesty favorably to receive in our Name, and as often as shall
be requisite to grant him free Access to your Person, and no less gracious
Audience; and lastly, to give the same credit to him in all things which he
shall Propose or Negotiate, as to our selves if we were personally present. And
so we beseech Almighty God to Bless your Majesty and the Russian Empire with
all Prosperity. From our Court at Westminster. April -- 1657.

Your Majesty's most Affectionate, Oliver, Protector of the Commonwealth of
England, etc.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the Most Serene and
Potent Prince Charles Gustavus, King of the Swedes, Goths, and Vandals, etc.
Most Serene and Potent King, our dearest Friend and Confederate,
THE most Honorable William Jepson, Colonel of Horse, and a Senator in our
Parliament, who will have the Honor to deliver these Letters to your Majesty,
will make known to your Majesty, with what disturbance and grief of Mind we
received the News of the fatal War broke out between your Majesty and the King
of Danemark, and how much it is our cordial and real endeavor, not to neglect
any labor or duty of ours, as far as God enables us, that some speedy remedy
may be applied to this growing Mischief, and those Calamites averted, which of
necessity this War will bring upon the Common Cause of Religion; more
especially at this time, now that our Adversaries unite their Forces and
pernicious Counsels against the Profession and Professors of the Orthodox
Faith. These and some other Considerations of great importance to the Benefit
and Public Interests of both Nations, have induced us to send this Gentleman
to your Majesty under the Character of our Extraordinary Envoy. Whom we
therefore desire your Majesty kindly to receive, and to give Credit to him in
all things which he shall have to impart to your Majesty in our Name; as being
a Person in whose Fidelity and Prudence we very much confide. We also farther
request, That your Majesty will be pleased fully to assure your self of our
Goodwill and most undoubted Zeal, as well toward your Majesty, as for the
Prosperity of your Affairs. Of which we shall be readily prepared with all
imaginable willingness of mind to give unquestionable Testimonies upon all
occasions. From our Court at Westminster, August -- 1657.

Your Majesty's Friend, and most strictly Counited Confederate, Oliver
Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the most Serene
Prince, The Lord Frederick William, Marquess of Brandenburgh, High Chamberlain
of the Imperial Empire, and Prince Elector, Duke of Magdeburgh, Prussia,
Juliers, Cleves, Monts, Stettin, Pomerania, of the Cassiubiands and Vandals, as
also of Silesia, Crosna, and Carnovia, Burgravae of Norrinburgh. Prince of
Halberstadt and Minda, Count of Mark and Ravensbergh, Lord in Ravenstein.
Most Serene Prince, our dearest Friend and Confederate
SUCH is the fame of your Highness's Virtue and Prudence both in Peace and War,
and so loudly spread through all the World, That all the Princes round about
are ambitious of your Friendship; nor does any one desire a more faithful or
constant Friend and Associate: Therefore to the end your Highness may know that
we are also in the number of those that have the highest and most honorable
Thoughts of your Person and Merits, so well deserving of the Commonwealth of
Christendom; we have sent the most Worthy Col. Will. Jepson, a Senator in our
Parliament, in our Name to kiss your Majesty's hands, and with all to wish the
continuance of all Prosperity to your Affairs, and in Words at large to express
our Good Will and Affection to your Serenity; and therefore make it our
request, That you will vouchsafe to give him Credit in those matters concerning
which he has Instructions to Treat with your Majesty, as if all things were
Attested and Confirmed by our Personal Presence. From our Court at White Hall,
August -- 1657.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the most Noble the
Consuls and Senators of the City of Hamborough.
Most Noble, most Magnificent and Worthy,
THE most Accomplished, Colonel William Jepson, a Senator in our Parliament,
being sent by us to the most Serene King of Sweden, is to Travel through your
City; and therefore we have given him in Command, not to pass by your Lordships
Unsaluted in our Name; and withal to make it our request, That you will be
ready to Assist him upon whatsoever occasion he shall think it requisite to
crave the Aid of your Authority and Counsel. Which the more willingly you shall
do, the more you shall find you have acquired our Favor. From our Court at
Westminster, August -- 1657.

To the most Noble the Consuls and Senators of the City of Breme.
HOW great our Affection is toward your City, how particular our Good Will, as
well upon the account of your Religion, as for the celebrated Splendour of your
City, as formerly you have found, so when occasion offers, you shall be farther
sensible. At present, in regard the most Accomplished Colonel, William Jepson,
a Senator in our Parliament, is to Travel through Bremen with the Character of
our Envoy Extraordinary to the King of Sweden, it is our Pleasure that he salute
your Lordships lovingly and friendly in our Name: and that if any accident fall
out, wherein your Assistance and Friendship may be serviceable to him, that he
may have free Admission to desire it, upon the score of our Alliance. Wherein
we are confident you will the less be wanting, by how much the more reason you
will have to be assured of our singular Love and Kindness for your Lordships.
From our Court at White Hall, August -- 1657.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the most Noble the
Senators and Consuls of the City of Lubeck.
Most Noble, Magnificent, and Right Worshipful our dearest Friends,
Colonel William Jepson, a Person of great Honor, and a Senator in our
Parliament, is to pass with the Character of a Public Minister from your City
to the King of Sweden, encamping not far from it. Wherefore we desire your
Lordships, that if occasion require, upon the account of the Friendship and
Commerce between us, you will be Assistant to him in his Journey through your
City, and the Territories under your Jurisdiction. As to what remains, it is
our farther pleasure, That you be Saluted in our Name, and that you be assured
of our Goodwill and ready Inclinations to serve your Lordships. From our Court
at Westminster, August -- 1657.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the City of
Hamborough.
Most Noble, Magnificent, and Right Worshipful,
PHilip Meadows, who brings these Letters to your Lordships, is to Travel
through your City, with the Character of our Agent, to the King of Danemark.
Therefore we most earnestly recommend him to your Lordships, that if any
occasion should happen for him to desire it, you would be ready to Aid him with
your Authority and Assistance: And we desire that this our Recommendation may
have the same weight at present with your Lordships as formerly it wont to
have; nor shall we be wanting to your Lordships, upon the same Opportunities.
From our Court at White Hall, August -- 1657.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England etc. To the most Sereae Prince
Frederick Heir of Norway, Duke of Sleswic, Holsatia, and Ditmarsh, Count in
Oldenburgh and Delmenhorst.
Most Serene Prince, our dearest Friend,
Colonel William Jepson, a Person truly Noble in his Country, and a Senator
in our Parliament, is sent by us, as our Envoy Extraordinary to the most Serene
King of Sweden; and may it prove Happy and Prosperous for the common Peace and
Interests of Christendom. We have given him Instructions, among other things,
That in his Journey, after he has Kissed your Serenities hands in our Name, and
declared our former Good Will and constant Zeal for your Welfare, to request of
your Serenity also, That being Guarded with your Authority, he may Travel with
Safety and Convenience through your Territories. By which kind act of Civility
your Highness will in a greater measure oblige us to returns of answerable
Kindness. From our Court at Westminster. August -- 1657.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the most Serene
Prince, Ferdinand Great Duke of Tuscany.
Most Serene Great Duke, our dearest Friend,
THE Company of our Merchants, Trading to the Eastern Coasts of the
Mediterranean Sea, by their Petition to us have set forth, That William Ellis,
Master of a Ship called the Little Lewis, being at Alexandria in Egypt, was
hired by the Basha of Memphis, to carry Rice, Sugar, and Coffee, either to
Constantinople or Smyrna, for the use of the Grand Seignior; but that contrary
to his Faith and Promise given, he bore away privately from the Ottoman Fleet,
and brought his Ship and Lading to Leghorn; where now he lives in Possession of
his Prey. Which Villainous Act, being of dangerous Example, as exposing the
Christian Name to scandal, and the Fortunes of our Merchants living under the
Turks to Violence and Ransack; we therefore make it our request to your
Highness, That you will give Command that the said Master be Apprehended and
Imprisoned, and that the Vessel and Goods may remain under seizure, till we
shall have given notice of our care, for the restitution of those Goods to the
Sultan: Assuring your Highness of our readiness to make suitable returns of
gratitude whenever opportunity presents it self. From our Court at Westminster.
September. -- 1657.

Your Highness's most Affectionate, Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of
England, etc.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the most Serene
Prince, the Lord Frederic William Marquess of Brandenburgh, etc.
Most Serene Prince, our most dear Friend and Confederate,
BY our last Letters to your Highness, either already or shortly to be
delivered by our Ambassador William Jepson, we have imparted the substance of
our Embassy to your Highness; Which we could not do without some mention of
your great Virtues, and demonstration of our own Good will and Affection.
Nevertheless, That we may not seem too superficially to have glided over your
transcending deservings of the Protestant Interests; we thought it proper to
resume the same subject, and pay our Respect and Veneration, not more
willingly, or with a greater fervency of Mind, but somewhat more at large, to
your Highness. And truly most deservedly, when daily Information reaches our
ears, That your Faith and Conscience, by all manner of Artifices Tempted and
Assailed, by all manner of Arts and Devices Solicited, yet cannot be shaken, or
by any Violence be rent from your Friendship and Alliance with a most
Magnanimous Prince and your Confederate: And this, when the Affairs of the
Swedes are now reduced to that condition, that in adhering to their Alliance,
it is manifest that your Highness rather consults the common Cause of the
Reformed Religion, then your own Advantage. And when your Highness is almost
surrounded and besieged by Enemies, either privately lurking, or almost at your
Gates; yet such is your Constancy and Resolution of Mind, such your Conduct and
Prowess becoming a great General, that the burden and massy bulk of the whole
Affair, and the event of this important War, seems to rest and depend upon your
sole determination. Wherefore your Highness has no reason to question but that
you may rely upon our Friendship and unfeigned Affection; who should think our
selves worthy to be forsaken of all men's Good word, should we seem careless in
the least of your unblemished Fidelity, your Constancy, and the rest of your
applauded Virtues, or should we pay less respect to your Highness upon the
common score of Religion. As to those matters propounded by the most
Accomplished John Frederic Schlever, your Counselor and Agent here residing,
if hitherto we could not return an Answer, such as we desired to do, though
with all assiduity and diligence labored by your Agent; we entreat your
Highness to impute it to the present condition of our Affairs, and to be
assured, that there is nothing which we account more sacred, or more earnestly
desire, then to be serviceable and assisting to your Interests, so bound up
with the Cause of Religion. In the mean time we beseech the God of Mercy and
Power, that so signal a Prowess and Fortitude may never languish or be
oppressed, nor be deprived the Fruit and due Applause of all your Pious
Undertakings. From our Court at Westminster, September -- 1657.

Your Highness's most Affectionate, Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of
England, etc.

To the most Excellent Lord, M. d. (...), Extraordinary Ambassador from the
most Serene King of France.
Most Excellent Lord,
LVcas Lucie Merchant of London, has made his Complaint to the most Serene Lord
Protector, concerning a certain Ship of his, called the Mary; which in her
Voyage from Ireland to Bayonne, being driven by Tempest into the Port of St.
John de Luz, was there detained by virtue of an Arrest, at the Suit of one
Martin de Lazan; nor could she be discharged till the Merchants had given
security to stand a Trial for the Property of the said Ship and Lading. For
Martin pretended to have a great Sum of Money owing to him by the Parliament for
several Goods of his which in the year 1642. were Seized by Authority of
Parliament* in a (...) Ship called the Santa Clar^^ (...) in manifest, That
Martin (...) the Owner of the said (...) that he Prosecuted the (...) Owners
Richard and (...) with his Pa^^ner, whole (...) was Antonio Fernandez; and that
upon the said Mar^^n and Antonio's falling out among themselves, the Parliament
Decreed that the said Goods should be stopped till the Law should decide to
which of the two they were to be restored. Upon this, Antony was desirous that
the Action should proceed; on the other side, neither Martin, nor any body for
him, has hitherto appeared in Court: All which is evidently apparent by Luca's
Petition hereto annexed. So that it seems most unreasonable, That he who
refused to try his pretended Title with Antonio, to other men's Goods, in our
own Courts, should compel our People and the true Owners to go to Law for their
own in a Foreign Dominion. And that the same is apparent to your Excellency's
Equity and Prudence, the most Serene Lord Protector makes no question; by whom
I am therefore commanded in a particular manner to recommend this fair and
honest Cause of Lucas Lucy to your Excellency's consideration; to the end that
Martin, who neglects to try his pretended Right here, may not under that
pretense have an opportunity in the French Dominions to deprive others of their
Rightful claims.

Westminster. October. -- 1657. Your Excellency's most Affectionate
.
Oliver Protector of the Commonweolth of England, etc. To the most Serene Duke,
and Senate of the Republic of Venice.
Most Serene Duke and Senate, our dearest Friends,
SO numerous are the Tidings brought us of your fortunate Successes against the
Turks, that there is nothing wherein we have more frequent occasion to employ
our Pens, then in Congratulating your Serenities for some signal Victory. For
this so recently obtained, we give ye Joy, as being not only most Auspicious
and Seasonable to your Republic, but which is more Glorious, so greatly
tending to the Deliverance of all the Christians groaning under Turkish
Servitude. More particularly we recommend to your Serenity and the Senate
Thomas Galily, formerly Master of the Ship called the Relief, who for these
Five years together has bin a Slave; tho this be not the first time we have
interceded in his behalf; yet now we do it the more freely, as in a time of
more then ordinary Exultation. He, having received your Commands to serve your
Republic with his Ship, and Engaging alone with several of the Enemies
Galleys, Sunk some, and made a great havoc among the rest; but at length his
Ship being Burnt, the Brave Commander, and so well deserving of the Venetian
Republic, was taken, and ever since for Five years together, has endured a
miserable Bondage under the Barbarians. To redeem himself he had not
wherewithal; for whatsoever he had, that he makes out, was owing to him by
your Highness and the Senate, upon the account either of his Ship, his Goods,
or for his Wages. Now in regard he may not want Relief, and for that the Enemy
refuses to discharge him upon any other condition, then by exchange of some
other person of equal value and reputation to himself, we most earnestly
entreat your Highness and the most Serene Senate, and the Afflicted Old man,
Father of the said Thomas, full of Grief and Tears, which not a little moved
us, by our Intercession begs, That in regard so many prosperous Combats have
made ye Masters of so many Turkish Prisoners, you will exchange some one of
their Number, whom the Enemy will accept for so stout a Seaman taken in your
Service, our Countreyman, and the only Son of a most sorrowful Father. Lastly,
That whatsoever is due to him from the Republic, upon the score of Wages, or
upon any other account, you will take care to see it paid to his Father, or to
whom he shall appoint to receive it. The effect of our first request, or rather
of your Equity was this, that the whole matter was examined, and upon an exact
stating of the accounts the Debt was agreed; but perhaps by reason of more
important business intervening, no payment ensued upon it* Now the condition of
the miserable Creature admits of no longer delay; and therefore some endeavor
must be used, if it be worth your while to desire his welfare, that he may
speedily be delivered from the noisome Stench of Imprisonment. Which, as you
flourish no less in Justice, Moderation and Prudence, then in Military Fame and
Victorious Success, we are confident you will see done, of your own innate
Humanity and Free will, without any hesitation, without any incitement of ours.
Now that ye may long flourish, after a most Potent Enemy subdued, our daily
Prayers implore of the Almighty. From our Court at Westminster, October -- 1657.

Your Highnesses most Affectionate, Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of
England, etc.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the High and Mighty
Lords, the States of the United Provinces.
Most High and Mighty Lords, our dearest Friends and Confederates,
THE most Illustrious William Nuport, your Extraordinary Ambassador for some
years residing with us, is now returning to your Lordships; but with this
condition, That after this respit obtained from your Lordships, he shall return
again in a short time. For he has remained among us, in the discharge of his
Trust, with that Fidelity, Vigilance, Prudence and Equity, that neither you nor
we could desire greater Virtue and Probity in an Ambassador, and a Person of
unblemished Reputation; with those inclinations and endeavors to preserve
Peace and Friendship between us, without any fraud or dissimulation, that while
he officiates the duty of your Ambassador, we do not find what occasion of
scruple or offense can arise in either Nation. And we should brook his departue
with so much the more anxiety of mind, considering the present juncture of
times and affairs, were we not assured, that no man can better or more
faithfully declare and represent to your Lordships, either the present
condition of Affairs, or our Good Will and Affection to your Government. Being
therefore every way so excellent a Person, and so well deserving both of yours
and our Republic, we request your Lordships to receive him returning, such as
we unwillingly dismiss him, laden with the real Testimonials of our Applauses.
Almighty God grant all Prosperity to your Affairs and perpetuate our
Friendship, to his Glory, and the support of his Orthodox Church.

From our Court at Westminster November -- 1657. Your High and Mightinesses
most devoted.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the High and Mighty
Lords the States of the United Provinces.
Most High and Mighty Lords, our dearest Friends and Confederates,
GEorge Downing is a Person of Eminent Quality, and after a long trial of his
Fidelity, Probity and Diligence, in several and various Negotiations, well
approved and valued by us. Him we have thought fitting to send to your
Lordships, dignified with the Character of our Agent, and amply furnished with
our Instructions. We therefore desire your Lordship to receive him kindly, and
that so often as he shall signify that he has any thing to impart in our Name
to your Lordships, you will admit him free Audience, and give the same Credit
to him, and entrust him with whatsoever you have to communicate to us: which
you may safely do, as if our selves were personally present. And so we beseech
Almighty God to bless your Lordships, and your Republic with all prosperity,
to the Glory of God, and the Support of his Church. From our Court at
White Hall, December. -- 1657.

Your High and Mightinesses most Affectionate Oliver, etc.

To the States of Holland.
THere being an Alliance between our Republic and yours, and those Affairs to
be transacted on both sides, that without an Agent and Interpreter, sent either
by your selves, or from us, matters of such great moment can hardly be adjusted
to the advantage of both Nations, we thought it conducing to the common good of
both Republics to send Geroge Downing, a Person of Eminent Quality, and long
in our knowledge and esteem for his undoubted Fidelity, Probity and Diligence,
in many and various Negotiations, dignified with the Character of our Agent, to
reside with your Lordships, and chiefly to take care of those things, by which
the Peace between us may be preserved entire and diuturnal. Concerning which we
have not only written to the States, but also thought it requisite to give
notice also of the same to your Lordships, Supreme in the Government of your
Province, and who make so considerable a Part of the United Provinces; to the
end you may give that reception to our Resident which becomes him, and that
whatever he Transacts with your High and Mighty States, you may assure your
selves shall be as firm and irrevocable, as if our selves had bin present in
the Negotiation. Now the most Merciful God direct all your Counsels and Actions
to his Glory and the Peace of his Church. Westminster. December. -- 1657.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. to the most Serene
Prince, Ferdinand Great Duke of Tuscany.
Most Serene Great Duke, our much Honored Friend,
YOur Highness's Letters, bearing date from Florence the 10th. of November. gave
us no small occasion of content and satisfaction; finding therein your Good
will toward us, so much the more conspicuous, by how much Deeds then Words,
Performances then Promises, are the more certain marks of a cordial Affection.
For what we requested of your Highness, That you would command the Master of
the Little Lewis, William Ellis, who most ignominiously broke his Faith with
the Turks, and the Ship and Goods to be Seized and Detained, till Restitution
should be made to the Turks, least the Cnristian Name should receive any
Blemish by Thieveries of the like nature; all those things, and that too with
an extraordinary zeal, as we most gladly understood before, your Highness
writes that you have seen diligently performed. We therefore return our Thanks
for the kindness received, and make it our farther request, That when the
Merchants have given security to satisfy the Turks, the Master may be
discharged, and the Ship, together with her Lading, be forthwith dismis'd, to
the end we may not seem to have had more care perhaps of the Turks Interest,
then our own Countrymen. In the mean time we take so kindly this surpassing
favor done us by your Highness, and most acceptable to us, that we should not
refuse to be branded with ingratitude, if we should not ardently desire a
speedy opportunity, with the same promptitude of Mind, to gratify your
Highness, whereby we might be enabled to demonstrate our readiness to return
the same good offices to so noble a Benefactor upon all occasions. From our
Court at Westminster. December. -- 1657.

Your Highnesses most Affectionate, Oliver, etc.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the most Serene and
Potent Prince, Charles Gustavus, King of the Swedes, Goths, and Vandals, etc.
Most Serene and Potent Prince, our most Invincible Friend and Confederate,
BY your Majesty's Letters, dated the 21st. Of February from your Camp in
Seland, we found many reasons to be affected with no small joy, as well for our
own particular, as in regard of the whole Christian Republic in general. In
the first place, because the King of Danemark, being become an Enemy, not
induced thereto, as we are apt to believe, by his own Inclinations or
Interests, but deluded by the Artifices of our common Adversaries, is reduced
to that condition by your sudden irruption into the very heart of his Kingdom,
with very little blood shed on either side, that what was really true, he will
at length be persuaded that Peace would have bin more beneficial to him, then
the War which he has entered into against your Majesty. Then again, when he
shall consider with himself, that he cannot obtain it by any more speedy means,
then by making use of our Assistance long since offered him to procure a
Reconciliation, in regard your Majesty so readily entreated by the Letters
only, delivered by our Agent, by such an easy concession of Peace, most
clearly made it apparent how highly you esteemed the Intercession of our
Friendship, he will certainly apply himself to us; and then our Interposition
in so Pious a work, will chiefly require, that we should be the sole Reconciler
and almost Author of that Peace, so beneficial to the Interests of the
Protestants; which, as we hope, will suddenly be accomplished. For when the
Enemies of Religion shall despair of breaking your United Forces by any other
means then setting both your Majesty's at variance, then their own fears will
overtake 'em, lest this unexpected Conjunction, which we ardently desire, of
your Arms and Minds, should turn to the destruction of them that were the
Kindlers of the War. In the mean time, most Magnanimous King, may your Prowess
go on and prosper; and the same felicity which the Enemies of the Church have
admired in the Progress of your Achievements, and the steady Careir of your
Victories, against a Prince, now your Confederate, the same, by God's
assistance, may you enforce 'em to behold once more in their subversion. From
our Palace at Westminster, March 30. 1658.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the most Serene
Prince Ferdinand, Great Duke of Tuscany.
Most Serene Prince,
THE Answer which we have given to your Agent here residing, we believe, will
fully satisfy your Highness, as to our Admiral, who but lately put into your
Ports. In the mean time, John Hosier, Master of a Ship, called the Owner, has
set forth in a Petition to us, that in April, 1656. he hired out his Ship, by a
Charter-party Agreement, to one Joseph Arman, an Italian, who manifestly broke
all the Covenants therein contained; so that he was enforced, lest he should
lose his Ship and Lading, together with his whole Principal Stock, openly to
set forth the fraud of his Freighter, after the manner of Merchants; and when
he had caused it to be registered by a Public Notary, to sue him at Leghorne.
Joseph, on the other side, that he might make good one Fraud by another,
combining with two other Litigious Traders, upon a faign'd Pretense, by
Perjury, seized upon Six thousand Pieces of Eight, the Money of one Thomas
Clutterbuck. But as for his part, the said Hosier, after great Expenses and
loss of time, could never obtain his Right and Due at Leghorn: Nor durst he
there appear in Court, being threatened as he was, and way-lay'd by his
Adversaries: We therefore request your Highness, that you would vouchsafe your
Assistance to this poor Oppressed Man, and according to your wonted Justice,
restrain the Insolence of his Adversary. For in vain are Laws ordained for the
government of Cities by the Authority of Princes, if Wrong and Violence, when
they cannot abrogate, shall be able by Threats and Terror to frustrate the
Refuge and Sanctuary of the Laws. However, we make no doubt, but that your
Highness will speedily take care to punish a daring Boldness of this nature;
beseeching Almighty God to bless your Highness with Peace and Prosperity. From
our Court at Westminster, April 7. 1658.

To the most Serene and Potent Prince Lewis, King of France.
Most Serene and Potent King, and most August Friend and Confederate,
YOUR Majesty may call to mind, that at the same time, when the renewing the
League between us was in agitation, and no less auspiciously concluded, as the
many Advantages from thence accrewing to both Nations, and the many Annoyances
thence attending the Common Enemy, sufficiently testify, those dreadful
Butcheries befell the Piedmontois, and that we recommended with great fervency
of mind and compassion, their Cause on all sides forsaken and afflicted, to
your Commiseration and Protection. Nor do we believe, that your Majesty, of
your self, was wanting in a Duty so pious, that we may not say, beseeming
Common humanity, as far as your Authority, and the Veneration due to your
Person, could prevail with the Duke of Savoy. Certain we are, that neither our
selves, nor many other Princes and Cities were wanting in our Performances, by
the Interposition of Embassies, Letters, and Entreaties. After a most bloody
Butchery of both Sexes, and all Ages, at length Peace was granted, or rather a
certain Clandestine Hostility covered over with the name of Peace. The
Conditions of Peace were agreed in your Town of Pignerol; severe and hard; but
such, as those miserable and indigent Creatures, after they had suffered all
that could be endured that was oppressive and barbarous, would have been glad
of, had they been but observed, as hard and unjust as they were. But by false
Constructions, and various Evasions, the Assurances of all these Articles are
eluded and violated: Many are thrust out from their ancient Abodes; many are
forbid the Exercise of their Religion; new Tributes are exacted; a new Citadel
is imposed upon them; from whence the Soldiers frequently making Excursions,
either plunder or murder all they meet. Add to all this, That new Levies are
privately preparing against 'em; and all that embrace the Protestant Religion
are commanded to depart by a prefixed day; so that all things seem to threaten
the utter extermination of those deplorable Wretches, whom the former Massaker
spared. Which I most earnestly beseech and conjure ye, Most Christian King, by
that RIGHT HAND, which signed the League and Friendship between us, by that
same goodly Ornament of your Title of MOST CHRISTIAN, by no means to suffer;
nor to permit such liberty of Rage and Fury uncontrolled, we will not say, in
any Prince, (for certainly such barbarous Severity could never enter the breast
of any Prince, much less so tender in years, nor into the female thoughts of
his Mother) but in those sanctified Cutthroats, who professing themselves to
be the Servants and Disciples of our Savior Christ, who came into this World
to save Sinners, abuse his meek and peaceful Name and Precepts to the most
cruel slaughter of the Innocent. Rescue you that are able, in your towering
Station worthy to be able, rescue so many Suppliants prostrate at your feet,
from the hands of Ruffians, who lately drunk with Blood, again thirst after it,
and think it their safest way to throw the Odium of their Cruelty upon Princes.
But as for you, great Prince, suffer not, while you reign, your Titles, nor the
Confines of your Kingdom, to be contaminated with this same Heaven-offending
Scandal, nor the peaceful Gospel of Christ to be defiled with such abominable
Cruelty. Remember that they submitted themselves to your Grandfather Henry,
most friendly to the Protestants, when the Victorious Lesdiguieres pursued the
retreating Savoyard over the Alps. There is also an Instrument of that
Submission registered among the Public Acts of your Kingdom, wherein it is
excepted and provided among other things, That from that time forward the
Piemontois should not be delivered over into the Power of any Ruler, but upon
the same Conditions upon which your Invincible Grandfather received them into
his Protection. This Protection of your Grandfather, these Suppliants now
implore from you as Grandchild. It Is your Majesty's part, to whom those People
now belong, to give 'em that protection which they have chosen, by some
exchange of Habitation, if they desire it, and it may be done: Or if that be a
Labor too difficult, at least to succor 'em with your Patronage, your
Commiseration, and your admittance into Sanctuary. And there are some Reasons
of State to encourage your Majesty not to refuse the Piemontois a safe Asylum
in your Kingdom: But I am unwilling that you, so great King, should be induced
to the defense and succor of the miserable by any other Arguments then those
of your Ancestor's pledged Faith, your own Piety, Royal Benignity and
Magnanimity. Thus the Immaculate and entire Glory of a most Egregious Act will
be your own, and you will find the Father of Mercy, and his Son, King Christ,
whose Name and Doctrine you have vindicated from nefarious Inhumanity, so much
the more favorable and propitious to your Majesty, all your days. The God of
Mercy and Power infuse into your Majesty's Heart a Resolution to defend and
save so many Innocent Christians, and maintain your own Honor.

Westminster. May -- 1658.
To the Evangelick Cities of the Switzers.
Illustrious and most Noble Lords, our dearest Friends,
HOW heavy and intolerable the Sufferings of the Piemontois, your most
afflicted Neighbors, have bin, and how unmercifully they have been dealt with
by their own Prince, for the sake of their Religion, by reason of the Felness
of the Cruelties, we almost tremble to remember, and thought it superfluous to
put you in mind of those things, which are much better known to your Lordships.
We have also seen Copies of the Letters, which your Ambassadors, Promoters and
Witnesses of the Peace, concluded at Pignerol, wrote to the Duke of Savoy, and
the President of his Council at Turin; wherein they set forth, and make it out,
that all the Conditions of the said Peace are broken, and were rather a Snare
then a Security to those miserable People. Which Violation continued from the
Conclusion of the Peace to this very moment, and still growing more heavy every
day then other: unless they patiently endure, unless they lay themselves down
to be trampled under foot, plash'd like Mortar, or abjure their Religion, the
same Calamities, the same Slaughters, hang over their Heads, which three years
since, made such a dreadful havoc of them, their Wives and Children; and
which, if it must be undergone once more, will certainly prove the utter
extirpation of their whole Race. What shall such miserable Creatures do? in
whose behalf no Intercession will avail, to whom no breathing time is allowed,
nor any certain place of Refuge. They have to do with Wild Beasts, or Furies
rather, upon whom the remembrance of their former Murders has wrought no
compassion upon their Countrymen, no sense of humanity, nor satiated their
ravenous hunger after blood. Most certainly these things are not to be endured,
if we desire the safety of our Brethren the Piemontois, most Ancient Professors
of the Orthodox Faith, or the Welfare of our Religion it self. As for our
selves, so far remote, we have not been wanting to assist 'em as far as in us
lay, nor shall we cease our future Aid. But you, who not only lie so near
adjoining, as to behold the Butcheries, and hear the Outcries and Shrieks of
the Distressed, but are also next exposed to the fury of the same Enemies;
consider for the sake of the Immortal God, and that in time, what it behooves ye
now to do: Consult your Prudence, your Piety, and your Fortitude, what succor,
what relief and safeguard you are able, and are bound to afford your Neighbors
and Brethren, who must else undoubtedly and speedily perish. Certainly the same
Religion is the cause, why the same Enemies seek also your Perdition; why, at
the same time the last year, they meditated your ruin, by Intestine Broiles
among your selves. It seems to be only in your power, next under God, to
prevent the Extirpation of this most Ancient Scien of the Purer Religion, in
these remainders of the Primitive Believers; whose preservation, now reduced to
the very brink of utter ruin, if you neglect, beware that the next Turn be not
your own. These Admonitions, while we give ye freely, and out of Brotherly
love, we are not quite as yet cast down: For what lies only in our power so far
distant, as we have hitherto, so shall we still employ our utmost Endeavors,
not only to procure the safety of our Brethren upon the precipice of danger,
but also to relieve their Wants. May the Almighty God vouchsafe to both of us
that peace and tranquillity at home, that settlement of Times and Affairs, that
we may be able to employ all our Wealth and Force, all our Studies and Counsels
in the defense of his Church against the Rage and Fury of her Enemies. From our
Court at White Hall, May -- 1658.

To his Eminency Cardinal Mazarin.
Most Eminent Lord,
THE late most Grievous Cruelties, and most Bloody Slaughters perpetrated upon
the Inhabitants of the Valleys of Piemont, within the Duke of Savoy's
Dominions, occasioned the writing of the enclosed Letters to his Majesty, and
these other to your Eminency. And as we make no doubt but that such Tyranny,
Inhumanities, so rigorously inflicted upon harmless and indigent People, are
highly displeasing and offensive to the most Serene King; so we readily
persuade our selves, that what we request from his Majesty in behalf of those
unfortunate Creatures, your Eminency will employ your endeavor, and your
favor to obtain, as an accumulation to our Intercessions. Seeing there is
nothing which has acquired more good will and affection to the French Nation,
among all the Neighboring Professors of the Reformed Religion, then that
Liberty and those Privileges, which by public Acts and Edicts are granted in
that Kingdom to the Protestants. And this among others was one main Reason, why
this Republic so ardently desired the Friendship and Alliance of the French
People. For the settling of which we are now treating with the King's
Ambassador, and have made those progresses, that the Treaty is almost brought
to a conclusion. Besides that, your Eminency's singular Benignity and
Moderation, which in the management of the most Important Affairs of the
Kingdom, you have always testified to the Protestants of France, encourages us
to expect what we promise to our selves from your Prudence and Generosity;
whereby you will not only lay the foundations of a stricter Alliance between
this Republic and the Kingdom of France, but oblige us in particular to
Returns of all good Offices of Civility and Kindness: And of this we desire
your Eminency to rest assured.

Your Eminency's most Affectionate.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the most Serene and
Potent Prince, Lewis King of France.
Most Serene and Potent King, our most August Friend and Confederate.
IT being the intention of Thomas Viscount Falconbridge, our Son-in-Law, to
Travel into France, and no less his desire, out of his profound Respect and
Veneration to your Majesty, to be admitted to Kiss your Royal hands; though by
reason of his pleasing Conversation we are unwilling to part with him,
nevertheless not doubting but he will in a short time return from the Court of
so great a Prince, celebrated for the resort of so many Prudent and Courageous
Persons, more nobly prepared for great Performances, and fully Accomplished in
whatsoever may be thought most Laudable and Virtuous, we did not think it fit
to put a stop to his generous Resolutions. And though he be a Person, who,
unless we deceive our selves, carries his own Recommendations about him,
wheresoever he goes; yet if he shall find himself somewhat the more favored by
your Majesty for our sake, we shall think our selves Honored and Obliged by
the same Kindness. God Almighty long preserve your Majesty in safety, and
continue a lasting Peace between us, to the common Good of the Christian world.
From our Court at White-May -- 1658.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the most Eminent Lord
Cardinal Mazarin.
Most Eminent Lord,
HAving Recommended to the most Serene King, Thomas Viscount Falconbridge our
Son-in-Law, desirous to see France; we could not but acquaint your Eminency
with it, and Recommend him in like manner to your self; not ignorant of what
moment and importance it will be to our Recommendation first given him. For
certainly, what benefit or advantage he shall reap by residing in your
Country, which he hopes will not be small, he cannot but be beholding for the
greatest part of it to your Favor and Good will; whose single Prudence and
Vigilance, Supports and Manages the grand Affairs of that Kingdom. Whatever
therefore grateful Obligation your Eminency shall lay upon him, you may be
assured you lay upon our selves, and that we shall number it among your many
Kindnesses and Civilities already showed us. Westminster. May -- 1658.

Oliver Protector etc. To the most Eminent Lord Cardinal Mazarin.
Most Eminent Lord,
HAving sent the most Illustrious Thomas Bellasis, Viscount Falconbridge, our
Son-in-Law, to Congratulate the King, upon his arrival in the Camp at Dunkirk,
I gave him Order to attend and wish your Eminency long Life and Health in our
Name, and to return Thanks to your Eminency, by whose Fidelity, Prudence and
Vigilance, it chiefly comes to pass, that the Affairs of France are carried on
with such Success in several parts, but more especially in near-adjoining
Flanders, against our common Enemy the Spaniard; from whom we hope that open
and Armed Courage now will soon exact a rigorous account of all his Frauds and
Treacheries. Which that it may be speedily done, we shall not be wanting,
either with our Forces, as far as in us lies, or with our Prayers to Heaven.
From our Court at White Hall, May -- 1658.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the most Serene and
Potent Prince, Lewis King of France.
Most Serene and Potent Prince, our most August Friend and Confederate,
SO soon as the News was brought us, That your Majesty was arrived in your
Camp, and was sat down with so considerable an Army before Dunkirk, that
infamous nest of Pirates, and Place of Refuge for Sea-Robbers, we were greatly
overjoyed, in certain assurance, that in a short time now, with God's
Assistance, the Seas will be more open and less infested by those Plundering
Rovers; and that your Majesty, by your Military Prowess, will now take speedy
Vengeance of the Spanish Frauds; by whom one Captain was by God corrupted to
the Betraying of Hesden; another Treacherously Surpised at Ostend. We
therefore send the most Noble, Thomas Viscount Falconbridge, our Son-in-Law, to
Congratulate your Majesty's arrival in your Camp so near us, and that your
Majesty may understand from his own lips, with what Affection we labor the
Prosperity of your Atchievemants, not only with our united Forces, but with
our cordial Prayers, that God would long preserve your Majesty, and perpetuate
our established Friendship, to the common Good of the Christian world. From our
Court at Westminster. May -- 1658.

To the most Serene Prince, Ferdinand Grand Duke of Tuscany.
Most Serene Great Duke,
IN regard your Highness in all your Letters, has ever signified your
Extraordinary Affection toward us, we are not a little grieved, that either it
should be so obscurely imparted to your Governors and Ministers, or by them so
ill interpreted, that we can reap no benefit or sign of it, in your Port of
Leghorn, where your Friendship toward us ought to be most clearly and truly
understood: Rather, That we should find the Minds of your Subjects daily more
averse and hostile in their demeanor toward us. For how unkindly our Fleet was
lately treated at Leghorn, how little accommodated with necessary Supplies, in
what a Hostile manner twice constrained to depart the Harbor, we are
sufficiently given to understand as well from undoubted Witnesses upon the
Place, as from our Admiral himself, to whose Relation we cannot but give
Credit, when we have thought him worthy to Command our Fleet. Upon his first
arrival in January, after he had caused our Letters to be delivered to your
Highness, and all Offices of Civility had passed between our People and yours;
when he desired the Accommodation of Porto Ferraro; answer was made, it could
not be granted, least the King of Spain, that is to say, our Enemy should be
Offended. And yet what is there which a Prince in Friendship more frequently
allows to his Confederate, then free entrance into his Ports and Harbors? Or
what is there that we can expect from a Friendship of this nature, more ready
to do us unkindness then befriend us, or aid us with the smallest Assistance,
for fear of provoking the displeasure of our Enemies. At first indeed, Prattick
was allowed, tho only to Two or Three of our Seamen out of every Ship, who had
the Favor to go ashore. But soon after, it being noised in the Town, That our
Ships had taken a Dutch Vessel Laden with Corn for Spain, that little Prattick
we had was Prohibited; Longland, the English Consul, was not permitted to go
aboard the Fleet; The liberty of taking in Fresh water, which is ever free to
all that are not open Enemies, was not suffered, but under Armed Guards, at a
severe rate; and our Merchants which reside in the Town, to the vast emolument
of your People, were forbid to Visit their Countrymen, or Assist 'em in the
least. Upon his last arrival, toward the latter end of March, no body was
suffered to come Ashore. The fifth day after, when our Admiral had taken a
small Neapolitan Vessel which fell into our hands by chance, above Two hundred
great shot were made at our Fleet from the Town, though without any damage to
us. Which was an argument, that what provoked your Governors without a cause,
as if the Rights of your Harbor had bin violated, was done out at Sea, at a
great distance from your Town or the Jurisdiction of the Castle. Presently our
Long-boats sent to take in Fresh water, were assailed in the Port, and one
taken and detained; which being redemanded, answer was made, That neither the
Skiff nor the Seamen should be restored, unless the Neapolitan Vessel were
dismis'd; tho certain it is, that she was taken in the open Sea, where it was
lawful to Seize her. So that ours, after many Inconveniences suffered, were
forced at length to set Sail, and leave behind 'em the Provision, for which
they had paid ready Money. These things, if they were not done by your
Highness's Consent and Command, as we hope they were not, we desire you would
make it appear by the Punishment of the Governor, who so easily presumed to
violate his Master's Alliances; but if they were done with your Highness
Approbation and Order, we would have your Highness understand, that as we
always had a singular value for your Friendship, so we have learnt to
distinguish between Injuries and Acts of Kindness. From our Court at
White Hall, May -- 1658.

Your good Friend, so far as we may, Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of
England, etc.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the most Serene and
Potent Prince, Lewis King of France.
Most Serene and Potent Prince, our most August Confederate and Friend,
BY so speedily repaying our profound Respect to your Majesty, with an
Accumulation of Honor, by such an Illustrious Embassy to our Court; you have
not only made known to us, but to all the People of England, your singular
Benignity and Generosity of Mind, but also how much you favor our Reputation
and Dignity. For which we return our most cordial Thanks to your Majesty, as
justly you have merited from us. As for the Victory which God has given, most
fortunate, to our United Forces against our Enemies, we rejoice with your
Majesty for it; and that our People in that Battle were not wanting to your
Assistance, nor the Military Glory of their Ancestors, nor their own Pristin
Fortitude, is most grateful to us. As for Dunkirk, which as your Majesty Wrote,
you were in hopes was near Surrender: it is a great addition to our joy to hear
from your Majesty such speedy Tidings, that it is absolutely now in your
Victorious hands; and we hope moreover, that the loss of one City will not
suffice to repay the twofold Treachery of the Spaniard, but that your Majesty
will in a short time Write us the welcome News of the Surrender also of the
other Town. As to your Promise, That you will take care of our Interests, we
mistrust it not in the least, upon the Word of a most Excellent King and our
most assured Friend, confirmed withal by your Ambassador, the most accomplished
Duke of Crequi. Lastly, we beseech Almighty God to prosper your Majesty and the
Affairs of France, both in Peace and War. Westminster, June -- 1658.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the most Eminent
Lord, Cardinal Mazarin.
Most Eminent Lord,
WHile we are returning Thanks to the most Serene King, who to Honor and
Congratulate us, as also to intermix his Joy with ours for the late glorious
Victory, has sent a splendid Embassy to our Court; we should be ungrateful,
should we not also by our Letters pay our due acknowledgments to your Eminency;
who to testify your Good Will toward us, and how much you make it your study
to do us all the Honor which lies within your power, have sent your Nephew to
us, a most Excellent and most Accomplished young Gentleman; and if you had any
nearer Relation, or any Person whom you valued more, would have sent him more
especially to us, as you declare in your Letters; adding wlthal the Reason,
which coming from so great a Personage, we deem no small advantage to our
Praise and Ornament; that is to say, to the end that they who are most nearly
Related to your Eminency in Blood, might learn to imitate your Eminency in
showing Respect and Honor to our Person. And we would have it not to be their
meanest strife to follow your Example of Civility, Candor, and Friendship to
us; since there are not more conspicuous Examples of extraordinary Prudence and
Virtue to be imitated then in your Eminency; from whence they may learn with
equal Renown to Govern Kingdoms, and manage the most important Affairs of the
World. Which that your Eminency may long and happily Administer, to the
Prosperity of the whole Realm of France, to the common Good of the whole
Christian Republic, and your own Glory, we shall never be wanting in our
Prayers to implore.

From our Court at White Hall, June -- 1658. Your Excellency's most
Affectionate.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the most Serene and
Potent Prince, Charles Gustavus, King of the Swedes, Goths and Vandals, etc.
Most Serene and Potent Prince, our dearest Confiderate and Friend,
AS often as we behold the busy Counsels, and various Artifices of the common
Enemies of Religion, so often do we revolve in our Minds, how necessary it
would be, and how much for the safely of the Christian world, that the
Protestant Princes, and most especially your Majesty, should be united with our
Republic in a most first and solemn Confederacy. Which how ardently and
zealously it has bin sought by our selves, how acceptable it would have bin to
us, if ours, and the Affairs of Swedeland, had bin in that posture and
condition, if the said League could have bin sacredly concluded to the good
liking of both, and that the one could have bin a seasonable Succor to the
other, we declared to your Ambassadors, when first they entered into Treaty
with us upon this Subject. Nor were they wanting in their duty; but the same
Prudence which they were wont to show in other things, the same Wisdom and
Sedulity they made known in this Affair. But such was the Perfidiousness of our
wicked and restless Contrymen at home, who being often received into our
Protection, ceased not however to machinate new disturbances, and to resume
their formerly often frustrated and dissipated Conspiracies with our Enemies
the Spaniards, that being altogether taken up with the preservation of our
selves from surrounding dangets, we could not bend our whole care and our
entire Forces, as we wished we could have done, to defend the common Cause of
Religion. Nevertheless what lay in our power, we have already zealously
performed; and whatever for the future may conduce to your Majesty's Interests,
we shall not only show our selves willing, but industrious to carry on, in
union with your Majesty, upon all occasions. In the mean time, we most gladly
Congratulate your Majesty's Victories most Prudently and Courageously
achieved, and in our daily Prayers implore Almighty God long to continue to
your Majesty a steady course of Conquest and Felicity, to the Glory of his
Name. From our Court at White Hall, June -- 1658.

Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the most Serene
Prince the King of Portugal.
Most Serene King, our Friend and Confederate,
JOhn Buffield, of London Merchant, has set forth in a Petition to us, That in
the year 1649. he delivered certain Goods to Anthony, John, and Manuel
Ferdinando Castaneo, Merchants in Tamira, to the end that after they had sold
'em, they might give him a just account, according to the Custom of Merchants;
after which, in his Voyage for England, he fell into the hands of Pirates, and
being Plundered by 'em, received no small Damage. Upon this News, Antony and
Manuel, believing he had bin Killed, presently looked upon the Goods as their
own, and still detain 'em in their hands refusing to come to any Account;
covering this Fraud of theirs with a Sequestration of Englisb Goods that soon
after ensued. So that he was forced the last year, in the middle of Winter, to
return to Portugal and demand his Goods, but all in vain. For that the said
John and Anthony could by no fair means be persuaded, either to deliver the
said Goods, or to come to any Account; and which is more to be admired,
justified their private detention of the Goods, by the Public Attainder.
Finding therefore that being a stranger, he should get nothing by contending
with the Inhabitants of Tamira in their own Country, he betook himself for
Justice to your Majesty; humbly demanded the judgment of the Conservator,
appointed to determine the Causes of the English; but was sent back to the
Cognizance of that Court, from which he had appealed. Which though in it self
not unjust, yet seeing it is evident that the Merchants of Tamira make an ill
use of your Public Edict to justify their own private Couzenage, we make it
our earnest request to your Majesty, that according to your wonted Clemency you
would rather refer to the Conservator, being the proper Judge in these Cases,
the Cause of this poor Man, Afflicted by many Casualties, and reduced to utmost
Poverty; to the end he may recover the Remainder of his Fortunes from the
Faithless Partnership of those People. Which, when you rightly understand the
business, we make no question but will be no less pleasing to your Majesty, to
see done, then to our selves. From our Court at Westminster, August, 1658.

To the most Serene Prince Leopold, Archduke, of Austria, Governor of the
Low Countries under Philip K. of Spain.
Most Serene Lord,
CHarles Harbord, Knight, has set forth in his Petition to Us, that having sent
certain Goods and Household Stuff out of Holland to Bruges under your
Jurisdiction, he is in great danger of having them arrested out of his hands by
Force and Violence. For that those Goods, were sent him out of England in the
Year 1643. by the Earl of Suffolk, for whom he stood bound in a Great Sum of
Money, to the end he might have wherewithal to satisfy himself, should he be
compelled to pay the Debt. Which Goods are now in the Possession of Richard
Greenville, Knight, who broke open the doors of the place where they were in
Custody, and made a Violent seizure of the same, under pretense of we know not
what due to him from Theophilus Earl of Suffolk, by Virtue of a certain Decree
of our Court of Chancery, to which those Goods, as being the Earls, were justly
liable; whereas by our Laws, neither the Earl now living, whose Goods they are,
is bound by that Decree, neither ought the Goods to be seized or detained;
which the Sentence of that Court, now sent to your Serenity, together with
these Letters, positively declares and proves. Which Letters the said Charles
Harbord has desired of us, to the end we would make it our Request to your
Highness, that the said Goods may be forthwith discharged from the violent
seizure, and no less unjust action of the said Richard Greenville, in regard it
is apparently against the Custom and Law of Nations, that any Person should be
allowed the liberties to sue in a Foreign Jurisdiction upon a plaint wherein he
can have no relief in the Country where the Cause of Action first arose.
Therefore the Reason of Justice it self, and your far Celebrated Enquanimity
encouraged us to recommend this Cause to your Highness. Assuring your Highness,
that whenever any dispute shall happen in our Courts concerning the Rights and
Properties of your People, you shall ever find us ready and quick in our
Returns of Favor. Westminster --

Your Highnesse's most Affectionate Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of
England, etc.

LETTERS Written in the Name of RICHARD Protector.
Richard Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the most Serene and
Potent Prince, Lewis King of France.
Most Serene and Potent King, our Friend and Confederate.
SO soon as our most Serene Father, Oliver Protector of the Commonwealth of
England, by the Will of God so ordaining, departed this Life, upon the Third of
September, we being Lawfully declared his Successor in the Supreme Magistracy,
tho in the Extremity of Tears and sadness, could do no less, then with the
first Opportunity by these our Letters make known a Matter of this Concernment
to your Majesty; by whom, as you have bin a most Cordial Friend to our Father
and this Republic, we are Confident, the Mournful and unexpected Tidings will
be as sorrowfully received. Our business now, is to request your Majesty, that
you would have such an Opinion of us, as of one who has determined nothing more
Religiously and constantly then to observe the Friendship and Confedracy,
contracted between your Majesty and our Renowned Father; and with the same Zeal
and Good Will to confirm and Establish the Leagues by him Concluded, and to
carry on the same Counsels and Interests with your Majesty. To which intent, it
is our pleasure that our Ambassador Residing at your Court, be empowered by
the same Commission as formerly; and that you will give the same Credit to what
he transacts in our Name, as if it had bin done by our selves. In the mean time
we wish your Majesty all Prosperity. From our Court at White Hall, September. 5.
1658.

To the most Eminent Lord, Cardinal Mazarine.
THO nothing could fall out more bitter and grievous to us, then to write the
Mournful News of our most Serene and most Renowned Father's Death;
nevertheless, in regard we cannot be ignorant of the high Esteem which he had
for your Eminency, and the great Value which you had for him; nor have any
reason to doubt, but that your Eminency, upon whose care the Prosperity of
France depends will no less bewail the loss of your constant Friend, and most
United Confederate, we thought it of great moment, by these our Letters to make
known this Accident so deeply to be lamented, as well to your Eminency as to
the King; and to assure your Eminency, which is but reason, that we shall most
Religiously observe all those things which our Father of most Serene Memory was
bound by the League to fee confirmed and ratified: and shall make it our
business, that in the midst of your mourning for a Friend so Faithful and
Flourishing in all Virtuous Applause, there may be nothing wanting to preserve
the Faith of our Confederacy. For the Conservation of which on your part also,
to the good of both Nations, may God Almighty long preserve your Eminency.
Westminster, Sept. 1658.

Richard Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the most Serene and
Potent Prince Charles Gustavus, King of the Swedes, Goths and Vandalls, etc.
Most Serene and Potent King, our Friend and Confederate.
WHen we consider with our selves that it will be a difficult matter for us, to
be Imitators of our Fathers Virtues, unless we should observe and endeavor to
hold the same Confederacies which he by his prowess acquired, and out of his
singular judgment thought most worthy to be embraced and observed; your Majesty
has no reason to doubt, but that it behooves us to pay the same tribute of
Affection and Good Will, which our Father of most Serene Memory always paid to
your Majesty. Therefore although in this beginning of our Government and Dignity,
I may not find our Affairs in that Condition, as at present to answer to some
particulars, which your Ambassadors have proposed, yet it is our Resolution to
continue the League concluded by our Father with your Majesty, and to enter our
selves into a stricter Engagement; and so soon as we shall rightly understand
the State of Affairs on both sides, we shall always be ready on our part, to
treat of those things, which shall be most chiefly for the United Benefit of
both Republics. In the mean time God long preserve your Majesty to his Glory,
and the Defense and Safeguard of his Orthodox Church. From our Court at
Westminster, October. 1658.

Richard Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the most Serene and
Potent Prince Charles Gustavus, King of the Swedes, Goths and Vandalls, etc.
Most Serene and Potent King, our Friend and Confederate.
WE have received two Letters from your Majesty, the one by your Envoy, the
other transmitted to us from our Resident, Philip Meadows, whereby we not only
understood your Majesty's unfaigned Grief for the Death of our most Serene
Father, in expressions setting forth the real thoughts of your mind, and how
highly your Majesty esteemed his Prowess and Friendship, but also what great
hopes your Majesty conceived of our selves advanced in his Room. And certainly,
as an Accumulation of Paternal Honor in deeming us worthy to Succeed him,
nothing more Noble, more Illustrious could befall us then the judgment of such a
Prince; nothing more Fortunately Auspicious could happen to Us, at our first
entrance upon the Government, then such a Congratulator; nothing lastly that
could more vehemently incite us to take possession of our Father's Virtues, as
our Lawful Inheritance, then the encouragement of so Great a King. As to what
concerns your Majesty's Interests, already under Consideration between us, in
reference to the Common Cause of the Protestants, we would have your Majesty
have those thoughts of us, that since we came to the Helm of this Republic,
tho the Condition of our Affairs be such at present, that they chiefly require
our utmost Diligence, Care, and Vigilance at home, yet that we hold nothing
more Sacred, and that there is not any thing more determined by Us, then as
much as in us lies, never to be wanting to the League concluded by our Father
with your Majesty. To that end, We have taken care to send a Fleet into the
Baltic Sea, with those Instructions which our Agent, to that purpose empowered
by us, will Communicate to your Majesty; whom God preserve in long fafety, and
prosper with success in the Defense of his Orthodox Religion. From our Court at
Westminster, October. 13. 1658.

Richard Protector, To the most Serene, and Potent Prince, Charles Gustavus,
King of the Swedes, Goths and Vandalls, etc.
Most Serene and most Potent King, our Friend and Confederate.
WE send to your Majesty, nor could we send a Present more worthy or more
Excellent, the truly Brave and truly Noble, Sir George Ascue, Knight, not only
famed in War, and more especially for his Experience in Sea Affairs, approved
and tried in many desperate Engagements, but also endu'd with singular Probity,
Modesty, Ingenuity, Learning, and for the sweetness of his Disposition caressed
by all Men; and which is the sum of all, now desirous to serve under the
Banners of your Majesty, so renowned over all the World for your Military
Prowess. And we would have your Majesty be fully assured, that whatsoever high
Employment you confer upon him, wherein Fidelty, Fortitude, Experience, may
shine forth in their true Lusture, you cannot entrust a Person more Faithful,
more Courageous, nor easily more Skilful. Moreover, as to those things we have
given him in Charge to Communicate to your Majesty, we request that he may have
quick Access, and favorable Audience, and that you will vouchsafe the same
Credit to him, as to our selves if personally present: lastly that you will
give him that Honor, as you shall judge becoming a Person dignified with his
own Merits and our Recommendation. Now God Almighty prosper all your Affairs
with happy Success, to his own Glory and the Safeguard of his Orthodox Church.
From our Court at White Hall, October. 1658.

Richard Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the most Serene and
Potent Prince, Charles Gustavus, King of the Swedes, Goths and Vandalls, etc.
Most Serene and Potent King, our dearest Friend and Confederate.
SAmuel Piggot, of London, Merchant, in a Petition delivered to Us, sets forth,
that he lately sent from London into France, upon the account of Trade, two
Vessels, the one called the Post, Tiddie Jacob Master, the other the Water-Dog,
Garbrand Peter's, Master. That from France, being laden with Salt, they Sailed
for Amsterdam; at Amsterdam, they one took in Ballast only; the other laden
with Herrings, in Copartnership, with one Peter Heinbergh, Sailed away for
Stettin in Pomerania, which is under your Jurisdiction, there to unlade her
Freight; but now he hears that both those Vessels are detained somewhere in the
Baltic Sea by your Forces; notwithstanding that he took care to send a Writing
with both those Ships, Sealed with the Seal of the Admiralty-Court, by which it
appeared that he alone was the Lawful Owner of both the Vessels and Goods, that
part excepted which belonged to Heinbergh. Of all which, in regard he has made
full proof before us, we make it our Request to your Majesty (to prevent the
Ruin and utter Shipwreck of the Poor man's Estate by the loss of two Ships at
one time) that you would Command your Officers to take care for the speedy
discharge of the said Vessels. God long preserve your Majesty to his own Glory,
and the safeguard of his Orthodox Church.

Richard Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the High and Mighty
Lords, the State of Westfriezland.
Most High and Mighty Lords, our Dearest Friends and Confederates.
MAry Grinder Widow, in a Petition presented to us, has made a most grievous
Complaint, that whereas Thomas Killegrew, a Commander in your Service, has owed
her for these Eighteen Years a considerable sum of Money, she can by her Agents
neither bring him to pay the said Money, nor to try his Title at Law to the
same, if he has any. Which that he may not be compelled to do by the Widow's
Attorney, he has Petitioned your Highnesses, that no body may be suffered to
sue him for any Money that he owes in England. But should we signify no more
then only this to your Highness, That she is a Widow, that she is in great
want, the Mother of many small Children, which her Creditor endeavors to
deprive of almost all that little support they have in this World, we cannot
believe, we need to make use of any greater Arguments to your Lordships, so
well acquainted with those Divine Precepts forbidding the Oppression of the
Widow and the Fatherless, to persuade ye not to grant any such privilege upon a
bare Petition, to the Fraudulent Subverter of the Widow's Right: and which for
the same reason we assure our selves you will never admit. From our Court at
Westminster, Jan. 27. 1658.

Richard Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the most Serene and
Potent Prince, Lewis King of France.
Most Serene and Potent Prince, our most August Confederate and Friend,
WE have bin given to understand, and that, to our no small grief, That several
Protestant Churches in Provence, were so maliciously Affronted and Disturbed by
a certain turbulent Humourist, that the Magistrates at Grenoble, who are the
proper Judges of such Causes, thought him worthy of exemplary Punishment: But
that the Convention of the Clergy which was held not far from those places,
obtained of your Majesty, that the whole matter should be removed up to Paris,
there to be heard before your Royal Council. But they not having as yet made
any determination in the Business, those Churches, and more especially that of
Yvoire, are forbid to meet for the Worship of God. Most earnestly therefore we
request your Majesty, That in the first place you would not prohibit those from
Preaching in Public, whose Prayers to God for your Safety and the Prosperity
of your Kingdom, you are so free to suffer; then that the Sentence given
against that impertinent Disturber of Divine Service, by the proper Judges of
those Causes at Grenoble, may be duly put in excution. God long preserve your
Majesty in Safety and Prosperity; to the end that if you have any good Opinion
of our Prayers, or think 'em prevalent with God, you may be speedily induced to
suffer the same to be publicly put up to Heaven by those Churches, now forbid
their wonted Meetings. Westminster, Feb. 18. 1658.

To the most Eminent Lord Cardinal Mazarine.
Most Eminent Lord Cardinal,
THE most Illustrious Lady, late Wife of the deceased Duke of Richmond, is now
going into France, together with the young Duke her Son, with an intention to
reside there for some time. We therefore most earnestly request your Eminency,
That if any thing fall out, wherein your Authority, Favor and Patronage, may
be assisting to 'em, as Strangers, you would vouchsafe to Protect their
Dignity, and to indulge the Recommendation of it not the meanest, in such a
manner, that if any addition can be made to your Civility toward all people,
especially of Illustrious Descent, we may be sensible our Letters have obtained
it. Withal, your Excellency may assure your self, your Recommendation, whenever
you require the like from us, shall be of equal force and value in our Esteem
and Care. Westminster, Feb. 29. 1658.

Richard Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the most Serene and
Potent Prince, John King of Portugal.
Most Serene and Potent Prince, our Friend and Confederate,
ALthough there are many things which we are bound to impart by Writing to a
King our Friend, and in strict Confederacy with our Republic, yet there is
nothing which we ever did more willingly, then what we do at this present, by
these our Letters to Congratulate this last Victory, so glorious to the Kingdom
of Portugal, obtained against our common Enemy the Spaniard. By which, how
great an advantage will accrue not only to your own, but to the Peace and
Repose of all Europe, and that perhaps for many years, there is no body but
understands. But there is one thing more, wherein we must acknowledge your
Majesty's Justice, the most certain pledge of Victory, That satisfaction has
bin given by the Commissioners appointed at London, according to the 24th.
Article of the League, to our Merchants, whose Vessels were hired by the
Brasile Company. Only there is one among 'em still remaining, Alexander Bence,
of London Merchant, whose Ship called the Three Brothers, John Wilks Master,
being hired and laden, and having performed two Voyages for the said Company,
yet still they refuse to pay him his Wages according to their Covenauts; when
the rest that only performed single Voyages are already paid. Which why it
should be done, we cannot understand; unless those People think, in their
Judgment, that Person more worthy of his Hire, who did 'em only single
Service, then he who earned his Wages twice. We therefore earnestly request
your Majesty, That Satisfaction may given for his Service truly performed, to
this same single Alexander, to whom a double Stipend is due; and that by Virtue
of your Royal Authority you would prefix the Brasile Company as short a day as
may be, for the payment of his just due, and repairing his Losses; seeing that
their delays have bin the occasion, that the Loss sustained by the Merchant,
has very near exceeded the Money it self which is owing for his Wages. So God
continue your Majesty's prosperous Successes against the common Enemy. From our
Court at Westminster. Feb. 23. 1658.

Richard Protector of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the most Eminent
Lord Cardinal Mazarin.
Most Eminent Lord,
BY Letters to your Eminency, about Eight Months since, dated June 13. we
recommended to your Eminency the Cause of Peter Pet, a Person of singular
Probity, and in all Naval Sciences most useful both to us and our Republic.
His Ship, called the Edward, in the year 1646. as we formerly Wrote, was taken
in the Mouth of the Thames, by one Bascon, and Sold in the Port of Boulogne;
and tho the King in his Royal Council, the 4th. of November 1647. decreed, That
what Money the Council should think fitting to be given in Recompense of the
Loss, should be forthwith paid in satisfaction to the Owner: Nevertheless, as
he sets forth, he could never reap the benefit of that Order. Now in regard we
make no question, but that your Eminency, at our desire, gave strict Command
for the speedy Execution of that Decree; we make it therefore our renewed
request, That you would vouchfafe to examine where the impediment lies, or
through whose neglect or contumacy it came to pass, that in Ten years time the
King's decree was not obeyed; and employ your Authority so effectually, that
the Money then Decreed, which we thought long since satisfied, may be speedily
demanded and paid to our Petitioner. Thus your Eminency will perform an Act
most grateful to Justice, and lay moreover a singular Obligation upon our
selves. From our Court at Westminster. Feb. 25. 1658.

The two following Letters, after the Deposal of Richard, were Written in the
Name of the Parliament Restored.
The Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the most Serene and
Potent Prince, Charles Gustavus, King of the Swedes, Goths and Vandalls, etc.
Most Serene and Potent King, our Dearest Friend,
SInce it has pleased the most merciful and Omnipotent God, at whose Disposal
only the Revolutions of all Kingdoms and Republics are, to restore us to our
Pristin Authority, and the Supreme Administration of the English Affairs, we
thought it convenient in the first place to make it known to your Majesty, and
to signify moreover as well our Extraordinary Affection to your Majesty, so
Potent a Protestant Prince, as also our most fervent Zeal to promote the Peace
between your Majesty and the King of Denmark, another most powerful Protestant
King, not to be reconciled without our Assistance and the good Offices of our
Affection. Our Pleasure therefore is, that our Extraordinary Envoy, Philip
Meadows, be continued in the same Employment with your Majesty, with which he
has bin hitherto entrusted from this Republic. To which end, we empower him by
these our Letters to make Proposals, act and negotiate with your Majesty, in
the same manner as was granted him by his last Recommendations: and whatsoever
he shall transact and conclude in our Name, we faithfully promise and and
engage, by Gods Assistance, to Confirm and Ratify. The same God long support
your Majesty the Pillar and Support of the Protestant Interests. Westminster,
May, 15. 1659.

William Lenthal, Speaker of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England.

The Parliament of the Commonwealth of England, etc. To the most Serene Prince,
Frederick King of Denmark.
Most Serene King and most Dear Friend,
SEeing it now is come to pass, that by the Will and Pleasure of the most
merciful and powerful God, the Supreme Moderator of all things, we are restored
to our Pristin Place and Dignity, in the Administration of the Public Affairs,
we thought it convenient in the first place that a Revolution of this
Government should not be concealed from your Majesty's notice, a Prince both
our Neighbor and Confederate; and withal, to signify, how much we lay to Heart
your ill Success: which you will easily perceive by our Zeal and Diligence,
that never shall be wanting in us to promote and accomplish a Reconciliation
between your Majesty and the King of Sweden. And therefore we have Commanded
our Extraordinary Envoy with the most Serene King of Sweden, Philip Medows, to
attend your Majesty, in our Name, in order to these matters, and to impart,
propound, act and negotiate such things as we have given him in charge to
Communicate to your Majesty: and what credit you shall give to him in this his
Employment, we request your Majesty to believe it given to our selves. God
Almighty grant your Majesty a happy and joyful deliverance out of all your
difficulties, and afflicting Troubles under which you stand so undauntedly
supported by your Fortitude and Magnanimity. Westminster, May, 15. 1659.

William Lenthal, Speaker of the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England.

The End.

