A Miraculous PROOF of the Resurrection: OR, The LIFE to come Demonstrated.
Being a Strange but True Relation of what happened to Mris Anna Atherton:
Who lay in a Trance 7 days, and had burning Coals applied to her feet, but no
life appeared: and lived comfortably 2 years after: with her Speech to her
Mother when she came to life, verbatim, as it came from her Brother Dr.
Atherton, Physician in Caermarthen.

Published, now seasonably, as an Invitation to an Holy Life in Maidens, in
this Adulterous, and Atheistical Generation, wherein neither God, Christ, Soul,
Heaven nor Hell are minded; but drinking, whoring, swaring, lying, etc. to be a
Curb to Vice, and encourage Virtue.

Mris Anna Atherton.



THIS Maid being about fourteen years of Age, fell sick in November 1669.
Whereupon several Physicians were called to her Assistance, who consulted about
her Distemper; and judged it to be something of an Ague, though the Symptoms
thereof (as they confessed) were somewhat different from those which are usual
in that Distemper. 2. Her Disease, whatever it was, proved too hard for their
Skill and Medicines, and brought the Patient to a thinness of Body, paleness of
Countenance, and Stupidness to any thing but her Devotion. She was before of a
full Habit of Body, of a brisk and lively Temper, and prone to all kind of
Exercise befitting her Age. 3. Under this strong Alteration she continued till
the Beginning of February ensuing, when by little and little she felt a
sensible Decay of her whole Body, which daily increasing, prevailed at length
upon all the Organs of Life and Motion; so that in appearance she lay void of
either, whereupon she was concluded to be really dead. 4. The Women who came to
do their last Office to her Body, perceived more Heat and Warmth in her, than
they thought to be usual in dead Bodies, upon which they desisted a while; And,
because the Room was close, and a fire had been always in it, (thinking the
unusual Warmth might proceed from thence) they opened the Casements to let in
what Air they could, and put out the Fire, and then left her some time to her
self. 5. But returning, they found the same Warmth to continue; then they left
her in this manner one whole day, yet could find no alteration: whereupon they
applied a Looking-glass to her Mouth, but not the least Cloud appeared: they
put live Coals to her feet, which discovered not the least sign of Life or
Sense. 6. Notwithstanding her Mother (it being so ordered by Providence) was
very timorous, which made her delay her Burial, and kept her uncoffin'd till
sev'n days were expired, at the end of which time, her heat which before was so
languid and obscure, that it could scarcely be discerned, began (like some
sparks of fire raked up in Embers) to glow, and more manifestly discover it
self. 7. Upon which, Rubbings and other artificial Helps were used, which did
not prove ineffectual; for, in a short time, they found a trembling Vibration
of the Pulse, afterward she began to breath, and so at last gradually
recovered all her Senses. The first thing that she spoke of, was That she
desired to see her Mother, who coming to her, she thus uttered her mind:
A Looking glass applyd to her mouth, and coals to her feet. Comes to herself,
Sees an Angel, and calls for her Mother



The Maids Speech when she came out of her Trance.
8. O Mother! Since I was absent from you, I have been in Heaven, an Angel went
before me to conduct me thither; I passed through three several Gates, and at
length I came to Heaven Gate, where I saw things very glorious and unutterable,
as Saints, Angels, and the like, in glorious Apparel; and heard Unparalleld
Music, Divine Anthems and Hallelu-jahs. 9. I would fain have entered that
glorious place, but the Angel, that went before me, withstood me, yet I thought
myself half in: but he told me, I could not be admitted now, but I must go
back, and take leave of my Friends, and after some short time, I should be
admitted. 10. So he brought me hither again, and is now standing at the
Beds-seet; Mother! You must needs see him, he is all in white. Her Mother told
her, It was but a Dream or Fancy, and that she knew not what she said:
whereupon she answered with a great deal of Vehemence, That it was as true, as
that she was there at present: She took notice also of several persons in the
Room by their Names, to show she did not dream, but spoke with Understanding.
11. But for the greater Confirmation, she told them of Three or Four Persons
that were dead, since she was deprived of her Senses, and named each Person;
(one of them was dead, and they knew not of it before they sent to enquire:)
she said, she saw them passing by her while she stood at the Gate. 12. One whom
she named was reputed a Vicious Person, came as far as the Gate, but was sent
back again another way. All the Persons she named, dyed in the time she lay in
this Trance. 13. She lived about two Years after this, enjoying a perfect
Health, and then dyed in great Assurance of her Salvation; speaking comfortable
Words, and giving wholesome Instructions to all who came to visit her. It is
worthy Observation, that during the whole time of her first Sickness, which was
about a quarter of a yer, she neither eat nor drank any thing, besides the
juice of an Orange and the yolk of an Egg.
It Is then necessary all Persons be kept 48 hours before burial, lest they
should be buried alive.

London, Printed by T. Dawks in Blackfriars, who was as desirous to be
satisfied in the truth of this Relation as any Reader can be, and was so before
he did dare to publish it. etc. Reader, be pleased to be advertised that from
the said T. Dawks may be had (1) the Pictures of the 3 prime Discoverers, Ores,
Bedloe and Dugdale, with Verses declaring their Reasons for discovering this
damnable Popish PLOT: (2) Godfreys Murder made Visible, in a large sheet, with
a Copper plate, in colors or plain, being an Ornament for all P^otestant
Families. (3) A Chronology of the Growth of Popery, showing when, and who
brough Superstition in. (4) The Rise, Discovery and Demonstration of the PLOT
in 52 Copper Figures, with a Book to explain them. (5) Also Salmon's Universal
Dispensatory a Companion not only for the chiefest Physicians of Europe, but
for the most ingenuous Ladies and Gentlewomen, furnishing them with the Nature
and Virtues of Roots, Herbs, Plants, Flowers; the Physical use of Insects,
Animals and their parts; Preserved, distilations; etc. (6) His Horae
Mathematicae, being a new Method of Calculating Nativities, Brief and Admirable
for Verity; which certainly will become, when known, the practicablest Book on
that Subject in the whole Universe (6) His Synop. Medicinae, with 21 Copper
plates will certainly be pulished, this Trinity-Term 1680. These things have
often been inquired for, and sent for into most Counties, but are de^v'd by ill
humord men, as if there were no such Books, when they may always be had there
for C^^p^^^^.

Reader, Beware of a Cheat, for This true Original Relation, from the Doctor,
the M^^^s (...) brother is (...) ridiculously counterfeited in a little (...)
penny Book: be not abused with that which (...) Propriety.


